Here begins the life of saint katherin of senis the blessid virgin
Audi filia et vide
HEre daughter and see fructuous example of virtuous living to edyfycacio^ of
thy soul and to comfort and encrese of thy gostly labor in all werkis of
pity: For as I trust by the gracious yeftes of our lord Jhesu / thy will is
set to plese him and to do him secuyce in all holy exercise by the virtue of
obedyence under counseyll and techinge of thy gostely governors / And for as
much as I feel by long experyens the inward affeccions inclynyng with pity to
comfort of all that have need both living and deed therefore to strength and
comfort of thy will and of al other of thy gostely sustere^ which our lord*
has graciously chose to serve him night and day in prayer and meditacio^ and
to labor bodily in time of need to socour and help of the seek and the pour
/ Here I purpos by our lordis mercy only in his worship with trust of his
grace and leave by help of your prayers to translate in english tongue the
legende and the blessid life of an holy maid and virgyn which was and is
called Katheryn of seen.

This legende compyled a worshypfull clerk friar Reymond of the order of saint
domynik doctor of deuynyte and confessor of this holy virgyn / But in this
translacion I leave of the two prologues which in the beginning the same clerk
made in latin. The which passes your understanding / And to touch all
matters only that longs only to your lernyng by cause that much manner of her
virtuous living shall be rehersyd in especial in chapytres of this book: which
in general words he touches shortly in his prologue: I leave of also points
of diuynyte which passes your vnderston dyng and touch only matters yt
longs to your lernyng / Now tha^ as I said in the beginning / Here daughter
and see what thou herest or redest of this holy maid and vyrgyn. And that thou
give full credence to that I shall write / The veryte may be preuyd without any
feynyng biscryptures of her confessors and verefyeng of creatures which late
lived in earth / Also the vytnes I purpose to put in at the end of each
chapter / as that worshypfull clerk did / Which compyled this book in
latin. Therefore that all our work begin and performed in the name of the
holy trynyte: This book shall be divided in three parties and each part of the
book shall be departed in to diverse chapyters / which chapyters been compyled
to gyder in the beginning in manner of a kalendre that ye mow redely find:
What matere in the book ye desire to here or read:

The first part of the book shall be the birth and the holy werkis of that
maid from her chyldhode and tender age In to the time that she was spoused
merueylously and gracyously to our lord*

The second part conteyneth the manner of her conversation from the time of
her despousacion to our lord. And what our lord wrought in her in to the time
yt she passyd out of this world /

The third part shall show the passing out of this world of the same maid
with miracles which our lord wrought for her in her life and after: and thus by
the mercy and grant of our lord almighty this work shall be termynyd to the
lawde of that holy. Trynyte to whom be honor and glory ever without end Amen:

Capitulum j THe first chapter of the first part of this forsayde blessed
maid and virgyn katheryn treteth of her progenyte and of other matters which
byfyll touching her or she went out openly abroad: And of her fader and mother
and of the condycions of her / C ij Of her birth and of merueylous werkynge.
which our lord wrought: And showed in the chylhode of this holy maid and
vyrgyn: C iij Item of the vow made of her vyrgynyte and of other virtuous
living and miracles which befyll till she came to the age of abylyte to be
wedded to man: but wedded was she not and never would / C iiij Item how her
fervor of devotion was wythdrawe which our lord suffered for encrece of more
grace following / and of her strong patience with which patience she suffered
in her faders house many Iniuryes / C v Item of the victory which she had of
them that desesed her and that was by a culuer the which her fader saw by a
vysyon of saint domynyk / C vj Item of the hardenesse of her bodily penance
and of afflyccion^: And what persecucion she suffered therefore of her mother /
Ca. vij Item of the last vyctorye that she had in a bathe: And how she took
the habyte of saint dominyk which she had long desired tofore: Ca viij Item
of the begynnyge and fondament of the relygyous state of the susteren of the
penance of saint domynyke: And wherefore come the manner of living of the
susteren / C ix Item of her wonderful encrece / and how she profyted in virtue
and holy living / And that she should be leuyd in all things which she
rehearsed to her consessour of graces do to her lord / C x Item of a noble
doctryue and notable which our lord gave to her in the beginning and of other
doctrynes in the which he founded her manner of living Capitulum xj Item of
merueyllus victory of temptacions by another manner of doctrine give to her of
our lord / And of a famylyaryte or homlyhed which she had with our lord
which has not beherde to fore / c xij Item of her merueylous despousacio^
with the which she was wedded in faith of our lord and to our lord with
arynge / C xiij
HEre begins the second part in the which is showed
Capitulum j the conversation of this holy maid and vyrgyn with men. And how
the yeftes the which she had received of our lord pryuely enclosed within her
self. Were openly showed to the world / And first how our lord bad her that:
that she should be conuersaunt among men: C ij Item of merueylous deeds which
she had in exercise and of miracles which befyll in the beginning of her
conversation among men: C iij Item of wonders which she did in help and in
comfort to the necessyte of them that were pour and nedy: C iiij Item
merueylous deeds which she did in lowly and besy service to them that were
seek: C v Item of the synguler manner of lyuinge: And how they were desceyued
that grutched with her merueylous fasting Capitulum vj Item of the wonderful
rauysshynge and excesses of her mind from her bodily wits and great
reuelacions showed to her of our lord / C vij Item of sum miracles graciously
wrought by this holy maid and virgin about the health of sowles C viij Item
of sum miracles do in her life by her about the life and help of mennys
bodies / C ix Item of miracles vrought by this holy maid and vyrgyn about the
delyueraunce of them which were acombred and vexed with fendes: C x Item of
the yefte of prophecye. And how by that yefte she delyuerd many me^ and wymmen
fro perils both of body and of soul: C xj Item of miracles which our
lord wrought by this holy maid and vyrgyn in herbs / breed / and wine / And
other things that had none life: C xij Item of the often resceyuynge of the
holy sacrament of the altar And of miracles the which our lord did to her
touching that holy sacrament / and other holy relyques of saints / Ca xiij
HEre begins the third part wherein is rehersyd
Capitulum j the deyeng of this holy maid and vyrgyn and miracles that were I
showed after her death: And first of the witnesses which were present at her
passing and enfourmed the auctur of this book which and what they were / Cap
ij Item of the merueylous things which befyll a year and half to fore the
death of this holy maid and vyrgyn / And of the martyrdom that she suffered
bodily of the wicked fendes whereof at ye last she had her bodily death: C
iij Item how this holy maid and vyrgyn desired to be unbound from the body
and be with christ / And that is preuyd by a devout prayer which she made /
And is put in the end of another book which she made: and what is in that
book generally and shortly it is written in this book with the same oryson: c
iiij Item of the time that she passed and when she passed out of this world /
and of the sermon which she made to her gostely dyscyples and susteren tofore
her passing / And how she informed them in general / and in special how they
should govern them when she were go^ / And of a vysyon which was showed to a
matrone in the hour of her passing. Ca v Item of tokens and miracles which
our lord wrought after her death of this holy maid and vyrgyn both tofore
her beryeng. and after that is to say of miracles which were know: And for
many that were not know: Cap vj Item of the mighty and strong paciens which
this maid and vyrgyn showed openly from her first age and young in to her death
by the which virtue clerly it preuyd that ryghtfull she is worthy to have the
name of holiness in gods church in earth* when she is made so fair and
glorious in gods church in heaven / and in this chapter is a recapitulacion
of all that is said to fore: For worthynes and also for werynes of reders / And
also for if each man may not have al this legende they may have the substance
of this martyr tofore her compendyously rehersyd in the last chapter /
The first chapter of this first part is of the progenye of this holy maid
and vyrgyn glorious saint katheryn of seen and of other matters which befyll
touching her: or she went out openly abroad And of her fader and mother and of
the condycions of them / Capitulu^ primu^
IN the cite of Geene in Italye and of the prouynce of Tuskane there was a man
his name was Janes or Jacob and his fader was called in the common speech of ye
contree Beuencasa: This James was simple virtuous without fraud or deceyte to
any man dredynge god and fleyng all evil: After the death of his fader and
mother he took a wife of the same Cite / her name was lapa: She was a woman
without such malice that is used among men that been now in our time / all be
it that she was full besy about that longs to household and about meynye and
servants as it was known openly to all that knew her while she lived here
in earth / when they both were joined to gyder in matrymonye and lyuyd
virtuously in symplycite / suffycient habondaunce they had of temperall gods
/ and they both of gentle and commendable birth. Our reverend lord blessed
lapa graciously and fulfilled her plentuously with the birthe of children as an
habondaunt vine in the house of Jacob which was her husbond. For each year
almost she conceived and bare a sone or a daughter and often fythes ij. sons or
two daughters / After time this Jacob was passes out of this world: Lapa his
wife as for a synguler laud and commendacion / rehersyd and said to master
Reymonde the confessor of this holy maid and vyrgyn and glorious martyr
katheryn that she was ever of so like dysposycion and so moderate in word /
that what occacion ever came or trouble or trybulacion / he exceded never in
speech by hasty ne angrye word / but when he saw any of his meyny grieved or
herd hem speak angerly or bitter words / anon he comforted each of them with
a glad ^here and said in ye manner of that contree. A brother good day be to
the: be not troubled: speak not such words which falls ne seems not us to
speak / And in special lapa his wife wherseth that when on a time one of his
neybours dysesyd him and wrongfully asked him a great som^e of monye which he
owed not by none reason* and so much he vexed him that simple man with the
might of other friends and supplanted him with great wrongs that he brought
him to the loss of all his gods / And in all this time: this good man might
never suffer in his presence a man to curse him wrong ne to speak of him harm
in no wise / In so much that he blamed his wife Lapa with soft words: and
said suffer dear wife / ye good day be to the for our lord shall show him
therrour. and he shall be our defendour: which words were found southe
afterward: for the veryte was showed openly as like to a miracle: And he for
pain that he had in his conscience delyuerd again how much he had errid
in his wrongful persecucion to the good man Jacob / These words said Lapa to
master Reymonde to whose words he yaue full trust / for as it was know to
all that knew her: she was of so much symplenesse at her age of xxiiij year:
that though she would have lied: she ^^wde not have feyned such a lesyng:

And so was the commyn testymonye of all tho that knew her husbonde. Jacob
that was he a man full simple by Innocencye and ryghtfull: always fleyng from
evil: Also this good mannys softenes in speech was so virtuous / that all
his meyny namely wymmen dame sels taught in his soole might not speak ne here
no word that were not semely or dyshoneste: In so much that one of his
daughter which was called Bonauentura was wedded to a young man which was
called Nycolas of the same Cite with whom were conuersaunt many other young men
of his age by cause he had another fader ne mother / And these men and he
without any refreynynge of tongue spoke each to other* and he with other: And
they with him foul words of dyshoneste matter. This Bonauentura at the last
took thereof so great an heaviness that she fill in to such sykenes that fro day
to day more and more she waxed lene / and vanysshed almost away and right
feeble /

Her husbonde saw this and asked her the cause of her heaviness and sickness
/ And she answered and said. I was norysshed in mine faders hours. and there was
I never wont to here such words as I here now every day / And so was I
never taught of my fader and mother / wherefore know it for sothe but this
dishoneste of speech be avoided fro this house within a short time / ye shall
see me deed: when her husbond herd this both he avoided that ungoodly
langage* and the felawshyppe and therwyth he was edefyed much more than ever
he was before* as well of the virtues lyuinge of the fader and mother as of her
daughter / that was his wife / And anon he forbode his felawes never more to
speak such manner words in her presens and no more they deed: and so the
softenes and the honest of Jacob his house amendyd in moderaunce / And the
dyshoneste of Nycolas house which had weddyd Jacob his daughter

Ferthermore ye shall understand ye Jacob used the craft of making of colors
wherwyth woollen and wolle clothes ben dyed: This craft used both he and his
sonys / In that contree they ben called dyers. wherefore full wonderfully god
ordained that a dyers daughter shol be made the spouse of the Emperor of
heaven: As ye shall see by gods grace after in this book: Sum of this that I
have showed in this chapter / was know to the more part of the cite / And
som^e her confessor had of the said maid katheryn and of her mother and of
many relygyous persons and of seculers / which were neybours and of kynrede to
the same Jacob and to his wife.

Of her birth and of the merueylous werkinge which our lord wrought and
showed in the chylhode of this holy vyrgyn and maid / Capitulu^ ij
When this foresaid Lapa which was like a fructuous vine by fulfyllyng the wine
of Jacob her husbonde in bryngyng forth full often both sons and daughters /
It befyll about the last time of the berynge of children by the ordinance
and die sposycyon of our lordis mercy that she conceived and brought forth; two
daughters / freell and febyll by nature. But much more freell by of bodily
strength as seemed outward* but strength and stabylnesse they had in the
sight of god.

When Lapa the mother besely beheld them she thought well that she suffysed
naught to nourysshe them both forth with her own milk / wherefore by a good
auysement she committed that one to smother noryse / And that other she
wythhelde and kept stylle to be norysshed forth with her own milk: And so
it befyll by the ordinance of our lord / that she chosed that daughter to her
own keeping* which our lord of everlasting time had chose unto his spouse
Both they resceyued the grace of baptysme And all be it that they were of the
nombre of gods chose children / Yet the foresaid maid was called katheryn and
that other was called Johan This later suster when she had received this
grace of baptysme in the same grace. she went forth to heaven / For in short
time after she passed out of this world. Katheryne abode stylle sukkyng on her
moders breasts by gods ordinance she should draw to heaven a long cheyn^ of
soulis / And for as much as Lapa ye mother consyderyd that katheryn abode and
that other was deed: She nourysshed her more dyligently hopyng that she was
chose to abide and be gods child

And often sythes this mother lapa would say to master Reymond her confessor
to this holy maid that she louyd katheryn passyngly above all the sons and
daughters that ever she had /

She said unto him also that she conceived so often that she might never
nourysshe any child of her with her own milk: Katheryn she nourysshed forth
in to ye end of the time yt she neded to be under the nourysshe / And in all
that time she conceived not / as it seemed that our lord for that daughter
had granted her a time of rest of traueylyng of the birth of children: and
in a token that she might come to the end of conceyuyng and birth: in that
daughter which should after ateyne and get the end of all perfection /

But yet this mother Lapa after the nouryssyng of katheryn* ones she conceived
and bare a daughter which was called Johan: And there she made an end of
beryng of children after that she had bo^en xxv children /

When this maid was thus brought forth and hallowed to god: And when she had
left the milk: and took to ete bread while she went about alone: She began
to be so acceptable and so byloued to all tho that saw her and so wise: and
wonderful words she spoke: that uneaths her mother might hold her in her
own house / Each man about of her neybours and of her kynrede lad her home
with them / and glad they were who might have her to here her wise speech /
And that they might have felawshyp and the gladenesse of that young maid. So
that of a manner gladdenesse and of a passing solace they called her not by her
own right name katheryn: but Eufrosyna: and what meued them to call her so:
they wist not them self / but she afterward sum time would say and suppose
that it was a mystery by cause she purposed to follow saint Eufrosyne in living
/

Her confessor that wrote this legende supposed that the young maid in her
chyldis speech used sum manner of sownynge that nyghed or acorded to that n^me
Eufrosyne. And so in manner as they would reherce her words they called her
so by that name: Nevertheless what ever it was that appieryd she burgenyd out
in her chilhode as a tree by any such showing what fruit was brought forth
Afterward in her old age the wisdom and the prudence of her speech and
connyng and the sweetness of her holy conversation might not be rehearsed with
tongue lygthly write with pen by them that knew only the veryte of this /
which had very experyence: She had also an Inward werkynge which showed
well* not only by her speech but by her co^uersacion where thorugh many mennys
sowlis were draw to god: And had thorugh her grace great lykyng and savor
in god in somoche that all heuynesses were excluded of all mennys hertes which
were conuersaunt with her* and not only that but all things that noyed the
soul was put away. Also the remembrance of each noye or angwysshe was take
away / And of this followed each man so great rest and stabylnesse / of soul
which they had before that every man woundred of them self / and made Joye
with a new manner of gladdenesse / and each man in his own soul cried and
said: Here it is good for us to be* Make we three tabernacles for our dwelling
place /

And of this none wou^der for douiles* he was there hid inuysybly in the
breast of his spouse which was transfygured in the hylle / As saint Peter
said and other appostles:

Now ferthermore to our purpos this chosen maid in her full tender age soon
began to wax and was comforted with the holy ghost in token that she should be
soon fulfilled with the dyuyne wisdom / About her age of five year when she
was taught to say the salutacion of the angel / Aue maria: She recordyd it
besely and said it full often / And when she could say it as she was enspired
from heaven: She began to great our lady going upward on a stayere and coming
dou^ward on the same stayere at each grees of the stayere to worship our lady
with an Aue maria / This she told her confessor afterward in the secret^^esse
of confession. By this ye may s^e that she that first in the beginning showed
forth first plesyng and acceptable words to men after that young age she began
to stye up from things that were inuysyble.

After this holy beginning the encresed every day* And than as it pleasyd our
lord the was vyse^ed with a gracyous and a wounderfull vysyon to stere her and
to show here her gifts of grace of the holy ghoost: And to show other how a
little plant should be brought forth and so nourysshed in to an him tree of
Cidre by the moyster of the holy ghost About her age of vj year. It befyll that
this chosen maid with her brother Steven sum what elder than she went to
her suster Bonauentura / Of which suster is made mention before / perauentur
on someuer end or to look how she ferde as the manner of friends of kynrede is
so to do /

when she had do that they were bode to do in her going homward again by
the way which is called in her tongue wallis piacta / This holy may lift up
her eyes: and against her over the church of the freer prechours she saw in
the air a full fair chamber ryally aparayed with all riches and honest /
where our lord Ihesu Christ in a trone Imperyall clothed with pontyfycall
vesture having on his head a myter papal /

And with him were saint Peter and saint Poule / and saint Johan Euan gelyst.
And when she beheld all this she was first a stonyd /

But by a vysement stably she stood still and with a louyngyng heart devoutly
she looked on her savior both with bodily and gostely eyes / And anon our
lord drew her love to him mercy fully set his even of his mageste upon her
graiously and louyngly with a manneuer smylyng chere / And reched out his right
arm toward her / and over her* and gave her his blessyng with the token of the
holy cross / And after the manner of other Bysshoppes and prelates /

The grace of this gift of god was spedfull and so effectuously put in her
that anon she was transformed and rauysshed in spyryte unto our lord whom she
saw / And behylde with so great gostely liking / and not only her gooyng /
and her way was out of her mind: but fully she had forgoten her self. And
often the went in the way beside men and bestes / By nature dreadful should be
as a child: but ever the eyes and the head were upward abydyng upon that
blysfull vysyon and none doughte so she would have abide but she had be
touched or take away by sum other body as long as that vysyon had endured:

But at the las^e whiles this was showed to the maid* Steven her brother held
forth his way and was passed her a great space wenyng that she had followed
him: But when he turned him and saw her not follow / he turned again and
saw his suster fer^e be hynde stondyng still in the way and look up in the
fyrmament /

And then he cried after her with alowde voys and called her she answerde not
and take none head. Then he went nere cryeng afterher: but his voys helped
not:

He woundred and went then and drew her by the hand and said: what do
thou here why come thou not forthr she anon cast down a little her eyes as
she had awaked of an heavy sleep and said / A if thou saw that I saw / thou
would not have let me from this holy vysyon:

And anon as she had said^^*o words She lift up her eyes again to be hold
more up that she had seen /

But the vysyon was all wythdrawe and cesyd / as his will was which aperyd to
fore: And that might she not bear without a sharp stroke of sorrow /

And anon she vengyd her on her self with sore weeping for sorrow that she
cast down her eyes: And from that time and hour / This young maid and
vyrgyn saint Katheryn began to wax old in virtues and sadness of manners and
to have a wounderfull wit and a felyng body bot^e by grace and by nature /

In so much that her deeds were ^other chyldysshe ne as a young woman.

But they seemed rather to all men that they came of the wysedom of a great
worshypfull age:

So that anon was showed that the fire of dyuyne love was kyndeled in her
heart / by the which virtue her intellection was made clear. Her will was
fervent her memory was comforted and all her outward werkyng showed in all
things the rewle of gods law:

And as she said in confession to hyrconfessour full mekely and lowely that she
learned and knew at that time with out techyng of any body or any redynge or
heryng / only by the ^nfusyon of the holy ghoose / the leuyng and the manners
of the folly faders of Egypt / and the living of many other Saints / and
specially of the life of Saint Domynyk*

She had so great desire to follow the living of the holy fadres and Saints
that she might no thing else think / but how that she might come thereto.

And by that cause many new things began in that holy maid / that her holy
living and deeds brought all men in to a wonder. For after that time she
sought out where that she might have a pryue place to abide in preuely when
she would use bodily afflyccyons / and when she would occupye her in prayer
and holy medytacyons*

In that place at certain times she scourged her little tender body with a
little scourge. She left of all manner pleye^ and dysportes / and besely gafe
her to prayer and medytacyons / full stylle she was and gaf all to scylence
every day more and more / ageynste the condy cyon of children less bodily mete
she took then she was wont to fore. And that is not wont to fall in
children that he wexynge.

Exemplum.
By the exsaumple of this young maid / many damse^^ys of dwelling there nigh /
and of her age were steryd to god by grace / and gadred to here of her holy and
gracyous wordys / and after her power to follow her holy werkys / where thorugh
it fill that all tho children at certain times ^amen to gyder in to a preuy
place of her hows where she dwelled / as she had chosen to fore her self /
and all they scour gyd hem self as she did. And each of them said a
certain Pater noster / and of Aue maria / as Katheryne bad him say.

All these werkyngee were but tokenys of gretter meruaylles that should follow
after that.

For as her mother told full often to Master Reymond.

And she when he asked her might not deny hit / that full often going upward
and dounward the grees of her faders hows vysybly to all their syghte that
saw her. Swyf^^ly she went in the air and touched no grees with her fete /
and this fylle namely when she would flee a way out of company / and
specially from the syghte of company of men.

And for as much as she had a gretely king in the beginning to say her Aue
maria. And to great our lady there with in going up and down on her faders
grees. Therefore it is to suppose that this miracle was showed there rather
thanne in another place.

Forthermore for as much as she had knowing of the life of holy faders of
Egypt by reuelacyon / therefore with all her strengthes she was steryd gretely
to follow hem.

In so much that in ye young tender age full feruentely she desired to be in
the wilderness as the holy faders were in old time / but she might not be
think her by what manner way she might perform her desire / and by cause it
was not ordained of god that she should dwell in so solytary place. Our lord
suffered her to stand to the wit of her proper nature as in that.

And she might no more know what she should do as touching that purpose / than
her own chyldes wit would show her. And right so it befyll that she with
her fervent will to her purpose she overcame the tendrenesse and the frealte of
her age / but yet had she not the parfyte vyctorye. For erly on a morowty de
she thought to go to the deserte or else wilderness and abide in a solytary
place / wherefor by chyldys prouydence she purueyed her of a lofe of bread and
of no more. Forth she went toward her susters hows that was wedded / which
hows was fast by the gate is clepyd the gate of saint Ansanye. She passyd her
sustrer hows / and forth she went out at that gate / and so did she never
before / and so passyd forth till she came to a way out of the Cite where she
saw no hows stand nyghe there as she did in the cite.

And then she thought well she was nyghe the deserte / yet went she somewhat
forther / and at the last she found a little cave under a bank / which
plesyd her well* And forth she went in with a glad heart wenyng to her that
she had fond the wilderness which that she had desired. And all be it
that she it had not yet our lord almighty god whom she beheld long to fore
and receyned his holy blyssyng / which gladly acceptyth all holy desires /
all be it that our lord had not dysposed his spouse to have that manner of
living / yet would not he suffer that deed that she did of good desire to
pass away with out a token / to sheweher that she did was acceptable and
plesyng to him. And anon as she began to pray there fervently / she was I
lift up little and little from the earth / and the body went up as high as
the height of the cave would suffer / and so she stood in prayer fro the morrow
in to none.

This maid perceived well that she was areryd from the earth / and as for
that time she wend it had been the wor^hyng of her enemy / which would with
his frauds and dysceytes let her prayer and desire that she had to the
deserte / And for that cause she besyed her and enforced her the more stablye
and fervently to pray. At the last about the hour of the day when our lord
after his passy on of the cross was take down fro the cross / she descendyd
little and little as she ascendyd. And by Inspyracion of our lord she had
understanding and knowing that the time was not yet I come where in she should
not put her body in such afflyccyon for our lord. Ne that she should leave
her faders hows in such manner / wherefor she turned as she came. But when she
went out and saw she was allone and beheld the gate of the Cytee long and
full fe^re to her age and feblynesse dredynge also that her fader and mother
should wene that she had be lost. She could no more but began to pray and
committed her fully to god.

And anon in a short while by the ordinance and might of our lord she was
borne up in the air and set in the gate of the Cytee with out any harm /
And anon she went home in all the have that she might or could. This she
told to a Cosyne of here is / which was called Laxa. But to her fader and mother
all this was hid and unknown till she came to elder age / for they wend
she had come fro her susters hows that was wedded. Of this that is showed in
this chapter in sum party. Lapa her mother told to master Reymond

Which was her last confessoure / and in sum party her self / and of sum
Laxa her cosyne not wythstondyng that he had great sweetness of all that is
I wrytton and said a fore / Save at the last both of her first confessor /
which was I nourysshed in her faders hows / and of many worshypfull and true
matro^s of neighbors nyghe / and of other beside nygh to her fader and mother /
and to her /

Of her vow made of virgynyte and of other virtuous living and meruaylles
which be fill till she came to the age of abylytee / to be wedded to man / but
wedded was she not ne never would / Capitulu^ iij
SO much virtue and grace was in that vysyon / which is rehersyd in the next
^hapytle to fore that all worldly love and affection was with drawn out from
the heart of this holy young maid / and only the holy love of goddys sone and
of the glorious maid and mother of our lord Ihesu christ / stylly and
steadfastly was prented in her heart* Wherefore she set all thing at naught
/ so that she might ouely win our lord her savior. And anon she had clear
understanding only by the techyng of the holy ghoost / that is full semyng and
according to our lord and our maker of naught to be served with all purytee
and ^lenues both in body and in soul. Wherefore she desired fully to have and
keep the clennesse of virgynytee / and for that she thought well and knowing
her by the techynge of god that our blessed lady goddys mother was the first
that found the life of virgynytee / wherefor this maid conceived in her heart
that up that matter she would have recourse to our lady for help and counseyll.
And when that she came to seven year age / she took great auysemente as though
she had be of sadness of xx year of age and contynuelly she prayed our lady
queen of angels and virgynes that she would wouchesauf to help her and get
her of our lord a parfyte way to the techynge of the holy ghoost / where by
she might do that were most plesynge to god / and most spedefulle for health
of her soul. And in each prayer ever she showed her desire to our lady how
sore she desired to live an aungelslyf / and in the life of virgynytee. And in
all this time the love of the everlasting spouse was more fervent fro day to
day in this maidens heart / which love steryd all her soul with out any
cessyng unto an heavenly living. And when this wise maid saw how fervent her
spyryte was in that desire / by cause she would not quench the spirit /
which that freely and gracyously had granted that she asked by a hot
kyndelyng of desire. Upon a day thanne she chose her a preuy place / where no
body might here her / and where she might speak all a loud with a high voys
what ever she would say there with all lowness of body and soul.

Thus spak she to our lady and said

O most blyssedfull Lady and most holy vitgyne / which first among all
wymmen thou halowedest for ever thy virgynytee to our lord with making to him a
vow / of whom thou were made mother of his only sone. Thy pity which may not
be spoke ne told of tongue lowely I beseech and pray that be none of my
merytes and notwythstondyng mine unworthiness wouches auf gracyous lady to do
me so much grace / that thou me spouse to him only whom I desired with all
the strengthes of my soul / and that is thyn holy sone my lord Ihesu christ
and here I make to him and to the fulle promysse that I shall never take other
spouse / and I shall keep to him my virgynyte vndefowled after my might and
pour / Loo maidens that read this / Loo vere ye may se how ordynatly all the
yeftes and virtuous werkyng and dedys of this holy maid were dysposed and
ordained by that everlasting wisdom / which myghtely dysposeth all things
in softnes. In the age of syy year she saw her spouse with her bodily eye /
and took of him his blyssynge. In the age of seven year she made a vow of
virgynyte. Takes head also by what auysement and what order she kept in
making her auowe. First she desired and asked to have him to her spouse /
whom her soul louyd. After that desire and askyng she forsook every manner
spouse behotyng to him troth and feyth for ever lasting. This petycyon might
not be denied. Takes head also whom she prays / and for whom she prayed /
and how she prays. First she prays that lady / which has properly inacte
the lyberalytee and the fredome of all graces / and can not but ever grant
and give grace. Be a man never so foul for sin / she holds her self
dettour to all both to wise and to unwise She despyseth none / she opened her
hand to each man that has need / and stretched out her pawmes to each pour
man / and shows out her self to all folk as a well that never faylled. How
should that gracyous lady not here that little maid so Innocent and fervent /
which puttyth not away from her grace sinful men / and women of elder age.
How should not our glorious lady receive the purpose of virgynyte of that holy
maid / which gracyously first among men found out the holy and clean lif
of virgynytee. How should our merciful and pyteuous lady deny this little
maid her sone / which drew him from heaven to the earth / for he should be
give to all that belyued on him. Now ye have seen whom this maid prayed Sith
now I pray thou for whom she prayed She asked that same / which he him self
taught for to ask which is asked. She sought that same which he byddeth
all men to seek that shall be sought. And he him self that shall be sought
may not put away ne put of. And the petycyon of such a thing must nedys have
grant after our lords promise where he said Askyth and ye shall have /
Speaks and ye shall find. He said also in another place. First sekyth the
kingdom of god and his ryghtwysnesse.

Therefore when this maid and so besely sought so tymely in so tender
chyldys age the sone of god / which is him self the kingdom of god / How or
what manner might it be / but that she should find what she sought / or have
that she asked / Ferthermore now sees in what manner she prayed or asked that
she desired / and ye shall clearly see that her prayer might not be done
away ne voydyd / She dysposed her self to receive that she asked / not only
for the time that now is / but for all the time that is to come / She remeuyd
all her obstacles / she clothed her with a plesable clothing of pouerte to
him for ever of whom she asked her desire / She bond hyrself / and oblysshed
her with a solemn vow as to fore god / And so straytely restrained her
self / that never the world ne the fend should let her dysposycyon /

In all this time there faylled her no condycyons / which a prayer should have
/ but that prayer must need be herd that she asked for her self / she asked
fulle mekely that was helthefull / and that was all health / feythfully she
stood and stedfastely / and to represente her perseuerau^ce. She made a
perpetuell vow where by she remeuyd all that should be obstacle for her
petycyon. Here may ye sekerly conclude that nedys she most be herd of our
lord / thinks then sekerly that as she asked so she resceyued of our lord.

And took her lord and her love for her everlasting spouse of his blysfulle
mother as she desired / and by help of that glorious lady she was coupled for
ever to her dear sone by a perpetuell vow of virgynyte / as it shall be proved
with the help of our lord by a clear token in the last chapter of this first
party. But now ferthyrmore ye shall know that after this vow this maid
began every day to wexe more holy and holy. And in that tender age she began to
take battle with her flesh / which as yet began never to be rebel. But for
all that she purposed to take a way from her flesh all flesshly mete as
much as she might. Wherefore when flesh was leyde to her / as it fylle
often / either she leyde it to Stephen her brothyr or preuely little and little
she voyded it / that no body should perceive it. She continued always her
dysplyens / of which I spoke a fore / and encresed hem more sharply either
allone by her self / or with other young maidens. Also a great well of othyr
sowles health began to be kyndelyd in her / and that was wonderful in such a
chyldes heart / and syngulerly she loved all tho saints / which labored
specially a boute the health of man's soul. She had also knowing only by
the techynge of god that Saint Domynyk ordained the order of friar prechours
for love of the feythe of holy church / and for the health of man's soul.
Wherefore she had that order in so much reverence / that when she saw frerys
of that order passing forth in the way by her faders how se / she marked well
where they went / and when they were passyd fulle mekely and deuoutely she
kyssed the steps of their fete. From that time forward / there wext a great
desire in her soul to go unto that order that she might profit man nes soul
with other brethern of that order / but by cause she saw a great obstacle in
that she was a woman. Therefore she thought to follow Saint Eufrosyen as me^
clepyd her in childhode wonderfully as for a pronostycacion / that right as
saint Eufrosyen feyned her a man / and went in to a monastery of monks / in
the same manner this maid is purposed to seyne her a man / and go in to far
contree where she was not know / and take the abyte of the order of friar
prechours / where she might help sowles and save them from perysshyng. But yet
not wytfstondyng that same thought and purpose abode long in her mind. Our
lord suffered not that thought to be performed in dedene brought to execucyon /
for ye love was put from her mind to another end / and our lord would also in
another manner fulfill her desire. In all this time this maid wexte fast in
body and encreced in age / but much more her soul encreced in virtue. Mekenes
wext fast / and devotion encreced / feyth was more clear / hope was gretely
strengthed. Charity multyplyed her fervor. And of all this virtues was gendryd
a virtuous / and a worshypfull sadness of maneres / and of relygyous put in
the sight of al men which considered her dedys. The fader and the mother were
astonyed / her brethern and susteren wondered gretely.

All the meyne of her faders hows meruaylled beholding and perceiving so
high wisdom in so tendyr age.

And among many notable wise words and dedys / one I will show you here in
co^mendacyon of that maid. Hit befylle at that time after seven year and to
fore ten year age that for devotion that her mother had to saint Anthonye. She
would have a mass I said in the worship of the same Saint / wherefor she
clepyd Katheryne her daughter and took her a certain of candelles and a
certain of silver and said.

Goo daughter to our parysshe church and pray our parysshe priest to sing or
do sing a mass in the worship of saint Anthonye. And offer these candelles
and this money up to the awtre. This maid was glad to do all thing that
might torn to the worship of god / and anon she went to the church and
performed her moders byddyng

But for devotion that she had to here mass / she abode stylle to the end
of the mass. And when all was I do / she went home ageyn / but her mother
wend she would a comen anon ageyn / anon as she had made oblacyon to the
priest And for as much as her daughter tarried so long after her semyng. When
she saw that she was come / she thought to blame her daughter and said. Cursyd
be the wicked tongues / that said thou sholdeste no more come again. This was
the manner of sum men to say her langage to her name that tarried to long
out. This maid then of great wisdom herd what her mother said / and held
her stylle a while / and spoke no word again. But after a good space this
maid drew her modre a fyde / And with great sadness of her mekely spak to her
modre and seyde A lady modre when ever I trespass or do aghast your biddyng beat
ye me with a rod as you thinks best that I be more ware Another time for it
is worthy and right full that ye do so But no thing I pray you for my defautes
curses never good man ne badde / For it is not semyng for your degree And to
me it is a full great affliccion^ in heart / while her modre herd these wordys
sche wondrid gretely And no merueill was to here her lytill daughter teache and
so wisely inform her In somoche that she had no spirit more to blame her at
that time for the wysdom that she saw in so young alitill thing Never the les
she would not that her daughter had know that / therefore su^what she thought
to speak again and turned to her daughter and seyde / Why were you there so
long / the daughter seyde mekely again modre I herd that mass that yebadde
me goo to / And when it was I done I turned home ageyn without any tarieng for
I abode nowhere till I come home again Thoo was the modre by tho wordis more
edyfyed than she was to fore and went to her husbonde / and said Thus and thus
has thy young daughter I spoke / He than as a good man gafthankynges to god /
and bare it stylle privily in his heart / And seyde naught again Loo ye
mayden^s that here or read this book of this oo point all be yt that it be one
of the least Yet mow ye well perceive how our lord encreceth his grace all
weye in this young maid till she come to ye years of abilitee to be weddyd /
of the which years ye shall see in the next chapter For of this chapitre I
make now an end

But yet ye shall understand that I had these that be contained in this
chapter of the same maid for the more party and sum I had of the modre
and of other dwelling in her fadres hows whyse she was of that age.

How her feruente devotion was draw which our lord suffered for encrece of
more grace following. And of her strong pacyence with the which pacyens she
suffered in her fadres hows many Iniuryes. Capitulu^q^rtu^
AFter the wonderful and virtuous course of living in the first years of this
maidens tender age / our lords will was in sum light defaute to suffer her
to fall as he suffered fulle often sum of his holy saints / to that intent
that they should the more myghtely arise up again / and live more warly / and
strenght hem to atteyne to the right way / and the heythe of perfeccyon and
gloryously have the vyctorye of the fend / which is ever enemy to man's
soul. These words I say here / for when she came to the age of the years
of abylyte to be wedded / that is to say to the twelthe year of her age or
little more / then after the manner of the contree she abode still at home and
came not out of her fadres hows. And the fader and the mother then and her
other friends and kynne / by cause they knew not the may dens purpose / they
bethought hem and besyed hem to seek about where that this maiden might
worshypfully and parfy tably be wedded and to what prosone.

Her mother supposed that for the great wisdom that her daughter had / she
should have be wedded to sum man of great kyneede / where for she besyed her
fast about the bodily apparayll and array of her daughter / and taught her to
wasshe often her face / and to kembe often her head / and to make her fair here
/ and to void all thing that should be dyshoneste / or should make foul her
face or her neck /

That when any man came to ask after her for marriage she should be the more
semely and fayrer. This holy maid was all of another purpose and had made
another vow. All be it she showed it not to her fader ne mother / wherefore
utterly she thought no thing to do as her mother bad her / touching such
curyosyte. She besyed with all her strengthes to plese god / but no man in
that wise. And when her mother had aspyed that she had no will to that
manner of living / she was dysplesed / and clepyd to her Bonauenture her other
daughter which was late I wedded before / And bad her trete so her suster /
that she might array her in bodily apparayll as the manner was of wymen in that
contre that should be married / and do as she had bad her do to fore. Her
mother knew well that Katheryne loved Bonauenture fulle tenderly / and
supposed that she should be brought in to that more lyghtely by her
suggestyons thanne by any other. And so she was as ye shall see after. For by
suffraunce of our lord she was brought so Inn thorough speech and example
of her suster Bonauenture by many manner ways / that at the last she assentyd
to her business in apparaylle of her body / after the will of her mother / not
wythstondynge that stably she kept her purpose never to have husbonde. But
after the grant to her sustre and followed her will / in such array / she
maad so much sorrow when that she was confessyd thereof with terys and
sobbyng that each body should suppose that she had do sum grievous sin: She
used often to be confessyd generally: and always wha^ she came to ye point she
accused her self full hard with weeping and sore sobbyng But the confessor
all be it he knew that a virtue it is of god: and lowely sowles to see in
them self defaute where none is. And where it is but little / it seems him
full great / Nevertheless for asmoche as she accused her self / and demed her
worthy everlasting pain, for that sin / saving the mercy of god / There he
asked her whether she purposed or wylled in all that time to do against her
vow: She said nay, for it came never in her heart. Also he asked again
whether she did it to the plesaunce of any man. In special: or to the
plesaunce of all men She answered and said: there was none somoche pain to her
as to be hold men or to be seyne of men / or to be there men should find her /
wherefore when her faders men yt learned dyers craft in her faders house came to
any place or chamber where she was. she fled as fast away as adders had
come to her so that all men wondered / She would never goo to the wyndowe ne to
the door of the hows to see how men went by the way / Then^e he said why
deserved ye that deed which was but for a bodily ornamente everlasting pain:
namely when the apparelle was not to excessyuely / She answered and said that
to excessyuely she loved her suster / And as her thought more tha^ god as at
that time wherefore she wept without remedy and did hard penance: Her
confessor would have replied again and said All be it there was sum manner
excess of love it was but little: And that deed as of him self was not I do
for no wicked or evil entencion / but for vain plesaunce of her for the time
and that was not against the precepte of god / She herd how her confessor
replied / she lift up her eyes to god / And with a loud voys cried and said.
A my lord god what ghostely fader have I now which excuses my sins / and
with a sore grutchynge against her self / she turned to her confessor and
said / Fader think ye that this wretchedfull and most unworthy creature of
god which has received of my maker of naught so many gracyous yeftes without
my labor / And wythouten any merit should occupye any time in arraye and vain
apparelle of this roten flesh which might or induce a dedely sin: I wene
she said hell suffyseth not to punysshe me: had not the pity of god do
gracyously and merciful with me /

After these words her confessor durst no more speak of that matter / But than
after that he besyed him to know if that blessed soul had ever in her life be
kept wythouten any spot^e of dedely sin:

So that she had kept fully hole her vyrgynyte both of body and of soul:
Not only from the sin of flesshely steryng / but also of all manner of sin
And after that he knew how virtuous and how clean a soul she had / This
witness and record he bare of her conversation and both said and wrote that
he could never perceive ne find another by her general confession ne special
confession as often as ever she was confessyd* And that was right often: that she
had offendyd against the precepte of our lord: But if it were that is told
before the which he might not suppose it were against the bidding of god / Ne
he trowed none dyscrete man would suppose it / And also he said that he found
her ever so clean fro venyall sins that uneath he could perceive by her
cotydyan confession any manner offense: It was openly known not only to her
confessors that knew her conscience: but to all that were conuersaunt* with
her that never or seldon she offended in word: For either she occupied her
time in prayer and contemplacion or ellis in good edyficacion of her neighbors
/ And as for her time of slepyng / uneaths she would grauute to her a quarter
of an hour And when she should ete her mete* yet it may be called a mete. ever
she prayed and thought holy medytacyons thynkyng of the things that she had
learned of our lord in her soul / More her confession: Master Reymound bears
a true record of her for the time yt he knew her and had cure of her
conscience / that it was more pain to her for to ete her mete, than it was to
an hungry man for to be wythdrawe from his mete. And a great tourmente it was
to her body after time she had ete: than it was com^ely to a fenerous man in
rennyng offhis fever /

And this was one of the causes why she would ete her mete as it shall be
declared within forth for to tourmente and put in pain her body: In what
manner of trespaas might such a soul be occupied: that always was occupied so
with our lord god / And yet not wythstondyng such good occupacions. She
accused her self so sharply in confession and so wyttyngly put her self in
trespaas and offenses / that if he confessor had not know her
conuersacyon: He might have supposed that she had trespased where she
trespased not, but rather deseruyd mede /

Loo ye maidens that heren and reden this book: all this process is for no
thing else I said but by that ye perceyuen this little defaute / In the
which this holy maid yield her self so mekely gylty /

Ye may understand thereby what per feccyon shows thereafter by the gracyous
yefte of our lord the which her confessor reherseth in this wise.
Bonauentura: right as she was besy before for to array this holy maid as the
world asks / Right so eftsoon she besyed her for to enduce her in such
array by her counseyll to the same apparaylle /

She might in no wise inclyne the may dens heart another general another specy
all that she should show her bodily presence wylfully to the syghte of man /
to that intent oonly that she should be desired the sooner to be wedded. all
though her fervor of prayer: and of sweetness off medytacio^ was slaked and
wythdrewe^ from her for a time:

At the last our lord would not longer suffer that his spouse the which
had so specially chosen should be withdraw and tarried from his special
service / he wythdrewe from her in this wise- In a time when the same
Bonauentura. the suster of the holy maid should bring forth a child she was
yet young y: nough of age for to bear children / Take heed maidens therefore and
see by this / How our lord is displesed with them that been about for to
let and wythdrawe them that would serve him specially in maydenhode and
chastyte of living /

This Bonauentura as it is rehersyd after was always full honest in her manner
of living both in word and deed / But by cause that she besyed her to draw
her suster to wordly things the which desired to serve our lord specially /
She was smyten of him and punysshed with a full sharp death Nevertheless our
lord yet wrought full mercyably with her / for as it was showed afterward by
reuelacyon to this holy maid / she was in purgatory / and suffered many grievous
pains. And by the prayers of her she was delivered of pain and restored to
bliss / as she showed afterward preuely to her confessor. When her suster
Bonauenture was passyd out of this world / thanne this blessed maid Katheryn
clearly perceived the vanyte of this world / and be ganne more feruentely and
more gredylye trewely for to be turned to the lovely ghostly clyppyng of her
endeles spouse Jhesu christ / claymyng and accusynge her self gylty with Marye
magdalene / falling down full streyte to the fete of our lord plenteuously
shedyng out terys axynge Inwardly his mercy / praynge and thynkyng vncessably
for her sins / that she might deserve to her with Marye magdalene the words
of confort of our lord as he said to Marye thus. Remittu^tur tibi peccata
tua. That is to say / daughter thy sins by foryeue the. And so she began
to have a synguler affection to Mary magdalene For thanne in that time she
enforsed hyrself with all her myghtys to conferme her to Marye magdalene to
have the more grace in forgyuenes of her sins.

Therefore afterward by encrece of devotion this follow thereof that our lord god
the spouse of holy sowles / and his blessed mother our lady Saint Marye gave
Mary magdalene to this blyssyd maid in to a maystresse and to a mother as it
shall be declared more openly with Inn forth by the help of Jhesu.

After this the fend enemy to all mankind sorowyng that thus his pray was
wythdrawe / and delyuerd all hole from his power / the which be little and
little enforced to draw it to him. And also considering / that this holy
maid encreced more and more to run quyckely to the tabernacle of mercy of
her spouse Jhesu. He thought felly and wylely to let her of her ghostly
purpose by the meyne of her faders howsholde / besyeng him by aduercytees and
persecucyons to draw her holy to the world / that she should not be occupied
in such ghostly excercyse puttyng in to the the mind of her fader and mother
and also her brethern / that in all wise she should be wedded. That they might
so by her mean purchase sum manner of kynrede / about this business the
fend enduced hem so hyely / that in asmoche as one of her daughters was passyd
out of this world / they should be about to recover the harm of her that was
deed by her that was a live. So ferforth that they were about to seek an
husbonde for this holy maid.

When this maid perceived and considered the wyles of her ghostly enemy by
Inspyracyon of our lord Jhesu. A none myghtely and besyly she continued in
prayer and medytacyon and excercyses of penance to have grace to flee the
conuersacyon of men / and so showed by open tokenys to her friends / that in
no wise she was in purpose to be wedded to no dedely ne corruptyble spouse.
Sith it so is and was that she had taken so gracyously to her spouse in her
young tender age the vndedely king of endeles bliss

When the fader and mother and kynne perceived verily that this holy may de
showed perseuerau^tly both by tokens and by word / that she wylled never to
be wedded to none erthely man / they thought to bow her heart / by a another
mean for to consent to their purpose.

They called to them a friend of therys a friar prechour the which they loved
specially / and prayed him entyrly that he would goo and counseyll that holy
maid that she should consent to there will. To whom the friar answerde and
said / he would do that he might. But when he came to this maid by
communycacyon he found her so steadfast in the purpose of maydenhode that by
conscience he was so enduced to give her holsum counseylle and said. Sith it
is so that thou art dysposed to serve our lord god in maydenhede / against
which purpose thy friends ben about to let the. Show the steadfastness of
thyn holy purpose / and cut a way all thyn here of thy head / and
peradventure they would cesse of there pursuyte. As soon as this blessed maid
herdethys his counseyll / she wrought there after as though she had I herd
it of god. And took a peyre of sherys anon and cut away her herys / in the
which she supposed she had sinned grievously / and that that she hated so much
/ she cut it away right gladly fast by the he de / And when she had I do /
she couerd her head with a Coyf / and so went forth all against the common
custom of other maidens of the world / with a kerchyf on her head after ye
doctrine of saint Powle / And when her mother Lapa aspyed this that her daughter
Katheryn used thus to cover her head customably /

She asked her why she did so / to who me this maiden gaf none clear answer /
by cause she would nethyr lie ne tell the truth. With that the mother went
to this maidens head and took of her kerchyfe with her own hondys. And so
perceived yt her here was cut awaey Tha^ne was the mother sorrowful in her heart
because her fair here was cut away waylynge and cryenge in this wise.

Aa daughter what haste thou do.

Anon the maid keuered her head efte sons / and went a side To the cry of
her mother came both the fader and the children meruayllyng what it might be

When they knew the cau^^ of her cryeng / they were hugely ameuyd ageynste
this maid / of the which trouble was begone the secounde bataylle against
this maid more sharper than then was the first. But yet to this maiden our
lord gaff the vyctorye / that thoo things which seemed lettyng to her holy
purpose was to her great help meruayllously for to knytte her to our lord more
myghtely Therefore they pursued her openly rebukyng her and thretyng her in
word and deed saying thus. Thou wretched creature trowest thou for to escape
thus that thou shall not fulfill our will because that thou have cut away
thyn here / hit shall grow ageyn will thou nyll thou / and though thyn heart
should to breast / yet shall you have an husbonde. And thou shall never have
rest unto the time that thou haste consented to our will.

And with that they made an ordinance that Katheryne should no more have no
pryue chamber by her self to dwell Inn / but that should openly be occupied
in the common service of the hows. So that the place and time of prayeng and
vnyeng and knyttyng to Jhesu her spoufe should utterly be with draw from her
And also that she should see her self so much the more in despyte that she was
made a common servant. After this ordinance this holy maid was put to all
manner fylthe business / and the foul of the kechyn. Suffryng every day
repreues / and every day also wrongs and rebukyng and dyspytable words were
multeplyed against her / that most of all ouercomen wymmenys hertys.

For as hit was supposed / her fader and her mother and brethern hadden fond a
young man of whose kynrede they weren gretely well apayde. And therefore they
steryd and Inpugnyd her the more sharply that she might the sonner be bowed to
their consent. But where that our ghostly enemy the fend / by whose wyckednes
and tretcherous works all these things were wrought / and down wend for to
with draw this maid from her clean purpose. There by the help of god she was
made most strengest for she was in no wise meuyd ne stered of all that was
done to her. But she made her a pryue chaumbre / by help of the holy ghoost
in her own soul / fro the which pryue chaumbre she made an ordinance in her
self / never for to go out for no manner of business And so it was done in
deed / that she the which first had an outward chaumbre assygned to her /
sometime stood with out and sometime went out. But afterward when she had made
her selue in her soul a pryue chaumbre that might not be take from her of no
creature in earth / she went never out. These ben tho heavenly vyctoryes that may
not be taken away fro crystis special in earth / ouercomynge with out any
doubt all stylly enemies

As holy writ seyth. Regnum dei infra nos est That is to say / the kingdom
of heaven is within us. And also the prophet Dauyd seyth. That all the joy of
our lords daughter is within forth. Within us with out any doubt / there is
a clear understanding / a fr^ will / and a retentyf mind. Within us also is
the gracyous Infusyon of the holy ghoost / the which makes perfyte these
ghoostly myghtys rehearsed before / and ouercometh and throws under foot all
outward aduersytres. Within us if we ben true vylners of virtue dwells that
ghest / the which said and seyth.

Confidite ego vici mundum. That is trusts feythfully that ye shall overcome
your enemies / for I have overcome the world that great enemy. In this
blessed lord / this holy maid Katheryn trustyd so hyghely that she made her
with Inn her self a chamber by his help / for whose love she charged not for
to lose the chamber made of man's hands without forth. But now one thing
shall I say / that master Reymond the confess sour of this holy maid beryth
record of that when that he should walk outward by cause other while of great
outward business and occupacyon that nedys must be done: This holy maid
oftymes warned him and said / that he should make within his soul a pryuee
celle / of which pryue cell he should never goo out

And all be it that he understand her not / but so ouerly so lyghtely. Yet
nevertheless afterward when he considered more wyttely her words. The words
that Saint Johan said in the Gospel fell in his mind where it is rehearsed
of crystys dyscyples in this wise. Hoe autem non cognouerunt discipuli eius
primum. Sed quando glorificatus est ihesus tune recordatisunt. That is crystys
dyscyples knew not all thing of him as touching his passion first but only.
But after time when he was reysen fro death to live / and gloryfyed / thanne
they knew more openly and clearly / And so in the same manner wise / both to
master Reymond her confess sour and to tho other that were conuersaunt with her
/ it happyd meruayllously that they perceived more openly and clearly both her
dedys and her words afterward / than whenne they were with her presently /

Yette shall I tell you of another holy conseyt and a blessed ymagynacyon of
this holy maid / that the holy ghoost taught her / by the which she overcome
all wrongs and despytes as she told pryuely to her confessor / axyng of him
mekely how she might be perfytly glad among so many despytes / And thanne
she brake out and said / that she had such an ymagynacyon in her self that
her fader represented our lord Ihesu Christ our savior and her mother our
blessed lady Saint Marye And her brethern and other many of the household
betokens the holy appostles of our lord and other dyscyples of his.

And for this blessed ymagynacyon she served hem all the more gladdely / so
that they were all a meruaylled thereof.

And by this blessed ymagynacyon she wan another great profit / and as oftr as
she served and made mynystracy on / ever she had in mind her her spouse
Ihesu Christ. Whom her thought she served. And so she being in bodily kechyn
was all way with that holy place that is called Sancta sanctorum. And as often
as she served at mete / so often she fed her soul with the presence of
our savior. A high and richesse of endeles counseyll / by how many diverse
and meruayllous ways delyuerest them that trusten in the from all manner
dyseses / and bryngest them in to the haven of endeles rest / delyueryng them
both from the pytte and the swolowe.

When all this was done / this holy maid considering euyr more in her soul
ye mede and the reward I ordained for her of the holy ghoost / suffered gladly
and naught paynfully / all the wrongs that was put to her. And also she
encreced contynually the course of her labor the more / that she might have a
full joy in her soul. And by cause that it was not suffered to her to have a
chamber by her self / but for to have her chamber openly as other had.

Therefore by an holy a^uysement / she chose the chamber of Stephen her brother
that had nether wife ne children. Where by days time when he was absente
she might be allone. And nyghtes time when he slepte / she prayed after her
desire / so that night and day she sought to see the face of her spouse
Ihesu Christ / knockyng at the door of his ghoos^ly tabernacle with out
cessyng. She prayed our lord vncessably that he would wouche sauf to be the
keeper of her virgynytee / saying and syngyng in in soul with Saint Cecylye
this holy verse of Dauyd the prophet Fiat cor meum domine et corpus meum
immaculatum. That is lord Ihesu I pray that mine heart and my body be kept
clean vnderfowled to the / and so in scylence and in hope she was made strong
in our lord right meruayllously. For the more torment and persecucyon she had
with out forth / the more she was fulfilled with ghoostly joys within forth /
so ferforth that her brethern perceyueng her steadfastness sayden betwyne them
seluen thus we be over come. Her fader that was most Innocente of all
consyderyng pryuely her deeds / perceived that she was ladde every day more
and more by the holy ghoost / and naught by the lyghtnes of yonthe.

All these that been rehearsed in this chapter / her confessor master Reymond
had it by reuelacyon of Lapa this maidens mother / and of lyxa her brother wife
and of other also that were in her faders hows / But as for other things that
other folk might not know / he knew by tellyng of this holy maid in
confession /

Of the vyctorye which she had of them that desesed her / And that was by a
culuer which her fader saw / and by a vysyon of S^ynt Domynyk Ca v
IN the mean while that this holy maid was put in such reprove and shame /
it happyd up on a day that she entered in to the chamber of her young brother
Stephen. And prayed devoutly leuyng the door vnshett for it was forboden to her
by her fader and mother that she should not shette the door.

Casuelly then it happened that the fader entered in to the chamber seeking a
certain thing of his sons that he had need to. And as he looked about / he
saw his daughter more gods daughter thanne his / prayng in a corner and
knelyng / and a little white culuer resting up on her head / the which culuer
fled out of the chamber wyndowe when the fader was entered in to the chamber
as him thought Anon the fader axed the daughter / what culuer that might be
that fled so out of the chamber / to whom the daughter answered and said /
that never she saw culuer ne other bird in the chamber. Then had the
fader great meruaylle / and kept all these words pryuely in his heart. Fro
that time forward there began gracyously to encrece in that holy maidens
soul an holy desire / which nevertheless was begone as it is reherced a
fore in her chyldehode / and now afterward it was renewyd for tuycyon and
disease of keeping of her maydenhode or virgynytee / and that desire was no
thing else but for to receive the habyte of the order of friar prechours the
which order Saint Domynyk was both foundour and fader. There she prayed both
day and night to our lord that he wouchesauf to fulfill her desire.

And thereto she had a great devotion to Saint Domynyk / as it is rehearsed a
fore to a worthy and a fruytfull lover of sowles. Almighty god therefore saw
how wisely and how myghtely his daughter as a young knight faught in battle /
and with what fervor of devotion she besyed her to plese him with all her
desire / he would in no wise dysceyue her ne defraude her of her holy purpose.

But for the more sekernesse he comforted her with such a vysyon.

This holy maid on a time had a vysyon in her sleep that she saw many holy
faders / and many diverse fou^dours of ye order of ye friar prechours / among
whom she saw saint Dominyk that she knew well I now / holdyng in his hand a
fair white lylye / the which lylye semyng to her was all a fire as ye busshe
yt Moses saw / and yet was not brennyd. When this holy faders al in general
and each in a special gaf her counsel for her more mede yt she should chese
oo Relygion of their ordinance in ye which relygion she might yield due
service to god. She turned her self hole to saint dominik / and so saw in
spyryt how yt ye holy fader saint dominyk came to her and brought in his hand
an habyte of sustris the which susters ben called sustres of penance of saint
Domynyk Of ye which susters there was ne yet is no little no^bre in ye cite of
Senee. And when this holy fader saint domynyk came to this maid he comforted
her with such words and said Dought be of good comfort / and dread no manner
of peril for right as you have desired this habyte: she thought she received it
and thankyd almighty god and his worthy confessor Saint Domynyke not with a
little gladness but with ioyefull teres that so perfyghtely had comforted
her: And so with weeping she awoke and was restoryd to her bodily wits.

And when she was awaked she caught comfort and bodily strength of this vysyon
/ and took so great a boldenes of the trust that she had in our lord /
that the same day she called her fader and mother and brethren togyders and
said to them boldly in this wise / Sometime ye said unto me / and tretyd me
long time thereof that I should be wedded to a corruptyble and to a dedely man
and though I had abhomynacion of such weddyng in mine heart as ye might
clerly perceive by many diverse tokenes if ye had I would yet for the
reverence that I should show to my fader and mother by the bydyng of god unto
this time I excused me never clerly to you / but now by cause I may no longer
be still I shall declare to you openly mine heart and purpoos / The which
purpoos it is not conceived of new: but of chyldhode unto this time* therefore
I will ye know it that in mine chyldhode I made avowe of virgynyte and serve
our lord savior of all the world / and his blessed mother glorious vyrgyn
marie. our glorious lady / not chyldely but with a sa^ and a long avysement.
And for a great cause / I made avowe also that I should never take husbond but
him alone: Therefore now sith I am come by the sufferaunce of our lord to a
more perfyght age and knowleche and vnderston dyng wit / wete ye right well
this is the same purpoos which is so mighty and stroonge in mine soul that it
were more possible hard flynt stones rather to be made nesshed. than mine heart
should be wythdrawe fro this holy pnrpos and therefore the more ye labor about
this thing / the more time ye lose: Wherefore I counseyll you that ye leave of
all manner such tretyng of wedding as touching mine person / For therein shall
I never fulfylle your will / by cause that I should rather be obedyent to god
than to man / therefore if ye will have me such one in your house that I now
serve god in this purpoos and for to be a commyn servant to serve you all / I
am ready in all that I can or may to do you service gladly: And if ye will
receive me but for this cause that ye will putt me out of your house / I do
you well to wete that in no wise mine heart may be wythdrawe fro this holy
purpos /

I have an husbond and a spouse christ Jhesu so rychely and so myghtely yt
will not suffer me in no wise to lack no thing / But he will mynystre to me
all that me needs:

When she had said all these words all that herd her speak fill in
weeping / and by cause of her plentnously syghynge and sobbing / they might for
that time give none answer: They consyderid to the holy purpos of this holy
maid ye which they might not with say ne wythstonde: and they behylde also
how still the maiden had I kept her: how clean and how pure unto yt time / and
how bodily she declared her conscience by words of great prudence / and also
over more they saw openli that she was rather diposed for to forsake her
faders house than for to break her holy purpoos and so they had no more trust
of her weddyng / wherefore it lyked them better for to weep than for to give
her answer /

Within a little while after when they had cesyd all her weeping: the fader
yt loved her so tenderly had dredde of god and dred god / so hyghely had
mind of the coluer that he saw and of many good deeds of the which she used
/ The which deeds he gretely merueylyng gave her such an answer and said /
Dear daughter god forbede it that we should any thing will or desire against
the will of god. For the which will / and fro the which will we know well
this holy purpoos comes fro / Therefore it is so that we ben taught by long
experyence. And now openly we see that thou art not steryd herto by the
lyghtenesse of chyldhode: but by fervent charity of god / Make thy vow
therefore freely / and do as the lyketh and as the holy ghoost techeth the:

And fro this time forward we shall never let the from thyn holy purpoosne
thine ghostely exercise / but only pray for us besely that we may be made
worthy to the promys and the byheste of thyn ghoostely spouse whom thou haste
chose by his special grace in thyn tender age: Then he turned him to his
wife and to his children and said none of you from this time forward be to my
ne dear donghter grievous. None be so hardy from this time forward to let her
in any wise to suffer her to serve her spouse freely / and she to pray for us
be sely /

We might never have found a better husbond to her then he is. the which
vochesauf to be so nere of our kind for to wedde our daughter and have her to
wife / Therefore we have none cause to pfayne us sithe it so is that we have
received now for a dedely man* vndedely god and man to be her spouse /

When the fader had said these words with weeping and with weylyng both of
them, self and also of other that herd them and him speak and namely of ye
mother that louyd this maid in manner flesshely. then^e this holy maid Katheryn
ioyefully thanked our lord that brought her to this vyctorye and also her
fader and mother with all manner of lowenes: dysposyng her self to use
profytably the license that was granted to her And this is the end of this
chapter:

But now I will ye known that redyn or heren this book that Master Reymound
confessor to this holy maid knew never by reuelacion of the fader that saw
the coluer the which restyd on this blessed maidens head for the fader was
deed or tha^ Master Reymou^d knew this blessed maid. But he knew it by
reuelacio^ of Cosyns that dwelled in the faders house. the which cosins
recorded and bare wytnes that the fader saw such a culuer with her often times
And therefore he had her in great reverence. and he would in no wise that she
had be lettyd or troubled /

Of the vysyon that she saw of saint Domynyk both master Reymound and her
confessor before him knew it by tellyng of this holy maid. And when master
Reymound examyned her of ye words that she said last to her fader mother and
brederen: and how she byhad her in her pesecucions: she told him all by order
mekely as it was /

Of the hardenesse of her bodily penance and of afflyction: and what
persecucion she fuffred therefore of her mother Capitulu^ vj
When this devout maid had received so large a license that was granted
her of long time desired before / She began right quyckely for to dyspose
merueylously all her life to the seruyse of god: At the beginning she asked to
have a little chamber to her self / and so had de it: wherein she purposed to
tourmente her body with penance as in a wilderness that she might have the
more fredome of soul for to serve our lord / How much and how hard penance
she used in tourmentyng of her body / And how great love she had in seeing of
her spouse in that little chamber: there may no tongue suffer to tell /
Nevertheless I have rehearsed some what in general of her great penance / And
now I purpose to tell you maidens in special under few words the hardness
of her penance / so that ye of the great virtuous herbs of her holy living
may taste somewhat of the fruit that grown about the herber both of the
first and of the last / And for the condycions and the kyndis of the fruit: it
shall be declared by the help of god afterward And the cause why that in this
place is rehersyd som^e what of her fruit full virtuous living is for nothing
else / But for the maidens should be the more able and redyer to ghostely
excercyse: In this little chamber that was granted her: often times she
considered swetely the ghostely werkis of our old faders of Egypt. And in
ghostely werkys was to her so much the more merueylous, and that she had
the true knowleche thereof in her faders house without ensample or doctrine off
other / First I shall tell you of her abstinence of mete and drink fro her
chyldehood in to the time that she came to that age / She ete full seldom
flesh as it is rehearsed before / but when she was come to this age and this
special fredom. she forsook utterly etyng of flesh so fer forth that
belong of custom and use that she had in forsakyng of it:

It was so light some to her that it was a pain to her for to smelle it as she
told her confessor preuely in confession and by cause ye should have none
gretter merueylle hereof. I shall tell you of another great abstynence / When
her confessonr perceived in a time that she was greatly wasted and feblyd in
body for she received none such mete and drink that febyll folk should be
comforted with / He gave her counseyll that she should put in her cold water
that she drank / sugar or a lytyl sugar roset: Whereby her spyrytys might the
more be quyckenyd / With that she touenyd to her confessor and said / A
little life there is left wytt in me the which me seems ye would it utterly
were quenchyd /

And when her confessor had asked her why and knew her excusacion / He
understood by her words that she had so used her to bitter metes and
unsavory drinkys. that all manner sweet thing was noyous to her body / by cause
her dysposycion was turned in to a custom: And so it was to her of etyng
f^esshe. as it is rehearsed before: And when she should drink wine as the
contree foryeuyd after the time she had license to keep her chamber: she
medlyd that wine so with water that it lost both his taste and his savor /
and also a great part of his color / But afterward when she was xv year of
age she left all manner of drynkyng of wine and used to drink cold water:
And all manner soden mete out taken bread alone / She wythdrewe fro her by
little and little every day somewhat / and within a lytyl time after she held
her to bread and raw herbs /

At the lasie when she was twenty year of age or there about. she left etyng
of bread and held her only to raw herbs: Then afterward she came to such
an high state of living. nonght by use and kind as it shall be declared
openly ynogh wythinforth by the help of god / But oonly by miracle that all
be it: her body was oppressyd gretely with many diverse sickness and great
traueylles: The kyndly of dygestyon in the body had no place in her: and the
stomach also used not the might and the use of his office of defyeng:

And yet the strengthes of the body notwythstondyng her strength living both
in mete and drink were never the febly er: so that than her confessor
records of her / all her life was miracle. She might never do that she deed
by strength of kind as physyens said and told afterward to her confessor:
but oonly by miracle.

All these things shall clearly and play nely by the help of god openly be
declared within this book afterward. But as for the conclusyon of her
abstynence fro the time that her confessor Master Reymound knew her as he
records of her is this that she lived not with no mete ne drink that was
nourysshynge to her. ne she had none comfort of none kyndely strength: And
yet nevertheless she suffered gladly all manner dyseses and labors: How came she
to this state of living trow ye trewely not by bodily excercyse and use. But
rather by fulness of ye spirit I shall tell you in what wise ye fulness off ye
spirit som^e time rebonudeth in to the body. there it is made subject and
acordyng to the werkys of the spyryte for there the spirit of a gostely
creature is fed with the gifts of gostely graces / the body suffers the
more pacientli above natural strength of his own needs: who would be in dobute
hereof I trow none reasonable creature / whether martyrs in her holy martyrdom
suffered not gladly above natural strength tormente and myserye of their
bodies in her passions / I trow yeis /

And fro whens comes this trow ye / but of fullness of the spyryte / This is
often times known by experyens in our days: that if a man or a womman be
occupied in gods service devoutly /

He reketh never how long he fasteth and never to speak with creature / but
when he ceseth of the special devotion / And is occupied in outward bodily
besynes / it is hard for him for to fast and do as he did before / Whens
comes this grace / but oonly of the fulness of the spyryte that conforteth the
body: the which accords to the werkis of it / and all be it that this is a
gift above nature yet naturally the spyryte otherwhyle communeth with the
body: And the body with the spyryte both in good and evil In these words I
deny not / but that there ben sum the which may fast more esely than
sum. But symply for to fast and absteyne long time together in this life / me
seems it is inpossyble by nature thus much is rehearsed of her great
abstynence for this time / Takyth head also of another thing that this holy
maid tourmentyd her body with: beside all her abstinence / She made to her a
bed al of bordes without any other stuff: otherwhyles she would sytte or
stand in holy medytacions and other while knele and pray: and always when she
would sleep she lay coun without any doing away off her weryng clothes. For
she weryd always woollen both next her body and without some time she used the
hair or the cilyce, and yt she left afterward by cause as her confessor
supposed / That she that was clean within eschewed vnclen^es without that is
engendered of the cilyce or of the hair / But for the hair she used an iron
chain next her body euyr syttyng fast to her sides without any remeuynct or
ease / unto the time it endented the skin / And made a mark there upon as it
had be forbrennyd: As her ghostely daughters and her felawes told after ward
to Master Reymond her confessor / the which ghostely daughters and felawes
often times for diverse sekenesses that she suffered constreyned her for to
change / her clothes and for to wasshe away the sweet.

And therefore her confessor afterward by cause of her great sickness that she
suffered a lytyl before that she should be deed constreyned her by obedyens that
she should leave her cheyne. All be it she would not do it by her good will.

Evermore she continued in wakyng till the day dawed on the morrow as it shall
be declared more opynly here afterward. After that by little and little our
lord gave her grace to overcome sleep / that uneath she would sleep half an
hour in two days: And vnnethys she would receive that half hour but as
sekenes coustreyned her thereto /

And she would say otherwhyle to her confessor that the most traueylle that
ever she had. was for to overcome sleep / It was so hard a bataylle for her
or she might have the vyctorye of it. Yet more over as her confessor recorded
off her if she might have found any body that cowde had understand her and
commyned with her of virtue: And of the goodness of god it should not grieve her
though she had been without mete or drink and slepte an hundred days and an
hundred nyghtes she should never have be weary but rather the fressher and she
gladder /

She told often times to her confessor that she was never so well refrysshed
in spyryt in this life / as when she might find with whom she might commyne of
the goodness of god: And that knew well tho the which were conuersaunt with
her.

This was openly perceived in her when she might have leyser to speak off god /
that tho things of virtue the which were hyd in her heart / appieryd strongely
by ghostely gladness in the body outward / And when she had no leyser to
talk of our lord then she was feeble: Hereof bears witness her confessor:
Master Reymound / to the worship of god and of his own shame that oftymes
When this holy maid would speak of the goodness of our lord and of the great
myseryes that he showed to her. by cause of the long time of her contynuaunce
in spekyng And also by cause he was far from her loving as he said him self
/

He fill in a slombryng / and always she continued forth in speaking: For she
was reysyd up by love in to the breast of our lord / nothing perceiving that
he was a sleep. till a long time afterward:

And when she perceived that he was a sleep / with a great voys she awoke him
and said: why lose here ye the prouffyte of our soul for a little sleep:
speak I to a wall or to you /

Ferthermore she desired above all this to follow the stappes of the holy
fader Saint Domynyke / And that was in this wise / she received every day
theyes dyscyplyne with an iron chain: The first dyscyplyne was for her self.
The second for all tho that were a live And the third for them that were
deed /

Thus we read in the legende of saint Domynyk that he used contynually / and
therefore she used the same long time afterward. But after time she was feblyd
with sekenes that she might no longer use hit. And when her confessor axyd
of her pryuely how and in what wise she used that manner of penance / with a
great shamefastenesse she knowleched to him. That in every dysciplyne she
occnpyed an hour and an half / so that for the most party the blood followed
foo the sholdres down to the fete. Loo maidens what perfeccyon was in this
holy maidens soul / that thryes in the day let her self blood for goddys
love / shedyng her blood for his blood. See^ye not in what virtue she was of /
that with out any exaumple or Informacyon of any man in earth that used such
great penance with in her faders hows

Redeth Saints lives and writing of holy faders of Egypt / leueth none
unsought / but sercheth over all / and espy whether ye find any like to her.
Ye shall find Saint Powse the first heremyte lived long in deserte. But a
crow brought him every day half a lof to his mete. Ye may also find saint
Anthonye a full holy liver and did great meruayllous penance / and yet he
went to diverse ankrys about / and of each of them he gadred sum flowers of
virtue. Ye may also find of Saint Hyllaryon an holy liver. Yet as Saint Jerome
seyth / he was first informed to virtuous living of Saint Anthonye and to went
to deserte and there myghtly ouercam his enemies. Ye may find also of Macharye
and Arsenye and many other which is long to tell of / that had techers to
virtuous living / one or moo / both in word and also in exsaumple / what in
deserte / or in Relygion And this holy maid had nethyr her doctrine to virtues
in Relygyon / another in deserte But in her faders hows without any Informacyon
or exaumple of any man in earth / and there to came to a great perfeccyon of
abstynence / notwythstondyn ge the manyfolde lettyng the which she suffered in
her faders hows Shall I yet say more of this maidens commendacyon I pray you
lystene a little while and I shall tell how holy writ makes mencyon yt
Moses fasted twyes forty days / with out mete and drink / and Ely ones /
and our lord Ihesu christ also as the Gospel says / that they fasted more by
many years continued Holy writ tells not. Saint Johan baptyst though he
were in deserte he lived by honey soukeles and herbs. But symply that he fasted
I find nowhere I wryton.

Of Marye magdelyne allone her storye makes mencyon of her life that she fastyd
every year forty days to gyder with out mete or drink three and thyrty years
following / leuyng in a Roche of the sea. There for I trow it was that our lord
and hye blyssed mother committed her to this holy maid for to be her may
stresse and her mother as it is somewhat I touched before. And as it shall clearly
be de declared afterward by the help of god. By this may ye know that this
holy maid had a special yefte and a synguler grace of god. Not that she is
preferryd in holy living above all the Saints / the which ben rehearsed
before.

For that were a full odyous comparyson. So for to make such lykenes between
Saints / among which saints our savior Ihesu Christ is I nempned / to whom
for to lyken any saint in comparyson of holy living / that should be even with
him / it were blasfemye / al tho other saints which ben named / they be not
rehearsed for to make likeness in merits of living / but that ye shall
consydere and take heed first of the great magnyfycence of our lord Ihesu christ
/ that every day by his gracyous plentuous largenes mult^plyed his new yeftes
and grace / where with he arayeth ghostly and makes perfyte his chosen sowles.
Another also that ye shall consydere and take of the great synguler worthynesse
in her was no Iniurye ne wrong to other saints For holy church syngeth and
seyth specially / and syngulerly of every saint by him self. These words of
Salamon. Non est inue^tus similis illi. That is none I found like to this:
These words must be understand of the great might and large fredom of our
lord / making holy and perfyte his chosen sowles. The which may and will
endowe and arraye every saint syngulerly with a special yefte of grace with
out any wrong of other. Of all this matter now I shall cesse and proceed forth
in the first purpose By these condycyons of abstynence of this holy maid / may
be understood clearly that she was lene in body / that with so many herdenes
of penance and sharp afflyccyon^ was so often times tamed / and all was for
to make her body buxom and subgett^ to the service of the soul. On a time her
mother Lapa told to master Reymond her confessor* Thought that her daughter
tormented so holy her body in penance / she was of so great might and
strenghte in body / that she would with out any greuaunce life up on her
sholdres a borthen that was I now for an horse for to bear / and bear it up in
to an high garet above two long steyers For she was that time as she said
twyes so great in body thanne she was afterward at the age of xxxviij when she
had continued in so great penaunces. Hit was no meruayll and so it is / for
but if it had naught I be that our lord had kept her by miracle / hit had
be no meruayll though she had be all wastyd away. For at that time when that
her confessor master Reymond knew her / she was a full slender creature and
that was no meruayll. For the spirit encreced in virtue / the weyker wexxd the
body as though it were overcome of the soul / and not wythstondyng all this
she would ever labor gladdely and namely for the health of sowles. All be it
she suffered great sickness in her body / for the spyryte which was so strong
within sustained and comforted the feeble body with out. Now shall I cesse here
of / and torn ageyn to the first matter of this chapter. When this holy maid
had full grant and license of her friends for to serve our lord in her
little chamber assygned to her / and there began full fervently for to styghe
up ghoostly to her heavenly spouse. The serpent our ol de enemy the fend
though she had overcome him diverse times before. Yet he cessed not for to
assaylle her estesonys.

He steryd Eve his daughter. Lapa this maidens mother by a carnal love that she
had more to the body of her daughter than to her self / for to let her of
her penance For on a time when the mother came to her daughter / and aspyed
how she beat her self with an yren chain / she cried waylyng with a loud
voys and seyde. A daughter what doste thou / thou art but deed / for thou
sleest thy self / allas who has cou^seylled my daughter herto / who has
steryd her to do this.

And so with cryeng and waylyng this old womman tormented her self as she had
be a wood body with t^ryng of her clothes and of her here / for she thought her
daughter was but deed. By the noise of this cryeng all the neghbours were
styred about for to come Inn and see what this old woman eyled. When they
came they saw how this holy maid had made her a bed all of bare boordys
where on she rested when she would sleep.

And with vyolence her mother took her out of the chamber and brought her to
her own chamber there she lay / for she thought that she would make her sleep
in her own bed with her. And when this holy maiden saw this / by wisdom of
spyryte she showed great gladness in chere and kneled down a fore her mother
prayng her mekely with esy words that she would wouchesauf to put away all
her steryng and vnpacyence and be esy / for she was ready to obey to her as she
would have her ready for to lie with her as she would bydde her. When she thus
wisely p^syd her mother for to keep her in quyete / she laid her down by her
in that one side of the bed / and had there sweet medytacyons that she was
wont^ to have. After time her mother was a sleep / she rose up pryuely and went
again to her holy ghostly excercyse. The fend eftsoon had envy herto that
she should so encrece in virtue / styred her mother the second time ageyn her.
But there ageyn this holy maid used this prudence by cause she would no more
make *her mother sorry with her / she took pryuely a post and leyde it in her
bed under a shete and clothes abouen / that the mother when she would comen and
vysyte her should suppose that it had be she / the which had lay there under
the clothes.

And yet never thelesse she kept her common ^^stome of hard lyeng / as she did
a fore / hit was not long time after / but that the mother aspyed this well /
and when she had aspyed it she said to her daughter in this wise. Daughter I
see well all my labor is in vain / I may not change the from thy purpose /
ese it is to me for to let it over pass lightly. And therefore go and sleep
there on thou art I wont^. And so she was ouercomen with the stedfastnes of
this holy maid and suffered her ever afterward to live as the holy ghoost
styred her. Thus ends this chapter. Sum things there ben rehearsed there
Inn that her confessor master Reymond knew and had reuelacyon of by the
holy maid Katheryne* As is of her great abstynence and other sharpness of
penance / and of her manner of worchyng in them / and sum thynkes he knew by
reuelacyon of her mother Lapa / and some of other diverse matrons that were
conuersau^t with her. But some things he knew by him self / namely of her
synguler and gracyous yefte of abstynence.

Of the last vyctorye that she had in a bathe. And how she took the abyte of
Saint Domynyk Which she had long time desired to fore. Ca vij
When this holy maid was restoryd ageyn to her devout excercyse the more that
she perceived that the enemy of all mankind was besy for to let her / the
more fervent she was in her ghostly excercyse. Every day she wayled and every
day she wept / axynge and prayng our lord devoutly that he would wouchesauf to
give her grace to resceyue the abyte of saint Domynyk that she had long
desired. The which thorugh his great ^yt^^ was be hot her by our^ holy fader
Saint Domynyk in a vysyon. For she was never seker in her self to keep the
purpose of maydenhode unto the time she resceyued that holy abyte she wist well
that after time she were arrayed with that abyte all manner speech of her
weddyng should cesse / and she should be suffered for to serve her ghoostely the
more freely. Wherefore she prayed her fader and mother that they would give her
leave to be one of the susters of penance of sayn t^ Domynyk / that been called
in common speech of the Cite of Senee susters of the mant^ll. And ouermore she
prayed to the same sustres that they receive her to the same abyte among
theyr^ holy nombre. To this axyng the mod was not well apayed / all be it she
said not ones nay / but ever she was about as much as she might for to
withdraw her from her great penance that she used. And for this cause she
purposed on a time for to go to an hoot bath / or for to be bathed and her
daughter with her. That as soon as this holy maid had felt any manner comfort
and solace to the body by that bathyng by little and little she should have left
her great penance* This was not done without will of the fend / the which
besyed him in that he might to with draw such a fervent soul from the
ghostly calling of her heavenly spouse He taught this sinful wo^man Lapa this
maidens mother full pryuely his malycyous wylles Nevertheless by cause there may
no counseyll preuayll ne have the maystrye against the counsel of god This
holy maid that was armed with the armere of vyctorye both in her right side /
and eke in her left side turned all the fend is treacherous wylles to great
profyt^ of her soul. When she came to the bathe / she found a new manner
bathyng in her soul / how that she should tormente her body among the
delycyous bathes. She went to the condyt^ there the hot water came Inn to the
bathe and there she satte all naked and suffered pacyently the hot water brenne
her tender naked flesh the which was more pain to her / then when she
beat her with a cheyne Now shall I tell you how her confessor knew it. In a
time her mother Lapa t^lde master Reymond before her daughter how they went for
to be bathed / and then this maid pryuely told him how she was bathed / and
how wisely she asked leave of her mother when she was there that she might be
bathed by her self when all folk were gone. For she wist well if her mother had
seen her she might not do as she did And then her confessor axyd her how she
might suffer so great he te with out peril of death. This maid answered to him
and said full symply / that when she satte in that bathe / she thought besyly
upon the pains of purgatory and of hell / prayng to our lord whom she had so
hyely offendyd / that he would wouchesauf to torn mercyably tho peynes that
she had deserved in to that temperall pain that she suffered gladly. Of his
mercy she had so great gladdenesse in her heart / that all the pain was right
sweet to her and therefore her body was no thing hurt there by / though she
felt pain. When she had told this tale / her confessor went home / and she
again to her penance that she was wont to use And when her mod yt perceived /
she had no more hope tho of her chaungyng. But yet she cessyd never with out
grutchyng of the penance that she used. Of the which grutchyng this maid her
daughter lyghtt^ly suffered hit over pass with a defeere having myude rather of
her holy purpos / and excyted and steryd her mother every day that ^he ^hold go
to the sustres of penance of saint Domynyk for to pray thom that her daughter
might receive them abyte of penance that she had so long time desired: The
mother seeing that she might have no rest for her daughter / she went to the
susters of penance and prayed that her daughter might receive the abyte
among them.

To whom they answered and said. That it was not her custom to receive maidens
/ ne young wymmen to that abyte / but only wedowes of sad age and of good
name and fame that would fully give hem to gods seruyse For sith it is so that
susters of that abyte be not enclosed up / but eueryche of them lived at home
in her own hows / hit were full necessary that each of them were of such
sad age yt they might and could govern them self saddely. The cause why
these susters of penance answered thus / it shall be declared by the help of
god openly I nough in the next chapter that sueth. When the mother had this
answer she went home and told her daughter / the which answer was to the
daughter full gladsome / and to the mother not full heuysom. Nevertheless yet
this holy maid mystrusted not / for she wys^ well her purpose should be
fulfilled that was behot her of so glorious a fader as Saint Domynyk. And
therefore ef^sones she prayed her mod that she should not cesse / but go to
these susters ageyn and pray them with asmoche instaunce as she could / that
she might receive that abyte. The mother did so / and brought ageyn the same
answer as she did first Then ne sone after it happed that this maid fill seek
in body / the which sickness comynly young folk ben vexyd with or tha^ne they
come to a sad age. And yet p^raduenture that passing he^^ that she suff^ed
in the hot bathe might be cause there of / al be it that it was the will of god
yt it should be so. All the skin of her body was full of bladders and byles /
that uneath she might be know. And there to also she had a strong fever. The
mother seeing that her daughter was so seek all though she loved her sons and
daughter tenderly Yet this daughter whom that she nourysshed with her own
milk she loved more tenderly / and therefore she was the more sorry of her
disease. And she knew no cause where of this sickness came For such a
sickness might not come of abstynence / but rather of supfluyte. And also that
same time it was common sickness to young children and young maidens And therefore
she could not deem where of the sickness came / and what ese and remedy she
might do there to / she did both in words of comfort / and also in deed /
syttyng all way by the beds side by her. But the seker ye daughter was in
body / ye strenger she was in her holy desire / wayteng after leysyr to
constreng her mod in manner for to pursewe to fulfill her desire wisely and
swetly she said to her mother.

Good dear mother if ye would I were hole and ferd^ well / I pray you beth
about yt my desire may be fulfilled for to receive that abyte of penance.
Else I wot well that our lord and saint domynyk the which have called me to
there service woll so ordeyne for me / that ye should no longer have me in this
life. When the mother herd this oft^ and many times rehearsed to her / she being
a ferde lest she should have deyde / went to the same susters ageyn and prayed
them so entyerly of the abyte / that they were overcome with her prayers and so
granted her in this wise. If your daughter be noght over semely in body / and
over f^y^^ in beauty / we shall graun^^ your axyng and receive her And if she
be to fair we dread us of the peril of slandre / and of malycyou^ living of
men in these days. And for this cause we dare not consent to receive her in
no wise.

To whom the mother answered and said

Comes and see her and eve ye the dome whee she be fair or not. There were
sent two dyscrete matrons chosen among them with Lapa for to see this maid
both of dysposycyon of her body / and also for to search her desire of soul
When they come they found this maid lyeng seek in a bed / and therefore they
might not clearly know the dysposycyon of her body for sickness.
Nevertheless as by her words they knew her fervent desire of soul to the
service of god / and were greatly astoyned there by. And also glad seeng so
young a maiden pass in virtuous ^yuyng many old matrons / wherefor they took
her leave ioyefully gretely edyfyed by her words and told their felawys with a
great joy what they hard and saw. When thise susters herd this / by
counseyll of the frerys they received her with oo will and one assent^ among
them sendyng word to the mother / that also sone as ye maiden were hole / she
should bring her to ye friar prechours / that she might r^ceyue the abyte of
Saint Domynyk / the which she had so long desired in presence of the brethern
and the sust^en of the same abyte as the custom is. When the mother told these
wordys to her dought she was glad that she wept for joy and thanked our
lord and saint domynyk that had fulfilled his promys and byh^st.

Thanne she began to preye to god that she might be hole of her bodily
Infyrmy^^ / for to fulfylle her holy purpose in receyuyng of the abyte / lest
she should be let and delayed of her desire / for that bodily seke^^sse. And
there she was first glad of her bodily sickness with meke suffrau^ce.
Afterward she was as heavy thereof besekyng our lord with besy prayers that he
would wouchelauf to deliver her with out any taryeng of that sickness the
which let the purpose of her desire / and as she prayed our lord granted
her / for with in few days afterward she was hole.

Our lord would not always of his goodness deny the axyng of such that
conferme them ever with all their business to fulfylle his will For what ever
she axyd or desired she referred it to him who me she loved with all the
myghtes of her soul / and to who^ service she offered her self all hole body
and soul / whom she was restoryd of bodily hele. All be it the mod was
about to tarry her of her purpose longer time. She made such Instau^ce to her
mother / that the day and hour was assygned when she should receive her abyte /
the which abyte she received with a great ghostly gladness / when the mother
and the daughter were come to gyder to the church. The friar that had the
charge of the susters arrayed that holy maid with that manner of abyte in
presence of them all of the colors of white and blak in token of Innocence and
me kenesse / the which abyte holy faders of Saint Domynykes order ordained for
to be had. So that by the whytnes is understand Innocencye / and by the
blaknesse mekenes. For as master Reymond her confessor records and writes*
There was none abyte so well according to her conuersacyon of living both
Inward and outward. Then this maiden with all her might ^^o that time
forthward mortyfyed her body in sleyng of the old lust of sin with all his
branches of pride / in the wynnyng of the very meekness / the which
meekness betokens the mantell of black that she had received. Alsoo she
besyed her with all her myghtes for to keep the Innocencye of virgynytee and
maydenhode / not only of body / but also of soul to her endeles spouse Ihesu
christ / the which is very light for to receive by him fayrenesse of virtuous
living / the which fayrenesse is betokenyd by the white cote under the
mantell. If her abyte had be all black or all white / tho two things
meekness and Innocencye might not properly be understand thereby. And if her
abyte had been graye russeth / it might represente mortyfycacyon. But not
properly puryte and clennesse of soul.

This was the cause why the susters at the beginning denied her this abyte lest
she had not be able to bear it in meekness and clennesse of heart / dredyng
of her young age. When that holy maid had received that abyte / hit become
her better than it did the matrons.

Therefore it had not be well do / that it had be denied her / which abyte was
ordained a fore of holy faders in token of Innocencye. Sith it so was that she
passyd in clennes all the chastyte of wedowhode. Of one thing her confessor
Master Reymond records and writes that / that abyte had never his full
perfeccyon in the Cytee of Senee unto the time that holy maid had I take
upon her for to were hit. She was the first maid in that Cytee that took it up
on her / the which many maidens afterward received also. So it might be song
of her that verse that Dauyd the prophet speaks of. Adducentur regi virgins
posteam. That is to our lord god endeles king / many maidens shall be brought
Inn after this holy maid Katheryne.

How this maiden encreced it shall be declared afterward by the help of god /
But now I shall make an end of this chapter and proceed forth how this holy
abyte began of this holy Relygyous estate / lest for defaute of knowing there
of / the opinion and the fame of this holy maidens virtuous living might be
lessenyd thereby in sum mennys hertys / as for the matere the which is
reherced in this chapter master Reymond records and seyth that he had it
by relacyon of her mother / and of her self And as the abyte it needs no proof
/ for it is known openly enough.

Of the beginning and the foundamente of the Relygyous state of the susters of
penance of Saint Domynyk / and where of came the manner of living of tho
sustren. Capitulum viij
All tho that will read this present chapter following / they shall find
written as it is recorded of many feythfull creatures in diverse parties of
ytalye / many worthy actys and dedys of our holy fader Saint Domynyk. That
glorious worthy confessor of Christ / Tutor and defendour of the feyth of holy
church Saint Domynyk also techer and enfourmer of the good state of perfyte
lyuers overcame myghtely both in Tholose and also in Lombardye. What by him
self and by his brethern / many heretykes: So that in the time of his
canonizacion at Rome was prouyd openly a for our^ holy fader the pope that an
hundred thousand heretykes and more were turned by his prechyng and showing of
miracles in lumbardye alone /

Nevertheless that venomous doctrine of the heretykes had so enfected the
people sowles that almoost all the possessions of holy church were in laymennes
hondes keeping it as here own heritage And that caused Bysshoppe^ to goo about
and beg. For they had none power never to wythstonde her here^ye for the
defaulte of temperall substance / ne for to releue clerkys and pour folk
after the dew of her office / This considered our holy fader Saint domynyke
and might in none wise suffer this myscheff in holy church for the great and
entyrly love that he had thereto he chaas a worthy life of pouerte both for him
self and also for them that should be his folowers

And then began to pursue forth for the right of holy church assosyeng^
to him cert^yn lay people that d^ed god and that he knew well and so co^myned
with them of the ordeynaunce of an holy living that should recouere again the
rychesses of holy church and defended it myghtely ever afterward / and
faithfully against heretics by common assent such a life was so granted and
ordained.

For there that our holy fader Saint Domynyke found any well willing folk to
such a living / First he enduced them for to swear that they should keep and
observe all the things that should be reherced to them to the vterest for to
put her goods and her life therefore in Jeoperdye: and le^te this holy living
should be let by such that we^^ wedded / He made also wives to swear that
they should also not let her husbondes to maynten in such a pour living the
right of holy church: but rather should help them to her power in all that
they might: And to either party this holy fader saint domynyke he byhote them
sykerly if they kept this purpoos: endeles life for her mede /

Tho men that took this holy life upon them were called friars of Crysico
knyghthode / Nevertheless by cause they should beknowen fro other by sum token
and that they should have sum manner of besynes above the usage of other lay
people: He gave them the color of his own habyte that both men and wymmen of
the same knyghthode of Ihesu christ should were white and blake.

So that either color should apere outward in token of innocencye and
mekenes: Evermore he assigned them to say a certain nombre of Pater nosters:
and Aue maria. That they should be occupied at every hour of divine service
day^ by day* when this was do after time saint domynyk passed out of this
world to bliss of heaven and by encresyng of miracles was canonyzed in the
court of Rome: The f^^res and suster^ yt first were called of ye knyghthode of
Ihu cyr^^ to amo^^ synguler* worship of the fou^der of saint domynyk changed
her name by a co^mi^ ass^t / and were called f^^ers and susters of the penance
of saint domynyk / and ye cause why them thought yt her first name should be
changed was this / they saw that by the merytes and miracles of saint domynyk:
and by the prechyng of ye friars their cursed heresye was cause / wherefore
them thought yt it was not much needful to be occupied in such outward
battle of prechyng but rather wythinward battle against her gostely enmyes /
they chose therefore to be called friars and susters of penance / At ye last ye
no^bre of friar prechours encresyd so hugely / among whom was one as a clear
shynnyng sterre: Saint peter both martyr and maid / the which was martred of
heretykes for the right of holy church: And destroyed more heretykes after his
death / And so this company of wulues that were about to destroy gods unite
of holy church were utterly avoided and peace was yelden to all holy church /
wherefore the cause of that name of knyghthede sesyd and channged in to a name
of penance / Nevertheless this manner of state of loving descends and
remains only to men a while: And there wives ben left soole living by them
self a relygyous life never afterward desyryng for to be wedded: by cause of
the relygyous that they kept with her husbondes a fore / But the state the
which they began they kept to her lives end /

This consyderyd and beheld other wydowes that purposed to keep them in
wedowhode desiring to follow susters of penance of Saint domynyke / For
remedy of her sins they prayed the friar prechours that were in Italye to
inform them of the manner of living / The which was ordained of Saint
Domynyke. By cause the manner of living was not hard: A blessed fader of the
same order / the which was called Munyo wrote that manner of living / and took
it to these wydowes: the which manner of living in to this day is called
among them a rule: All be it they it may not properly be called so / In as
much as encludeth not within it the three pryncypall vows that other relygyous
folk have / And after time that this nombre of susters thus encresed in
diverse parties of Italye / Our holy fader the pope in tho days the which was
called honoryus perceived that good living of these susters granted them by
bulle that in time of Interdyction that they might here her dyuyne service
among the friar prechours / And so our holy fader the pope Johan the which
came after him he had made the constytucions of Clementynis against the
vyrgyns and by gardys: He declared the bulle of the same decretall or
constytucion that it should not be understand of the same susters of penance
of Saint domynyke: For by that Decretall the astate is not repreued in any wise
/

Loo maidens by this ye may under stand why that state of living was found in
wymmen only: And why the susters answered so at the beginning to the mother of
this holy maid / that were not wounte to receive maidens to that state of
living: but oonly to wydowes approuyd in sadness / these things that been
written in this chapter for the more part Master. Reymound found them
written im diverse places of Italye: But some matters he herd and understood
them with inquysycion of many holy faithful and old friars and susters of
Saint Domynyke And thus ends this chapter /

Of the wonderful encrece and how she prouffyted in virtue and holy living /
And that she should be byloued in all things which she rehearsed to her
confessor of grace done to here of our lord Capl ix
How this holy maid in receyuinge of her habyte made none byhest to the three
pryncipalle avowes of relygyon / by cause that the estat asked it naught: As it
is rehearsed before Yet nevertheless she purposed to kepefull steadfastly tho
three pryncypal avowes i^ her self. As for the vow of chastyte there was none
doughte of / For she had made avowe of maydenhode before in her tender age. as
touching for her obedyence: She purposed oonly for to be obedyent to that
friar that was master of the susters and to the pryoresse of the same susters.
But also to her confessor the which obedyence she kept to her lives end /

For as she said by her live when she should pass out of this world: She
had never mind that she brake onis her obedyence / Neuerthels by cause there
were sum the which had envy off her holiness both bacbyters and liars
that said the contrary /

I do you to understand maidens that thowe this holy maid had none other
tourment while she was living in earth but oonly indiscreet byddyng and
mysseyng of her souereyns: she might have been in manner a martyr by the great
patience the which she suffered: Her confessors understood nonght ne gave none
credence many times to the excellent gift of grace that she received of god /
Ne gave none reverence to the werkys of our lord that wrought in her
merueylously / And therforre they would have made her living after the commyn
living of her susters / not consyderyng ye opyn tokens of grace that were
showed in her diverse times.

But rather they myghi be lykened to ye pharysens that seyth the opyn miracles
the which our lord wrought: And yet they grutched by cause he helyd a man upon
the sabat day seeing thus /

Non est hic homo a deo qui sabbatum non custodit: That is this man is not of
god hals that keeps not his sabat day This holy maid when she had received
her habyte of penance* she besyed her what she cowde to obey to her souereyns
/ and thereto she durst not forsake ye way of virtuous living / the which our
lord taught her by him self / so that between these two / she was sore
angwisshed in tourment that there may none tongue tell it ne pen write it /
Was this not trought ye maidens a martyrdom for her / I trow yeis / A a lord
god often was it said to her in repref yt all her vysyons come naught of god
but of the fend /

Notwythstondyng that they the which saw in her many merueylous works and
that thereto they might see that all her life was miracle / as it shall declared
more clearly here after / Now was this a strong martyrdom as me seems

And as touching to pouerte of lynyng she kept so perfyghtly that virtue
pouerte that she being / in her faders house and household where great plente
was of temperall goods: for her self she took no thing but that she would
give freely to pour folk / And thereto her fader gave her a special leave /

She loved so much pouerte that as she said preuyly to her confessoure she
had never joy of her faders house by cause temperall goods were so
plenteuosly used therein:

And therefore she prayed our lord hertely that he would vochesauf to tak away
that richesse: And bring her friends to pouerte seeing in this wise. Lord
whether this good that abounds so plentuously in mine faders house by that
good I should ask for mine friends / and naught oonly of good everlasting / I
know well lord that among these temperall goods there is much peril
medeled among: And therefore I would naught mine friends were encombred with
them.

When she had thus prayed / our lord of his goodness herd her prayers: and
suffered he friends Fader and mother and other of her kynne to fall to right
low pouerte by many merueylous chances without any trespaas of them: As it
was well know to all tho that knew them whiles they lived / By this may ye
know that this maiden kept full dewely the three pryncipall vows of relygyon:
That is obedyence / chastyte and pouerte / all be it that she made none avowe
openly when she received her habyte of penance /

Now shall I tell you of her perfection after time she had received her
habyte when she had received habyte as our holy fader Saint domynyke promised
her / she began anon sweet virtuous living and sought occacions and causes
for to constreyne her self more streyghtly: than she did before that she might
the more deuoutlye love her spouse Ihesu seeing to her self in this wise: Lo
thou have now take up on the a manner of relygyon thou may no more live as thou
have do thy seculer living is goo: And a new relygyon is come: after the
which reule thou must needs be reuled /

S^est thou not the color of thyn clothes the needs now fro this time forward
to keep perfyghtly pouerte and clennesse of body and soul, which be tokeneth
by the white cote: The needs also to be deed to the world: the which
betokenneth by the blake mantel / therefore see to thy self how thou gouerneste
the for thou must now goo in the streyte way that few walken ynne: For the
more sekernesse therefore of keeping of her pouerte and cle^nesse /

This holy maid purposed her to keep silence full streyte / and not for to
speak but when she should be shryue / And as her confessor both said and wrote
that was before Master Reymound* three year contynuelly she kept her silence /
but when she would beshryue She kept her also contynuelly in her chamber / But
when she would goo to the church for her mete she had none need to goo out /
It was little and soon do. For she used to ete none manner of mete that was
made by the fire out taken breed alone as it is rehearsed before /

Also she made an ordinance in her own heart never to come to mete but with
weeping: so that ever before mete she would offer to our lord teres for to feed
her soul first / And than afterward would she sustain her body with mete /

Her faders hows was to her as a wilderness and deserte / notwythstondyng the
confluence of people that were therein.

Beside all this what wakyng what prayers what medytacions and what teres she
used. I trow there is none tongue cowde tell /

She made also an other ordinance in her self that when her brethren the
freer prechours stepte. she would wake / And when the friars had tongue the ij
peel to matyns and anon erst would she seye than her spouse Ihesu Christ in
this wise Loo lord mine brethren And thyn servants have I rested the^ in to
this time / and I have prayed for them to the that thou sholdest keep them fro
deuelys and fro the ouercomyng off the fendes / Now lord they be arise to
pray to the / therefore lord I pray the keep them / and give me leave to
rest a while / And so she lay down upon hard bordes / and a stoke under her
head instead of a bolster /

Our lord Ihesu her gracious spouse seeing all this in this maid the which
gave her all these graces would not suffer so able and so dylygent a dyscyple
to be untaught without a perfyght mayter Another man ne angel: But he him self
would be her informer of virtue: Anon as she was shett up in her chamber our
lord Ihesu Christ her well beloved spouse and savior of all mankind /
appieryd to her and taught her and informed her fully of tho things that
longs to the health of soul as she her self told privily after ward to her
confessor and said to him these words:

Fader understands this for a truth that I was never taught ne informed any
thing that longs to health of soul: of man ne of woman but oonly off mine
lord Ihesu the spouse of my soul other by his inspyracion or else by his
open apperyng spekyng to me as I now speak to you:

She knowleched also to her confessor that in the beginning of that vysyon
when it apperyd openly to her bodily wits / so that she perceived with her
bodeli erys a voys / she began to wax a ferd lest it had be a deceyte of the
fend that often times transfygureth him in to an Angel of light: the which
feer in no wise dysplesyd our lord but rather he commended that feer and
said /

As long as a man or a woman lives in this life. they should ever be aferd /
for so thou may find written /

Beatus vir qui semper est pauidus / That is to say blessed be that man that
ever is feerfull:

Ferthermore our lord Ihesu Christ said to her: Daughter wylt thou that I
shall teache the how thou may know mine vysyon from the vysyon of the fend.
To whom this holy maid answerde full mekely and prayed him that he would
vouchesauf to teache her

Then said our lord thyn soul may esely be taught by Inspyracyon and by
word for to dyscerne between the one and the other / But by cause that I would
it might prouffyghte as well to the other as to the / Therefore I shall teache
the by word.

Doctors of holy church whom I have taught the truth seyn / and soothe it
is / that mine vysyon begins with a dread but ever in the passing it sets
a soul in great rest and sekernes / It begyn^eth with a manner of bytternes
But evermore more and more it wexith sweet / And the contrary heart does the
vysyon of the fend: It gives in the beginning as it seems a manner of
gladdenes or sykenes / or else sweetness / But when it passes away / ever
it encreseth in the soul dred and bytternesse This is the trewest knowleche
for to know mine ways from the fendes ways

The way of penance and the keeping of mine preceptys and commandments in
the beginning it seems hard and sharp / But the more a soul prouffyteth in
keeping of them: the more esely it waxith The way of sin in the beginning
seems full delectable but ever in encres thereof a soul is made more and more
dampnable /

But yet shall I give the another token for to know mine vysyon from the vysyon
of the fend / Understand this for a sothe / that sithe it so is that I am
truth ever of mine vysyons the soul of man receives a great knowleche of
truth: and by cause that the knowleche of truth is full necessary to the
soul as well to her self as to me that she may know me and her self / of the
which knowleche she passes out fro her self in settinge little by her self
and honors and worshyppeth me / The which condycion properly is called the
condycions of mekenes. Therefore it were full needful that a soul should thus
know her self / And so be made meke by vysyon.

The contrary is of the vysyon of the fe^de. sithe it so is that the fend is
fader of lesynge and king of all the children of pride / And he may not give
but that / that he has as his lesyng and pride. Therefore as of his visyo^ / a
soul seems much by her self and is made glad and (...) Joye / The which is
properly the condycion of pride: and so she is by left swellyng and bolnyng in
pride: Then^e therefore if thou examyne and dyscusse dylygently in thy self:
may know whether vysyon come to the of truth or else of falsenesse / if
it come of truth: it makes thyn soul meke / if it come of falsenes and by
desceyte: it makes thyn soul proud.

Then this holy maid when she had herd this / she kept this wholesome
doctrine full dylygently in her soul and told it afterward to her confessor
and also to other for her edyfycacion as it shall be rehersyd wythinforthe by
the help of god. And then began our lord to showed this holy maid visyons
and reuelacyons plentuously: so ferforth yt uneath might be found two men so
homely in conversation to gyders: as our lord Jhesu and she were to gyders /

For whether she prayed or read or had medytacions or walked or slepte o wise
or other: she was comforted many times when she spoke with other she had
reuelacions or vysyons and spoke in her soul to our lord whiles her tongue
spoke outward to other / But that might not long continue for her soul was
so wonderly I draw up to her spouse Jhesu that within a little while
afterward. She was rauysshed out of her bodily felyng. Out of this rauysshyng
came many merueylous things that follows afterward* as well of her great
abstynence as of her merueylous doctrine: And also upon miracles the which
our lord showed in her by her lyffe / now than lest there be sum that would
be in doubt whether this holy maid had such reuelacions or not. I shall
tell you how her confessor Master Reymound preued it whether her reoelacions
and vysyons were true or not / At the beginning when Master Reymound herd of
her hye co^uersacio^ of living he began to wax homely with her in comunycacion
with her / for he could not feel it verily yt such reuelacyons in her might be
true the which mystruste was for his better / And therefore he inquired by
diverse menes and ways to know whether they came of god. or of the fend: Or
whether they were falls or true:

For then came to his mind of ypocritis the which regnyd in his days / and
that he found many dyscetys / and namely among wymmen / whom ye devil
dysceyued with ye vice above all other creaturs

Hit came also in to his mind how ye first womman Eve was deceived / and many
such other / and therefore he doubted the more of this holy maid. While he
stood long thus in such a doubt / it came to his mind / that if he might by
her prayers get of our lord one great contrycyon for his sins above the
customable contrycyon yt he was wont to have / by that might he know that all
her vysyons reuelacyons and dedys come of the holy ghost

For there may none get such a contrycyon / but by yefte of the holy ghost.
And all be it that there is none living that can say whether he be worthy of
god hate or love Yet hertely contrycyon for sins is a great token of grace
Master Reymond had not so sone thought this / that he went to this holy maid
/ and prayed her hertely / that she would pray for him to our lord / yt he
wouchesauf to for give him the sins the which he had done To whom this holy
maid answered and said that she would full gladly. Than said master Reymond
that he might not be easyd in his desire by her prayers only but if he had
there of a bull that his sins were for given Of whom this holy maid axed
with a smiling chere / what bull he desired to have. He answered that in token
of a bull he axed one great contrycyon for his sins / the which contrycyon
this holy maid said he should have all ready. Then that time hit seemed to
master Reymond that she understood clearly all his thoughts / and so he went
from her. On the morn it happed master Reymond for to be seek and lay don in
his bed / whom kept one of his brethern a devout man the which was called
Nycholas of Pyse. The place there he lay in seek was an hows of sustres in as
much as he caught his sekenes sodeynle Jorneyng by the way. When this holy
maid perceived that he was seek. She a^os up of her bed not wythstondyng
that she was seek her self of the fevers / and other diverse passions / and said
to her felawe Goo we and see we how srere Reymond does fare. And her felawe
answered and said that it was no need / and though it were need / yet was she
more seker than he Nevertheless yet she come to him and axyd how he ferd.

Anon when he saw her he meruaylled gretety and said to her as fe^illy as he
might speak. Aa lady why come ye hither / ye be agrete dele seker than I am.

Thanne she began to speak of the goodness of our lord as she was wont to do
and of our unkindness against him.

With that master Reymond her confessor arose up out of his bed gretely
comforted by her words / and sat in an other bed beside / having no mind
yet of the words that the holy maid spoke to him at even before All this while
she continued in spekyng of the kyndenes of our lord / and of our great
unkindness.

Suddenly in time of her devout comunycacyon came to his mind a clear
consyderacyon of his sins / that him thought he stood before the ryghtwys
Jugement to be condemned to the pain for his wicked living right as a thief
that stood before a temporal Juge. Him thought also that he saw in his soul
the great benygnyte and the mekenes of our lord / that gracyously delivered
him fro the pain that he was worthy for to have / and not only that / but
also he clothed him with his own clothes / there he was naked / and had him in
his holy hows / and fed him and nourysshed him / and accepted him to his
service / and there to by the synguler grace of his end. Loo the goodness /
his death / unto life / his dread unto hope / his sorrow unto joy / and his shame
unto worship. By these consyderacio^s and clearly knowynges / and syghte of his
soul / the wyckettes of the wyndowes of his hard heart were broken up and
opened / and the wellys and ryuers of weeping terys aperyd plenteuouly / by
cause that the foundament and the ground of his trespassys were showed so
clearly to him / in so much that he wayled and that he was aferde last by
such great plente of sorrow / his heart and his breast would have to barst When
this holy maid saw that she was still and suffered him a while to be fed with
his own terys / for therefore she came. Within a while after he cessyd little
and little / and bethought him meruayllously of this new grace / thynkyng also
of his petycyon the which he axed of this holy maid the day before / with
that he turned to her and said / is this thy bull that I spak of to you
yesterdaye. She answered and said ye laynge her hondes upon his sholdres seyeng
thus / have in mind fader of the gracyous yeftes of our lord. And so went
home to her chamber / and he abode stylle with his felawe gretely edyfyed and
comforted. Another time the same master Reymond had another excellent token of
this holy maid with out any axyng before Hit happed on a time that this holy
maid was vysyted by diverse sekenes / and lay seek in her bed. And sent
after her confessor desyryng to comen with him pryuely of other new
reuelacyons / the which our lord had showed her great sickness began to
speak of the goodness of our lord / and of the reuelacion that he showed her
that day. He heryng so great reuelacyon^ and wonderful showed to her / and to
none other that ever he herd of / having no mind of the grace that our lord
had give him before by prayers of this holy maid. He bethought him of
somthynges that she rehearsed and said to himself thus / whether it be all true
that she seyth. When he had thought thus / he looked suddenly in her face /
and saw that her vysage was transformed in to man's vysage berded / the which
vysage beheld him steadfastly / and made him sore aferde. Hit was to his sight
a semely long vysage of myddel age / not having to long a berde / but of a
reasonable assise colored after whete / showing in his syghte a mageste after
the mageste of our lord Jhesu / and might in no wise for that time see none
other face / but only that face. Of this sight he had so great a fere / that
he lift up his arms and began to cry and said. Oo who is he that looks upon
me. To whom this holy maid answered and said. He that is sees and beholds
you with that word / that dredefull face vanysshed away / and the maidens
vysage appyred to him clearly. This was no feynyng thing but a true / as he
records and bears wytnes in his wrytynges He records also for the more
confyrmacyon of that miracle that after that sensybly vysyon / he had so
clear a knowing within himself im his soul by ghostly Illumynyng of the matter
that the holy maid spak to him / of the which he will not pupplyche it
openly. That him thought he felt in experyence that thing the which our lord
said to his dyscyples when he behote them the holy ghoost seyeng to them thus

Et que ventura sunt annunciabit vobis. That is when ye have received the holy
ghost / he shall show things that been to come Loo For the mystrust that he
had to her words our lord of his gracyous goodness wouchesauf to teache
him clearly by him self / he afterward for to bear wyttenes to other that her
reuelacions weren and ben true pryntyng steadfastly in his mind / the great
graces that he showed to Saint Thomas of Inde / for he that would not be taught
and enfourmed by open tokenes of gracyous gift / the which he received by
this holy maid he was taught and informed by example of such a disciple that
was mystrowyng as he was For after time he had received a gracyous token of
conpunccyon of our lord a fore by merytes of holy prayers of this holy maid /
yet he continued in mystrust of her reuelacyons that they were not true.
Wherefor our lord himself / showed him self openly to his outeward wyttys /
that he might thereby know by open experyence that he spak in her so that it
may be said that he showed him then to master Reymond / the which mystrowed
as he did some time to saint Thomas of Inde by bodily felyng. And right as he
cried afterward and said this word Deus meus et dominus meus.

That is my god and my lord So may this mystrowynge renuwed say after thise
two vysyo^s of this holy maid / that she is and was the very spouse and the
very discyple of our lord god. All these ben rehearsed to you maidens / that ye
should be in no doubt / ne despise the reuelacions and the vysyons / the
which ye shall here by the help of god afterward All be it that no wytnes
may be found of record save she allone / but that ye should here hem / read
hem / and understand hem with reverence. And also that ye may learn there by
holy examples and doctrynes / the which our lord has showed in such a
vessel by kind seek and bryttell. But by grace meruaylously made strong and
precious. And thus I make an end of this chapter. All thoo things the which
master Reymond was taught and enfourmed of this holy maid / he has declared
them openly in this chapter. Outake one thing that he was charged by her to
keep it pryuely of a certain reuelacion as it is rehearsed a fore.

Of a noble doctrine which our lord gaf to her in her beginning / and of other
doctrynes in the which he founded her manner of living. Capitulum x
Sith it so is that the ground and the foundament of trust and believe touch
the reuelacyons of this holy maid by the help of god / is declared in the
chapter that goth before. Therefore now I shall proceed forth and show you the
spyrytuall edyfycacyon of this same maid. And by cause that true sowles and
feythfull ben fed and edyfyed by the words of our lord. Therefore I shall
tell you and show you a notable doctrine of ye which this holy maid was
taught of our lord him self. This holy maid told to her confessors among
whom master Reymond was one / that in the beginning of her vysyons our lord
appyred to her when she prayed and said to her in this wise. Know thou not
daughter who thou art / and who I am if thou know well these two words /
thou art / and shall be blessed Thou art she that art not / and I am he that am.

If thou have the very knoweleche of these two things in thy soul / thy
ghostly enemy shall never dysceyue the. But thou shall escape gracyously all
his snares / ne thou shalt never consent to any thing that is against my
commandments and precepts. But all grace all treuthe all charity thou
will win without any hardenesse And now is this a bryef word and a great
and in manner Infynyte and endeles. Oo this is a great wisdom expressyd under
few syllables Whether this be not that leng the that bread / that heythe and
that depthe the which saint Poule desired for to have with all saints / I
trow yes. Oo dear maidens consydereth and beholds meruayllously this
Incomparable tresoure / the which is found in this holy maids breast. For
our lord Jhesu that vndeceyuable troth seyth to this holy maid thus. If thou
know these two things in thy soul / the fend shall never deceive the Me
seems it is full good for you to make here three tabernacles or dwelling places
unto the worship of god / that excellent doctou^ the which t^ched the
understanding of these fruytfull words

Another to the love and devotion of this holy maid Katheryne. The which
received the holsom doctrine of this few fruytfull words And the third to
the ghostly tresoure of valor of all tho the which fynden life in this few
fruytfull words. In the understanding of thoo fruytfull words / now be
founden and had ghostly richesse so plenteuously that it shall no need be to
all tho that have so found this ghostly richesse / for to beg of other A
whether this bryef fruytfull sentence be not true / where it is said.

Art not thou she that is not / I troweyes. Every creature is made of our maker
Jhesu christ of naught So ferforth that if our lord Jhesu christ our maker would
cesse for a time / be it never so little fro conseruacyon of his creature that
he has made. Anon that creature should torn in to naught / when so ever a
creature does sin / the which sin in him self is naught: Ne of him self he
may no thing do or think that is ought. As Saint Poule seyth. And that is
meruaylle / for he may not be ne have being of him self / ne yet be conserved
of him self in his being. And therefore the apos^le said. Qui se existimat
ali^uid esse cu^ nichil fit ipse se seduci^. That is he that wenyth he be ought
/ he is naught / he decey ueth him self. Se^st thou not maid how noughty a
creature is A creature made of naught / ever of him self ^owyng to naught by
sin makes him self naught / as Saint Austyn said / for he may no thing do
that is ought by him self / but rather that is naught / as our lord said.
Sine me nichil po^^stis sacere.

That is without me ye may do right naught / the which naught is sin.

Therefore ye may well clearly know by this that a creature of him self is naught

And that knew well Saynt^s before this time / the which by knoweleche of this
very wysdom excluded vera^ly out of their sowles all manner of sin.

What manner of Inflacyon of sin may entree in to such a soul the which
knows her self naught How may she be joyful in vain glory of any good
work that ever she did / the which knows well I nough that such good dedys
come never from her / but fro god How may such a soul enhaunce her self by
pride above other that holds her self naught. How may a soul that thus
sett^th her self at naught / Inwardely despise other / other have envy to
other.

How may any creature have vaynioye in outward richesse / that now has
despised all his own joy of him self. I trow such a creature is taught by
the words of our lord endeles wysdom where he said Siego quero gloriam meam
gloria mea nichil est. That is if I seek mine own joy / my joy is naught Also
how may such a creature that knowed him self in no wise his own / but only
his that made him / see of all outward things / this is mine / sith he him
self is not his. How might make such a creature to have delectacyon in
flesshely sins / that every day restreyneth him self by such manner
consyderacion of naught

Loo maidens by this bryef fruytfull words / thou art naught / ye may
consydere / that all manner of sin is and may be excludes. That other bryef
fruytful word that our lord said to this holy maid is this. I am he that
am / whether this bryef fruytful word be a new word / ye forsothe both new
and old. This is that old word that our lord said to Moses in the sussh /
the which semyd brennyng when he said. Qui est misit me. That is say to the
children of Israel He that is sent me to you. Hit is also now a new word /
by cause it is new reherfed to this holy maiden in like words that she the
which by the first bryef fruytfull sentence was I taught to know her self
nough / should learn by the next fruytfull senten^e to ask our lord ought /
the which is the endeles well of all essencyall being. By these bryef
fruytfull sentencys may ye know that a creature is naught of him self. For all
that he has of virtue / and of being comes of god maker of all creatures.

Almighty god maker of al creatures has only of him self and of none other
endeles perfeccyon of essencyall being.

For he might never form and make all thing of naught / but if he had an
Infynyte virtue of essencyall being in him self. Wherefore all that ever our
lord Jhesu / that sovereign master taught his spouse in tho two bryef
sentences as it is rehearsed before / is no thing else but this / that she
should know her self as she is / and our lord verayly as for her maker in the
depnes of her heart / and then she should be blessed. In the same wise I
find I written that he said to saint K^theryne the virgyn and marter. When he
vysytre her in prysone / Daughter know me for thy maker. Of such manner of
knoweleche comes all manner of perfeccyon and all ordynate setting of the soul
/ What is he that may not love so large and so free a gyuer with all his heart
/ and all his soul / what is he that is not styred every day more and more to
love such a lord that first er thanne he made his creatures / he loved hem
not for their deserve and merit / but only by his Infynte goodness /

What is he that ferth not and dredeth contynually to offend in any manner of
wise / so great and so dredefull a maker so mighty and so large a gyuer /
so gladsom and so free a lover. What is he that may not gladdely suffer all
manner of dyseases for such a lord / of who me he has received / and
receyuyth day by day / and hops to receive without any deubte so manyfolde
goodness.

What is he that should be weary / or tormented by sekenes to please so amyable
a lord. What is he that endeyneth to keep reverently and louyngly in his mind
the blessed words that such a lord wouchesaue to his creatures.

What is he that will not gladdely obey to the commandments and pretho
things that the soul loves ye which desire may not be had wiwout work:
so ferforth that in as much it loves so much it werketh / And yet
nevertheless it trusts naught in her own work as in her own self: but only
in our lord that worched in her:

The cause of this lovely desire is noothynge else / but the very knoleche off
god that he is aulterd / therefore among all other merueylaus things of this
holy maid: she held that doctrine the which our lord taught her syngulerly
to be worshy p^ed / To the which wurshypfull doctrine yet shall I add more
to / For but if I be greatly dysceyued all they come out of the first notable
doctrine. Often times this holy maid was wou^t to common and to speak to tor
confessoure Master Reymound of the worthynes and condycions that our lord
loved off a soul / And she said that such a soul perceived not ne sees not
ne loved her self ne none other soul ne had none mind of none creature:
This was a full hard word to Master Reymound for to understand and therefore
he prayed this holy maid for to declare it. Then she said a soul sees
her self that she is verily naught of her self and knows perfyghtly that all
the goodness with all the myghtes of the soul is her maker /

She forsaked vite^ly her self And all creature and hedeth her self fully in
her maker our lord Jhesu in so much yt she sends fully and pryncypaly all
her ghostely and bodily werkynges in him In whom she perceived that she may
find all goodness and all perfection off blessydnes and therefore she shall
have none will to goo out from such inward knowleche of him for nothing /
And of this vinte and love that is encresed every day in such a soul: She is
transfourmyd in a manner in to our lord that she may neither think ne under
stand ne love ne have no mind but god or else in god / she may not see her
self ne none other creatures but only in god / Ne she may not love her self ne
none other but only in god. Ne she may not hane mind in her self ne of none
other but only in god: ne she may have no mind but only in her maker: Right
as a man that is under a water and swymmeth under the water nether sees ne
touched nothing but water and that is under the water / And thing yt he is
above ye water he neither touches ne sees of that yt is above ye water it shy
neth under the water for that he may perceive and yet none other wise but in
the water / And as they may byshewed in water as long as he is voder the
water: Right so fares it of a soul that is hyd in the love of god:

All this she learned of our lord that dyuyne love the which never teched
error to his meke dyscyples: ne gives them cause to coueyte any thing with
out him / For ever her ghostely excersyse in is him /

Another time this holy maid reher syd in presence of her confessor Master
Reymound and to many other that were called to clennes of living: A full notable
doctrine and a virtuous the which is good for pure maidens to know / Whose
chaste living is full spe^yally to god /

And the more ye ben met ner to god by sweet meke maydenhede the sonner ye may
understand that virtuous doctrine / And it is this that a soul the which is
virtuously I met to god as it is rehearsed before: As much as it has of the
love of god / So much it has of the hate of her own sensualyte. For of the
love of god naturally comes hate of sin the which is do ne against god /
the soul the^fore consyderyng that the rote and the beginning of sin
regneth in the sensualyte and there pryncypally is roted: She meued and storyd
hyghely and holyly with all her merytes against her own sensualyte / not for
to utterly destroy the rote For that mayr not be long the soul dwells in
the body living in this lyffe But ever it shall be left a rote namely of small
venyall sins: Whereto accords right well saint Johan when he says thus / Si
diximus quia peccatu^ non habemus / ipsi nos seducimus etc.

That is if we say that we have no manner of sin in our sensualytes namely
of venyall sins* we desceyue our self / And by cause she may not utterly
destroy that rote of sin thus in her sensualyte as it is said before / She
conceived a great displesaunce against sen sualyte and of her sesu^lyte /

The which dyplesaunce spyngin up an holy hate and a dysplrsyng of her
sensualyte by the which the soul is ever well kept fro her ghostely enemies
There is no thing that keeps the soul so strong and so syker as does
such an holy have: and that felt well the Appostle when he said / Cum
infirmot tunc forcior sum et potens /

That is when I am feeble and syke in mine sensualyte by hate of sin / Then I
am the stronger and mighty er in mine soul / Loo fader of such hate comes
virtue and of sweet febylnesse and sykenesse comes *strength / And of such
displesaunce comes plesaunce.

Such holy hate fader have ever with you: For it shall make you meke and ever
to feel meke things of your self / it shall make you pacient in aduersyt^ /
and temperate in prosperyte / And set you namely in all honest of virtue:
And it shall also make you loved ^oi^^e god and man:

A / a / now is that a paynfull soul and full of woo that has not this bliss
For where that such holy hate is not. there is much vnordynate love the which
is the stynkyng thorroke and canell of all sin: and the cause and the rote of
all evil concupyscence.

Al such and like words this holy Maid comyned day by day / with such
dread in commendyng of holy hate of sin and in despysyng of vnordynate love:

But when ever she perceived that any defaute of sin or of sin i^ many
creature that comyned with her or in any other / Anon she would be styred to
compassyon and said / Loo brethern loo susteren the cause of this tr^spaas and
this sin is nothing else but an vnordynate love of your self: The which
vnordynate love is norysshed of pride and of all vices /

Does all your besynes for the love of god to put^e away such vnordynate love
of your own self out of your own hertes / And planteth therein holy hate of
sin for certain that is the right way of perfection and amendment off all
sin /

Loo maidens how well this holy maids doctrine accords to the words of
Saint Poule where he said thus

Quod virtus i^ infirmitate perficitur That is virtue is made parfyghtly i^
sekenes and febylnes and that was wha^ he prayed to our lord to remeue away
his temptacions / To whom our lord answered and said thus / Sufficit tibi
paul gracia mea. That is it is Inow to the paul mine grace / that is for to
hate sin and wythstonde it: Then brake out saint Paul and said:

Libenter gloriabor in infirmitatibus meis vt inhabitet in me virtus cristi:
That is I shall gladly be Joyefull in minsekenes and febylnes by laboring in
hatyng and understanding of sin: that the virtue and the grace thereof may be
inhabyted in mine soul: See ye not now how these holsom doctrynes of this holy
maid ben grounded upon a steadfast stone of truth the which stone is Christ
In as much as they acorden with holy wrytynges of doctors: Thus ends this
Chapter* but I pray you all that shall read it or here it that they mekely
consydere the merit and the deserte of this holy maid / when our lord vou
chesaf to inform her in virtue by his own proper person* And also that would
give credence wythouten any oath to her words: For he was a faithful doctor
that taught her / And thus I make an end of this chapter.

Of the merueylous victory of temptacions by another manner doctrine give unto
our lord / and of a famylyaryte and holiness which she had with our lord
which has not be herd to fore / Capitulum xi
IFynde written that when king Salamon had done make and raised up a toure
for to keep the Cite of Jherusalem fro enemies /

The king of Babylone was wood with all and raised up an host for to destroy
that toure if he might As Soon as king Salamon perceived that he would come with
an host for to destroy that toure / He ordained to be made merueyllous
strong wallys round about the toure so myghtely and so mighty walls that
when ever they came to assail it with any manner of shot: their darts should
merueylously turn again and wound or slay the host

Right so the king of Babylone that is the king of pride and enemy of peace
the fend of ghostely enemy consyderyng that king Salamon auctor and
conseruatour or keeper of peace had raised up an high virtuous toure the
which was this holy maid Katheryn to the defens of Jherusalem that is holy
church dredyng thereby feste she should be cause of many creatures health as
she was in deed: both by good ensamples of living and also by her holy doctrine
/ he waxed wood with her and turned to her with all the spyryte of his malice
for to destroy her with many thousand whiles. But almighty god that mercyable
and peasyble lord suffered that to be done for to encrece the victoryous blessed
endeles crown of his spouse / and thereto he strengthed her over all with
mighty ghostely armor for to overcome him so that she wan^ more of virtue in
time off her battle by ouercomynge of the temptacyons / Then she did in
time off peace whylys she was without temptacions and so all the fend whiles
turned again shamefully to him self / Our lord enspyred her to ask him by
prayers for to have the virtue of ghostely strength wherefore she prayed many
days and long time / At the last after such long and devout prayer our
lord vocheu^saufe to here her Gracyously / and taught her in this wise sey^ng
thus Daughter if thou will get the virtue of ghostely strength thou must
follow me all be it that I might by mine goodly virtue overcome all the power of
the fendes by many manner ways of ouercomyng:

Yet for to give you ensample by my manhede / I would not overcome him but only
by taking of death upon the cross that ye might be taught thereby if ye would
overcome your ghostely enemies / for to take the cross as I did: the which
cross shall be to you a great refresshyng in all your temptacyons if ye have
mind of the pains that I suffered: there upon of temptacyons:

And certain the pains of the cross may well be called refresshyng of
temptacion / For the more pain ye suffer for mine love: the more like ye be to
me in passion / needs ye must be like to me in Joye / Therefore for mine love
daughter suffer pacye^tly bitter things and none sweet things / And daughter
in none wise for thou shall be strong enough^ for to suffer all things
pacyently* When this holy maid had herd this holy lesson she foryate it
naught but bare it ever quykly in her mind. And ever afterward had Joye and
delight in trybulacions / so ferforthe that there was no thing in earth so
great refresshyng to her: as was passions and trybulacyons / For by sweet
sufferaunces of trybulacions she wyste well that her crown encresyd in the
bless of heaven:

After time that king Salamon our lord Jhesu Christ king of heaven ande of
earth had armed his blessed toure this maids soul by sweet mighty and
holsom doctrynes / he suffered enemies to come and preue that toure / if they
might by any way or wise destroy it.

The king of Babylone our ghostely enmye the fend with all his cursyd
company come and byseged this blessed toure thorugh the sufferaunce of god
round about with many wretchid temptacions / But first he began to assail
this maid by flesshely temptacions whom not oonly he tempted by thoughts
withinforthe ne by yllusyons and fantasyes in her sleep: but by opyn vysyons
waking both in seyeng and herynge and seeing.

He tempted her in many manner off wise by taking upon him a body off the air*
shame it is to here in how foul flesshely sin he tempted her / And therefore
I shall not rehearse them / but to clean sowles it is delectable to here

How this holy maid overcame such foul delusyons: and therefore that shall I
reherce: When this holy may de perceyned how besy the fend was to bring her
to sin / She arose against her self* myghtely and punysshed her body by
weryng of the cheyne in so much that the blood followed / And thereto she
walked more then she^ was wont to do in church that almoost by use of the
which the sleep was taken away from her:

And yet would not the fend sece fro his bata^^^e that he had begone. but
he took upon him a body of the air as I have rehearsed to fore with a great
nombre and an horrible company with him and came and stood before this holy
maid as thought he had compassyon of her and cou^seylled her and said: O
wretch why tourmentest thou thy body in so ydell / what shall thou win by
such tourment off pain: wenest thou that thou may continue therein to thyn
last end then may thou never continue therein I warn the well: but if
thou wylt slay thy self and so it were better for the for to sese off this
great folly then so to slay thyn own body: Yet have thou time that now for
to have joy in the world / thou art young / and therefore thou may the
sonner recouere thine strength of thy body again /

Notwythstondyng thyn great penance that thou have do / live as other wymmen
do take an husbond and bring forth children to encrece of mankind: If thy
desire be to plese god / trowest you that holy wymmen have not be weddyd /
Think on Sara and Rebecca / Lya and Rachell. how they were weddyd and brought
forth children and yet weren holy wymmen. Whereto have thou tabe upon the a
synguler life that thou may in no wise continue /

All the whiles that such words and many other like. the fend with his
cursyd company multeplyed against her / She prayed ever deuoutlye and
com^aunded her living to her spouse Jhesu / and kept her heart keys all the
whiles that the fendes stood before her and she answerde none word to them but
thus: I trust in mine lord Jhesu Christ and not in mine self / other word
might they never have of her but always she continued steadfastly in her devout
prayers:

And afterward she told to her confessor master Reymound / and thaughte many
other that were conuersaunt with her this lesson for a general rule / that
when temptacions arysen in us we should never despise ne make questions for
that is she said that the fend seeks off us for to fall in questyons with
him / He trusted so hyely in the great sotelte of his malice that he should
overcome us with his sofystycall resons / Which we should not make questyons
with him ne answer to his questyons / I shall tell you by ensample: Right a
chaste woman to her husbonde should not answer to the sotelte maundes that
wonteth to make to her / but rather bow away from him if she would escape
sin / Right so is a soul the which is coniuncte to our lord by chaste
love should never make questyons ne answer / the questyons to the fend that
cursed auout^^er our enemy: But rather turn her to devout prayer and
command her to our lord / that she consent not to his sotell demau^des /
for by virtue of devout prayer and steadfast faith we may overcome all the
sotell temptacions of the fend: Thus in this wise this holy maid crystis
spouse overcome her enemy so that he cesyd of the kind of temptacions
against her and turned him to another abhomynable kind of temptacions that
was this He brought before her the likeness of me^ and wymmen medlyng togyders
in the fowlest wyses that might be devised / Spekyng to gyders foul dyshonest
words in so much that this cursyd company ran abonte her with ellyng and
cryeng for to stere her to such abhomynable sins /

O lord god what traueyle had she than in her soul that was so constreyned
to see and to here that thing that she had most in abhomynacion / al be it
she closed her eyes / and stopped her eren.

And there to yet she had another torment for her spouse that our lord Jhesu
was wont to vysyte her and comfort gracyously. Seemed as for a time far from
her that another vysybly ne vnuysybly he showed to her his help / as it seemed /
of the which she had full great sorrow in her soul / all be it that she
cessyd not of her great penance / but ever continued there Inn and in devout
prayer. At the last she bethought by Inspyracyon of the holy ghoost of a
certain fleyte / the which she told afterward to her confessor and to many
other. For to eshe we there by the sotell temptacion of the fend and it was
this. It happed she said that other while devout fervor of a soul leuyng
our lord Jhesu other by sum certain sin / or else by new sotyll
temptacyons of the fend wexyth dull and slow / and other while it is I
brought to very coldenesse. In so much that sum vnwytty folk consyderyng
that they ben destytute so fro ghostly comfortes / the which they were wont
to have leave therefore their ghoostly excercyse that they were wont to use of
prayer / of medytacyons / of redyng / of holy comynycacyons / and of penance
doing / wheby they be made more ready to be overcome of the fend For he desired
no thing else of crystys knight but that he should put a way his armor /
by the which he was wont to overcome his enemy.

A wise knight of our lord Jhesu christ should not do but thus / the more he
sees him self dull and sloth or cold in devotion / the rather he should
continue in his ghoostly exercise / and naught for to make them less / but
rather encrece them.

Another thing also this maid ferned of our lord Jhesu and used for to say
it her self in edyfycacyon of other. Thou vile wretchyd creature art thou
worthy any manner of comfort in this lyffe / why host thou not mind of thy
sins / what supposest thou of thy self wretchyd syn^er this is not I nough to
the / trowest thou that thou art escaped by the mercy of our lord fro ever
lastyng dampnacyon. Therefore thou sholdest be well apayed you wretch though
thou suffreddest / the peynes and derkenes of soul all the days of thy ^^f
why art thou thanne heavy and sorrowful to suffer such peynes. Sithe by gods
grace thou shalt escape endeles peynes / with christ Jhesu without any doubt /
thon shall be comforted endelesly / if thou suffer this peynes pacyentely /
whether thou have chosen to serve our lord only for the comfort / that thou
may have of him in this fyf / nay but for the conforte / that thou shalt
have of him in the bliss of heaven. Therefore arise up now and cesse not of thy
ghostly excercyse that you have used / but rather encrece more there to.

With these darts of mekenes this holy maid wounded the provide king of
babylonye her enemy the fend. And strengthed her self gretely with such wise
words / and as she knoweleched to her confessor master Reymond / there was
such a multitude of fendes in her chamber as her seemed / ^he saw with her
eyes about for to styre her to foul thoughts of sin that she fled her
chamber for a time and kept her self more in the church thanne she was wont
to do. All be it that she was pursued thither by their sotyll temptacyons / yet
nevertheless she thought that she would follow the steps of Saint Jerome
fleenge and hydyng her self by dales and hills in eshewyng of such
abhomynable temptacyons.

And ever when she came home fro church to her chamber / she found so many a
multitude of fendes there Inn / seyenge dishonest words / and doing the
abhomynable dedys of lecherye / and as her seemed rennyng about hyder and
thither / as it had been a passing swarm of flies

Thanne she took her to prayer / and so long she prayed to our lord unto the
time that heuysom compayne were I swaged somewhat fro their abhomynable
temptacyons. When these wretched temptacyons had continued many days to gydres
/ In a time when she was come fro church to her chamber and fill down to
prayer / sone after there appyred a gladsome beme of the holy ghoost / and
opened her soul / that she should have in mind how that not many a days a
fore she had asked of our lord the virtue and the gift of strength. And
what doctrine our lord had give her for to get the gift of virtue and of
strength.

And anon she understood the meuynge of the foul temptacyons of the fend /
and conceived there by a great gladness / that our lord had give her such
strength to overcome them / and purposed ever afterward to suffer mekely and
gladdely all such heuysom temptacion / and all manner dyseases for the love of
her spouse.

Than one of the fendes that was more bolder thanne any of that other and more
wicked spoke to the holy maid in this wise. What thynkest thou to do wretch /
thynkest thou ever to keep this caytyf life / know it well we shall never cesse
to pain the and heavy the to thy death unto the time thou consent to us / To
whom the holy maid answered having in mind the doctrine the which our lord
taught her seyeng thus: I have chose pain for my refresshyng And therefore it
is not hard to me for to suffer them: but rather dylectable for the love of
my savior as long as it pleseth his mageste that I shall suffer them as soon
as she had said that word anon suddenly the abhomynable company of fendes
vanysshed away all confused And after that a great unspeakable lyht of heaven
appieryd and shynned all her chamber / and in that light apperyd our lord
Jhesu christ as he hynge upon the cross when he shed his precious blood and
called the holy maid to him and said: Mine own daughter katheryn: see thou
not what I suffered for the be not heavy therefore for to suffer for me / After
that he came more nerre to her in another manner of lyknesse for to comfort her
and thank her for her glorious victory that she had won Then she after
these words: of saint anthonye seyde to him thus / O my lord Jhesu where were
thou when my soul was so vexyd with such foul fylthy temptacions:

Our lord said again I was in thy soul and in thy heart / Then said she
again / A lord saving always thy truth and the reverence of thy mageste / how
may it be that thou sholdest dwell in so foul a heart: that was replete with
so many fylthy thoughtis and uncleanness /

Our lord said eftsoon, whether caused tho temptacions and tho thoughts in
thyn heart gladness or sorrow delectacion or weylynge /

She answerde nay lord / But great soro we and weylynge / Our lord said
then. who was cause of that sorrow and weylyng: But I that dwelled in thyn
heart: if I had not be there thylke foul thought should had partyd thine
heart and so thou sholdest had dylectacion in them /

But my presence was cause why theymyslyked the: when thou would had put
them fro the with dyplesaunce and myghtest not as thou would thou weptyst /
and were sorry / and all this made I that was present wythinforth with in thyn
heart and defended the from thyn enemies: And suffer the without forth to
troubled as much as was nedeful be and spedefull to thyn health / And when the
time that the bataylle was fulfilled and ended by me. I sent the with out
forth my bemys of light And anon the derkenes of the fendes fled / for they
might not abide there my light is who was he the which enfourmed the now last
that tho pain were to the full holsom for to win ghostely strength by. And
that thou sholdest suffer them patiently as long as it was liking to me: but
only that shyneth in the beme

And by cause thou offredes^ thy self hertely to suffer tho peynes patiently
for my soul Therefore they were freely with draw fro the by showing of my
preserce / And therefore daughter that have so trewely overcome by my virtue /
and not by thine: thou have deserved there by more grace of me then thou
wenest:

Wherefore fro this time fortherward I shall show me to the more famulyerly and
more homely than I have do before / After time this vysyon was ended she was
belefte in so much plente of sweetness that no pen may write it to ye
full. There belefte in her heart syngulerly amerueylous sweetness of that
word that our lord called her his daughter /

When he called her mine own daughter katheryne* So that she prayed her
confessor Master Reymou^d wha^ that ever he would call her he would vouche
sauf to call her on the same wise that euyr her sweetness might thereby be
renewed in her soul / Fro that time fortherward our lord Jhesu her spouse
was with her right homely for he apperyd to her often times other while him self
allone / other while he brought our lady his blessed mother with him /

Other while saint Domynyk there while both to gyders.

Also sometime he brought with him Marie magdalene / Saint Johan the
Euaungelyste / Saint Poule the Appostle and other moo such as he lyked / But
for the more party he came him self allone and spoke with her as homely / as a
friend would speak with his most homely friend / In so much that both to
gyders would walk up and down in her chamber / as two relygyous men or two
clerkys seeing psalms or hours to gydres / And this she be knew often time
afterward to master Reymound her confessor full ferefully. O now was this a
merueylous thing / O what this was a merueylous showing and an homely that
never has be herd before.

Nevertheless maidens ye need to be in no doubt thereof if ye mekely and
Inwardely consydere the depthe of the goodness of our lord:

For to eueryche of his chosen souls he gives sum synguier gift and grace
whereof they may have an excellent Joye above other* that not only the heythe
of his souereygne magnyfycence apperyd in all his saints at onys but in
eueryche by him self sum synguler grace. For right at it is seen all day yt
one man is not like another / but has sum manner of dyfference / Right so
eueri saint in heaven has sum dyffere^ce of som^e synguler grace given of
god fro other / Therefore it is not to merueylle gretely though sum special
grace be seyde of one that is not found thereof / And by cause I have rehersyd
of seeing of there psalms I shall tell you maidens how this holy maid learned
for to read for by techyng of man or of woman learned she never She told ones
to her co^fessoure master Reymond that she had a desired to kunne her
mattyns and therefore on a time she prayed one of her susters to get her an A
/ b / c / to teache her for to know her lettres: And she had I traueylled
sore many wekes to gydres: and did spend her time there aboutes for to know
her lettres: And might not come thereto / She bethought her to complain to our
lord that heavenly master for myspendyng of her time / prayeng him that he
would vouchesauf to teache her if it were liking to him and spendefull for her
so for to kunne to read And else lord thy will be done / For it is Inow to
me if it be lykyng to the ye I be simple of living / and for to spend my time
in holy medytacions / Now is this a merueylous thing She had not so soon
ends her prayer but that she could read lyuelye her psalms as redely as she
had been any kunnyng clerk / when her confessor perceived that he was
gretely astonyed / For as much as she could not spelle ne know uneath no
lettre the which was ordained of god as he supposed for a merueyllous token in
her: After this / this maid gate her books of gods seruyse / for to say
there matyns and her howrys theri^ And among all other verses that she said /
she marked the verse that every hour begins with that is: Deus in
adiutorium meum intend / ^n^e adadiuuandum me festina / And kept that verse
specially in her mind to her lives end. And often times she would reherce yt /
Soon after that she encresyd in her soul merueylously in perfeccion of
contemplacion / And then cessyd little her vocal prayer because that she was
so often times rauysshed in to the heythe off contemplacion / so ferforth that
by cause of such often rauysshyng she might not often times perform ne make an
end of her Pater noster / For her soul was rauysshed fro her outward wits
as I shall declare to you here afterward by the help of god. For thus shall I
make an end of this chapter: All this that is contained therein her confessur
had som^e other by knowleche of her pryuely / And sum by relacion that she
told to other As it had be told of another and not of her self to the more
edyfycacio^ of them

Of her merueylous disponsacyon with the which she was weddyd in faith to our
lord with a ring. Capitulum duodecium /
AS this holy maid encrecyd and profyted more and more day by day in grace
and in virtue / there came an holy desire to her soul to pray our lord to give
her the perfyte degree off feyth: By the which faith she might be more able to
him ^oythouten any chaungynge then she was a fore: Anon forth she prayed to
our lord that he would vouchesauf to encrece her faith and make it so perfyte
in her that it should never be hurte^ne throw down by violence of any manner
aduersarye: To whom ouce lord answered in this wise / I shall dyspouse the to
me in faith / yet she prayed the same often times aftyrward and ever had the
same answer of our lord again At the last it happened a little a fore the
beginning of lent in the days when ye people made an end of eting offlesshe
and in manner made vein and ydil festys in seruyng of the womb*

This holy maid closid her up in her chamber Sekyng by fasting and prayen ge
the gloryus and gracious face of her spouse ^hu axyng specyaly by fervent
prayer vncessablythe same that she axid before of the virtue of faith that he
would vouchesauf to encrece it and make it perfyggt in her / To whom our lord
apperid and said. By cause that thou have putt away and flelde all manner nf
vanytes of etyng of slesshe these days for my love* And set the dylectacion
of thyn heart fully in me this time / where all other about the and namely in
the same house that thou dwell in: maken festys and ioyen therein. I shall
therefore make a solemn feste of dispousacion between the soul and me. And so
as I behyte I shall dispouse the to me in faith / Our lord had not so soon
said this words. That our lady his glorious mother / And his blessed
Euangelyste saint Johan / and the glorious appostle saint poule / and saint
Domynyke the fader of her relygion apperyd and with them Dauyd the prophet
brengyng in his hand a sauter of musyke: First our blessed lady gods mother
came to this holy maid / and took her hand In her holy hand stret chyng out
her fyngers to her sone prayleng him that he would vonchesuf to wedde this
maid to him in feythe. The which devout axynge our lord granted her and
brought forth a Ring arrayed round about with four precious margarete stones
/ And in the over part off the ring was enclosyd a right fair dyamant stone
/ That ring he put with his holy hand upon the fyngre of this maidens right
hand seyeng to her thus Loo I dyspouse the to me that am thy maker and thy
savior in faith the which disposycion shall be confermed and kept in the
vndefouled unto the time you shall halowe everlasting weddyng with me in the
bless of heaven / Therefore douhter now fro this time fortherwarde work
myghtely and put away all manner of doubt for now thou art armed with the
strength of the feith / for to overcome thereby all thyn adversaries / And thus
this gracious vision cessyd: But ever afterward* this ring bylefte up on this
holy maids finger not to other folks syht but to her own sight for she be
knew many times and often to her confessor master Reymound with great dread
and fere that she saw ever that ring upon her fyngre / And there was never
time but that she saw it / Loo maidens ryht as saint katheryn the martyr
virgyn and queen. After her baptym was dyspoused to our lord as ye legende
makes mention / Right ye may consydre now how this holy maid katheryn /
After so many victoryes of temptacions of her flesh was solemply dyspoused to
the same lord: And ye consydre the coudycyons of this ring / ye shall^welle
see that the tokene acordeth that that is betokens to She axed steadfast
feythe / what is strenger than a dyamaunt stone: it wythston dyth all manner
hardenesse and it persyth the hardest thing that is /

but that stone it self is broke only with the blood of a goote. Right so a
strong feythfull heart wythstondeth and ouercometh with his strenthe all
manner of aduersyte / But the mind of crystys precious blood the which is
called in holy write a goote the which precious blood he shadde upon the
cross for mankind: that stroge heart is re lentyd and al to broste / the four
precious Margarete stonys in the ring betokenyth no thing ellis / but four
purytres and clenes yt which was in that holy maid / that is clennes of her
entente clennes of her thout clennes of her speech and clennes of her workynge
All these shall be declared by the grace of god more largely here aftyrwarde I
supposo that this dyspousacion^ was no thing else but a confirmaciou^ of
godis grace And the token of this gracyous confyrmacion^ / was ye ring the
which only apperid to her and to none other for this cause that she should not
fere ne dread to deliver other owte of the wretched world by her prayers / and
by the help of that special grace that god had endowed her with. One of ye
princypall causes after holy doctors why ye almighty god vouchesauf of his
synguler preuylege to show to som^e that they ben plesaunt to him and in
estate of grace is in this wicked world for worship for his intent is to
send them / For to fight with this wicked world for worship of this holy
name and health off souls as he did to his Appostlis on wytsondaye / the
which token / specyal tokenes of grace: Right so this holy maid above the
condycion of all other wymmen after time she was thus confermed i^ grace / she
was sent openli for the wourshyppe of god to procure health of sowles / as it
shall be declared by the help of god here afterward more openly / And
therefore I trow it was that she took of our lord the token of confyrmacio^ of
grace that she should boldly and myghtely do execucion of that / that our
lord commanded her / Thus shall I make an end of this chapter and of the
first part of the legende of this holy maid saint katheryn of Scene to the
worship of the holy trynyte and to health of sowles / Regnaute semper in oi^us
scis domino nostro Ihesu cristo / qui^ cum patre almoque spu^isco^ viuit et
regnat deus Per oi^a secula seculorum Amen /

Here begins the second party in the which is showed the conversation of
this holy maid with men / And how the gifts which she had received off
our lord pryuyly enclosed within herself were openly showed to the world /
And first how our lord bad her that she should be conuersaunt among men /
Capitulum Prymum
^After time that this holy Maid was despoused as it is rehearsed before / our
lord began to draw her litill and little to the conversation of men / And
that was full mennerly and mesurably not for to wythdrawe utterly fro her his
dyuyne presence / but rather as much as longs to the mesure of perfection
for to encrese it as it shall be declared openly afterward / And therefore in a
time when he appyred to her and had taught her of the kingdom of heaven and
showed her many mysteryes / And also to seye the psalms and the hours of
dyuyne serui^ce as it is rehearsed before / forthwith he bad her that she should
go down to mete with other of her moders household and afterward that she
should come again to him When this holy maid herd this she sobbyd and wept
and fill down to his feet for sorrow and fayde to him these words / O sweet
Ihesu lord why put you me away fro the / and if I have offendyd and
displesyd the master / Loo lord there is mine body at thyn feet / punysshe it
and I shall gladly help thereto / and suffer me not good lord to be punysshed
with so^ sharp and so hard a pain to be departed in any manner of wise fro
thin blissed presence / what have I to do with that mete I have mete that they
knew not of whether receives anon more life by bodily metes or by ghostely
metes /

Lord as thou know well I have fled the conversation off men / that I
might the sonner find / and now sithe I have found the by the mercy and
graciously thou haste showed the to me though I am unworthy should I now than
forsake this precious tresour And put me to the conversation of men eftsoon
and so ben found reprobable in the faith / A nay lord suffer not that be so
for thine infynyte goodness / wha^ she had thus long wept and weyled with
sweet sobbyng words / our lord said to her / suffer now dear daughter for
it is full semely to the that thou shodeste fulfylle all manner of virtue that
not only it be fruytfull to thyn self / but also to other by mine special grace
it is not mine intent for to dysceuere or depart the from me in any manner of
wise. But rather I shall have the to me more strenger by medytacions of
neighbors charity Knew thou not well that in thise two things scondeth the
perfection of mine commaundementys that is in love off god and love of thyn
neighbor / I will therefore that thou will fulfylle the verof these two
preceptis that thou may go to heaven not with one wynge but with tweyne / Have
daughter how of thin young age thou have had hither to a yele and a love of
health of sowles / and by me it has be encresyd in so much that in thyn
young age thou purposed the to feyne the aman by cause thou myghtest the sonner
be received among the order of the friar prechours in strange contrees that
you sholdest not be known so for to prouffyte to the health of mennys souls
and for yt synguler love that thou had to mine servant Domynyk / thou
desyrest with a great honor his habyte that thou now have received / the
which domynyk pryncypally for health of souls I ordained that order why
merueylest thou / and wey lest thou so / if I bring the to that / that thou
have so long desired / With these words of our lord / this holy maid was
gretely comforted and said unto him like as our glorious lady glorious vyrgyn
marie said to gabriel such words Qn^o fit istud / A good lord in what wise
and what manner may this be done / Our lord said again as mine goodness shall
dyspose and ordeyne / Then^e she as a good dyscyple and a true follower of her
master Christ Ihesu said lord thyn will be done in all things and not in me
for I am derkenes / and thou art light / I am she that is naught / and thou art
he that is ought I am she that is vnwis / and thou art he that is endeles
wysdom of ye fader / But yet I pray the lord in what manner of wise may this be
that you seyste now that I wretch than am so freell should be so profitable to
mannys soul Thou know well lord that men setten little store by women's
words speak ye never so virtuously as it were not semely / Ne lyuest thou that
wymmen should be more conuersaunt among men / To this our lord answered in
manner as Gabryell answered our glorious lady glorious vyrgyn Mary / and said
there is none word that comes fro gods mouth impossible at him for to be
done / Am not I he the which has made mankind both man and woman and the
shappe of every either / And where that I will enspyre mine grace al is one to me
both man and woman / the neck again in his kind / But by cryeng of one of
this maids susters to her that she should cese she left of / And after time
that her spyryte was restoryd again to the bodily wyttys she felt her neck
so sore as thought it had be smyten with many great strokys / There as the
holy maid told it afterward to her confessor master Reymou^de if her mother
had put never so little more strength than she did to ryghting of her neck
as she was about* she should have broken her neck / with such manner passing
out of the body / The soul of this holy maid was often times rauysshyng* so
that other while by vyolens of the spyryte / the body was left up fro the
earth / as marie Magdalene was in time of her rauysshyng as it shall be
declared afterward more openly /

But now I shall tell you of a miracle that befyll in the beginning of her
rauysshyng / It befyl in a time when this holy maid tournyd a spete or a
broche with flesh by the fire of hot brenning coals, her soul was enflam^ed
and burnt in the mean while with the fire of the holy ghost / And anon she
was rauysshed fro her bodily wits seasyng for ye time of her tournyng of her
spytte / Wha^ her brothers wife the which was called Lysa perceived this
knowing the condycions of this holy maid* she took the spytte of her hand and
let her alone / and when the mete was ynow* and also folk had suppyd / yet
she bylefte in the sarauysshyng / Then Lysa bethought her to abide upon her
unto the time that she had do / She brought her husbond a bed and her
children and came again to aspye how she did / and found here fall down in
to the hot brennyng coals with that Lysa weyled and cried and said Alas alas
katheryn is all brennyd and ran to her anon and pullyd here out of the fire.
A and found her clothes nothing hurt ne burnt ne having no manner of tastyng
of the fire, ne yet more over there bylefte nomaner of ashes upon her clothes
/

Loo perceive ye not maidens what virtue of gostely fire was within this maids
soul by whose might the strength of that outward natural fire was utterly
wytdrawe / See ye not how the miracle of the children which were cast in to
the oven for to be brent was then renewed in this holy maid. And this
miracle was not onys showed in her but often times:

Onys it befyll her as she was in the church of the friars when she was so
rauysshed: she bowed her head down to a pyler. in the mean while / in the
which pyller there were certain images of diverse saints at the reuerens of
which saints there was a man styked up a wax candell brennyng the which
candell fill down upon this holy maids head in time of her rauysshyng / And
so it brennyd upon her head in to the time the candell was all wasted / And
so she had no harm: Was not this a merueylous thing and a wounderfull that
ye candell brennyd upon her head till it was wasted and hurt nothing her
kerchies And when the candell was all burnt / It quenchyd upon her head as
though it had be quenchyd upon a stone or upon earth.

Of this miracle bare witness many of her susters that saw it and told
afterward to her confessor / Master. Reymound: One of the susters which saw
it was called lysa / another Alyxa / and the third Francisca. Yet beside as
this it befyll like unto the same of her in diverse places of the world there
that she came: Namely when she was about to edefye men^ys sowles to virtue /
than the fend by his malice was gretely stered against her by the sufferau^ce
of god: and so ferforth that in the presence of many of gods servants he
kast her in to a fire /

And whiles other were about to draw her out with weeping and weylyng she
smyled upon them and come out of the fire by her self and was nothing hurt
neither in body ne in her clothes / Then she said to them that stood about
beeth no thing aferde: For it is mine ghostely enemy the fend that has do
this miracle and this records diverse that saw it to master Reymound her
confessor /

Another time also in her chamber by her beds side there was an erthen pan
with brennynge coals in the which brennyng coals the enuyous fend cast her
with such a strength that her head was the first that fill in the fire and so
the pan to braste for vyolence of the stroke / and yet her head was in no
wise hurt: She arose up and said with smilyng there to a devout woman which
was called Gabryell / Loo how this malycions enemy werketh:

Like to I ride in vitas patrum of a woman that was called Infracia: and
therefore it is none merueyle though our lord suffer the fend to work such
things in his derlynges and chosen children / sythen it so was that he suffered
him to work as hard things in his person / wha^ he suffered him to set him
upon the pynacle of the temple / And upon the hye hylle /

Tus by such merueylous things our lord wrought merueylously in his maiden
katheryn so that she encresyd more and more by his grace every day in his
perfection and as much that love was both rote and cause of all her werkys:
The charytable werkisof her neybours passed all other werkys. And the
charytable werkys was in double wise that is both to body and soul.

The first shall I tell you of the dedis of charity and of mercy that she did
to her neighbors that were syke in body / And afterward of the deeds of
charity and of mercy that she did to them that were seek in soul /

The next chapter shall declare openly of diverse merueylys that our lord
showed in her in helyng of pour folk And also of a merueylous charity that
she showed a nemptis hem that were seek in body / The witness of this chapter
is rehearsed within the same chapyter /

Of woundres which she did in health and in comfort to the necessyte of
them that were pour and nedy Capytulum iij
When this holy maid Katherin perceived yt the more mylder she was to her
neighbors the more gracyous she was to the syghte of her spouse Ihesu / she
applied her ever afterward to socour and help them in her need with all her
heart largely /

And by cause she would nothing have of her own as her own in her own
possession* Right as a very relygyous woman that had ordained in her own
heart to keep the iij pryncipall vows of relygyon as it is rehearsed before in
the first party / lest she should be found gylty of withdrawynge other mennys
good against the will of ye hauer / she went to her fader and besoughte him
mekely and lowely that he would give her leave to give alms after her
conscience to ^ore folk of the goodis of god I give him in his household / To
the which her fader granted her the more freely in as much as he know well
that she following perfyghtly the steps off of our / And granted not oonly
to her thus in pryuyte between them both: But also afterward to all that were
in in his household he gave in commandment that no body should let his
dear daughter for to give alms of such goods that our lord had give him
in his household though she would give to pour folk all that ever he had in
his household / As Soon as she had this license* she began to depart the
goods of her fader to pour folk: Nevertheless in as much as she lived with
a gift off dyscrecion: she departed not that good to all that would ask /
But to them that she knew were need folk / all though they asked not /
among all other nedy folk there came two he knowleched that there were many
pour nedy householders a little beside the Cite of gene that had great need and
were sore ashamed for to ask / after time she knew that she forgate it not
but that she arose up erly in ye morrow as saint Nycholas did and bare on her
sholders home to their houses both wine and oil and other things that was
needful / And as god would when she came she found her dorys open And she put
within the doors that she brought: and drew the door to and fledpreuyly her
way

It befyll in a time that she was seek in body so that fro the sole of her
foot to the top of the head the body was swollen / that she might not arise
up of her bed ne stand on her fete* And she herd say than / that there was
a pour wydowe a little beside, the which great hunger and great need with
her sons and daughters: For compassyon that she had of this pour woman and
of her children: The next night after she prayed our lord that he would
vochesauf to give her so much strength for a time yt she might goo and so
oour that pour woman / Anon she aroos, up erly upon the morrow and filled her
sack of her faders: where and her great vessel or a flacat of wine and
another vessel with oil: and what that she might ever find beside forth the
which might be necessary to mannys lyuelood and all these she kept in her
chamber: all be it that eueryche of these was for her berdem ynow for to here
alone yet she bare all at onys to the wedowes house sum thereof she trussed
upon her sholders sum up her right arm and sum up her lift arm and sum
thereof bonnden onder her gyrdell / and by miracle that was heavy ynouht to bear
eueryche by him self / she bare it all at onys esely without any pain or
greuau^ec She knowleche after ward both to her confessor Master Reymou^d and
to other of the friars: that the berdom wayde no more to her than thought she
had lift up a little wase of straw: and yet in truth if it had be
trewely wayed

It should have wayed an hundred pound of weyte or there about Er than the
common bell of the Cite was roungen erly in the morrow it was not lefull never
one to walk in the cite: aft time it was ronge this holy maid waited well her
time and took her Journeye with her burden / All be it that she were young and
all forbolnyd bysekenes: yet she ran to the pour wydowed house so fast as
though she had felt nothing of pains ne of the burden / And wha^ she came
nyghe to the pour wydowes house her byrthen waxit heavy and greuo^ to bear / so
that her seemed she might not bear it a paas further / when she perceived this
she understood anon yt it was our lords will and prayed him devoutly with
trust that he would vouchesaufe to ese her / Anon she was esyd of her byrthen
/ and came to the pour wydowes house and found her door half open / As preuyly
as she could she drew her byrthen within the door / and yet it made such a
noise that it woke the wydowe. And she fled as she might for sekenes but that
was not full far / but for her sekenes encresyd more and more / by the
ordeynaunce of god that uneaths she might remeue her out of the way /
wherefore she spak to our lord with wei lyng chere and in manner in smylyng chere
/ and said good lord why have thou so dysceyued me / it is good to the to
shame me here / it is thy will that mine folly be pupplysshed to all folk here
about have thou now forgete thy mercy that you haste showed to me thyn
vnwourthy* I pray the lord yield me mine strength that I may come home to mine
chamber / in time she spoke thus and these words and like to these / She
enforced and strengthed her self that she might go forth seyeng to her own
body thus / thou most needs forth though thou sholdeste deye by the way and
therefore goo forth what with going but more with crepyng forth she went little
not so fer / but that the pour wedowe arose up and aspyed by the habyte who
it was that did her that benefet

Our lord then considered that she was gretely tourmentyd in her going /
restoryd her again to the strength that she had before / but not so
perfyghtely / So that with great hardynes she came home er then it was light
day. And lay down in her bed right feeble as she did before thus our
lord touched and touched her by sickness as him lyked / Loo maidens here ye
may see the miracles of saint nycholas been renewed in this holy maid / and
not only by miracle / But by many miracles: now shall I proceed forth and show
you the virtuous living of saint martyn / How our lord showed him in her:

It befyll on a time when this holy maid was in the church of the freyers
There came to her a pour man and asked sum help of her for the love of god.
This holy maid perceived well that she had nothing that she might give hi^
For she was not wont to here neither gold ne silver / she prayed him that he
would abide a while till she came from home / For gladly she would and
plenteuously give alms of such things yt she had at home in household /
Then ye pour man sade if thou have any thing for to give me here I pray the
to give me for I may not abide so long / it was to suppose by this that it was
another yt apperyd in the pour man his lykenes and not he that it seemed / This
holy maid was both that she should goo fro her with out somewhat she bethought
her what she might give him to fulfylle his need / Anon it came to her mind
of a little silver crose that hynghe by her bodies yt which for that time she
had in her hand she pulled away that little cross and gave it gladly to the
pour man / when the pour man had that cross he went away fro her gladly
and asked no more alms ye day of none other man as though he had come for the
cross alone / The next night following when this holy maid prayed as she was
wounte to do Almighty god our savior apperyd to her having that same little
cross in in his blessed hand arrayed with mani precious stones and said
daughter know not thou this cross / this maid answerde to him and said /
she knew it well but she said that it was not so fair araied wha^ she had
it / To whom our lord said again / yesterday thou gave it me this gladly
with great charity and love the which love and charity betokens by these
precious stones therefore I behote that at the day of dome before all ye
company of angels and men / I shall show the this to encrece of thy joy /
For I shall not head ne suffer to be hyd the deeds of mercy that been do by the
/ with this our lord cesyd of that aperycion. and she thanked ourlord / and
ever after was I steryd to do more such alms as it was well proved
afterward / another day also it befyll when deuyn service was do at the
friars after time that the people was goo out of the church and she bylefte
behind alone with one of her susters for to pray* as she came dounward fro
the chapel the which was ordained / for the susters of penance / our lord
apperyd to her in likeness of a pour pilgrim at the age as her seemed of ij.
or iij and thyrty year half naked and asked her that she would give him clothes
for the love of god / Theen^e she was that time steryd to do deeds of mercy
more than ever she was: she prayed the pour man that he would abide a while
unto the time she came down again fro the chapel: and then she would help
him of sum clothes / She went up again to the chapel and did of herk
ertyll under the which kertell she wered next her her body here cote that was
without sleues and gave it with a great gladness to the pour man / After time
the pour had received it he asked more of her and said / A / a. good lady I
pray you sithe ye have give me a woollen clothe / give me lynen clothes for to
were next mine body / Then she said to him come after me and thou shall houe
gladly and she went a fore and her spouse Thesu unknowing to her in a pilgrim
lykenes followed her. When she came home she went thither where the lynen clothes
of her fader and of her brothers layen / and brought out both a sherte and
other lynen clothes and took gladly to the pour pilgrim / Yet when the pour
man had received that he asked more and prayed her that she would give him
sleues to his kertyll for to cover his arms /

With that she went her in nothing heavy of his crawyng but gladly sought
about for his sleues / At the last she found a new cote of a maiden
servant of the house having and hangyng upon a perch the which was never
werid there of she took away the sleues and took it gladly to the pour man /
yet he asked more and said / Lady thou have now clothed me, he thank the for
whose love you have do it but yet I have a felawe lyeng in an hospytall her
beside the which needs gretely clothes. If ye will send him any clothes I
shall bear it to him in your byhalue full gladly / yet this holy maid for his
multyplyeng of asking was never the weryer But rather the more fervent for to
do alms largely She be thought her where she mygth have a clothe to clothe
with this nedy man yt lies in the hoospytall Then fill to her mind that all
the meyne of the hou / sold were right loathe to given alms out take her fadre
allone / and therefore ye shytte up all her clothes under lok and keye / lest
she should find them and give them in alms. Ouermore she considered
dyscretely that she had take I nogh away of the maiden servant of the
household / and therefore she would take away no more of hyres by cause she was
nedy her self. Thanne she dysputed with her self whrther she should give him
her own cote or not / by cause she had no moo but one / charity said yes /
but hone ste said nay. At last charity oueroo me honest / that is for to say
charity that longs to the soul / overcome honest the which had
compassyon upon the body

She thought if the pour man should go away without sum clothe / it should be
slanderous to other / and if she had given her own coote and goo naked than
should she had slandred sowles / whose souls she ought for to love more than
the body And therefore her seemed that sowles should not be slaundred in no wise
for no temporal alms. And thanne she answered to the pour man thus. Trewely
dear friend if it were honest and lefull to me for to give my cote that I were
thou sholdest have it gladdely. But by cause I have no moo / it were not semely
that I should give away this. And therefore I pray the hold me excused / for
gladdely would I give it the if I had any moo. Then the pour man smyled
upon her and said well lady I see well if thou had moo thou would
gladdely give me / therefore I thank the / fare well. When he was borned fro
her / this holy maid perceived by certain signs that it should be he the
which was wont to appear to her and was often times conuersaunt with her /
she was in manner of doubt / but her heart brenned in love. Nevertheless in
as much as she held her self to comyne occupacyon of household as she was
wont to do The next night suyng our lord Jhesu christ appeared to her / as she
prayed in lykenes of that pour man holdyng in his hand that cote that the
holy maid gaf him arrayed with clear shynyng precious stones / and said to her
thus Dear daughter know thou not this dote / she answered and said yes / but
she gaf it not so arrayed: To whom our lord said again. Thou gave me yester
day this cote so freely and so charytable that it voyded away fro me the pain
of cold Therefore I shall now give the a cote / the which shall be Inuysyble
to men / but to the it shall be sensyble. Out of mine holy body I shall take it
/ and hyue it the / by the which both thy body and thy soul may be keuered
and kept from noyous cold unto the time yt they shall be arrayed in joy
without an end a fore my saints and angels. Anon forth with he took out a
clothe of a sangueyne color with his holy hondes out of the wound of his side
shynyng all about to the quantyte and mesure of the maidens body. Where with
he arrayed her with his own holy hondes and said. This clothe I give the all
the while thou dwell in earth in token of thy clothe of joy / that thou
shall be arrayed within heaven Thus this vysyon cessyd. After that the holy maid
had so great grace in receyuyng of that ghostly gift / not only in her
soul but also in her body / that fro that hour in to her endyng day / she
neded never to were moo clothes in winter thanne in somer. For were the wedder
never so cold she used no mo clothes than a cote and a kertell. For ever
afterward as she seemed she felt that ghostly cote upon her / the which our
lord gaf her / and that was the cause that she felt no cold. See ye not
maidens of what worthynes this holy maid was that followed Saint Nycholas in
gyuyng of atmespryuely / and followed saint martyn in gyuyng of her own clothes
the which our lord allowed by his holy apperyng to this blessed maid. And
there to gaf her a sensyble and an everlasting token / for to feel in earth how
plesau^t alms deeds ben to him. Me seems that when our lord said to this
holy maid that he would she we her that little cross at the day of dome the
which she gave in alms And also that he would array her with a clothe of joy
/ in heaven is no thing else but a sikernes of endeles health. And thereto an
excellent joy in bliss for her mede

Therefore maidens set not little by such reuelacyons and such tokenes / for
sykernesse of endeles health only causes so great joy and so great comfort
in a soul that it were impossyble a tongue to tell it or a pen to write it.
What follows after such a sykernesse of joy trow ye to a soul. Trewely
encrece of all virtue of pacyence / of strength / of temperaunce of business
/ and delygence in keeping of her self / in holy works of feyth / of hope / of
charytr / and of such other virtues.

And all that were hard to such a soul a fore ben made by such comfort
right esye Loo what grace such predestynacyon notefyed to a clean soul
wercheth.

Another time also it befyll that this holy maid fulfilled with compassyon
perceived that there was a man the which made him pore wylfully for gods love
and lacked mete / wherefore she took preuely a lynnen bag and filled it with
eggs / and bare it with her preuely under her ^oote to refresshe with that
pour man when she met with him. She came to the place there that the pour
man dwelled / and entered first in to the church there beside for to pray. And
when she was entered / she bethought on our lord so Inwardly / and anoue her
spirit was rauysshed / so that she was fully for that time wythdrawe from her
outward wyttys / as it is rehearsed before.

When she was thus rauysshed / it happed suddenly that the body bowed to a
pyler casuelly on that side that the eggs were on / so that she lened fully
upon the bag with eggs / thanne was there in the same bag for gotten a fore
a thymbyll as tayllours sown with / the which thymbyll was broken in three
parties by burthon of her body / but the eyren that charity hyd there were hole
and in no party broken. Now was this a meruayllous thing that the eyren were
hole / and the thymbyll of coper was to broke / so our lord showed there his
miracle in the charytable eyren. For our lord showed his help not only by this
holy maid to nedy folk / but also he showed his miracle in her by works of
his godhede

And for to declare the more openly / I shall tell you a meruaylles thing / of
which meruayll were wytnes both men and wo^man about the nombre of xx of
this maidens faders household Her mother Lapa told master Reymond her
daughters confessor that after time her daughter this holy maid had leave of
her fad to give alms. It befylle that the meyne of the household had drunk
among them a certain vessel of wine / so that the remenau^t the which was
left was not fresshe for to give to pour men / in asmoche she had in custom
to give them of the best for gods love. She went her than to the next
vessel of wine there beside in her faders seller / and tamed that for pour
folk And gaf them largely there of every day as they neded many days to gyder
/ and it was not aspyed of the meyne. At the last when the first vessel was
done / the boteler mynystred drink to the meyne of the vessel the which the
holy maid had tamed. Yet the holy maid left not therefore / but always she
gave there of to the pour folk / and ye more the meyne drunk / the more
largely she gave to pour folk / and it was not aspyed / ne the wine was never
the vnfressher ne never the less in the vessel / but allewaye kept his
estate / both in fullness and in fresshenesse. All the meyne of the household
gretely meruaylled there of that the vessel continued so long / and the wine
was so good and so fresshe / for it was well know a fore / that such a
vessel of wine might not last over xv days or xx days at the ferthest
Nevertheless it continued not only xx days / but a full month complete And
yet it semyd that the vessel was no wise lessened.

All the meyne had meruayll there of yt the wine was so good and so fresshe and
lastyd so long. For better wine them seemed they tastyd never It was unknow to
them all how that might be / but the holy maid knew well I nogh yt it was by
miracle of our lord / by cause of the alms that she gave there of the more
largely to the pour folk. And therefore she gave there of the more largely to
pour folk openly that all the meyne might see it and yet it seemed never the
less in the vessel. O month was passyd and an other began to enter / and yet
the wine continued ever like fresshe / and like full as it did first in to the
time the grapes were ripe for to make new wine. Whenne the g^apes were ripe
and vessellys were ordained for to be filled with new wine / the master of
the wine bad and commanded / that the vessel which co^tynued so long with
old wine / should be emptyed and fyllyd with new wine One of the servants
made ordinance for to empte that vessel by fyllyng of botellys / and yet it
seemed never the less. At the last the vessel was undone for to be gawgid
to know there by what was left in the vessel / and it was found all dry as
though there had no wine be there Inn many months before Then all the
household were more amexuaylled of ye miracle then they were of the
habundaunce of wine before.

Loo maidens what miracle our lord showed by gyuyng of alms deed of this holy
maid Katheryne / the which miracle was openly afterward known in the Cite of
Seen Thus ends this chapter. The wyttenesse of this matter contained in this
chapter ben rehearsed in this chapter.

Of meruayllous dedys which she did in lowely and besy seruyse to them that
were syke. Capitulum iiij
This holy maid had a meruayllous compassyon in her soul of pour folk and
nedy But yet she had a more excellent and a more meruayllous pity of seek
folk / for the which pity that she had of them she wroughte many wonder
things / whom I shall rerce by the grace of god / for the more edyfycacyon of
them the which shall read or here this holy legende. And though it seem to
sum incredyble / yet shall I not leave therefore. In the cite of Seen there was
a full pour womman / and a syke that for need and wantyng of temporal gooddes
/ she was constreyned to lygge in an hospytak in the same Cite where she
supposed to have and find remedy of her syknes / that she might not have by
her self / it happed thanne that she was received in to a pour hospytall of
the same cite / in the which hospytall uneath she might have that she nedyd
Her sykenesse encrecyd so hyghely that she was a lepre tho^ugh out all her body
/ then all that ever were with Inn the hospytall eshewed her te more / and
dysposed for that she should be sent to the spytellhous without the town /
the which was ordained for lazaros and not for to abide among them. When
this holy maid perceived this / she went full of charity to the same
hospytall / and vysyted the pour leprous womman / and mynystred to her not
only the substance of temporal gooddes / but also the help of her own
mynystracyon. For every day on the morrow / and every night at even / she
vysyted the same seek womman by her own person consyderyng in that same
leprous womman her spoust Jhesu with her ghoostly eye. And therefore she served
her to more besely / the more dylygentely / and the more mekely / this holy
maid served her the more prude and unkind / the seek womman was against her.

For so often times it happeth in them that been not meke / that the more mekenes
there is showed to them / the more proud they be. And there that they should
thank our lord for the kyndnes which is showed to them / the show rather
Iniuryes and wrongs / right so did this seek womman to this holy maid when
she saw that she was served so customably every day of this holy maid / she
began to chyde her when she was not served to her plesaunce. It befyll other
while that this holy maid was long at the church / and continued sometime
longer then sometime / and that was the cause often time why she was tarried fro
that seek wo^man And after when she came late to the seek wo^man / she would
chyde her shappely / and said to her soornfully many such heavy words. O lady
queen welcome / where have ye ben so long lady queen / a now ye be a great
lady that so long have been at the frerys / have ye talkyd I nough with the
freres lady / with such like words and many like these / she did what she
could to styre this holy maid to wrath / yet was she not styred by her words
/ but rather served her as she would her own mother / and comforted her as
lowely / and as mekely as she would her own mother / seeing to her right thus O
good mother / for gods love be not dyspleased with me / for though I have be
long I shall mende all thing anon. Than she hyd her fast and made a fire /
and ordained besyly for her mete / and for all other necessaryes as she would
for her own mother / so that the seek womman in all her vnpacyence meruaylled
of her pacyence This rebukynge continued long time / and yet was that holy
maid never weary of her seruyse / but rather continued / many folk had meruayll
thereof. But her own mod Lapa was gretely troubled with al and cried upon her
that she should leave that minystracion lest she were a lepre as ye seek woman
was / and oftymes she said to her Daughter I wot well thou shall be a leper if
thou continue in service of this seek woman / and that may I not suffer / And
therefore leave of I charge the / To whom this holy maid excused her honestely
and said that she had it of our lord that she should not leave the
minystracion of that pour woman / And so she e^ed her mother / and she
continued forth in her holy mynystracion. Then the fend perceived that she
might not be overcome by sweet reuelyng / he turned him to another while by
the suffraunce of our lord and made her hondes leper the which touched the
lepers body of the seek woman in so ferforth that every body yt saw her said
that she was a leper yet would she not sece thefor but rather desires to be a
leper than for to se^e of holy ministracio^ / she despised her own body and
rought never what befyll to her so that she mightserue our lord That lepers
sekenes continued upon her many days /

But her seemed full few day in comparyson of great love that she had to our
lord. That blessed lord the which tournyd all thing to god in his lovers
after time he consyderyd the ghostely strength of his spouse this holy maid:
he would not suffer that the lepers sykenes should long endure in her / Within
a little time afterward it happed by the dysposycyon of our lord that lepers
woman should pass out of this world / So that in a time of her passing this
holy maid was with her and comforted her besely and blessydly.

When she was passed she washed deuotly that lepres body and arrayed it to the
berynge / And when her dyryge and her mass was done / she beryed her with her
own hondes / And as soon as she was buried / the leper passed away fro her
hondes as though she had never no ne sykenesse thereof / But rather her hondes
was more fayrer afterward then any place of her body / as though she had
never be touched with any spyce of lepre. See not ye maidens what encrece of
virtue this holy maid wan by this deed of mercy / charity the mother of virtue
stererd her to do that charytable deed of mercy and meekness conpeled with
charity the which made her to be subject and servant to the seek / And also
pacyence was conpeled with that charity the which made her to suffer pacyently
and gladly the seek wommans rebukynge:

And yet ferthermore to this deed off charity was knytte wythouten any doughte
sekernesse of clear faith / By the which faith she beheld ever her spouse
Jhesu in her soul as often as she mynystred to that woman.

And yet nevertheless she failed none hope, by the which she continued to the
last end in her holy mynystracyon. After all these holy company of virtues
followed an open miracle in clensyng of that lepre by the death of this pour
woman the which she took by her mynystracyon. This is a gracious miracle and a
merueylous yet should ye see and here a more merueylous thing that followed if
ye lysten / and here it besely / In the same Cite of Gene there was a susters
of penance of Saint Domynyk seek yt which was called after the manner of
speech i^ ye country Palmaria / ye suster Palmaria was so gretely styred to
hate by excytacion of ye fend against this holy maid katheryn / yt as often as
ever she saw her or herd herd her speak or herd speak of her. she was hyghely
troubylyd in her soul so ferforth that she showed all the tokenes of malice
against her both in ba^bytyng of her pryuyly and openly and also in cursyng /
As Soon as the holy maid perceived this / she showed to her all manner of
myldenes and mekenes for to pees her in that that she could: but always her seek
suster despised all her meekness to the vtterest and set none price by her
Then this holy maid ran by prayer with a fervent deuote heart to our lord
Ihesu her spouse prayeng to him specially for her seek suster that he would
vouchesauf to give her grace of forgyuenes the prayers were as a brennyng fire
ascendynge up to our lord askyng of him both mercy and dome / all be it that
the intent of this holy maid was nothing else but for to ask mercy for her
and no ne dome / yet it was lykyng to our lord for that time not for to give
his mercy without dome / there showed our lord his great dome but if
byrrayers of this holy maid / He showed a more gretter mercy / he smote
mercyably to that suster Palmarya in her body that her soul shol be made hole
/ but what hardynes of obstinacion was in that seek suster / And what swetenes
of charity there against was in his spouse katheryne / It was clearly showed
afterward by ryghtwysdom evermore he encresyng in this holy maid katheryn the
love of sowles by showing of a wonderful fayrnes of that susters soul / the
which was first by ye right wisdom of him I demed to be dampened for her
obs^ynacie / but merytes and prayers of this holy maid / it was afterward
saved / When our lord had smite that suster palmarya in her body by bodily
sekenes to that intent only that her soul should be more hole / yet would she
not sece of her malycyous hate that she showed without cause to this holy maid
/ But rather was more grievous to her after her sekenes then she was in her
hele / The more froward she was to the holy maid. the more mekenes she she wed
again to her and would often times full charitably be with her and do her service
both with loving words and deeds Yet was that seek suster harder then any
stone against her that neither by charytable words ne deeds ne seruyces she
would not be pesed / but ever was grutchyng upon her so ferforth that she bad
her goo out of the house that she was inn with a wood violent spyryt This
consyderyd our lord that rightwis judge / he leyde his hand of ryghtwysnes upon
that enmye of charity / and touched her so / So suddenly that both without
shryfte and housell she drew fast to the death of body and soul: When this
holy may herd her of / Anon she went to her chamber and bysoughte our lord by
devout prayer for that soul lest it should peryche by occasyon of her / Such
words she seyde to our lord in her soul in time of her prayer as afterward
she was be know to her confessor / Lord whyder I wretch am I bore to the
end by occasyon of me souls I made like to yt should be put to endeles peynel:
^and wylt you suffer lord yt by occasyon of endeles da^pnacion to mine suster to
whom I should be an instrument of everlasting health: A mine good lord put
away such an orybyll dome sor the multitude of thyn great mercy / It had be
better I had never be borne / than soulis I bought by precious blod should for
me be dampened

O lord be these thine byhestes the which thou behotest me by thy large mercy
I should be profitable to the soul hele off mine neighbors: be these the
fruytes of health that I should bring forth for that mine suster should be
dampened / and none douwte mynsynne is cause thereof and of her pain / For other
fruit bring I not forth but sin alone / But yet shall I not cese to ask
mercy unto the time I have sum comfort of mine susters sauacion in this wise
this holy maid prayed more in soul then in word outward and for that she
should have the more compassyo^ of her susters soul: our lord showed her in the
mischefs perile that her susters soul was inn comered and wythinne that sight
our lord answered her and said that he might not suffer it of his ryghtwysnes
but that such a malycious hate and an obstynate must needs be punysshed /
Then the holy maid fell down a fore our lord in prayer and said: Lord I
shall go never out of this place in to the time, thou have showed methy mercy
for my suster / punisshe me lord for her sin for I that am cause of her
trespaas should be punisshed and not she therefore merciable lord I beseech the
for thy great mercy and thyn endeles godenes that you suffer not mine susters
soul goo out of her body in to the time that she have received that grace and
thy merci Loo maidens that prayer was off great strength that her suster soul
might not pass out of the body unto the time our lord showed his plentuous
mercy in her. notwythstondynge the seek woman lay adrawyng on three days and
three nyghtes so that many folk that knew her merueylled and sorowed for her
that she suffered so long a pain. and yet in all that time this holy maid
continued in her devout prayer / never cesing unto the time she had overcome
in manner of our lord by meke teres / Then^e our lord by her devout prayers
graciously sent his mercy unto that soul / and gave her clear knowing to know
her trespass / and also gave her suffycient contrycion to health of her soul.
As Soon as this holy maid perceived that by reuelacion that she had such a
grace she went to ye seek susters chamber for to comfort her / And when the
seek suster saw this holy maid she did her reverence with great joy as she
might whom she had first in great repreue and so she accused her self with
speaking and tokens making and asked her mercy and forgyuenesse of her trespaas
as she might speak and so she was shryue and hoselyd and passyd out of this
world with great contrycion / When she was passed out of this world. then
our lord showed to this holy maid her soul in so great bryghtnesse and
fayrnes / yt as she knowleched afterward to her confessor it might not be
told ne spoken with mannys tongue / Yet was not that the fayrenesse that she
should have in bliss endelesly but oonly the fayrenes that she had in her
first creacion and in receyuyng of her baptysme And then said our lord to
this holy maid, loo dear daughter by the I have receyned this soul yt was
lost / is this not a fair soul and a semely / Loo is he or she that will not
do her besines for wynnyng of such a fair soul / if that I am ye most
souerayn fayrnes of whom comes all manner of virtues fayrnesse was so oucome
through love of fairness of man^ys soul yt I would come down froheue^ to earth
and shed my blood for to rau^som it / much ye then should labor so either
for other ye so fair a creature be not lost. for this cause I have showed the
this soul yt you may ye more her afterward be ^^erid for to win souls to me
/ and also that thou may stere other to the same grace / This holy maid then
thanked our lord for his blessed reuelacion prayng him mekely with all the
affeccion of her soul that he would vouchesaf to give her that grace ever
afterward that she might see the fayrnesse of every soul of all tho the which
been conuersaunt with her: so the more be steryd for to win her health / the
which grace our lord granted her and said / by cause thou haste despised
for mine sake all manner of flesshely conversation and art knytte to me in the
spyryte the which am the most souerayn spyryte / and also haste prayed so
besely and so deuotily fore this soul / therefore now I give thy soul clear
sight by the which thou may perceive and behold both the fayrenes and the
fylthes of every soul that is present before the / So that as thy bodily wits
before this time have perceived the condycions of bodies right so from this time
forward thyn ghostely wits should perceive and consydere the conditions of
the spyrytes not only of tho the whilche ben I presented to the / but also of
all other for whose help thou shall pray though they never be presented to thy
bodily sight / The grace of this gift was ever after ward so spedefull in
this holy maid that fro that time forward she perceived more clerly the
qualytes and deeds* of ye sowles of them the which aperyd before her than of
her bodies / so ferforth that in a time Master Reymound her confessor
complained to her of som^e that grutched upon her by cause that she suffered
many diverse persons to knele before her and would not bid them stand up / To
whom she aus^terd in this wise. God knows fader that I am occupied about the
consyderacion of her sowles that I perceived nothing in manner of outward deeds
/ Then asked her confessor of her and said wheder^ye see her sowles / To
whom she answered thus / Fader under confession I show to you that after time
our savior had I give me such a grace that I saw the fayrnesse off mine
sufters soul the which was ordained to be dampened for her trespaas by his
right wysdom he delyuerd mercyable by mym prayers showed me afterward

He fayrenes there apperyd afterwar uneath before me / but that I saw the
condycions of their sowles and therefore fader I am syker if ye had onys seen
the fayrenesse of a reasonable soul / ye would suffer an hundred times bodily
death if it were possible for the wynnyge off a soul / there is nothing in wis
world that may be lykened to her fayrnesse wha^ here o^fessour herd / this he
prayed her yt she would vouchesaf to tell him all the process how she come to
such a reuclacion / Then this holy maid told him all the process as it is
reherced before all be it though she told it but shortly and me kely of the
trespass of her seek suster done against her / But her confessor afterward
inquired the sothe of that odyous crime of her susters ye which knew the^
both well ynow / Ferthermore to the more co^fyrmacion of these things that
benrehersed a fore master Reymound her confessor records of her yt he was
often times a speker between her and the pope gregori xj For she was an ytaly
could vnd stand none latin / and the pope Gregorye could understand none
ytaly. and therefore Master Reymound her confessor that could both was a
speker between them Among all other communycacions that this holy maid
communyd with pope Gregory. she complained her of the court of Rome / And said
that the that paradyse should be of virtue / there she found stynche of cursed
vices then the pope asked her by her confessor how long she had be in the
court / To whom she answered suddenly with a meke boldenes to the pope in this
wise / to the worship of almighty god I dare well say that I perceived much
more the stynche of sin the which is used in the court of Rome at home in
mine own cite there as I was borne: then they that has sinned and sin
every day: Then the pope after this answer held his peace: And was
merueylously astonyed: but her confessor master Reymound merueylously marked
he words and with what auctoryte they were spoken to such a wourthy prelate:
Also often times it befyll both to master Reymound her confessor and to other
that followed that holy maid in to diverse countrees: where neither she ne they
came before yt there come to her and to him many unknown persons semely arrayed
for to comin with them of virtue semyng as though they had be virtuous folk:
But in truth they encombred with wretched sins. whose sins she perceived
anon wherefore she would neither speak to them netourne her face to them. And
when she saw that they abode long; Then she brake out a little her voice
more than she was wont to do and said to them such words: First we should
amend our life fro sin and goo out of the deuyles service: and then to
speak of our lord: Wha^ she had said such words she went fro them as soon as
she might goodly. And afterward her confessor and her felawes found it sothe
that they were e ncombred with wretched sins in the which sins they
co^tynued wythouten repentance / Another time also she spoke with a woman: ye
which woman seemed an honest woman but in soth she was the concubyne of a man
of holy church and that was great pity: As they spoke togyders the wymmen
might not look upon the maidens face: by cause ever the holy maid turned
away her face fro her. Of this thing her confessor had great merueyle: And
in a time asked her why she did so / To whom she answered and said Fader I
am syker and ye had felt that stynche of sin that I felt in her / ye would
have cast out all that is in your body for sqweymusnes / Loo maidens all
these ensamples have I set here for ye should know what excellent gifts of
grace our lord gave to this holy maid by cause of her meke living: Ouermore
our ghoostely enemy the fend perceyuyng that this holy maid wan great
virtues by the service that she deed to seek folk He thought by sum manner of
will to wythdrawe her fro that holy besynes: and yet might he not For the more
that he was about to let her. the more she encresyd virtuously by that
occupacion / It befyl in a time that one of the susters of penance which was
called after the manner of the country Andred / This andred was touched by the
suffrau^ce of our lord with a grievous infyrmyte and that was in this these.
She had upon her breast a sore the which was called a cancer. And that
fretid the flesh round about / and it was so corrupt that there might
none come nyghe her for stynche / But if they hylde her nose / And so there
was few or none that might suffer to come nyghe her.

when this holy Maid perceived this. she understood that our lord had
received that seek suster to her keeping / Then anon she came to her that
with a glad there she comforted her and she served her gladly to the last end
of her sekenes / that seek suster took her service the more freely in as much
as she considered that all other forsook her / this holy maid left no thing
undo yt was longyng to her seek suster encresyd never her abhomynable stynche
never so much / She stood by her and opened her wound / washed it and wept
it / and coueryd it* and yet never she hyldeth she her nose for no stynche ne
showed none token of lothsomnes / ne never was heavy ne wroth of service ne weary
about her. but gladli did her dilyge^t service / so that her seek suster had
merueyle of the great stedfastenes / and of the great sufferaunce and of the
great fulness of love and charity that was in so young a maid / Of this great
love and charity that she showed to that seek suster ye fend had great envy
and was about to let that deed of mercy and of charity after his power.

First upon a day as this holy maid was about to vnoouere her wound for to
wasshe it and wype it and to refreissh it again* there came out such an odoure
of stynche that uneath her stomach might suffer it: But almost she was brought
to a vomyte. As Soon as she perceived that / she arose against her self with an
high wrath and said to her skeymons flesh in this wise whether ye wretched
flesh haste abhomynacion now of thyn suster the which our lord boughte
with his precious blood / you may fall every day in ye same sykenesse that
she is in or in verse: trewely thou shall be punysshed therefore / Anon she
bowed done to the sore and hyld her nose and her mouth open against the wound
so long unto the time she felt in her self that her skeymousnes was goo /
and so she over came the flesh that was contrary to the spyryte / The seek
suster beheld this and cried to her merueylyng and said cecedere daughter
corrupt not thy self with this foul stynkyng sore /

This holy maid for all her cryenge would not arise up unto the time she felt
her enemy was overcome and so she arose up and he avoided away fro her for a
time / But he consyderyng that he might not have the maystry of her wrought
wylyly against her by her seek suster / He put in her heart such an heuenes
against this holy maid that she lotheth her service / and by little and little
that malice so encresyd that lothenes was turned in to an hate. For though
she knew well ynow that there was none that would serve her but she / But yet
she s^cyd not of that pryuy hate but brake out against her in to a suspycious
g^losye. for that is the condycion of them yt lyuen in hate ever lyghtely for
to leave a suspycious thought of them that they hate: And at the last she began
to image ne and bear her an hand that when she was not present with her she
was about sum actuell sin flesshely in sum other preuy places*

Yet would not this holy maid never s^ce of her holy seruise about her
notwithstondyng suspycious ymagynacions I put against her / For she well that
wylecome by the devil and the more besy she was about her the more wrathful
was her seek suster against her by exortacion and excitacion of the fend that
ever hated the deeds of charity / In so much that he steryd that seek suster
to slander this holy maid openly of ye filthe of vnclen^e and that scland was
so open / that at the last when that it came to her susters he ryng / sum
of the oldest / and of the sted fastest came to this seek suster for to know
the truth Thanne the seek suster as she sdau^dred her a fore / right so she
continued in the same sclaund to her susters / accusyng her full foul actuell
uncleanness Of the which foul accusacy on / these sustres were gretely a
meruaylled and styred against this holy maid / and so was called forth a fore
them / and sharply rebuked with many repreuable words axyng of her how she
would suffer her self so be deceived for to lose her maydenhode. To whom this
holy maid answered full pacyently and softely / seeing thus* Trewely ladies and
sustres by the grace of our lord Jhesu christ / I am a maid. And never would
she say other word in blamyng of her that so had accused her / but only thus.
Trewely I am a maid / trewely I am a maid. Yet for all this she cessyd never
of her seruyse / all be it that it was full heuysom to her for to here such
words and sclaundre But yet first she served her seek suster / and afterward
went to her cha^b^e for to pray / for that was her most comfort in all such
dyseases. There she prayed in soul more then in words by mouth / and yt
was in this wise. O almighty god and my dear beloved spouse / thou know well
that the name of maids is tender / and lightly for to catch sclaundre / and
namely of such maidens that have chosen the to be their spouse / and that was
ye cause why that thou would / that thy glorious mother our lady Saint Mary /
was committed to Joseph / that was called and spoused her husbond for to keep
her name of virgynyte without sclaunder Thou know lord that all this
sclaundre / the which is put upon me is come by the fend ^he fader of
^esynges / by cause I should cesse of the besynes the which I have begone for
thy love. Therefore lord I pray the help me / that know well I am gylteles
/ and suffer not this wicked enemy the which was ouert^ row by thy passion
to have the maystrye of me.

When she had prayed thus long to our lord weeping plenteuously. Our lord
appyred to her as she knowelechyd afterward in confession to her confessor
master Reymond. Holdyng in his right hand a golden crown arrayed with
precious margaryte stonys. And in his lift hand a garlonde of sharp thorns
/ seeing to her in this wise Dear daughter it is needful yt thou be crowned
with own of these two crowns / and therefore chese whether thou have lever
have of this two. Ch^se now whether thou had lever be crowned with the
sha^pe crown of thorn in this ly^ / and that other to be reserved to the in
ever lastyng life. Or else for to have this precious crown. and for to have ye
other after this life. Then this holy maid said.

Lord thou know well that I have forsake mine own will / and chosen for to
do after thy blyssed will / therefore I dare not chese no manner thing without
thy plesaunt will. Nevertheless by cause thou will that I shall answer I say
thus that I chese rather in this life ever to be co^fourmed to thy blessed
passion / and so for to suffer peynes for thy love. After these words anon
she took of our lords hondes the garland of thorns fervently and put it
myghtely upon her head with a manner of vyolence / that the thornys percyd her
head round about / as her thought in so much that she had a pain long
afterward in her head by prykynge of the thornys / as she recorded her self
openly to master Reymond her confessor. Than said our ford to her thus / in
my pour is al thing / and as I have suffered this sclau^der to be areysed /
right so it is in my power to cesse it. Therefore thou shall continue in that
holy seruyse as thou have be gonne / and give no stead to the send that would
let the / I shall give the full vntorye of thine enemy / that what that ever
he has Imagyned against the it shall torn to his own head for thy more joy
/ and his more pain. Thus was this holy maid comforted / and so bode stylle
in that holy seruyse. But when this sclaundre came to her mother Lapa / all be
it yt she was seker enough of her daughter / she was gretely styred by this
sclaunder and said to her with mighty spyryte in this wise Daughter have I not
often said to the / that thou sholdest no more serve that stynkyng woman / loo
what reward she has give the for thy besye seruyse She has sclaundred the
full foul to all thy sustres / if thou ever serve her more or come to her /
never shall I call ne name the my daughter afterward / ne thou me thy mother.
Now was this the soty lest will of all. For there the fend might not have the
maystrye of her by sclaunde ryng of her seek suster / he began with a manner
of pity to let her of her holy seruyse by her moders mouth. Then was this
holy maid astonyed somewhat for her moders words. And at the last she went to
her and knelyd before her seeing to her thus. Sweet mother whether our lord
would be pleased if we leave undone the dedys of mercy to our negyhbours for
their unkindness.

Whether our savior left to raunsom us by suffryng death on the cross for the
reprouyng words and obloquye of men. God knows mother and your charity also
if I left this seek suster / and would do her no seruyse / there would none do
her seruyse. And so she should deye for defau^^. Should we be cause and occasyon
of her death / she is now a little deceived of ye fend / perauenture here
afterward our lord will give her grace for to know her trespass. By such
words and like to thise / at the last she wan her moders blessyng / and went
to the seek suster ageyn and served her so gladly as though she had never said
evil of her. These ke suster was than astonyed / and perceived then that she
had do amysse / and began to have sorrow and contrycyon in her heart of her
sclaunder that she had put upon her. Then our lord showed mercy to her. And
for to make the good fame of his maid / he showed that seek suster in a time /
as she lay in her bed a gracious vysyon / that he wouchesauf to show to
this holy maid upon a day / when this holy maid went to her / chamber
after her seruyse that she had do to that seek suster. That same seek suster
saw as she lay in her bed about the holy maid a great light coming don
from heaven / of so great mirthe and swetenes that it made her for to forgete
utterly all her dyseases / what this might mean clearly she wist never / but
she looked about here and there. And beheld the maids face transformed or
tra^sfygured / that her seemed that she was not then Katheryn Lapais daughter
/ but rather like to an heavenly creature gloryfyed / and that light beclypped
her round about. And the more she beheld her / the more she yield her self
gylty in her soul to our lord / of the sclaunder that she putt^ upon that
holy maid. When this vysyon had tary^^ a while the which appyred to the
bodily eyes of that seek suster / as it came so it passyd away / after the
which passing the seek suster was long after comforted / and also sorrowful
for her trespass

And anon she axed mercy of the holy maid with sobbyng terys that she had so
wyckedly trespassyd against her / and sclaundred her full falsely. Loo maidens
by that outward light / our lord gaf her an Inward light / for to know how
falsely she was deceived by the fend. Anon forthwyth when this holy maid
herd how mekely she axed forgyuenes. She went to her mekely and took her in
her arms and kyssed her / seeing to her thus full comfortably.

Dear mother I am not dysplesed with you in no wise / for I wot well it was the
fendes malice / and not youres / but I thank yon with all my heart / for ye
love me in that ye would I were kept clean And therefore I wit you no thing of
all this / but the fend that has wrought all this so malyciously against me /
with such words and like these. This holy maid comforted her seek suster and
did her seruyse as she was wont to do / and when she had do / lest she should
have spend her time in vain / she went to her chamber and occupied her in
prayer.

In the mean time that the seek su ste knowleched her gylty with weeping and
waylyng before all thoo that came to her and said openly before them all that
by dysceyte of the fend / she sclaundred ye holy maid wrongfully. And she
axed forgyuenes of hem all. For she said that she knew well enough yt this
maid was not only pure and clean from flesshely sins / but also she was
holy and fulfilled with the holy ghoost / and that she knew well. Then sum
of the saddest of her susters axyd her pryuely and wisely how she knew that
the maid was holy / and what tokens she had thereof. She answered steadfastly
with a fervent spyryt that she knew never before what was swetnesse of the
soul and ghoostly comfort unto the time she saw this holy maid before her
transfygured or transformed and ouercouered with an unspeakable light. Eftesones
then her susters axyd her / whether she saw that sight with her bodily eyes.
But she could not tell it with no thing the fayrenes of that light / and the
swetnesse that she felt in her soul for that time.

Then ye holy maidens name began to encreace virtuously over all / for there
the fend was about to dysceyue / and to hinder her name / there the holy
ghoost enhauncyd her name virtuously. But in all this right as she was never
the sonner throw down by an evil fame / right so she was never the more
enhauncyd in her self by elacyon for such a good name

She continued ever forth in her holy seruyse and did her business / ever for
to know her self that she was naught / but yet her ghoostly enemy the fend
cessyd never for to let her / eftesones he tempted her in her holy
minystracion by squey mousnes of the stomach. In a time when this holy maid
wesshyd her seek susters horrible wound / there came such a savor out thereof
that she was in point to cast out all that was in her body. Then she rose
against her self and so much the more vyolently that she had the vyctorye of
another temptacyon by the grace of the holy ghoost / and said to her self thus
Trewly wretch thou that have so much abhomynacyon thou shalt receive it
within the. Anon she took all the wesshyng of that wound / with the matter
and fylthe and went aside / and dra^ke it of preuely / when she had so do
all her te^ptacyon of abhominacion cessyd

This was told afterward to master Reymond her confessor in her presence to
whom she addyd and said pryuely / that srth^n she was borne in this world /
she etc never ne drank so sweet ne so good a savor of no manner mete ne
drink.

After this glorious vyctorye that same night suyng our lord Jhesu christ /
appyred to that holy maid / showing to her his five blessed wounds / the
which he suffered for our health and said thus De re daughter many bateylles
thou have ouerpassyd for me and by my help thou have oue coome them / yet
hither to / for the which vyctoryes thou art to me right welcome / but
specially yester day thou plesyst me gretely in that / that you dyspysedest
thine own nature and kind for my love thou receyuest a drink the which was
abhomynable and dedely. Therefore right as in that thou pass^st thy kind and
thy nature Right so shall I give you a drink that passyth the custom and the
kind of man With that he held his arm of her neck and brought her mouth to
his blessed wound in his side / and said to hi^ thus. Drink daughter out of
my ^y ^ the drink of health / by ye which thy soul shall be fulfilled with
so much sweetness that it shall ^^bou^de in to thy body the which thou have
so meruayllously despised for my love. Then this holy maid sowked out of the
pype of life coming out of his blessed wound with her mouth of her body / but
much more with the mouth of her soul / long time to gyder full plentuou^ly
an unspeakable drink of ever lastyng health. At the lost by the ordinance of
our lord she cessyd and yet thursty not withstondyng she had enough. Now
maidens I pray you consydereth mekely this virtues act of this blessed maid.
Beholds I beseech you the rote of her charity / where with she was moeued to
take upon hit folowely a seruyse for to serve seek folk*

Also beholds how long she continued in that seruyse / not wythseondyng the
great lettyng that she had by abhomynacyon of nature. Beheld also the great
stedfastenes that she had in abydyng not wythstondyng the foul sclandres the
which were put upon her / and at the last she behold a notable co^clusyon /
how after time she had received that holsom drink out of our lords side.
She was fulfilled with so much habundaunce of grace that she etc never ne
might etc afterward in such a wise as she did before as it shall be declared
more clearly within forth. For as touching this chapter I shall make an end
There is no thyn ge written ne reherced in this chapter / but such as master
Reymond this holy maids confessor knew it out her by confession of her / or
as he found by writing of her confessor that was before him / or of certain of
her sustres / the which were true and sad of leuyng.

Of her synguler manner of living / and how they were dysceyued / that grutched
with her meruayllous fasting. Ca V
AFter time our lord Jhesu the endeles spouse of this holy maid had proved her
in the oven of manyfolde trybulacyons / and also had taught her to overcome her
ghostly enemy ye fend by diverse bateyll / it were right semely yt he should
reward her in this life with sum special gift of grace But by cause that
souls as long as they ben in the body may not fully receive the fruit of
virtue / as it is had in bliss endelesly

Therefore it is full needful as for the fulfyllyng of the dyuyne prouydence of
our lord that every chosen spouse of his in earth should yet dwell in earth /
and nevertheless yet shall be endowed with some specyal reward of mede for this
cause / it was that our savior wouchesauf to begin in his spouse and in his
handemayde Katheryne / this wretched life a manner of an heavenly living. And with
that manner of living he would assocye her to erthely folk Therefore which
such a manner of reuelacyon he enfourmed her. It be fill in a time that this
holy maid prayed in her chamber / where our lord apperyd to her and said in
this wise / wete right well dear beloved daughter that thine abiding in earth
shall be fulfilled with so many meruayllous gifts of my grace / that it shall be
cause of studieng and Incredulyte to many man's hertes / and specially to
flesshely me^nys hertes / that known not the manner of my gracyous gifts. And
also many that louen the / they shall be in thought and suppose that my passing
love the which werche in yt should be dysceyte For I shall give so great
habundau^ce of grace in thyn soul / that it shall meruayllously rebounde in to
thy body / by the which thy body shall receive and have a meruayllous manner of
living / the which has selde be herd before Ferthermore thyn heart shall be
so gretely kyndelyd to health of souls / that thou shall forgete in manner
thyn own kind and change althy first conuersacyon. For thou shall not eshewe
and shun the company of men and wommen as thou were wont to do but rather for
their soul health thou shall put the to all manner of labor to thy power and
might. Of this manner of living many one should be sclaundred / and so of many
thou shall be ageyn said that the thoughts of their hertys may be known by
their words / but look thou be in no wise aferde ne troubled / for I shall
ever be with the and deliver thy soul from treucherons tongues and liars.
Therefore work myghtely that the holy ghoost shall teache ye / for by yt I shall
delyuere man's soul out of the fendes power / and by mediacion of my special
grace I shallede them to heaven. When our lord had said these words / and
often times had rehearsed to her the same comfortably as touching that point.
Where our lord said to her that she should not be a ferdene troubled She
answered as she beknewe afterward in contessyon Thou a^t my lord and my god /
and I thy wretched servant / ever more thy will be done / but have mind of me
good lord god after thy great mercy and help me / and thus vanysshed and
cessyd this vysyon. This holy maid bethought her and kept well in her heart
wha this gracyous chau^gyng should be in time coming. Fro that time afterward
fro day to day / the grace of our lord Jhesu encreced in her heart / and the
holy ghost habounded in her so much / that she her self was astoned thereof /
and wext feeble in body and said as the propheet said these words Deficit caro
mea et corpus me um deus cordis mei et pers mea deus inete^nu^ That is my body
and my flesh sebled and de^ailleth / but good lord by ye governor of mine
heart and my part wythoutenende And eftesones she said as the same propheet
said in another place. Memor fui dei et drlectata sum and exercitata sum / et
deficit spiritus meus That is I have mind of my lord god / and have therein
great delight / and I hau^ce me in ye ghostly delight / and therefore my spyrytes
and strengthes of my body wexen feeble and defayllen This maid wext seek in
body for the love of our lord / and her sekenes had no remedy but by weping and
waylyng / and therefore she wept and wayled every day / and yet by such weeping
and waylyng she might not so cour her sekenes Than our lord put in her heart
that it should be good for her as for a souereyn cemedye to her sekenes often
times to be housled / that so she might receive that lord yt she loved / by
sacrement of the autre. Of whom she might not yet be fulfilled fully in this
life / as she should be in heaven bliss And netheles yt was cause of more love
and encrece of gretter sekenes. But yet for a time it made satys faccyon by the
virtue of the feyth to ye ser ^yse of her charity / that brenned contynuelly in
her heart by in sufflacyon of the holy ghoost. After time she had in custom to
be comuned and houseled as it were every day / all be it though she were often
times let by sekenes of body / and so for besynes that she had of men's
souls She had such a desire often for to be house led / that but if she were
her body should su^^^^ great pain / and in manner it should feeble and defayll
and right as the body had par^^ of the haboundaunce of the spyryte by affluence
that habou^ded fro within forth Right so it might not be but if it had be
per^eyner of the anguysshe and disease that the spyryt suffered This matter shall
be de da^d more largely by the help of god afterward. For now I shall tell you
of the meruayllous living / yt she leued as touching her body / master Reymond
records thus of this holy maid / as he knew well by her confession and also
by writing of her confessor before him / yt after time she was vysyted by ye
foresaid vysyon / she had so much plente of graces and ghoostly comfortes / and
namely when she had received our lord Jhesu in ye blessed sacrement of the
autre / that it reboundyd in to her body by a copyous affluence / that the
kyndly consumpcyon of dygestyon in her body had no place / but it chau^gyd so
the kind of her stomach that the receyuyng of mete was not now ned full to her
/ for she might not receive mete without great torment of the body / and if she
should algates ^te her body suffered right great pain / for it might have no
kyndely dygestion / but nedys it must by vyolence come out again yt she etc
there that it went June. It is not lefull to write with a pen how often and how
many peynes this holy maid suffered for receyuynge of bodily metes This manner
kind or condycyon of living in the beginning was to many folk / both to them
of the household and to other that were conuersaunt with her so Incredyble that
they named this synguler gift of god either a temp tacyon or else a sottyll
dysceyte of the devil. In to this error fill master Reymond her confessor
as other did yt wend she had be disceyued of her enemy ye which oftymes
transfygured him self to an angel of light for to deceive souls* And
therefore he bad her etc her mete every day / and give no credens to such
desceyuable vysyons that would let her fro her mete. Then said this holy may
de to her confessor that she found well by experyence yt she was more hole in
body when she received no bodily mete / tha^ when she received it. Yet for
all such excusacyons he would not cesse of his precepte / but badde and
commanded her yt she should ete. Then she as a true daughter of obedience
obeyed to his byddyng / and ete her mete unto ye time by sekenes she was almost
deed. Then she called her confessor master Reymond and said to him thus.
Fader if I be to much fasting were I cause of mine one death / were I a sleer of
mine one body / he answered and said yes Then she asked eftesones whether it
be great sin to be deed by etyng or by abstinence / he said by etyng. Then
she said sythen it is so that ye see me wexe feeble and nere to the death by
etyng as ye know well by experyence: why will ye not fobede me etinge as ye
would forbede me fasting in such a caas: To this reso^ he could not answer /
but by cause he perceived that she was nyghe to death by euydent tokens / he
said to her daughter: do as our lord taught the / For they ben merueylous
things to me that I see our lord work in the / Many grutchynges there was in
the household against her for this merueylous living by cause they knew not
the gracious werkynge of god in her / And thereto also they stered her
confessor master Reymound to repreue her albe it: it was of^^ times against
his will / and what great dysese she suffered of other there can none tongue
tell by cause she was so obedyent and so grounded in mekenes that could
another excuse her self ne wythstond the will of her confessonr what that ever
^^ badde her do for one or other / she wist well that ye will of god was
contrary against all their domes And on the other side she was aferd for the
dred of god to forsake obedyence that she was bode by her confessor / And
thereto she was loathe to notefye the truth to them carnell pepse by cause the
could not sauore such a ghostely truth: therefore what she should do she
wist never / Thus she suffered much angwyshe in this conflycte / But among
all these conflictis she ran to her pray: and for a souerayn remedy / she
wept plentuously before our forde teres of sorrow and of hope besechyng him
mekely with much instaunce that he would vouchesaf to show his will to all
tho that were contrary again ste her manner of living / And specyafly to her
confessor whom she was most loathe to offend / She would not reherce the
word of the Appostles that they said to princes of the law when they said
thus /

Oportet obedire deo magis quam homini b^. That is we should rader obey to god
than to man: But for to seye so she was loathe lest it should have be answered
her yt the fend trans^igureth him often times in an angel of light / And
therefore she should give none credens to every spyrit Ne should not leave to
much to her owna wit but to do after counseyll:

In this devout prayer our lord herd her graciously as he did in many other
and often times illumyned her confessor his soul and changed his counseyll /
But now I shall sece of this matter and proceed in the process of this holy
maidens living / The first time that this special grace befyll her she was so
full of the holy ghost that fro the beginning of lenton in to Ascenci^on off
our lord she was without bodily mete or drink ever glad and merry / This was
none merueyle for the fruit of the spyryte is charity joy and peace / as saint
pouse says. And as our lord says him self / A man lives not always with
bodily sustynaunce: but with the word that comes out of gods mouth And for
as holy wryt says: Juseus exside viuit / That is the ryghtwysman lives by the
faith / On ye asce^cio^ day our lord granted her that she should ete as she
told afterward preuely to her confessor. And so she did for she ete bred
and potage of wortes and other raw herbs and also other lenton metes / for
that meruey lous body about kind might not recey^ue none delycat^ metes. After
that day she tournyd again to her simple fast yt she had begun a fore /
and so by little and lytill she tournyd that simple fast in to a costome
contynuelly that was never herd in to tho days / Her confessor master
Reymound berith record and says that often times he knew that her body was not
comforted by none bodily mete ne drink / but only with cold water unto the
time she was brought to such a febylnesse that him thought and other moo that
she was almost deed / But as soon as she herd say of any need that should be
done to man^is soul. / she caught strength suddenly wythouten any bodily
comfort that she was able to goo as mightily as ever she was without any
greuauuce a boue the commune strength or of other the which followed her and
never wae weary. Whereof came this grace trow ye / but only of the spryte that
comfort and quickens the body merueylously above kind namely of such a
body that is subject to the spyryte in all ghostely works / By this may
every ghostely man understand that all this holy maidens life was above kind
and full of miracle /

In a time when she had fast so long and lived without mete and drink /
Her confessor master Reymound asked her wheder she had any time any manner of
appetyte to mete or drink / To whom she answered thus / I have so great swetnes
that our lord gave me by receiving of that blessed sacrament off ye altar his
own precio^ flesh and blod yt in no wise I might desire none manner bodily
sustynaunce of mete or drink. Then^e her confessor asked eftsoon whether she
had any appetyte to mete ye day that she was not hosylyd / She said nay for
wha^ it happed that she was not hose lyd / the presence and the sight of that
blessed sacrament and not only the sight of ye blessed sacrme^t but also the
presens of that presie the which she knew well had that day said mass and
I touched that blessed sacrament comforted her in such wise that she had
none mind of bodily mete / This holy maid stood both full and fasting
wythoutforth fasting / and wythinforth full / wythoutforth dry: and
wythinforth moist with flodes of quyk water and in all manes of chances she
was ever glad and iocu^de / But the fend might not suffer this that the she
should thus be endowed by such gracious gifts. but by his venyms woodnes of
malycious envy / he steryd both spyrytuall folk and temperall folk /
Relygious and seculer against her / for that syuguler gift of fasting /
merueyle not though he styred ghostely folk and relygyous against her / for in
such but if their own love of them self were fully quenched by grace regnid
more perylous envy than in other / and namely when they see another do the
which them thinks is vnpossybyle them for to do / Search wisely now and
aspye whether this was not soth among the holy faders dwelling in thebayde /
there was a seculer man that came to the great congregation where: Phatomye was
abbot for to receive the habyte among them / And when he was received to the
habyte to ye holy congregation the covent saw how merueylously he lived / And
they might not do as he did / They came all with one voice gretelysteryd
against Phatomye / and bad him either put out of the congregation that new
monk / or ellis they would not abide with him / Loo if such envy reigned
then in tho days among such yt were hold ryht ^fyght folk / What envy
tro we ye myht regne among our ghostely folk yt lyue^ in these days / it is
none wonder therefore thou ghostely folk grutched with this holy maids fasting
/ For sum there were that said there is none living gretter than our lord /
for our lord yet ete and drank whiles he lived in earth and his blessed
glorious mother our glorious lady glorious vyrgyn marye and all his appostles
/ and also whom our lord bad that they should ete and drink that was set before
them / and so they did: How is that that now is living in earth that might
pass them or to be like to them. I trow none / Sum there were also that
said and afermed that saints before us taught by word and by deed that there
should none take upon them a synguler living passing other but all should live a
common perfyght living Sum there were also that were preuy bachyters and
said that the end of that fasting should be vicious: And therefore they gave
counseyll to other for to take none ensample of her for she is deceived There
were also other carnal people and open bacbyters that said her fasting was
but a feigned thing for to win thereby veyn glory / and therefore it seemed to
other that she fasted but preuyly she ete / All this was no thing but envy
against whose falls doers and falls opynyons: I purpos to reple by the help of
god / As for the first there we sum a legged for them our lord / and our
blessed lady gracious virgyn mary and all the appostles that they lived a
common living without any great fasting. the^ ne should it sywe that saint
Johan baptyste was more holy than our lord Jhesu Christ / for our lord said
him self of saint Johan that he was come and never ete ne drank but fasted /
But the sone of man is come that both ete and drank / The same also should
sywe that saint Anthony macharye / Illarion / Scrapion and many other holy
faders: the which uses many merueylous fastings above the common life of the
appostles should be gretter then the appostlis. Ouermore if these forsayde
grutchers will reple against me and said that saint Joha^ in wyldernes and
these holy fathers of Egypt fasted not symply without mete and drink / but
sometime they ete / what would they say than of mary Magdalene the which lived
in a roche of the sea xxx / year together without mete bodily or drink as her
story makes mencyon of the same place there she lived in it shows i^to this
day / that never might come thy der man ne woman to bring her mete ner drink
whether she was gretter than our blyssed glorious vyrgyn lady glorious virgyn
Mary that never fasted so ne lived in such a roche. What will they also say
of many other holy faders that lived here many years without mete or drink and
passyd out of this world and enspeciall of one we read yt when he had received
ye blessed sacrament of the altar without any other bodily sustynaunce of mete
and drink he lived many years / Therefore if such grutchers never learned. let
them learn now that the gretenesse and lytylnesse of holiness is not mesured ne
demed only by fasting but by charity. thus let the^ learn never to make them
Juges of things that they know not: In a like manner sum said off saint
Johan when he came and fasted that he had a devil within him / And when our
lord was come that fasted / not they said to him that he was a deuourer of
mete and drink. and a great wine drynker / this last sentence is suffyciant
ynow to stop the mouths off such grutchers /

The second grutchers the which hate^ syngularyte of living / it may lyghtely
and es^y be answered and thus it is though a man should not take upon himself
any new synguleryte that never was held before. if that god work in him /
hemaye not refuse but needs must work it and use it with thankynges else the
synguler yeftes of our lord should utterly be despised /

Holy write says that a right wise man should not search ne seek curyousey
high things above him and anon afterward it followed this that many things
benshewed to a right wise man above his wit. What is all this to mean*
nothing else but a man should not seek by him self but if our lord above him
and showed to him many great merueylous things that he should resceyue and use
with thankynges / therefore as this holy maid deed / who may sey that she did
it of synguleryte of her self to whom our lord vouchesaf to give her ye
gift by his synguler ordinance. In such manner of wise this holy maid
answered when she was I asked why she ete not as other did / all be it that she
answered in other terms I coueryd with mekenes / when she was asked why she ete
not as other did / She said that our lord had smite her for her sins by
a synguler passion of infirmytes: wherefor she was let to ete her mete as other
did: Gladly she said that she should ete but she might not / therefore she
said I pray you pray for me / that he vouchesaf to forgive me mine sins
wherefore I suffer all these sykenesses / As though she had said thus / god
does this in me and not I in mine self / And also less any manner of spyce of
pride should appyre in her ever she said she suffered that infirmyte for her
sins: And yet she said not against conscience: for she supposed stedfastely
that our lorst had suffered her to fall in to the grutchynge of men for to
punysshe her sins / For what manner of evil be fill to her / She wyted it her
sins and what good that ever was wrought in her she put it to our lord /

This same sentence is a good answer to the thrydde preuy bacbyters that
sayden and ever conseylde to other for to be ware of the end of such synguler
fasting / For the end must needs be vycious the which is not of god / How
may the end of this holy maids fasting be vycious the which come of god and
not of her self as it is clerly declared before / Also there that they said
that she was dysceyued of the fend / how may that be that so often overcome
the dysceytes of ye fend / But now I set caas that she might so be dysceyued
of the fend what was he than that held and kept her body in such kyndely
strength perauenture they would say the fend. Then^e would I wett if he kept
her soul in such ghostely gladness and peace / sithe it so was depreuyd fro
all manner simple delight or delectacion / This fruit of the holy ghost may not
be in none devil is power to give: for ye appostle says yt the fruit off ye
holy ghost is charity / joy and peace I would not suppose yt all this should be
directed to ye fend / Therefore all such sclau^ders and bacbyters of virtue
should be answered rather by silence than by word / Every virtuons man should
eschew them and suppose yt they ben vnwurthy to have an answer / This holy
maid did what she could every day to stop her mouths lest they should be
sclau^dred in her / In that yt she came to mete every day to ye meyne of ye
household therbi for to know whether she might or not as other did / And yet
otherwhyle she would assaye for to ete / and it was so great pain to her that
all yt saw her had compassyon of her / For her stomach might not defye her
mete and the kyndly consumpcion of natural dygestyon had none use in her: But
all yt entryd in her in to the stomach come out again by the same way there
it went in / This caused in her many diverse passions / For all be it that
this holy maid received not in her stomak any mete the which was mete wurthy
as for that time: yet she spet out fro her great matter off flewme as other
folk did the which might not be by nature: But if the stomach had
received sum substance before / and thrfoere our lord wrought merueylously in
her above nature / Also as for drynkynking of cold water she received it
gladly to refresshe her chykes and her throat: This manner of life she lived unto
her I aste end for grutchers and for them that were slaundred by her fasting
/ Her confessor Master Reymound perceived how great pain she suffered by
vndygestyon of her stomach and all for to stop grutchers / he conforted her
for co^passyon that he had upon her that she should leave and ete no more
rather than for to suffer such a pain /

And let theymgrutche ynow To whom she answered smylyngly fader is better for
meto suffrein this lyfefor my sins thanne for to suffer pain endelesly /

Her grutchyng is to me profitable by cause I shall be delyuerd of pain
wythouten end for the pain that I suffer in this life should I fle the
ryghtwysnes of god / Nay god forbede it our lord does to me great grace by
cause he gives me mine pain in this life /

So her confessor could no more answer to her but held his peace in this /
wise Of all her enemies she had the maistry what so in manner of the fend and
of grutchers / and so she taught other to do every day: So yt in a time when
she comynyd with her confessor of the gracious gifts of our lord / She said
who so could use the grace of our lord He should ever have the vyctorye of
all things that fallen to him / And then^e she turned to her confessor and
said to him. so I would that ye did as often as any new thing byfalleth to
you be it prosperyte or aduersyte thinks with in your self and says often
this / I will wanne somewhat and ye do so ye should soon be rich in virtue.

Loo maidens have mind of thysnotable doctrine for thus I make an end of this
chapter / The wytnes of all things. the which ben write therein / Is this
holy maid either by her opyn deeds or ellis by her words. And also her
confessor the which was a fore master Reymound.

Of the wounderfull rauysshyng and excess of her mind for her bodily wyttees
/ And of great reuelacions I showed to her of our lord / Capitulum vj
rIght as our lord granted to his spouse this holy maid a synguler living
as touching her body* right so he vysyted her soul with great merueylous
confortes of reuelacions / First for the great habou^dant graces with her come
that bodily strength yt she had about kind. Wete ye right well yt fro the
time that this holy maid had I drunk of our lords side the drink of life as
it is rehersid a fo^^ / many great graces were habou^dant i^ her yt often times
and often times as it had be in manner contynuabyl / She was occupied in actuell
co^templacion and her spyryte was lowyd to our lord that for the more part she
by left without felyng in her bodily wits / So that as it is rehearsed in
the first party her arms were found often times so styf in time of such
actuell contemplacion that rather they should break then bow / Her eyes were
all closed her eres herd none noise were it never so great and her bodily
wits for that time were sequestered fro her own werkynge This should be none
merueyle to noman if they would take heed to yt syweth Our lord began to be
so homely with her and brennyd her soul with so much haboundante fire of
love not oonly in pryuy places / but also in open places as well stondyng as
going / that she the which had these great graces by knew it plainly to
her confessor she could find none words for to tell expressly the grace
that she felt /

For in a time when she prayed to our lord feruentely with the Prophet Dauyd
seyeng devoutly these words /

Cor meum crea in me deus / et spiritu^ rectum innoua in visceribus meis /

That is prayng our lord specially that he would take away her heart and her
own will and give her a new heart after his will / She had such a comfort
that her seemed that our lord Jhesu come to her and opened her lift side and
took out her heart and went his way: and belyfte her with out her own heart:

Afterward it befyll that she commynyd with her confessor / and among all
things she said that she had none heart in her body / the which words her
confessor s^^rned her in a manner and blamed her for she said so / Then she
rehearsed eftsoon and confermed her words trewely fader as much as I may
feel / yet after the felyng of mine body me seems I lack mine heart for our
lord apperyd to me and opened mine lest side and took out mine heart and went
his way / Then the confessor said that it was impossible that she should
live with out an heart. she said nay there is nothing impossible to god. And
therefore she bad him give credens that it is so

For often times after ward she rehearsed that she lived without heart with in a
few days afterward it befyll that she went to a chapel of the friars where
susters of penance were wont to knele / And when all were goo home it befil
that she continued in her prayers so that she was fro her self by rauysshyng
and at the last she awoke of her rauysshyng and went homward / And as she
went by the way suddenly a light of heaven bicliped her: And in that light
aperyd our lord holdyng in his hand a reed shining heart in lykenes of a
mannys heart / At the coming of this heavenly light she was aferde that she
fill down upon the ground / Then came our lord to her and opened her
lyftesyde eftsoon and pute in her body that heart the which he hylde in his
hondes seeing to her thus /

Loo dear daughter as I took away thyn heart the last day / right so now I
give the mine heart whereby thou may live endelesly: and when he had so do
he closed the wound again that he made open in the flesh / Nevertheless
there by left a merueylous mark in the lykenes of a wound heled in the same
place ever afterward / where as her felawes told her confessor Master
Reymound for often times they saw it as she could not forsake it to him when he
askid it of her whether it were so or not. Out of that meruayllous gracyous
heart that was so I given her of our lord came out many meruayllous werkys And
yet many moo meruayllous reuelacyons haboundeth within forth. She came never
afterward for to be hoseled / but that there was showed to her many synguler
gifts of grace. Often times she saw a little child in the prestys handys / and
other while a well grown child / and other while an hot brennyng oven of
fire. And when the priest received that blyssed sacrament / it seemed to her
that the fire entered in to him. But when she should be houseled often times she
tastyd so great an odor of that blyssed sacrament that almost her body
defaylled. Evermore also whether she saw or received ye blyssed sacrament She
received with all a new joy in her soul / so that many times she should
dance in her body for joy / making a noise that her felawes might here her /
the which told it afterward to her confessor / and he inquired the truth
whether it were so / and found it true and so wrote it for a perpetuell
record.

That sown and that noise was not like other manner common sownes of men / but
as it had be a noise above common course of kind what meruayll was that though
she made a joyful noise above kind. Sith it so was that she had received an
heart above kind For after time that she had received that new heart as it
is rehearsed before / she seemed that she was not the same that she was before /
and often times she said to her confessor.

See ye not fader that I am not the same that I was before / but rather changed
in to another person. O would god fader ye knew that I feel / for I true
verily if a creator knew that I feel in my soul / he should be resolved and
made right esye were he never so hard. For my soul is full of melodye and
joy. And it is meruayll to me how it may abide in the body. There is also
great hot brennyng of dyuyne love therein / that this outward materyall fire
seems me in co^paryson of that fire rather cold than hot. Also of that
ghoostly hot is kind led in my soul as me seems so great a love of my
neghbours that my thinks I might gladdely suffer for them bodily death with
great joy. And ouermore out of that ghoostly hot is come to my soul a
renewyng of purytee and mekenes / in so much that me seems I am brought to
the same purytee and mekenes / that a child of four or a five year age is Inn

All this she told to her confessor preuely and to none other. After time
that this holy maid was thus fulfilled in her soul of such plente of new
gracys that were many notable vysyons showed to her / of whom sum I shall
reherce by the grace of god.

First our lord Jhesu and his blessed Mother and Marye magdalene appyred to
gydres to her and comforted her in her holy purpose / whom our lord axed and
said. Daughter what desyrest thou / She with weeping chere answered and said

Lord thou know what me needs better than I / for I have no will but thine
/ ne none heart but thyn heart. Then came to her mind how Marye magdalene
committed her self fully to our lord when she satte and wept at his fete.
With that she felt the same sweetness of love that Marye magdalene felt that
time when she wept. Wherefore she beheld Marye magdalene. Our lord perceived
that and for to fulfill her desire he said. Loo dear daughter for thy more
solace and comfort I give the Marye magdalene to be thy mother. To whom thou
may trustely go to and be comforted / for to her specially I commytte thy
governance For this great gift this holy maid thanked our lord with gpete
mekenes and reverently and devoutly she commended her ghoostly governance to
Marye magdalene prayng her that she would wouchesauf to take her under
governance. Sith our lord had specially committed her to her.

Fro that hour ever afterward the holy maid called Marye magdalene her mother
/ the which was not do without great mysterye as me seems. for as Marye
magdalene lived xxxiij year in a ^oche without bodily mete / and all that time
was I occupied in comtemplacyon.

Right so this holy maid fro that time that she was endowed with these new
graces unto the age of xxxiij year afterward / which year she passyd out of
this world. She was so occupied in dyuyne contemplacyon that she had never
need all ye time of bodily mete And yet as Marye magdalene was take up in to
the air by angels seven times in the day / where she herd the pryuetees of
god Right so this holy maid for the more party all her years she was
rauysshed fro her bodily wits by strength of the soul that was occupied in
contemplacyon of heavenly things / and so praised our lord with angels / in so
much that often times her body was lift up in to the air / of the which
many men and wommen that saw her for that time bare record Ouermore in that
rauyssheng she saw many meruayllous things and spoke preuely in time of her
rauysshyng many high words of contemplacion / of the which some I shall tell
you afterward Her confessor saw her ones in a time rauysshed fro her bodily
wits in the same wise as it is rehearsed before / and he herd her speak
preuely / then he came nere for to lysten clearly what she said / and he
herd that she said formably these words in latin. Vidi archana dei. And that
was said often times / other words said she none but thoo When she was
restoryd again to her bodily wits / she cessyd not to rehearse these same
words co^tynuelly / and it is no more for to say / but I have seen the
pryuetres of god. Then her confessor desyryng for to know why she rehearsed
tho words so often / axyd her in this manner of wise. Good mother why rehearsed ye
so often the words and will not tell me what ye mean as ye were wont to do.
She answerde I may not say none other wise. Her confessor axed her why / and
what is the cause / ye were wont to declare me many things that our lord had
showed to you / why will ye not do so now / then she said. I should have as
great conscience thereof if I should declare to you that I have seen with my
langage that is so imperfect / as I should have if I blasfemed our lord / or
Inhonoured him / for there is a great dyffrence between the understanding or
intellecte of the soul Illumyned of god / and the expressyng of words they
seem contrary each to other / therefore as for this time I can not tell you what
I have say / for they ben unspeakable For this skylle me think that she was
well committed by the dyuyne prouydence of our lord to Marye magdalene / that a
faster should be knytte to a faster / and a lover to a lover. And she that had
so high contemplacyon to her that was so high in contemplacyon. Also her
confessor rehearsed of her / that after time she saw that vysyon of our lord
and his blessed mo^ and Saint / mary magdalene / that for that tymeit seemed her
that her heart went Inn by the side of our lord in to his heart and was made
both one / so that she felt her soul / all for melte and relented by the /
strength of his dyuyne love / and that she: ^^yed in her soul and said. Lord
thou / have wounded mine heart lord you have wounded mine heart. And this was on
saint margaretes day as she told to her confessor in preuytee. Hit befell
also in / another time the morrow after Saint. Laurence day that this holy
maid came to the church for to here mass / and kneled next to the auter as
she was wont for / to do / for to see the blessed sacrement and because that
she should not let the priest at theautre by her great sobbynghir confessor
came to her and warned her that she / should constreyne her asmoche as she
might fro such great sobbynges / lest the pressed were let by her. Th^nae
anon she mekely as true obedyent maiden satte ferther fro the altar and
prayed to our lord that he would vouchesauf to Illumyne her confessor that he
might see and know / whether such sterynges of the spyryte of god might be
mesured of man. Then by virtue of that prayer her contessoure / had so
perfyte knoleche of feuoure of / devotion by experience that he knew fully by
that / that such feruoures of the soul might not be kept within / but needs.
by strenthe of dyuyne love yt must break out. Ferthermore oftyme when she: was
not houseled she desired in her soul for to receive the blyssed sacramet of /
the aulture And oftymes she would break out and say devoutly thus. I would.
receive my lord Jhesu crystys body / with that our lord would appyre to her
as he was wont to do / and to fulfylle her desire / he took the maidens mouth
and put it to his blessed wound of his side and bad her receive of ^s flesh
and of. his blood as much as she list. Then she received plentuously of our
lord breast / that she seemed for pure love she / should had dyed / by cause
of the great / swetnes that she felt in her heart. Hit befyll also upon Sanyt
^^exis day / that this holy maid prayed to our lord devoutly that he would
vouchesauf to grant her bre^nyng desire for to receive his: flesh and his
blood With that she had d^a reuelacyon yt she should be houseled / on the
morrow doubteles / for it was forbeden her of the freres that she should not so
often be houseled. Then whane she had this confortable reuelacyon. She.
prayed our lord yt he would wouchesauf to clenie her heart against the time she
should receive him that she might the more worthily receive him. In time that
she / prayed thus / she felt a reyne comenge / down in to her soul in manner
of a great. haboundant flood / not of water or of such other lyquore / but
only of blood medelyd with fire the which as her seemed purgyd and cleansed so
myghtely ^^ rsowie. that by strength of that tire it re^o^ded / in to the body
and cleansed also her body. After this on the morrow she was ^oseek that by no
way it seemed to her she / might not goo one foot. Neuertheless she doubted no
thing of ye promysse o^ our: lord / but trustyng to him fully began to: go to
church. And when she was come / thither / she knelyd down in a chapel beside
an altar Then came to her mind how she was enfourmed / yt she might: not be
houseled of what pressed she list / but of such that been assygned to her* with
that she desired her confessor should say a mass at that same altar: Anon
our / lord gaf her comfort that he should sing there. Suddenly our lord
then touched the heart of her confessonr with deuocio^ that he sholdesaye a
mass that day / for he was in no will for to sing that day / ne / he wyste not
that the holy maid was come to church. Then at the steryng of our lord he
dysposed him to mass / and went to the same altar there the holy maid was
and abode our lords behest / at which altar also he was never wont to sing
And when he came he found there this holy maid axyng for to be houseled for
charity Then he rceyued that it was the will of god he should sing that day.
He said mass / and at the end of the mass / as the manner is he came for to
housele her this holy maid at the altar end where she was ready for to
receive / that blessed sacrament. Her confessor beheld and saw her vysage
all shynyng read / and al for wepre with terys / the which was to him a great
meruayll / and Wuth that devotion she received that blissed sacrament. And
after time she was houseled / she was so plenteuously replete of our lord /
that all that day she might speak no word to no creature. On the morrow her
confessor axed her what / her eyled / and what now grace she received ye
other day a fore / by cause she was / so shynnyng read when she received that
blyssed sacrament / she answorde thus. Fader of what color I was that time I
wot nere / but this I know well wha^

I unworthy wretch received that / blyssed sacrament of your hondes / it drew
me some to it that all other thing save that allone wexed to me lothesom not
only temporal things and dylectacyons. of the world / but also other
comfortes and pleysaunces / were they never so ghostly / wherefore I desired and
prayed yt all such ghostly comfortes should be sequestryd from / so that I
might pleese god and end lesly be I knytte to him And also I prayed him that
he would take away my will and give me his will / and so he deed right mercyably
and said to me thus. Loo / dear daughter now I give the my will by the which
thou shalt be so strong that what ever hap to the fro this time for the
ward thou shall never be changed / nestyred and right so it was / She was.
ever afterward despised and set little by of all folk / and was never the
more / styred ne troubled ageynsthem. Ouermore yet this holy maid said to her
confessor. Fader well will ye wete how / our lord served me. Trewely as a
mother served her little soukyng child whom she loves tenderly. A mother
suffered / other while her child stand a far from her while she shows him
hirtete of her breast / and suffered him to weep long time after hit / but all
that time the lawhed At the last when she has suffered it to / weep long time /
she gothe there to with a lawhyng there and beclypped it in her arms and kyssed
it and so gives it her / breast or she tete. Right so ferde our lord with me
/ that day he showed me his / blessed wound in his side stondyng all. a far
from me. And I for desire that I had there to put my mouth to that / blessed
wound and wept haboundantly Then our lord said after time yt he had so
suffered me to weep / he came to me gladdely and took my soul in his. arms
and put my mouth to his wound. And then my soul for that great desire
entered all hole in to his blessed wound / where I found much swetnesse and
knowleche of his godhede And yfye wystye would meruayll that mine / heart for
gretnesse of that joy and love. to barst not. And ye would be astonyed how I
might live in this life with such a great passing hete of love. Also another
thing befyll her the next year se wyng upon the same day as she was a boute to
receive the blyssed sacrament of the altar / when the pressed held the
blessed sacrament in his hands before her / and taught her for to say thus.
Lord I am not worthy that thou sholdest enter in me. Then when she had de
received him / her seemed that as a fysshe entered in to the water / and the
water in him / right so her sowfe entered in god and god in her And so she
felt her self all I draw in to our lord / that uneath she might come home to
her chamber / And when she was come home / she laid her down upon her hard
bed / leyng long time still and moeuyd not. At the last her body was take up
in to the air and stood the re a while to gyder as three wytnessys bears
record / the which names I shall tell you afterward. Then afterward she
came down and lay upon her bed all weyke and feeble / and spoke softely many
blessed sweet words. And hye contemplatyf words that it steryd her felawes to
weep the which herd them. And among thoo swetr words she prayed for many
folk / and for som^e specially by name / namely for her confessor that was
that same time in the same momente in the church / and thought for that time
on no thing that should styre him to devotion But suddenly by her prayer he
felt a meruayllous devotion / that never he assayed before / consyderyng and
meruayllyng how that new grace camto him so suddenly / that hour while he
thought thus / suddenly came to him one of this holy maidens felawes and said

Trewely fader Katheryne has much prayed for you this day such an hour.

Then anon he know that such a new denocyon came to him at that hour by
Katherynes prayer. And he axed of her felawe what she prayed / and she told
him that she prayed for him and for other that our lord would wouchesauf to
grant them everlasting life / and that she putt forth her hand and prayed him
for to grant that. Then she took down her hand again semyng to her al
sore / and with great syghenge she said thus. A lord worshypped mote thou be /
for that was ever a common term in her mouth for to say when she was seek and
sore trauaylled. When her confessor herd this / he went to her and prayed
her tille him all her vysyon. She as meke obedyent maid told him all the hole
bysyon as it is said before / and when she came to that matter where she prayed
for special friends she said to him. Fader when I prayed for you and for
other / that our lord would wouchesauf to graun te you everlasting life / with
that I had a comfort that it should so be / and forthwyth I asked a token of
our lord / that I might know it should be so / not for none Incredulyte / but
rather for a notable memory. Then he prayed me that I should stoetche out
mine hand / I did so / and he put in my hand a nail and closed the nail
so fast with Inn mine hand. Then I felt a great pain in mine hand as
though an yren naylle had be smyten thorugh myghtely with an hamour / so
that me seemed to mynowne sight / thought it be Jnuysyble to other / I have a
mark of Crystys wounds in mine hand.

Also for contynuance of matter I shall tell you another meruayllos thing like
to this that befylle in the Cytee of Pyse As master Reymond her last
confessor bears record. In a time this holy maid came to the Cite of Pyse /
and other many with her / among whom master Reymond was one the which holy
maid was received in to a worthy man's place of the same Cite beside a
chapel of Saint Crystyane. In the which chapel master Reymond said mass
at the holy maids prayer / and there he houseled her after her desire / as she
used to be contynuelly when she had received that blyssed sacrament she
was anon rauysshed fro her bodily wits / and all that time master Reymond
and other moo abode till she had do / for to here of her sum ghoostly
comfort as they were wont to do after such rauyssheng. Suddenly as they
beheld her / the body that lay prostratr upon the ground was raised up / and
she kneled upon her knees stretchyng up her arms and her hondes with a clear
shynyng vysage. When she had so long kneled with closyng and styf arms / at
the last she fill down suddenly as though she had be dedly wounded / and
anon sone after she was restoryd again to her bodily wits. Then she sent
after master Reymond her confessor and said to him preuely this words.
Fader I do you well to wete that by the mercy of god I here now in my body the
markys of the blessed wounds of our lord.

master Reymone then axed her how that might be and how it stood with her in
time of her rauyssheng / she answer de and said. I saw our lord fastened upon
the cross coming a down and beelyppyng me with a great light By the which
gracyous vysyon the soul was so gretely steryd to me with my lord yt the body
was constreyned by strength of the spyryte to arise. Then out of the holes
of his holy wounds I saw five read bemys come down from him and fastened upon
my body / and was cause why that my body was all forstoeyned.

With that I cried to our lord and said. A a lord god I beseech the that
these wounds appyre not in me to the sight of men outward.

Then suddenly while she said these words er then thoo read bemys were
fully come down to the body changed her colors out of read in to a
meruayllous bryghtnesse / and in lykenes of a pure light they restyd in five
placed of my body / that is upon the hondes / the feet / and the heart.

Then master Reymond axed her whether any of the bemys come to the right
side. She said nay / but only upon the lift side upon my heart / master
Reymond axed her eftesones felyst thou any manner of sensyble pryne in thoo
places.

She answered with a great sygheng and said / I suffer so great a sensyble
sorrow in all tho five places and specyaly in my heart / that but god show a
new miracle it is Impossyble to me for to live long time to gydres in this
body This word marked well master Reymond her confessor and espied where he
could see in her any manner tokenes of pain Wha^ she had told that she would say
they depted a sonder out of that chapel / and they went to gyders home to
their Inn / and the holy maid went to her chamber and there she lay down
femyng to all that ever were about her drawyng to the death. Then was master
Reymond called and other of his feleshyp for to see ye wound thing / when they
were come / they wept sore by cause they wend she should had depted from the^
for they saw her ne^ so feeble nygh so to ye death Nevertheless within a while
after she resorted again to more strength and received mete and then she
spoke eftsoon to master Reymound and said to him as she said a fore that she
may not long live / but if god show a new miracle. Then Master Reymound
called to gyders all her children both men and wymmen prayng them with weeping
there that they would all with one voice pray to our lord that he would
vochesaf to grant us this holy maid katherin our ghostely virtuous Mother and
our maystres the which lythe in passing / for to abide with us a while in
this life and for to conferme us in more virtue:

All they granted with one voice that they so would / than they went all
with Master Reymound to this holy maid ^yeng in transyte saying such words
weylyng and weeping: Mother we wete well that thou desyrest to be with thine
spouse with our lord Jhesu christ / but thy mede and thy reward is reserved
fro the all auf have rewthe on us whom thou forsakest mother And leave us not so
freell without better enformacion of virtue in this wretchyd world / We know
well also thy well byloued spouse whom thou love with so great a desire
will nothing deny the that thou ask / therefore we beseech the pray to
him that he vouhesauf grant the to us for a time lest thou pass fro us. And
we no thyn ge or little edefyed by thy good living For though we pray as well
as we could / We dread us lest he will not here us for our wretchyd living
for certain we ben right vnwurthy to be herd Then^e therefore that have louyd
our health / and that so tenderly and fervently / pray ye for us and win
our lord that we mow not leave yt in this life till we ben more edefyed in
ghostely virtue many such words they said among them with great weeping /
To whom this holy maid answered / ye know well that I have forsake mine own
will / ne I desire never but that / that were to gods will / and all be it I
have desired your health with all mine heart / yet I know well that he yt
which is your health and mine / can better ordeine for you than one creature
can pray for you / his will therefore be done in all things: Nevertheless yet
I shall pray gladly that he vouchesaf for to do that him seems best / When
she had said this word we went a side for a time being in great sorrow unto
the time we know an answer / The next day afterward she called master
Reymounde to her and said / me seems fader yt our lord has condescendyd to
your prayers / and I hope ye should soon have your will and intent* as she
said so it was sone after / For upon the morrow the which was upon a sunday
she received crystis body in ye sacrament of ye altar of her confessor his
hondes / and right as in the sunday before she was brought in great febylnes
by her rauysshyg after time she had received that blessed sacrament / Right
so in this sunday she was greatly strengthed by her rauysshyng after that
blessed sacrament the which was great merueyle to all that were about her /
To whom Master Reymound said: I hope yt our lord has accepted our teres and
co^desce^dyd to our prayers though they ben vnwourthy Then^e within a litil
time afterward she was so quikly revived yt none of the^ all was in doubt but
yt she should live / and yt god had granted fulli her desire / O almyghti god
fader of mercy what wylt you do for thyn true servant and well-beloved children
you co^descendist so benigly to thyn sinful seruauntis: master Reymound then
asked her for the more sykernes wheder the passyo^ of tho wou^des contryned
always as they deed in her body / She answered in this wise: Our lord ^hu has
herd your prayers and thefore tho wounds tourment not now my body as they ^yde
/ but rather they comfort me and strength me / Loo maidens here now ye know
what evcellent of grace this holy maid had / and also ye mow learn that
our lord vochesaf to here sins when thry asked any thing that longs to
soul health:

Yet shall I tell you another merneylous thing that as me seems it passes
all other that I have rehearsed yet / And so shall I make an end of this
Chapter by the help of god /

After time that our lord had received her soul in to his blyssyd wound off
his side and there showed her the mystery est of the glorious trynyte / then
came our glorious lady his glorious mother glorious vyrgin marye and fulfilled
her with the glorious milk of her glorious breasts and tetes / After came mary
magdalene and comynyd with her full homely of her reuelacions yt she had when
she was in desert and other while these three come togydre and gave her many
blessed comfortable words / Yet wanted she not the comfort of other saytes
and the apperyng and namely of saint poule the Appostle and saint Johan
theuangelyst and saint domynyke and saint Thomas dalquino / And oftetymes saint
Agnes of whom she had onys a reuelacion that should be her felawe in the
kingdom of heaven as it shall be declared afterward by the help of god But now
I shall tell you two notable points that befyll to this holy maid when she
had any vysyons of saint poule ye apostle it befil i^ ye fest co^^sacio^ of
saint poule yt this holy maid was so merueylously rauysshed out of her self /
That her thought that her spyryt was draw up to heaven / so ferforth that three
days and three nyghtes she was vnmeuable without bodly felyng so that it seemed
that she was fully deed / But there were sum that understood better her
condycion and said that they supposed she was rauysshed with saint poule in to
the third heaven / At the last by the three days end she was reforted to her
bodly feling But the spyryte was so comforted with that reuelacions that she
stood long *time afterward as she had be half a sleep: and yet she slepte
not: In the mean while Friar Thomas her first confessor and another fellow of
his which was called friar donat of Flerence had a desire to goo for to
vysyte an holy here myte in deserte: but first or than they went they come to
this holy maid hou^^ and found her in on holy sompnolente / and by cause they
would excite her they asked her whether she would go with the^ to deferte for
to vysyte that holy man. She answered to them in the same holy sleep and said
ye / notwythstondyng yt she wist not what she said by cause that she was not
fully evcyted /

But anon as she perceived that word she had such a reuerse of conscience
off that lesynge / that for sorrow the which she took thereof / She was
restoryd fully to her bodily wits /

And as many days and nyghtes as she stood before in rauysshyg / so long after
she wayled and wept vncessabyly yt sy^e / and said to her self: O wicked woman
have thou so well be feed with the infinite goodness of god that thou must
now make a lesyng: be these trenthe^^ that thou haste learned in heaven / is
this. ye doctrine that thou art taught of the holy ghost for to make lesynges.
Then: wist thou right well that thou woldeste / not goo with tho friars / And
yete thou. saydest thou would / and so made a / lesyng to thyn confessor
and to thyn ghostely faders / O meost wicked sin: ce / ye not maidens the
meruaylous ways and manners of our lordis prouydence / Loo lest her
reuelacyons should have by / cause of pride to her Our lord suffered her for to
fall in to such a lesyng / if it may / be called a lesyng / for there was
none ^ntencion of deceyte / and so by that mekenes and lownes our lord
covered her / virtue that the fend should not enter for to destroy them / But
tho things that the saw for that time in her reuelacyons she told not to her
confessor as she was / wont to do of other reuelacyons / for as she said her
self she could find none la^guege that might express tho reuelacyons by
wordene it is not lefull to no man for to speak of hem with tongue as the /
same appostle says him selt / Nonlicet / ho^iloqui: /

Eut the feruoure of her heart the besynes of her prayer* and her holy
exortacyons showed openly ynowe that she saw the preuytes of god /

The which may not be co^mynyd but: they^ that saw them. Ouermore another
time saint poule the appostle arpperid to her and warned her that she should
give her besely to prayer the which she told / afterward to her confessor /
And therefore that she used much / Then it befyll / afterward whiles she
prayed in the church on the vygylle of Saint Domynyke: many reuelacyons were
showed to her of saint Domynyke / and of other saints She was so often occupied
with reuelacyons the same time when she would speak to her confessor she had
reuelacions / Then i^ the next day afterward of saint Domynyke a lytyl:
before even / song time whiles she was occupied / with reuelacions suddenly
entered in to the church a friar which was Bartylmeus her confessors felawe
in whom she / trusted as much as in her confessor for* he was her confessor
absens of her goostely tader / When ^he perceived that that he was come she
ar^os and went / agayst him and said to him that she / would speak with him of
certain reuela / c^ons. Theune they satte down bothetegyders in the church and
she began to reherce how many reuelacyons our lord had / deshewed her of saint
Domynyke at the last she said / loo fader I see now mine* holy fader Saint
Domynyke as I see* you now / And yet he is more nerer me / than ye be /

And then she procedyd forth of many merueylous reuelacyons within a / while
after it befyll that her young brother that was called also Bartylmeus / went by
her / And suddenly she cast her eye a little a side and behylde her brother and
left of the sight of saint Domynyke for that little time and then continued
forth in her tyste matter / But for that / deed she made much sorrow / when she
per ceyued what she had I do / that long after she held her peace and spoke
no more but always wept for that trespaas / When / she had long continued in
weeping / at: the last Friar Bartylmewe prayed her / to proceed forth as she
began / but she migte not for sobbyng uneath speak one word.

Yet as she might speak she said.

O what wretch am I And he shall / do me vengeance for my sins / Friar
Bertylmewe / What sin might that be / then she said / Saw ye not how I
bowed away / mynhede and mine eyes for to behold my: brother that went right
now by / the whiles our lord she wed me many merueylous things / Friar
Bertyimewe say: nay he could not perceive that she bowed in any wise her head
and her eyes a side: Then she said fader yt ye wyste / how our blessed
glorious lady glorious: virgyn mary repreuyd me right now / for that sin: Ye
woide weep also fore / as I and so she spoke no more of that / ma^ie^ of
reuelacyons / but ever co^tynued in weeping unto the time she had made / her
con^e^ion / and thene she went home to the chamber / where saint poule
appleryd to her as she to: de afterward to her confessor and repreuyd her
sharply off the lokyng of that time when she turned her head so a side in so
ferforthe she said that it had be more lever for her / to be shamed of all
the world than onys: ^stsones to suffer that shame: the which she had of
saint poule when he repreuyd he^ / Thene she said to her confessor fader
bethynke you what repreuynge of christ shall be at the day of dome to all
sinners / yt the cepreuynge of one of his appostles is now so sharp and make
me / so much aferd / She said also but if / she had / had comforthe of a
fair lamb that stood beside her whiles the. Appostle repreuyd her / She should
have deyed for sorrow as her seemed wherefore ever after ward she was she more
meker ^ her reuelacyons: Loo maidens how our lord suffered her to fall for her
more mekenes / But now shall I tell you what the* reuelacyons was the which
she had ofsaynt Domynyke. When this holy maid comyned and spoke with Freyer
bertylmewe of her reuelacyons: she said that she saw in deed by a vysyon of
imaginacion allmyghty god the fader brenging forth as her seemed out of his
mouth our lord thu^cryste his endeles sone the which apperid openly to her
in lykenes of mankind: On the lodersyde the blessed: Patryarch Saint Domynyke
coming out of the / breast of almyghcy god the fader shyn / nyng all in ^y^ht /
And the herd of the mouth of a^^myghty god the fader these words: dear
daughter I have brought / forth thyle children / the one kyndely and /
natural being the second person in intrynyte: The oder louyngly and swetely
by adopcion / Then this holy made had great marvel of such comparyson by
/ twene the sone of god and saint Domynyke.

But almighty god the fader to put / away that great marvel expownyd / these
words and said / Dear daughter: right as here mynowne sone whom I / brought
forth of me naturally and eternaly was ever pertyghtly obedyent to me unto the
death by taking upon him mankind: Right so the deeds of Domynyk mine sone by
adopcyon what that ever / wrought fro his chyldehode in to the enof his bodily
life were reuled:

After the obedyence of my^ commau^de tys and never brake onys any manner of:
precepte of mine for the virgynyte ofthis: body and soul and the grace of his
baptyme he kept ever to me vndefoylyd:

And also right as here mine / eternal and natural sone the endeles / world
of my mouth told and spoke openly to all the world that I badde him say: And
thereto bare wyttenes of truth / Right so Domynyke mine sone by adopcyon
preche my truth openly to the / world / as Well Among heretykes as
among faythfus people / and not only by himself but also by other of hi^ and
not only* whiles he lived in earth among you / But also by his successors by
whom yet they precheth and shall preche for right as my natural and eternal
sone sent his dyscyples for to preche right so Domynyk mine sone by a dopcion
sent his friars / And also right as mine natural sone and eternal is mine word
/ right Domynyke mine sone by adopcion is the prechour about of mine word /
wherefore of mine synguler gift it is give to him and to his friars for to
vuderstonde the truth of min words and not for to pass therfro / Also right
as mine natural sone and eternal ordained and dysposyd all his lyff and his
deeds by doctrynes and ensample to health off mannys soul / right Domynyke mine
sone by adopcion put all his besynes to deliver out souls of ye sorrow of
error and of sin / And that was his pryncipall intent / When he began his
order / that is for to say for health of souls therefore he may well be lyked
to min natural and eternal sone sone Ihesu Criste / This was the reuelacioy
the which she comynyd to friar Bertylmewe* when that sodeyn caas of lokyng
aside byfyll to her as it is rehersyd before /

Now I shall proceed forth of the remenaunt of the life of this holy maid in
reuelacions and visyons* but first I would ye knew maidens that for the great
haboundance of greces and open reuelacions and visyons and for the gre^enes of
love therwyth / The which this holy maids soul was fulfilled / She was right
syke in her body / and ever encresid in sekenes more and more for love so yt
she roo^ no more out of her bed but lay still ever newyng the love of her
spose seeing thus / Aswete lovely lord gods sone: and the sone of a maiden*
with such many loving* words she praised our lord and her spouse: She
beleft without bodily mete and thereto her spouse Jhesu Christ the which given
her that fire of love by cause it should bren^e more sto^gely / he apperyd to
her often times / Then ne said she to him that was so febyll off the fire of
love Good lovely lord you suffer me so long abide in this wretched body and
wylt not take me to thyn endeles presence / I have none Joye now off this
wretchid life but only all mine joy is for to seek the / For I love the Ihesu
and none without the: for what that ever I love lord it is for the why am I
there for delayed so long* fro thyn endeles presence / Ha ha mekest and
myldest lord deliver mine soul out of this prison and out of this dedely lif:
To thise words that were said so weylyngly / our lord answered / Dear
daughter when I lived in earth among men I besyed me never for to fulfylle mine
own will but mine faders and albe it that I desired to ete the last paske with
mine dysciples for to be with mine fader as they herd me often times say / yet I
suffered patiently the time that was ordained off mine fader / so must thou do
/ though you desire fervently to be onyd to me perfightely in the bless of
heaven / yet thou must abide the time that I have ordained: Theenne she said to
our lord / lovely lord sithe it so is that it is not kind to me as yet to
pass out of this lyff / thyn will be done: Fiat voluntas tua / But one thing I
beseech ye whiles I live in this earth yt sithe I may not yet be onyd to yt i^
bliss* grant me as long as I live in this life to be onyd to ye and with ye
by part taking of thy blessed passion ye which was granted to her:

For as she asked / so she had / fro that time forward she had so much
experiens every day in her heart and i^her body of the passions of our lord as
she told afterward preuyly to master Reymou^d that she never felt such a
soor and that was in this wise / Often times she would sytte and talk with
master Reymound and teache him of the passion of criste affermyng myghtely that
our lord Jhesu christ fro the time of his glorious concepcion in to the time
of the end of his blyssyd passion he bare ever the cross of his death in his
soul* for the great passing desire that he had for the health of mannys
soul / For when he was conceived he was full of grace and of wisdom and of
charity / And it was none need to him for to encrece in him afterward for he
was perfyght ynow in them at the beginning / Therefore sithe it so was that he
loved so perfyghtly god the fader and mankind in heart seeing and consyderyng
god the fader in trinite in manner depryued of his honor. And also mankind
depryuyd f^o his blessed end / he was so tourme^ted with compassyon in him
self unto the time that he might restore by his passion the dew honor to god
the fader in T^inyte and endeles health to mankind* Also she said the
affliction of his holy desire was none little pain / But it was a great pain:
And thefore it was that he said to his dyscyples on schherthursday at the
soper / Deside^io desideraui manducare vobiscum hoc pascha / That is I have
desired with a great desire long before this time to ete with you this paske /
and the cause was for he gave them in that soper an special ernest of health
the which he would work er then he purposed to ete with them eftsoon /
And therefore she alleggid for her the wordys of our savior where he says in
another place. Pater transfer calicem hu^c a me / That is fader put away this
passion fro me that I shall now drink / the which words she expownyd thus
and said / Perfyght folk should not understand these words as simple folk
done / that our savior asked of his fader to put away and remeue hye
paynefull passion But thus fro the beginning of his glorious concepcton unto
that time of his death he drank ever of that paynfull passion by the great
desire that he had off mannys health / And then the more he draw nere to the
death* the more gredyly he desired that drink* he asked therefore that it should
soon be fulfilled the which he had so long time desired for the health of
mannys soul / that the dryke ye which he had drunk so long before should
then be ended* And thus this was not for to ask a remeuyng away of his death
/ but rader an hasti end of his death: the which our savior declared full
openly afterward when he said to Judas / Quod facis fac cicius / That is friend
that thou shall do / do it anon / Nevertheless though it so were that the
foresaid pains full drink of his desire were to him right grievous for to
drink / yet as right an obedyent child to the fader he said thus /
Veruntamen non sicut ego volo sed sicut tu: Fader I desire that mine will be not
fulfilled but thy will offering him self ready by th^se words for to suffer
daily of his pain full desire as long as it lyked to his fader so that the
first words where he said / Transfer hunc calitem etc. Fader a void this
paynfull fro me / he understood not for to have a voyded his passion that was
to come / But the passion of his desire before by suffryng the death for health
of man's soul for to be endyd. Then said master Reymond. Mother comynly
after exposicion of doctors our lord said tho words as a very man and head
of all his chosen both f^eel and strong / whose sensualyte naturelly dread the
death / that he might by example to all both to freel folk and to strong folk /
that they dyspeyre not / all be it they felt their sensualyt^e kyndely
dredyng the death.

Here to this holy maid answered and said / that the acts and the dedys of our
savior if they ben wisely considered / every creature after his consyderacyon
may find in them ghostly felyng / as it is spedefull to his health. And
therefore sith it is so that feeble and freall creatures fynden in tho words
comfort against their feblenesse / it were right necessary then that perfyt
folk and mighty should find also there Jnne co^fyrmacyon of their strength /
the which might not be but by this exposycyon before* Therefore it is better yt
it be expowned in many manners so yt al may be comforted there by / then in a
manner of wise for one manner of folk allone

When master Reymond herd this he held his peace / meruayllyng of her great
wysdom and grace that she had / for he her de never that exposycyon before.
Another exposycyon of the same words by the same holy maid. Master Reymond
found written in a book that her first confessor wrote and they ben these

In a time when she was rauysshed she learned of our lord that the prayer the
which he made a fore his passion when he ^watt both blood and water seeing
thus

Transfer hunc calicem and^. That is fader remove this peynfull passion fro me

He prayed then for them whom he saw before that would have no part of his
passion / the which was to him peynfull passion. And by cause he loved
ryghtwysnesse / he put a condycyon and said. Veru^tamen non mea voluntas That
is neuthelesse fader be not my will fulfilled / but thy will / and if he had
not putto such a condycyon / it would have followed there on she said that all
folk should have be saved. After time then that he had thus prayed / he was
herd as saint Poule said for his reverence. Exauditus est propter suam
reuerencia^ In exposycion of this words of saint Poule comynly doctors
vnderstonden the same It had be else meruaylle but that the same sone of god
should have be herd. Also she said another time to master Reymond and taught
him that the passions which our our lord god Jhesu Christ ve ray god and man
suffered for the health of mankind were so mighty / that it were impossyble any
man in earth for to suffer but that he should dye and it were possible many
time if that he suffered them. For right as his love yt he had then / and has
yet to mankind vnestymable / and vncomperable. Right so his passion that he
suffered by constreynyng of love allone was vnestymable. Who would believe that
the thorns of his crown should perysshe in to the brain. Or that the bones
of a quyk man should be draw out of their joints For the prophet said of
our lords passion thus. Dinumeraueru^t omnia* ossa mea. That is they told and
nombred all the bones of my body

So then it may be proved yt the pryncypall cause of his passion was love /
the which he shemed for mankind And it might not be showed more conuenyently
than by his passion. By this it seemed that the naylles held him not upon the
cross / but his love only. Ne the strength of man overcame him ^ot / but
love. How were men so strong for to hold him / that at a word of his mouth
they fill down to the ground when they came for to take him Such high
words and conuenyent words of our lords passion this holy maid co^myne with
master Reymond. And yet she said more that she had experyence in her body of
some manner of passion that Christ suffered on the cross* Of all she would not say
for that was Impossyble to any erthely creature. But specially by cause of the
great love that she had to our lord and to his passion the most pain yt she
suffered was in her heart / so that it seemed to her other while that her heart
was to braste and cut a sondre fro that one end to that other.

And for this great pain of love / she was oftymes deed to all mennys sight.

Of this bare wytnes many one / the which were present when she dyed for
the love of Crystys passion allone.

Here of was master Reymond in great doubt. But for to put away that doubt
/ he thought to comen with this holy maid and search the sothe of her whether
it were so or no. When he axed her this. She for great weeping could give none
answer long time to gydre / but at the last she said. Fader would ye not have
great pity and compassyon of a soul that were delivered out of a derke prison
to light / and after time it had see so merry a light / eftesones to be reclused
ageyn in the same derke prysone. I am that same wretch that thus happed me by
the ordinance of god for my sins. Then ne master Reymond axed her where her
soul was fully departed fro the body.

To whom she answered and said thus. That the fervent fire of dyuyne love and
of ghoostly desire was so much in her heart for to live with our lord
endelesly whom she loved. That though her heart had be of stone or of yren it
must nedys to breast. Therefore fader understands this for truth that mine
heart of mine body was then undo and opened fro the ouermost party to the
nether / only by the strength of pure love / so that me seems yet I feel the
markys of that syssure in mine heart. By this ye may know yt the soul was
fully for that time deperted fro the body / and set in the presence of god /
where I saw the preuyt^es of god / that is vn^efull for to speak to any man on
earth For there is no speech in earth that can express the preuytees in any
ma^nis tongue. But this wot I well as often as I here of that matter I am
tourmented so greatly in my soul consyderyng where I was then and where I am
now / that I can not tell my sorrow but with weeping and sobbyng. Then
master Reymond prayed her to tell him how that all this began in her. She
answered and said. After time that I was fed and comforted with many vysyons
and reuelacyons by our lords mercy / I fell seek for pure love and lay down
in mine bed where I prayed our lord Jhesu that he would deliver me out of
this wretchyd world / and oned me perfytely to him The which for that time he
would not grant me.

But he granted therefore as long as I lived in this life / should be partyner of
his passion / in asmoche as it is possible a dedly body for to suffer / and so
she told him all that / that is rehearsed before. And more over she said / loo
fader by such experyence of his passion / I am made so seek by the strength
of love / that my soul desired no thing else but for to be delivered out of
this world And the same fire so encrecyd in my soul that my heart often times
defayled and departed a sonder and my soul was utterly delivered out of the
body Nevertheless it was but a little time and that was my sorrow. Then ne
eftesones master Reymond axed her how long time her soul was out of the body.
She said as they that kept her and were about to have beryed her four hours
or then she reuyued ageyn Yet he axed her what she saw for that time / and
why came the soul again to the body she answered thus Fader that time my soul
saw and understood joy of blessed sowles / and peynes of sinners. And as mine
mind would suffer me and words would suffyce to express them / I shall tell
you. My soul saw the divine essen cyall being of god / and that is the cause
why I am so loathe and impatient to live in this world / and had not be the
love of him and the love of christian people / for which my soul was restoryd
to the body again / I should had defaylled and dyed for sorrow. The highest
comfort that I have is when I suffer any disease / for that I have the perfyte
vysyon of god / therefore trybulacyons ben not heuysom to me / but comfortable
as ye may know / and other that been conuersaunt with me I saw also the peynes
of dampened sowles / and peynes of sowles that been in purgatory / the which I
can not express perfytely with no manner of words. For if wretched sinners
saw the least pain that is there / they had lever chese bodily death an
hundred times if it were possible / then for to suffer o day the least pain
that is there. But specially I saw hem ponys shed syngulerly that had sinned
in matrymony / the which had not kept hem to gyder honestly as they should
do / but followed the dylectacions of their lustys

Of this master Reymond her confess sour axed her why that sin in special
was more grievously punysshed then other sins / sith it so is that it is not
the most grievous sin She said for this skylle. For they had not so great
conscience of that sin ne so great contrycy on as they had of other sins /
but rather they offended in that sin then in any other That sin the
which a sinner charge not for to remove / by penance is a great sin be it
never so little.

Then this holy maid proceeded forth in her matter and said thus also. Fader
wha^ne I had seen all these joys and these peynes wenyng my self that I had
fully be delivered out of this body.

Our lord said to me / see thou not daughter what joy they lack and what
pain they have that offenden me. Torn ageyn therefore to thy body and tell to
the people their error and their peril. And with that word I was astonyed for
to torn again to the body and sore aferde.

Then our lord said to me / it is profit to mennys souls that thou torn
again / and thou shalt not live the life that thou have lived a fore ne keep
the solytarie allone in chamber / but thou shalt goo a broad to win sowles /
I shall ever be with the / and goo with the both going and coming. Thou shalt
bear the worship of my name and of ghoostly doctrine before great and small and
lay people and clerkys and a fore Relygyous folk also I shall give the both
mouth and wit for to speak that none may wythstande the. I shall also bring
the before bysshoppys and curates of sowles for to confound there pride. Whiles
our lord spak these words suddenly my soul was restored again to my body.

And when I perceived that I had great sorrow / that I wept three days and
three hyghtes to gyders without cessyng And yet I can in no wise absteyne ne
refreyne me there fro / when it comes to my mind how suddenly I was come fro
the great joy unto this prysone of the body What wonder is it therefore fader
though mine heart to breast every day consyderyng the great excellent joy that
time that I had / the which now it is far fro me / but all is done for the
soul hele Therefore there shall no man marvel though I love them passyngly to
whom our lord has bid me warn them of their sinful living / for I have
left for them a great joy for a certain time I wot not how long. Therefore as
saint Poule seyth. They ben now my glory my crown and my joy. All this I
say to you fader and to all other for to put out of your hertes the passion
of grutchyng in time coming when I shall be homely among all men. When
master Reymond herd all this and understood them / after the grace that was
give him / he perceived in his heart / that for the incredulytee and blyndnes
of men / all that she said should not be publysshed. Wherefore he for bade
both the freres and the sustres / that all the while this holy maid lived in
earth they should not pupplysshe that matree.

He perceived also of sum that followed first her doctrine / how they went
backward / for they could not ne might not take her words But lest he should
offend god if he had hid it himself without writing / he wrote it for a
perpetuell record after her dyssece / and not while she lived Now maidens for
to know veraly that all this is sothe I shall tell you wytnes of record that
were present with this holy maid when all these things befyll her In that
same time when this holy maid drew nigh to the death as it seemed and as it is
rehearsed before.

There drew about her wymmen and other ghoostly daughters of herys / and they
sent after her first confessor friar Thomas for do be present at her passage
by prayers and other holy exercyses in comme^dyng of her soul to god. He came
and three freres with him mo to be present at the passing of this holy maid.
But when she was passyd as it seemed. One of the freres took so great sorrow
therefore that by vyolence of his weeping / a vein of his breast was all for
brosyd / where with he caught a coghe and spatte gebettes of blood. Then was
that another sorrow to them that stood about / for both they wept for the
holy maid that was so passyd. And also for her brother the which was not
shappely to live long after in that pain. Then said friar Thomas her first
confessor to that seek friar with great feyth and trust. Brother I wot well
this holy maid is in great reputacyon before god for her good living. Therefore
take her hand and put in the same place of thy sekenes. And I doubt not but
that thou shalt be hole. And anon forth with he did so and so he had health
/ the which he told afterward to all that would here if There was also a
ghoostly daughter of herys that was present then / the which was called
Alyxa / and passyd out of this world sone afterward Moother were that came
Inn for to see whether she was passed or not / and there was none that could
suppose otherwise There were also two other special wyttenessys / that were
about for to ordeyne for the body that it should be beryed. And both were
susters of penance of Saint Domynyk / that one was called Katheryne as she was
/ the which was her felawe long time before. And that other was her cosyn Lysa
/ and thus I make an end of this chapter.

Of sum miracles wrought gracyously by this holy maid about the health of
sowles. Capitulum vij
IF I should reherce all the miracles that our lord showed by this holy maid
/ I might rather make a great book of them than for to comprehend hem in oo
chapter. But by cause I would put away dullness of them that should read or
here this legende of this holy maid I am about asmoche as I may under few
words for to comprehend them in one chapter / that they might know under
few words how great they ben the which I pass over lyghtely. therefore in as
much as the soul passes the body in worthynesse. I shall begin of tho
miracles the which were showed of our lord by her about mennys sowles / and
after that of the bodies

As touching for the first when that Jamys or Jacob / the fader of this holy
maid perceived that his daughter Katheryne was all given to serve and to
please our lord as it is rehearsed in the first party of this legende / ever
he loved and tretyd her reuere^tly and louyngly / for bedyng all folk of his
household that none be so hardy for to let Katheryne his daughter in any
manner wise / what that ever she will have done This is a great cause why that
the daughter loved the fader. And therefore she commended specially her faders
health often times to our lord. And he had such a trust in his daughters
prayers / that he supposed well she might have of god what she would for his
health Sone after the fader sykened and lay down in his bed all seek. When
this holy maid his daughter perceived that / anon she prayed to our lord
her spouse for the health of her fader. And it was answered to her of our lord
/ that the end of his days of this world were come / and that it were not
spedefull for him for to abide longer in this life. Then ne she went to her
fader and vysyted him and examyned him how he was dysposed in his soul / and
found ready and wylfully to pass out of this world / having no lust for to
abide longer / wherefor she thanked our lord hyghly But then she prayed our
lord eftesones / that sith it so is that he had given her fader so great
grace for to pass out of this world without sin / that he would wouchesauf
to grant him also for to flee to heaven / without pain of purgatory. Of this
she had an answer in this wise / that ryghtwysnesse must nedys be kept /
and therefore it were no right / but Impossyble a soul to have the clerenesse
of endeles joy without perfyte purgacyon a fore.

For all be it thy fader has been in his days of good living among all other
wedded folk / and also do many good things that I am well pleased with / and
specially as touching the Yet nevertheless it may not be saving my
ryghtwysnesse. But that his soul must be purged by the fire for to brenne out
the duste of erthely conuersacyon / the which is hardened and endured in his
soul Then said this holy maid to our lord thus My dear well-beloved lord
what may I suffer yt my fads soul by whom I have be so tenderly nourysshed /
and have had so many co^fortes in his life / that it be not tormented in such
pains. I pray the lord for the goodness that ever thou shewdest to man kind
/ suffer not his soul to goo out of his body unto ye time it be perfytly
purged oo way or other yt it need not in no wise the pain of purgatory After
such words / our lord showed his mercy meruayllously / as though he had
obeyed to the voice of his maiden. All be it that the bodily strengthes of her
fader Jamys began for to defaylle more and more to the death ward Yet his
soul passed never out of his body unto the time yt holy and dysputacion
between our lord alledgyng for him ryghtwysnesse. And the holy made axyng grace
and mercy* And at the last after long dysputacion / the holy maid said to our
lord. My well-beloved lord if this grace may in no wise be gotten or granted
without some manner of ryghtwysnesse / suffer that ryghtwysnesse fall on me / for
I am ready to suffer al manner of pain what ever thy goodness will ordeyne for
delyuerau^ce of my fads soul. Then our lord granted her grace and said. Loo
daughter for the love yt thou have to me I shall grant the thine axyng / and
I shall deliver thy faders soul fully out of pain But thou shall be suffer a
pain for him as long as thou lyuest / the which I shall assygne the. This
holy maid thanked our lord and said. Good blessed lord be it to me as you
haste ordained. After that she went to her fader as he lay a deieng / and she
comforted him meruayllously of his endeles health that he was right ioyefull /
and she went not from him unto the time he was passyd out of this world And
when the soul was passyd out of ye body / anon forth with this holy maid was
payned with a sekenes in the side / the which is called Ilica passyo / that
never went from her in to the time she passyd out of this world

And there was never time afterward but she had ye pain as she said / and
other bare record often times to master Reymond. But the virtue of her
pacyence without any com^yson passyd her sekenes / as I shall declare by ye
help of god afterward in the last chapter of the thrydde pertye When her
faders soul was delivered out of the body / this holy maid smyled full
manerly and said / now would god I were as ye ben. And all that time other wept
/ she showed gladness of chere for she might none other wise do For she saw
his blessed soul when it passed out of ye body / how it was received in to
endelesse bliss without any taryeng of the which she was right glad a
little before / she had experyence of the same joy / as it is rehearsed in the
chapter before this

See ye not maidens how wisely the prouydence of our lord was wrought in this
maidens fader. Our lord might if he had would / have purged his soul in many
manner of wyses / and made him able Enough to joys / as he did to the thief yt
hynge on his right side / but he would not without some pain that this maid
should suffer as she axed for her encrece of her more joy / the which pain
was ever afterward sweet to her as her seemed / not without cause for she wist
well yt her sweetness should ever encrece aftward her by grace / and in bliss
by joy / and therefore she might in no wise call ye pain of Ilica passio but
a sweet pain This holy maid told puely to master Reymond yt by long time
aft her fads death / his soul appyred oftymes to her / tha^kyng her for her
grace yt he received by her / and also told her many puy things / and gave
her warnyng of ye assaillyng of her enemy / and thereto kept her from al
ghostly euelys. Right as I have told you maidens of a miracle showed to a
ryghtwysmannys soul. So shall I tell you now a miracle showed to a sinful
man's soul.

There was a man dwelling in the cite of Seen the which was called Andrewe a
full rich man of out wordely things of the world / but full pour off
inwardly heavenly things he was a vicious man / for he neither dred ne loved
god But an hasarder and a cursed blasphemer or a swerer of god and of his
saints / within a while afterward that man was take with a sykenes and lay
done in his bed so seek that every man and leche said he was deed: That
perceived his curat and come to him for to comfort him that he should beshryue
and take penance and make his testament as the manner was in the country / when
he had herdde how the preeste counseylled him. he despised both him and his
counsel: his wife considered / that having zele and love to his soul / she
went after all manner relygyous folk both men and wymmen for to stere him to
god: But yet for all her counseyll they might not bow him to confession and
contrycion of his sins / neither with thretinge of endeles pains ne with
rewards of endeles joys. Then eftsoon his curate came to him dredyng lest
he should have deyed for defaulte of counseyll and said to him as he said
first adding thereto many more holsom words / Yet always that wretched man
despised him afterward as he did before both him and his words / At the last
he fill in despeyre and in to the sin of the holy ghost* and so he drew
fast to the death: This was afterward told to Friar thomas this holy maids
first* confessor And he went to this holy maid house pursuyng for to
constrayne her by all the virtue of obedyens and of charity for to pray to our
lord that he would vochesaf to socour ye wretched soul that it be not
dampened wythouten end /

But when he came to this holy maids house he found her rauysshyd fro her
bodly wits and as long as she was so occupied: he durst not occupye her /
ne durst not long abide out of his house by cause yt might drew fast upon him
wherefore he charged a fellow of here is that was that time with her: ye which
was called katheryn as she was for to charge that holy maid in gods behalue
and his / when she were restorid again to her bodily wits that she would
pray for such a mannys soul that lies in passing / she said she would so:
when the holy maid herd that she had so great compassyon of his soul /
that she prayed our lord* anon devoutly besechyng him entyerly that the soul
should not perysshe which he boughte with his precious blood / To whom our lord
answered and said thus his wyckednes has asserued pain as an horrybly
blasphemy For he has not only blasphemid me and mine saints with his mouth /
But also he has thrown a table in to ye fire for despyte of me in the which
was painted the image of mine passion / And the image of mine blessed glorious
mother / and of other saints: And therefore it is worthy by ryghtwysnes yt he
brenne in endeles fire /

Then she fill down prostrate with weeping to the feet of our lord: and
said lord if thou wylt consydere narowe to the sins of men / who may escape
endeles dampnacion / wherefore come thou down to be born of a glorious maid
and for to suffer tourment of cruel death only for to wait after mennys
sins: and to punysshe them horrybly to endeles pain / why tellest thou me
this and the sins of a lost man that barest upon thyn sholders all manner of
sins whether I am come to the now for mercy or for ryghtwysnes have mine lord
blesfulle what thou saydest to me when you put me forth for the health of
many mennys sowles: I have none other refresshinge in this life: But for to see
mine neybours turned to the / And for the alone I suffer patiently thyn absence
/ if thou give me not this joy what shall I than do Good meke lord put me not
away fro the / yield me mine brother graciously that is now obstynat in heart:

Thus she prayed contynuelly fro the beginning of the night unto the graye
morning all that time weeping without any sleep dysputyng with our lord always
for the help of that soul / Our lord aledgyng ryghtwysnes to give to him
vengeance for his sins / And the holy maid asking mercy at the last our
lord of his endeles mercy gave her an answer and said / dear daughter I shall
show him mine grace for whom you have prayed to Andrewe and said / Dear child
whi wylt thou not beshreue of ye tres pas that thou have done to me / look you
beshryue for I am ready for to forgive the thyn sins / Then was his hard
heart souple by grace that he cried with a great voice to his meyny about him
and said / send for the priest for I will byshryue / For my lord Jhesu crist
has warned me that I should beshryuen /

When his meynye perceived that / anon they went for the priest / the priest
came and he was perfyghtly confessyd to him: and made his testament with great
contrycion he passyd out of this world to our lord Ihesu christ:

O fader of endeles mercy how mercy able ben thy works / and how profounde ben
thyn prouydence whose gracyous werk is ben vnscrutable unto man / thou
suffredest that man to be hardyd in his sins unto the last end femyng that
thou had none torce of him /

But yet at the last thou prouydest for his health / thin servant came to him
for to stere him to grace: And yet al her cou^seylles might not avail to the
meke prayers of thy meke maid thou condescendyst mekely and mercyabyly: And
who gave her that boldenes of heart: but thou who gave her fire of compassyon
in heart for her brother but thou / who gave her the meke teres that bowed to
thy mercy / tree wely none but thou Thou aryssydyst up to thy spouse that she
should bow the to her: Lord these ben thy works that gloryfyest thyn saints:
What is he that will not be coplued to the in love seeing thy mercy so
plentuous*

Loo maidens what mercy our lord showed for meke teres / yet shall I tell you
a merueylous miracle /

It befyll also another time in the same Cite of Seen that there were two
famous thefes and right peryllous the which were take and brought before a
temporal Juge for to be dampened to the pain for the misdeeds: and so they
were put to a cruel tourmente that was called the tourmente of the hot iron
and that was in this wise. They were put in a Carte and tourmentours were ready
with hot yrous for to breune them now in one place now in another of her body
/

And thereto the thefes were so obstynat that neither in prison ne out of
prison there might none creature stere them to be shryue and take penance for
her trespaas / And as they were led by the cite for to make other aferd: they
blasphemed god and all his saintis and specially when they felt brennynge they
cursed the magnyfycence of our lord / so as it seemed by they pain of that
temperall fire that the drew fast to the endeles fire Then our lord Ihesu
of his endeles goodness the which would none body were dampened but all saved he
thought he would let tho wretched sowlis by medyacion of his spouse katheryn
out of dampnacion so that by the ordenaunce of him that this holy maid for
her more quyete was that same day in her felawes house whom she loved
virtuously the which was Alixa whose house stood by the same way where that
this dampened wretches should pass by. Sondenly on the morrow Alyxa herd a
merueylous voice coming by her house / with that she looked out of the wyndowe
and saw all a fire two men the which were dampened to the hot yrens / then
she went in again and told this holy maid and said / O yren / When this
holy maid herd this she went to the wyndowe and looked and turned in again
to her prayers she saw as she said afterward to master Reymound her confess:
sour a great multitude of wicked spirytes about them that brennyd her sowles
within much more than the tourmentours did the body without /

And therefore she was stered with double compassyon for to pray for them to
our lord for to help the wretched sowles out of pain seyeng thus / Ha ha
mekest lord Ihesu why set thou so lytyl by thy creatures whom thou made
to thyn likeness And boughtest with thy precious blood that above all her
bodily torment thou suffrest them to be cruelly tormentyd of spyrytes
wythinforth in her sowles when thou illumynyst so graciously that thief that
henge on the right side / al be it that he took his tourment of the cross
wurthely as he had deserved that he knowleched the very god and man in all
his tourmente / where in the appostles were in doubt: wherefore he deserved for
to here thyn blessed voice when thou saydest thus / Hodie mecum eris in
paradiso / That is* to day thou shall be with me in paradyse: why dedyst thou
this lord* trewely for nothing else: but for you would grant forgyfnes to
such as were like to him / thou despysyd not mary magdalene that great sinner
but thou drewest her to the graciously /

Thou put not fro the puplycane ne the woman of Cananye ne the prince of
pupplycanis zacher But rather thou calledest them to the: therefore by all thy
mercies I beseech the that thou help mercyabyly the souls of the sinners that
been now lad to tourment. Then our lord bowed his mercy to the wretches and
grant this holy maid such gra^e that she went with them in spyryte weeping
and weylyng for to stere them the sonner to repentance / when the fendes saw
that they cried alowde upon her and said katheryne but if thou wylt leave of
thyn ghostely besynes in prayng for these me^ we should so work against the
that you shall travail with a wicked spyryte: To whom she answered again: what
that that god will I will and therefore I shall not leave of that I have bygonne
when these wretches were outward at the gates of the Cite our lord Ihesu christ
appyred to them with his blyssyd blody wounds steryng them to be tournyd /
and thereto byhete them forgyfnes: and so they been of dyuyne light entryd in
to her hertes / and they asked apreste with great instaunce for to beshryue:
and after time they were shryuen / They turnyd there blasphemynge in to
praysyng of our lord ever accusyng them self seyeng that they were wurthy tho
pains and more gretter pains and so with great gladness they went to her death
as they had gone to a great feste / This consyderyd all tho that stood about
merueylyng gretely of that changynge perceyuyng evermore in great deuocio^ of
ye tourme^tours yt they durst no more brenne the^ where they thanked our lord of
his great mercy / For there was none that knew how and in what wise and by
whose prayers this mercy was given /

Nevertheless a devout priest the which her confessor command afterward with
this holy maids confessor merueylynge of the great mercy of god that so soon
turned them to grace / Then^e her confessor asked afterward Alixa this holy
maids felawe how this holy maid was occupied when the man were led to the
death / Then Alixa told him all the process as it is said before: and he
found well by record of her that the same hour katherin left her prayer: tho
me^ dyed and passed out of this world: the which he knew more perfyghtly
afterward by preuy reuelacion of the same holy maid /

After yet certain days after they were passey. some of her felawes herd her
say with a full voice in time of her prayer these words lord Ihesu I thank
ye that thou have delyuerd them out of the second prison it was asked her
afterward what she meant thereby / She said that the sowles of the theefes ben
restored to paradyse / For albe it they went to purgatory after time they
passed: yet she secid never by prayer unto the time they were fully delyuerd
out of pain / Paraue^t now sum ther^en that set lityl by this miracle by
cause if was inuisybyll / but if they take heed inwardly of the words of saint
augustyn and saint Gregory / they should find well that this was more miracle /
than if the bodies had been raised from death to live / For saint gregory said
thus that in the bodily resurrexcio^ the flesh is raised the which shall deye
eftsoon / and when the soul is raised / it shall live wythouten end / yet
shall I tell you another synguler gift of conversation of this holy maid
wan of god / There was one the which was called ^abes among whom there was
one child of his that was called James or Jacob and he was a sinful liver
full of pride and of creuelte / so that yet being young in age he kyllyd two
men full cruelly that every man that knew him was aferd of him ne loved him
not: But every day he lived werse and werse / and had a suster that was called
Shy nochya the which was fully given to vanyte of the world in passing
outrages array of her body albe it she was a maid of her bodi: Her mother ^abes
had thereof great forowe lest they should be dampened for there mysbelyuyng she
went to this folly maid and prayed her that she would vochesaf to speak
somewhat of soul hele with her to her daughter Fracisca and Shynochya but
specially with shynochya / this holy maid as she had ever to sowles great
compassyon granted her that she would gladly and so she did: For what prayer
and monycions of our lord Ihesu Christ was so grounded in the soul that
Shynochya that suddenly she put away fro her all the vanyte of ye world that
she used in pompous array /

And kyt away her here of her head: whereof she was woute be proud of / And
took upon her the habyte of Saint Domynyk and so was made a suster of
penance. And ever afterward she lived in prayers and medytacyons and in great
sharp penance Sone after came her suster Francysca and took upon her the same
abyte / and lived to gyder right deuoutely. Of this herd James or Jacob her
brother that was not ye same time in Seen when his sustren were turned / he
came to ye Cite ward with a young brother of his cursyng and thretnyng with a
great pride all tho that excyted his susters to that abyte. Seeing and cryeng
with a bold spyryte that he would tere away that abyte fro their back and
breng them to his hows there he dwelled To whom his younger brother the which
came with him said / trewely James if thou come to Seen / thou shall be turned
also / and be shryuen of thy sins / with that he cursed his brother bytterly
and said / that he had lever flee both freres and prestys then he would be
shryuen to any of hem all The child oftymes rehearsed his prophecyes / and as
often he cursed: So that at the last he entered in to the Cite as a wood man /
and forth he went to his faders hows thretnyng that he would do great horrible
things / but if his sustren specially Ethynoccyam would do away her abyte and
come home to him All this was not unknown to this holy maid / but she know
it never by creature on earth / but by god.

In the mean while his mother Rabes stylled and peased him / prayng him that he
would abide till the morrow: On the morrow she sent to this holy maids
confessor friar Thomas that he would wouchesauf come and speak with her sone
James And counseyll him for his soul health

He came and with him a felawe friar Bartholomew and spoke to him: But all
their speech as them seemed might not profit in him All that same time this
holy maid Katheryne prayed to our lord for his conuersyon / whiles friar
Bartholomew spak to him:

And then suddenly our lord touched Jamys heart to contrycyon / and he
said to friar Bartholomew that he was well apayed of his suster that she
should serve god: But also he prayed him of confession with great contrycyon /
that he might be shriue^ of his sins and serve god also: He was then so
perfytely shreuen That sum sins which he would never be know ne confessyd
to no man / he was confessyd to him:

So that with Inn a little time after of a wolf he was made a lamb / and of
a lion a whelpe: That all folk that knew him were amerueylled of his sodeyne
tornyng:

His mother Rabes was a meruaylled and all her meyne / and thanked our lord
for that special grace:

Friar Thomas and friar Bartholomew also ioyed in our lord and went for to
tell all this to this holy maid / the which was down / when they were
come to here hows they found her yet in rauyssheng / and her felawe was that
time in her chamber with her / As soon as she was cessyd of her rauyssheng /
and restoryd to her bodily wits / her felawe came down out of the chamber
from her and welcomed her confessor:

Then said her confessor to her felawe: We ben come for to tell Katheryne
that she should thank our lord god:

For James that is turned trewely to god / and is shreuen of all his sins
this morrow tide to friar Bartholomew: To whom said her felawe / right now
Katheryne told me the same that ye say: And when they were were come up to
katheryne she said to them with great sadness in this wise / Faders we been
much bound to thank our savior yt never dyspsed the prayer of his
seruauntis: For the same desire the which he enspyred them with: he fulfilled
in them / The fend wend he should have had away fro us our lytill sheep.
But our fader of mercy has byreiued away from him his pray: he wend to had
away from Christ Shynochia / But he has lost James that he held so strong in
his bonds. For so it happeth ever to him when he reyseth up his head of pride
against Crystis chosen /

Afterward that maid Shynochya ever continued in prayers and holy medytacions
to her last day. And with a great ghostely joy by diverse sekenes ye which
our lord gave her / She passes to our lord out of this world / Then her
suster francisca that lived but lytyl while after followed her in good living
and with a merry smylyng there she passed also to god out of this world:

Ferdermore the said James her brother within a little time after forsook
perfyghtly the world and was made a friar prechours and lived devoutly ever
after / All these things were wrought by the holy ghost and by his spouse
Katheryne granted his grace to all tho yt she prayed for /

Ouermore I shall tell you another merueylous thing that Master Reymound
bears record of him self / In the same Cite of Seen there was a great man
the which was called Nannes and he a wounder wordely wise man more enclynyng
to evil than to good / that man often times because of his great sotyll wit
he loved so much thereto that he made party in the same Cite and great
enstaunce between neyghbore and nyghbore / whereof came a great enmyte and preuy
morderyng the which came by him slyly and by his mayntynaunce / At the last
mean persons came between for to make peace / but he answered ever so wylyly
that he rought never whether there were peace or none as it seemed to them that
herd him / and always he was glad to make vnpeas that he might and to be
avengyd after his desire /

That herd this holy maid katheryne she desired to speak with him for to sece
that evil hatered but he fled her as soon as he knew that she came to him /
Right as the serpent would flee from him that should charyne him: At the last
an holy man the which was called Friar wyllyam of England a friar austyn he
spoke so to him that he graunt^ him that he would gladly speak with that holy maid and here her / But he said he would nothing do as she would counseylle
him /

So then he kep^ his promys and he went to the holy maids house the same
time that master Reymound was there / But that holy maid was not therein by
cause she was gone a little before to procure the health of souls: In the mean
while that master Reymound was therein / there came a messanger to him and said
that Nannes was at the door and would speak with katheryn whereof master
Reymound was glad for he knew well that the holy maid had often times desired
that /

And with that he went and welcomed him and told him that she was out / and
prayed him that he would not think long for she would come anon / And then
they went to this holy maids chapel when they had sytte a while there he
thought long and said to master Reymond. Thus I behete friar Wyllyam / that I
should come hyder and here this holy lady Katheryne speak / therefore sith she
is out and occupied / I may naught abide here wherefore I pray you excuse me to
her / for I have much thing to do / master Reymond was heavy here with that
she was so long / for to occupye the time till she came / he axed him of the
manner of pees the which he knew To whom this Nannes answered* Sire I shall
tell you the sothe / for to thou that been a pressed and a relygyous man / and to
this holy maid / of whom I here a great name of holiness. I shall not lie
but say the sothe. Therefore what that ever I say to you I am not in will to
do by your counseyll. Sothe it is that I am he the which that lets ye pees
by twene him and him and that pees and that pees. And yet it seemed by my dedys
that it am not I that let it by cause it is done by other / but I maynteyn
them pryuely there to / for if I allone would consent to have pees / al should be
well cessyd But I purpose in no wise for to consent thereto / wherefore it
needs not for to counseyll me and preche me / for I shall not consent in any
manner wise Loo now I have told you that I have hid from other / tarry me no
longer and hold you apayed / yet master Reymond prayed him to reherce it
again / for to occupye the time / and he would not / at the last by the
dysposycyon of god the holy maid was come Inn.

When that Nannes saw her / he was right sorry But master Reymond was glad
As soon as she saw that erthely man / she took him with an heavenly charity
and sat down to gydres / and axed him the cause of his coming. Then he
rehearsed to her all that ever he said to master Reymond with the last
negacyon. This holy maid began then to show him what peril he stood Inn
so that she touched him over all / but as a deef serpent he stoppyd the erys
of his heart that he would not here her counseylles / that considered this holy
maid anon. She sat still and turned Inward and prayed our lord in her heart
and axed his gracyous help When master Reymond aspyed how ghoostly she was
occupied for him. He occupied him with sum words hopyng in the mean while of
some help of our lord by her prayers / within a while aft Nannes said to them
both thus. Loo I will not be so unkind / but that I will do nigh all yt ever
ye will bid me / but somewhat I shall grant / and then will I goo fro you. I
have made four debatys which continued yet Of that oo debate I will give you
leave do wi^h all as ye will and cesse it as ye will / with that he roos up and
would have go out / and in the rysyng he said to him self thus O lord what
comfort may this be / yt I feel now in my soul of that word that I spak of
pees / and soon after he said more A a lord god what virtue and strength may
that be that holds me and drawed me now / I may not go hens / ne I may not
deny no thing O who is that / that constreyneth me now. O who is that / that
holds me now with this he wept sore and said I am over come and I may not
wythstonde it. Then he kneled down on his knees to the holy maid and said
with weeping chere.

Holy maid I shall do what ever thou bydde me do: Not only of this matter but
also of all other what that ever it be.

I know well now that ye devil has had me bound in his chain hyder to /
but now I shall do what ever ye counseyl me to do / counseyll my soul how it
may be deliuerd out of ye fendes pour I pray you. At these words the holy
maid turned to him and said. I thank god brother that thou have perceived
what peril thou stodest Inn of the mercy of our lord / whereof I spoke first
to the / but thou ^ettys^ little thereby And then I spak to our lord / and he
herd my prayers. Therefore now good brother do penance for thy sins by times
/ lest a sodeyne trybulacyon fall upon the Then anon with great contrycion
he was shryuen of master Rymond of all his sins / and afterward by help of
this holy maid he made pees with all folk / and also with god by counseyll of
master Reymond. But within a few days after he was take by the Justyce of
the Cite and put in a streyte prison / and it was a common saying yt he should
be behedyd. Then master Reymond herd that / he came to this holy maid with
a sorrowful che^e / and said Loo mother all the while Nannes served the fend /
he had no disease / but always ^speryte And after time now he is turned to god
/ all the world is against him where of I am a ferde by cause he is yette but a
young brau^che / lest he be all for broke by this tempest / and so fall in
despeyre. I pray you therefore pray for him to god / that he whom ye have
delivered from the deuelys pour by your prayers / help him also and defend
him from his adversaries Then she said to master Reymond why be ye sorry for
him for whom ye should be glad. Now be ye seker that our lord spares him
and will relesse him from endeles pain by that temporal pain.

First when he was in the world / the world loved that was his And now he is
passyd out of the world / the world begins to hate him. First our lord
reserved for him endeles pain / but now of his mercy he has changed his
endeles pain in to temporal pain And of his desperacyon be thou no thing
in doubt / for he that has delivered him of hell / will deliver him
gracyously out of this peril / and as she said so it was / For within a
while after he was delivered out of prison / though he had great loss of his
temporal goodys / where of this holy maid was no thing sorry / but was
ioyefull and said that our lord of his mercy has do away fro him the poison
yt he was poisoned with. And at the last he had so many trybulacyons / and his
devotion encrecyd so much that he gaf to this holy maid a fair paleys of his
under his letter and seal yt was two mile without the Cite. Of the which
paleys she should make a monastery of sustres of penance. Then this holy
maid by special license and auctoryte of her holy fader the pope Gregory the
xj made there a monasterye in the worship of our lady to all her ghostly
daughters and called the monasterye the monasterye of our lady. And Nannes that
man the which this holy maid converted was governed ghoostly by master
Reymond and lived after a blyssed life.

Abouen all these matters if I would reherce all the conuersyons of evil lyuers
/ all the roburacyons and the strengthes of seek folk All the comfortes of
desolate folk or them that were in trybulacyons / all the exortacyons of them
that were in ghoostly perellys / the which our lord has meruayllously
wrought by his spouse this holy made. I might make many great books. Who could
tell how many wretched sinful lyuers she has delivered out of the fendes
bondys /

How many obstynate folk she has brought again to their own knowleche. How
many she had made forsake and despised the world And how many tempted folk in
fonle sins she has delyuerd out of the fendes danger by her prayers and
doctrynes. Nevertheless ye shall say as saint Jerome said comendyng our lady
/ I might say that if all the membrys and lym^ys of my body were turned in to
tongues / they should not suffyce for to tell all the fruit of souls / that
this holy maid has purposed to heaven by the help of almighty god / master
Reymond bears this true record / that he saw a thousand or moo both of men
and wymmen coming down fro the mounteynes and other vyllages longyng to the
shyre of the Cite of Seen / coming for to see and here this holy maid as
though they had be called by an Inuysyble trompe / the which not only by
her words / but also by her lokyng were styred to compunccyon for to be
confessyd of all their sins with great contricyon / and so their went two
confessors of whom master Reymond was one as he seyth him self / and they
confessyd her sins with so great contrycion that each man might well know
that there was grace given of god in her hertes / and that was not onys ne
twyes but oftymes.

Wherefore the foresaid Pope Gregorye that was that time had so great joy /
and delight of the wynnyng of so many souls that he granted by bull to
master Reymond and to his felawes / that all thoo the which would come and
vysyte this holy maid / and after desyren for to be shreuen / they should here
them and assoylle them as much as the bishop of the dyocyes might do.
Therefore master Reymond bears record and seyth / that there came many
sinful wretches to him and to his felawes / the which were never shreuen a
fore of the sins / the which they were shreuen to him and to them.

And they stood often times fasting fro the morrow till even / by cause of great
concours of people / and yet they might not suffyce for to here all that would
be shryuen

All that time this holy maid prayed and thanked our lord ioyefully that the
fend had lost his prayer. There is no pen that can express the joy of
her heart that she had that time of wynnyng of souls. Thus much is rehearsed
in this chapter of the ghostly meruayllous things that our lord wrought by
his spouse. This holy maid Katheryne about the health of man's souls.

Now shall I tell you in the next chapter what god wrought for her about the
health of bodies / and so shall I make an end of the next chapter. The
wyttenesse that needs to be rehearsed in the end of this chapter / ben
rehearsed a fore in the same chapter / and that suffyceth enough.

Of sum miracles done in her life by her about the life and health of mennys
bodies. Capitulum viij
I Shall tell you maidens a wonder meruayllous thing. And yette it is light and
esye to them Enough / with whom is found none vnpossybylyte. Lapa this holy
maids mother was a womman of great symptenesse and Innocencye. Yet she had
for that time little affection to Inuysyble things. And therefore she was sore
aferde to dye and pass out of this world. She caught a bodily sykenes / and
it encreced day by day more and more. When this holy maid this understood. She
prayed to our lord deuoutely for her that he would wouchesauf to socour her
mother with health / that brought her forth and nouryshed her. She had an
answer anon from heaven that it was best for her for to pass now out of this
world / or then she have more aduersytees that been to come. As soon as she
wyste this / she went to her mother and said to her wyttely such sweet words.

Mother if our lord sweet Ihesu will call you to him out of this world /
dyspose you to be confourmyd to his blyssed will / and beth no thing sorry.

Then the mother desyryng not for to deye / prayed her daughter to pray for
her that our lord would wouchesauf to grant her bodily hele / and speak
no more to her of her death. This holy maid prayed then our lord hertely and
feruentely that he would wouchesauf take her naught out of this world in to the
time she knew that her will were more confourmed to his will.

Our lord granted her / her axynge and suffered her mother to be seek for a
time / and not for to draw to the passage of death. And then this holy maid
was made mean between god and her mother for to pray that one / and exhort
that other. Our lord she prayed that he would not take her against her will.

And her mother she exorted and admonysshed with sweet words that she should
confourme her and consent to the will of god. Nevertheless though in manner she
bowed our lord to her prayers yet she might not enclyne her mother will by her
exortacyons.

Then our lord spoke to his spouse Katheryne and said. Tell thy mother that
she has now no need to pass out of this world / but time shall come that she
shall desire for to deye / and then^e she shall not have it / and that was sothe.

Hit befyll that she lived in to a great age / and saw many aduersytres in her
days / as well of persons as of their goodys / in so much that she said
often times in heryng of many folk such words. Whether our lord Ihesu has
put a soul in my body / that it shall never be delivered thens So many
children and daughters great and small young and old ben deed / and I may not
deye

Now I shall cesse of this matter and proceed forth in the first matter that I
began Lapa this holy maids mother was of so hard heart that she would in no
wise dye ne by confessyd / ne think in no wise on her soul hele.

Then our lord for to appyre more meruayllously in his spouse Katheryne
denied in manner as it seemed his first grant. And suffered Lapa to draw fast
toward the death without confession When this holy maid perceived that / she
lift up her eyes to heaven with wypyng terys and said to our lord thus. A a
lord god ben thise thy behestys that thou have granted me / that none of my
faders household should perysshe / is this thy mercyable byheste that saydest my
mother should not pass hens against her will.

I see well now that she shall dye without sacramentys of holy church Therefore
I beseech the by all thy mercyes that thou suffer me not to be deceived / and
that I goo not hens a live unto the time thou haste yolde to me my mother
reuyued in soul and body.

These words and these meruayllous cause herd three wimmen of Seen that were
present.

When her mother as it seemed by syghte and felyng was deed / so that they were
about for to go home again to their howses leuyng Lapa there for deed / if it
had not ben that the holy maid prayed as she did / and therefore they abode the
longer. Of the manners of these wymmen I shall tell you afterward.

This holy maid continued long in prayers / at ye last our lord herd her
prayers gracyously / and quyckened the soul and the body again of Lapa / that
she lived afterward unto ye time she was four score year of age and nine with
great torment of heart for many aduersytres that she suffered as it was
prophesied to her before by her daughter this holy maid.

Of this miracle were witness one Katheryne and Angelyna sustres of penance /
and also Lysa this holy maids cosyn they were present when Lapa was leyde
forth for deed and herden how this holy maid prayed to our lord thus.

Lord ben these thy behestys that thou behote me as it is said before. Of the
remeynaunt of her age / when she was restoryd again to life / bare wyttenes
many one. Lo ye maidens here may ye know of what merit this holy maid was
with our lord Ihesu that delivered her faders soul out of purgatory / and
reduced her moders soul in to her body again meruayllously.

Another meruayllous thing shall I tell you. It happened that there was a common
pestylence of bocchys reygnyng in the Cite of Seen / so that it oppressyd
both men and wymmen / young and old to the death / that comynly they dyed
within two days or three at the ferthest / the which sekenes feryd many a man.

Then master Reymond went about to vysyte seek folk / and comforted them
in god no thing chargyng of the Infeccyon of that pestylence touching his
bodily death / so that he might win souls. When he had so vysyted them
for werynes that he had in going about / he restyd him in a church of our
lady / where to he had a great devotion / and namely for the person of the
same church was a blessed liver and well known with this holy maid Katheryne
/ the which person was called Sir Mathewe.

It befyll few days after that master Reymond went out by the morrow for to
vysyte seek folk as he was wont And as he came by the church of our lady for
devotion that he had to our lady in that place / and also for affection that
he had to the person sir Mathewe / he went for to look how he ferde.

Suddenly when he was entered in to the church / he saw sir Mathewe bear up in
to his chamber semynge as he had be deed by vyolence of that pestylence For
he had lost both color of his face and strength of his body / and also his
speech.

Then master Reymond axed of other about what him eyled. They answerde and
said / that the night before about one after mydnyght / he was up for to
vysyte a seek body And with Inn little time afterward he was take with the
pestylence Here of was master Rymond right sorye and followed him up to his
chamber as other did and then ne satte down by him.

Within a while after when he was laid in his bed / he recovered his
spyrytes again and called master Reymond to him prayeng him of confession /
and so was shryuen clean of his sins as he was often wont to do.

After time that he was assoylled master Reymound axed how it stood with him /
and he answered and said again / that it grieved him so sore in his grynde or in
the flank / that it seemed to him / his thygh would fall away / and not only
the thygh / but also ye head fares as though it were departed in four parties
/ by pain and ache that he suffered there Inn.

Then master Reymond touchyd and tastyd his pou^se and found well that he
had a passing fever Wherefore he had his menye that they should bear his water
to leches and so they did But master Reymound followed soon after to know
verayly what the leches would say. To whom the leche said thus.

This man is take with the pestylence / and therefore I dread me that the hows
of our lady shall want and lack a good person.

Then axed master Reymond / whether he might be help by any manner remedy
of medycynes / he said that he should assaye. But he had no great trust in
no medycynes by cause the sykenes was right grievous. Thus master Reymond
departed from him with great sorrow ever prayeng by the way to our lord in his
soul / that he would wouchesauf to save his bodily life Yet a while for his
example to many:

In the mean while this holy maid herd say that sir Mathewe was seek / whom
she loved tenderly for his virtuous living. Anon she went home to him / and
as soon as she saw him she cried to him and said.

Arise up sir Mathewe / arise up for shame / is it now time to lie a bed.

Suddenly then at her calling / the fever and the bocche went away fro him
as though he had never had hem / and then he roos up without any taryeng
goodly / so that in his rysyng he said smylyngly and ioyefully / that the
virtue of god restyd in that holy maid.

Then the holy maid went away and fled the preysyng of men. But as she
went out of the hows / the met with master Reymond. To whom master Reymond
said full sorowfully.

Mother whether thou will suffer this man to dye / that is so dear and
profitable to us. All be it that she wist well enough what she had to done /
yette she said to him of mekenes such words.

Fader what words be these / whether ye wene I am god / that may deliver men
fro death.

Then said master Reymond to her again with a great spyryte for sorrow
that he had of his death Say this to whom that thou lust / but to me tell no
such things that knows how our lord does with the. I know well that what
that ever thou axyste of god thou shalt have.

Then this holy maid bowed her head to him and smyled. And at last she
looked up with a glad chere upon him and said. Be of good chere fader / for he
shall not dye at this time.

With that was Master Reymound glad / he knew well that god had give her
great grace / and so he departed from her and went to sir Mathewe for to look
how he ferde. Whom he found syttyng in his bed / and with gretr joy
rehersyng the miracle of the holy maid.

To whom Master Reymound said in confortynge of him that the holy maid
told him.

Sir Matthew said then to master Reymond. What trow ye she has do / he said
he wist ne^ for she told him no word thereof. Sir Matthew with yt aroos up out
of his bed and sat down by master Reymound and told him all the hole
gladly how the holy maid was there and said to him as it is rehearsed before
Soon after sir Matthew ete and drank none seek mannis mete / but hole ma^nys
mete / and that was a great merueyle / he was mercy and glad that vnne the he
might speak a word that same day in the morrow / Of this miracle were
witness: one Friar Nychol that came with Master Reymound and other prestes
and clerks of the house of our glorious Lady glorious vyrgyn Mary xx. or there
about / But now I pray you maidens takes head that infydelyte off curyous
hertes dysceyue you not in this miracle / Sum will say to you perauenture
that it is none great merueyle though a man be helyd of such a common sekenes
as is the feueres and pestylence for all day such a thing happeth / To whom
it may be asked again what merueyle that was when our lord heled petre his
wyffes mother of ye fevers / al day it happeth that men ben delivered of the
fevers be it never so grievous: why is it than of petris wyffes mother rehearsed
for a miracles in the gospel. But now takes head ye curyous vntrowyng hertes
take heed whether it be not he the which heled this man Mathewe that heled
petris wyffes mother: In helyng of petre wyffes mother he commanded that her
fevers should goo fro her / and so it did anon without any taryeng* And she
then arose up and mynistred our lord at mete

Right so in this miracle it was the same lord that spak in the holy maids
breast the which heled petrys wyffes mother / and so sir mathewe was both off
the fruers and also of the pestylence / What was the cause trow you / trewely
for the mynystracion that he should show to our lord in time coming for
wynnyng of souls / so then the intent following is cause of the miracle that
goth before / and thereto he was made so perfyghtly hole that he ete forwyth
hole mete and mennys mete as thought he had not be seek before now I sithe I
have told you of the miracle done to the health off bodies. I shall tell you
a another by the help of god /

A lytyl beside the Cite of Seen there was a devout woman that was one of the
susters of penance of saint Domynyke the which herd and saw much off the
virtuous living of this holy maid / she drew much to her afterward and was
under the counsel of this holy maid / and did her reverence as to her mother
After it befyll on a day that this devout suster was on hye on a solier of her
house for certain things that she had to do And suddenly the solyer fill down
and the woman underneath * all the raftre treys brosed so her that she was
draw out half ded or soon after to be deed / At the last by the help of
god she was brought to bed and began to reuyue and felt that pain of her
heart brosour: and complained her sore with weeping and weylyng / Leches than
were sought to do the besynes for to hele her* but yet for all her lechecraf
she might not turn her in her bid without help of other: When ye holy maid
katheryn herd thereof / she had compassion in heart of the suster and came to
her and comforted her in penance and in her dysese / But when she perteyued
that her dysese was so passing pain to her

She touched the places of her body that were paynefull as though she would
anointed them with her hondes:

Of the which touching the suster was well apayed supposyng faithfully by the
mercy of god that it should be to her great ese / She had not so soon
touched her side but that she was all hole as though she had felt before none
pain / Then the seek suster prayed her that* she would touch the oder side
as she did ye side by cause the holy maid then supposed that it was ese to
her / She did so as she badde her and in the same wise her dysese went a way
in that place after her touching as it was in the other side: so then at the
last the holy maid touchyd over all her body there she felt dysese / and all
dysese was clean a voyded / At the last when she was all hole she turned her
about by her self wythouten any help that all might see verily by her tokens
that she was fully hole: Nevertheless yet she held her peace till tfe holy maid was a goo lest she should have troubled her mekenes if she had told
it her i^ presence / but afterward she told it both to leches and to
neighbors and said thus katheryne the daughter of Lapa has heled me by her
touching / All they had me rueyle thereof and thanked god that had give
such gracious virtues to the holy maid katheryne / For they wyste right well
that the holiness might not come but of god and therefore they thanked him / This
miracle Master Reymound knew by tellyng of other: But now I shall tell you of
anther yt master Reymound him self knew and saw it

In that time when the great pestylence continued in the Cite of Seen as it is
rehearsed before: there was an holy recluse in the Cite of Seen and was called
Scu^s that louyd the which was touched with that same pestylence: when this
holy maid perceived that she ordained that he should be brought to the house of
our glorious lady glorious vyrgyn mary the which was called also ye house of
mercy where she her self with her felawes vysyted him and ordained for althynge
that was needful for him in his sekenes and at the last she came to him her
self and told him preuyly in his ere and said thus / Fader dread you not for
thou shall not deye for this sickness at this time / but she would tell not
thing of this to Master Reymound and to her felawes the which prayed her to
pray for him that he should live / For it seemed to them that she was in doubt
off his life as well as they were / and therefore she ordained for him medycins
for to be heled by: wherefore Master Reymau^d and all her felawes were sorry by
cause all they louyd that holy man for his good living: Then at the last his
sekenes encresed more and more and drew fast to the death as it seemed: whereby
all that saw him supposed he should deye and prayed for the good passage of his
soul:

And also the holy man wend he should have deyed right anon / In that same
point of death this holy maid came and rouned in his ere and said to him ye
second time / fader dread you not for you shall not deye at this time for this
sekenes he understood her well all be it yt his wits were in party dystraut and
alienyd fro him for the greuousnes of the pain and he gave more credence to
her words then he did to his actual pain of death / and so it fill
afterward that the holy maids words o^came ye deeds of kind and nature /
Nevertheless he continued in such transite passing ye common time of other mani
days to gyder / but at ye last as ye spirit was in passing as it seemed /

The holy maid came and said now ye third time in the seek mannys ere thus

I charge the spyryte in the name of our lord Thesu Christ that thou pass not
/ Anon the spyryte resorted quycly again to the body / And then the holy man
took strength to him: and ros up and asked mete so within a little time he
was all hole and lived / Afterward that the holy maid was passyd out off this
world many years that holy man yt was called Scu^s both in name and in deed /
After time he was hole he told to Master Reymound and to other more what the
holy maid said to him in time of his sekenes preuyly in his ere / And he felt
the might of her virtuous words whereby the spyryte was called a gayn that was
in the point of passing

And he afermed it to all folk that it was none natural cause that restoryd
him again to his life but only the might of god I showed by his spouse katheryn
/ To whom folk gave credence by cause he lived in great virtue of holiness and
was known a famous man in the Cite of Seen by xxxvj year. to gyder without
any repreue in his living:

Ferthermore maidens I shall tell you of another miracle that this holy maid wrought in master Reymound After time that the great pestyle^ce was so
breme in the Cite of Seen as it is rehearsed a fore that all folk fled by
cause that it was so infectyf. So that men and wymmen deyed, without comfort
and counseyll and keeping master Reymou^de bythought him that he was bound to
love mennis soul castyng none peril for his one bodily death by enfection of
that pestylence purposed him to goo about the Cite and vyseted seek folk and
comforted them and did it in deed / Nevertheless by cause he was alone in
party in so great a Cite for to visyte and comfort the seek / that uneaths he
might have time or space for to ete and to rest. He was so sent after fro
one house to another /

Soon after in a night it befyll he took his rest and was wakyng at a certain
hour for to serve god: He felt a greuau^ce of a pestilence both in his grynde
or flancke: and for fere he durst not arise but lay still and by thought him
off the passage out of this world / he desired gretely that it had be day
that he might goo and speak with this holy maid katheryne or then he were
more seek. In the mean while he had a fever and the head ache as the manner
was off that pestylence sekenes so that he was gretely payned and tourmentyd /
But yet he said his matyns as he might: when it was day he called to him his
felawe and went to gyder as he might to the holy maids house and found her
not at home for she was out to vysyte a seek body /

In the mean while him thought she was so long and he so seek that he might
no thing do / but lay down there in a little bed / prayeng all tho that we
ren in the house that they should send for her as soon as they might / She was
sent after and came anon and perceived yt he was sore seek / she knyled down
before his bed and crossed him on the forhede with her hand: And then she
began to pray as she was wont to done in her soul / Master Reymound beheld
how she was rauysshed a fore him hoping of som^e synguler grate for the
prouffyte of his soul or of his body abode her long as him seemed / within a
half an hour afterward or there about he felt all his body sterid to
avomite: wening yt he should have cast. But yet was it not so / but him
thought that out of every* part of his body was pulled out with a manner of
vyolence sum manner of corrupcion / And so began to wexe better at ese than he
was / yet or than the holy maid was fully restoryd again to her bodily wits
he was all hole save a lytyl fevylnes bylefte in him / After time this holy
maid had purchased of our lord that grace of the health she se^yd of that
rauyshyng and badde her felawes should ordeyne sum mete for him / when he had
received mete of her holy hondes she badde him lie down and ^este a while he
did so as she badde him: And wha^ he awoke / he was as strong as though he
had not be seek / Then^e the holy maid said unto him / fader gooth and
labors now for the health of sowles thanketh almighty god that has
delivered you fro this parylle: he went forth to his custumably besynes and
thanked god that had give such virtue to his blyssyd maid / Such a like
miracle our lord wrought by this holy maid to Friar Bertylmewe in time of the
same pestylence / But yet that miracle was ye more by cause her long time was
oppssid in that sekenes than Master Reymou^d

And by cause it was in all wise like else / therefore I pass over and reherce
it not: But I would ye understood may dens that this holoy maid showed not
oonly the dyuyne miracle of curacion in time of pestylence but also in other
times / and yet not only in the Cite of Seen but also in other places But
therefore one I shall declare at this time whereby ye may understand all other
if ye take heed wytely thereto

It befyll soon after that the general pest^lence the which is rehearsed before
/ ye many folk both men and wymmen as well relygyous and seculer / But
specially certain mynchis of the Cy^^ of ^yse herd of the famous name of this
holy maid katheryn desyreden to see her and here her speak / And by cause it
was notlefull for them to goo out and seek her therefore they prayed her as
well by lettres as by messengers that she would vouches ^f to come to ^yse
seyeng to her that there she might win many a son le the which should be to
our lord great worship / Albe it that this holy maid eschewed always for
to go fer about the contre / yet she was so often prayed with so many
messengers or messages that she was almost constr^yned thereto by prayer of
lettres and messages: Then she had a recource to prayer as she was wont to
done and asked our lord mekely declaracion of that doubt that she stood in
and what she should do / sum off them that were counseyllers to her said
that it was best for her to goo: and som^e said nay: within a few days
afterward she had an answer of our lord as she beknewe afterward to master
^eymound that she should not tarry: but algatys she should goo to speak with his
seruauntys and his spouse dwelling in the same Cite of Pyse: Then as a t^ewe
obedyencer by leave of Master Reymound her confessor she went to Pyse whom
followed afterward Master Reymound with a certain of his bredren for to here
confessyons: For many there were that came to her wha^ they herd her speak so
^eruent words of love / were steryd thereby to contrycion / And le^t they
should be let fro true conuersacyo^ and fall again in to the fendes snares
after such co^puccion she would beidde them go to confession and be shryue
without any taryeng / And by cause her confession was often times delayed for
defaute of confessors / therefore often times she desired that she might have
confessors by her to whom she might send such repentance: And therefore
Master Reymound and his two felawes had power of the pope by bull for to
here and assoyle all tho that were endu^ed to confession by this holy maid:
Wha^ she came to Pyse she was received in a burgeys house that was called
Gerardus the which Gerad upon a day brought with hi^ a young man of xx year
of age all seek of the fevers to this holy maid besechinge her that she would
pray for his health for he told her that he was vexid. xviij / months to
gyders with the fevers so that it was none day but that he had it / And
thereto it was so mighty to him that it had brought him so low / and that is
well seen by his chekes and by his body: And^^ might never by none medecyn be
made hoole / Then the holy maid had great compassyon in heart of that
young man / she asked him how long it was a goo that he was shryue of his
sins and took penance / he said not many a year / therefore it is said she
that our lord has give the this ^oorge for thou have not purged thy soul by
holy confession so long time. Therefore sone goo forth anon to confession
and cast out that venim the which enfecteth all thy body: when he was
confessyd and ^ame to her again she put her holy hand upon his sholders and
said to him thus. Goo sone in pee^ of our lord ^hesu christ for it is his will
that thou be no more vexed with tho fevers as she said it was fro that time
forward he was not vexed therwyth. Within few days after he came again to the
holy maid / and thanked her of her curacion and said openly before a^ folk
that he had never the fevers sithe she a voyded it by the virtue of our lord /
^ff this bears wytnes Master Reymound for he saw that miracle: And other
witness there were ynow by Gerad and the childs mother and many other
afterward the young man puplychid that miracle by all ^^e contree such another
byfyll in the Cite of Seen / but much more* merueylous by cause the sikenes
was more perylous /

There was a suster of penance of saint Domynyke in the same ^yte off Seen
that was called Gemina the which loved well this holy maid: she had a sekenes
of her throat the which was called the s^ynce / by contynaunce of time the
sekenes encresyd so that it made her throat so straight that vnethe she might
draw her brethe* but almoost often times was strangelyd / Then she went to
this holy maid and prayed her as she might speak seyenge thus / mother I
shaldeye but ye help me / this holy maid had so great compassyon of her
that she took her holy hand and crossed her throat*

And anon without any taryenge the sekenes avoided: and so she that come with
great sorrow: went home with great gladness / And told it soon after to her
confessor /

But by cause sum what I have told you of curacions done to the body by this
holy maid to diverse persons therefore I shall tell you now of a great
notable miracle that our lord wrought ^i this blessed holy maid /

It befyll that this holy maid went in a time fro Pyse to Auyoun with whom
went two good devout young men that wrote the lettres that this holy Maid
would send: The one was called Neryus that afterward ^as a devout recluse.
And the other was called Stephene that was afterward a monk of the charterhous
/ And a good vyrtuous liver thereto / to the same ^yte of auyoun went als^
master Reymou^d It happed when they were entered in to the Cite of auyoun the
foresaid Neryus was seek with a merueylou^ sykenes in his bowellis that he might
have none rest / neither night ne day / But cried and wayled often times and
he might not lie in his bed but creped about on hondes and on feet and sought
rest / and yet might none find

This was told to the holy maid and she badde master Reymound send afleches
to help him: For other comfort would she none give master Reymou^d did so:
and there was none leche that might ese him but rather he was the more payned /
I trow for that end allone by cause our lord would work that myrarle in his
spouse katheryn / At the last leche said to master Reymou^d yt they might not
prouffyte in him / And therefore they had none trust in his lyffe /

When Master Reymound had told this to his company as they sate^ at the
mete Stephene the fellow of Neryus roos up with a great spyryte and went to the
holy maids chamber sytyng down on his knees and prayed her mekely that she
will not suffer his fellow Neryus to deye in such a strange contree:

To whom this holy maid answerde thus / sone why art thou heui thou sholdest
not be sorry for thy felawe / For our lord will reward him in bliss for his
pacyence in sufferyng of that sekenes / Then^e he said again / dear mother yett
here mine prayer at this time and help him for I wot well ye may and ye will /
Then she said well sone I see well that thou art not in will to conform the
to the will of god as I have told the / Therefore sithe I see that thou art so
tourmentyd for him / come to me to morrow when I go to here mass and be
houselyd and reduce this matter to mine mind / And I shall send up thyn prayer
to god / And thou shall pray for me that I may be herd Then stephen was
well apayed with this vyheste^erly / on the morrow / he met with this holy
maid going for to here mass / As Soon as he aspyed her / he fyldoune on his
knees and prayed her that she would not forgete him of that he spoke to her the
day before.

After time when she was ho^elyd she was rauysshed from her bodily wits and
prayed our lord for that seek man:

Soon after she was restoryd again to her bodily wits and came to the same
Stephene smylyng the which abode her there of an answer and said unto him
thus: Sone thou have the grace that thou have asked / Then he asked her
whether Neryus should be deliuerd of his sekenes She said ye: with that he went
gladly to his felawe and badde him be of good there for he shall be hole / and
so he was full tendaunt about for to recover him / In time of his
mynystracion about hi^ it happed the same Stephene to be seek and lay down in
his bed of a passing fever / When the holy maid knew that she had great
sowwe and went to him and asked him what sekenes he had: And she perceived by
touching of his ponse that he was vexed with a strong fever: Anon with a
great fervor o^^ spyryte she said thus / I charge the fever by the virtue of
obedyence that tho^ goo out of this man / then went the fever a way and he
wos up all hole with out any taryeng / and thanked our lord of his great
grace that he showed to his spouse Katheryne. Another notable miracle I shall
tell you of a suster of penance / the which was called Johan dwelling in the
Cite of Seen In a time that our holy fader pope Gregory that lived that time
was in the cite of Seen at the byddyng of our holy fader Gregorye / this holy
maid was sent to Florence to make pees between him and his rebel children of
florence / ye which mat is to long to tell here But this matter shall hau^ a
chapter by hit self afterward by ye help of god And when she was come to
Florence / and with her a felawe of here is / the which was called Johan / for
to trete for the pees between our our holy fader / and that rebel people. The
people set little by her words / but s^laundred her meruayllously and set
her at naught. Then ne she was counseylled for to withdraw her a while unto
the time that they were cessyd of their malice. She did so / but yet she said /
that she would never pass out of that cite in to the time they were accorded /
and pees were cried thorugh out all the cite of Florence / and as she said so
it was. Then she went a side and was lodgyd a little beside the cite / where
suddenly her suster Johan was seek in her foot / so that her foot was all
forswo^land there with for pain of her foot / she had a great ^eruent axes /
and so she was in double wise tormented that she might not goo with her. Thy^
holy maid was heavy thereof and would in no wy^e leave her behind / le^t
s^launder should spryng

She prayed to our lord for help / that he would wouche^auf mercyably to help
her fel^we / all the while that she prayed her suster was a sleep And when she
awoke she was all hole as though she had I had no sykenes. Anon she arose up
and went with this holy maid as quykly as ever she did before. Of this miracle
many one thanked our lord that saw it / the which had wrought so gracyously
by his spouse Katheryne. Yette shall I tell you another meruayllous thing that
our lord wrought by her in the cite of Tholetane. When this holy maid was
entered in to the Cite of Tholetane / she took her Inn / and anon she went in
to her chamber as she was wont to do In to ye which master Reymond was come
on the popes message. Suddenly then he herd in the stretys of the Cite of
wymmen / that an holy womma^ was come and entered in to the Cite Then ne soon
after came men / and after wymmen to her Inn and axed where this holy maid
was. They of the Inn might not hyde her / but they suffered wymmen only to goo
in to her and speak with her.

Then there was one of the wommen that had a little child / whose whombe was
meruayllously swolle. And they prayed this holy maid that she would take that
child in her arms / at the beginning she refused it / by cause of vayn glory
/ but at the ^ast she was overcome by pity / and did as they had her / as soon
as she took that child in her hondes / anon ye child delivered from him
much wind / so that at last his belly aswagyd / and was as small as ever it
was / and so the child was hole. All be it that master Reymond saw not this
miracle / yet there was so open speech thereof in the Cite of Tholetane yt it
came to the bysshopys ere / and sent after master Reymond and prayed him that
he might speak with ye holy maid / for the child was neuewe to a vycary of
his. And than this holy maid came and spoke with the bishop of many virtuous
matters. Many moomeruayls our lord wrought by this holy maid that been not
written in this book.

But these few I have written to you maidens by cause that ye shall the sonner
give credence that our lord Jhesu Christ dwelled in this holy maidens soul /
the which principally wrought all these meruayllous werkys / wytnes of tho
matters ye which ben reherced in this chapter ben reherced before in tho places
where these my racles were showed / and thus ends this chapter.

Of miracles wrought by this holy maid a boute the delyueraunce of them which
were encombred and vexyd with fendes. Capitulum lx
Owre lord all mighty Ihesu cessyd not to show outward ye Fertue that he gave
Inward to his spouse Katheryne by many meruayllous works. The virtue therefore
of our lord Ihesu christ angmented so myghtly in the breast of this holy maid /
that not only it was showed to seek bodies as it is reherced before / but also
it was showed in voydyng of wicked spyrytes as it shall be declared in this
chapter by the help of god. There was in the Cite of Seen a man / the which
was called mychael that used the craft of writing / when he was passed in years
of age by consent of his wife / he was in purpose to leave ye world / and serve
our lord more specially then he was wont. And also for to make two daughters
of his mynchyns in a monasterye in the same Cite of Seen endowed in worship of
saint Johan the Enange list and so his list was fulfilled. And at the last by a
pryue dome of god / one of his doughts the which was made a mine then that was
called Laurencyana of vill year of age or there about / was vexed with a fend
so yt all the monasterye was vnquyeted by her vexacyon. And at ye last by common
assent they sent after her fader and delivered again his daughter / for they
would no more have her in the monasterye as long as she was so vexed.

When she was take out of the monasterye / the fend spak within her by ye
childys mouth many wondre things and all in latin words / so many herd
questyo^s and there to pupplysshed many pryue sins in sclaunder of many folk
/ by ye which it might well be understand yt he was no good spyryte Of this
vexacyon her fader and mother and other of her friends were right sorry / and
went about to diverse relyques of sentes for to seek help and grace that her
daughter might be delyuerd of that spirit And specially they trusted gretely
in the relyques of saint Ambrose the which was a friar prechour / to whom our
lord granted a synguler gift / to put away wicked spyrytes / so that his
cope if it had be laid upon any creature that had be vexed with a wicked
spirit it should be avoided / where fore the same child was brought to the
friar prechours and leyde upon a tomb of saint ambrose / and his clothes were
leyde to the child / and the fader and the mod prayed in the mean whyl the
help of god and of ye sent yt the child might be socourre. But yet for that
time were they not herd. Not for no sin that ever they did But I trow be
cause yt the syguler remedies was reserved to this holy maid. Then was it
counseylled to the fad and mod for to present her daughter to Pratheryne the
holy maid / they sent to ye holy maid prayenge her yt she would help their
daughter. And she sent ageyn answer and said / that often times defayled and
departed a sonder and my soul was utterly delivered out of the body
Nevertheless it was but a little time and that was my sorrow. Then ne
eftesones master Reymond axed her how long time her soul was out of the body.
She said as they that kept her and were about to have beryed her four hours
or then she reuyued ageyn Yet he axed her what she saw for that time / and
why came the soul again to the body she answered thus Fader that time my soul
saw and understood joy of blessed sowles / and peynes of sinners. And as mine
mind would suffer me and words would suffyce to express them / I shall tell
you. My soul saw the divine essen cyall being of god / and that is the cause
why I am so loathe and impatient to live in this world / and had not be the
love of him and the love of christian people / for which my soul was restoryd
to the body again / I should had defaylled and dyed for sorrow. The highest
comfort that I have is when I suffer any disease / for that I have the perfyte
vysyon of god / therefore trybulacyons ben not heuysom to me / but comfortable
as ye may know / and other that been conuersaunt with me I saw also the peynes
of dampened sowles / and peynes of sowles that been in purgatory / the which I
can not express perfytely with no manner of words. For if wretched sinners
saw the least pain that is there / they had lever chese bodily death an
hundred times if it were possible / then for to suffer o day the least pain
that is there. But specially I saw hem ponysshed syngulerly that had sinned in
matrymony / the which had not kept hem to gyder honestly as they should do
/ but followed the dylectacions of their lustys

Of this master Reymond her confessor axed her why that sin in special was
more grievously punysshed then o there sins / sith it so is that it is not
the most grievous sin She said for this skylle. For they had not so great
conscience of that sin ne so great contrycyon as they had of other sins /
but rather they offended in that sin then in any other That sin the
which a sinner charge not for to remove / by penance is a great sin be it
never so little.

Then this holy maid proceeded forth in her matter and said thus also. Fader
wha^ne I had seen all these joys and these peynes wenyng my self that I had
fully be delivered out of this body.

Our lord said to me / see thou not daughter what joy they lack and what
pain they have that offenden me. Torn ageyn therefore to thy body and tell to
the people their error and their peril. And with that word I was astonyed for
to torn again to the body and sore aferde.

Then our ford said to me / it is profit to mennys souls that thou torn
again / and thou shalt not live the life that thou have lived a fore ne keep
the so lytarie allone in chamber / but thou shalt goo a broad to win sowles
/ I shall ever be with the / and goo with the both going and coming. Thou
shalt bear the worship of my name and of ghoostly doctrine before great and
small and lay people and clerkys and a fore Relygyous folk also I shall give
the both mouth and wit for to speak that none may wythstande the. I shall
also bring the before bysshoppys and curates of sowles for to confound there
pride. Whiles our lord spak these words suddenly my soul was restored again
to my body.

And when I perceived that I had great sowwe / that I wept three days
(...) end of this chapite / It needs not for to reherce the witnesses of
every act that was done in this chapter / for it is made mention of forthwyth
at every act i^ the same chapter /

Of miracles which our lord wrought by this holy maid in breed / wine.
herbs* and other things that had none lyff: Capitulum xj
BY cause at the beginning wha^ Adam was made our lord ordained a rewle to all
tho that obeye^ to him perfyghtly / that all things should obey to them.
Therefore maidens in this next chapter I shall tell you how to this holy maid
obeyden all creatures by cause she obeyed perfyghtly to god: In the time that
this holy maid lived in the Cite of Seen: it befyll yt there was a wedowe a
young woman called alixe the which with a great favor drew to this holy
maid / so that she thought she had so great affectyon ^o her* that as her
seemed she might not live without her: And therefore she took the habit of the
susters of penance and for soke her own house / And hired her an hows by side
the holy maids hows that she might the more often be conuersaunt with her.
When she had do thus the holy maid was often times in her house with her /
and fled for a time her faders house / It happed afterward in ye same year
that in the Cite of Seen there was a great sharsyte of breed corn so ye
stynkyng whete was drawn out of the earth and out of dyches the which was
bought of Cytezynes of the same Cite as that time for good where by cause there
might none other begoten for none price / Of the which stynkyng whete / Alyxe
the sorsayde wedowe must needs be ye / or else she should be without br^d /
Neu^rtheles in as much as it was nyghe ye time of herwest her old whete was
failed and brought to the marcat Alixe wist thereof that new whete was comen
she purpose to cast away the old s^ynkyng whete and beye new: but because
the hole Maid was in her house she would nothing do without counseyll of her
wherefore she opened her purpos to her semyng thus / mother sithe our lord heth
do mercy with us in syndyng of new whete I am in will to throw mine old
s^inkyng whete* To whom this holy maid answered thus / if ye will not ete of
that old corn / give it else to pour folk yt haven none* Alixe said than yt
she should have great conscitence for to give the pour folk so stynkyng
whete she had lever for to give them of the best whete

Then this holy maid badde her ordeyne water and bring to her that stinkyng
whete that she purposed to cast away for she said that she would make bread
thereof for pour folk / as she said so it was / First she made her dowe and
after she molded loves of that little qua^tyte of whete: And it encresyd so
plentuously in the moldyng that both Alyxe and her servant weren gretely
astonyed that sagen such multyplycacio^ of loves For as them thought so many
loves might not be made of such four little quantyte of whete as this holy maid made and set forth for to be bake / and also there was none stynche of
tho loves as it was of the other that were made of the same whete before / when
they were bake they were set fourth on ye table for to be eten: and in ye
etyng there was found none bitterness no stynche / but as they said that eten
thereof / they eten never betyr bread. This Alexe sent for her confessonr and he
came with certain of his brethren for to see* that miracle and like as it was
said to him in quantyte encresyng and in qualyte right well amendyd: To these
two my^acles / the third was addyd to and that was this / the breed was
largely given to pour folk and to other yt would ete thereof and yet was it
never ye less in nombre / but always was it found ynow in ye breed hutche:
were not this trewely three fair miracles / for first she put away the stynche
of that corn: and afterward encresyd the loves in the muldyng / and at the
last she multyplyed ye loves in etyng of the breed: in so much that they
might uneath be distribued by many wekes togyders neended / so yt xx year
after or moo there were sum yt kept of that breed for a relyke:

Then master Reymound her confessor asked her how ye miracle was done / She
answered and said that she had so great zele or love to pour folk lest they
should spylle for defaulte and so tender love to our lord lest his gift should
be despised that she went with a great fervor for to make breed of that
stynkyng whete:

And then our blessed glorious lady glorious virgyn Mary with a multitude of
angelis stood by her and help her to molde / by virtue of her holy glorious
hondes she trowed that the loves encresed / for tho loves that our glorious
Lady glorious vyrgyn Mary molded / she delyuerd to this holy maid / And she to
Alixe and to her servant for to be put in to the oven: what marvel is it
maidens though tho loves were sweet sithe the holy glorious hondes of our
blessed glorious lady gloryons virgin Mary molded them / consydereth therforre
good maidens and takes good heed of what merit this holy maid was to whom
vouchesaf our blessed glorious lady glorious vyrgyn mary stand by her and
help her in that miracle for to make us understand that right as bodily
lyuelode encresed in that holy maidens hondes / Right so ghostely liuelode
should encrese by her blessed exortacion:

Now sithe I have begone of breed multyplyed by miracle therefore I shall
continue forth in such in such in such a like miracle was done in the last
end of her lyff when she lived here in earth: Of the which miracle were
witnesses lysa her cosyn and a suster of penance the which was called Johan
for both they were with her when she was sent after by our holy fader pope
vrbane the vj to the court of Rome / And when she was come to the Cite she
r^sted there with a certain nombre of her ghoostely children that she had
noryssched in virtue the which followed her fro the parties of Tuskan in manner
against this holy maids will / som^e for prechyng of ghostely grace of our
holy fader / and sum for pilgrimage and visitacions of saints the which
desired to go specially in this holy Maids company by cause they might be
fed with the swetnesse of her blessed conversation /

Then this holy maid had made an ordinance among them that they should
not have about them neither gold ne silver. But oonly they should live of
pour alms / And that they should be herbourd in an hospytall /

And also the wymmen eueryche off them a weke should mynys^re lyflod such as
they had received of alms to all^ her felawes that other myghten be
occupied in the mean while in prayers / and in holy contemplacyons and about
their pylgrymages / wherefore they were come to the Cite When this ordinance
was made / soon after it happed that this Johan / the which is reherced before
mynystred to other as for her weke. In whose weke it befyll casuelly that she
lacked bread when her felawes should go to mete / and then badde this holy
maid here before / that when she lackyd bread she should warn her over even
that she might goo and make sum ordinance. But Johan had forgete that / when
her felawes were come to mete Johan would have set bread before them / and she
found no more but a cantell that would uneath se^ue four to their mete / and
there were in nombre of persons xvj Then Johan went to this holy maid and
knowleched her negligence all sorry and shamefast / seyeng that there was no
bread but a little that uneaths would suffyse to four / each of them to
resteyne a little. To whom this holy maid said A suster god for give it you /
why have ye so neglygently brought us to this last need / might ye not have
warned me as I bad you / well well bid gods servants go sytte down

Then said the mynyster that there was but a little bread / yet bid them
sytte down said this holy maid to her / and serve them with that little / and
bydde them begin with that little till that god ordeyne more. After these
words the holy maid prayed while they et^. Johan fulfilled her byddyng and
divided to every man a little / and they as hongry folk and gredy by long
fasting ete fast / wenyng that they should no more mete have. And also the
suposed that that little bread should soon be do But always they had ete
enough / and yet the bread might not defaylled And then they axed what the
holy maid did / it was told that she prayed Then they said all by virtue of
her prayer our lord fed them as he fed five thousand men with five louys /
and so they thanked god. When they had all ete / yet there was such plente
left that pour folk had enough.

Now yette shall I tell you of another miracle that master Reymond bears
record of / the which was done after time that this holy maid was passed out
of this world in to the bliss of heaven. In a time hit happed master Reymond
by counseyll of the Pryour of the freres and the covent / would do sum
solemn reverence to the head of Saint Katheryne this blyssed virgyne / after
time that it was translated out of the Cite of Rome to the freres that dwelled
at Seen. He set a day and bad to mete all her ghostely children that she had
nourysshed in virtue. In the which day the freres were fully auysed to give
her a solemn reverence / and also to feed that day all her ghoostly children.
When the day was comen and the solenpne was done. The friar that kept the
botrye of the covent looked what bread he had for the Covent / and for the
gestys / and he found scarsely enough for half the Covent And then were
there in Covent fyfty or there about and of gestys twenty / when the Pryour
herd here of he was sorry. Nevertheless yet he served the gestyn first with
that little / and then the Covent with a little quantyte among them all / and
yet belefte enough So then eueryche of the Covent and of the gestys had
plenteuously enough / of that uneath as them seemed that little nombre of louys
might had suffysed fyfe a fore. When they had all eten / the Pryour and the
Covent came thither there master Reymond satte with the ghoostly children of
that holy maid Saint Katheryne / and rehearsed a fore them all that miracle.
Then said master Reymond these words. Loo friends this holy maid Saint
Katheryne in the day of her solempnyte will not leave us without sum miracle /
with whom she was so famylyer whiles she lived in earth. Often times when she
was with us living in this life she showed this miracle among us And therefore
for to show us that she now accepts our obseruaunce this day done to
gods worship and to herys / she had showed the same miracle eftesonys after
her passing / wherefore yield we thankyng te almighty god. Yet furthermore our
lord showed meruayllous things by his spouse Katheryn in vnlyfely things / as
in flowers where in she had often times great delight by cause she florysshed
in virtue her self. And in other vessels of household that were lost and
destruyed and of thoo meruayllous things I shall tell you.

This holy maid was sum time in the Cite of pyse / herborowed in a worthy
man's hows of the same Cite / the which man loved well this holy maid.

After time she was there a while / she was gretely feblyd in body by often
excess of spyryt in rauyshyng / so that as it seemed master Reymond and other
moo that saw her. She was brought nigh to ye death / wherefore master Reymond
was fore aferde lest she should have dyed / he bethought him what remedy he
might ordeyne for to restore her to longer life / and he wist never what he
might ordeyne for her as for eggs and wine / and also other letuaryes he knew
well that she might not ete. Then he came to her and prayed her that she
would receive a little suker in her water that she drynketh / to whom she
answered thus. Fader I see well that ye will take away fro me that little life /
the which is left in me by such sweet drynkes / for I do you well to wete
that all sweet thingi^ to me dedly Then master Reymond and the souerenys of
the hows bethought hem to gydres what remedy they might ordeyne against her
feblynes At the last it came to master Reymond mind that he had see that
often times feeble folk had be wesshen / sum time with vernage about the
temples in the pouses of the body / and so were restored of strength and
greatly comforted Then master Reymond said to the souereyne of the house
thus. Sir sethe it is so that we may not put no comfortable remedy within
her body / let us* use sum remedy without on her body. Then said the
sovereign of the hows / that he had a little beside his hows a neighbor that
had a vessel of vernage / to whom he said / he would send to for to have
a botell full thereof / for he knew well that he should have it full gladly. A
messenger was sent to him / and told him how this holy maid was feeble /
wherefore he prayed in his maystrys behalf that he would wouchesauf to send her
a botell of vernage. To whom the neighbor answered thus that he would send
him all ready / but certain he said his vessel was emptyd / and therefore he
prayed him to hold him excused / for I wot well in all my hows is no drope of
wine / and that I am right sorry fore. Nevertheless to be seker come and see /
and then bear witness of the troth to my friend as thou see.

Then forthwyth he took the messenger with him all against the messengers
will / and brought him to his wine seler / and showed him that same vessel of
vernage / the which vessel seemed by outward tokenys that it was void many
day before / yet nevertheless the good man did more for to see the truth that
it was void / he drew out the spygot / that was in the vessel / and drew it
out in his presence / that he should see that there was no wine Inn. As soon
as he had done so / the vernage came out and ran upon the ground
plentuously / he was sore astonyed and stopped the vessel again / and called
all his meyne / and axed of them whether they had put any* wine of vernage
in that vessel. All they said nay / they knew no wine there in three monthys
a fore and more. And it had be a great meruayll that without them any lyquor
had be put there Inn.

This was af^rward notefyed to the neghboures about / and all they said it
was a miracle as it was The messenger came again with a great meruayll
gladdenes bryngyng with him a botell of vernage / and told all the miracle as
it was / so that all thoo that herd it thanked our lord that wrought such a
miracle in his holy maid Katheryne / and many one aftward when this holy maid
was hole / came for to see her / seyeng with great meruaylle such words / how
may this be that drynketh no wine by miracle. By such words of the people /
this holy maid caught great sorrow in her heart as she knowleched afterward to
master Reymond. And with such sorrow and waylyng / she prayed to our lord in
her soul more then in her mouth seyeng such words: A good lord why
suffrest thou me to be so tormented in heart that I shall be to all folk shame
and reprove. All other servants of thine may live among the people save I
allone. O good lord who axed of thy myldenes wine. I by Inspyracyon of thy
grace have kept me fro wine long time And now I am made to all people for wine
in s^orne and reprove / I pray the lord for thy great pity / make that wine
for to vanysshe away / that this same which is deuulgyd among men now
cesse. Our lord of his mercy herd her prayer and made the vessel of wine to
decrece / so that suddenly there it seemed full to all men's drynkyng the which
drank thereof of devotion by cause of the miracle it was decrecyd to the lies /
and so all tho that praised it before for miracle / held there pe^s afterward
for shame* And master Reymond and other moo of her ghoostly children were
ashamed of their great praysyng before. But the holy maid was Jocunde and
glad thankyng our lord her spouse that had delivered her of such open
praysyng of men.

Now I pray you maidens takes he de how our lord kept this holy maid from
vain glory / and set her in a perfyte ground of meekness by these two
miracles. By the first he gave her matter to worship him that wrought that
miracle without her wetyng in that / that he filled ye vessel of wine. By the
secounde he gave her matter to follow him in mekenes / in puttyng away of vain
glory / the which was put upon her. By the first our lord showed what
virtue of miracle she was endowed with By the secounde he showed what wisdom
she was fulfilled with. For there that mekenes is / there is wysdom.
Nevertheless yet the secou^de miracle in emptyng of the vessel was gretter
then the first in fyllyng of the vessel / and that seemed well by a
simylytude that Saint Gregorye makyth in his dyaloges betwyne the virtue of
pacyence and showing of miracles / whether he seyth that the virtue of pacyence
passes showing of myraclee. Why then may not the virtue of true mekenes /
the which is never without wysdom pass with out any comparyson showing of
miracles / the which come as well by pride as by mekenes. A bestely man may in
no wise perceive this / and that is no meruaylle. For Saint Poule said that
prudence of the flesh is in no wise subject to god. Loo maidens now have I
told you what miracles our lord showed by his spouse Katheryne in vnlyfly
creatures / and thus I make an end of this chapter The witness of this
chapter also ben expressyd before with Inn this chapter there that the
miracles ben declared.

Of the often receyuyng of the holy sacrament of the altar / and of the
meruaylles which our lord did to her touching the holy sacrament / and other
relyques of saints. Capitulum xij
IT was known to all that knew this holy maid while she lived in earth / what
excellent love she had in reverence and devotion about the worshypfull
sacrament of the aultre.

Our lord his flesh and his blood so that for the often receyuyng thereof /
hit was a common seyeng among the people that Katheryne the holy maid was
houselyd every day and lived there by allone without any bodily mete. And all be
it that they said not always truth / yet I suppose they told it mekely
gyuynge honor to god that ever apperyth meruaylous to his chosen Nevertheless
be cause she received it so often / all be it that it were not every day / yet
there were sum that grutched with all / against whom may be brought wytnes
enough of holy faders that they did the same. But first I shall tell you what
the use was of holy church in old time. Saint Denis seyth in a book that he
made de ecclesiastica Jerarchia / that in the beginning of holy church / the
feruoure of the holy ghoost was so haboundaunt in the hertes of feythfull
creatures both men and wo^men / that they received the sacrament of the
altar every day Furthermore the doctrine of holy church techeth this / that
every feythfull man is bound in no dedely sin if he have actuell devotion /
it is not only lefull for him / but also merytorye for to receive that
excellent worshypfull sacrament Whoo then durst forbede such a feythfull
person and such an holy liver in any manner wise for to win so often great
mede in receyuyn^ of that worshypfull sacrament. Trewely I doubt not thereof /
but that such a creature had great wrong if it be denied when it is mekely
vxed. But if they would say utterly / that it is not lefull to no creature be
he never so feythfull / ne never so perfyte ne deuote for to receive that
blyssed sacrament often. To this I shall tell you what answer this holy maid
gave to a bishop in presence of master Reymond that said these words
aforsayd to her. Alledgyng for him the words of Saint Austyn where he seyth
thus. Every day for to receive the sacrament of the altar another I praise ne
blame it* to this obyeccyon answerde this holy maid in this wise to the
bishop. Fader if Saint Austyn blame it not. Ye alled ge that holy doctor
against your self.

Ouermore now shall I tell you what Saint Thomas A^uyne seyth of this doubt /
whether it be spedefull to a christian man often times or every day for to receive
the sacrament of the altar. He answers thus thereto / that often receyuyng of
that blyssed sacrament / encrecyth the devotion of him that receives it / but
it lessyth other whiles his reverence that he should have to that blyssed
sacrament.

Therefore every feythfull Christian man should have both reverence and devotion
to that blyssed sacrament And when he feyleth that his reverence is lessened
by often receyuyng of that blyssed sacrament / he should absteyne a while /
that he might go thereto afterward with more reverence. And if he feel his
reverence ever hole and never lessened / but (...) encrecyd with devotion / as
o^ ever he receives it. Then he may sekerly receive it. For truly without
any doubt such a soul well dyspesed wynneth much mede in the receyuyng of
that blyssed sacrament. This holsom doctrine of this devout and holy doctoure
Saint Thomas kept this holy maid Katheryne For often time she received that
blyssed sacrament. And sum time she absteyned her there fro. All be it that
she had ever desire to be knytte to her spouse by medytacyon of the blyssed
sacrament / for the brennyng charity where by she was draw to him / in so
much other while she desired to be houseled.

That but she had received that day when she desired that blyssed sacrament
she should have a passion of syknes in her body / as though she had be vexyd
long time before with a contynuell sekenes of fever / and all that sykenes of
the body came fro the passion of the soul. Many times she was thus vexed
when she was let from houselyng / other while by the Pryoure of the freres
/ and other while by the Pryoresse of their order of her susters. Nevertheless
by cause she should not be let / our holy fader the pope Gregorye the xj for
her more comfort granted her by bull that what priest h^rde her confession
might housell her in what place that he would say mass without any leave of
any souereyne.

Of one meruayllous thing now shall I tell you yt befyll to master Reymond
this holy maids confessor. In a time when master Reymond came from Auyon to
the Cite of Seen / and thought to look how this holy maid ferde / he entered
in to her house about none days and found her in her oratorye. And this was
on Saint Markys day the Euangelyst / as soon as she saw him she rose against
him and said to him these words. O would god fadre ye wist how hongry my soul
is* Then master Reymond answered her / for he wist well enough what she
mente. And said mother it is now all most paste time of syngyng / and I am so
weary that uneath I may dyspose me to sing With that she held her pees a
little while. And soon after she brack out again the same words and said /
she was sore an hongred.

Then master Reymond went to mass in her own chapel that she had by
license of the pope / and said mass of Saint Mark. And when he had used he
turned for to give this maid general absolucyon / as the manner of holy
church axeth. He saw her face like the face of an angel sendyng out bemys of
bryghtnesse / in so much that he meruaylled and said in him self to ou^e lord
thus. This is not Katheryns face. But certain lord this is thy dear spouse /
with that he turned him to the altar / and said this words to our lord in
his soul. Come lord to thy spouse / anon as he had said that in his thought
suddenly with the same thought / the oste rose up him self and came to his
hondes

Another meruayllous thing of this blyssed sacrament I shall tell you / that
befyll to the same master Reymond. He was in a time in the Cite of Seen for
certain things that he had to done / and as soon as he had done / he
went for to speak with this holy maid and found her syke of a sykenes in her
side the which was called Ilica passio / and of other gret^ infyrmytees of her
body / de syryng that same day to be houseled if her sykenes had be cessyd.
And after time master. Reymond had commyned with her of the great excellence
of the blyssed sacrament^ of the altar / he went home to his Covent for to say
mass And as he made him ready to masseward / this holy maid sent to him by a
felawe of here is / and prayed him to abide a while / for she would be houseled
that day when her sykenesse were passyd away from her. He did so and abode her
leysyr till it was about none time / this holy maid was esyd and came to
church for to be houselyd. But her felawes considered that the time was late
for to be houseled / then by cause she had it in custom for to abide
afterward three hours or four to gyders in rauysshynge or more So that the
church doors most all that time stooden open / of the which custom many of
the freres grutcheden / therefore they counseylled her not for to be houseled
for grutchyng of sum of the freres. To the which counseyll this holy maid
mekely and obedyently conc^tyd

But for her great desire that she had to that blyssed sacrament / and might
not receive it she prayed our lord deuoutely in the ferrest place of the
church / unknowing to master Reymond that she was come / and there she prayed
in this wise. Lord Thesu endeles mercy as thou have give me gracyously this
desire. So I beseech the perfou^me it by thyself / sith I may not perform my
desire by no priest. Then almighty god that never despyseth the desire of
his servants / herd his spouse Katheryne not only mercyably. But also
meruayllously as I shall tell you. When she had comfort of our forde / she
sent to master Reymond by one of her susters and prayed him to goo to mass
when it lyked him / for she might not be houselyd that day.

Then he went to mass supposyng that she had be at home at her hows / and
not in the church. And when he had sacred / and would make the fraccyon a
fore Agnus dei in three partys as holy church has ordained. Meruayllously as
he wend to have made iij partycles / he found four partycles.

And that fourth partycle skypped above the Chaleys and come down be it self
/ and laid it self upon the corporas / as it seemed to master Reymond. But he
could never find it afterward.

For many times he sought there after both that same time / and also when
mass was down / wherefore he made great sorrow in his hert^. When he had de
so dylygent^ly sought it over all about the altar beside the altar and
upon the ground At the last he bethought him to ask counseyll of the pryour
of ye place hereof / the which pryour loved and dred our lord god right much
/ covering in the mean time the altar that none body should come there unto the
time he should come again. But suddenly as he was going to the pryour come to
him a special friend of his a pryour of the chaterhous preyng him he might
speak with this holy maid katheryne for certain matters. Then Master
Reymou^d prayed him for to abide a lityll time till he had spoke with the
pryour of his covent. And he would come anon again He said he might not tarry
by cause it was a solemn day among them and needs he must be at home at
the mete and thereto he had a mile home wherefore he prayed him for gods love
to tarry him not for his conscience constreyned him to speak with this holy maid katheryne /

Then of charity he left his own need and with his special friend to this
holy maid katheryns house wenyng yt he should have found her there: but her
felawes answered him that long a go she went to church and come not home yet /
When master Reymond herd this he was admerueylyd and came again to church
with his friend and found her there in a corner of the church knelyng and
rauysshed as she was wount to be / and sum of her felawes with her /

Off whom he asked how long that holy maid katheryne had be there: they
said all this mass time and more that he prayed them for to excite her
as soon as they might for his friends is come for to speak with her / And he
might not tarry / When she was cesyd of her rauysshyng / master Reymound took
her aside and told her of his dysese under few words by cause the other man
his friend should not be let / Anon she smylyd upon master Reymound and
askyng him thus gladly / Fader sought ye not all about / he said yes / Then
she said why have ye so great sow we therefore: And with yt she smiled ^ft /
^^is and went so forth for to speak with the pryour off the charterhous: In
the mean time master Reymound abode somewhat I comforted / but not fully unto
ye time he wist how it might be so away:

When she had full do with the Pryour of the Charterhous and delyuerd hi of
an answer that he came for. She turned her to master Reymou^de again /
Then Master Reymound said to her thus / Mother I too we it be ye that has
away that partycule of the holy host: she with smyling said nay but it was
another that took it away from you and therefore be ye no more sorry therefore /
ne for it ne seek no more for it for I tell you ye shall never find it: Then
Master Reymond prayed her that she would tell him al hole how it might be: To
whom she said thus / Fader take no more sorrow for that partycle for if I shall
and should say the soth to you as to mine confessor and mine ghostely fader
that partycule was brought to me and I received it by ye reverend hondes of our
reverend lord almyhty god sweet glorious Jhesu christ And I shall tell you the
cause why / This day I was in purpos with a great desire for to be houseled /
but mine felawes gave me counseyll for to cese that I should not be hoseled in as
much as som^e grutched with all: After whose counseyll I wrought and was purpos
for to cese / but mine desire was so great thereto / yt I prayed our lord
almighty god of help / and he in his own reverend person aperit to me and
gave me that partycle with his* own reverend hondes: And therefore fader be
not sorry there is none necligence in you as for that pertycule / After this
reuelacion Master Reymound was right ioyefull by cause the thaghte of his
concience was put away from him: Such myr^c^e our reverend lord almighty god
showed in the reverend holy sacrament of ye au^ter by the merytes of his hand
maid holy katheryne of Seen / Also there were many other feythfull folk and
true that said* they ^awe often times wha^ Master Reymo^de houselyd this
holy maid kathery^e of Seen the sweet holy ghooste flede out of his hondes in
to her mouth the which Master Reymound perceived never save this he perceived
that / The sweet reverend host made anoyse in her mouth when she had received
it / a^ though a stone had be cast in her mouth from a far contree / Now
thus shall I make an end off the great merneylousnes of that reverend sweet
holy sacrament of the altar and tell you of diverse miracles that befylle to
this holy maid saint katheryne of seen about certain relykes of saints. This
holy maid katheryne of Seen had onys a reuelacion as she told pryuely to
Master Reymound her confessor that she should be set in the same degree of
joy in the bliss of heaven / And be felawe with saint Agnes the which was a
suster of the mount of Pollycita / Wherefore this holy maid katteryn of seen
desired often times with all her heart for to bysyte the relykes of saint Agnes
But now ye maidens by cause ye shall know how bertuous a liver that saint
Agnes was when she was here in earth / I shall tell you shortly under few
words: This holy maid Saint Agnes suster of the mount of polly^yta the same
time that she should be borne off her mother there was in the chamber there her
mother chylded a great merneylous light that all th o the which were in the
same chamber might clerly see it / And when she was born it cesyd By this ye
may know of what merit she should be in the sight of our reverend lord
almighty god afterward that so soon in the beginning received the merueylous
light of our reverend lord almighty god: After time she was born she encresyd
virtuously more and more in all time of the years and at the last she made two
monasteryes of maidens and lies berye^ in the town / in the which is showed
by our reverend lord almighty god in her co^tinuelly many wou^derful miracles
And among all other miracles wha^ she was passid out of this world her body
was not buried but left upon earth all hooll without any corrup^ion: Wherefore
other devout folk that knew her by her ly^^e consyderyng how many merneylous
things our reverend lord almighty god showed in her / would have bawmed her
sweet body / that it might so be k^pte upon the earth with miracles and when
they came to bawme it / they saw how there came out of the toes of the feet and
of the fyngers of the hondes drops of bawme / the which bawme is kept yet
in to this day for a relyke among the susters of the same place / This
miracle was showed for this cause / that all folk should know that she had
none need for to be bawmed outward when our reverend lord almighty god had
bawmed her within forth / Ferthermore the same hour yt she passed out of this
world in the time of the night infantes both maid children and other as they
lay in her moders beds cryeden and sayeden that now suster agnes is passes
out of this world and is a saint in^heuen: On the morrow these in fantes drew
them together in a company and would suffer none corrupt child come among
them and went each of them as in pro^^ssyon with candeles in her hands to
this monastery where su^ter Agnes passed out of this world ofofferyng to that
maid maydenes oblacion / Many moo miracles our reverend lord almighty god
showed by that holy Maid saint Agnes in the sight of all people / wherefore she
is had every year in great reverence with devout oblacion of many brennyng
tapres for to see that holy maids body / this holy maid katheryne of Seen
took leave of her confessor as as child of obedyens and went to that
monastery there she lay / whom followed her susters and Master Reymou^d for to
see what miracle our lord and almighty god would show in metyng to gyder of
peace two glorious vyrgyns and maidens and his chosen spouses: When she was come
to the monastery she went to the same place there she lay and knelyd down /
and began to bow her head for to kiss that holy vyrgyns feet: with that
bowyng down the holy vyrgyns body off glorious Agnes lift up by miracle her
own foot as hye that the holy maid katheryn of Seen should kiss it without
any bowyng of her body or head / This miracle saw all the susters of the same
monasteryeland also the susters off penance with this holy maid katheryne of
Seen. When the holy maid katheryne of Seen perceived this / she was ye more
meke: and bowed the lower / And than this holy maid and vyrgyn saint Agnes
drew down her leg again and her fete and laid it as it was first: Another
time this holy maid katherin of Seen came again to vysyte the sweet holy body
of this holy maid saint Agnes and brought with her two cosyns of here is young
maid children for to make the^ ^usters in that monastery: there for to serve
our lord almighty god / And when she was come*to the monasterye: She went
there ye sweet holy body lay of glorious saint Agnes / and knelyd not at the
feet as she did the first time / but at the holy head eschewyng mekely as it
seemed the eleuacion of her holy feet as it was do first / And as she knelyd at
her head she laid her cheke to the sweet cheke of this holy maid glorious
Agnes long times to gyders / But wha^ she had so long tarried / she turned
her to her cosyn Lysa the which came with her and other moo of her susters and
said in this wise: Lysa why perceive ye not the gift off our reverend lord
almighty god has give to us out of heuene / why be ye so unkind with that
Lysa and other susters of here is looked up / and saw manna reyne down out of
heaven covering both glorious saint Agnes and the holy maid katheryn of Seen

And also other that stood about / So that Lysa filled her hondes with that
same white seed of manna.

This miracle appieryd not wythout^n cause / For glorious saint Agnes when she
lived in earth was wounte to have that token out of heaven when she prayed to
our reverend lord almighty god / So that sum of her susters saw ^er
mantell all white when she wos up fro her prayer and unknowing what it might
be and would have shake it away from her mantyll and she forbode it them full
esely / And also it was do for another mystery* Glorious saint Agnes knew
well that this holy maid katheryne of Seen should be felawe with her in heaven:
And therefore she began to felyshyppe with her in earth and worship her also
with that token that was wont to appe re to her when she lived in her body. By
that manna is understand puryte and mekenes for by wytnes of that manna is
understand puryte and clennes of maydenhede: and by the lytelnesse of greyne
of that man^a is understand of the mekenes of maidens that they should have /
That puryte and that meekness was right haboundaunt in these two maidens saint
Agnes and this holy maid Katheryne off Seen / As for that witness of the
miracles I showed in this chapter was Lysa and other susters of hers and also
susters of the same monasterye where these miracles weren showed / Ouermore as
for witness touching the miracles off the holy sacrament of the altar was
master Reymond her confessor / and another master of dyuynyte the which was
called Berthylmewe and other mo many moo miracles our glorious lord almighty
god showed by his holy maid katheryne and by this holy maid saint Agnes
whiles they lived here in earth the which ben not written in this book but that
is written herinne / is written to the worship of our glorious lord god and
health of soulys: And thus I make an end of this chapter of this holy
legende of this holy maid glorious saint Katheryne of Seen to the honor
worship and glory of all the glorious trinyte: Cui referantur lauds honor
et gloria in secula seculorum Amen /

Explicit secunda pars gloriosissime vite gloriosissime virginis Katerine de
Seen:
Here begins thr third book and party wherein is rehearsed the deyenge off
this holy maid glorious saint katheryne of Seen and of her miracles that were
showed after her death / And first of all of the witness which were present
at her passing and informed the auctor of this book which and what they were /
Capitulum Primum
When this holy maid katherine of Seen was sent to the Cite of Florens by
our holy Fader Gregory xj / the which was that time pope off Rome as it is
rehearsed before in the second party for to make peace betwyne our holy father
the pope and his children of Florence: she found them vnobedyent and rebel
where and among whom she suffered much persecucion in so much yt one of
them drew his sword and would have smyten of her head so wood he was with
her all be it thought he were let by the virtue of our glorious lord almighti
god And yet notwythstondyng such persecucion she would never goo thens unto
the time that peace was cried thorugh out all the Cite of Florence / And that
was not by pope gregorys days for he dyed in ye mean time* but it was by pope
vrbans time and days ye which was pope after him in whose time the peace was
made / And after time the pope was made she went home again to the Cite off
Seen / And bylefte in her own house full dylygently about the making of a
certain book the which the swte glorious holy ghost endyted by her mouth in
her own langage. She prayed her writers the which wrote the book yt they
should consydere besely that she tells the^ in time of her rauysshyng and so
she bad them write / Then she went and prayed / and sone after she was
rauysshed from her bodily wits and in that rauisshyng she spoke many swehe
words: ye which words the writers wrote as she spoke and so compyled a book
full off profitable sentence as our sweet glorious for almighty god told her /
In the which endytyng one special thing and a merueylous was showed / And
all yt was comprehended and written in the book was endyted by her by diverse
times in time of her rauysshyng and never else so that in that same time that
she was so rauysshed she saw none bodily sight with her eyes ne herd with
her eeres / ne swellyd with her nose / ne none of her bodily wits / neither
had her bodily workynge for that time yt she was in that rauysshyng / By this
ye may co^sydere and understand that ye book was not endyted by none natural
kyndely wit / But only by the infusyon of the sweet glorious holy ghost / ne
I doubt not that all tho the which be understanding men and dylygently
search the sentences shall read that book and of that book they shullen say the
same that I say After time she had made that book / our holy fader pope
vrbane the vj: that knew this holy maid in auyoun and had great deuoucion in
her words and in her virtuous living sent to Master Reymound her confessor
that he should stere her to come to Rme for to vysyte the sain^^s that been
there / Master Reymounde did so: but she was so full of dyscrecion that she
answered again in this wise Fader many of this Cite of Seen and also of our own
susters by cause of mingoyng about hider and thither ^en sklandred thereby and
seyn that it is not semely to a Relyous maid for to go so about / all be it I
hope to our glorious lord almighty god that I have not offedyd in mine going
about / For by obedyence of our glorious lord almighty god and by his vycar in
erther and for the health of soul I went thither that I went. And therefore
leest I ben to them matter of sklander by mine own will I purpos not to remeue
out of the Cite

Nevertheless if the glorious lovely Crystis vicar will algatis that I come his
will be done and not mine. And thereto I pray you goo to him and pray him that
he vouchesaf to send me word by you of his will that they the which ben so
sklandred by min going about / Now ye may clerly know that I took not that
journey upon me by min own will / Master Reymound went and told to the pope
all this matter / and he sent again by him that she should come by ye virtue of
obedyens / Then as soon as she herd this com^au^dement as a true douhter of
obediens she spedde her fast and came to Rome with a great company both men
and wym^en and many moo would have come had she not forbede the^ / * When our
holy fader ye pope saw her he was glad and ioyeful and he desired yt she should
seye som^e word of exortacio^ to ye cardinalis yt weren there present: namely
for the scisme ye which began the same time / And so she did full virtuously
and made each of them steadfastly strong with many sweet words and sentences
and counseylled them that they should not dread for nothing notwythstondynge
the scisme the which began / but to stand myghtely and dread noman / and
proceed forth in things yt longen to our glorious lord / for he is mighty ynow
to mayntene them: when she had made an end of her words our holy fader the
pope was glad and rehearsed her words tournyng to his Cardynales and said /
Loo brederen the more vnfeytfull we be / the more reprouable we ben in the
sight of our glorious lord almighty god / this woman has shamed us all. she
should rather be aferd tha^ we by cause she is a woman / yet in that we be
aferde she is not aferde but conforted us with her good counseyls: Certain we
ought all to be ashamed / wherefore should our glorious lord god Ihesus Crystus
vicar be aferd* Trewele though all ye world were against him our glorious lord
god Ihesus christ is myghtyer then it: And it is not possible that he will
forsake his church / with such words and many moo like these / our holy
fader the pope comforted the Cardinalis and commanded this holy maid in our
glorious lord god and granted her for her self and for her friends many
special graces Within a few days afterward it came to our holy fathers mind
that he should send this holy maid katheryne with a another maid that was
called katheryne and was one of the ghostely daughters of saint Brygytte of
swethe / the which saint Brygytte was canonysed by pope Bonefas the ix* to
dame Johan the queen of cycely that openly rebelled against holy church and
gave great favor to Scismatykes / that both two maidens ye which were well
known with the queen of Cycely should wythdrawe her from her error / Then
this holy maid katheryn of Seen herd this: she would in none wise wythdrawe
her fro this holy obedyens but oblysshed her self for to goon The other
katheryn of swethe in no wise would take that iournaye upon her but refused it
in presence of master Reymound / Then master Reymound bythought him that
the fame of holy maidens is right tender and a little ^^otte of sin thought
they be not gylty therein Is sklaunderous to them / Also he thought that she to
whom these maidens should be sent might by counseyll of her and many about
her to lie awayte in ye way that these maidens should not come to her presens
and so to be let off her purpos: And also they maidens might not escape
without a great sklander al be it they might be gyltles: these thoughts
Master Reyymound told our holy fader / To whom our holy fader answered and
said thus / thou seyst well master Reymou^de / It is better they goo not than
goo / After this time master Reymound went and told this to this holy maid:
/ Anon she turned her to Master Reymound and said thus with a mighty voice
/ Fader if saint Agnes and saint Margarete and other maidens should have
thought thus / they should never have had the crown of martyrdom / whether we
have not a spouse that can deliver us out of the hondes of wicked men and keep
our clennesse among the fylthy company of lecherous meyny: all such
thoughts ben but veyn thoughts: And come out rather of the defaute of little
feythe then of very wisdom: All be it yt Master Reymound was thus made
ashamed of his imperfection / yet he had a great gladness of her perfeccion
consyderyng and nothing in his heart the stedfastenesse and stabylnes of her
faith: Nevertheless by cause that our holy fader had ordyned that tho two
maidens should not go on that Journay he durst no more meue to him of the
matter. Loo maidens this is rehearsed here by cause ye should know how steadfastly
this holy maids foot was set in the feyth of perfeccio^ Furthermore when our
holy tader had ordained that these maidens should not go / he ordained that
master Reymonde should goo to France. Supposyng that he might torn king
Charles out of his error by enbassatour between / but year might he not. For
the kings heart was so enduratin malice / and would not torn / for he began
to be auctor and begy^ner of that scysme. After time master Reymond knew the
will and intent or our tader / he came to ask counseyll of this holy maid
what were best for him to do then all be it yt she was loathe to want his /
presence / yet she gave hy^ coun^eylitor to obey to the byddyng of our holy
fader: And among all other things she said: thus to him Fader understands
his for treuthe. This pope Urbanis very Crystys vycarye in er^he / and for
d^^ence of this treuth preceth and puts you ^orth as ye would for the feyth
of holy church. All be it that master Reymond understood this well before /
yet she made him ye strenger and more steadfast in his labor for when he was
most in dys^ase he had her words in mind / and so he took the holy
obedyence upon him. But a latell a fore that he went / this holy maid co^myned
with him and told him four hours. or five to g^ds of the reuelacyons and
comfortes that our lord showed to her but a little before / and when she had
do* she said this words. Fader now goth and our. lord speed you for I trow
we shall never in this life speak so much to gyder as we have do now. And like
as she said so it / was. For or then master Reymonde came again / she was
passed out of this / world / furthermore by cause that she would fully take her
leave of him she went personally to the same place / there he should take his
Galey. And when they began / to row she kneiyd down and prayed / and /
afterward blyssed the Galey with weeping chere / and said pryuely that other /
herd to master Reymond Thou lone shall go save / for the cross shall keep
the but thou shall never see thy mother in this life. And as she prophesied so
it was for there were many enemies in the ^ee and yet they went save away from
them and also in the mean time that he was out. this holy maid passyd out of
this world But first or that I tell of her blyssed passing out of this world /
I shall reherce to you the wytnes which were at her passing / and knew of
the miracles: that our lord showed here in her passing The names of the wymmen
that were most contynuell with her be^thy^e. Allexe of Seen sister of penance
of S^y^t. Domynyk / the which was a perfyte dyscyple of this holy maids / and
followed her in all as^yte of penance / as nygh as she / could / so yt this
holy maid or thenn^ he should pass told her all her preuytees / and
ordained her for to be a mother to other after her dyssece: This same Allexe /
enfourmed master Reymonde when he: was come home / and other of this holy.
maids passing / for she lived not long. after. The second wytnes was
Francysca of Seen this Francysca had a devout soul to god and to this holy
maid / with an hertely love wherefore when her. husbounde was deed she took the
abyte of penance and was made sister of Saint Domynyk: This Francysca
enfourmed master Raymonde when he came / home and many other folk of this
maids passing and then she deyed soon / after Allexe The third wytnes was.
Lysa her cosyn / the which I will notte commend / all be it she was right
true by cause she was this holy maids brothers wife where by should behold
suspect / in her wytnes among men. further more there were many men in her
passing the which beren true record othyr bussed end But four in special
I thy^ke to rehearse here ye which were right virtuous men. The first was
called friar Sanctus / the which was both holy indede and in name. This holy
man forsook all his kynne / and came to Cite of ene Where he lived virtuously
xxx year and more an ancheres life. And when / he herd speak of this holy
maid he was styred to speak with her / and so he did for to be enfourmed of
her. And at last he thout that it was better to walk out of / his cell for to win souls then for to be so enclosed. And so he did by counseyll he went
out and followed this holy maid and wan souls to Christ / but specially he
was present with her at her passing This holy man enfourmed master Raymonde
also when he came home of the passing of this holy maid / and soon after he
dyed. The second witness of men was a young man in age / but he / was old in
virtue / the which was called Barductyne. This young man forsook all his kynne /
and followed this holy / maid and was with her till that she passyd / whom she
loved yettenderly / by cause he was a maid and that was no meruaylle / for it
is semely that oo maid should love another. To whom this holy / maid said
and chargyd him that he should be governed by master Raymondis counsel: For
this cause I trow she did it in as much as she knew well of god / that he
should not long live after her / so that he did of tesyk / but first he
continued long therynne / and was amended by medycines / but at the last he
did thereon. And by cause that master Raymonde dread him that the air of Rome
shol^e enfecte him he sent him to Seen where he passyd out of this world /
and / they bear wytnes yt were at his passing that when he should pass he
looked up into heaven / and began to smyle / and so with that smylyng he passyd
/ So that after time he was passyd / the tokens of gladness appyred in his face
I trow it was therefore / by cause he saw her whom he loved so charitably
come after him.

This Barductyne also enfourmed / master Raymonde when he came home of th^s
holy maid passage. The thryde wytnes of men was also a young man: the which
was called Stephen that was one of this holy maids writers / ye why / she
wrote both her letters that she sent. and also hyrbook that the holy ghost
endyted by her. The which young man this holy maid called to her when she
should pass and said thus. Sone it is the will / of god that thou be a monk
of the Charterhous / and therefore I charge the that you so do As she bad him so
he did / and lived ever afterward a perfyt life for he hadno felawe of
perfeccyon in that Relygyon / and as soon as he was professyd / he was. made
Pryor of ye same house that he was. shorn Inn. And afterward he was made
Pryour in another place of the same order at melayne and visitour of the order
This young man Stephen wrote certain things that happed in the passing of this
holy maid and e^tfourmed afterward master Raymonde of the same / when he
came home. The fourth and last witness of men that were at ye passing of this
holy maid was one / the which was called Raynerus the sone of a worthy man
Landocte of Seen. This man after time that this holy maid was paste / was a
devout recluse that ever afterward lived a blyssed life / he was also one of
the writers of her lettres / and of her book that the holy ghoost endyted by her

He was the first of men that forsook his kynne and followed this holy maid /
and by cause he knew her virtuous living of long time / therefore master
Reymond called him to him / and made him a special wytnes in making of her
Legende / and his felawe also Stephen pryour of the Charterhous. These men and
these wymmen enfourmed master Reymond when he came home of the things /
which was done in his absence as well of tho things that she did or that she
paste as of tho things that she showed and did in her passing / and thus
ends this chapter.

Of meruayllous things which befyll a year and half to fore ye death of this
holy maiden / and of the martyrdom that she suffered bodily of wicked fendes /
where of atlast she had her bodily death. Capitulum secundum
AFter time ye master Reymond went fro this holy maid as it is rehearsed
before / by the byddyng of our holy fader the Pope / she belefte in the Cite of
Rome / and what that our Lord deed for her or that she deyed / and showed to
other how holy of living she was / and also what joy he gave her or she passyd
out of this world I shall tell you.

Leave it well maidens / when this holy maid perceived that so much disease
encrecyd in holy church by the scysme / yt was begone / and perceyuyng also
that Crystys vycarye suffered great disease / she wept day and night / and
prayed to our lord for the pees / that he would wouchesauf to set pees in holy
church. Then our lord comforted her in some manner of wise for the year before
and an half or she dyed our lord gave double vyctorye to holy church / and
to Crystys vycarye the pope as well of the castle of Saint Angel that was in
the Cite of Rome / the which was in scysmatykes hondes in to that day / as of
the people that held the castle in the name of scysmatykes / that were ye
same day take / and the castle yolde.

After that our holy fader the pope that might not dwell in Rome as he was
wont by cause of the enemies that were in the Castle of Saint Angel know
this / he came to this holy maid and axed her counseyll what he should do.
Then she gave him counseyll that he should go barfoot and all the people of
Rome with him to the mynster of Saint Peter thanking our lord god with good
devotion of that grace / and of that benefetys the which he had do for them.
Thus holy church began to quyken / and the holy maid had thereof great
comfort. But soon after her sorrow began to encrece eftsonis for that the
fend might not do by strayn gers / he assayed for to do by them that were of
the Cite of Rome. He made a dysoorde between ye people of the Cite and the
pope. That perceived this holy maid she prayed to our lord that he would
wouchesauf put to his mercyable hand / and suffer not that cursyd sin be
done And as she prayed / she saw the Cite full of fendes styryng and excytyng
the people to kylle their ghoostly fader / and cried horrybly to this holy
maid all the while she prayed / seeing to her thus Thou cursed wretch thou
art about for to let us / therefore we shall slay the with an horrible death.
To whom she answered no word / but prayed more besyly and more fervently axyng
of our lord that he would wouches auf for the worship of his holy name / and for
remedy of all holy church that then stood in great meshyef / keep her and
his vycarye without harm / and not for to suffer the people do such a sin
and so to put away the fendes fro their purpose / the which steryng the
people there to. She had an answer of our lord / and it was this. Daughter
suff^e this people / that every day blasteme mine holy name / for to fall in to
this sin / that I might so dystruye them for their cursed wretchydnesse for
my ryghtwysnes axyth that I should no more suff^e their wyckydnes. Then she
prayed more fervently with such words and said. Mekest and myldest lord /
thou know well how thy spouse holy church is dyseased and tormented /
almost thorugh out all the world and that is routhe. Thou know well also how
sewe helpers and defenders she has / and therefore now if they slay thy vy
carye as they ben in purpose / hit shall not only be grievous to this people of
Rome but to all Christian people Thempre therefore good blyssed lord thy
ryghtwyse hand and despise not thy people that you haste bought so de^ with
thy precious blood / but torn thy mercyable hand and cesse this myshyef. In
this prayer she continued many days to gyder as she wrote to master Reymond
by a letter ever our lord alledgyng his ryghtwysnes and she axyng his mercy /
and in all that time the fendes cried ho^^ybly upon her as it is rehearsed before
/ so that she was feeble for afflyccyon / yt but if our lord had kept her
strength / her her^e should to borste / at last she said to our lord these
words. Lord sith it ^^ so yt this mercy may not be granted without
ryghtwysnes / I beseech the despise not my prayers / but what manner of pain
these people should have put it on my body / and I shall glad dely ^eceyue it
for the worship of thy name / and for the sauacyon of holy church.

Then our lord alleged no more his ryghtwysnes / but held his pees and gave
her the vyctorye / and fro that hour forthward the grutchyng cessyd of the
people by ly^^ll and little / but her passions encreced so ferforth that
serpents of hell had power of god and t^rmented her body cruely that it were
vncredyble a man for to believe it but if he had seen it / as they sayden that
saw it and were there p^esente / when her body au^tyshed / all be it that
they saw not the serpents. They fretted and devoured so that maidens body /
that therein be left but bones without skin / as though it had been consumed
and wasted by long lyeng in the earth / and yet neuerthe^^^ she walked and
prayde as she was wont / the which was to many folk a wonder thing / for she
seemed rather a wonder thing to look upon / then ne a naturell thing Her
torments of pain encreced contynually / by the which she was consumed / and
yet she cessyd not from prayer / but she prayed ^ore fervently and more len^er
then she was wont. Her ghoostly children whom she had nourysshed in virtue
were that same time / and they saw openly the marks of the strokes that the
^endes of hell gave her in her body / and they might do thereto no remedy for
two skylles. One was for they wyste well hit was the will of god whom they
might not wythstonde. Another cause was / for they saw her glad and joyful
in her pains / and the more that she prayed the more was her bodily pain But
yet would she not cesse therefore / and the tormentours of hell faylled not /
but that they cried upon her all that time / and said to her thus. Cursed
wr^tche thou have ever be against us / and therefore thy time is come we for to
be avenged upon the. Thou haste put us oft^ times from our pray / and
therefore we shall never cesse unto the time thou art out of this ^yf. This
she sent by letter to master Reymond / and so she continued in that pain
from the sunday of septuagesme unto ye last day of Apryll. save one day ye
which day she passed out of this world In ye which time a meruayllous thing
happed her as she said and wrote to master Reymond. Cuery day it befyll her
of custom that she had the passion on the side that is called ^lyca passio /
and other moo unto none time / wherefore often times she desired heryng of her
mass / and therefore every day by the morrow or then that the pain came
upon her / she went to Saint Peter's church thorugh out all the lenten. And
so herd her mass / and abode there till euensong and then came home again
and lay her down in her bed.

In the which bed whose had seen her / he would have sworn that she might
never remeue her thens. Yet on the next^ mo^we she wse up and went eftsonys
f^^ a place that is called via pape in to Saint Peter's church / so fast that
her Journey should have made an hole man weary. This she continued all the
lenten / and within a few days after she lay still in her bedd^ / and might
not remeue her thens for feebleness.

And at last our lord called her and she passyd out of this world.

In the same day that is rehearsed before about none days / that is the nine
and twenty day of Apryll / the which was upon a sunday. The year of our lord
a thousand three hundred and four s^ore. In the which day the feste of Saint
Peter the martyr of the order of the frece prechours was and is solempnysed in
holy church.

Many notable things were wroughte then in her passing / the which I left
of in this chapter / for they shall be declared openly enough by the help of
god in the next chapter / and thus ends this chapter.

How this maid desired for to be unbound fro the body / and be with Christ
and that is prouyd by a deuote prayer that she made / and is put in the end
of another book which she maid / and what is in that book generally and
short^ly is written in this book with the same oryson. Capitulum ^ij
When the end of the bodily life of this blyssed maid Katheryn drew fast
upon her / our lord showed a joy to her in her passing by diverse tokens / by
the which ioy^ and glory he purposed to reward his spouse after her labor
and sykenes in heaven answeryng to the gifts of grace / that she received in
earth. Among all other tokens by the which he showed the perfeccyon of her
^owl^ to all thoo that would consydere / it was this. That he quy^ kened her
desyr^ every day more and more for to desire to be^^ unbound from the body
and be with Christ. And for this skylle it was that she might clearly and openly
behold in bliss* That t^^uthe / the which she saw in this life by a myrour
of feyth. The which desire so much the more it encrecyth in hy^ heart / in
as much as the light above kind shyned in her herd from heaven.

And therefore about a year and a half before or then she passyd out of this
world. Our lord showed to her such a cle^e knowing of t^^uthe / that she
was constreyned to show it openly out by writing. That was the cause why she
prayed writers as it is rehearsed before / that when they saw her in rauysshyng
they should be ^^dy to write that / the which she should speak by the mouth
for that time / and so in a little time she compyled a book / that conteyneth
a manner of a dyaloge / between a soul axynge of our lord four petycyons.
And our lord Ihesu Christ answeryng to the same soul / and enformyng it of
many profitable trouthys. In the last end of which book two things ben set
that me seems is needful for to rehearse here / as well for the great profit
that rederys should find therein / as for to declare this blyssed maidens
desire / that she had so perfyt^ly in her soul.

Nevertheless by cause no body should mysdeme me / wenyng that I would
translate it other wise then she said in her own language / therefore I
purpose to translate it none other wise then she said it word by word. Tho
two things by these. First the recapytulacyon of the same book I set in the
end / the which rehearsed shortly all tho things that been dyffusely set in
the book before. The second is a prayer / the which this holy maid made /
when she had endyd her book / by the which prayer is openly showed what
desire she hadd^ to be unbound / and loosyd out of her body and be with Christ.

Before the recapytulacyon this holy maid reherseth in the end of the same
^oke / that almighty god the fader of our lord Ihesu Christ spekyth to a soul
at ^^e end of the dyaloges after time he had long time spoke before of
obedyence of perfyte folk in this wise.

Now my well-beloved and dear daughter I have made a sithe to thy desire ^ro the
beginning to the last end / the which I have made spekyng of obedyence.

For if thou have good mind in the beginning / thou axest me with a great
desire of heart / as I made the to axe / that I should encrece the fire of my
charity in thy soul.

Thou axest also four petycyons / of the which one was for thy self. To the
which petycyon I made a sethe to the by Illumynyng / the which the light of
my truth / and showing to the all the manner / by the which manner by
medytacyon of the light of feyth with knowele chyng of thy self / and of me /
thou comes^e to the knoweleche of the truth.

The secounde petycyon that thou axest that I should to mercy with the world.

The thrydde petycion was for my mystery all body that is of my spouse holy
church / prayng me that I should wythdrawe all derkenesse of perfeccyon from
her that she suffers. And thou axest that I should punysshe the wyckydnes of
them upon the. Therefore it was that I declared to the that no pains fynyte or
given in time fynyte of it self allone may make satysfaccyon for trespass
done ageynste me / the which am god infynyte / but it makes a sees well if
it be oned with contrycion of heart and desire of ^oule: The manner how it
makes dew satysfaccio^ / I declared to the yet evermore I answer to the that
I will do mercy to the world showing to the that mercy is appropryd to me
wherefore for the great mercy and the inestimable love that I had to mankind
I sent mine only begoten sone for to declare more openly to the / I lykenyd to
a bridge that stretchy^^ and atteyneth from heaven to earth and that is from the
head the which is made in him by dyuyne nature and mankind / Also for to make
the more clear by the light of my truth I showed the how with me yt may s^ye
up to the bridge that is by / iij: degrees the which ^en in three myghtes of
the ^owle / Also of this word bridge I made another lykenes by figure of mine
own body: The third for said degrees as thou know well: The first in ^^e
feet wounded the second in the side wounded / And the third in the blessed
mouth: in the which I put three states of ye soul: yt is vnperfgiht state ye
perfight state: and the most vnperfyght state in ye which most perfig^^ state
a soul atteyneth and comyth perfyghtly to ye excellent of the unity of love
showing to the / Also in every foresaid a state what thing it is that
wythdraweth and puts away inperfeccion: and by what way men may goo thereto
/ And also I told the of ^^e preuy deceytes of fendes and of properte of
ghos^^ly love. speaking also to the reprehencions in these three states the
which my mekenes does and makes / And the first reprehencion I put yt is done
to me^ in ^er live or the soul go out of the body / The second in the death as
for ^^eym ^^at deyen in dedely sin wy^^out hope / of whom I said to the that
they went under the bridge by a way^ of ye fend tellyng to the mysery and
wretchedness of such dampened souls / The reprehencion shall bedone in the
general dome: And there I told the somewhat off the pains of dampened souls
and off the joy which blyssed souls have wha^ they shall receive the^ own
bodies / Also I promytted to the and eftsoon I promytte to the that with much
sufferaunce I shall reform mine spouse / byddyng you and them to suffer for
her and playnyng with the of the wickedness of mineuyll servants: And s^^wyug
to the in what excellens and wourthines I have set them. and the reverence
that I require and will that seculers done to them Showing also to the how for
defaute off them the reverence that ought to be done to them should not be
lesned:* and how such lesnyng of reverence is ^ysplesau^t and contrary to mine
will / And also I spoke to the of the virtue of them that lyue^ virtuously in
er^^e as angellis / touching the also with that of the excellens off the
reverend sacrament of the altar / Also by cause I spoke of the fosayd iij
states of the soul / thou would wete and know also of the estate of teres
and from whens the (...) come I told ye for to accord ye statis of ^^ris with
ye states of ye soul and said that al (...) come^ out of the well of the
heart / and ordeynatly I assygned to the cause of such teres and ye iiij
states of ^eres / and of ye first state of ^^r^s yt causes death also I told
/ I answered also to thyn fourth petycion in the which petycion you praydest me
yt I would provide for every partyculer cas that might hap and I provided and
purueyde therefore as thou know well Above all this I declared to the and
told the off my^ prouydence as well in general as in special. beginning from
the beginning of the creacion of mankind unto the end of the world / how I
made all things and make yet with him dyuyne pro^ydence gyuyng and promytting
that what that ever is given to you be it ^^ybulacions or ellis temperall
comfor^^s o^ spyrytuall comfortes all things is done for your good / that ye
may be made holy in me And mine truth may be performyd in you / My truth
was and is this / that I have made you of naught that ye may receive
everlasting ^y^^ / The which touthe I made open to you by the blood of mine
only begoten sone / Also at the last I made a sees to thyn desire and the
promyssyon that I made to the telling to the of the perfection off obedyence.
And whens it comes and what it may be that wythdrawe you away from your
obedyens / And I put obedyens for a general key / and so it is And I told the
also of partyculer obedyens both of perfyght folk and of vnperfyght folk as
well as within ^^lygion as without relygyon spekyng of each of them dystynctly
And of the ^ees that obedyens yeueth / and of the wer^^ yt inobedyens makes
And how much an inobedyent man disceyu^th him self addyng and puttyng to that
for the inobedyen^ of Adam / ^^eth entered in to all the world / Now I
sovereign and the glorious everlasting fader of endeles truth and veryte
conclude the: that by obedyens of mine only go^^n sone / Ye shall have
everlasting lyff / And right as ye all token de^^ of the first old man of
sin so all ye that wyllen be^^ the keye of obedyens have take life of the
new man: the which is sweet Ihesus ^^^st of whom I have made you a bridge af^
time ye way of heaven was book yt ye mow goo by this sweet right way the
which is one right veryte shynyng with the keye of obedyens / that ye may
pass the derkenesse of this world with outen offense: And at the last with
the keye of mine obedyent sone ye may op^ne heaven / Now I stere the and all
mine servants to weep / for with weeping and meke contynuell prayer and pray^ng
I will do mercy to the world: renewed to ye world by this way of truth /
And yt you shall not afterward be repreuyd with light steryng: for now I shall
ask more of the than I have do before sythen it is so that I have showed the
mine self in mine truth / And take heed that thou goo not out of the celle of
the knowlec^^ of thyn self / But therein spend and conserve the tresour that I
have give to the

The which tresour is one doctrine of truth gronuded upon a steadfast: and
quycke the stone: the which is Ihesu crys^e: That doctrine also is clothed
with ^yght: by the which derkenesse ben destroyed / therefore well-beloved
daughter be arrayed with this light of truth: Then the soul of this holy
maid katheryn after time it saw all this with the eye of understanding and by
medyacion of this light of faith / it know right ^o^yly the truth and the
excellens of obedyens / and it herd it with right feeling and tastyng it with
affection and with an vnspecabyll desire beholding it in the dyuyne reverend
mageste / And it thanked him saying thus /

I thank the glorious (...) fader almighty god / For thou ^aste not despised
me thine hondwerke / ne thou haste not turned away thyn face ^oo me ne
despised mine desires thou endele^ lygh^ considerest not mine death. ne thou leche
despisest not mi gr^^ous sekenes. ye endeles puryte despysest not me / full of
fylthe and much wretchedness thou infynmyte consyderest me that am fynite*
Thou wysdom wysdom beholdest me that am folly / For these and other moo infynyte
wretchydnesses and innumerable defautes yt ben in me: thou have not despised
me: ne thyn wysdom / thyn goodness. thy mekenes thyn endeles goodness has not
despised me but rather thou have give me light in thyn light / In thy wisdom
I have know treuthe / In thy mekenes I have found charity of the and love off
min neighbors: who styred the thereto and her to none virtue that is in me / but
only thyn chary^^: thyn love alone co^s^^^yneth me to Illumyne the ^y^^ of mine
under stodyng by the light of ^aythe / that I should understand and know thyn
^^^u the the which thou have made open to me

Good lord grant me that mine mind and mouth be Capax catchyng for to help
and conserve all thine benefaytes / Also that mine will may brenne with the
fire of thyn charity: the which fire may make mine body give out a gift of
martyrdom: For the love of thyn precious blood: And that I may opene the
yates of heaven with the keye of obedyens. And that same I ask for every
reasonable creature as well generalle as partyculer / And also for the mysteri
all body of holy church /

I knowlec^^ and deny it not that you have loved me first or then I was. And
that thou love so vnspecable thynne creature that thou art lykened in sum
manner wy^e to a man that is sat^^d in love / O endeles eternyte / O god^^de the
which by union of dyuyne natri^e ^ast made the blood of thyn oonly gotten sone
so much wourthe in p^y^e yt it suffyseth do rawnsome all mankind / Thou
endeles Trynyte art a deep see in the which the more I ^eke the* the more I
f^nde / And the more I find the / the more I seek the / Thou fulfyllest in
many manner vnsaciabyle* for in thyn depthe thou fulfyllest so a soul that
ever she byleu^th hongry and hongryng the endeles and glorious T^inyte / And
desy^eth to see the light in thyn light / ^yght as an ^erte desires to a
well of wa^^rs so desires my soul to pass out of this derke body and see
the in the t^^w^^e as thou art / O how long shall thyn swe^^ lovely face
behyd from mine eyes /

O endeles glorious trynyte and depthe of fire of charity / Dyssolue I beseech
the from this time forward the cloud of mine dedely body for to knowlec^^ yt
thou have give to me of the in thyn t^^wthe / it coarteth and co^streyneth me
to desire the deposycion of my grievous body And it makes me gredy to gelde mxn
lyff for the praysyng and joy of thine worshypfull name: For I have tasted and
seye with light of understanding by thyn light thyn depthe endeles glorious
trinyte and ye fayrenes of thyncreature Goo when I see mine self in the: I see
me like to thyn Image by the endeles glorious fader / Gyuyng to me of thyn
might and of thyn wisdom in mine understanding /

The which wyssdome is apperyd to thyn oonly begoten sone the holy ghooste
that comes from the glorious Fader and from thyn own only begoten sone has
give me will by the which he has made me able to love: For thou endeles
glorious trynyte art maker / And I thyn hand work whereby I have know by the
Illumy^^yng of the in mine recreacion that thou dydest to me by the precious
blood of thyn only begoten sone / that thou were in manner I sotted with love by
the fayrenesse off thyn creature / O depthe / O endeles godhede / O deep see:
what myghtest thou more give me than thy self / thou art fire yt ever brennyste
/ And thou wastest never

Thou art that fire that consumest all propyr love of the soul by thyn heete
/ you art also that fire that do away all coldenesse and illumyniste soulys
by thy light / with the which light thou have made me to know thyn truth /
thou art light above all light the which thy light gyuest to the hyghenes of
understanding su^ natural light in so great habu^daunce and perfyghtnesse
that also the light of faith is the more clarefied by it In the which faith I
see mine soul have life / And by this light it has received the light / Now in
the light of faith I seek wisdom of thyn only gotten sone:

In the light of faith I am made strong and steadfast. And am perseueraunt in
the light of faith: I seek hope that you shall not suffer me to defayle in the
way / Also that light techeth me the way whereby I should walk: And without
this light I should walk in derkenes / and therefore I have asked the endeled
glorious holy fader that thou sholdest Illumyne me with the light of the most
holiest faith / Trewely that light is a see ye which norysshed a soul unto
the time it be all in the: O peasyble see endeles glorious holy Trynyte / the
water of the sea is not troubled water and therefore it gives no dread: but
rather it gives know leche of truth / It Is water is dystylled and it makes
opyn pryue things Therefore where the habundaunt light of thyn habundeth / a
soul is is in manner clarefied of tho things that it byleueth. This see is the
endeles glorious holy Trinite makes me know as a mirror the which all the
while it is hold with the hand of lou^ before the eyes of my soul / it
represents me in the that I am thine creature / In the light of this myrrour
is represented to me that I know the most highest and infirmyte god and good
/ Good above good / blessed good / incomprehensybill good / and vnestymabyll
good:

Fay^nesse above all fayrnesse wysdom above all wysdom: For thou art the same
wisdom: thou art the same angelys mete: have given thine self to men with fire
of charyt^: Thou clothyng have coueryd mine nakedness / And thou fydest us
hungry: of thyn swetnesse: For you a^t ^^^ete / without any bytternes / O
endeles sweet glorious Trynite in thyn light that / have give me / I have
received by medytacion of that light the most holiest sight by declaracion: I
have know the way of thyn great perfe^tion by many and merueylous
declaracions that I should serve the fro this time forward with light and not
with derkenes and may be a myrrour of good ensample and holy living and that I
may arise out of my wretchyd lyff in the which hyder to always I have served
the in derkenesse: I have not know thyn trewthe before And thefore I louy^ it
naught: But why knew I not the / trewely for I see ye not with the light of
the most holiest and most glorious faith / Trewely for the cloud of mine own
^ou^ has derked the eyes of mine understanding / But thou endeles sweet
glorious holy Trynyte with thyn light have dissoluyd m^^ derkenesse / And who
may att^yne to ye heyghthe and yield the thankyng^^ of ^o grrte gifts and so
large benefeytis yt / thou have give to me and of thyn doct^yne of treuthe that
you have give to me now The which doctrine is a partyculer grace above the
general grace that thougyuest to other creatures / Thou vouchedest sat to
condescende to mine necessyte and / to the necessite of other creatures the
which in that time coming will behold in: ^reuthe as in myrrour / Therefore
reverend lord answer to thyn self for me you that haste give gifts and make
satysfactyon for thyn gifts and answer for / them gyuyng to me a light of
grace that thou may yield thanking to the with: the same light of grace /
Clothe me an / make me that I may be arrayed with thyn endeles truth that I
may run this dedely way with very obediens and wythg the light of the most
holiest teytn /

Loo maidens as nere as I might and could I have translated / word for word
the words of the book And prayer that this holy maid of the / which gift
ye besely take heed ye may wors^ippe the excellence of this blessed maid /
not only as for her manner of ^yuyng / but also for the doctrine of truth the
which is right marvelous I said and namely of a woman.

Furthermore ye may perceive by thy se words that she desired gretely to be
unbound of the body and be with christ for she knew and understood well that
it was much beter to be with christ than / to live in this life / And therefore
her desire ever encrecyd unto the time she had fulli her desire and her full
weddyng oned off the sweet glorious holy ghost the which was promytted unto
her in her young age when she received of our glorious / lord almighty god the
ring of spousa^le as it is rehersyd before in the last chapter of the first
party / for in the next / chapter shall be declared how this holy / maid and
virgyn passyd out of this / world

Of the time when this h^oly maid: passed out of this world and of a sermen:
that she made to her ghoostely dy^^yples and susteren to ^ore ^er passing: and
how she informed them in general and. enspecyall how they should govern they:
when she was goo / And or a vy^y^n which was showed to a matrone in the /
hour of passing Capitu^um v
When this holy maid perceived and understood by the reu^lacy^n that ye
hour or her death drew nygh She drew to her a^ her ghostely dyscyples to
whom she spa^e generally a long notable sermon of exortacion to the encrece of
virtue: In the which exortacyon she expressyd sum certain notabylytes the
which I purpos / to write in this book / The ^y^^te notable doctrine that she
taught was this / That whatso ever he bet at comes to ye service of god / If
he will have good t^e^ely it is nede^ull for him that he make / his heart naked
from all sensyble love. not out of certain persons but of every creature what
yt ever he be and than he hold stretche up his soul to our reverend lord and
maker symply with all his desire o^^ / his heart for an heart may not holy be
yeuen to god but it be fre fro all other love: opyn and simple without
doub^lnesse and so she affermed of her self yt it was all her^ principal
labor and besynes fro her young age unto ye time ever for to come to that:
perfection also she said she knew well that to such a state of perfection in
the which al ye heart is give to our glorious lord almighty god a soul may
not come perfyghly: whiles she answered / and other whiles she smyled as though
she had soorned the words that she herd of her enemies / and other whiles
she was enflammed in love of the holy ghost / but one word they marked well
that herd her when she spak in this ghoostly battle After time she had be
still a cert^yn time hering as it seemed the words that were put against her of
her enemies / with a glad chere she answered thus. Main glory never but ve
ray and trow glory and honor of my forde Jhesu christ it was. These words by
the dysposycyon of our forde were not said without cause / for there were many
ghoostly men and wymmen wened that for ye great graces that our lord had given
her / she had sought praysyng of ye people / or else that she had some manner
dylectacyon there Inn / and therefore they said she desired to be conuersaunt
among men / in so much yt some would say to master Reymond her confessor thus
/ why ^enneth this womman thus about if she desire to serve god Why abides she
not at home in her celle herto it may be answered as she answeryth before to her
ghoostly enemies in her passing / thus vain glory never but ve ray and true
glory of my lord Ihesu christ it was / as though she might answer thus. I ran
not about / ne did none other manner ghostly work for vain glory / but for
the honor and glory of my lord Ihesu crystis name. That it was so the /
master Reymond bears record of treuthe that herd her confession both
general and special / wherefore he records for a sothe that all that ever
she did / hit was done for the worthyp of god / and not for praysyng of men /
in so much yt she thou^t on no man as for ye time / but when she prayed for
them / so ordained for their bodily need So that it might be veryfyed of her
the words of ye apostle where he seyth thus. Nostra conuersatio in celis est.
That is our conuersacyon is in heaven / so she what yt ever she did in earth /
her con^sacion was in heaven After time then she had long continued in that
long ghostely battle with her enemies / she resorted again to her self / and
made a general confession openly / the which is called the confytro^ axyng
forgyuenes eftsonys ^o lowyng of doctrine and exsample of saint Martyne Saint
Jerome and Saint Austyn / that showed both in her dedys and in her words /
that be a man never so excellent in virtue in this life / he should not pass out
of this world without waylyng and hertely penance for his sins. In token
here of Saint Austyn in his last end when he should pass out of this world he
ordained for to write to him the seven psalms of penance / and for to be
set upon ye wall / that he might see tho psalmys as he lay in his bed. The
which psalms he radde often and wept plenteuously in seyeng of them Also
Saint Jerome when he should be deed / he made a general and an open confession
of his sins and defautes Saint Martyne also in his last end / taught his
dyseyples / that a christian man should not deye but in asshys and in heir in
token of meke hertety penance / whom this holy maid followed in all manner of
tokenes / by showing of hertely penance and axyng mekely many times and often
absolucyon both of her sins and pains. Then soon after she began to
wexe more febler and febler / but yette she cessed never of holy exhortacyon to
all her dysciples both to them that were present / and to them that were
absent And specially that same time / she charged all her dysciples to axe
counseyll of master Reymond / what doubt that ever they had. And
furthermore she had them say to him when he came home / yt he faylle not ne be
not aferde for no thing that shall fall / but ever continue virtuously for
she said that she would be with him / and deliver him from all peril. And when
he does any thing that he should not do I shall give him warnyng she said for
to amend. These words she said often times to tha last end of her passing
but the last word that she said was this Domine in manus tuas comnendo
spiritum meum. And so that blyssed soul paste out of the body / and was and is
complyd and knytte to her spouse Ihesu / whom she loved so hyghly with an
Indyuysyble and perpetuell on head or union The year of our lord a thousand
threhondred and four soore the nine and twenty day of Apryll / the which was
in the cite of Rome and fill upon a sunday about the hour of tyerce / that
same and the same hour the soul of this holy maid appyred to master Reymond
that was that time in far contreys / and not by open bodily apparycyon / but
by mental apparycyon seeing to him in his soul such words of comfort. Dread
the not for I am here for the / I am in heaven where I may help the and defend
/ be seker therefore and dread not for I am here for the With the which
comfortable words master Reymond was in manner astonyed and ameruaylled what
it might be / wenyng that this comfort had come from our blyssed lady mother
of mercy / by cause he stood a fore an image of here is and said an Aue maria But
yet nevertheless he was aferde to think so / by cause him thought he was
unworthy to have such a comfort of her And so what it might mean / or what it
might be / or whennys it might come he nyst never. But afterward in heryng of
another reuelacyon of this holy maid showed to a devout matrone / he
understood the better what it might mean so whens it might come. Of the which
matrone I shall tell you. The same time when this holy maid passyd out of this
world / there was in Rome a devout matrone / that was called Semya / the
which had two men to her sons / to whom she was every day both mother and
servant / in making of their mete. This devout matrone after time her husbonde
was deed / she purposed ever after to serve god / and visyte by pilgrimage holy
saints of Rome / and she continued many years

She had also in custom for to rise at mydnyght and pray / and afterward
for to take a little rest syttyng or lenyng with her head / that she might be
the more quycker on the morrow erly for to go her stacyons of Rome. It befyll
soon after that when this holy maid Katheryn was come to Rome / this devout
matrone took knowleche of her / and was often times edyfyed by her good
exhortacyons / and so had a good ghoostly affection to her / and was often
times homely with her in her hows almost every day Nevertheless a ^ytell before
this holy maid deyed / she came not to her because of certain besynes that she
had to done / what for her pylgrymages / and the purueyaunce of mete for her
sons / And therefore she wist not that this holy maid passyd This devout
matrone Semya arose up at mydnyght as she was wont / for to do and pray a
long time to gydre / she purposed for to rest a little / by cause she would
up by times on the morrow for to here nasse / and then for to be besye about
her children mete. She did so / but ever she was trayueylled in her sleep
that she should O wretch / the fend has deceived the / she ^se up then and
went about for to seek in paryshe chyrches where sum hole masses were
aseyeng / and as she went she herd a be^le ring to a mass in an hows of
Nonnys / she was glad then and thither she went and left her wortys vnpy
kyd and vnwashe for have and shytte her do ^e and bare the keye with her / when
she came the mass was in ye beginning / with that she said to her self thus.
Now I wot well the fend has not deceived me as I wend. Nevertheless as much
as she wyste well that the mete of her sons might not be ready or they came
home to mete / she was sorry / but for the comfort yt she had in her mas^e /
she committed all to god / prayeng him that he would wouche sauf to keep her
that day fro heavy words of her children / the which were grown men / for she
was sore aferde to dysplease them / and so she herd forth all the hye mass
/ when the hye mass was done / as she went^ home she met with her sons
coming homward to mete seyeng to her thus. Mother hye you fast for it is time
to go to mete. She answered ageynefull esely and said. Good sons abides a
while / and ye shall go to mete anon

When she was entered in to her house she found her mete all ready enough / and
the wortys all ready in the pot well soden at the full / she was than astonyed
/ and than ked our lord that she had herd her mass / and so badde her sons
sytte done to mete in ye name of Jhesu / thynkyng in her self that after none
she would go and vysyte the holy maid Katheryne / all the mete time she
thought much in that vysyon / and how it was co^fermed with so great miracles

In the mean whiles her sons commended their mete and said that it was beter
sesoned that time / than any mete that they had eten before many a day / but
the devout matrones ^erte was always upon the vysyon seyeng within her self
thus. O mother Katheryne and crystis spouse. Yet for all this she wend not that
she had be deed And when her sons were a gone and had et^ / she went to
Katherynes house and knockyd at the door and herd none answer / it was said
her of ye neighbors there about yt she was walked out for to vysyte holy
places / yet in treuthe her susters were within waylyng And would not suffer
none to enter in to the time they had axyd counseyll how they should be^y the
body / At the last it was determined among them that on the morrow the body
should be ladde to the friar prechours / and there for to do ye seruyse as god
would ordeyne by counseyll and so it was done / But as soon as the body was
come to ye church / ye people followed for to touch her fet^ or her clothys /
so that both ye freres and also her sustres and other of her dysciples were
aferde / lest they should have borste and toren her clothys / and therefore they
set the body within the chauntell of a chapel / that was endued in the
worship of Saint Domynyk / What that fill afterward I think to declare you in
the next chapter by the help of god Casuelly whiles this was adoyng Semya
the Matrone came Inn the mean time / and axyd what that noise and concourse of
people might mean / Hit was told her that Katheryne of Seen was passyd out
of this world / her body was in the church / wherefore the people gadred so
fast for to see it.

Anon when she herd that / she wayled and wept and went Inn there the
body ^aye seyeng to the ghoostely children of this holy maid Katheryne.

O vnpytuous woman why have ye hid this fro me / why called ye me not to her
passing / They excusyd them that they might not for certain causes / than she
prayed them for to tell her wha^ she departed from the body they said yester
day about vnderne of the day / with ye Semya wept and said thus that same
time it was that I saw mine glorious mother lad up to heaven with ang^lis with
three precious crowns on her head: Now I wot well she said that our reverend
lord almighty sent his angelys and showed me the passing of mine glorious mother
glorious saint katheryn of Seen

And more over she mynystred for me merueylously in mine kytchyn / O mother O
glorious mother why understood I not when I had that glorious visyon that
thou that time passid out of this world / Then she respyred and told to her
susters and to other ghostely children of here is what vysyon she had such a
time* al as it is rehearsed / thus ends this chapitr^

Of tokens and miracles which our reverend lord almighty god wrought after the
de^h of this holy maid and vyrgyn glorious saint Katheryn of Seen both
tofore her beryeng and after. That is to say of tho miracles were know for
many there were yt were not know / Capitulum ^
When the blessed soul of this holy maid and virgygyn glorious saint katheryn
of Seen was de liuerd out of her sweet body: and the swe holy body put in a
chaunsell of saint Do mynyk I closed by cause the people should cerce a while
of her confluence as it is ^eher^ed before in the iiij chapter: In the mean
time that it s^ode there came a suse of saint fraunceis order that was called
Domynyca the which had a sekenes in her armr / that half a ye^e before this
holy maid and vyrgyne dyed she might not by welde her arm: for it was in
manner benomme her and drped up / This suster Domynyca in hope to have help
herd seye that this holy maid and vyrgyn was deed* came to the church there
she lay and said that she might not come to this holy body for the people /
and by cause also the chaunsel door was shette / she threw in a keuerchef and
prayed the susters of saint Domynyk that they would touch ye sweet holy body
of that holy maid and vyrgin with that keuerchefe and then^e to give ^t to her
a gayn. They did so / and as soon as she had the keuerchefe again she put it
to her arm and was hole anon / with yt she cried to all the people and said
that her arm was hole by miracle of this holy maid and vyrgyn glorious
katheryne

Then the people made much noise in thankyng our reverend lord almighty god
and brought children of here is and other seek bodies that they might have help
by miracle namely by touching sum hemme of that holy maid and virgins
clothes* Among all other there was brought a ^^^^de of iiij year old whose he
de lay upon his one sholdes by cause off a certain infyrmyte that he had by
the which infyrmyte ye synowes of his neck were shronke to gyders so that he
might never lift up his head fro the sholder As Soon as this childe^ was
brought to ye holy body and was touched in the neck with the holy maid and
vyrgyn: about whose neck also was put a keuerchefe of this holy maid and
vyrgyn* ^ythin a little while and time afterward ye child began to amend and
so was at the last hole. This was the cause why the friars durst not burye
the holy body by three days to gyder in as much as our reverend lord almighty
god should show miracle by her: For there was so great a confluence of people
thoo three days that a master of ^yuynyte was steryd for to make a sermon to
the worship of our reverend lord almighty god and of this holy maid and
virgyn But when he stood up in the pulpyt he might not be herd for noise of the
people and the great concurs to the sweet holy body. So that at the last he
left of his sermon and said to all the people in this wise / Syres I see well
this holy maid and vyrgyn needs naught our prechinge for she by her self
pr^^heth suffyciauntly ynow and then he went down out of the pulpyt:

The myraclys of this holy maid and vy^gyn encresyd fast: For there was a
Roman the which was called Lucius / that had such a sickness the which
might not behelyd of none leche a joint off his knee was to broste so that he
might not walk uneath but by sustentacion of a staf: This lucius herd say
that such an holy maid and virgyn did myraclys* with great traueyle and
help of other he came there her swe^^ holy body lap: and there with great
reverence and deuoucion he took the holy maid and vyrgyn hond and put it to
his thye / and to his leg. ^ythin a little while and time after he felt more
strength in his leggys than he did a fore so that or than he went fully
thens he was all hole / praysyng our reverend lord almighty god in his
merueiles that he showed in his saints /

Also there was a young maydede child yt was called ^e^^zola ye which had an
horybyll infyrmyte of a lepyr in her face yt her noise and the ouerlyppe of her
mouth was coueryd with that horrible lepre / This maid herd speak also of ye
miracles showed by this holy may de and vyrgyn glorious saint Katheryne of Seen
/ and come to the same chriche where that her holy body lay and in to come to
that holy body / but always she was put a back by prees of the people: At the
la^t she came in to that sweet holy body and put not only her face to the holy
maid and vyrgyns hondis and feet / But also to her lovely sweet face and
vysage Soon after she felt releuyng of her sekenes so that within a short
time she was so perfyghtly hole and never afterward apperyd in her face any
naner of ^eper / spottene mark / of any manner leper /

Also there was a Roman calli^ Cypryus yt had a daughter the which daughter of
young age took a sekenes yt is called ye tysyk of that sekenes she might never
be deliueryd by none manner of me decyne / when the fader and the mother herd
say of the myraclis / showed by our reverend lord almighty god by by this holy
maid and vyrgyn glorious saint katheryn they came to the same place and her
daughter with them where the sweet holy body lay and recommendyd devoutly her
daughter to that holy maid and vyrgin As Soon as the child was hole / Also in
the mean time the sweet holy body lay vnberyed / there was a cytysyn of Rome
that was called Anthoni ye which was the same time in saint Pet^is church
when he herd of the myraclis that was wrought by this holy maid and vyrgyn:
This Anthony was enfected so yt he might not be cured with none natural
mede^in / he bethought hi^ of this holy maid and virgin and devoutly he made
a vow to her and he had not so sone made his a vow / that he ne felt his
body and his lym^es as strong as ever they were / Then he came to this holy
maid and vyrgyn and thanked our reverend lord almighty god and her of his
recoueryng /

Also there was a devout matrone yt was welknowe with this holy maid and
virgyn when she lived in earth / for often times when she came to her place she
and many of her dysciples were herberowed with her: the which matrone she
called Paula / In the same time wha^ this holy maid and vyrgyne passyd out of
this world This pau^a was seek and had lay seek iiij months before upon a
sekenes that is called podagra and upon another sekenes on her side that is
called Ilycapassio / And by cause the remedies of thoo two sykenesses ben
contrary each to other for the tone sickness required openenyng / and the
other closinge / therefore this matrone was much more vexed* so that other
whiles she was nere deed: ^han t^is matrone herd say that this holy made and
virgyn was ^passyd: She asked for charity that she might hau^ som^e manner of
clothe / that her sweet holy body was coueryd with or touched as she desired
so she had: that same night at even she leyde that clothe upon her as she
lay in her bed all night:

On the morrow she roos up all hole and walked on her fete as though she had
never that sickness. Such myrac^es and many moo our reverend lord almighty
god wrought in that blessed maid and holy vyrgyn or than it was buried. Yet
our reverend ^lorde almyghty^ god cecyd not for to work health to seek folk
For in werkyng it rather encresyd than dymynused:

There was a woman that was called ^one which had a little child yt might not
stand right up on his fetene goo / This ^one herd how our reverend lord
almighty god wrought many fair my ra^^ys by this holy maid and vyrgyne
glorious saint katheryne she made auowe to our reverend lord almighty god and
to here for the ^elthe of her child

After time she had made her a vow she took her child with her and came to
the grave where the holy maid and vyrgyn was buried / And she laid her
child upon the grave / And anon the child began to stand right up and go as
though he had had never sickness in his legs: Also there was a man of Tose
yt was also called Johan ye which had an horrible sekenes in his eyes so ye
worms bredde in his eye / this ^ohn made a vow devoutly to our reue^^nde
lord almighty god and to this holy maid and vyrgyn glorious saint Katheryne
off Seen / and anon he was delyuerd of his sekenes / when he was so delyueryd
he came to the sepulcre of that blessid maid and virgin and set^^ up a toke^
of wax as ye manner is in sign and toke^ of delyu^ra^ce than he told to all
folk yt would h^re it the merueyle of our reverend lord almighty god showed by
this holy maid and virgyn: Also there was a woman pilgrim of duchelond whose
name was not wryton because it was foryete of negligence the which pilgrim
had desuche a sickness in both her eyes that she had almost lost her syghte
The pilgrim made a vow devoutly to our reverend lord almighty god and to
this holy maid and vyrgyn glorious saint Katheryn of seen / And within a
little time after she had clear ^ yght and her sickness was gone when she was
to her sepulcre for to thank our reverend lord almighty god and her / She
saw as clerly as eue^ she did / Also there was a lady of Rome that was called
Mary^ the which the which had in her head a grievous sekenes that
notwithstondyng many sundry medecyns the which she used she might never be
help thereby / but lost her eyes / Wherefore for sorrow and shame that she had
thereof / she would never pass her house after ne appear in the sight of men:
This lady herd speak of the gteate myraclis that our reverend lord almighty
god wrought by that holy maid and vyrgyn glorious saint katherin / she made
auowe to our reverend lord almighty god and to her devoutly / After time her
vow was made: the next night sueing this holy maid and vyrgyn apperyd to the
servant of this lady in her sleep and bad her sey to her lady that she should
do no more medecyns to her sight. but every day in the morrow she should goo to
church and here ye service of our reverend lord almighty god and then she
shall be hole When this servant had told her lady thus / she deed so / and
at the last by lytil and little she began to see with that blind eye and was
fully restoryd to health: Loo dear susters by this miracle ye may consydere
that this holy maid and vyrgyn followed the deeds of our lord almighty god
sweet Ihesu Christ / For when our reverend lord almighty god sweet Jhesu
Christ was sought whiles he was in earth here for the health of body / Him
thought it was not ynow for him to hele only the body but if he helyd the soul
When he said to one that came to him for to be helyd in body thus:

Fili remittuntur tibi peccata / That is to say / thyn sins be forgyuen /
Right so this holy maid and virgyn there she was asked of health / She gave
also health of soul in that she badde her here her dyuyne service The which
is health and comfort to thesoule:

Also there was a young man ye which was called James the sone of a Roman
that was called Peers / the which was in a time so seek in body that none
leche might hele him / But alegates he drew fast to death: Then was there a
deuote woman that was called Ceccola / The which woman saw this young man in
point of death: and made avowe for hi to this holy maid and vyrgyn glorious
saint katheryn / She had not so soon made her vow / but that the young man
began to recouere and was fully delivered from his sekenes /

Also there was a woman called gallya that was sore seek and might not be
helped by none lechecrafte So that lechee said by course of natural kind that
she should be deed within a short time then this woman Gallya thought upon
saint glorious katheryne of Seen and recommended her lyff to her / She had not
so soon do so / but that she felt comfort and amendment / And so little
and little she was restoryd to health /

Also there was a devout lady that was called dame Jone the which knew well
this holy maid and virgyn glorious saint katheryn whiles she lived / And she
counseyled seek folk when she spoke with them to recommende her sekenes to ye
merytes of ye holy maid and vyrgyn in as much as she herd speak of ye great
miracles that our reverend lord almighty god wrought in her trusting fully that
they should be help by her merytes. So that by her steryng and exortacio^
many were help / Then it fill in a time that off the children of that worthy
Lady dame Jone sodenli as he went upon an hye steire fill down hedelyng a fore
this Lady his mother / So that she wend as it was lykely to be that the child
either was ded or else should have caughte a mayme thereby all the days of his
life after / With that this lady the mother of the child cried to this holy maid
and virgyn glorious saint katheryn off Seen thus glorious saint katheryn off
Seen to the recommau^de mine child / she had not so soon said so* but that
the child stood up wythouten any harm less or more: for he was as hole
then as ever he was a fore: Then the mother thanked our reverend lord
almighty god and this holy maid and virgyn glorious saint katheryne of the
blessed miracle /

Also there was another woman the which was a general launder and lived by
that manner of besynes that was cally d bone Johan. i. bona Johanna / In a time
as this woman should goo to the River there beside and washed clothes /

It behapped her that she should wasshe a quylte: and in the mean time she
held the ton end under her arms while that the other end was a wasshyng /
It behapped yt the heuyer end in the water drew down the lyghter end under
her arms and so fletted feer within the River*

When she perceived that she wyste well if it were lost she might not pay
therefore by cause she was right pour. She tha^ a rechyd after the quylte for
to have it again and suddenly she her self fell in to the water / so that the
water bare her far within: with that she bethought her of glorious saint
katheryn and said thus O thou glorious saint Katheryne help me now in this
need: This word was not so sone I said but that she was help in so much
that she was lift up above the water and took the clothe and came to land
without help of man when she was recouereude she was sore astonyed merneylyng
how that might be / that she was so soon help then she conceived well that
it thus by the help of our reverend lord almighty god and this holy maid and
virgyn glorious saint katheryn of Seen

Of another miracle now I shall tell you of the which Master Reymound bears
witness as it was told him It befell on a time when Master Reymound was come to
the Cite of Rome upon a day when this holy maidens and virgyn body should be
translated as she prophesied long before whiles she lived as it shall be
declared afterward / that her fylle seek then came to him a physycion yt was
called Master James of saint Mary the round upon a day: when this physycien
came to visyte Master Reymond

And for to give him medycyne he told Master Reymound of a young man that was
called Nycholas a worthy mannys sone of Rome that was passing seek off a
sekenes that is called the quynauncie so that every leche said by nature he
might notlyue / For to all mennys sight he drew fast to the death /

This perceived Alixa a suster of penance of saint Domynyke in as much as she
knew well that the fader and the mother loved this holy maid and vyrgyn
glorious saint Katheryne: When she lived: came to this young man and brought
with her a tooth of this holy maid and vyrgyn glorious saint katheryne that
she kept always for a relyke. The which tooth she put in that young man's
mouth / She had not so soon do so: But that the posteme that was within
brake and the matter fill out off the childs mouth / and within a while after
he was hoole and thanked our reuerede lord almighty god and this holy maid
and vyrgyn glorious saint katheryn. Also afterwar he told that miracle openly
to all that world here it / So that in a time when master Reymond preached he
told that miracle to the people as he herd off other / When that young man
herd him speak thereof the which was at the sermon for that time / he stood up
openly and said to Master Reymound thus / Syrye say sothe for I am the same
that this miracle was showed to: Many mo miracles were showed by our reverend
lord almighty god of this holy maid and virgyn which ben not wryton in this
book / But they might be known wythouten any writing openly ynoto by ye images
of wax that were offered up to her sepulcre / soon after she was buried
Nevertheless of one miracle I shall tell you that Master Reymou^d bears
record of / It befyll soon after that this holy maid and vyrgyne was buried
that queen Johan of Cecyly sent in a time Reynold of vrsyne with a great host
off armyd folk to the Cite of Rome for to make Pope vrbane the vj either for
to put him out of the Cite / or else for to slay him* All be it the Romans
hylde with the pope as true children with ye Fader / Of the which Romans
sum of the common people were take of thoo scismatykes and crruelly punisshed /
sum were bound to a tree so to deye myscheuously sum were led to a
field and I payned with certain infirmytes and instrumentis of iron so for to
take her bodily death / But as many as asked help of this holy maid and virgyn
glorious saint katheryn of seen preuily in her heart or openly in word with
deuoucion They merueylously and suddenly were undo of her hondes without any
help of any man /

Of such myraclis that were many ye which ben not written in this book / Loo
dear friends thus ends this chapitre where ye may see many fair miracles by
the which ye may understand that this holy maid and virgyn was and is a
dear spose of our lord reverend lord almighty god: I will thus make an end of
this book: save by cause holy church commendyth more the virtue of patience
then showing of myraclis as saint Gregrye says therefore I think to write to
you a chapter of the virtue of patience that this holy maid and virgyn had
wherein ye may gader flonres and fruit to encrece of your virtuous living by
the help and socour of our reverend lord almighty god sweet Ihesu Christ:

Qui cum patre et spiritu sancto viuit et regnat deus per omnia secula
seculorum Amen:

Of the might and strong paciens which this holy maid and virgyn glorious
saint katheryn of Seen showed openly from her first young age unto her death by
the which virtu clerly is prouyd that ryghtfully she is worthy to have the
name in gods church of earth when she is made so fair and so glorious in
goddis church in heaven / And in this chapter is a recapytulacion of all the
holy fill of this glorious saint and virgyn before said for werynesse of reders
/ Also if: each man may not have all ye hole holy life of this glorious saint
and virgyne before said / Then may he have ye substance of it here
compendyously rehersyd / Capitulum vltimum
THe holy doctor saint Gregorye seyth in his dyalogus yt the virtue of
pacyence is more commendable then showing of miracles This is the cause why
our mother holy church / wha^ she wodel Canonyze any saint / first she
enquyreth of the virtue of pacyence. Then of the showing of miracles / and
that is for two skylles. One is for many evil lyuers have do wond things /
and shall do yt seems miracles / all though they be none / as Simon magus did
/ and Antecryst shall do in his time. Another is by cause some there has been
that have done and showed miracle by ^tue of our lord Ihesu / the which have
be dampened afterward as Judas / and all tho you our lord speaks of in the
gospel / where he says that some shall stand on ye lift side on the day of
the general dome / and say to him in excusing of them self. Lord have we not
in thy name showed and do wonderful miracles To whom our lord shall answer
again and say Go ye from me werkers of wickydnes / by these two skylles ye may
understand ye holy church in earth may not only be certyfyed by miracles /
whether ye person be holy or not / by whom they be showed / all be it yt they
show presumpcyon of holiness. And namely tho miracles that been showed after
the death of a person / for they were no saints / at whose graves miracles ben
showed. Yet were possible yt our mercyable lord should have them excused / and
yield them after their meke believe / the which beleuen that they be saints.
Not for them that been there beryed but for the glory and the joy of his own
name / lest they the which believe in him be defrawded from their desire
wherefore our mod holy church in earth / that is governed by the holy ghost /
desyryng for to be certefyed of tho merits of holy saints as much as it is
possible in this life enquyreth specially of their virtuous living / and of tho
things yt they wrought whiles they lived in earth. So our lord Ihesu her
spouse taught her to do when he said Ex fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos That is
of her werkys ye shall know them / for it followed aftward in the same place
where that clause is written before / yt a good tree may not bring forth evil
fruit. What ben these fruytes. Trewely no thing else but werkys of love and
charity / both of god and of our neighbors But by cause of these werkys of
charity / right as they be plesaunt to our lord / right so they ben dysplesaunt
to the fend So that he is about in all yt he can and may for to let the
deeds of charity / both by him self and also by the world / that is by
worldly lyuers. Wherefore it is full necessary to holy lyuers to have pacyence
and perceuerau^ce if they will be rewarded for their mede in bliss / by the
which pacyence they may conserve them and keep them in good love of god and of
their good neighbors / notwythsto^dyng all manner persecucyons. Therefore it was
that Saint Powle assygned the first condycyon of charity pacyence when he said.
Caritas paciens est. That is charity is pacyence Loo maidens this is the cause
why our mother holy church in earth / requires more after the pacyence of a
saint if he should be Canonyzed then after the miracles / for among all
^tuous werkys / yet pacyens is the grettest witness of holiness. And this is
said maidens be cause that ye should not be in doubt of this holy maidens
holiness / for she had that virtue of pacyence full blyssedly / As I shall tell
you by the help of god and of your good prayers rehersyng all her deeds of
pacyence / by recapytulacyon of this hole legende namely for weary reders that
thynken an hour in devout redyng is longer than a day / and if they were
occupied in tales and tryfles / then them seems ye long day ^hort then an
hour. Understand well maidens that this holy maid Katherin perceived / that
the virtue of pacyence myt not have his gracious werkyng in a soul / but first
unlawful things were remeuyd away from it / and namely such unlawful thyngys
that been e^^ytable to the lusts of ye flesh / wherefore or then she came to
the age of experyence of flesshly lusts. She ^emeuyd away myghtly all such /
as such things that should styre her when she came to age. And yet she did
not this without Inspyracion / and notable vision of our lord by ye which
Inspiraco^n when she was ^j year of age / she saw our lord arayde as a bishop
sytting in a ry^t fair chamber over the church of the f^ere p^echours / With
whom she saw also saint Johan Euangelyst / and whiles she beheld our lord /
he lokyd upon her full benyngly and mekely and blyssed her. After this holy
vysyon her soul was fulfilled with per^y^e love / that she put away all
children condycyons / and gave her self anon to prayer and to penance / and
therein she encrecyd perfytly / that in the next year after / when she was of
vij year of age she made a vow of madenhode before an image of our lady / not
sode^^ly but with great delyberacyon before / as it is openly declared in the
second and the thrydde chapter of the first pertye. Furthermore by cause that
this holy maid wist well that abstynence was necessary for to keep ye purpose
of maydenhode. Therefore she gave her to great abstynence in her young age / and
performed it meruayllously For as it is reher^^d in the thrydde chapter of
the first per^ye / and in the vj chapter of the same party more largely the
began preuely to leave flesh. And then as she encrecyd in age little and
little / she left all manner etynge of flesh / and thereto she drank no wine
but when it was meddled with wat^r / so that it had all most lost his ^ast and
his color of wine. And when she was xv year of age / she left both wine and
flesh / and all manner of metes out take bread and raw herbs. Also when she
was xx year of age / she left bread and took her only to dyetyng of raw
herbys / and so continued in that manner of living unto the time our lord gave
her a new manner of gracious living / when she lived without any manner of mete
/ and that was when she was xxv or xxvj year of age / as it is openly declared
in the vj chapter of the first party / where is rehearsed the cause and the
manner why and wherefore she came to such estate And where also is answered
suffycyentely to them that grutched to that manner of living. When this holy
maid had thus fully o^come the styryng of sins that she came to the
perfyte virtue of pacyence / as I shall tell you by the help of god The first
prove of pacyence that she had / was by her mother Lapa that would that she had
be wedded / when she came to the age of xij year. And when that she saw that
she might not bring her daughter well thereto / then she put hy^* out of
her chamber that was assygned to her before of honest / and put her to all
manner defoule of the kechen / that another she might have lesyr for to pray ne
for to have medytacyon ne contemplacyon as she was wont / what pacyence she
had in this persecucyons / and how glad she was there Inn / it is clearly
declared in the fourth chapter of the first party. Meruayllously and
virtuously always she stood in the purpose of maydenhode / and yet served the
household with a glad chere. And never for such occupacyons and pryuacyons
of her pure chamber she cessyd fro prayer and other ghoostly excercyses / un to
the time she had overcome both her persecucyons and her pursuers / as it is
rehearsed in the same fourth chapter / but yet ouermore / when the fend
styred her mother Lapa for to set this holy maid from holy dyscyplynes and
wakynges / and also herd lyggyng^s. This holy maid then with a mighty
pacyence / and a meruayllous tempred right dyscretely her moders heaviness
against her. And yet nevertheless kept forth her hardenes of living / as it
is declared in the vj chapter of the first party fully enough And moreover
what Impediment she suffered in her soul by the fend in time of prayer / and
of other ghoostly excercyses / in tormentyng of her flesh / and other alms
deeds that she did as it is openly showed in many diverse chapytres of this
legende before as I shall declare to you. The fend besyed him that he might
first to remeue this holy maid away from her spouse Jhesu / afterward to
wythdrawe her fully from him. Or else at the last for to let her / namely
for a time / but she with a mighty fervor first ouerthrewe her enemy the
fend. Afterward by wit and counseyll of the holy ghoost overcome him. At the
last with stedefast virtue shamed him / that was about to let her. As for
the first the fend began to remeue her fro her holy purpose First by her
suster Bonauenture / the which was wedded curyosyte of her here and clothys /
as it is declared openly in the fourth chapter of the first party. The
second time by her brethern and her mother that were in full purpose for to
marye her as hit is showed in the same chapter. And the thrydde time by him
self / puttyng to her diverse heaviness of temptacyons / and diverse Illusyons /
or then she received the habyte of penance / as it is rehearsed in the vij
chapter of the first party. Also master Reymond of her beside all this as he
was enfourmed of other that were true folk / that in a time wha^ she prayed
before a crucifyxe of our lords passion / the fend stood before her having in
his hand a clothe of sylke / and was about to array her with the same clothe
The which Illusyon of curyosyte she despised and blyssed her and turned her to
the crucyfyxe. After that the fend vanysshed away / but yet he left in her
mind temptacyon of curyosytre of clothyng. Then anon she had mine of her
purpose of maydenhode / and spak to our lord in this wise. Dear lord and sweet
spouse / thou know well that I desired never husbonde but the Therefore I
pray the help me that I may overcome these temptacyons of curyosyte by virtue
of thine holy name. I axe not lord / that thou sholdest take them away fro me
/ but yt thou wouchesauf to give me the vyctorye of thy mercy. As soon as she
had said these words. Our blyssed Lady queen of maidens apperyd to her
sight / semyng to her sight that she took out a right fair clothe out of her
sons side / with the which clothe she arrayed her / And afterward she said
to this holy maid thus* I do the well to wete daughter / that the clothes
which comen out of my sons side passen all other clothes in fayrnes and in
beauty. Then all her temptacyon went away / and she was gretely comforted.
As for the second there the fend was about to wythdrawe her fully from our
lord / by wytty counseyll of the holy ghoost / she overcome him and let him
of his wicked purpose in that that she pesyd her mother Lapa with great wit
cessyd her of her hastynes when she was about for to let her of her penance
doing / and continued afterward nevertheless in her penance as she began*
also when she bare her self so wisely to her confessor and to other
counseyllours the which counseylled her to leave her great abstynence and to
live after a comyndyete / as it is declared in the fyfthe chapter of the
second party And also wisely and meruayllously she pesyd her soueraynes that
forbode her to go to places thither that our lord sent her. But yet she
fulfilled gods byddynges / and esely pesyd her soueraynes / what pacyence she
had in this work / there can no tongue tell ne pen write. Furthermore the
fend saw that he might by no while remeue ne wythdrawe this holy maid from
her devout purpose / he besyed him namely for a certain time for to let her
not only by him self / but by diverse persons / the which shall be told you
specially wythinne forth what they were.

First by her own mother Lapa that brought her to a bath for to be bathed /
that she might by that esy bath be wythdrawe for a time fro her sharp
dysciplynes / and from other hardenesse of penance But yet she could find
there more sharp penance then in her own chamber when she suffered the hot
brennyng water upon her naked body / a^ it is rehearsed in the seuenthe chapter
of the first party. Also another time he would had let her by the byddyng
of indiscreet soueraynes that were ever about to let her from confession /
from prayer / and from all other ghoostly exercyses / as it is declared openly
enough in the first chapter of the secounde party. Nevertheless sum shall
I rehearse here in special that been not spoken of in the same chapter.

And all be it that sum things may not be rehearsed here without shame of some
Relygyous personys / the which were contrary to her holy purpose. Yet better
it were that I rehearsed them / then the gifts of the holy ghoost be hid /
where by ye maidens may have love and dread / both for to here such
trespasses of such Relygyous folk / and love in seyeng of the virtue of
pacyence in this holy maid.

This holy maid Katheryne after time that she had sauoure and swetenes of
devotion / she might never do deed of virtue openly without sclaundre and
bacbytyng of such / namely that she should rather had favored her and
comforted her therein / as ghoostly lyuers both of Relygyous and seculerys /
meruaylleth noothyng here of / for as I said before in the fyfthe chapter of
the secounde party.

But if ghoostly lyuers quench perfytely her propre will of them self / they
fall more cruelly in the dyche of envy then other flesshely lyuers. As I
put an exsample thereof. Of the monks of an holy Abbotte Pachamye / that for
the great abstynence of a new monk / that was come among them / they said
theywold goo out of the momasterye / but if that new monk were avoided. Right
so it befyll with this holy maid. All the susters of penance saw that
Katheryne passyd them all in hardenes of living / in sadness of virtue / in
devotion of prayer and contemplacyon. Anon the serpente of envy entered in
them and styred them for to bacbyte this holy maid / both pryuely and also
openly to the prelates and the order with great boldenes / and yet they that
were hold most sad / held with them and said that it might not be else
but that she wrought all that ever she did in Belsabub the prince of all
deuelys.

This womman by such false suggestyon drew unto their error many sad folk /
both Relygyous and seculers / so that by their counseyll this holy maid was
often times let from her confession and her confessor / and also from
receyuyng of the blyssed sacrament / and all this she suffered pacyently without
any grutchyng or playnyng. Rather supposyng of them that so let her / that
they did it for an holy entente / and for the health of her soul / where fore
her seemed that she was ye more bound to pray for them not as for her enemies
/ but as for her special friends. Yet above all this when she was other while
suffered to be houselyd / in receyuyng of ye blyssed sacrament of the altar /
they would not suffer her afterward to abide long in prayer as she was wont to
do / the which was to her impossible / by cause she received it with such a
passing fervor of devotion / so that ever soon after her spyryte was
rauysshed fro her bodily wits / and so she abode many hours to gydre / as it
is declared before in the second and in the last chapter of the second
party As soon as she was aspyed in that wise / some that were dysceyued by the
forsayde susters would come Inn and draw her out of the church / where often
times she should lie in the son when it was most hotest about mydde day
long time to gyders or then she cessyd of her rauysshynge and restored to her
bodily wits. And there with weeping and waylyng sum* of her susters that were
virtuously styred to grace kept her till she was restoryd.

Also there came another man that came in a time and found her lie there as a
deed womman in rauysshyng / and with a great anger he went to her and sporlyd
her with his feet. And when she was restoryd to her bodily wits again / it
was told her how she was ferde with / yet she would never blame hem therefore /
but rather excuse hem when other spoke evil of hem. Nevertheless they were
punysshed of our lord full hard / and that was a great sorrow to her / save
she durst not long strive against his ryghtwysnesse. For in a time there was a
lady / that had great Indygnacyon of this holy maid when she saw her in
such rauysshyng / wherefore she came to her and sporlyd her with her feet. But
as soon as she was come home to her own place / she dyed without receyuyng of
any sacrament. There was also another wretch that sporled her in the same wise
/ wha^ she was so rauysshed. And also was one of tho that one time bare her
out of the church when she was so rauysshed full vyolently / but he was
punysshed afterward that I am a ferde to tell it. This wretchyd man was so
enuyous and so odyous to this blyssed maid / that not wythstondyng all the
formest cursed dedys that he showed to her / yet he was about in a time for to
kylle her / and there was no thing that let him / but only he had her not
there he would have her

This holy maid knew no thing hereof / but our lord Jhesu punysshed him
therefore full sore / and that was in this wise within a little time after /
this wretchyd man / as he went to a certain place he was take with the frensye
that he cried night and day such words / help me help me / for the hang
man comet^ for to smite of my head. Other that were nyghe him and herd him /
they saw that he was so from him self comforted him that he should not be
aferde / and for fere that he should slay him self / as he showed by certain
tokenes that he would / they kept him the more dylygently Soon after it seemed
that he was amended / so that he was not kept so dylygently as he was But
pryuely anyghtes time he went out of the Cite / and henge and strangelyd him
self meruayllou^ly. He took a cord and tied it upon the foot of a tree even
by the ground / and that other end of the cord he put about his neck /
and so with pure vyolence he slyded upon the ground and killed him self / as
it was demed of them that found the deed body was not beryed in holy place /
but in the dongehyll as it was right semely that it should. By this maidens ye
may know what virtue of pacyence this holy maid had / and how pleasant her
dedys were to our lord / that so auengyd her wrongs unknowing to her.

Also yet shall I rehearse to you by manner of recapytulacyon three meruayllous
things that be written in the fourth chapter yt of secounde party / by the
which things ye may consydre that this holy maid had passyngly the virtue
of pacyence. As for the first it is written in the same chapter of a leprose
womman that was called Secta lyeng in an hospytall / the which womman not
only lacked necessaryes but also a keeper / for there was none that would keep
her by cause of her lepre. This holy maid herd here often she went to her and
was to her a servant / and ordained gladly for all that she neded. Of this
mynystracyon the syke leprous womman was proud / and styred what she could
this holy maid with many Iniuryes reproues and sclaundres puttyng against her*
But yet this holy maid was so armed with mighty pacyence that she was no
thing meued by her words / then the fend saw that he might in no wise
meue her from her merytorye service / he enfected and desouled her hondes with
the same lepre that the same leprous womman had / yet for that would she not
leave / but rather desired to be a lepre then for to leave her vnseruyd And so
she continued in her service unto the time she had beryed that syke womman.
And aftertyme she was beryed / our lord by miracle clensyd her from her lepre
in her hondes. Charity that is pacyence and benyngne taught her for to overcome
all this. As for the second / there is also written in the same chapter of
another womman that is called Palmarya / the which was one of the sustres of
penance. I shall tell you this womman Palmarya was hyghly set in a wicked
hate against this holy maid / so ferforthe that she dyffamed her wretchedly /
wherefore our lord gaf her first a sykenes in her body. Afterward she began to
perysshe body and soul / so that she might not esha^e dampnacyon / but if this
holy maid Katheryne by perfyte pacyence that charity formyd in her soul / had
prayed for her as it is rehearsed in the same for the chapter of the second
party. Also there was another suster of penance / that was called Andrea as
it is written in ye same chapter / the which had in her breast a foul stynkyng
kancre / yt there was never one yt would minystre to her for stenche Of this
herd this holy maid / and she came to ye syke wo^man and served her gladly
without any squeymousnes / in washyng and wypyng of her wound / and when she
felt in her self any manner squeymousnes she would then put her nose to ye
wound long time to gyds unto ye time her body defaylled / but ye lothenes went
away there by. Then ye fend Satan entered in to ye syke suster / and made
her to grutche with this holy maid and for to have her in suspeccion / and so
wood she was with her yt she sclau^dred her openly to her susters and said that
she had sinned flesshely and lost her maydenhode.

Al be it that this holy maiden and vyrgyn was heavy of this shlaunder: yet she
left never her service to her / but over came by meke seruyse and mighty pacy
ence her malice / and went to prayer as for a souerayn remedy against such
accusacions / at the last by grace of this holy maid and vyrgyns prayers and
by ye merytes of her strong patience / this seek suster saw this holy maid
and vyrgyn in time of her prayers transformed a fore her in to a great light
that she had thereby great comfort and repented here of her falls accusacion
Tha^ she called this holy maid and vyrgyr to her and asked her forgyuenes af
her cursed accusacion and all other to whom she had shlaundred her / she sent
after and told them that she had falsely accused this holy maid and
vyrgyn wherefore she asked them forgyuenes / and then she told them what
she saw of this holy maid and vyrgyn affermyng to them all that she was not
only a pure maid and virgyn but also an holy maid and vyrgin Loo dear friends
there the fend went to the fame this holy maid and vyrgyn by his malycious
excitacio^ / there he magnefyed her virtuous name all against his will: yet
all this our reverend lord almighty god by medytacion of the virtue of
patience that was in her / Then from that time forward this holy vyrgyns name
encrecyd so hyghely among the people / that it come to the audyence of two
popes which were in her time and many cardynals /

Ferthermore of another thing I shall tell you the which is written in the
same chapyter of the same woman Andrea. It befell in a time when this holy may
de and vyrgyn wasshyd and wyped her stynkyng wound / The fend made her so
skeymous that her stomach was meruey lously steryd for to cast with that she
aroos and said to her sefl thus Trewely wretch thou that art so skaymous off
thine susters sykenes: leave it well thou shall receive the fylte of her wound
with in thyn own body / Then she went and wysshe that stynkyng wound and
received the fylthe that came there fro in to a dysshe and went a side and
drank it of The next night after our reverend lord apperyd to her and said:
Daughter in this deed thou passyst in mine syngh / And thou have thereby pleasyd
me more than in any work that ever thou dedest And therefore by cause thou have
do so merueylously a deed for my love / I shall give the a merueylous drink
by the which thou shall be had in great merueyle among all creatours with
that as it seemed to her he putt her mouth to ye reverend wound of his sweet
blody side / And said daughter drink ynongh of the drink of mine side that is
merueylous and delectable by the which not oonly thyn soul but thyn boody
shall be fulfilled the which thou have despised for mine love / Fro that time
forword her s^omake had none appetyte to any matery al mete ne it night not
defye any mete and that was none merueyle For where that any creature has
received drink habundauntly of the well of life / what merueyle is it though it
need none help of other bodily mete / Out of this grace came that merueylous
fast the which is rehersyd in the first Chapter off the second party:
Wherefore was all this grace granted trow ye dear friends trewely for the
charytable pacyens that she had to syke folk and to all other for the great
charity that was so habou^daunt in her heart received and took the word of life
ye which brought forth fruit in patience that is thrytty fold fruit: syxty
fold fruit and an hundred fold fruit Thrytty fold fruit she brought forth
by paciens that she showed to Cecca the leprous woman / syxty fold fruit she
brought forth by patience that she showed to Palmarya / and an hundred fold
fruit she brought forth by the patience that she showed to Andrea this last
seek suster / Now I shall I tell you of sum things that been not rehearsed in
ye book before uneath was there any body that had conuersacio^ with this holy
maid and vyrgyn / but that they deed to her many iniutyes and wrongs one way
or other / so that there was one of the friars that was so fulfilled with the
fend that in the presens of all her susters he put to her full reproues and
defamacio^s She was never the more meued out off paciens but she charged her
susters that they should not trouble him ne tell nothing afterward to other
thar should soune to her repreff / what that ever they herd him speak the more
pacient the holy maid and vyrgyn was / ye more wood was he against her so that
in a time he stale her monye that was given to her for to do alms with / yet
for all this she was notfynge steryd but kept always patiently her charity /
and so at the last over came him by her patience /

Ouermore if I should tell you of the great patience that she had in suffering
of diverse infyrmytes of the body: my pain should not oonly fail me but also
mine understanding / she suffered ever co^tynuelly the pain of ylica passyo as
it is rehearsed in the vj / Chapter of the second party / where is declared
and told clerly the cause why she had that infirmyte / And therwyth she
had a pain in the head contynuelly /

And above all this she had a synguler continuell pain in her breast fro
that day that our reverend lord almighty god made her taste pains of his
precious passion as it is rehersyd in the vj / Chapter of the second party:
That same pain in her breast left with her the which passed all her other
bodily pains And yet more over with all these pains she had de right often the
feueres /

For all these pains she showed never sorry there / but ever glad there to
all folk and never pleyned her /

But all those that came to her to be comforted she comforted them with word
if it need were notwythstondynge her great infyrmytes she would labor for
them so that her sickness should not let to her. But that she would arise
out of her bed and traueyle both for her bodily hele and ghostely hele as it
is rehersyd in the vij / Chapter of the second party:

Ferthermore what pain she suffered of fendes it may not lyghtely be told
you by cause it was so often: It is touched before in the second Chapter of the
second party how often she was cast off fendes in to the fire albe it she was
in no wise I hurt / But specially of one thing Master Reymound bears
record yt in a time that he and certain of his brethren were out for the
health of sowles And this holy maid and virgyn with them and as they came
homward again a little a thyshalf the Cite of Seen / this holy maid and virgyn
for werynesse was set upon an horse / she had not ryden but a little time
that the fend drew here down in to a pyt^e so that the ^y^st that came to the
ground was her head: when master Reymou^de perceived that he cried help of
our glorious lady glorious virgyn Mary and came and found this holy maid and
virgyn all smelyng as she lay and despysynge the fend and she had none harm:
but she said to Master Reymound loo ye fend has do this / Then she was
take up and set upon the horse again eftsoon / And she rode not as ferve as
a man might shete an arow^ but that the send had eftsoon throw her down in
to a foul fenne or lake and the horse lay upon her side / Then she smelyd
and said this horse warmeth well my side there I suffer ^he pain of ylica
passio / and so she s^^rned the fend and had none harm / Master Reymound
and his fe law then took her up and would no more suffer her ride but ladde
her betwyne them both. By cause also they were nyghe the ^yte / Yet the cursed
fend / would not ase but always he tourmentyd her and drew her now on that
one side / now on that other side / And but ^he had be hold she should have
fall to the ground / Nevertheless always in suffryng of such tourmentis she
showed e^uer glad pacient chere and despised the fend / After such I^^usyons
followed great profyght of souls as it is made mention of the vij chapter of
the second party: And that knew well the fend wherefore he tourmentyd her in
that ^ wise that he did. And right as these tourmentis beren witness of her
great pacyence: Right so they may well bear witness that she was and is an
holy maid and vyrgyn in suffryng of them as it is openly declared in the
second chapter off the third party where it is rehearsed that she ended her
bodily life in such martyrdom / Ensample hereof I may tell you dear friends of
Saint Antony when he was in deserte he knew well that martyr dome was a
sovereign thing in the sight of our reverend l^rde almighty god and therefore
he desired martyrdom whom our reuer^nd lord almighty god suffered to be
tormentyd of ^endes for a martyrdom but yet he left not his bodily lyff for
such tourment / This holy maid and vyrgyn was so vyolently tormented by such
pains that she ended her bodly lyff with them ever thankyng our reave rend
lord almighty god. This was a geete token of holiness for to suffer martyrdom
of fendes:

Loo dear friends now have ye herd the virtue of paciens which this holy maid
and virgyn used wherefore she is oned and spoused to our reverend lord
almighty god sweet ^hesu Christ in the bl^sse off heaven / And thus I make an
end of this recapytulacion of this holy book to the honor and worship of
our glorious reverend lord almighty god all the ^euerend Trynyte / Cui
referantur lauds / honor e^ gloria in scla^ sclo^^^ Amen /

Here ends the lyff of that glorious vyrgyn and Martyr saint Katheryn off
Seen /
Here begynnen the reuelacio^s of Saint Elysabeth the kings daughter of
hungarye /
ON a day when saint Elisabeth was in preuy prayer: and sought her spouse Ihesu
Christ / with devout heart and drery spyryte: and found him not / as she was
wounte / She began to think her and egerly to syghe in her soul what were the
cause that her spouse vysy ted her not by insendynge of sweet comfortes / as he
was wont to do other times / And when she stylye dysposed her to goo to sum
spyrytualle brother for to have counseylle thereof: The blessed maiden marye
apperyd to her and said Elysa^eth yff thou would ^ee my dyscyple / I would be
thy maystres / and if you would be my servant: I would be thy lady / To whom
Elysabeth said / Lady who be ye that would have me dyscyple and s^^uaunt / To
whom maid Marye answered I am mother to the sone of god a live / whom thou have
chosen to be thy lord and spouse / Then she said there is no brother in the
world that may better inform the of thy spouse / than I may Then Saint
Elysabeth faylyng upon the earth / honouryd her and kneling she laid her
hondes ionyd to gyder bytwyxte the hondes of the blessed virgyn And eftsonys
our lady said / If thou wylt be my daughter dyscyple and servant: I would be
thy mother lady and maystresse / And when thou art of me suffycyently enforned
and taught / I would led the to the louyd spouse my sone / which wol receive
the in to his hondes As I now have received the / Then / afterward she began
to warn her and said / Flee chydynges and streues / ba^bytynges and
^u^murracions / and murmurs that be made of the: give no heryng to them: ne
let not thy heart be tormentyd thersore but think there may not so much ill be
spoken of the / but there is more In them than is spoken of the The next feste
of our lady than following after when Elysabeth gods seruau^te in prayeng
wept full bitterly dredynge that she had not fully kept the foresaid warynge
of the glorious virgyne

Suddenly she apperid to her not in sleep but wakyng swetely calling her by her
propre name and said: O Elysabeth my sweet daughter tourment ye not so much
though thou have not fully bowed to my warnynges and byddynges For why thou
beginnest now for to profit in the way of god / But thou atreyned not yet the
hyghenes of perfection But fight stedfas^ly against vices / and say on^ the
angelis Salutacion: that Gabryell gods messanger hayled me with / and all thy
trespace shall freely be forgive the: of my sone /

By process of time in the feste of saint Soolaste. whiles Elysabeth Crystis
ser uaunte was steadfast in prayer: and so bytterly she weped: that she might
not with hold her from utterly sobbynges* Ans cryenges with voice suddenly /

The blessed maid Mary^ apperyd to her so having with ^er Saint Johan
Euangelyst then the blyssyd maid said / O Elysabeth thou have chosen me to
be thy mother lady and maystres: but I would that thou make a charter to me of
this chesyng and thy wylfull byhetyngis and that thou may not slide from this
purpose wher^ore I have brought with me my sons loved dysciple Johan the
Euangelyste ^or to make thereof if thou consent an open Instrumente / Then
saint Elysabeth knelynge upon the earth / and with her hondes joined / honored
her and said / Of me my lady do what be pleysyng to you: as of your servant
/ And this gift she confermyd with oath / and seeyn Johan at the byddyng of the
glorious vyrgyne / made thereof an open Instrument / Ones in the vygyll of the
natyuite of our lord whiles she was prayeng with ententyue mind and said ye
salutacion of our good lady with hye voice and much devotion and shedyng of
teres: vysybly the blessed (...) marye apperyd to her and said* I am come to
teache the the prayer that I maid wha^ I was young and being in the temple

I purpose with a vysement in mine heart that I would have god my fader: And I
ordained me for to do waht I trowed most plesyng to him that I might find
grace in his sight: And he did teache me his law and of all the
co^maundementys therein / three namely I took to my stodeyng / to keep them with
souerayn besynes and with all my might* which are these* Thou shall love thy
lord god with all thy heart / and with all thy soul and with all thy strength
this thou shall love thy neyggbour as thy self / Thou shall love thy ^rende /
and thou shall have thyn enemy In hatred / man and good angel / I understand
my friend / And the devil and the wicked man in as much as he is wicked I
understand mine enemy / Out of this love of god and of m^n neighbor and hate
of mine enemy that is the devil and syn light in to me all fullness of grace
and virtue: Sothly this love may not be rootyd in mannis her^e / But where
hatred is of thy enemy that is the devil and sin /

Therefore if thou wylt get this love: do as I did in the temple in the
begynynge of my yonhede / For I rose at mydnyght and stonding before the aulte
with all business of my thought. I asked off god his grace by the which I
might keep the foresaid things / And in prayer before the altar / I made vij
askynges by order /

The first was that he would give me grace / thorugh the which he would give
me grace that I might fulfylle the first commandment that is for to love god
over all things with all my heart with all my sonle and with all my strenghes

The secoude was that I might fulfylle the second commandment of loving my
neighbors as my self and that he would make me to love ye which he loves /
and hate what he hates / The iij was that I might fulfylle ye third
commaundemen^ and that he would make me hate the enemy of mankind for
^nchosen that (...) took beginning of him: The iiij was yt he would give me
meekness patience myldnes devout and these other virtues by the which I
might be made more gracious in sight of him / The v / was yt he would make me to
see ye time in ye which yt blessed maiden should be born yt prophets for
sayenges should bear his sone* and yt he would keep my eyes with ye which I
might behold here / Mine erys with which I might her here sp^ke / My tongue
that I might touch here: my sete with the which I might (...) to her: my
knyes that I might honor her and see and honor her son syttyng in her
arm: The v^^was that he would give me grace: by the which I might keep all
the byddyngis of the bisshoppes and the ordeynaunce of the temple: The vij: and
the last was / that he would vouches af to keep his holy temple / And all his
own people ever to ^^tille his own service / When Elysabeth had herd this /
she braste out in these words and said / O my most excellent lady In what
manner said you this things were ye not ^halowed in your moders women / ne
were you not gyltles of al blame / and full of grace / To whom this blessed
maiden said / Here qu^d she Elysabeth / thought all I was so with out doubt
as thou say / Nevertheless wit thou this in sothfastenesse that I held me
that time as vile and wretchid de and unworthy the grace of god / as thou
hold the now: And much more unworthy / And therefore I asked ay of him that
he would vouchesafe to send in to me his grace and his virtue /

Over that in a night whiles Elysabeth Crystis servant began to think / how
god the glorious fader was plesid in the glorious maid M^^ye / Yet why les
sh^lyued: for that he would his sone took flesh of her / And took the blessed
maiden answerde to her / Of me my lovely daughter god wrought: as ^e that ^^an
touch the harp or the fydele / For why first he temperyth it that it makes a
sweet sown / and acordyng ^owne / and afterward ledyng and touching he synget
sum thing with the sown of it: Right so god the fader first he ordained
and tempered in me all my stringes and all my wits as well of the soul as of
the body:

After that he tou^^edand ordained with the finger of his ghost all my saweys
and my works to the plesaunce of him and of ^e sythes he raised me with
company of angels to be hold the court of heaven / Wherefore I found so
much comfort and echeing of great and of ghostely sweetness that after when
I come again to my self I was so fulfilled in love of that cont^ee that I
desired ^or to half stones trees* bestys^and other creatures for love of him
that them formyd / I coueted also for to do seruyse to all the ladies that
came to the temple / for love of her maker off whom I tasted such sweetness
that they may not be spoken / Therefore daughter on that same manner / when god
would give the any grace or comfort: thou shall take it mekely / and suffer
him to do of the what so be pleseyng to him / Ne thou shall not wax proud
under color of meekness / And say lord why do thou these things to me I
am not worthy and such odyr / For though thou be a^therwysest / he knows
better what is to do of the / than thyn own self: And if he works in the
any wounderfull thing / the joy is his and not thyn: Then it befyll while
this homely speaking was drawn on long / that one of Elysabeth fellows passed
forth where she prayde whom saint Elysabeth gretely blaming said full
sharply to her / Whereto gooste thou now hither and thider this time before my
face / And began as it were to menace her with words and signs: Then when
she was passed our lady the blessed maid said to Elysabeth Crysty^ servant.

O daughter loo who that thou art pet a fool and vndescrete / that ^plyest
thy^^ heart to any worldely things while thou ha^t me present with ye.
Therefore use now my presence this nyghtfor o^ specy: all grace I am sentefro
my son to the that thou ask sekerly what the lyketh: And I would answer
instedfastenesse to the all thing that thou ask: Neueryelesse for thou
applied thine heart to the de de of thy ^olowed and reproved here vndiscely I
would give to the penance / that*in no wise thou go again to thy bed this night
/ ne I think not to show the sum thing now / the which I would have said
if thou had not offended my presence / when that night was passed and. day
was come: Elysabeth began to make much sorrow and gretely to be tormented for
the offense she had done in the / night before to the mageste of ye glory ouse
virgyne / as it is said above: And she / dread gretely / lest she might never
after recover such a grace / and so great a comfort To whose preuy thougt the
blessed / maid answered aperyng to her ef^sones and said Dread the not
daughter ne tormente the not with folly doubtyng for wantyng of me / for thy
trespass that is passyd / for why thy trespass is now for / gyueng to the by thy
penance / and I am now come to the that thou ask what the: lyketh / for I am
ready to give the answer of althynges as I bydde ye To whom Saint Elysabeth
said I pray you / lady that ye say me / what steryd you forto ask of our lord
that he would let you of his special grace seen that maid borne of the
which his ^one should be borne. And she answered on a day when I / had
comfort of god so wonderful that unto that time* I was not expert of none
such / and came again to myself I / began to think and desire with will
full brennyng heart / if I might do onythyng / or have in me / for the which
god / would let me never part from him / And when I thought thus / I rose
up: and went to a book / and began to read in it. And the first o^enyng of
the book: came before my sight the word of Esaye the prophet Ecce virgo
concip^et et pariet ^^^^um and ct: That is Loo a maiden shall conceive and bear
a son and c^: And as I bethought me / thynkyng that maydenhode pleased much
to god: Sithe he would his son should be borin of a maid then I purposed
in my heart for the reverence of him to keep maydenhode and if it befyll me to
see hy^ / for to serve hy^ / in maydenhede all my life time. And if it nedyd for
to goo with her through a^ the world After this the next night following
whiles I prayed with devotion of souls besought god that he would let me see ye
maid before or I deyede / sodey^ly when I was in derkenes so much /
bryghtenesse appeared to me before my / sight that in comparyson of it the son
/ was as naught / and fro that shynnge I / herd a voice clereli seyeng to me
maiden of Dauyd kyured thou shall bear my ^onne. And he added thereto / wot
thou certainly that the same worship and reverence that thou desired for to do
to another maiden / shall be done to the before other. I will for sothe that
thou be that / maiden / the which shall here my son. And the which not
only thou shall have him by thy self / ne in thy self / but by / law of
matrymonye thou shall may give him to whom the lyketh / and he shall not have
my grace ne my love ne he shall* not enter the kingdom of my son yt / will
not love the / and trow the / the mother of my sonns that shall take flesh
of* the for health of mankind. And thou all one shalt may grant to other of
his grace / the which thou shall receive of / me. And when I herd this
words I was rauysshed of my self for much / dread and wonderyng / and I
fylle down prostrate on my face as deed / for I might not hold up my self /
but suddenly / the Angels of god stood by me reysyng me fro the earth and
comforted me / and sayd^ Dread the not / for why thou art blyssed above all
wommen and in / the restyth gods grace / by the which / all may lightly be
fullfylled / that be said to the of our lord:

For that time forward I cessyd not / to give louynges to my creature day:
and night / with heart / mouth / and work / with stable and certain truth
abiding the day and the hour when tho / things should be fullfylled / that
were / showed to me of our lord: I said also often sythtes within my self O
most benygne lord / sythen yt lyketh the for to / give so great grace to
thine unworthy / ha^dmayden I beseech the that thou give me the spyryte of
wysdom / that I may worthily conceive thy son maker of heaven and earth and
serve him to pay The spyryte of understanding / by the which I may with
lyghtned soul fulfill his mekenes / in as much as is possible in this world.
The spyryte of counseyll / by the which I may keep and govern him as it /
besemeth while he is in his chyldehode: and weeping of man's Infyrmyte / and
not yet formyng words in spekyng. The spyryte of strenthe / by the which che
I may with manly heart bear mind the name of his worthynesse / and stedfastely
cleue unto him. The spyryte of conyng / by the which I may enfourme all thoos
that shall / have to do with him and that will follow him. The spyryte of pity
/ by the which I / may have compassyon of his sweet man head and of his tender
compleccion / as / it seems for to have. And the spyryte of dread of god / by
/ which I may serve him with a meke soul and dew reverence.


All this things my dear daughter the which I asked were granted to me as
thou may understand by the Angellys salutacyon / which I was haylled of
Gabryell the Angel.

Another time as Elisabeth Cristys servant stood in prayer and thought how /
much grace god hadd done to the glorious vyrgyn mary. She apperyd to her and
said my daughter thou thynkest that I had so much grace without traueylle of
my creator / but it is not so out / take the grace of halowynge in my mods
womb. All other grace I had with much travel of soul and body contynually
prayeng day and night with fulle brennyng desire and weeping with full bitter
morning / and ever thynkyng spekyng and workyng that I trowed were / most
plesyng to my creator Eschewing with sovereign keeping me fro all offenses of
him / ye were it never so little and. then she said / have thou for certain
/ daughter that no moystour of pleasyng devotion or gift of grace or virtue
desce^dyth perfytely from god in to man's heart but by devout prayer of soul
and sharp bodily traueyll: For after that a man perfytely offers to god two
mytes the / which he has that is his soul and his body and ordeyneth him to
his seruyse and honor our lord god of his high graces begins to glad:
that man's soul in so much that he n ay not bear it / but for swetnes and
for wondryng it fares as it were in hit self / as a man that were drunk of
sweet wine and mighty / put out of him self that may not bear it for
feblynes of head.

And then that soul knowed that she has no thing down pleasyng to god for
to have so great comfort before.

And she holds more under vile / and more worthy dyspyte / then ever she
held her before / but afterward when such a soul torneth again to her
self / she yeldeth thankynges and louynges to god / with devotion and affection
of will / and woldeth her unworthy of grace. And with much dread storeth her
self as unkind ageynste so great a benefactour.

And god seyeng her ever wax more meke thorught the gifts that she receives
/ he took more head to give her moogyftes of grace in so much / that as it
were that he fulfilled her desire in this world. So that her thinks / that
her dwelling is in heaven with god / and not in earth with men here / and
thynked also that she has paradyse in her self.

So I knowleche that it befyll with me while I lived in earth / and when I
was all brennyng in gods love / and felyd so much swetenes in him / that
for him all the world was vile to me / Ones when I was a lone with devotion
in my preuy chamber.

Loo suddenly the Angel Gabryell stood by me / and as the Gospel seyth /
sheylled me and said. Aue gracia plena etc. Off the which salutacyon when I
herd it first / I was fer^e / but afterward that I was comfor^ed with his
holy and sweet speech and made seker / not doubtyng these things to be sothe
that he showed. I fill to the earth / and knelynge with my hondes ioynde I
honored and said. Ecce ancilla domini. fiat michi secundum verbum tuum. That
is to say. Loo here the servant of god / be it done to me after thy word.
The which word said anon I was rauysshed / and in so great fullness of
gods grace enbasshed me that I never felt so much sweetness and comfort
in my soul.

And in that rauysshyng gods son took flesh of my puryst blood / with
out any wem of me / or (...) delight.

The cause why god deed this grace to me / was feyth and mekenes / with which
I troweth in fulfeyth the Aungellys words / and meked me and dressed me all to
gods will. And therefore he wouchesaue to give me so much grace.

And so thou my daughter in all things that god heteth or does to the /
have thou not in mistrowyng / ne yensto^d him not seyeng lord / why do thou
this to me. But by exsample of me say.

Ecce ancilla domini etc. And any time be not fulfilled / as it is hight to the
or else it is taken fro the that was given to the of god. Blame thy own self
/ and think that thou have done sum trespass before the syghte of gods
mageste / for the which gods sentence is changed for he has will to
purchase the life wythouten end / he needs to be buxom of heart to the
commandments and love him self to god / by very meekness and obedyence /
for the contrayous of tho sins / pride and Inobedyence of our fore faders
Adam and Eve / for the which they lost the grace and the dygnyte that they
were made in.

Over that then in another time on the vygyle of the natyuyte of our lord /
when Elysabeth Crystys seruannt was during in long prayer and asked mekely of
god with much de^ocyon and falling of terys / that he would give her grace by
ye which ^he might love him with all her heart. The blyssed maiden was beside
and said to her / who is he that loves god with all his heart / where it be ye
Elysabeth. And when she d^ede to af^erme and said that she loved god with all
her heart: And therefore she was still and answered no thing / then the
blessed maid said to her / would thou that I say who loves god perfytly For
certain Bartholomew thapostle loved him well Laurence the ma^tyr and Johan the
Euan gelyst and other apostles and martyrs. And thereto she said would thou
for the love of him ben slain rostyd or drynk venym And when she durst not
afferme ne deny that she would suff^e this things for the name of christ.
Then the blyssed maiden said. In steadfastness I say the daughter if thou
would for love of god be spoiled of all worldly things and garments of thy now
mind or will / so yt you will no thing have ne ^oueyte in this world I will
procure to the of my son the mede that Bartholomew has for his fleyeng / and
if thou be^^ patiently wrongs and reproues and all manner of wrongs born of
the / thou shalt have the mede that Laurence had for the rostyng of his body.
And when thou art reproved / soorned and se^^^ at naught of other / if thou
be^e it gladly and mekely thou shall have the mede that Johan the Euangelyst
had for the drynkyng of venyme. And if thou would be t^ewe to me and be buxom
to me / I would be nyghe to the to fulfill all that is said before / and I would
be with the ever helpyng the when it is spedfull to the. Over that another time
as saint Elysabeth prayed / and in her prayeng she thought with devotion of
soul and in what wise the blyssed maid prayed as she had showed her as it is
said before.

The blyssed maid answered her / In prayeng daughter I did as he that will
new make a fair well / first he gothe to the root of the hill under which
the water spryngeth / and herken^th besyly vn^ what side the veins of water
gothe / and when he sought him by herkynge / then he begins to delue in
that side of the hill till he find an able beginning of a welstede fro the
spryngyng veins / and afterward he dressyth water in to the well stead / the
which he makes large and fair and clean After that he makes a wall all
about the well / and in the mids of the well a stone pylar fastened in it
pypes all about thorugh the which the water may pass out of each half / more
prop^^tably to the use of men. This did I ghostely / for then went I to the
hill / where I besyly herkened and learned the law of moses / and all the x
commandementes / Then fond I the vein of water when I learned in redyng
thynkyng and prayeng that the wellhede and beginning of all good is for to
love god with all the heart and with all the strengthes yt I can wa^ to ye well
show / when I conceived a styff desire to love all things that god loves /
and hate all that he hates / than forsothe I kept shynyng water and clear when
I studied to keep ye desire of mine heart and ye affeccion of ye sensualyte
vnhurted from all fylth of sin / than I raised a wall above the well wha^ I
besyed me to keep in me al ^tues vnhurted and namely mekenes / pacyens and
myldnes with hope and charity to mi lives e^de / tha^ I reised ye peler and
fastened in it pypes wha^ I gave my self in exsample to all mankind / so yt
none from now forth may be excused* For why who^ someuer will follow me and be
b^usome to my wrongs* he shall find grace and heeale thorugh my procuryng*
And certainly wit thou daughter that he that loves me not. may find no
grace of my sone: and as it follows thereby another of the fader ne of holy
ghost / These things my dear daughter I say to the that thou learn to ask
grace of god in prayer with faith and meekness as thou knew that I did by
things before said: For wythouten prayer: It is impossible to get the grace of
god /

Neuerthelater virtues and grace bennot given of god to all I like: For whi
they can not ask them alyke off god al in prayer* In mekenes and faith ne
keep them when they have them / And therefore should men excyte on an other in
prayer / that echosen come to other that god has give to him and take off
other that he has not him self.

Wherefore daughter I would that thou pray besely / not only for thyn own
heal / but also of other / For there by shall grace be encresyd to the and to
other: And thy prayers shall be fruytfull / It happened that Elysabeth was
morning in a spyrytuall dysese during three year. And that was for thought that
she might not have her confessor as often / as she would be confessyd /
wherefore god having compassyon of her desolacyon / he assygned saint Johan the
Evangelist to be her confessor commaundynge that so often as she would be
shryuen he should besely here her and assoyle her by his auctoryte / And it
shop so by goddis grace: that when she shroue her to saint Johan she had
full mind of all her sins. and when she shroue her to any other confessor /
She had uneaths mind what she should say: She was not glad and iocunde
after her assoyling* as wha^ she shroue her to Saint Johan /

It befyll on a day that Elysabeth gods servant suffered a great notable
wrong of another wicked woman / wherefore as to mennys sight / She was gretely
dysplesyd. At the last when she came again to her self and thought that she
had suff^ed wrong / Then suddenly she lyghtned with a ^eruent spyryte off
charity gave her to prayer / And with passing morning and flowynge of teres
devoutly prayenge: she besought god that forsayde woman and for all other of
which she had taken any wrong / brast out in these words / O sweet and aid
hastynge god / that gyldest good for ill / I beseech the that thou ye^de to
her that bears on me this wrong. a notable gladness of holsom comfort so
that she have Joye thereof as I should Joye if I were thy good daughter / and
this said a voice suddenly soned to her erys and said Elysabeth though never
made prayer that pleased m^ so much: as this does And therefore I make it
known to the that all thy sins be forgyuen the / And when she began to tell
him by one and by one / all the trespaces that she had in fresshe mind:
saying / such and such have I done / the voice answered these and al other
ar forgy^e the Then she said: who art you quod she you spekest to me and for
^euest me all my sins / and the voice said to her* I am he to whose feet
marye magdalene came and went away clensyd of all sins / Ons also whiles
elysabeth bythought her in her prayer what thing yt she might do to ye most
plesau^ce of god she herd a voice sayng to her: Spera in domino ^^ fac
bonitatem et cetera / That is hope in god and do goodness and dwell in e^
the and thou shall be feed in the riches of it / Delyt the in our lord: and he
shall give the thyn askyges of thyn heart / Hope in him and he shall work and
he shall led out as light / Thy right wysnes and thy dome as myddaye Be thou
suggette to our lord and pray him / On a day whiles Elysabeth was lastyng in
prayer: and full bytterly wept her sins / our lord Jhesu Christ that is
confortatour of them that been soroufull said to her apperyng / O my dear
daughter trouble the not ne be not sorry for mind off thy sins / For why all
thy sins ben forgyuen the / And when she answered the contrary and said that
she was certain* that if he would do with her rightfully and not mercyfully /
she was worthy to be dampened to the pains of hell Then our lord Jhesu
Christ answered and said: Daughter ryghtuosnesse is now done to god my fader /
For they sins / and satysfaction is fully made to him / for them all / after
that ryghtuousnesse asks. For if thou have offen did god / with all the
membrys of thy body / I was ^^ormentyd in all the membris of my body for thyn
and for all man kinds sins / For if thou trespased with hand and with fete
/ My handys and my feet were nailed to the cross with hard nails* If thou
have trespased with thy eyes* Mine eyes were blynfyld with a clothe / if thou
have trespased with thyn ^erys mine ^rys herd blasphemes and great wrongs / if
you have trespased with thyn heart my heart was persed with a spear and if thou
have offendyd with all thy body / My body was shorged so that from the sole of
the foot unto the tope of my head / apperyd in me no stead hole.

Therefore daughter think not but that dew satysfaccion for thy sins* is do
full right wysly to god my fader: Sothely I ^uffred the pains of all sinful
and the wrongs of them / I bare in my heart that did not sin / ne gyle was
founden in my mouth:

On another time when Elysabeth gods servant was prayeng / Suddenly she saw
with her ghostely eyes: a full fair hand that had long fyngers and the
palm large and broad: And in the mids of the palm was a wound all read of
blood / And as soon as she understood that it was the hand of Christ: She
wondrede that it was so small and so long / And also ne it was answerde to
her* that it was so small / For which christ lived in flesh / On nyghtes when
he prayed / he held his hondes streyth forth / And on days* he t^aueyled with
hondes and his fete / and all his body by tounes and castellys prechynge the
kingdom of god. And after this she herd a voice saying to her / Elysabeth loo
/ This third time I say to the / thy sins ben fogyuen / And thou have my
grace: To the which voice she answerde. Lord if I be hallowed as thou sayste
whero^ is it that I may not wythholde me but that I offend thy mayeste each
day in sum thing

And the voice said to her / For if thou no time offended / thou should not
be so mocho mekyd / And by that I followed / that thou would not love me so
much. And thus thou sholdest wax worse then fendes that both trusts and
dredeth /

Therefore I have not so haloweth / ye but that thou may sin* But it
suffyseth to the that I have give the so much grace: that would suffer thy
self be slain rather then thou sholdest offe^de dedely: And when this was
said / Christ apperyd to her openly / And her thought that thyke lopred blood
largely flowed out of his side / wherefore she began to / wonder / To whom
Christ said daughter wonder the not For why when I hangyd on the cross all my
membrys were dysioynyd out of ioynte for undone trespass / And mine entrayles
were broken and my veins opened / And therefore so haboundaunt and thyke
lopered b^ode followed out of my side / All these things before said. Sayn^
Elysabeth a boute the endyng of her lyff / the which was in the year of Our
lord a M CClxi affermyng that she had seyn and herd. as it is above wryton.
And she said that she had so great certain off them all / that she would
rather suffer death the^ ne to doubt any little part of them that they were
not true.

Here ends the reuelacyons of saint / Elysabeth the kings daughter of
hu^garye /
Enprynted at westemynster by Wynkyn. de word.

printer's or publisher's device W ^ C




