A LEARNED AND EXCELLENT Treatise containing all the principal grounds of
Christian Religion. Set down by way of conference in a most plain and
familiar manner.

Written first in French by master Matthew Virell, after translated into
Latin: and now turned into English for the use of our Countrymen.

1. Tim. 4. 15. These things meditate, and labor in them, that thy profiting
may be manifest to all.

The second Impression, corrected and amended.

printer's device of Robert Dexter (McKerrow 260) DEVS IMPERAT ASTRIS.

Imprinted at London by Richard Field for Robert Dexter, dwelling in Paul's
churchyard at the sign of the brazen serpent. 1594.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader, an admonition touching reading.
IT falls out in matter of learning as it does in matter of meats. For as in
meats, one, and the self same dish is diversely set forth, according to the
invention of the dresser, and appetite of the eater: so in learning, one, and
the self same point is diversely handled, according to the discretion of the
writer, and capacity of the Reader. Hence it comes that in humane learning,
every writer (almost) has his Grammar, his Rhetoric, his Logic, his
Philosophy; and in divine knowledge, his Catechism, his Common places, his
Commentaries. Many complain of this, as a thing which distracteth the mind,
co^foundeth the memory, and hinders the judgment. And not without cause.
For as variety of meats do corrupt in the stomach, and breed sickness,
rather then preserve health: so variety of treatises, upon one and the self
same thing, does hinder the growth and profiting of diverse, in soundness of
judgment and godly life. But the reformation hereof, is a work worthy of all
the Churches, Princes, and states in christendom; for the beginning and
perfecting whereof, private men can but pray and wish well; and every man
carefully look to the warrant of his own work. In the mean time let no man
condemn, the variety and choice of Gods manifold gifts, which both in bodily
and spiritual things, set forth the riches of his wisdom and goodness.
What then? Surely the corruption and vanity of men, who, do either not use at
all, or else greatly abuse the gifts and blessings of God bestowed upon them.
This vanity appears partly in the food of the body, but more specially in
the food of the soul. 1. Sam. 28. 23.
For no man will refuse his meat except it be in some extreme passion.
Besides, how careful are the most part in making their provision? how curious
in asking what is wholesome or hurtful for the^? how precise and constant in
keeping their hours for dinner and supper? how willing to keep themselves to
some few kinds of meat, though they have often tasted and fed on them before?
But touching the food of the soul (which consists chiefly in the pure use of
Gods public worship, and partly in holy prayers, meditations, and readings in
private) how many do refuse it as a fruitless and unsavory thing? And though
the most part be content, for some carnal respect, to show themselves in the
public assemblies: yet who shall find a faithful Christian, that is careful
to redeem the time, and to make himself, by private reading and meditation,
more fit to reap fruit by the public ministry of the word and sacraments?
But know thou (beloved) that as they, who, through error, prejudice, or self
love, are so addicted to their private studies that they despise or neglect the
public ministry, shall (without speedy mercy from God, fall into diverse fond
opinions, and dangerous errors, and pine away in their ignorance and sins: so
to little purpose is out hearing of sermons abroad, if there be not a settled
and constant course of private prayer, reading, meditation, and conference at
home. But because my purpose is now to speak only of reading, and that very
briefly (for the argument is infinite, and I have somewhat touched it else
where,) Preface to master Cuppers Sermons
I would entreat thee Christian reader, and in the Lord Jesus beseech thee (if
my request may seem reasonable) that thou would be as wise for thy soul as
thou art for thy body; as mindful of the life to come, as thou art of this
present life; Four things to be observed in reading.
and that for this end thou would observe these four things, as well for
the one as for the other. 1 Provide the best books.
First therefore make thy provision of good books, especially of the book of
all books, I mean the holy Canonical Scriptures, in that respect called the
Bible: and then of some other, such as are most fit for thy calling and
capacitiy. And because thou shall want either money to buy, leisure to read,
judgment to understand, or memory to bear away the substance of al good books,
provide the best. Many will say, they find by experience that in meat and
apparel the best is best cheap: and thou shall be sure to find, that among
books the best will yield most fruit to thy soul. 2 In chus^ng use the advice
of the godly learned.
Secondly, because the most part are babes in judgment and discerning of
spiritual things (though every fool be wise in his own eyes) not knowing what
is fit and profitable, or what is hurtful and inconuenie^t: let me entreat
thee to ask counsel and advise of the godly learned, especially of thine own
pastor (if God have blessed thee with an able and faithful man) Heb. 5. 14.
or otherwise of him whose public ministry may give thee hope that his
senses are exercised in the discerning of good and evil. No wise man will
receive a writing for the least plot of ground without the counsel of some
learned Lawyer, nor a medicine for his body, without the advice of some learned
Phisitio^: and will thou venture upon a book, wherein may be some damnable
error, which may co^uay from thee thy heavenly inheritance; or some deadly
poison, which may kill the soul, without the direction of some godly divine?
do it not. 3 Be constant in keeping of hours.
Thirdly, remember that nothing is more hard, then to be constant in holy
exercises. For herein the subtlety and rage of our invisible enemy Satan
does most notably appear, herein the frailty and corruption of flesh and
blood will bewray it self. Here profit and pleasure, business, and idleness,
matters at home and matters abroad, company, and a thousand occasions will lie
in our way as so many Lions to let and hinder us. Therefore herein gird up the
loins of thy mind, put upon thee the whole armor of God, and daily renew thy
covenant of redeeming the time made with God and thy own conscience. Thou
see that men who are most greedy of the world, will not miss (scarce once in
a year) their ordinary hours of eating and drinking. Why then should thou
be so sickle and unfaithful in forgetting and omitting the times of reading
and praying unto God. 4 Read a good book through, and read it often over.
Fourthly, when thou have begun a good book, give not over till thou have
ended it, and when thou have read it over once, let it not be tedious unto thee
to read it over again and again, for thou shall find the second reading more
fruitful the^ the first, and the third more fruitful then the second, and so
the oftener the better This is a great vanity and an evil sickness among
me^, that if they have once seen the title of a book, and the authors name,
and read two or three leaves, it is cast at their heels for ever after, as if
they had attained all that could be learned by it, when they can name the title
and author of it. Wherefore for this point mark the course and manner of me^
in the keeping and increasing of their bodily strength though they eat their
fill of this kind of meat to day, yet they come with great desire and fresh
appetite to the same again within a day or two, yea oftentimes the same day:
otherwise it argues either an extreme weakness or an intolerable
daintiness of the stomach. Here perhaps thou will ask what books, beside
the holy Bible I would commend unto thee: Wherein though I see some
difficulty, because it cannot be done without co^parisons which are counted
odious: yet for thy good I will not spare to show my poor opinion: No one book
of the like volume more fruitful then Virell.
which is that no one man (that I have seen) has set down the sum and
grounds of Christian Religion more holily and happily, for the capacity and
edifying of all sorts, the^ this present author. For this cause I specially
reco^mend him to thee, as one by who^ thou may specially profit if thou call
upon the name of God through Jesus Christ, and bind thy self to diligence and
constancy: remembering that as one dish of meat, well chewed and digested,
will comfort nature more then diverse delicates, that lie raw and undigested in
the stomach, so one book often and thoroughly read will do thy soul more good,
then the superficial fight and taste of a thousand. And so I commend thee to
the Lord, who vouchsafe to give thee wisdom in all things, for his mercies
sake. Black Friars the 23. of July. Thine in the Lord Jesus.

STEPH. EGERTON.

The argument and order of the three books of Christian Religion.
The first Book.
Declares the fundamental points of our salvation, and it stands upon four
heads. 1 1 The first entreats of the knowledge of God, who being perfectly
just, and perfectly merciful, does not only show mercy, but does also
declare his justice. ibidem. 2 The second of the knowledge of man, who being a
most miserable sinner, is guilty of eternal death before the judgment seat
of God. 9 3 The third of the knowledge of Christ, who having satisfied the most
perfect justice of God for us, opens a way unto his most perfect mercy, that
we may obtain forgiveness of our sins. 15 4 The fourth of faith, whereby we
are made one with Christ, and so partakers of all his benefits, and even of
everlasting life. 22

The scond Book.
Contains the testimonies of our salvation, and that stands upon two
special points, whereof 1 The first entreats of good works, by the which
faith lying hid in our hearts, is manifested. 78 2 The second of prayer, which
has the first and chief place among good works, to testify and confirm our
faith. 188

The third Book.
Sets before us the outward means, whereby God brings us unto salvation,
and it consists upon four principal points. 219 1 The first entreats of
the ministry of the word, by the which the holy Ghost begets faith in our
hearts, keeps it there, and increases it. ibidem. 2 The second of the
Sacraments ordained of God to be as seals of the word, to the end we might
with greater assurance embrace the promises revealed unto us in the word of
Christ. 140 3 The third of Baptism, whereby God testifies that we are
received of him into covenant, while by it he communicates Christ unto us,
together with his benefits. 248 4 The fourth of the Lords Supper, by the
which God witnesses, that his covenant is confirmed in us by it, making us
more and more partakers of Christ and his gifts. 259
A sum of all, set down in a triple or threefold method, that we may the
better know the order and coherence of every point of Christian Religion, as
also the truth, excellency, and profit of the same. 259
THE FIRST BOOK of Christian religion, wherein the grounds of our salvation
are handled.
Speakers. Theophilus. Matthew.


CHAP. I. Of the knowledge of God, who being perfectly just, and perfectly
merciful, does never exercise his mercy, but he does also exercise his justice.
Theophilus. MOst dearly beloved brother, I have oftentimes desired to hear
of you, all the doctrine of Christian religion in exact order, because once I
heard you plainly and briefly discoursing of some points thereof, wherein I
was not a little satisfied.


Matthew. As my good will has not at any time in any thing ben wanting unto
you (most loving Theophilus) so I will with the more ready mind perform that
which you desire when it shall be convenient, because the thing of it self is
profitable, and I trust it shall be to mine own edifying. For this is proper to
Christian doctrine, that the oftener it is handled, the more plentifully it
sets forward the force and working of it in the hearts of the faithful.


Theoph. Go to then, have thou not now leisure, to declare unto me every head
of Christian religion, in the order, wherein I have determined to ask thee? I
will cause them to be put in writing, and so to be communicated with my
brethren.


Mat. If I had not leisure, there is not any business which I would not leave
to satisfy you in this behalf: for what is there, wherein time can be better
spent?


Theoph. Seeing therefore our disputation shall be of Christian religion, I
desire to be taught, what is meant by the word Religion.


Mat. Before I answer, I pray God our heavenly Father, to be present with us by
his holy Spirit, that we may neither think nor speak any thing, which may
not tend to the honor of his own name, and to the edification of his whole
Church.

The word, Religion, is derived of a word that signifies to bind And it is a
spiritual bond, by the which men in a certain holy reconciliation are made
one with God, and are kept in his love and fear, that at length they may be
partakers of his heavenly glory, and of the blessed life. Which no Religion can
do but that which is Christian, that is to say, that which has the foundation
in Christ.


Theoph. Why so?


Mat. Because by Christ alone through faith we are reconciled unto God, and
that freely, and so are made one with God by a most near bond, that he may be
glorified of us in this life, and eternally in the heavens.


Theoph. From whence have we proof of that?


Mat Out of the word of God, which is most certain, and upon the truth whereof
rests all Christian doctrine.


The. What understand thou by the word of God?


Mat. The Canonical books of the Bible, whereunto for this cause is given the
name of holy Scripture.


Theoph. How came it to pass, that those Books were called the Bible?


Mat The Christians of the primitive Church, after they had gathered into one
volume the books of the Prophets and Apostles, by an excellency called that
volume in Greek (...), because those books far pass others. For truly the
word of God in worthiness and excellency goes beyond all the words of men.


Theoph. But how may it certainly be proved, that the doctrine which is
contained in those books is the word of God, seeing that the Prophets and
Apostles, who it is certainly known were men, were the authors and writers of
them?


Mat. First of all indeed it is necessary, that the holy Ghost which spoke by
them, nay whose instruments only they were, do engraue that faith in our
hearts. Then, that assurance may be confirmed by observing the special
excellency, which it is easy to perceive in those writings, as also the most
holy effects which they work in us.


Theoph. What excellency do you mean?


Mat.



Ier. 26. 12. Dan 9. 24.
Hence it is that David gives the^ most excellent commendation, saying: Psalm.
12. 6.
The words of the Lord are pure words, as the silver is tried in a furnace of
earth, fined seven fold. I say nothing of their antiquity, and that not
without a miracle they were preserved among so many enemies, which would have
destroyed them, and among such cruel persecutions.


Theoph. But what holy effects do they work in us?


Mat. This general we may mark, that the Church has always (as it is at
this day) been gathered together by the authority of the holy Scripture: that
is to say, a company of men of diverse ages, sexes, and conditions, which
worshippeth God according to the instructions and doctrine of that Scripture: a
good part whereof in all ages has sealed the same with their blood. But the
special or particular effects are, that they ravish the reader, and enforce
him to the reverence of God, no otherwise then as if God himself did speak.

Moreover, that by the reading of them, our hearts are touched with an earnest
feeling of our sins.

Last of all, that they lift up our minds above all heavens, kindle within us a
desire of a better life, and cause us that in comparison thereof, we do easily
despise all other things.

All which are not done by the writings of men, notwithstanding they be
artificially handled. Therefore the Apostle to the Hebrews says, that the
word of God is living, mighty in operation, and piercing more then any two
edged sword, and that it does reach even Heb. 4. 12.
to the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, of the joints and marrow.


Theoph. Verily these are most strong arguments, to prove the truth of Gods
word. But there be some which say, that all the authority of it depends upon
the Church.


Mat. They do, as if one should say, that the light of the sun hangs upon
the testimony of men. For as the Sun shall not cease to shine, although all
men be blind: even so the word of God, shall never receive loss, whether it be
allowed or dissalowed of men.

Moreover how can it be, that the authority of the word of God, should depend
upon the allowance or consent of the Church, seeing that the Church it self
borrows all her authority of the word, as it were of her foundation? for it
is built upon the foundation of Ephesians. 2. 20.
the Apostles and Prophets.


Theoph. But they say, that in this place, it is not meant of the truth of the
word in it self, but of the mean whereby it is understood, and received of
men. Which they affirm to hang upon the testimony and allowance of the
Church. To which purpose they allege this saying of a certain Father, I
should not have believed the Gospel, if the authority of the Aug. contra
epist. fund. Manich.
Church did not move me


Mat. This sentence makes not for them. For this was the mind of that holy
man, that being a stranger from the faith, he was moved by the authority of
the Church to embrace the Gospel, and that after by the working of the holy
Ghost, he was confirmed it that faith. Which he does a little before declare
in these words; The Church first calls us to believe that, which yet we are
not able to see, that being made stronger in faith, we may come to understand
that which we believe, not now men, but God himself inwardly strengthening and
lightning our mind.

Which thing I doubt not but it is true, namely that the witness which the
Church gives to the word of God, does not a little move us to embrace it. But
then only this is, when our faith is beginning: for when it is come to any
age, and we our selves by reading and hearing of the word, have tasted of that
truth, then we believe not by the testimony of the Church, but by that which
the holy Ghost seals in our hearts. In so much as if the Church should then
teach us a doctrine diverse from that, we would not give our consents unto it.
This shall be made plain by the example of the Samaritanes. Those hearing the
report of the woman with who^ the Lord had spoken, that he was the Christ,
believed. But after that themselves had heard him, they said unto the woman,
now we believe not any Ioh. 4. 39. 42.
more for thy saying, for we have heard him our selves, and do know, that this
is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world.


Theoph. This example brings no small light to this doubt. But hitherto
sufficiently of the truth, and authority of the word of God: now let us in a
few words consider, what it does contain.


Mat. It has in it at large, whatsoever concerns the glory of God for our
good and salvation.


Theoph. By what means does it teach us to attain salvation?


Mat. By the true knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ, which it does teach.


Teoph. Let us therefore first entreat of the knowledge of God, and after we
will speak of Christ in the proper place. What do the holy Scriptures teach us
concerning God?


Mat. Three heads or principal things, whereby he is distinguished from all
feigned Gods, besides those which we do know by the natural instinct given us
of God, and by consideration of the creatures. Namely that God is a spiritual
essence, eternal, of infinite wisdom, goodness, and power.


Theoph. Rehearse the first of those there.


Mat. Of the Trinity.
That in one divine essence, there be three distinct persons, the Father, the
Son, the holy Ghost.

The Father indeed is the beginning of the Godhead, but yet in respect of the
order of the persons. For in the Godhead, we may not seek for any first or
last.

The Son is the wisdom of the Father, begotten of himself before the
worlds.

The holy Ghost is the infinite power proceeding from the Father and the Son.

Now these three persons are distinct one from the other, not only by those
incommunicable properties which each of them has by himself, that none of the
other can have, but also by the difference of their actions. For the Scripture
ascribes to the Father, the beginning of working, to the Son, wisdom and
counsel, and to the holy Ghost, virtue and power. Notwithstanding they be
alike in all things, in respect of eternity, dignity and power, because there
is one most undivided divine essence common to them, and so they are one God.
Howbeit so often as at one time there is mention of the Father and the Son
together, or of the holy Ghost, the name of God is then peculiarly given to the
Father, as unto the first person of the Deity, and yet nothing is diminished
of the Godhead of the Son or of the holy Ghost: but the unity of the essence
is kept, and respect is had of the order of the persons. Hence it is, Ioh. 3.
16.
that the Son is called the Son of God, Genesis 1. 2.
and the spirit is called the spirit of God. But whenever the name of God is
put indefinitely, the Son and the Spirit are no less noted by it, then the
Father; as when the Scripture says: Mat. 4. 10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. 1. Tim.
1. 17
To the king eternal, immortal, invisible, to God only wise be honor and
glory for ever and ever.


Theoph. Verily this doctrine is beyond all the reach and understanding of man.


Mat. It is indeed: and yet to be believed, as that which God in his word has
revealed for our salvation, which cannot stand without it.


Theoph. In what place of Scripture is this doctrine taught?


Mat. It may be gathered out of diverse places, but most easily it is declared
by this of John: there be three 1. Ioh. 5. 7.
which bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Spirit, and
these three are one. When he says three, he notes the distinction of the
persons: when he says one, he shows the unity of the essence.


Theoph. What is the reason, that the Son of God is called, Word: and the
third person Spirit?


Mat. To the Son, that name is attributed by a similitude. For, as speech is
the declarer of the mind in men, so by his Word does God make himself known
unto us Concerning the third person, that also is called the Spirit, by a
likeness taken from men, to the end we may understand it to be, as it were, a
breath coming out of the mouth of God, not vanishing away, but that which is
his power spread over all things, which notwithstanding always abides in him
self. The Prophet does not darkly express either of the similitudes in these
words; By the word of the Lord were the heavens Psalm. 31. 6.
made, and by the breath of his mouth all the host of them. Wherein he does
plainly teach, that the Father by his eternal wisdom which is the Son, and
by his infinite power, which is the holy Ghost, did make all things.


Theoph. Hitherto enough of the Trinity: for the more deeply the sharpness
of man's witstriueth to look into it, the more is it blunted with the
greatness of that mysteric. Now therefore, declare the other head of the
knowledge of God.


Mat. It teaches, that God did not only in six days by his immeasurable power
make all things, but also that they are still preserved and governed by his
wisdom and providence, and that his hand is always at work, insomuch as
nothing of all that is done in heaven or earth, comes to pass by chance or
by fortune. For the Scripture witnesses;

That the Lord sends thunders, winds and te^pests. Psalm. 29.


That he thundreth with his voice, and says to the snow, be thou upon the
earth. Job. 37. 5. 6.


That he covers the heavens with clouds, and prepares the rain for the
earth. Psalm. 147. 8.


That he deuideth the sea, when the waves thereof do roar. Isa. 51. 15.


That he gives meat unto all flesh. Psa. 136. 25


That he makes peace, and creates evil. Isa. 45. 7.


That he kills, and makes alive: that he brings down to the grave, and
brings up again. 1 Samuel 2. 6.


That he makes the wound, and binds it up, smites, and makes whole. Job.
5. 18.


That he changes times and seasons, takes away kings, and sets up kings.
Dan. 2. 21.


That he orders wars, and appoints the victory. Psalm. 33. 16


That he throws down and lifts up. Psalm. 75. 8.


That he directs the steps of men. Pro. 16. 9.


That he guides the answer of the tongue. Pro. 16. 1.


That he turns the hearts of men at his pleasure. Pro. 21. 1.


Finally, the providence of God leaves no place for fortune. For Solomon
affirms, Pro. 16. 33.
that even the whole disposition of the lot is of the Lord. It is plain
therefore, that God orders all things, but is not troubled with any thing.


Theoph. Now remains the third point of the knowledge of God.


Mat. That God is perfectly just, and perfectly merciful. For seeing he is of
an infinite essence, all his proprieties and virtues be also infinite* for they
be essential in him, with who^ (says James) there is no change Iam. 1. 17.
or shadow of turning. That is to say, that in God there is nothing subject to
increase change, or lessening. He does therefore not only show mercy; but does
also declare his justice, punishing the offenders and guilty persons, with
deserved punishment. For this cause, when Moses had largely in these words
commended the mercy Exo. 34. 67.
of God the Lord God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in
goodness, straight way after he adds: not making the wicked innocent.


CHAP. II. Of the knowledge of man, who being a most miserable sinner, is
before God, guilty of eternal death.
Theophilus. Seeing God acquiteth not the guilty, it is so far off that by the
knowledge of him, man is lifted up into the hope of salvation, that clean
contrariwise he perceives his comdemnation to be proved and confirmed, because
he abounds with innumerable both infirmities and sins, for the which he is
found guilty before the most just judgment seat of Almighty God.


Mat. Of ma^s free will.
Man is not only as thou say, defiled with many vices and infirmities, but
also by his own nature, 1. an enemy of God. 2. Full of wickedness. 3. A
servant of sin. That is to say, such a one as has neither will nor power to
do well.


Th. Thou do indeed very much throw down man.


Mat. Genesis 6. 5.
I do it not, but God himself in these words. The wickedness of man is great
in the earth, Gene. 6. 5.
and all the imaginatio^s of the thoughts of their heart is only evil
continually. Moreover in the same Chapter he teaches us, Verse. 3.
that man is nothing else but flesh.

And Saint Paul plainly affirms, Romans 8. 7.
that the understanding of the flesh is enmity against God: because says he,
it is not subject to the law of God* for indeed it cannot be.

The same also he affirms in another place, when he says, Col. 1. 21.
that we are strangers from God, and enemies, our mind being set upon evil
works. As if he should say, that the enmity hid in the heart, was bewrayed by
evil deeds.

Romans 7. 14.
In another place also the same Apostle says, that we are carnal, sold under
sin: that is, that we are the bondslaues of sin.

2. Cor. 3. 5.
Yea, he proceeds so far, to say, that of our selves we are not sufficient
to think, much less able to do that which is good.


Theoph. But was this the mind of the Apostle, to show that all generally be
bondmen of sin?


Mat. Romans 3. 9.
Yea verily. For, speaking of the natural corruption of man, out of the
testimony of David, he plainly says: We have proved before, that both Jews
and Gentiles be under sin. As it is written, there is none just, no not one:
there is not any which understands, Psalm. 14. 3. 53. 3.
or which seeks after God. They have all gone out of the way, they have bin
made altogether unprofitable. There is none that does good, no not one.

The faithful indeed, be exempted from that number, but yet not because they
be not such by nature. But because God (such is his mercy) amendeth our
wickedness and corruption, by the benefit of regeneration, whereby he works
in us, both the will and the power to do well, as in the proper place shall be
more largely declared. But all the unbelievers, as they be unprofitable to any
good work, so they are carried with great violence unto evil.


Theoph. But the thing of it self seems to prove that it is otherwise. For
there be, as there ever have been, some which have been endued with most
excellent gifts.


Mat. The Scripture says, it cannot be, that an ill tree should bring forth
good fruit. It may in deed sometime bring forth such as be fair to the
outward appearance, which notwithstanding are not good. So also a man may find
many infidels, which do works having a beautiful show, but such as cannot be
good in deed. For the heart, which God specially looks unto, is corrupt and
unclean: for it cannot any way be made clean but by faith. Therefore the
Apostle says: Act. 15. 9. Romans 14. 23
What soever is not of faith is sin.


Theoph. Wherein stands that uncleanness of the heart?


Mat. In that doing those beautiful works, they be neither touched with the
love nor fear of God, and therefore do not think of yielding him obedience:
neither is it marvel, seeing they know him not. Whom notwithstanding no man
can love or fear, before he do know him.


Theoph. What is it then that moves them to do those works which are so fair
in show?


Mat.





will be chaste. Finally, the unfaithful never respect the glory of God, when
they think to do good works. Which nevertheless, is as it were the very life
of good works; so as if it be wanting, they cannot be acceptable unto God.


Theoph. If therefore all the goodly deeds which the unfaithful do, be of no
account with God, he shall be in no better case which carries himself
modestly, and keeps under the lusts of his flesh, then he which passes away
all his life dissolutely.


Mat. No verily, not so. For God rewards those works, but only in this life.
And oftentimes also he gives the^ such things, in respect whereof they did
their good deeds, as health, quiet life, praise, good report among men, and
such like. Therefore our Savior Christ says, that the Scribes and Pharisees,
in that they prayed Mat. 6. 16.
and fasted to be praised of men, had their reward.

Mat. 11. 22
Moreover, the state of such as in this life have behaved themselves modestly,
shall be easier in the day of judgment then of the other.


Theoph How can it be, that God should reward works which he likes not, being
such as were not done for his sake?


Mat. Thereby he declares, how pleasing a thing true obedience is unto him, for
as much as he rewards the very shadow of it. Add this hereunto, that he has
regard unto those works, not as they come from unclean p^sons, but from
himself.


Theoph. (...) what sense say thou, that those works come from Go^*


Mat. I say that ^d to the end that order and eue^ disposing of things may
(...) kept in the world, does bridle the wickedness of some and so makes them
fit to follow virtue. In respect ^ereof we fear not in our common speech, to
call them ^ll borne, or of a good nature; whereby we mean, that (...) from the
beginning of their life, God gave them some special grace. Which if it be not,
there is no doubt but (...) be such, as they are lively pictured out of the
Apost^ (...) after he has said, Romans 3. 12.
that there is not one which does good, straightway he adds, Psalm. 5. 10.
Their throat is an open sepulcher, they have used their tongues to deceit:
the poison of Aspes is under their lips. Psalm. 10. 7.
Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. Their feet are swift to shed
blood. Isay. 59. 1.
Destruction and calamity are in their ways. And the way of peace they have
not known. The fear of God is not before their eyes. Psalm. 36. 2.
Which testimonies are gathered by him out of sundry places of the old
Testament, that he might procure the more authority and credit touching this
matter.


Theo. But how could it be, that man the most excellent creature of al others,
should be so much corrupted?


Mat. It was not by his first nature, for he was made like unto God, but by
original sin, wherewith Adam by his disobedience in eating the forbidden
fruit, infected himself and all mankind.


Theoph. Tell me what that likeness of God is, wherein thou say the first
man was created: as also the original sin, wherewith mankind was tainted
afterward.


Mat. Of the Image of God.
The likeness of God was, that the understanding of man, was lightened with
the true knowledge of God, and of the worship due unto him. That also he had a
right will framed to the obedience of God. Now it is called the image or
likeness of God, because in those excellent gifts, man did show and set out the
wisdom, goodness and power of his creator. But when Ada^ by rebellion fell
from this his estate, he was deprived of this likeness, and together put on
the likeness of the devil. That is to say, he was spoiled of those notable
gifts, in stead whereof came in all manner of vices. As,

1 The ignorance of God, and of his service.

2 Wickedness, for he hated virtue, and loved sin.

3 Weakness, unto all goodness:

Of original sin.
And this is the blot of the original sin, which being within us as a fire
of wickedness and lust, does continually breath out the fruits and effects of
it, to wit, ungodliness and unrighteousness.


Theoph. But that corruption seems to be accounted, rather a punishment of
Adams sin, then sin it self.


Mat It is indeed a punishment of sin, and the fountain and welspring of all
sins. Nevertheless it is also sin, and worthy of death, even as Paul
says: As by one man sin came into the world, and death by Romans 5. 12.
sin, and so death went over all men through him in whom we have all sinned,
that is to say, were infected with original sin.


Theoph. But how could Adam make all his posterity partakers of that infection
of sin?


Mat. By generation: For he could not beget any children but such as were like
himself: even as a viper brings forth none but vipers.

Now it is called original sin, to show that we are corrupted, not by any
wickedness taken to us or far fet, but that we do bring with us corruption
bred within, even from our mothers womb. Which David confesses of himself,
Psalm. 51. 5.
Behold I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me.


CHAP. III. Of the knowledge of Christ, who having satisfied for us the perfect
righteousness of God, has opened a way to his infinite mercy, through the
which at length we may come to eternal life.
Theophilus. LEt us repeat the order of our former speech. Forasmuch as God
cannot deny his justice, neither yet show mercy without the upholding of his
justice, and man is so corrupt as has bin declared by thee out of the
Scripture, he ca^ look for nothing else, but: he wrath of God and eternal
death.


Mat. God himself has given the sentence. For he says by his Prophets:
Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Cursed be every one that continues not in all things written in the book of
the Law to do them. And again: Ezech. 18. 4
The soul that sins, that shall die. Which things are to be understood, as
well of the eternal death, as of the natural, as it is expressed by the
Apostle John. But in Christ there is Apoc. 21. 8.
remedy offered unto us. Therefore the knowledge of him in the holy Scriptures,
is joined with the knowledge of Ioh. 17. 3.
God, by the which we may attain eternal salvation.


Theoph. Let us therefore speak of the knowledge of Christ. And first of all,
declare thou those things which concern his person, and then we shall see, what
remedy is brought unto us by him for our salvation.


Mat. Of the person of Christ.
Concerning the person of Jesus Christ, he is the eternal Son of God, which
took upon him the nature of man, that is to say, was made man in soul and
body, like unto us in all things, sin only excepted. Therefore the nature
of God and man, are so joined together in him, that they make but one person.
He has also but one Father, and one mother: A father in respect of his
Godhead, a mother in respect of his ma^hood: the Virgin Marie, of whose
substance he was conceived, by the power of the holy Ghost.


Theoph. Prove all these things briefly out of the word of God.


Mat. Saint Paul speaking of Christ, says; when the fullness of time was come,
God sent his son made of Gal. 4. 4.
a woman. When he says, that God sent his Son, he declares, that Christ is
the second person of the Trinity, and therefore God: which also elsewhere he
confirms in these words; Who is God over all, blessed Romans 9. 5.
for ever. But when he adds, made of a woman, he plainly declares that he
is very man. Which also he affirms elsewhere in these words; 1. Tim. 2. 5.
There is one God, also one Mediator of God and men, the man Christ Jesus.
Whereof it follows that Christ is very God and man. For although each nature
has it own property remaining distinct to it self, yet to the end we may
understand, that in Christ they be joined together by a most near bond, so as
they make but one person, the Scriptures oftentimes say that of the Divinity,
which agrees to the humanity. As when it is said, that God had purchased his
Church with his own Act. 20. 28
blood. And contrariwise, those things are said of the humanity, which
appertain to the Divinity: whereunto that saying of Christ is to be referred,
no man ascends up into heaven, but he which came down Ioh. 3. 13.
from heaven even the Son of man which is in heaven.


Theo. Declare a little more plainly, what thou meantest by this, when thou say
dest, that each nature has his property remaining distinct unto it self?


Mat. The divinity was not changed into the humanity: for it remained,
eternal, infinite and impassible. Again, the humanity was not turned into the
Godhead. For before the death and resurrection of Christ, it was passible, such
a nature as might suffer. And before as also after death, created and finite,
which at one time could not be in more places, for this is contrary to the
nature of a true body.


Theoph. This doctrine again is beyond the reach of man.


Mat. It is indeed: as Paul himself proves in these words: Without
controversy great is the mystery of 1. Tim. 3. 16
godliness God manifest in the flesh.


Theoph. Hitherto we have heard sufficiently of the person of Christ, now let
us speak of the remedy brought by him for our salvation.


Mat. Of the remedy by Christ.
He has fully satisfied the judgment of God for our sins, and has so
redeemed us from everlasting death, and has together made us capable of the
heavenly life, so as we be partakers of his gifts.


Theop. There come three things to my mind, whereof I will ask thee.

1 How Christ has satisfied the judgment of God for our sins.

2 How he makes us partakers of the heavenly life.

3 And why it is necessary, that his gifts should be made ours.


Mat. To the end it may the more easily be understood, we must remember that,
whereof we spoke before; namely that God has pronounced the curse against all
such as transgress his Law, and that we in two respects have broken it: that
is to say, 1. Pet. 1. 19
That we were redeemed by the precious blood of Christ. 1. Pet. 2 24
That Christ upon the tree did bear our sins in his body. 1. Ioh. 17.
That the blood of Christ, does cleanse us from all sin.


Theoph. I cannot sufficiently wonder at the exceeding great love of God toward
us, that he gave his most dearly beloved Son to the death to redeem us.


Mat. Add this, which were his enemies; which also is diligently observed by
the Apostle in these words: Doubtless one will scarce die for a righteous man:
for, Romans 5. 7.
for one that is profitable to him, peradventure some man will die. But God
commends his love toward us, that when we were yet sinners Christ died for
us. From whence he draws this most comfortable conclusion: If when we were
enemies, we were reconciled Romans 5. 10.
to God, by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled shall we be
saved by his life.


Theoph. But could the judgment of God be no otherwise satisfied for our
sins, except his beloved Son had taken upon him our nature, therein to
suffer death, the death (I say) of the Cross?


Mat, No; for man which has offended the infinite Majesty of God, does deserve
infinite punishment, that is to say, eternal death, which could not be suffered
and overcome of any, but of the eternal and infinite Son of God. Moreover,
the justice of God required this, that the nature which had sinned, should
suffer the punishment of sin. But because God could not suffer, and man could
not overcome death, it was necessary that the Redeemer should be very God,
and very man, to do both. Wherein also it is to be marked, how near an
atoneme^t God has entered into with us by Christ, in whom the parties at
variance be inseparably joined together: whereby it is come to pass, that God
has turned the fall of man to his great good: for, thereupon he has taken
occasion to unite us more nearly with him self. Romans 5. 20.
Wherefore where sin was increased, there grace has abounded much more by
Christ.


Theoph. Hitherto we have heard sufficiently of the first point, namely, how
Christ has satisfied the judgment of God for our sins: now let us come to
the other; which is, by what right we may claim to our selves everlasting
life.


Mat. By a double right through Christ. First, because for us he has fulfilled
the whole Law, Leuit. 18. 5.
and God has promised life to such as fulfill it. Secondly by the right of
inheritance. For after that Christ is made ours, we are not only partakers of
his spiritual riches, as his perfect righteousness and obedience, whereby we
are accounted just before God, but also of his dignity, namely, that with him
we are reckened and taken for the children of God.

Romans 8. 17.
Therefore Paul says, If we be sons, we are also heirs; heirs indeed of
God, but heirs annexed with Christ. And again in another place, he calls
eternal life the inheritance of the Saints, and so he compriseth both the
rights, by the which we lay claim to Colos. 1. 12.
it for our selves.


Theoph. Therefore in Christ alone we find all things necessary to salvation.


Mat. Yea verily: For in him there is righteousness, and the fullness of life,
and without him, man full of sin, finds nothing but everlasting malediction
and Act. 4. 12.
curse. Therefore Peter says: that neither salvation is in any other: and that
there is no other name under heaven given among men, whereby we may be saved.
For this cause also, the name of Jesus Christ was given him from heaven, by the
which his office is plainly set forth, that is to say, all that which he has
performed for our salvation, and does still perform.


Theoph. Go to therefore, tell me what the name of Jesus Christ signifies, as
also of whom it was given him.


Mat. The name Jesus signifies (Savior): and an Angel gave it to the Son of
God, because (as he himself expounded it) he should save his people from their
sins. Concerning the name of Christ, it is to be understood, Mat. 1. 21.
that in times past in the old Testament, Christ was figured or shadowed in the
Kings, Prophets and Priests, who when they were consecrated, were anointed
with oil, which signified the gifts of the holy Ghost. Now the Redeemer
promised, in Hebrew was called Messiah, but in Greek it is translated by the
Dan. 9. 25.
word Christ, which in Latin signifies anointed. By which name, we are
taught that he is the chief.

1. King. Luc. 1. 33.


2. Prophet. Deu. 18. 18


3. Priest. Psalm. 110. 4


Howbeit he was anointed not with common visible oil, but with the grace of
the holy Ghost, and that most fully, that from him as from the head, it might
be powered into each member, namely into all the faithful: in so much as they
also together with him are made Kings, Prophets and Priests. Now the name of
Christ has bin retained in all tongues, because the Apostles them selves wrote
in Greek. This therefore is the cause, why that name was given unto him, as
also why all the faithful are called christians: even because they be partakers
of his anointing, and therefore of his kingdom, prophecy, and priesthood.


Theoph. Of the office of Christ.
First therefore we must see, how Christ performed the office of King, Prophet
and Priest. And afterward how he communicates the same with the faithful.


Mat. He did the office of a king, when by his divine power, he delivered us
from the tyranny of our enemies, the devil, sin and death, whom he
overcame, that he might make us his servants, and subjects to his kingdom:
which indeed he does continually exercise in us, when he rules us by the
scepter of his word, and by the power of his spirit He did the office of a
Prophet, in that he declared all the will of God unto us by his word: he gave
the holy Ghost, by the help whereof it might be understood of us, and we yield
our consents unto it. This office also he exercises every day, when by the
ministry of the word and working of the Spirit he causes us daily to
profit and to go forward in that knowledge.

Finally, he did the office of a Priest, when upon the Cross he offered his
body and blood for us to God the Father, that he might be a satisfaction for
our sins. The execution of which office is also at this day, when he makes
intercession for us. Now this priesthood of Christ is the truth, and fulfilling
of all the sacrifices of the old Testament.


Theoph. Let us now speak of our kingdom, priesthood, and prophetship.


Mat. Apot. 1. 6.
We are spiritually kings in Christ, that we may overcome the devil and sin.

1. Pet. 2. 9.
We are Priests, through him to offer up an acceptable sacrifice of praise to
God.

Act. 2. 17.
We are prophets, that being taught the truth, we may teach others, and open
to them the mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven.


Theoph. It has bin sufficiently declared, how Christ has delivered us from
condemnation, as also by what means he has made us fit to attain to eternal
life. Now the third point remains, namely, why it is necessary, that his
gifts should be made ours.


Mat. Because otherwise they shall no way help us to the satisfying of the
perfect justice of God: even as other men's riches profit not to deliver us out
of debt, except they become ours.


Theoph. How therefore may his gifts become ours? Mat. If we be made one with
him. For by the benefit of that union, we are made partakers of all his
spiritual Of the union with Christ.
graces and riches, which are no less imputed unto us before God, the^ as if
they were ours by nature. For this cause the Apostle says, Coloss. 1. 22.
that we are by Christ reconciled in that body of his flesh through death. By
which words of his, he means, that the merit of Christ's death pertains
not to any, but unto such, as be grafted into his body, and are made his
members.


Theoph. Can therefore no man be partaker of Christ's gifts, except he be made
one with him?


Mat. He cannot Even as a woman cannot be partaker of the riches and honor of
some great man, except she be joined with him in marriage, that they become one
body and one flesh: the members also cannot draw life from the head, if they
be not joined with it. There is therefore no true partaking of Christ, except
there be an union with him. For this cause therefore Christ said to the
Capernaits, Unless ye eat of the flesh of Ioh. 6.
the Son of man and drink his blood, ye shall have no life in you. In which
words he plainly shows, that we are not partakers of his gifts unto
salvation, except we be as nearely coupled with his humanity, as meat and
drink are joined with our body, which of all others is a most near union.
For, meat and drink, when they are digested in our stomach, are so turned into
our substance that they cannot be distinguished, much less separated from it.


Theoph. This doctrine also is above the capacity of man.


Mat. Ephesians. 5. 32.
It is indeed. Wherefore Paul speaking of it, says, that it is a great
mystery. Now if we can never so little see the body of the Sun, but our eyes
do dazell: how can our minds pierce to that inaccessible light of the divine
majesty, to conceive his heavenly mysteries? such as be the points which we
have handled first,

1. Concerning the Trinity.

2. Of the union of two natures in Christ.

3. And of coupling the faithful, with the humane nature of Christ.

It is therefore our duty, rather holily to believe these three fundamental
points, or principles of Christian religion, then curiously to examine them by
the rule of our reason.


CHAP. IIII. Of Faith, by the which we are made one with Christ, and so be
partakers of all his gifts.
Theophilus. HItherto I have hard. First that God which is perfectly just, does
no way absolve the guilty. Secondly, that men, which are most miserable
sinners, are before the justice of God, guilty of eternal death Thirdly, that
Jesus Christ by his death has satisfied the exact righteousness of God; which
is imputed unto us, to the end that being set free from condemnation, we may be
partakers of eternal life, so as we be joined with him. It remains therefore
that I understand, how we are made one with Christ.


Mat. By faith, even as he him self testifies in the prayer which he made to
God for all the faithful, in these words; Ioh. 17. 20.
Father I pray thee for such as shall believe in me, that they may be all one,
as thou (O Father) art in me and I in thee, that they also may be one in us.

Whereunto also that saying of Paul is to be referred, Ephesians. 3. 17.
that Christ dwells in our hearts by faith. And hereupon it is, that these
sentences be often repeated in the Scriptures.

1 That every one which believes in him is absolved an^ discharged. Act. 13.
39.


2 Is made the child of God. John 1. 12.


3 Does not perish, but has everlasting life. John 3. 16.


In which places those things be attributed to faith, which we receive of
Christ alone, to the end we may understand, that both he and his gifts are
committed to us by faith.


Theoph. Thou have touched a little concerning the righteousness of faith,
which I desire to have declared Of Justification.
by thee somewhat more at large, for I perceive that Paul oftentimes speaks
of it.


Mat. To be justified before God, is to be accounted just, that is to say,
without blot, and unreprovable. Now Paul does often handle this point,
because it is one of the special grounds of our faith. For no man can please
God, but he that is justified.


Theoph. How so?


Mat. Because as God is perfectly just and holy, so he loves holiness and
justice: on the other side he hates unrighteousness, and therefore we can
have no fellowshippe with him, to be partakers of his heavenly glory, except
we be perfectly righteous. Therefore he says, that no unclean thing shall
enter into the holy Apoc. 21. 27
City.


Theoph. How then are we justified or made righteous before God?


Mat. In the Scriptures, there be two righteousnesses set forth to us, which
also do very much differ the one from the other. These are.

1 The righteousness of the law, and

2 The righteousness of faith.

But the holy Scriptures do teach us, that we cannot be justified by the
former, which is of the Law, to the end we might fly to the other, which is of
faith.


Theoph. Declare unto me, wherein both these righteousnesses do stand, as also
what the difference is between them.


Math. The righteousness of the law, is the perfect keeping of the law. For if
we did but fully and perfectly fulfill whatsoever that commands, we should by
our works be just before God, neither should we need any other righteousness.
But the Apostle in diverse places shows, Romans 3. 20. Gal. 3. 11.
that this can not be, for as much as all men be sinners, and therefore
unrighteous: (which shall not be omitted by us when we speak of works) and
therefore he concludes, that we are justified by faith.

But the righteousness of faith, is the righteousness of Jesus Christ, which
by faith is freely imputed unto us of God. By these things thou may
understand, what the difference is betwixt the righteousness of the law, and
the righteousness of faith.

1 The Law requires it of our selves, but faith calls us from our selves to
seek for it in Christ, in who^ only it is, and that indeed perfectly.

2 Again the Law requires us to observe and do all that it commands,
otherwise it threatens the curse But faith requires this one thing, namely
that we believe, and promises all kind of blessings to such as believe.

3 Finally the righteousness of the Law coming from our selves, should set up
merit, and put away grace. Contrariwise the righteousness of faith, which is
from God, takes away merit, and sets up grace.


Theoph. Now I understand, wherein both these righteousnesses consist, and in
what things the one differs from the other: But I think it may be gathered
of your words, that we are not properly justified by faith, but by the merit
of Christ.


Mat. Thou gatherest rightly: For if faith should justify by any inward
virtue, as it is always weak and imperfect, our righteousness also should be
imperfect. Faith therefore is as it were an instrument wherewith we take hold
upon our perfect righteousness, which is in Christ: which Paul plainly
expresses in these words; All have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of
God: Romans 3. 23. 24. 25.
but are justified freely, that is to say, by his grace, by the redemption made
in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith
in his blood.

1 First the Apostle witnesses, that all men be unrighteous, for as much as
all men have sinned, and therefore be deprived of the favor of God.

2 Then he teaches us, that the righteousness, by the which we are justified
before God, has the foundation in the only merit of Christ's death, wherewith
God is pacified, so as he is become merciful and fanourable unto us.

3 To conclude, he shows that freely by faith, we are made partakers of that
righteousness of Christ. How often soever therefore this manner of speech is
used by the Apostle: we are justified by faith; he understands, that this is
done by the most perfect righteousness, obedience, and satisfaction of Jesus
Christ, which gifts are imputed unto us, when we are by faith made one with him.


Theoph. it follows then, that all our righteousness is only in imputation.


Mat. Yea truly. For it is necessary to the end we may be accounted righteous
before God, that our unrighteousness be not imputed unto us, and that Christ's
righteousness be imputed. Now Christ performs both these, the imputation of
whose gifts, causes that our sins be not laid to our charge, for as much as
by the benefit of that imputation they be covered and removed out of the sight
of God, although he knows every one of them, so as he can tell their very
number. This case therefore stands as it does with the blackness of a coal
set on fire, which blackness we know to be in the coal, although we see it
not with our eves.


Theoph. Psalm. 32. 1
That excellent saying of David calls these things to my remembrance. Blessed
are they whose iniquities be forgiven, and whose sins be covered Blessed is
the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin. But seeing our righteousness and
all our salvation depends upon faith in Christ, tell me what faith is.


Mat. Faith in Christ, is a certain special assurance, by the which we know
that we are partakers of the merit of the death and resurrection of Christ, so
as it is satisfaction for us, and forgiveness of all our sins: which indeed
is the foundation of the Christian faith. Gal. 2. 16. Ioh. 6. 47. Romans 3. 23.
Ephesians. 2. 8.
Whereupon it is that they be indifferently used. For sometime the scripture
says, that we are justified by faith in Crhist: and sometime it ascribes it
simply unto faith.


Theoph. What then is faith?


Mat. Of Faith.
The word faith has many significations. For sometimes it is as much as a
promise to perform somewhat: thereupon to keep faith, is the same with
standing to a man's promise. 1. Cor. 13. 2.
that if he had all faith, so as he could remove mountains, yet if he had not
love, that he were nothing. Tit. 1. 13.
Admonish them that they be sound in faith. In which sense he is commonly said,
to think ill of the faith, which erreth from the purity of doctrine. Gal. 2.
16. Ephesians. 2. 8.
when in every place we are said to be justified and saved by faith, and that
without faith no man can please God. Heb. 11. 6.
The^ indeed faith is the certifying of us of the love of God toward us.


Theoph. But why saydest thou at the beginning, that faith in Christ is the
foundation of faith it self?


Mat. Because we cannot certainly determine, that God will be merciful unto
us, except we do first know that Christ by his death has made satisfaction to
God for our sins, and reconciled him unto us. Therefore Peter says, 1. Pet.
1. 21.
that through Christ we believe in God, which raised him from the dead, and
gave him glory, that our faith and hope might be in God. From whence it is
easy to gather, that Christ is the only foundation of our faith, which the
holy Ghost has engraven in our hearts. And this is as it were the sum of the
Christian faith, which commonly is called the Apostles Creed.


The exposition of the Apostles Creed.
Theoph. Let us therefore speak of this confession of faith, the whole whereof
I desire thee to expound unto me. But before I come to the parts of it, I will
propound three things, wherein I desire to be satisfied of thee.








Mat. The word (Symbolum) which in English sometimes we translate Creed, in
this place signifies as it were the gathering together of many parts into one:
which term does not unfitly agree to the confession of faith, which we see is
made of many articles.

Now it is called the Apostles Creed, because it contains as it were a brief
sum of all the Apostolical doctrine, written in the books of the old and
new Testament.


Theoph. Let us come to the other point whereof I doubted: why do we say
rather, I believe in God, then we believe, seeing this doctrine is general,
and all Christians are bound to believe it?


Mat. That is for two causes.



Now, we profess that applying of it to our selves, when every of us says, I
believe.


Theoph. As far as I perceive, there is no little likeness, between the
sickness of the body and the sickness of the mind, as also between the way
of attayning the health of the one, and the health of the other.


Mat. Yea indeed, there is great likeness. For, as in the sickness of the
body, there be three degrees to the obtaining of health, that is to say, the

1 Knowledge of the sickness.

2 The knowledge of the remedy.

3 And the applying of it.

So also it fares with our spiritual sickness, sin. For, whosoever knows
that sickness, is come to the first degree of health. If he know the remedy
which is Christ, he is in the second. But all this is to no purpose, except the
remedy by applied by faith.


Theoph. Let us therefore come to the third. What is it properly to believe in
God?


Mat. To believe in God.
When we speak of God, we say that we believe three manner of ways.







Whereof the first two degrees are they, by the which at length we come to the
third.

To believe one God, is as much to say, thou beleeuest that there is one God.

To believe God, is to believe that God is true concerning his promises
declared in his word.

To believe in God, is according to those promises to put thy whole trust and
hope in God: which belongs to the faithful only, who by true faith apply
those promises to themselves.


Theoph. Thou do then account them infidels, that stand still in the first
or second degree.


Mat. I do indeed: for they believe no more then the devils themselves do.


Theoph. Thou have satisfied me, we are therefore to come to the parts of the
Creed.


Mat. The parts of the Creed.
They are four.

1 Of faith in God the Father.

2 Of faith in his son Jesus Christ.

3 Of faith in the holy Ghost.

4 And concerning the Church.


Theoph. Why our faith is referred to each person by it self.
But why is our faith distinctly referred to every person by it self, seeing
that it is one God, in whom we believe?


Mat. That our faith may be the better strengthened which is then done, when
severally we perceive what each person by his distinct property, has wrought
in our salvation. Our faith notwithstanding is referred to one God.


Theoph. How?


Mat. It is all one, as if a man should say, I put all my hope and trust in one
God, of whose love I can not doubt: For, whereas he is distinguished into three
persons, every one of them confirms in me the assurance of that love. For the
Father has both created me by his omnipotency, and does also guide me by his
merciful providence. The Son has redeemed me by his death, reconciled me to
God the Father, and even now makes intercession to him for me. The holy Ghost
by his divine power has sanctified me, and joined me with Christ and his
Church, that with it I might be partaker of all his gifts, until he bring me
unto eternal life.


The first part of the Apostles Creed, which is of faith in God the Father.
Theoph. In this exposition of the Creed, which thou have even now made, there
be some few things whereof I will ask thee. I will keep the order of the
parts in propounding my questions.

Whether the Father only created us.
I will therefore begin with God the Father, by whose gracious providence, thou
saidest that we are ruled.






Mat. Those three persons for as much as they have all one essence, namely the
Godhead, and therefore are one God, do nothing apart, or a sunder one from the
other. Therefore, both in our creation, redemption, and sanctification, every
one of the persons wrought according to their distinct property.


Theoph. In those three divine works, show me this distinctly.


Mat. Psalm. 33. 6.
Concerning the creation, the Scripture does teach us, that the Father made all
things by his word, that is to say, by his Son, and by his spirit.
Concerning our redemption, the Father (says Christ) so loved John. 3. 16.
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son to the death for our
redemption, which death the Son suffered by the power of the holy Ghost. The
same also Heb. 9. 14.
so is to be understood of our sanctification, whereof the Father is as it were
the beginning. For Christ praying for the faithful, says: Father sanctify
them. The matter of our sanctification is in the Son, for he adds; John.
17. 17. and 19.
I sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified. And the holy Ghost is
as it were a co^duit, through the which that holiness flows from Christ,
which is the head, into us that are his members.


Theoph. How comes it to pass then, that the Scripture ascribes creation to
the Father, redemption to the Son, and sanctification to the holy Ghost?


Mat. Why the Scripture ascribes the creation to the Father.
It is in respect of our rudeness, because the work of the Father is more
manifest and evident in the creation, the work of the Son in the redemption,
and the work of the holy Ghost in the sanctification. For, Genesis 1.
in the creation the Scripture sets the Father before us as some mighty
king commanding.

In the redemption, it sets forth the Son, Phil. 27.
which manifested himself unto men in the flesh, wherein he suffered death for
us.

In the sanctification it sets forth the holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 6. 1. Cor. 6.
19 Act 4 24. Romans 4. 9. 1. Cor. 12. 3.
which declares his divine virtue and power whereby he dwells in us. Hence it
is that the Father is called the creator, the Son our Lord, that is to say
redeemer, and the Spirit holy to the end we may understand that we are
sanctified of it.


Theoph. Wherefore say thou, that when the Son is called our Lord, it is
all one as if a man did call him redeemer?


Mat. How Lord signifies redeemer.
Because he has gotten this Lordship by his redeeming of us. For, so he has
delivered us from the tyranny of the Devil, and made us subject to his own
kingdom.


Theoph. I had thought the holy Ghost had therefore been called holy, to note
the holiness wherewith he is endued.


Mat. Why the holy Ghost is called holy.
Surely in that sense he cannot be called holy more then the Father, or the
Son, who it is certain are also holy: But therefore he is called holy, in
respect of the holiness which he works in us.


Theoph. Touching the first part, I require no more. I come therefore to the
other. Wherefore thou make mention of the gracious providence of GOD, whereof
this confession of our faith makes no mention at all.


Mat. Of the providence of God toward the faithful.
The providence of God is joined to the creation with so near a band, that of
the one, the other does necessarily follow. For it is altogether contrary to
the nature of God, to neglect all things after he had once made them,
especially when we speak of the elect, for whose salvation he gave his only
begotten Son unto death. Howsoever therefore God do guide all things by his
providence, as it is before declared of us, yet after a special manner he
looks upon the faithful, to be present in their necessity, and to deliver
them from dangers, whom whosoever touches, touches the apple of his own eye.
Now all these Zach. 2. 8.
things are plainly comprehended in the article, which is of the faith in God
the Father.


Theoph. Go to therefore, handle each point by it self.


Mat. I believe in God the Father.
When we call God father, it is first indeed in respect of Christ, which is
his only begotten Son. Notwithstanding from thence we gather, that he is a
father to us, who^ through him, or for his sake, he has adopted and taken for
his children. Therefore the name of Father does secretly contain in it, the
love of God toward us. Omnipote^t.
He is called omnipotent, not so much that we should know that he is able to
do whatsoever he will, as, because he not only wishes us well, but also can do
his own pleasure, so as nothing can keep him from being present with us. Mat.
19. 16


Maker of heaven and earth.
Finally, he is said to be the maker of Heaven and Earth, Act. 4. 24
not only to teach us that all things in heaven and earth were made by him,
but also to show, that he has all things under his hand, to be a help unto
us if need be. And that he does so bridle the devil, and all our enemies,
that they cannot hurt us. Therefore the faithful do not in vain put their
trust in God, but with David may say: Psalm. 18. 6.
The Lord is with me, I will not fear what man can do unto me.

Psalm. 23. 4
Although I should walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none
ill, because thou art with me.


Theoph. But often times it falls out, that the faithful are most cruelly
handled by their enemies.


Math. Mat. 10. 30
That never comes to pass but by the will of God, without whom not one hair
can be plucked from us. Whereupon it is, that he which loves us (for he is
our Father, and also is omnipotent) does not suffer them so much as that, but
to our good.


Theoph. Were it not more fit, if we said according to the common received
opinion, that these were only by the sufferance of God, and not by his will?


Math. No man can separate the sufferance of God from his will, but he does
manifest injury unto God, and takes from us a chief part of our comfort.


Theoph Why so?


Mat. Because by that means God should be made idle, and al occasion of
putting our trust in him should be taken away. And indeed the state of the
faithful were most unhappy, if they lay open to the assaults of raging
Satan, and to the blouddy lust of the ungodly. Job. 1. 12.
But the holy Scriptures teach us far otherwise, that the devil could do
nothing to Job, before he had obtained leave of God. Also that he could not
enter Mat. 8. 31.
into swine, but when Christ bad him. And that the wicked be in the hand of the
Lord. Psa. 17. 14.
That Sennacherib the enemy of Gods people, was a rod of Gods wrath, Isai. 10.
5.
and the staff of his hand.


Theoph. But how can it be, that evil things should be done by the will and
appointment of God, and he allow them not? is not this altogether unworthy of
God? Moreover if that were true, the wicked should be without fault, seeing
that when they do evil, they execute the will of God.


Mat. Although evil things can not be done without the will and appointment
of God; yet he neither wills nor allows them, so far forth as they be
evil, but rather abhors them, as clean contrary to Psalm. 5. 5.
his nature But the good which by his maruailous wisdom he brings out of
those evils, he both wills and allows. Which may be seen in the very
death of Christ, whom Peter affirms to have been delivered Act. 1. 23.
by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, out of the which he
brought the salvation of the world, although he neither allowed the treason of
Judas, nor the wicked envy of the Jews.

Hereuppon it is, that notwithstanding the wicked do the will of God, yet are
they no whit the less guilty before him. For they have no purpose to do it.


Theoph. Therefore unless I be deceived, the wicked do not the will of God,
but God does his will by the wicked.


Mat. Thou iudgest rightly. For the purpose of the wicked in doing the will of
God, is far unlike the purpose of God himself. Which Isaiah himself does
plainly note, speaking of Sennacherib. For, after that Isai. 107.
he had said, that he was the rod of Gods wrath, and the staff of his hand,
whom he sent to a dissembling nation, whom also he would command to pray and
to take the spoil of the people of the Lords wrath, straight way he adds:
But he thinks not so, neither will his heart esteem it so, for he imagines
to destroy and to cut off not a few nations.


Theoph. God then is the maruailous workman which can use any instrument to do
his work by.


Mat. Yea indeed, he uses both good and evil to his glory, but in far
unlike respect. For, he guides the affections of the former, namely of the
Angels and of the faithful, by his holy spirit, so as the work which he does
by them is altogether good. But the other, that is to say, the devil and the
wicked, are moved by their own malice, and so they do wholly differ from God,
who nevertheless by his wonderful wisdom does so guide their actions, that
in the end they fall out unto his glory.


Theoph. This doctrine excellently agrees with that which I have heard of thee
more then once: namely that the sins of the wicked be from themselves, but
while as sinning they do this or that thing, that is of God.


Mat. Thou gatherest well. For, so does God execute his judgments. For he
punishes sin with another sin, and for the most part with a sin of the same
kind. As murder with murder theft with theft, according to the unchangeable
sentence pronounced by himself. Genesis 9. 6.
Whosoever sheddeth man his blood, by man his blood shall be shed. Isai. 33. 1.
Woe to thee that spoilest, when thou have made an end of spoiling, thou shall
be spoiled.


Theoph. But often times it falls out that the wicked prosper, so as they be
free from all adversity, yea from deserved punishments, and the godly every
where be pressed down with afflictions.


Mat. Indeed, God punishes some sins in this world, that both his
providence and justice may appear, for else he might seem not to care what me^
did. And again he leaves many things unpunished, that we may understand,
there is another life after this, wherein he will most severely revenge all the
sins of men, yea with the greatness of punishment recompense his long patience
toward them: wherewith by his innumerable benefits he called them to
repentance.

But concerning the afflictions of the godly, when God sends the^, he has
regard both to his own glory, and to our salvation. For, according to the
saying of the Apostle, all things work together for the best Romans 8. 28.
unto them that love God. I omit that there may be many Hypocrites among the
faithful, whose sins God does worthily punish.


Theoph. Of afflictions.
But what profit may the faithful reap by their afflictions?


Math. What profit? not one kind but many, which for the help of memory, I
will bring into six heads.


Theoph. Declare the first.


Mat. The first use of afflictions, humility.
By them God brings us to humility, while by our own experience he
proves, that what soever goodly thing we wondered at in our selves is
nothing. Hereuppon was that speech of David, With rebukes thou chastisest men
for iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume as a moth: surely every
Psa. 39. 11
man is vanity.


Theoph. What is the cause that God does so humble us?


Mat. 1 First, that all glory and praise may be given unto him alone.

2 Secondly, that we may put away that same vain confidence which naturally
sticks within us, so to fly to him alone; and to put our trust in him.

3 Last of all, that we may be the better prepared to receive his gifts, 1.
Pet. 5. 5.
which he gives not but to the humble.


Theoph. Come to the second point.


Mat. The second use of afflictions, repentance.
By afflictions God calls us to true repentance. For when he chastises our
sins, he does this to make us understand, how much he detesteth sin,
wherein we do not a little flatter our selves, that so also we might detest
them.

Moreover, with this he tameth the rebellion of our flesh, even as husbandmen
are wont to tame their stout cattle with the plough, and daily more and more
teaches us obedience: Hereuppon David says, It is good for me that I was
afflicted, that I may learn Ps. 119. 71.
thy statutes.


Theoph. This brings that to my remembrance, which before this time I have
heard of thee: namely that God by afflictions does correct our vices, that he
may allure us unto virtue.


Mat. Thou say well. For, even as iron if it be not occupied is marred with
rust, and the earth except it be dressed brings forth only briers and
brambles. So also the godly, if they be not exercised with diverse
afflictions, do as it were fall a sleep in their pleasures, and become dull
and slow to Gods service, so as in stead of fruits beseeming repentance,
they bring forth nothing but vanity and folly. Therefore the Apostle says to
the Hebrews: Heb. 12. 11.
every affliction for the present time seems not joyous, but grievous, but
afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them that are
thereby exercised.


Theoph. It is now time to come to the third point.


Math. The 3. fruit of afflictions pity to others.
By afflictions God works this in us, that we learn to pity such as be in
distress. For no man has compassion or suffers with another, who himself
has not suffered before. By this argument the Apostle to the Hebrews
proves, that Christ will have compassion upon our afflictions, and that he
will be our advocate, with his Father. These be his words: we have not an
high Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but
such a one as was in all things tempted in like sort, yet without sin.


Theoph. Go forward, declare unto me the fourth point.


M The fourth use of afflictions, prayer.
By afflictions, the Lord shakes of our drousines, and does stir us up to
earnest prayer. In so much as not without good cause, afflictions be called the
school of the holy Ghost, where we are taught to pray well. The Lord also
commands us to pray in the time of trouble, and promises that we shall be
heard. Call upon Psalm. 50. 15
me in the time of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Which all the faithful do often prove true in their own
experience. For, as the same Prophet says: Psalm. 34. 19
the Lord is near those that be broken in heart, and will save the contrite in
spirit.


Theoph. That is a most excellent use of afflictions. Now declare the fifth.


Mat. The fifth use of afflictions, the trial of our faith.
By them the Lord brings our faith to light, that we may be confirmed in it:
For Peter says, 1. Pet. 1. 7.
that it is tried no otherwise, then gold is tried in a furnace of fire: which
similitude is most fit. For, as the fire either consumes base things, as it
does wood or straw. or else hardneth, as it does the clay; but precious things,
such as be gold and silver it melts and cleanses so there be diverse effects
of afflictions, according to the variety of the persons to whom they be sent.
For, they do either consume the wicked through impatie^ce, or else they harden
them through despair.

1 On the contraie side, they soften the hearts of the godly to call upon God.

2 They cleanse their hearts, for as much as by afflictions our concupiscence
is mortified.

3 Finally they try our faith, For, while the Lord does temper the bitterness
of them with his love and gentleness, he causes us to take them patiently,
and to fashion our selves to his most holy will, by the which means our faith
is manifested. Hereupon James calls afflictions by the name of temptation.
Iam. 1 12.
Blessed is the man which endures temptation. For when he has been tried, he
shall receive the crown of life. Whereunto also that is to be referred, which
is spoken of Paul: Romans 5. 3.
that affliction brings forth patience, patience experience, and experience
hope. For this the Apostle means, that God by the comfort which he gives us
in afflictions, by experi^nce proves unto us the truth of his promises, by the
which we are for the time to come confirmed in the hope of eternal life.


Theoph. Indeed the former four verses of afflictions are most excellent, and
this fifth is nothing inferior. Hasten therefore unto the last.


Mat. The sixth use of affliction, the renouncing of the world, and desire of
eternal life.
By afflictions God will call our minds away from these earthly things, that we
may earnestly desire the life to come. For the Israelites if they had not bin
ill entreated, both in Egypt, and in the wilderness, would never have
thoroughly thought upon going to the land of Canaan, which was a figure of the
heavenly inheritance. Therefore God does as a careful nurse, who when she would
weane the child, lays some bitter thing upon the teat, to cause the child to
hate and abhor it.

Thou have now how many ways afflictions be necessary for us. Thou see
therefore that we are not without cause warned by the Apostle, to bear the^
patiently, as sent from God our father, when he says; Heb. 12. 5. 6. 7. 8.
My son despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art
corrected of him. For, whom the Lord loves he chastises, and scourges every
son whom he receives. If you endure chastening, God offers himself unto
you as unto sonns. (For what son is there whom the father chasteneth not?)
But if you be without chastening, whereof all be partakers, verily you are
bastards and not sons. Moreover we had the fathers of our bodies chastisers
of us, and we did them reverence, should we not much more be in subjection to
the father of spirits, that we might live? For they indeed for a few days
corrected us after their own pleasure, but he chastises us for our profit,
that we might be partakers of his holiness.


Theoph. There is no cause then, why the faithful in this world should look
for all prosperity.


Mat. True, unless they will deceive them selves: for otherwise it were
necessary, that

1 The devil should be without envy.

2 The world without malice.

3 And we our selves without sin.

But the Devil will always burn in envy against the faithful. The world
with malice and mad hatred, and our sins will minister sufficient matter unto
God, (who in the mean time has care of our salvation) to give the raines unto
those our enemies, to molest and trouble us. Wherefore according to the saying
of the Apostle, 2. Tim. 3. 12
let all such as desire to live godly in Christ Jesus make their accounts, that
they shall suffer persecutions. Of prosperity.
Add hereunto, that prosperity is not always profitable for us, nay
oftentimes it hurts us.


Theoph. Why so?


Mat. Because often it hinders our salvation, for it brings forth fruits,
altogether contrary to those, which we reckened up even now.

2 For, it makes us proud and insolent, and keeps us from the acknowledging
of our sins.

3 It stirs us up to serve our own wicked lusts, and it is unto them, as a
bait, wherewith they are more and more set on fire.

4 It makes us negligent in prayer, and as it were puts out in us the
desire to pray.

5 It provoke us to impatience and wrath, and makes us void of the affection
of mercy.

6 Finally, it makes us drunken with the love of our selves, and of the world,
and draws us away from the meditation of the heavenly life. Act. 14. 22.
Therefore, not without cause the Scripture testifies, that we must through
many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God. Now these in the holy
writings, are not seldom called strikings, to the end we might know them to be
as it were certain spiritual medecines, which be diversely administered by God
him self the best spiritual Physician, to sundry purposes, according to the
quality of our sicknesses and necessity. Notwithstanding, he deals always
so gently with us, that he suffers us not to be tempted, above that we are
able to bear. For, while he chastises us with the one hand, he does lift us
up with the other, and causes, that the issue of the affliction is always
happy. And so he declares his goodness to us in adversity, as well as in
prosperity. For, often, he tempereth them both together, or sends them by
course, least we should be too much puffed up with prosperity, or thrown
down with adversity. Hereupon the Prophet says: Psalm. 30. 5.
weeping may abide in the evening, but joy comes in the morning. And that
more is, he uses this course of things, that we may the more acknowledge, what
the sweetness of prosperity is, and so be more earnestly bent to yield him
thanks. For, as it is in the proverb: Sweet things deserved has not be,
Which before did bitter never see.



Theoph. Hitherto thou have declared certain very excellent points concerning
afflictions, which if they be earnestly fixed in our minds, they will bring no
small comfort, nor a little stir us up to patience. Now these unless I be
deceived, are

1 First, that afflictions come not to us, but by the will of God.

2 That they be sent unto us from God to our good.

3 That God will assist us to the patient bearing of them.

4 That God promises us a blessed issue, yea at length a full deliverance.

5 Finally, that by means of them, prosperity is made more pleasant and
delectable.


Mat. Thou passest over the chief point, that is to say, the fatherly love that
God shows even then when he does chastise us, for he always deals
mercifully and gently with us in the very afflictions. Which thing David
witnesses in these words; The Lord is merciful and gentle, slow in wrath, and
great in goodness. He is not Psalm. 103. 8. 9. etc.
wont to chide always, neither will he keep his wrath for evermore. He has
not dealt with us according to our sins, neither has he rewarded us
according to our iniquities. Because according to the height of the heavens
above the earth, so great is his goodness upon them that fear him. As far as
the East is from the West, so far has he removed our sins from us. As a
father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on them
that fear him. For he knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we are but
dust.


Theoph. Why call thou this the chief point?


Mat. Because unless that love of God be before our eyes in our afflictions
there can nothing else be to any purpose: On the other side if this go before,
and the other which thou even now reckenedst up do follow, either I am greatly
deceived, or else there is no affliction so hard, which a faithful man may not
be able to overcome, especially if it be to be suffered for the testimony of
the truth of the Gospel.


Theoph. Why so?


Mat. Afflictions for righteousness.
There may five causes be alleged, besides those which thou have heard already.


Theoph. My heart desires to hear them.


Mat. The first is this, that by afflictions for righteousness sake the Lord
vouchsafes us the honor to be Martyrs, that is to say, witnesses of his truth.
And so he turns the punishment joined with shame which we have deserved, into
most glorious sufferings. Whereupon Peter speaking of them, says: that it is
better, if so the will of God be, that doing well we should be punished, then
doing evil.

2 Another is, that by them we are made like, not only to the holy Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, and other Martyrs, which lived before our times: but also
to Christ himself, which has set himself before us as a pattern of the^;
with whom (says the Apostle) Romans 8. 17. 2. Tim. 2. 12.
we shall no otherwise be glorified, except we suffer with him.

3 The third is, because the glory of God, which ought to be far dearer unto
us, then our own life, is thus not a little advanced: for, it comes to
pass, that the very enemies of the Christian truth, are called to the
knowledge of Christ, and the weak be confirmed in it, by our constancy, and
open confession of God his name. Therefore it was well said of one of the
ancient fathers, Tertul. in apol. adu. gent.
that the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church.

4 The fourth is, that while we be made partakers of Christ's sufferings, the
spirit of God rests upon us, wherewith we are maruellously comforted. 1. Pet.
4. 14 2. Cor. 1. 5.
For, as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, even so through Christ
abounds our comfort.

5 The fifth is, because our reward is great in heaven, even as Christ himself
witnesses, Mat. 5. 12.
Yea he wills us to rejoice and to leap for joy in the midst of
afflictions. Paul also says the same in these words: Luc. 6. 23.
The momentanie lightness of our affliction, 2. Cor. 4. 17.
causes unto us a far most excellent eternal weight of glory while we look
not on things which are seen, but on things which are not seen. For the
things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen, are
eternal Therefore we have no occasion of heaviness offered unto us by
suffering in this sort: yea rather we ought to receive great matter of comfort
and joy, as of the greatest good which is wont to be given of God, and as of a
special gift which he gives not, but to his elect, and most dearly beloved
children. For Paul teecheth, Phil. 1. 29.
that it is given us not only to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for
him. In another place also the same Apostle says of himself; Gal. 6. 14. 4
God forbid that I should boast in anything, save in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by the which the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.


The second part of the Apostles Creed, which is of faith in Christ.
Theoph. We have spoken largely enough of the first part of the Creed, the
matter therefore requires that we come to the second: which is concerning the
son, of whom thou saydest we were redeemed, and that he did continually make
intercession for us.

I do therefore demand of thee, in which articles that redemption and
intercession is contained?


Mat. The foundation of our redemption.
Indeed redemption has chiefly the foundation in the article of the death and
passion of Christ, which is as it were the price of our redemption: For by it,
joining thereto the resurrection, we were delivered from the tyranny of the
devil, and brought into the liberty of Gods children, which Christ him self
witnesses in these words, The son of man is come into this world to give
his life a price of redemption Mat. 20. 28
for many.

Concerning his intercession: it is joined by Paul with the article of sitting
at the right hand of God, as a part thereof. These be his words, What is he
that Romans 8. 34.
shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea rather which is raised up from
the dead, who also is at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us.
For because the sitting at the right hand of the father, is referred to the
dignity, whereunto he is advanced with the father, by a similitude taken from
kings, which are wont to place those at their right hand, that be most welcome
and acceptable to them, and whom they desire to have most honored therefore
does he join his intercession with it, to the end we might know, that Christ
bestows the great authority he has with his Father in this, that by the
benefit of his death, he might become merciful unto us.


Theoph. Forasmuch as in these three articles of the death, resurrection, and
the sitting of Christ at the right Why there be in the Creed more articles of
Christ then these three.
hand of the Father, the chief points of our salvation be contained, why were
the other articles put into the Creed, especially seeing it is a sum, and as
it were an epitome or abridgement of the things which are to be believed to our
comfort and salvation?


Mat. It was that our faith might be the better defenced, against the
temptations of the devil and the flesh.


Theoph. I do desire to have these things declared by thee more at large, and
to be instructed, to what temptation, each article of the faith is opposed or
set against, that if at any time need shall be, I may make my use of them.


Matthew. The use of the articles of the faith against the sundry temptations.
The things which have been spoken by me in the former Chapter, of the person
and office of Christ, there is no cause in this place to repeat. This only I
will show, that each article is placed in most exquisite order, to the end we
might acknowledge in Christ, remedies against every kind of spiritual
sicknesses, and against all the punishments which we have deserved. Psalm 51. 7.
Ephesians. 3.
As first of all, we indeed be conceived in sin, by means whereof it is that
we are the children of wrath. The remedy against this evil, is that, which
in the first place we believe of Christ, Conceived by the holy Ghost. Math. 1.
20
namely, that he was conceived by the holy Ghost, that we may know our
conception to be sanctified in Christ, so as now even from our first beginning,
we are by him consecrated to God the Father.


Theoph. Why was it necessary, that for these things Christ should be
conceived by the holy Ghost?


Mat. Because the natural order of humane generation is defiled and corrupted,
so as it was altogether necessary, that the holy Ghost should have the work
in that conception, to purge and cleanse the substance of the virgin of whom he
was conceived, and that thus he might be pure, and far from the blot of
original sin, wherewith if he had been defiled, he himself should have
needed a redeemer and mediator, so far should he have been from redeeming us,
and from being able to reconcile us to God the Father. Ad hereunto, that there
can be no joining of the Godhead, with that that is unclean.


Theoph. Borne of the virgin Marie. Gal. 4. 14. Mat. 1. 13.
Wherefore, having mentioned his conception, is it by and by added, that he was
borne of the virgin Marie?


Mat. It was to teach us, that he did not only take our nature, as one which
was made of a woman, as Paul speaks: Gal. 4. 4. Mat. 1. 23.
but also that we might know him to be that very redeemer and Messiah promised
to the fathers: for as much as he was borne of a virgin descending from Adam
and David, according to the Prophesies of the Prophets, and that in the time
and place by them appointed.


Theoph. Why was it necessary that his mother should be a virgin?


Matthew. That both in his conception and nativity, the work of God might the
more plainer appear, and that there might be nothing whereby to darken it
never so little.


Theoph. Declare the other articles.


Mat. Because after our conception and birth, for the innumerable sins by us
daily committed, we had deserved to suffer even in this life all manner of
reproaches and contumelies, and besides in time to come hereafter, most grievous
torments both in soul and body, it is expressly mentioned, that Christ suffered
all those things for us, when it is said, Suffered under Pontius Pilate.
he suffered under Pontius Pilate: for under him, for us or in our steed, he
was bound, railed upon, beaten and crowned with thorns Moreover, we had
deserved most cruel death with reproach and shame, this also Christ suffered for
us: Crucified. Mat. 27. 35
For he was crucified between two thieves, which kind of death was accursed of
God himself, for it was appointed for evil doers and wicked men. Dead.
But by dying he overcame death, so as death is now to us, not deadly, but
making alive. Mat. 27. 50
Moreover, the Judge is named under who^ he suffered, not so much to prove the
certainty of the story, as to teach us that Christ, notwithstanding he were
most just and innocent, was for us condemned before an earthly Judge, as a
guilty person, that by his most unjust condemnation, we should have full
absolution and discharge before the Judgment feate of God.


Theoph. I desire to have that more largely declared by thee, which I heard
even now of the death of Jesus Christ; namely that by dying he overcame death,
so as it is not now deadly unto us, but making alive.


Matthew. How Christ brought death to death.
That thou may understand these things rightly, it is to be known, that
death when it would have swallowed up Christ, in who^ is the fountain of life,
was it self swallowed up of him, so as he became deadly to death, according to
the Prophecy of Hosea; Hos. 13. 14.
O death I will be thy death. Seeing therefore by the death of Christ, death is
swallowed up in victory, now the faithful are delivered from the tyranny of
it. There is no cause then, why we should fear it, nay rather let us be bold
to provoke, and as it were to challenge death with the Apostle crying out, 1.
Cor. 15 54.
O death where is thy victory?


Theoph. But it does still daily exercise it tyranny upon the faithful, for
it kills them.


Mat. Death delivers the faithful from innumerable deaths.
Nay rather clean contrariwise: For while it seems to kill them, it
delivers them from a thou-and deaths, that is to say, from the innumerable
troubles of this world, to the end they may live most blessedly in the heavens.


Theoph Let us go forward to the rest.


Mat We had deserved, that our bodies after death, should be thrust into the
grave, which is deaths prison, and that our souls should be cast down into
hell, to be tormented with everlasting pains.

Christ, that he might remedy both these evils, would have his body buried,
that so he might pursue death it self being ready to dye, into his own hold,
that is to say into the grave: whose nature therefore he changed, so as it is no
more to us the goal of death, but a place appointed of God, wherein our bodies
are kept against the day of the glorious resurrection.

For this cause the scripture affirms, Acts. 7. 60. 1. The. 4. 13
that the faithful departed, are not dead but a sleep. Whereupon it came to
pass, that the fathers of the primitive church named those places wherein the
bodies of the faithful were buried (...), that is to say, sleeping places.

Moreover, Christ would tarry in the grave some days, that so it might
certainly appear, that he was dead indeed. But then he descended into hell
for us, He descended into hell.
when he endured those most extreme torments and sorrows, even the wrath of
God, which we had deserved. Now those were the everlasting punishments, Mat.
26. 38
which we should have suffered.

Upon the feeling of these sorrows, he sweat blood in the garden, and not for
fear of bodily death, for otherwise he should have been the most fearful of
all other men.

Moreover these sorrows caused, Luc. 22. 44. Mat. 27. 46
that in the very agony he cried out; my God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Yet, not that God ever forsook him, but because he was in out steed, and
offered himself to his Father as a bail for us, it was necessary that his
divinity should be hidden for a time, until the humanity had suffered all the
things, which both here and in the world to come we had deserved Howbeit, the
punishment which in respect of us was eternal and endless, in Christ was made
temporary and having end, because he himself is eternal and infinite, and
therefore he put an end to those everlasting punishments, whereunto we were
accursed.


Theoph. But this article of Christ's descending into Hell, is placed in the
Creed after his burial: wherefore it seems, that it cannot be referred unto
those pains which he suffered before death: for the order it self is against
it. Moreover, this self same thing seems to be contained in another
article, even in that he suffered under Pontius Pilate, in which words, not
those pains only are to be understood, which he suffered in his body, but
those also which he suffered in his soul.


Mat. This article of Christ's descending into Hell, cannot otherwise be
expounded, but as it has been expounded of me: for if it be referred to his
burial, as some would have it, bringing for the confirmation of their opinion
those places of Scripture, wherein the grave it self is called by the name of
Hell, it shall be nothing else, but a repetition of that which is far more
plainly set out in the former Article: which indeed does not agree to so
short a summarie as the Creed is. Much less is this article to be understood,
of Christ's soul going down into the place of the damned. For Christ said to
the thief, this day shall thou Luc. 23. 43.
be with me in Paradise. Moreover, there was no such thing further required,
for as much as all things were finished upon the Cross: for he said a little
before his death: it is finished. Concerning the order or method, Ioh. 19. 39
it has been before declared by us, that they which wrote this Creed, looked
unto this, that in each article they might set before us, the several
remedies, which be ministered unto us by Christ, against all kinds of
temptations and spiritual discases. Therefore they would not only express
the pains which he suffered in his body, but also the fearful torments which
he suffered in his soul, and which unto us are most terrible, for these we
have deserved to endure for ever in Hell it self* the temptations whereof
far exceeds that which arises of the afflictions of this life, yea and of
bodily death. Wherefore having comprehended all these pains generally in this
Article; he suffered under Pontius Pilate, afterward they would handle them
particularly. And first of all, those which The order of the articles which
respect Christ.
he suffered in body, in these words, He was crucified, dead, and buried: for
they purposely joined his burial, that as it were in one row they might
comprehend all things, which appertain to the abasing of his body. Which being
declared, they added those horrible torments, which he suffered in his soul,
in these words; He descended into Hell. Which they did, to the end we may
understand, that Christ when he had suffered all the things, which we should
have suffered in Hell, did as much, as if by a local descending, he had
descended into Hell it self; and that therefore we are free from it.


Theoph. Now do I very well allow the exposition of this article which you
have delivered, as that which brings us no small comfort. Yea I do very well
like the order it self. For it is easier to apply the sufferings of Christ to
our selves, when they are reckened up in that order wherein we should have
suffered them, then in any other.


Mat. Thou iudgest rightly: for the temptation of the second death, that is to
say, of the punishments which abides for us in hell, is wont to come into our
minds, after the temptation of the first death.


Theoph. Declare unto me the other articles.


Mat. The third day he arose again.
The resurrection follows, by the which Christ overcame, death, hell, sin,
yea and the Devil himself, and triumphing over them, and leading them
captives, Act. 10. 46 Ephe. 4. 8. He ascended into heaven Act. 1. 9.
he ascended into Heaven, whither he is gone up with the greatest glory, not
so much for himself, as thereby to open a way for us, and to take possession of
it in our name, until our souls come to possess it after death, and body and
soul together after the resurrection. But because so long as we here live,
even after we are by faith made partakers of Christ's gifts, we fall into
many sins, which are wont to trouble our consciences, and to weaken our
faith, it is by and by added, And sits at the right hand of God the father
almighty.
that he sits at the right hand of the Father, to the end we might know, and
be assured of that intercession which has before been mentioned. And so we
might understand, that after he had once suffered death upon the Cross for
our sins, he does continually offer the merit thereof unto his father for us,
and therefore causes the father himself to be favorable unto us. Which thing
Paul shows in these words; Christ is at the right hand of the Father, Romans
8. 34.
and makes request for us.

More, he uses that great authority whereunto he is advanced, to the
government and help of his church, against all the hurtes that might come upon
it, and to the accomplishment of our salvation Finally, because (such is the
weakness of our faith) some fear of condemnation may assail our minds in
that last day, Mat. 16. 27
wherein the Lord will render to every one according to his works: therefore
that this temptation may be met with, it is said further; that Christ which is
our intercessor, shall also be our Judge. And this is the meaning of that
article, From thence he shall com^ to judge quick and dead.
wherein we believe that he shall come to judge quick and dead: even that we
might be without all fear of condemnation; and contrariwise, certainly know,
that by the sentence of the Judge himself, we shall obtain salvation.


Theoph. Who are those quick, and dead, who thou say shall be judged of
Christ?


Math. The quick, are they which at that day shall be alive, who also as
Paul says, 1. Cor. 15. 52
shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye: and the dead are they, whom
death before shall have taken out of the company of the living.


Theoph. But is it necessary, that the dead should rise again in that day,
of whom judgment was given before, whether they be good or evil?


Mat. These things shall not let their appearing at that day, and that for
two causes.

1 The first, because that first judgment, pertains only to the soul: but
the later to the whole man.

2 The other is, that that particular judgment may be proclaimed before all
men, and so there may be a more manifest declaration of God his righteousness.

Therefore the Scripture affirms, that in that day both good and bad shall be
judged by Christ according to their works: which without doubt shall be
brought to light, as it were manifest testimonies, either of the faith, or the
unbelief, lying hid in the heart, although faith it self, or unbelief in
those that come to years, be special causes either of the salvation or
damnation of men, as it is declared by the Judge himself; Ioh. 3. 18. and 5.
24.
He that believes in me, is not condemned: but he which believes not, is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God.


Theoph. Why Christ's death is mentioned oftener in the Scriptures, then the
other things he did for us
I do now at length acknowledge all the articles which appertain to the faith
in Christ, to be indeed profitable, yea necessary to the establishment of our
faith I would notwithstanding know, why in the Scriptures his death only is
for the most part spoken of, as in that place of Paul, Romans 5. 10.
We are reconciled by the death of his son.


Mat. By such kind of speeches, the scriptures, desirous of breuity and
shortness, of the chief part names the whole. Nevertheless, sometimes his
resurrection also Romans 4. 25.
is joined because in it Christ overcame death, whereupon it is, that the force
of Christ's death hangs upon his resurrection. For if Christ be not raised up
(says Paul) 1. Cor. 15. 14
our faith is vain. This also is to be noted by the way, that the death of
Christ is not seldom understood by his blood, because that pouring out of his
blood, amongst other things, which he suffered for us, is verse excellent and
notable.


Theoph. Bring forth some testimonies for it.


Mat. They are to be found every where in the holy writings. Peace being made
by the blood of Christ, by him he has reconciled all things to him self, as
well those that be in earth as those that be in heaven, that is to say, both
those that be in the Church already received into heaven, as those that be
yet in the militant Church below.

1. Pet. 1. 19
We were redeemed not with corruptible things, as silver or gold: but with the
precious blood, as of a Lamb without spot, and undefiled, even of Christ. Romans
5. 9.
We are justified by the blood of Christ.


The third part of the Apostles Creed, which is faith in the holy Ghost.
Theoph. We have proceeded far enough concerning faith in Christ. Now
therefore we must come to the third part of the Creed, which is of the holy
Ghost, whereunto thou did dest attribute, that it does sanctify us, and join
us with Christ. But there be two things, which I will propound unto thee to be
declared.

1 First, wherein that sanctification stands.

2 Secondly, in what sense thou say, that we are by the holy Ghost joined
with Christ, forasmuch as even now thou ascribedst that unto faith.


Math. The sanctification which the holy Ghost works in us, stands herein,
that it amendeth the corruption planted in our minds, and repaireth the decay
of our souls, otherwise cast away and undone by original sin.


Theoph. Declare to me the effects of that repairing.


Mat. First of all, it lightneth our minds, so as we do acknowledge the true
God in Christ, and yield him the worship due to his majesty.

Secondly, it reformeth our hearts, working faith in them, which piety or
godliness follows, that is to say, the love and fear of God, from whence
also springs repentance it self. For this faith which lies hid in the
heart, shows it self, as it were visible to the eyes. But the sanctification
whereof we speak, is not seldom called by the name of regeneration.


Theoph. Why is it called also by this name?


Math. Because, when the holy Ghost by his grace and virtue works in us,
steadfastly to believe the things, which in former times we condemned, and that
truly repenting, we do the things which be directly contrary to our former
actions: Ephe. 4. 24. 2. Cor. 5. 17
we do in very deed seem to be borne again, and to be made new men, as
Paul speaks. And verily then all the parts and qualities of our soul are so
reformed, as they may seem to be altogether changed.


Theoph. What our regenetatio^ or sanctification is.
Therefore this sanctification or regeneration, is nothing else, but the
repairing of the image of God, which we lost in Adam.


Math. Thou iudgest rightly: and Paul himself testifies this, when he says;
Col. 3. 10.
that we have put on the new man, which is renewed into knowledge, agreeable to
the image or likeness of him that created him. But Christ is he, by whom that
likeness of God is brought from Heaven unto us, and communicated by spiritual
regeneration, even as Adam by carnal generation had made us partakers of sin
with him.


Theoph. Thou speak of two generations, very much differing the one from
the other, I mean the first which we have from Adam, from that which Christ
works in us by his spirit.


Mat. Verily, by that first generation we are borne unto sin, but by this
latter, we are borne unto righteousness.

2 By the first we are borne children of wrath: by the later, children of God.

3 By the first we are borne unto death; by the later unto everlasting life.
And for this cause Christ said to Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. 3.
Except a man be borne again, he cannot not see the kingdom of God.


Theop. Hitherto I have heard what sanctification or regeneration is, namely
that it consists in the understanding of heavenly things concerning our
salvation; and in the reformation of our heart and will, which causes us to
believe in God through Christ, and to obey him. But how is it that the Apostle
whom thou citedst speaking of this repairing, makes mention only of the
understanding, and not of the will? For he says, that we have put on that new
man, which is renewed into knowledge Col. 3. 10.
agreeable to the image of him that created him.


Mat. In that place indeed there is only mention of knowledge, but under the
name of knowledge are understood both holiness of life and reformation. Which
also in another place are by name spoken of by the same Apostle, when he says;
Ephesians. 4. 24.
that that new man is put on which is created after God in righteousness and
true holiness. Thou see that in those places, one part is taken for both,
because they are at once or together reformed by the holy Ghost, although in
diverse manner. For to some he gives more knowledge then reformation. And
contrariwise to some others, more zeal and reformation, then knowledge.


Theop. But how is it, that there be many also found, unto whom there is given
more then common knowledge of God, and of his truth, whose life notwithstanding
is most wicked?


Math. In deed I grant this, that God sometimes gives even to the unfaithful
some knowledge of his truth, which also for the most part is colored with
great words, and external show. But it is not the right knowledge of the true
God, which is always joined with his obedience. Neither in deed can any man
know him, but he is straight ways beloved of him: but that love cannot stand,
except we do obey his commandments. Therefore John says, By this we know that
we know him, if we keep his commandments. He that says, 1. Ioh. 2. 3.
I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not
in him.


Theoph. But whether of those two is the better, either the knowledge of God,
or the obedience of his commandments?


Mat. Indeed knowledge is better then obedience in this, that it begets in
us both the love and obedience of God: but especially for that by it we are
transformed as the Apostle speaks from glory unto glory, 2. Cor. 3. 18.
that is to say, as it were by certain degrees as that knowledge gets
increase in us. Nevertheless that image or likeness of God, does not so
expressly shine in us in knowledge, which for the most part lies hid in the
mind, as it does in obedience, namely while we live te^peratly, justly, and
godly, for those excellent virtues declare us not to be bastards, but the true
children of God.


Theoph. Why so?


Mat. Because we are thought their children according to the flesh, whose
likeness we have concerning the body: so are we accounted his spiritual
children, whose spiritual likeness we show in our works.


Theoph. Thou call the words of Christ to my remembrance; wherewith he
reproves the Scribes and Phatisies, bosting them selves to be the children of
Abraham. If you were Abraham's children, you would do the works of Abraham. Ioh.
8. 39.
You are of your father the Devil and the lusts of your father will you
fulfill.


Matthew. Very truly. Hereunto also may be referred that saying of Christ, which
he adds after that he had exhorted us to holiness of life: That you may be
the children of that your Father which is in heaven. Math. 5. 45.
But this holiness and reformation of life are effects and fruits of
repentance, whereof mention was made before by us, when we spoke of
sanctification.


Theoph. Of repentance.
Let us therefore now speak somewhat of repentance, and first what is
repentance?


Mat. It is the hatred of sin, and an earnest love of righteousness, by the
which we are continually stirred up to abhor our vices, and are moved to do
good works, not for fear of punishment, or hope of reward, but for that love
we bear toward God, which works in us, that with a joyful heart we are
moved to his obedience, and with grief go astray from his commandments. And
therein is the promise fulfilled made unto us of God by his Prophets, Ier. 31.
33. Ezec. 36. 26
namely that he will take from us the stony heart, in stead whereof he will
give us an heart of flesh wherein he will engraue his Law, that we may walk in
his commandments. Hence it comes, that the Law of God, which in former
times was grievous and hated of us, is now not only not grievous, but most
acceptable and delightful, even as it is written by the Prophets. Psalm. 110.
14. 17. 47.



Theoph. How many parts of repentance be there?


Mat. Two. Namely,

1 The mortification or killing of the old man, that is to say, of the
corruption which by reason of sin sticks within us.

2 And the resurrection of the new man.

The same also be the parts of regeneration, for it is necessary, that the
holy Ghost do first kill all evils, and even corruption it self, before it
plant good things in our hearts. But that mortification has it force from the
death of Christ, of whom when we are made partakers by faith, he does not only
blot all our sins, but also causes that we acknowledge them, and being
acknowledged, do hate them. Which thing Paul teaches us in these words: This
we know, that our old man is crucified with Christ, Romans 6. 6.
that the body of sin might be weakened, that hereafter we should not serve
sin.

Moreover the rising again of the new man, which borrows his force and
efficacy from the resurrection of Christ, works strength in us, by means
whereof from the heart we apply our selves to the obedience of God, which also
the same Apostle plainly teaches, where he says; We are buried together with
Christ by Baptism into his death, Romans 6. 4.
that as Christ is raised up from the dead, into the glory of the Father, even
so should we walk in newness of life.


Theoph. Are then these two parts joined together by so strict a band, that
the former can never be severed from the later?


Math. They are indeed, for it is impossible that any man should be partaker of
Christ's death, but the same also is partaker of the fruit of his resurrection.
The Apostle expressly affirms it; If we be grafted with Christ Romans 6. 5.
to the similitude of his death, even so shall we be to the similitude of his
resurrection. For this cause so often as the Scripture speaks of repentance,
it does not only simply understand, some grief conceived for our sins, but
reformation of life, and returning to a better course, which be witnesses of
that sorrow lying hid in the heart.

Therefore such as brag of repentance, and yet do not return, nor give them
selves to amendment of life, are liars, and do mock God himself.


Theoph. Thou say truly, for in our common life, he should be thought to
mock us, that said he was sure he had done us wrong, and yet in deed continued
in the thing it self. I do rest satisfied in this doctrine of regeneration.
But by it, that is not a little confirmed which was before proved by thee in the
chapter of man, namely, that man by his own nature is the servant of sin,
which neither understands heavenly things that appertain to his salvation,
neither has any freedom or power to do that which is good. For seeing those
faculties and powers are given unto us by the spirit of regeneration, it is
without doubt that we lack them and therefore that we are altogether unable of
our selves to believe, or to do well.


Mat. Thou gatherest well: Of man's free will.
But because this doctrine concerning man's Free will, before this time, being
as it is at this day in controversy, is notwithstanding of great force, to the
establishment of the glory of God, and of our own salvation, although it has
before bin declared by us, yet I will not think much to speak of it again,
and to confirm it by testimonies of the Scripture. And first of all,
concerning the true knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ, which is the
foundation of our salvation: Christ himself says; No man knows Mat. 11. 17
the Son but the Father, neither does any man know the Father but the Son,
and he to whom the Son will reveal him. John. 6. 44.
No man can come to me, except the Father that sent me draw him. But concerning
the will, and that power whereby we do obey God, Paul says: It is God which
works in us to will, and to perform Phil. 2. 13.
it. Which also is confirmed of Christ himself, by a most fit similitude, in
these words; As the branch John. 15. 4.
can bear no fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine: even so neither
can you, except you abide in me. He that abides in me, and in whom I abide,
the same brings much good fruit, for without me you can do nothing. Which
things being so, what can man of himself believe in the matter of Religion, but
error and lies? what is he able to do when the question is of worshipping God,
but all manner vice and wikednesse? I will ad a place out of Paul, wherein all
this doctrine in one word is plainly set down. You were dead in sins and
Ephesians. 2. 1.
trespasses. He says not you were sick, so as some little life was left in
you, but you were altogether dead. The self same thing also he confirms
afterward, when he says: Ephesians. 2. 6.
that we are raised up from the dead, when God does regenerate us. If therefore
the unregenerate man be spiritually dead in sins, it follows that he has
no more understanding in things pertaining to eternal salvation, then has a
dead man in the things of this life.

Moreover if a man unregenerate be spiritually dead in sins, he has no more
power to do a good deed, then a dead man has to do the actions of the body.

Therefore even as our soul gives life to the body, so also the spirit of
God is the life of our soul, being otherwise dead, and unable to believe or do
any thing that is good.


Theoph. Although I do wholly give consent to this doctrine, which I see has
express grounds in the holy Scriptures, yet I will propound unto thee a
certain objection, sometimes put forth to my self: about the answering
whereof, I found no small difficulty: namely that God seems to mock us,
which so often by the Prophets exhorts us to turn unto him, and to keep his
commandments, if it were not in our power, at least in some part to do this.

Furthermore, that exhortations be made in vain, the use of admonitions is but
needless, and that reproves are but ridiculous, if it were not in the power
of the sinner not to sin.


Matthew. They that measure the strength of man by Gods commandments, be
altogether deceived. For Christ commands us: Thou shall love the Lord thy
Mat. 22. 37
God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. And
again, Be you perfect, as your father which is in heaven is perfect.

But what is he which confesses not, that he can never come to that divine
perfection, nor love him with that love that is due?

In Enchiri. ad Lauren. de gratia and lib, arbit.
Therefore as it is notably written by Austen, God commands the things which
we cannot do, that we might know what we ought to ask of him.

Which indeed may appear even by this, that every where by the Prophets, the
Lord commands us to turn unto him, and to repent us of our sins. But
Jeremy answers, Ier. 31. 18. Eze. 18. 30. Joel. 2. 12.
correct me Lord, and I shall be corrected: when thou did correct me, I did
repent. For this cause the same Austen, Confess. l. 10
which handled this doctrine of Free will most excellently, writes in another
place. O Lord give me that which thou command, and command what thou will.


Theoph. Indeed this is a solution or answer to that objection, not to be
despised.


Mat. I do ad, that it may be gathered out of Paul, that exhortations to
holiness of life, have not their foundation upon our natural powers, but upon
the promise of God, wherein he promises to be with us, not to help our Free
will in part, but wholly and altogether himself alone to make it good in us.


Theoph. Bring some places out of Paul, for the confirmation of this doctrine.


Mat. Writing to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. 24.
when he has admonished them to live, blamelesly, justly, and soberly, in love
and in patience, he prays to God to sanctify them, to the end they might be
able to perform those things: and at length says; Faithful is he that has
called you, which will also do it. In another place also, after he had exhorted
the Philippians, to work out their own salvation with fear and trembling,
presently he adds: Phil. 2. 12. 13.
For it is God which works in you, both the will and the deed, even of his
good pleasure.


Theoph. What use is there of exhortations, admonitions and reprehensions to
the unbelievers?


Mat. They shall be a witness against them, when they come to the judgment
seat of God: For they shall the more be convinced of rebelling against God,
and of the hardening of their own hearts.


Theoph. I am now well furnished against those, that shall hereafter set upon
me with that objection.

To conclude, it seems to me, that this doctrine may fitly be referred to
that, which sometimes I have heard of thee; namely that all the sins of men
be of themselves, and not of God: but that their good works, if they do any, be
not of themselves, but of God.


Mat. True. Neither is there any cause, why we should fear to receive this for
true doctrine, forasmuch as it tends both to the glory of God, and to the
throwing down of our selves, which is a most certain mark, whereby we may
discern or know true doctrine from false, according to the rule of Christ.
John. 7. 18.



Theoph. Now we are to go forward to the rest. We have at large handled the
first effect of the holy Ghost: let us therefore come to the other. How make
thou the holy Ghost the author of our union or being made one with Christ,
which in the beginning of this Chapter, thou did attribute unto faith?


Matthew. In what sense the holy Ghost is said to be author of our union with
Christ.
When I did attribute or give it to faith, I did it according to the use of the
scripture, but this I meant that faith is the instrument, and as it were a
spiritual hand, by the which we do receive Christ with all his gifts. In the
mean time, this is to be understood, that the holy Ghost is author of them
all. For, that uniting of us to Christ which is in heaven, is not done but by
his own divine power. Add hereunto, that the holy Ghost begets faith in us,
and sanctifies us, that so we may be made fit to receive Christ, and apply
him, with all his gifts unto our selves.


The fourth part of the Apostles Creed, which is concerning the Church.
Theoph. We have expounded three parts of the Creed, it remains that we come
to the fourth, which is of the Church. Now there come two things to my mind,
whereunto I would have thee to answer. First:

1 What the Church is: and

2 Why thou saidest, that by the working of the holy Ghost, we are joined with
it.


Mat. What the Church is.
The word Church, signifies a company: in this place it is taken for the
company of the faithful chosen of God.

But although the Church be only one, which is the spouse and the mystical
body of Christ, yet it is wont to be considered in two respects:

1 As it is invisible. And

2 As it is visible.


Theoph. Of the invisible Church.
What do thou understand by the name of the invisible Church?


Mat. All the elect, which may be divided into three sorts.

1 The first, of them which already be received into heaven, who for that cause
are called the Triumphant Church, because they have overcome all temptations
and troubles, they do enjoy the heavenly glory.

2 The second is, of the^ which do yet live in the earth.

3 The third, of them that are yet unborn. Now these three parts in that last
day, shall be gathered together into one body, and then shall be a Church all
together triumphant and glorious.


Theoph. Which is the visible Church?


Mat. Of the visible Church.
The company of the faithful, gathered together in the name of Christ: to be
instructed and confirmed in his faith, by the sincere preaching of the word, as
also by the use of the Sacraments, which are two most certain marks, wherewith
God would mark her out, and as it were, set her forth to be seen, that she
might be known of all her children, and they might be gathered unto her.

Now this is that which is called the milita^t Church, because continually it
warreth with the devil, the flesh and the world.


Theoph. Why will God have all his children join themselves to the visible
Church?


Matthew. That he may be worshipped of us, which is when we do consent together
in calling upon him, and that he, as a good house-holder, may feed us with his
word, the spiritual food, wherewith we may be daily strengthened, until he
bring us to the celestial inheritance.


Theoph. What is the use of this article?


Mat. It shall most easily be perceived of thee, if thou do but mark the
testimonies of praise and commendation, wherewith Paul decketh the Church,
which indeed are answerable to diverse places of the Prophets. Now they be
three, and those most excellent* For he terms her

1 The house of God.

2 The pillar of truth.

3 The mother of all the faithful.


Theoph. We are to examine the reason of these titles given unto her. And first
of all, why do thou call it the house of God?


Mat. That we may understand, that God dwells in his Church, does defend it,
and guide it by his holy spirit. Even as Christ himself says: Where two or
there be met together in my name, there am I in the Mat. 18. 19
midst of them.


Theoph. Why is it called the pillar of truth?


Mat. Because by the ministry thereof, God preserves and keeps his truth
in the world.


Theoph. What is that truth?


Mat. Christ himself, when as he is acknowledged to be not only very God and
very man in one person, but also a Savior and Redeemer, which is the most
certain truth, and most profitable to the believers: for, by it they attain
eternal life. Which Christ himself affirms in these words: I am the way,
the truth John. 14. 6.
and the life.


Theoph. Therefore it follows, that this Church which we believe, forasmuch
as it is the pillar of truth, cannot err.


Mat. Indeed in those points which appertain to the person and office of
Christ, it cannot err, but in some other parts of doctrine it may err, which
falls out not seldom.


Theoph. Why may it not err in the things which concern Christ, as well as in
others?


Mat. Because by the testimony of Paul, Christ is the only foundation of the
Church, which being taken 1. Cor. 3. 11.
away, it can no more stand, then an house without a foundation.


Theoph. What if the Church erred in those things?


Mat. It should then not be a Church, but rather the synagogue of Satan,
seeing that it had overthrown or pulled down Christ it own true foundation.


Theoph. Of the foundation of the Church.
But Christ seems to have appointed an other foundation of the Church beside
himself, namely Peter the Apostle, to whom he said, thou art Peter, and upon
this rock will I build my Church.


Mat. The name of rock no way can or ought to be referred unto Peter himself,
although the words seem to bear it. For Paul affirms, that no other 1.
Cor. 3. 11.
foundation can be laid by any, besides that that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ. Moreover, how absurd a thing should it be, that the Church which is
invisible, should have her foundation in a mortal man, and that which more is,
one very weak, so as not long after he denied Christ? Verily it has need of
a stronger foundation, that it may be able to stand against so many assaults,
wherewith it has been and still is set upon, by the devil and the world,
even from the beginning.


Theoph. Deliver therefore the true sense of those words of Christ to Peter.


Math. Because Peter had confessed Christ to be the son of the living God,
Christ answers; But I say that thou art Peter. Now he is called by that name
which Christ had before given unto Simon, because Math. 4. 18 and 10. 2.
he was a living stone in the building of the Church, who acknowledged Christ
to be the son of God, and therefore the chief stone in the Church. When
therefore he adds; Upon this rock I will build my church, that is referred
to that rock, which Peter himself had confessed. Austen agrees with this
interpretation: Upon Idm. tract, 124..
for he says; The church is built upon the rock, whereof even Peter had his
name. Therefore truly the Lord says; Upon this rock will I build my Church,
because Peter had said; Thou art Christ the son of the living God. Upon this
rock therefore says he, which thou have confessed, will I build my church.
For the rock was Christ, upon the which foundation Peter himself was builded.
For no other foundation can any man lay, but that which is already laid, which
is Christ Jesus. These be the words of that father, wherewith also agrees that
which Peter says; when he exhorts the faithful, that as living stones, 1.
Pet. 2. 5.
they would be built upon Christ that chief stone. But he proves this out of
the testimony of Esaias: Behold, I put in Sion a chief corner stone, elect and
precious, in whom whosoever believes shall not be ashamed. He adds also out
of the Psalm: The stone which the builders refused, is made the head of the
corner, that is to say, vpholdeth all the building.


Theoph. Hitherto we have heard sufficiently of the second thing testified in
the praise of the church: we must come to the third. Why is it called the
mother of us all?


Mat. First, because God therein has begotten us with the incorruptible seed
of his word. And then because he has put us over unto it, as to a special
good mother, to be guided and brought up, that we may daily wax elder in
faith, until we come to the inheritance of our heavenly father. Wherefore,
whosoever refuse the government of this mother, can neither have God for their
father, nor claim to themselves any right in his inheritance.


Theoph. Why the Church is called holy.
Let us consider the very words of the creed, and first of all; Why is the
Church called holy?


Mat. For two causes, the first whereof and the chiefest is this, because as
Paul speaks; It is sanctified after that he has cleansed it, by the
washing of Ephe. 5. 26.
water, through the word. As if he should say, that it was made clean from all
sin, by the precious blood of Christ, which is daily presented unto us, both
in the word and in the Sacraments.

The other cause is, for that the members of it, which indeed are regenerated
of the holy Ghost, and sanctified, do apply themselves diligently to holiness
of life: wherein by the benefit of the ministry of the Church, they go
forward every day somewhat. Notwithstanding, in themselves it is certain,
they be defiled with many filthinesses and sins, which indeed are not
imputed unto them, for they are partakers of Christ's merit, by whose help
they obtain forgiveness of sins.


Theoph. Let us come to the other title of the church: why is it called
catholic or universal?


Mat. Why the Chuch is called catholic.
That we may understand, it is not now tied to any certain place or people,
as we read it was under the Law, before the coming of Christ: but that it is
dispersed and scattered throughout the whole world, and distinguished into
many members, which are particular Churches, gathered together in sundre
places, which notwithstanding make one body of the Church, for they be endued
with the same faith, and hope in Christ.


Theoph. Of the church before Christ.
It may seem then, that the Church which was before the coming of Christ, was
diverse from ours.


Mat. Thou gatherest ill: for although in some circumstances, it differed from
ours, yet it was one Church in substance, for as much as both of them
acknowledge

1 One and the self same father, God.

2 One Jesus Christ, redeemer and mediator.

3 Because also that old Church, had the same hope with us, namely to obtain
salvation by faith in him; by the which faith, the believers even then
communicated with his body, and therefore were partakers of all his gifts.

4 Because they had the same ministry of the word and sacraments with us, as
concerning the substance.


Theoph. But how could this be, that the faithful should be partakers of the
true body of Christ, which was not yet borne?


Mat. It was then indeed spiritually received by faith, as it is this day of
us: this only is the difference, that our faith looks to Christ now long ago
manifested: but the faith of those ancients looked to Christ, which was not
then come. Neither were they therefore excluded from the true partaking of him.
For all things are present with God. Hence is that of John; The Lamb (meaning
Christ) slain even from the Apoc. 13. 8.
foundations of the world.

Christ also confirms the self same thing, when he says; Ioh. 8. 56.
Abraham rejoiced to see this my day, and he saw it, and was glad.


Theoph. But be there any places of scripture, whereby this may be
determined, that the faithful which were under the law, were in deed and
truly, partakers of Christ's body?


Math. 1. Cor. 10. 3
There be: For Paul says; That all the fathers did eat the same spiritual
food with us, and that they all drank the same spiritual drink: for they
drank of the spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ.
By which words he means, that the fathers by their Sacraments, did no less
communicate with the body of Christ and his gifts, the^ we do at this day by
outs.


Theoph. What therefore is the difference, between their and our church?


Mat. There be reckoned not one, but four.

1 First, because the old church, did set forth Christ his death and
resurrection darkely, by certain outward ceremonies, as sacrifices, lights,
washings, and such other, Col. 2. 17.
which of the same Apostle are called shadows of things to come, but the body
is Christ.

Wherefore seeing that by his coming he has put an end unto those
ceremonies, he has now laid himself open unto us far more plainly. For he
comes forth, as it were in the midday, abounding with his gifts, that every
one may see and know them. For this cause the Apostle compares the fathers
which lived under the Law, unto children, which did learn as it were their
letters and first grounds, to give us to understand, that we may be called
learned and skillful if we be compared with them. This therefore is the first
difference.


Theoph. Declare the second.


Mat. This consists in reformation of life; for as the knowledge of Christ is
greater, so also the efficacy and working of the holy Ghost, is far greater,
which mortifieth our flesh, so as we do more earnestly obey his commandments,
according to the promises declared by the Prophets; This is the covenant Ier.
31. 33.
which I will make with the house of Israel; After those days (says the
Lord) I will put my Law in their inward Eze. 36. 27.
parts, and will write it in their hearts. I will put my Spirit within you, and
will cause you to walk in my statutes, and to keep my judgments, that you may
do them. Yet not that the godly before the coming of Christ, were without the
Spirit of regeneration, but that we might be taught, how the Lord in the very
coming of Christ, by whose blood he renewed the covenant with us, did more
abundantly bestow his gifts upon his people. For this cause the Lord did
suffer not a few blemishes of the Israelites, which among us were not to be
borne: no otherwise then as a most wise Father will bear with many childish
faults of his sons, as long as they be children, but when they be come to
years, he will in no case bear them.


Theoph. I would have thee show me some example.


Mat. Mat. 19. 8.
I will allege one; The bill of diuotsement, which was nothing else but a
liberty to put away the wife, even for the smallest cause. But the Lord
affirms, that it was permitted to the Israelites, for the hardness of their
hearts, that is to say, as well for their rudeness, as for their infirmity.
Notwithstanding, he shows, That for the time to come, it was not lawful but
for fornication.


Theoph. But it may be objected, that it is so far of, that the fathers of
the Israelites church are excelled by us in holiness and sanctimonie of life,
that contrariwise, there be, not a few of them found, which did a great deal
go beyond us; such as were Moses, Elias, Daniel, etc.


Mat. When we speak of the difference between the church of the Israelites
and ours, we must not allege some special gifts granted to some special
me^, but it must be considered, what was the whole body of that Church, for
therein stands the difference.


Theoph. Declare the third difference.


Math. It is herein, that everlasting life was obscurely and darkely offered to
the Israelites, wrapped or folded up in earthly promises. For they were
children, as Paul speaks, whose age far more esteems some small things,
then those that be of the best value. But now after we be come to age, and are
taught the Gospel, by means whereof, the benefit of eternal life is much
more plainly made known unto us, we are in the very right way, led to the
hope and meditation of it, neither do we stay in these earthly and frail
things. And this was the cause why the Fathers under the Law esteemed this
life, more then we ought to esteem it.


Theoph. Now remains the last difference.


Math. It is that, whereof by the way we made mention: namely, that the church
under the law, was as it were bounded with the borders of Judea, or shut up
within that country. But now it is scattered throughout the whole world,
neither is it tied to any place.

Mat. 10. 5.
For this cause Christ, when he sent forth his disciples to preach the Gospel
before his death, in plain words forbad them to go to the Gentiles, but to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel. But after his resurrection, when he
had put an end to the ceremonies of the law, he bids his Apostles, going
into all the Mar. 16. 16
world, to preach the Gospel to every creature.

Behold what the differences be between the old and our Church. Now these have
been the cause, that the books of the Bible which respect the state of the
Church before Christ was borne, had the name of the old Testament, and those
which were written after his resurrection, are called the new Testament, or the
new covenant, yet not that there be two covenants, or two Testaments betwixt
God and his Church for there is only one which is diuersely considered.


Theoph. Let us go forward to the rest. What is the reason that we say: I
believe the Church, and not I see the Church?


Mat. Although particular Churches, be seen of us, yet because here is
entreated of the universal church, which we cannot behold with the eyes of the
body: therefore we do not say, I see, but I believe the Church. I add
moreover that the Church properly is no other but that company of the elect.
For the hypocrites and reprobats which are mingled with the particular
Churches, are not members of the universal Church. I do annex furthermore for
a larger declaration of these two arguments. First,

1 That it falls out not seldom, that by the persecutions of the enemies,
the Church is so scattered, that it seems almost to be clean put out:
Howbeit it is not so, but only for a time it is removed from our fight even as
the wheat lies hidden under the chafe. Which indeed came to pass in the
days of Elias: for 1. Reg. 19. 10.
the Prophet complained that he aloue was left. For he thought that all the
people were fallen away from true Religion. Notwithstanding the Lord answered:
There be remaining unto me seven thousand, which have not bowed their knee
before Baal. Therefore when the Church is hidden either in the whole or in the
parts, yet ought we not thereupon to cease to believe that it is: For the
Lord said by the Prophet, that Isreal's seed Ier. 31. 36.
should not fail, as long as Sun and Moon should be in the heavens The
same thing does Christ confirm, Mat. 16. 18.
when he says, that it shall never be, that the gates of hell shall overcome
the Church, that is to say, that neither the Devil nor his Angels shall ever
be able to bring to pass the final or utter destruction of the Church,
howsoever God sometimes so give them the bridle, that is to say, such liberty,
that they bring upon it great calamity. The Church therefore may most fitly be
compared to that bush which Moses heretofore saw in the wilderness, Exodus 3. 2.
which burnt in the fire, and yet was not consumed.


Theoph. How does the speech of the gates of Hell, whereof Christ makes
mention, agree with the practices, deceipts and counsels of the devil?


Mat. It is a similitude or likeness taken from common wealths, in the which
in former times judgment was used at the gates of their Cities, where also
the store of Armor and munition for war was kept. Hereupon Judge. 5. 8.
it grew, that commonly in ancient times the gates were taken for strength and
counsel.


Theoph. Bring forth the other argument, by the which thou may prove, that
the Catholic Church is to be believed.


Mat. It is drawn from this that although in it there have always bin many
elect (seeing the word of God is never preached in vain,) yet never the less
all they that join them selves to particular churches, do not straight way
belong to the universal church: that is to say, are not by and by of the
number of the faithful and chosen. For as (says Austen) Hom. 45. upon John.
there be many sheep without the sheepfold of Christ, which God in his time
will call, so there be many wolves in the very Church, whose hypocrisy the
Lord in their time will discover. Therefore God only knows who be his, to
use the words of the Apostle. And this is the cause, why making 2. Tim. 2.
mention of the invisible Church, I comprehended under it the elect of God
still living in the earth.


Theoph. But are the elect them selves being called of God, and joined to the
particular churches uncertain of their salvation?


Mat. No not so: For, each of them may know their own faith, by the feeling
put into them by the holy Ghost, and another faith they cannot. The word of
believing contains all these things. For it is as if thou saydest, I believe
that there is a certain company of the faithful and elect in the Church,
which God defends in this world, of whose number I certainly know that I am.
In the mean time Christian charity requires this, that we judge well of all
those, that have joined themselves to particular churches, so long as they show
themselves tractable, and do obey admonitions.


Theoph. It comes to my remembrance, that the article of the Church is set
after the article of the holy Ghost, because the holy Ghost bears witness
within us, that we be members of it.


Mat. Not only for this cause, but especially because it is gathered together
by the divine working of it, by the which indeed we are knit together into one
body with Christ, and are partakers of all his gifts, that is to say, the
merit of his death is communicated unto us, by the which we obtain
forgiveness of sins, the force also of his resurrection is imparted, by the
which we shall rise again in that last day, and shall live eternally with him.
All which things, are in the Creed in exact order declared presently after the
article of the church


Theoph. Hitherto we have spoken sufficiently of the true Church, therefore we
have dispatched the first point that I propounded. Of the communion of Saints.
Let us therefore come to the other. What is the cause that thou saydest, we
were no less joined by the holy Ghost with the Church, then with Christ?


Mat. Because it cannot ioyn the faithful with Christ, but it does also join
them together among themselves, even as the members cannot be joined with the
head, but they be also united together into the body. Now this is a most fit
similitude, and best agrees to the vnio^ which we have with Christ. For as the
head, if it be joined with the members, guides them, nourishes them, and
gives them life and motion, even so Christ perfourmeth all these things to his
Church, with the which he is made one by the working of the holy ghost. For
this cause is this sentence so often repeated of the Apostle; Col. 1. 18. 1.
Cor. 12. 27
Christ is the head of the body of the Church. The faithful are the body of
Christ, and members for their part. Therefore also Christ him self gives his
own name to the Church, as when he reproved Paul: Act. 9. 4.
Saul Saul, why persecutest thou me? and this he does because the head and
members be one.


A short exposition of the Apostles Creed.
Theoph. Thou have made me to understand all the articles of the Apostles
Creed: Nevertheless I do desire, to the end the things which thou have said
may the better stick in my mind, that the sum of the same articles should
again be declared in some short Paraphrasis or exposition: as also to be
taught how the faithful may apply them to them selves.


Mat. Thou desire a thing (except I be deceived) not unprofitable. Therefore
every one may comprehend the sum of the Creed, and apply it to himself, in
these words; I put my whole trust in God the father, I believe in God the
Father.
as in him which will bless me. For I doubt not, seeing he is the Father of
Jesus Christ, but he is also my father, and therefore loves me perfectly and
infinitely, even as he him self is perfect and infinite.

Now, that will of his cannot be hindered by impotencie Almighty maker of
heaven and earth.
or weakness, as our earthly parents are often wont: For he is omnipotent,
and has all creatures, as well those that be in heaven, as those that be in
earth in his hand, to do me good, to keep me safe from all sins, and to
help me in all my necessities, so far forth as he him self shall know to be
expedient for me: who also does so keep in, bridle, and hold back the devil
and all mine enemies, that they cannot by any means hurt me.

And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.
I do also put my whole trust in Christ Jesus our Lord, the only Son of God,
of the same essence with the Father and the holy Ghost, who came down into the
earth, that he might lift me up into heaven; which was made man, to the end he
might have the same God with me, and I might have the same Father with him. For
these be his words, I ascend or go up to my Father, Ioh. 20. 17.
and your Father, and my God and your God.

Which was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the virgin Mary, suffered under
Pontius Pilate.
Who also that he might reconcile me to God the Father, was conceived by the
holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Marie: Moreover under Pontius Pilate he
suffered all the reproaches which I had deserved. For he was bound as a guilty
person, that I might be loosed out of the chain of the Devil and sin. He
was condemned of an earthly Judge, notwithstanding he were most just and
innocent, that I which am guilty of innumerable transgressions, might be
discharged before the tribunal seat of the heavenly Judge.

Who in scorn was clothed with purple, and crowned with a crown of thorns,
that he might make me partaker of his glorious crown and kingly dignity.

Crucified dead and buried.
Who was nailed to the cross, dead, and buried, that he might deliver me from
the curse of death, and slavery of sin, and the tyranny of the devil.

Who for me descended into hell, while as in the very time of that passion, he
suffered both in soul and body, He descended into hell.
the fearful torments of the wrath of God, which I had deserved, and
wherewith I should for ever have been overwhelmed in hell, who also the third
day rose again from the dead, that for my sake death being The third day he
rose again from the dead. He ascended into heaven.
fully overcome, he might give me life.

Who finally ascended into heaven, from whence I was banished for my sins,
that he might set open a passage for me into it, and might in my name take
possession of the heavenly kingdom.

Sits at the right had of God the Father almighty.
But now he sits at the right hand of God the Father almighty, and there
continually makes intercession for me with his Father, and offreth for me the
merit of his death, that so he may become merciful unto me.

From thence he shall come to judge the quick and dead.
I believe also that at the last day he shall come visibly down from the
heavens to judge both quick and dead. Neither is there any cause why I should
fear, or be afraid of condemnation, seeing I shall stand at the judgment
seat of that Judge, which is also my patron and advocate. I do therefore
assuredly know, that he will give sentence on my side, and absolve me, that I
may be partaker of his glory.

I believe in the holy Ghost.
I do also put my whole trust in the holy Ghost, which is God of the same
essence with the Father and the Son, who also has joined me with Christ, and
sanctified me in him.

Which bears witness with my Spirit, that I am the child of God.

Which makes request for me with sighs that cannot be expressed.

Which comfort me in adversity.

Which kindles a desire in us to lead our lives in the obedience of God,
strengthens us, and finally gives us the gift of perseverance to the end.
Confirms me against all temptations. If at any time I fall, it raises me up
by true repentance, and promises to be with me with his grace even unto death.

The holy Catholic Church.
I believe the Catholic Church, gathered together by the power of the holy
Ghost, that is to say, the company of the faithful chosen of God, which are
scattered throughout the whole world, of whose number I do certainly know my
self to be one.

I believe that all we which are faithful, are so united The communion of
saints.
and joined with Christ our head, that we are made partakers of his gifts, that
is of the merit of his death, and the power of his resurrection.

The remission of sins. Resurection of the body. The life everlasting.
Whereupon I am assured of the full forgiveness of my sins, and of my
glorious resurrection in the last day, which the partaking of eternal life
shall follow, together with all the faithful and elect, with whom he shall for
ever be praised of me in the heavens.


Theoph. I have verily heard of thee an excellent Paraphrasis or short
exposition of the Apostles Creed, and such a one as does not a little serve
for edification. But that thou may provide for, and help the memory of the
unlearned, draw all this into as short a sum as thou can.


Mat. The sum of the Creed.
It cannot be made shorter, then if thou say: I put the whole hope of my
salvation in one Jesus Christ crucified, who being given unto me by the mercy
of the Father, communicates himself unto me by the power of the holy Ghost,
to make me partaker of the merit of his death, and also of eternal life. Now
this agrees with that which the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 2. 2.
I determined to know nothing among you, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified.


Theoph. I am fully satisfied with this exposition of the Apostles Creed, and
it contains many things, which bring no small comfort to the hearers. And I
pray our good and heavenly Father, to engraue them in our hearts by the working
of the holy Ghost, and that so we may earnestly acknowledge and steadfastly
believe that immeasurable love wherewith he loves us in Christ Jesus. By who^
he has redeemed us, from everlasting death, and has taken us for his
children, that at length we may be heirs of his kingdom.


Mat. But now night draws on, wherefore I would advise, that we put off the
rest till to morrow. Farewell Theophilus.


Theoph. Fare thou well also Matthew.


The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF CHRISTIAN Religion, wherein the testimonies of our
salvation are declared.
CHAP. I. Of good works, by the which the faith that is hidden in our hearts
is manifested, that it may be seen and known.
Theophilus. GOd save thee most dearly beloved Matthew.


Mat. God save thee also most loving Theophilus: have thou thought upon the
things, which were handled of us yesterday?


Theoph. Yea indeed most diligently, in so much as they occupied my mind in my
sleep, whereof to make proof, if it be not troublesome to thee, I will
comprehend them in a short sum, which shall be as an entrance for us to the
rest.


Mat. Thou shall do me a very great pleasure.


Theoph. The sum of our speech yesterday may be referred to four heads.

1 The first whereof, is of God, distinct in three persons. Who also by his
providence governs all things, is most perfectly just, and most perfectly
merciful.

2 The second is of man, who being by his own nature, a most wretched sinner,
is guilty of eternal death before the judgment seat of God.

3 The third is of Christ Jesus, whose death is a most present remedy for us
against death.

4 The fourth is of faith, whereby that remedy is applied to us for our
salvation.

Now unless I be deceived, order requires, that we speak of good works,
which do necessarily cleave unto faith, and be effects of it. Moreover, seeing
in the first Chapter of the former book, it has been declared, what manner
one God is, and in the third and fourth Chapters, what a one he shows
himself toward us; this one thing seems now to remain, that we understand,
how we should carry our selves toward him, that is to say, what works are to
be done of us, that we may obey him, and be acceptable to his Majesty.


Mat. Thou have very well delivered the sum of our yesterdayes talk, I do
also allow the order propounded by thee concerning good works.

This one thing remains, that thou move thy questions of the^ in some easy
method, to the end, that this place which of it self is somewhat intricate and
doubtful, may be plainly and clearly handled of us.


Theoph. I have no easier order, then that, which sometimes I learned of thee,
namely that all this discourse be brought unto three heads.

1 First, what be the good works, to be done of us, that we may please God.

2 How those works may be performed of us.

3 And thirdly, to what end they must be done, and what is the use of them.

But in the former book, when we spoke of regeneration, we did sufficiently
discuss that second point. For, we taught that man of himself could do no
good thing, and that God by his spirit, wrought in us both to will and to be
able to do. There are therefore behind the two other points to be examined of
us, which will cause us to divide this Chapter into two parts, if it so seem
good unto thee.


The first part of this Chapter, shows what good works are to be done of us.
Theoph. Let us therefore come to the first part: namely what good works are to
be done, that we may obey God.


Matthew. Before we go any further, we are to call upon him, without whose
guidance, no good thing can be thought, much less performed of us. I do
therefore pray our good God and heavenly Father, to give us the spirit of
wisdom and understanding, that the things which we shall speak of good works,
may agree with the truth, so as they may tend to his glory and the building up
of his Church. Now Theophilus, do I answer unto thy question, that we must do
those good works to obey God, which himself has commanded in his own Law.


Theoph. Why so?


Mat. For he has plainly forbidden, that any thing be added unto it, or taken
from it, and that any man should turn aside from it, either to the right hand
or Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Deuteronomy. 5. 32.
to the left.


Theoph. What if men be so rash, that they dare do it?


Mat. The Lord will not accept their foolish devises for good works, but will
demand of them, that which in former times he demanded of the Israelites: Isay.
1. 12.
Who required these things at your hands?


Theoph. I confess it to be a most righteous thing, that the worship of God
should be according to his own prescription, and not after the invention of
men. Forasmuch as we also which are created of him, do require this of our
servants, that they serve us according to our direction.


Matthew. Right, for otherwise we might think our selves not the masters, but
the servants of our servants. Should it therefore be righteous and just, that
God which is our Creator and Lord, should allow that in us, which is of us
condemned in our servants as a thing unrighteous and unjust?


Theoph. Seeing they only be good works, which God has commanded in his law,
let us see what that law of God is.


Mat. It is that which himself delivered to his people by the hand of Moses,
which also with his own finger he wrote in two tables of stone, fifty days
after the deliverance of the people out of their bondage in Egypt, which also
is commonly called the moral law; The moral law. Exodus 20. 2. Deuteronomy. 5. 6.
beginning thus, Hear Israel, I am the Lord thy God.


Theoph. Why is it called Moral?


Mat. Because it entreats of manners, as it appears by the etimologie or
true interpretation of the word. For it shows us the virtues to be followed,
to obey God, as also the vices to be avoided, least we run into his
displeasure. The Moral law distinct from ceremonial and Judicial.
But it is also called Moral, for difference sake from the ceremonial, which
co^prehendeth the ceremonies prescribed of God in the old Church, as also from
the Judicial or Political law, which contains judgments, and the penalties
to be inflicted upon the breakers of this moral law.


Theoph. Is not this moral law the same doctrine, whereof the Philosophers
wrote so many books, and which they called Moral Philosophy?


Matthew. The Moral law graven in the minds of men, as it were renewed by Moses,
and expounded in many places of the Scripture.
Altogether. For it is nothing else, but the law of nature, which God has in
graven in the hearts of men, which also, because by little and little it wore
out, (for it was greatly darkened by sin) he did as it were renew by that
proclaiming and writing of it. Therefore concerning the Philosophers, they
only attained unto and taught the shadow of that, the body whereof, and the
very truth it self, is most briefly purtrayed or painted in this law, and is
after beautifully set out in the proper colors in the writings of the Prophets
and Apostles. For, the Prophets and Apostles so often as they entreat of
virtues and vices, be the true interpreters of this law.


Theoph. Wherefore say thou that the Prophets and Apostles, when they speak
of virtues and vices, be the true interpreters of this law?


Mat. Forasmuch as the Lord forbad, that any thing should be added to the law,
or taken from it, it follows necessarily, that it is most perfect, and that
therefore whatsoever the Scripture in any place does command or forbid us,
ought of necessity to be referred unto the law, and be accounted an exposition
of it. And indeed by this means he would take away all excuse from the
transgressors of the Law.


Theoph. How?


Mat. The moral law comprised in very few words.
First, that no man should pretend the largeness of it as an excuse, why he
had not learned it by heart, the Lord would have it brought into so many
precepts, as we have fingers upon our hands. Whereupon more then once it is
called of Moses: ten words.

More largely declared.
Afterward, least any by the shortness should seek to excuse himself, that
he could not come to the understanding of it, the Lord would expound and
declare his own mind more at large by his Prophets and Apostles.


The exposition of the moral Law.
Theoph. We are therefore to examine this moral Law. How many parts be there
of it?


Math. The Lord himself is the deuider of it, and has divided it into two
Tables. In the former whereof, Two Tables
being comprised in four commandments, he would establish true religion:
for, it teaches all the worship which he requires of us. But in the later, in
six commandments, he has taught the love, friendship, and fellowship, to be
kept among men: for in it, he has commanded all the things which serve to
maintain peace and agreement amongst us. Briefly, the first Table commands
all the duties which man owes to God. And the later, all that man owes The
sum of the moral Law.
to man, according to the will of God. For the commandments of the later
Table, are to be referred to the first, that is to say, they ought to be
kept, not indeed for our neighbors sake, but for Gods sake, of whom they be
commanded.


The first Table of the Law.
Theo. Now we are come to the exposition of the former commandments of the
first table. I do therefore demand of thee, what order thou think good to
be kept, that the whole matter may be made the plainer?


Mat. The order of the first Table.
1 My counsellis, that in the first place we expound the Preface set before the
Law.

2 Secondly, I will deliver some general rules of special good use, to give
light to every commandment.

3 Which things being set down, these four commandments of the first Table
shall generally be expounded, and together it shall be observed of us, how
well they agree one with the other. And at length we will come to the
exposition of each commandment by it self.


The preface of the law.
Hear O Israel, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Theoph. I will follow the order which thou
aduisest, and will begin at the preface of the law. What therefore is the
meaning of it?


Matthew. First, the Lord would make us attentive to the hearing of the Law, when
he says: Hear Israel.

2 He does also challenge to himself power, and the right of authority in
these words; I am the Lord; wherein he shewerh, that we owe him obedience as
unto our Lord.

3 But because he requires of us, not a constrained but a voluntary and
willing obedience, he allureth us unto it, by a rehearsal of his love toward
us, and that is propounded in these words thy God, that is to say, which do
embrace thee with good will and favor.

Finally, he brings forth a notable testimony of that love, when he says;
Which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. In
which words he declares the self same thing, as if he should say; I have
delivered you from the tyranny of the devil and sin that I might bring you
to eternal life. For, that temporal benefit in times past bestowed upon the
people of Israel, was a tipe or figure of the spiritual deliverance of the
Church.


Theoph. But the Lord seems not to speak to us in these words, Hear
Israel, but only to the Israelites that came of Abraham and Jacob, to whom
the name of Israel was given by the Angel.


Mat. The Apostle witnesses, that all they that be of faith, are the sons of
Abraham. And therefore in the name of Israel, all the faithful are spoken
unto: and yet not that the unfaithful and unbelievers are exempted from
keeping of the law, but because they have not ears to hear, much less an
heart to understand, therefore the Lord speaks not unto them.


Theoph. I have attained the sense and meaning of this Preface. Now declare
those general rules, which thou saidest were helping to the understanding of
the Law.


Mat. They be three. The first whereof is this, that when God commands good,
he does not only forbid the evil that is contrary unto it, which indeed is
done in the laws of men. But when he forbids evil, he commands the good
that is contrary unto it, and this is peculiar or proper to the law of God.
For example. When God forbids to take his name in vain, he does on the
contrary side command that it be hallowed and honored of us. When he
forbids, that no man steal, he commands us to give our selves unto
charity. And so of the rest of the commandments.


Theoph. Why be almost all the commandments delivered rather negatiuely then
affirmatively, that is to say, so as they rather forbid evil, then command
that which is good?


Mat. Indeed that is well marked of thee; for, only two, namely the last of
the first table, wherein the observation of the Sabbath day, and the first of
the second Table, wherein the honor of parents be commanded, be propounded
affirmatively, all the rest negatiuely, and so forbid evils. But this was done
that we might understand, that no man can give his mind to that which is good,
before he have laid aside the evil that fights with it. Even as we see that
thorns must be first pulled up, before good seed be sown. Therefore the
Prophet calling the Israelites to repentance, says; Iere. 4. 3.
Plowgh up your fallow ground, and sow not upon thorns. Moreover every where
in the holy Scripture is this order kept, that it first forbids evil,
before it command good, as where the Prophets say: Isai. 1. 16. Psalm. 34. 15
Cease to do evil, learn to do well, decline from evil, and do that which is
good.


Theoph. Let us come to the second rule.


Mat. The Lord minding to forbid diverse evils of the same kind, he
comprehended them in the name of the greatest, and as it were of the chief, to
the end we might know, that the sins which seem to be most small by the
judgment of men, are accounted with God, of the same nature with that under
the which they be forbidden. As for example. When God would forbid murders,
reuenges, injuries, and privy hatreds, he comprehended them all under the word
murder, to teach us, that he which hates his brother, is a murderer, as John
says. The same is to be said 1. Ioh. 3. 15.
of him, which looks upon a woman to lust after her: for Christ affirms,
that such a one has committed Mat. 5. 28.
adultery in his heart.


Theoph. The third rule is behind.


Mat. When any vice is forbidden, not only they be forbidden that be of the
same kind, but also all the degrees by the which men come unto them, yea and
all such things, which by any means may minister occaon of our falling into
such vices. On the contrary side, when virtue is commanded, all those things
also be commanded, that may draw us on forward unto it.


Theoph. How the 4. commandments of the first table agree together.
Those general rules being declared, we are to consider the coherence or
agreement of the four commandments of the first Table, according to the order
which thou did prescribe.


Mat. I did therefore set down this order, because it will bring greater light
to each commandment. Thou have heard already, that in the first table, God
has commanded, the worship due unto him. Seeing therefore he is to be
worshipped of us no less in our bodies then in our souls, as he that is
creator of both,

In the first commandment, he sets out the duty of our soul: for he
shows what inward knowledge he requires of us.

In the second, he reformeth the disposition and behavior of our bodies, in
the things which appertain to his worship. And together co^de^neth Idolatry,
wherein men do chiefly sin against this commandment.

In the third, he restrains our speech: for by it we ought also to declare
that inward worship.

In the 4. he appoints a certain day of the week wherein these things may
be called to practice, as well these before mentioned, as those also which be
commanded in the later table; and this indeed is the cause, why it is placed
between both the tables.


The first commandment.
Thou shall have no other Gods before me. Theoph. Let us at length come to the
special exposition of the first commandment. What the meaning of it is, it is
sufficiently understood by that which has been said: let us therefore see
what be the parts of it, then let us follow each of them in their order.


Mat. Seeing this commandment is delivered negatiuely, by our first rule, it
contains the affirmative under it. Therefore it is to be divided into two
parts.

1 In the first, which is not expressed, he will be acknowledged of us for our
God.

2 In the later, which is indeed expressed, he forbids that we acknowledge
any others for our God, beside himself.


Theoph. Of how many parts stands that acknowledgement which God requires?


Mat. Upon four: namely,

1 Adoration, or worship.

2 Trust.

3 Invocation, or prayer.

4 And thanksgiving.

Now this acknowledgment proceeds from knowledge, for he cannot be
acknowledged except he be first known.


Theoph. Declare this unto me in those several parts.


Math. First he cannot be worshipped of us (now he is worshipped when every of
us submits himself unto his greatness) but he is also acknowledged our
creator and Lord. We can not put our trust in him, but we must confess him to
be omnipotent and perfectly good, that he may help our necessities. We will
never think upon praying and giving thanks unto him, except we be well
assured that he is the fountain and wellspring of all good things.


Theoph. Are these four virtues only included in the first commandment?


Mat. If thou respect the substance, these only: howbeit many other spring
from them. For true adoration or worship, has always piety for a companion,
that is to say, a child-like fear, and willing obedience toward him.

Out of trust, arises:

1 Hope, that is, a certain looking for the fruition of the heavenly promises.

2 Patience in adversity.

3 Perseverance or continuance in his service.

4 A holy security, so long as we keep our selves within the bounds of our
callings.

From prayer and thanksgiving springs true humility of heart: For by them
we be admonished, that we be empty of all kind of good things, until they be
given us of God, and that if there be any good thing in us, it is of God That
humility also brings forth modesty, which causes that we desire not a
higher place, but be content with the condition whereunto God has called us.


Theoph. For as much as we have reckned up the virtues contained in this
commandment, now we must oppose or set against them, the vices whereunto they
be contrary.


Matthew. These are:

1 Rebellion against God.

2 Doubting of his promises.

3 Desperation.

4 Impatience in adversity.

5 Inconstancy in the worship of God, and in our own vocation.

6 Falling away from the truth of the Gospel.

7 Pride.

8 Disdain.

9 Ambition.

10 Faint heartedness in good things, and finally rashness, which aduentureth
upon unnecessary dangers, under a color of Gods providence.


Theoph. The later part of the first commandment.
Let us come to the other part of this commandment. Now in it is forbidden,
that we acknowledge any other but the true God. How do we fall into this sin?


Math. When we give unto creatures those four points or any of the^. For then
they be made our Gods, when we ascribe the things unto the^, which appertain
to one God. Therefore in this commandment the Lord says not; Thou shall
acknowledge me for thy God, but, thou shall have no other Gods before me; but
in these words he compriseth three things:

First, that we ought to have one God.

Secondly, that him self is he, whom we are to acknowledge for our God, even
as it is plainly expressed by him in the Preface, in these words, I am the
Lord thy God.

Thirdly, that it is not sufficient if he be taken of us for our God, except
we take him alone, so as we join no other Gods as it were fellows unto him,
which they do especially that pray unto Saints, and put their trust in them,
what so ever they may pretend, or howsoever they may seek to shift the matter.


Theoph. Is it not also forbidden, that we should in any case put our trust in
the living? as for example, in our kinsfolks and friends, to crave their help
if need be, or to give them thanks for benefits received?


Mat. No not so, so as they be acknowledged of us only as instruments, by
which God will help us, and that they have their will and ability to do us
good from God: For then we put not our trust in the creature, but in the
Creator himself, in whom only we confess is the power to help us: without
whom men can have no help at all for us. Notwithstanding, it is meet, that we
do give them thanks, so often as we receive any benefit from them, so long as
we remember that the chief thanks is to be reserved unto God the true giver
of all gifts.


Theoph. What if we put our trust in creatures more then in the creator?


Mat. Then be they our Gods: therefore Paul speaking of covetousness, Coloss.
3. 5.
calls it Idolatry, by which words he means, that covetous men take their
riches for their Gods, seeing they trust in them more then in God himself.
Which indeed is not only true in that, but also as often as we prefer any
other creature before the creator, whether we fear, love, or obey it more: for
then it is made our God. Therefore Paul speaking of such, who that they may
live daintily and quietly, cast off the service of God, says their god is
their belly.


Theoph. Phil. 3. 19.
I think that to be the meaning of Christ, when he says; Call no man your
father on the earth, for one is your father which is in heaven.


Mat. It is indeed: for in those words he does not only warn us to acknowledge
God for the chief father, Math. 23. 9.
but especially that we love, fear, and worship him far above our earthly
parents, and all others that be set over us.


Theoph. Now do I understand in what manner we should seek for help at the
hands of men, and trust in them without diminishing the honor of God. But what
lets, that we may not do the same toward the Saints already received into
heaven? that is to say, call upon them, and in some sort put our trust in them,
upon this condition, that we take them as instruments appointed of God for our
help?


Mat. God verily gives this ability to those that be alive, yea he has
commanded that one should help another: but this cannot be in the dead, for
Solomon says: Also their love, and their hatred, and their error, Eccles. 9. 6.
is now perished, and they have no more portion for ever, in all that is done
under the sun.


Theoph. How know thou, that God has not given this power to the dead to be
able to help us, and that therefore they are not to be prayed unto when any
necessity presses us?


Mat. There is no one example of this in all the scripture, which
notwithstanding is the most certain rule of truth. Ier. 17. 10. Psalm. 7. 10.
Moreover it teaches us, that God only knows the things that be absent, and
understands the heart of man, so as he hears and favorably hears our
prayers and complaints, and helps us.

Wherefore no man can call upon the dead, or can any way trust in them, but he
takes away the honor due unto God, which he gives unto them: and therefore
makes them his Gods.


Theoph. If it will be none otherwise, the things which have been spoken of the
dead, seem not to appertain unto the Angels, specially seeing that it is
manifest by the testimony of the Scripture, Psalm. 91. 11 Heb. 1. 14.
that God oftentimes uses their service to help us, and that they be
conversant among us, so as they may hear our prayers. Therefore it shall be no
hurt, if we call upon them to help us, as we do upon the living, yet with this
condition, that they be taken only for God his instruments appointed by
himself.


Mat. Thou gatherest ill: for they can not help us, save in those things which
be expressly commanded them of God, which indeed be unknown unto us. But
forasmuch as they do most readily perform the things they be commanded, it is
not necessary to call upon them, although we our selves knew those things.
Howbeit it is altogether necessary to speak to the living here upon the
earth, because for the most part they scarce yield any help except they be so
called upon, that it trouble them. But whereas thou saydest, that the Angels be
amongst us, do understand what we need, and hear our prayers it is indeed
true. Nevertheless they cannot be every where, nor know all things, for that
is proper to God only, which is a cause that they ought not to be prayed unto
of us. But although all the things which we have alleged were of no force,
there is no commandment of it in all the Scripture, nor any example whereby
we may be informed, that worshipping of Angels is pleasing to God, albeit Paul
affirms, Romans 14. 23.
that whatsoever is done without faith is sin.


Theoph. Now the exposition of this commandment, wants this one thing, that
thou show why these words be added, In my sight or before me.


Mat. That he might more and more keep us from the transgressing of it, while
he teaches how great injury is done to his Majesty, when we dare commit so
heinous an offense even in his presence. For, although that impiety and
ungodliness be hidden in the heart, yet it is manifest to the eyes of the
Lord, whereunto all things are naked and open says the Apostle. It is therefore
as if an dishonest woman, should provoke and set on Heb. 4. 13.
fire the mind of her husband, by bringing before his face the party with whom
she plays the harlot, and by committing of the very act of uncleanness in
his presence.


The second commandment.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor any likeness of the
things that be in heaven above, nor of the things that be in the earth beneath,
nor of the things that be in the waters under the earth. Thou shall not bow
down to them, nor serve them: For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God,
visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them that
love me and keep my commandments. Theoph. Thou have satisfied me concerning
the first comm^ndement, let us go forward to the second. How many parts has it?


Mat. Three.

1 The first of the forbidding of the things wherein a man may sin, in the
outward worship due unto God.

2 The second is of the things commanded, which are to be performed in the
profession of that worship, which is done by the outward behavior of the
body: now this precept is comprehended under the prohibition by the first
general rule.

3 The third contains threatenings against the breakers of the law, and
sets before us a promise to such as keep it.


Theoph. Let us in the first place consider of that prohibition.


Mat. It is contained in these words: Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven image, neither any likeness of the things that be in heaven above, nor
of the things that be in the earth beneath, nor of the things that be in the
waters under the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, neither serve them.


Theo. Why after the words, Thou shall make thee no graven image, it is
presently added, nor any likeness?


Mat. It is, that we may know, that pictures painted, or any other kind of
images, be forbidden of God, no less the^ graven images, which are by name
mentioned.


Theoph. What understand thou, by the things that are in heaven?


Mat. The Sun, Moon, stars, birds: and under the things that be upon the
earth are comprehended, me^, brute beasts, plants, trees: and finally by those
that be in the waters, fishes. Moreover the waters, that is, the sea, is said
to be under the earth, in respect of men that do inhabit it: for otherwise the
sea together with the earth, make a globe, whereof nothing is highest or lowest.


The. Why would God thus recke^ up all his creatures?


Mat. Because there was no kind of them, which the heathen did not at that time
abuse to idolatry, which custom the Jews themselves followed,
notwithstanding Ezech. 8.
this prohibition given them.


Theoph. But in this place there is no mention of spiritual and heavenly
things, whereof nevertheless there is very often abuse among the heathen to
idolatry.


Matthew. True. But here is no mention of them, because they cannot be
represented, but by borrwing the form or shape of the visible things, which in
this place are reckened up. Therefore under the visible, the invisible also are
comprehended.


Theoph. But is every kind of picture and images forbidden of God?


Mat. It is truly condemned, Deuteronomy. 4. 15. Act. 17. 28.
if they be made to represent his Majesty, for that is directly forbidden by
him.


Theoph. Why so?


Mat. Because it cannot be done but to the contempt of his divine Majesty,
forasmuch as he which is eternal, infinite, without body, and invisible, is
represented in the likeness of a frail creature, finite, having a body, and
being visible. For this cause Esaias going about to reprove the madness of the
idolaters of his time, that did set forth God in a visible shape, describes
his wonderful greatness, howbeit in terms agreeable to our capacity, when
he says, Who has measured the waters in his first, and counted heaven Isay.
40. 12
with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and
weighed the mountains in a weight, and the hills in a balance. And a little
after he adds: To whom then will ye make God like, or what similitude Isay.
40. 18
will ye set up unto him?


Theoph. I grant that God is not to be set out in any visible shape, but why
may it not be lawful so to represent things created?


Mat. It is lawful: so long as it is not done to adore or worship them: which
the Lord straightway adds, after the forbidding of making images in these
words: Thou shall not bow down to them, nor serve them.


Theoph. Think thou that it is all one for a man to bow himself to idols,
and to adore or worship them?


Mat. Altogether. For, adoration signifies all religious worship, but no man
boweth himself to idols, but with religious worship.


Theoph. What understand thou by the name of worship?


Mat. That they be not apparelled and decked; that incense be not burnt to
them, temples built, altars set up, holy days kept, and such like.


Theoph. Therefore it is lawful to have any images, so as it be not to
adoration and worship, except those that be made to represent God.


Mat. All religious images be also to be excepted, by the precept of our third
rule, least men abuse them to idolatry, being of their own nature above
measure prone to that wickedness. Which thing gave John occasion that in the
end of his Epistle he joined this admonition: 1. John. 5. 2.
Babes keep your selves from idols, that is, from images made for religious
use.


Theoph. But they may teach the ignorant people, according to the common
speech: Images are unlearned men's books.


Mat. They be indeed the books of the unlearned: For, they can teach nothing
but vanity and lying, as the Scripture testifies: and therefore they hold men
in ignorance, and make them idiots and unlearned, which experience it self
proves. But the most sure way whereby all the faithful of what degree soever
may be taught, and that with fruit, is that which the Lord himself has
appointed: that is, the preaching of his word, by the which Paul says, that
Christ is painted before our eyes.


Theoph. Let us go forward: Is there no other evil forbidden in this
commandment, besides the adoration and worshipping of images?


Matthew. Two other besides be forbidden, namely,

1 Worshipping of creatures: and

2 Superstition.


Theoph. What cause have thou to say, that these two evils be forbidden in this
commandment?


Mat. Because they be of the same kind with idolatry, for they tend hereunto,
to declare by the outward gesture of the body, the worship which they think
they give unto God. Whereupon it is that these two be called by the name of
idolatry.


Theoph. Right. For, both the worshippers of creatures and superstitious
persons, have accustomably bin called idolaters, as well as the worshippers of
idols.


Mat. And verily they be joined together, by a most near bond: for idolatry
always accompanies the worshipping of creatures, and brings forth sundry
superstitions.


Theoph. Of the adoration of creatures.
Let us speak of these two evils. What understand thou by the adoration of
creatures?


Mat. The religous worship, which is given unto them.


Theoph. Why so?


Mat. Because adoration belongs only unto God, whereof the Scripture it
self is a plentiful witness. Whereupon it follows, that we can bestow
never so little of it upon any creature, whether it be visible or invisible of
what condition soever, but we do take from and diminish the worship due to the
creator. Therefore the Angel said unto John, Apo. 19. 10
which had fallen down at his feet to worship him: See thou do it not, I am
thy fellow servant, one of thy brethren Worship God.


Theoph. But do thou comprehend under that prohibition, the worship and
reverence which is usually given to men that be alive?


Mat Not so verily, so as it be only civil: for, if there be never so little
affection mingled tending toward Religion, it is corrupt and displeases God.
For this cause Peter refused the reverence done to him by Cornelius: Act. 10.
26.
for the holy Apostle perceived, that that reverence was not merely civil,
but had mixed with it somewhat of Religion Now if it be unlawful to worship
Saints, yea the very Angels themselves, how much more unlawful is it to worship
their images, relics, the cross of Christ, the likeness of it, and such
like?


Theoph. Let us come to superstition: what meanest thou by this word?


Mat. Is it called superstition, when any worshippeth God, by rites or
ceremonies devised of men. Of this sort are.

1 To wear a certain kind of apparel for Religion sake.

2 To hold difference of place in worshipping of God.

3 To observe days and times for that purpose.

4 To make a difference of meats.

5 To abstain from marriage, and such other inventions of men, whereof Paul
thus speaks, Col. 2. 23.
which things have indeed a show of wisdom, in voluntary Religion, and
humbleness of mind, and in not sparing of the body, yet they are not any
thing worth. Yea rather they are to the contempt of God, and hinder our
salvation.


Theoph. How are they to the contempt of God?


Matthew. Because he prefers obedience before sacrifice, and will be
worshipped not after the inventions of men, but according to his own will,
which he has therefore made known unto us. Therefore Christ said to the
Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 15. 9.
They worship me in vain, teaching doctrines that be the commandments of men.
Moreover, superstitions bring in the contempt of Gods commandments, and of
that worship, which he requires of us to be performed unto him, which
experience does plentifully prove.


Theoph. But how do superstitions hinder our salvation?


Mat. Because superstitious persons, imagine that they merit somewhat by them,
which thought turns men from Christ, and therefore from their own salvation.
For that cause Paul calls the forbidding of meats and of marriage, 1. Tim. 4.
the doctrine of devils. It is therefore a great deal better, to go on slowly
in the ways of the Lord, then to run a pase in the way of superstiton: which
who soever has entered into, the further he goes forward, the further he goes
from God, and therefore from eternal life.


Theoph. Now do I understand what superstition is. I demand, why, seeing there
be three evils, by the which the worship of God is defiled, Idolatry only is
shortly touched in this commandment?


Mat. It is according to our second rule, namely, that God when he means to
forbid many sins of the same kind, forbids them all under the name of one,
and that the greatest, such a one as idolatry is.


Theoph. Why think thou idolatry to be a greater sin, then the worshipping
of creatures, or superstition?


Matthew. The reason in my judgment is most plain. For, although a man be mad
already, when he forsakes God, for some excellent gifts wherewith any creature
has been adorned of God, and worshippeth that creature: yet then he may be
said to be stricken through with rage and fury, when he worshippeth an sdoll,
made by the industry and help of man. Therefore, the Scripture describing that
vanity, calls Idols the works of men's hands, and presently after adds:
They have a mouth and speak Psalm. 115. 4.
not; they have eyes and see not; they have ears and hear not; they have
noses and smell not; they have hands and handle not; they have feet and walk
not; and finally that they be dead. In which words he signifies, that men be
altogether out of their wits, which worship the work of man's hands, an Image,
dumb, blind, deaf, that perceives nothing, and is void of all the senses,
and therefore inferior to his maker and worshipper: which appears even by
this, that neither of them would be like their Idol.


Theoph. Against worshipping of Idols.
But the worshippers of Images, will not grant thee that thou say, namely
that they worship the Images, much less take them for Gods. For they say, they
be not so void of reason, but they know, they be either of wood, or stones, or
of painting. But rather they affirm boldly and constantly, that all the
worship is done by them, in the honor of God or of the Saints, whereof they be
Images.


Mat. What although we should grant them all that they say? were not this
extreme madness, that they will worship God, by doing the things, that be
directly forbidden of him? Which also he affirms to be despite against him.
But howsoever they deny it, it is so. For, when they prefer one Idol before
another, and for religions sake take upon them long pilgrimages, to salute
such an Image, do mumble their prayers before them, even as for that purpose
they have many Images with them: it is clearer then the light, that they
think there is in them some divine power. And therefore they be convinced,
that those Images be taken of them for Gods. Whereupon the Idolaters of that
time are most sharply reproved by Esaias, although they even then sought the
same Isa. 44. 7.
shifts. So is the Devil wont to bewitch all those, that receive Idols for
religions sake; for at the beginning indeed, he persuades them, that they be
received that God may be worshipped in them; but by little and little, he
blinds them with their mad religion, so as at the length they both worship
them, and put their trust in them. And indeed (as Austen said most truly) no
man looking upon Images, can do them any worship, whose mind is not so moved,
as if he were heard of them.

For this cause, the Fathers of the Elibertine counsel, the year from the
birth of Christ 330, decreed thus concerning this matter; Can. 36.
It has seemed good unto us, that there be no pictures in Churches, least that
which is painted upon the walls, should be worshipped and adored. Against those
which then would have Images placed in Churches.


Theoph. How came it to pass, that afterward they were received into Churches?


Matthew. It was decreed after many contentions and iarres in the last counsel
of Nice, about the year 754. when the Devil had before brought in many
superstitions into the Church: But it lacked Images all the time, from the
coming of Jesus Christ, until that counsel.


Theoph. Truly I am glad, that in going over these things, I have learned at
what time Images were brought into the church. Now I will return again to the
order of our speech. Thou saidest, that in former times the old Idolaters, used
the same excuses to defend their Idolatries, which the Idolaters of our time do
use now, who do specially complain of this, that they have very great wrong
done them, when they be compared with those ancients, for as much as there is
great difference between themselves and the other.


Mat. If it shall seem good unto thee to propound the things, wherein they say
that difference is, I will cause thee to understand, that whatsoever they
allege is most vain: and moreover, that the Idolatry of our time, is
altogether the same, with that ancient Idolatry of the Heathen and Jews.


Theoph. It shall very much please me to hear that of thee. But they make
four heads of that difference.

The excuses of the newer Idolaters.
1 First, that those ancients, both Heathen and Jews, (say they) believed
their Images to be gods, which is not believed of us.

2 Secondly; they made many Gods, we only one.

3 Thirdly, because they worshipped the Images of things without sense and
reason, or else of most wicked men, as Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and many other of
this sort: and those Images (say they) be forbidden in this commandment, but
not the Images which we worship, as of Christ, the Virgin Mary, and of the
Saints that now live most blessedly in Heaven.

4 Fourthly, and last of all, we give not that divine worship to our Images,
which in former times was given by Idolaters to their Idols and fained Gods.
Upon which things they gather, that indeed those ancients are worthelie called
and esteemed Idolaters: but that they have great injury done unto them, when
they be charged with this fault, from the which they think themselves free,
upon the reasons which I have reckened up.


Mat. The answer to the excuses of the newer Idolaters.
I will answer in order unto these four points.

1 First, they be fowlly deceived in this, that they think those old Idolaters
believed their Idols to be gods: for they changed the^ according to their
pleasure, but they always kept the same Gods in their mind.

2 Moreover, there was no God of theirs, which had not many Images: and yet
they did not according to that multitude, make to themselves many gods.

3 Finally, they did daily consecrate new Images, yet it was not in their mind
to make new gods. Whereupon it is plain, that they were not so blockish and
without sense, to believe, that an Idol of stone, or of wood, or of gold, or
of silver, was the very essence of God: but only a similitude or likeness of
God. It is indeed certain, that the Prophets sometimes reproved the
Israelites for this, that they said to their Idols: Thou art my God. But this
was done for the cause which I spoke of before, for that giving to Images the
honor due unto God alone, they esteemed them in the place of God,
notwithstanding, they colored that Idolatry with fair excuses.


Theoph. Concerning the first point, thou have sufficiently satisfied me. Let
us therefore come to the second; Namely, that the Heathen had many gods.


Math. That indeed is true, but they did never esteem them alike; but rather
constantly continued in this mind, that there was one chief God, to whom all
the rest were subject. For, so is the feeling of one Godhead graven in the
minds of men, that it can not be plucked out, notwithstanding it be corrupted
by their own mad inventions, and that more is, by their Idolatry, as Paul
says unto the Romans. Romans 1.


Therefore the other Gods whom they adored besides that chief God, were for
this end worshipped, that they might be their patrons: which self same thing
they also do at this day, which adore men Saints, and women Saints. For they
take them in the stead of their Gods, when they give that worship to their
relics and Images, which is due unto one highest God.


Theoph. Let us now come down to the third point: it is this; That the
prohibition which is contained in this commandment, is understood only of
those Idols, which are the likenesses of fained Gods, which the old Ethnicks
and Jews Idolaters did worship, and that it is not extended to the Images of
the Saints that be in Heaven.


Math. This distinction is most false, for (...) in Greek, is altogether the
same, that Image is in Latin. But both do signify the likenesses which are
made upon foolish devotion. Whereupon it is, that they of whom they be
worshipped, are called (...), that is, worshippers of Idols or Images.

But let us grant there is that difference or diversity between these words
which they affirm, what will it make for them, for as much as there is so
general a prohibition in this commandment; Thou shall make to thy self no
graven Image, neither any likeness of the things etc. that it admits no
exception orrestraint? For it does plainly comprehend every religious
likeness of all things as well living as without sense, reasonable or
unreasonable, men and women as well which now live blessedly in Heaven, as of
the wicked, which now suffer the torments of their sins in Hell. For, the
difference of the things to whom the worship due to God is given, takes not
away the reproach and injury done unto God.


Theoph. Now what answerest thou to the last point, namely, that they give not
the same worship to their Idols, which in times past the ancient Ethnicks gave
to their fained Gods?


Matthew. Acomparing of the old and new Idolatry.
I answer, that they be altogether like, which shall plainly appear, if we
do a little more diligently look into both, and make a comparison between
them.

1 The Ethnicks sacrificed to their Idols: so also do the Idolaters of our
time: For they say Masses, (which they hold to be sacrifices) to the honor of
Saints, yea at their Altars.

2 They offered them gifts, and so also do ours.

3 They saluted them, they fell down upon their knees before them, and finally
made their prayers unto them. Which thing also is diligently observed and done
by the Idolaters of our time.

4 They called upon some for the plague, upon other some for the safe
deliverance of women, other some for tempests upon the Sea, other some to
obtain rain, and other some for fair weather: so also do our Idolaters.

5 They apparelled them, they set up lights to them, they burnt incense: the
same also do our Idolaters.

6 They carried them about in their solemn supplications, they followed them
most devoutly, being carried upon men's shoulders, and with this mind that
they might obtain their requests. The same also is used among ours.

7 They appointed unto them forms of prayers and worship, they built them
Churches, and ordained Priests, of whom their service might be done: so also
is ours.

8 They sought high places, and places out of the company of men planted with
trees, wherein they built the chapels of their Idols, by means whereof wretched
men (made drunk with blind devotion) were so out of their wits, that there was
very great resort of people unto them, no otherwise then as if God himself
had bin present there. The Idolaters of our time have carefully done all these
things to the very self same end.

9 In each city and town one was chosen, to be the patron of the place, and
the protecting God. The same also do ours.

10 They swore by their names, and had them continually in their mouth, and
always carried about with the^ their Images to worship. The same also is done
of our idolaters. To conclude, at length the names of the Idols were changed,
but the same Idolatry is still retained.

But we must diligently mark the craft of Satan in this behalf: For, to the
end he might restore or bring in again the old Idolatry, he has borrowed
the names of the holy Apostles and Martyrs, by whom in former times it was
ouerthrown and driven away, and by this means it has put on another person,
that it might not be known.


Theoph. I have taken no small pleasure by that which thou have spoken upon
these four points. Now that our speech may end there where it begun, I do
acknowledge that the Devil which in our age has set in again the ancient
Idolatry, vpholdeth it by no other arguments, then those wherewith in former
times it was defended by him.


Math. It is altogether so. For, whereas the Idolaters of our age, devising a
worship of God and Images of Saints, pretend and say, that the remembrance of
God is the better engraven in their minds, the self same thing was pretended
by those old Idolaters.


Theoph. It is very like that men even from the beginning were by these two
reasons moved to Idolatry; namely, that both they might worship God better,
and deeply fasten the remembrance of him in their minds.


Mat. But there is nothing which is more to the dishonor of God, and more
puts him out of the minds of men, then Idolatry.


Theoph. Why so?


Mat. Because there can be no greater despite done to God, then (contrary to
his express forbidding) to give the worship due to him, unto dead Images,
which also we may liken to stocks, snares, or gins, wherewith men be held fast
upon the ground, being lets and hindrances to their minds, that they look not
up to heaven, neither come unto God with true knowledge and remembrance of him.


Theoph. I desire, if it shall not be troublesome to thee, to allege three
objections, wherewith Idolaters labor to defend themselves, not that I make any
doubt of things so plain, but to the end I may be able fitly to answer the
adversaries, if at any time I have occasion.


Math. Thou shall not trouble me, though thou enlarge this speech, for I am
much delighted when any occasion is given me, to lay open the craft of the
devil, who under a color of religion and of worshipping God, brings it to
pass, that he himself is worshipped of Idolaters. Therefore propound those
objections.


The ph. The first objection of the Idolaters of our time.
The first of them is this, that they give not to the Images the adoration or
worship due unto God: For they say, they give to Images only that worship
which they call (...), and that they do reserve (...) unto God.


Math. The answer to it.
This distinction is nothing else but a matter feigned of the Greeks, as it may
appear by the words them selves being Greek, wherewith they might cover the
ungodliness of the idolatry brought into the church by them. Howbeit by this
distinction they menat that they worshipped God, and served the Images. But
their deeds declare that the matter is far otherwise. For, if it were their
purpose to worship the images with the worship which they say is to be kept
unto God, what would they do more? seeing they fall down upon their knees, and
most devoutly salute them whenever they come in their sight. But let us
grant that the Idols (as they say) be not worshipped, but served of them, are
they not in express words condemned of God by the prohibition of this
commandment, when after these words; Thou shall not bow down to them, the
Lord straight way adds, Neither shall thou serve them? Which things being so,
it is plain that this distinction is most frivolous, and that it is only in
words, by the which they would blind the eyes of the simple, especially seeing
it is certain that the Scripture uses those words, (...) and (...) for the
self same thing, and attributes both of them unto God. Romans 1. 9. and 7. 6.
and 12. 11.



Theoph. The second objection. Exodus 25. 18 Number. 21. 8.
Now I come to their other objection, which is of the Cherubins, and the Brazen
serpent, that was made by God his own commandment. The Cherubins to cover
the Arc of the covenant, but the brazen serpent was set up in the wilderness,
that such as were stong by the biting of the serpents, by the sight thereof
might be healed, and delivered from present death, whereupon they will have it
proved, that it is lawful to have Images in churches.


Matthew. The answer.
These examples do not any thing at all serve their turn. For God him self
had commanded the Cherubins, as also the brazen Serpent, not indeed to be
adored or worshipped, but to represent or signify some things fit for that
time, when the ceremonial law was in use. For, the Cherubins were bestowed in
that holy inner place which is called the holiest of all, out of the sight of
all, save only of the high Priest, who went into Exodus 30. 10.
it only once every year, so as all occasion of abusing them was taken away.
Concerning the brazen serpent, 2. Kin. 18 4.
Ezechias is in that behalf specially commended of the holy Ghost, for that he
brake it, because after a sort it was worshipped of the people. Now therefore
with what face dare they allege these examples to uphold their images, set up
contrary to the express commandment of God, seeing especially there is so
filthy an abuse of them unto all kind of idolatry?


Theoph. But what did the Cherubins, and the brazen serpent signify?


Math. Every Cherubin had four wings, with two they covered their face,
whereby was taught, that the Angels them selves be so stricken with that
brightness of the divine Majesty, that they cannot endure it, and so be
compelled to cover their faces: with the other two wings they covered the
mercy seat which was upon the Arc, to instruct us that God is
incomprehensible, and therefore ought not to be represented by any human
likeness Touching the brazen serpent, God signified by it, that all they whom
that old serpent (namely the devil, with whose poison and that indeed deadly,
we are infected through sin) had bitten, were healed, so as by faith, they do
fly unto Christ's death. For the brazen Serpent was a figure of Christ, as the
Lord himself teaches in these words; As Moses lifted John 3. 14.
up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up:
that who soever believes in him should not perish, but have life everlasting.


Theoph. The third objection.
I am satisfied for the second objection, the third is behind, wherein they
allege almost innumerable miracles, which were wrought in favor of the
worshippers of Idols, and for the punishment of such as despised them.


Matthew. The answer.
Although I might most worthily reject the greatest part of those miracles as
false and feigned, yet will I grant this, that they may be all taken for
miracles indeed. But what can they build with them? might not the Heathen boast
the self same things of their Idols?

Valor. M^ lib. 1. Cap. ^.
Let profane histories be read, they will afford infinite examples of those
things, neither indeed is it marvel. For, the devil to the end he might
establish his own false doctrine, would therein follow God.


Theoph. How?


Matthew. As God when he meant to open his truth unto men, sent forth true
Prophets and Apostles to preach it, and furnished them with the power of the
holy Ghost, that they might confirm it by sundry miracles. So the devil the
father of lies assayed the same thing, when he would bring in Idolatry and
superstition into the world. For, he raised up false Prophets and Apostles to
preach it, and put into them the power of working miracles, for the
confirmation of it. Hereupon it is that Christ warns us, diligently to take
heed of Mat. 24. 24.
false Prophets, who (says he) shall do great signs and miracles, so as they
shall deceive (if it might be) the very elect. Whereunto also may be applied
the saying of the Apostle speaking of Antechrist; Whose coming 2. These. 2. 9.
is by the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders.


Theoph. Why does the Apostle call them lying wonders?


Matthew. Not so much to note the falsehood of them, as to give us to understand
of the end, whereat those miracles do shoot. And that is to confirm most
false and lying doctrine, such as are Idolatry and superstition, which are
directly contrary unto Gods word, which indeed ought to be unto us in stead of
a touchstone, by the which to discern true miracles from false, that we be not
deceived by them.


Theoph. Thou think therefore that all miracles, which serve to confirm
false doctrine, are wrought by the devil, and therefore to be refused, as
lies, and done to deceive.


Matthew. I think so. And for this cause, does the Lord warn us by Moses, if
there arise in the midst of us a Deuteronomy. 13. 1. 2. 3.
Prophet, that foresheweth things to come, or shows any other signs for
this purpose, to turn us aside from his worship, that we do not hear such a
Prophet: for the Lord your God (says he) proves you, to see whether you love
him with all your heart.


Theoph. But how can the devil have the power to work miracles, which
appertains only to God?


Matthew. The Lord loses the bridle unto him, and gives that power, that he
may avenge him self, upon those which despise and refuse his truth, of whom
Paul thus writes; Therefore will the Lord send them the 2. The. 2. 11
strength of delusion, that they may believe lies.


Theoph. Thou have now satisfied me concerning the first part of this
commandment, and those abuses have been discussed in it, which are wont to be
brought into the worship of God, but chiefly the greatest among them, namely
Idolatry. It remains therefore that we The other part of the 2. commandment.
come to the other part, to the end we may know, what is to be done in the
outward service of God, that is framed according to his own will.


Matthew. That is, when a worship is given both agreeable to his nature, and
acceptable to his Majesty.


Theop. What is that worship or adoration agreeable to the nature of God?


Math. Of spiritual worship.
It is taught of Christ himself, Ioh. 4. 23.
speaking to that woman of Samaria; he says, The hour comes, and now is,
when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth: for
the Father requires even such to worship him. Now he opposes or sets
spiritual worship which God requires, against carnal worship devised by men:
which, because it is answerable to their carnal, and corrupt nature,
maruellously pleases themselves, but does most of all displease God that is a
spirit. Yea indeed no worship but spiritual is acceptable unto him.


Theoph. Now it is to be seen, wherein that adoration or spiritual worship
stands.


Mat. Sincere prayer is the chief part of it, whether it be publi^e or
private, when our hearts be lift up unto God with a pure conscience, all things
being taken away, that may withdraw or estrange our minds from him, as images,
candles, and such other inventions of men: falling down upon our knees, our
heads uncovered, and hands lifted up to heaven.


Theoph. Are not kneeling, uncovering of the head, and lifting the hands up to
heaven carnal ceremonies?


Matthew. No in no wise. For we call them carnal ceremonies, that were devised
by men, and such as tie our minds to these earthly things: but these are both
ordained of God, and do bring forth far diverse or unlike effects. For they
call our minds from these earthly and frail things, and do lift them up to
true piety, and spiritual meditation.


Theoph Is there nothing else required to worship God spiritually, besides the
things which thou have reckened up?


Mat. There is somewhat else required: namely, that we do hear his word and
receive the Sacraments with humbleness and reverence of mind, and with purity
of conscience. Concerning the rest, so as we avoid all superstitious and humane
ceremonies, we must use the liberty which Christ by his death has purchased
for us.


Theoph. What is that Christian liberty?


Matthew. Of Christian liberty.
It is in every part of it, a spiritual thing: the whole force whereof
stands in the appeasing and quieting of fearful consciences, that God may
be so much the more earnestly glorified in us Howbeit it consists of four
parts, the first two whereof (notwithstanding they be the chief) do not make
much for that we have in hand: they were also handled by us in the former
book, yea rather they be the argument of it.


Theoph. Nevertheless I would have them declared by thee in a few words, that
my memory might be rubbed again, with the things that have bin already spoken
before.


Matthew. John. 8. 35.
The servant abides not for ever in the house, but the son abides for ever.
Therefore if the son have freed you, you shall be free indeed.

2. Cor. 3. 17.
Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.


Theoph. Declare the other parts of Christian liberty, appertaining to the
speech we have in hand.


Mat. Either of them hangs upon our redemption. Now the first is this:

But if we be delivered from all those ceremonies which were commanded of God,
Col. 2. 6. Heb. 10. 1.
by much more strong reason are we set free from those, which were invented by
men, which also have in them plain superstition.

Christ, the lawful use of the creatures, which we had Of the use of meats
and other things.
lost in Adam through sin, is again restored and renewed unto us.


Theoph. By what means?


Matthew. Men by sin became the enemies of God, and therefore unworthy to use
his goods: but being made at one with him by the death of his Son, and
adopted or taken to be his sons, we may now with liberty of conscience use
all the blessings of the earth, and other creatures which he gives us to
sustain our life, to the end he may be with the more veheme^cie served of us,
until he translate us from this life, into that eternal inheritance. Hence is
that of Paul, To the pure indeed Tit. 1. 15.
all things are pure: but to the defiled and unbelievers nothing is pure. By
which things it appears that Christian liberty does by no means loose the
bridle to our carnal desires: but stands only in this, to bring peace to
troubled consciences, whether they be out of quiet, and full of care about the
forgiveness of their sins, or else be troubled about the use of the creatures,
and of other indifferent things, so as they may use them most freely, without
any doubt or scruple of co^scie^ces.


Theoph. But that use of indifferent things, seems not to avail much to the
quieting of our conscience, much less to the spiritual worship of God,
whereunto notwithstanding it was ascribed by thee.


Matthew. It profits much unto both: and indeed first of all except we do
certainly know, that we may freely use the creatures of God, our co^scie^ces
shall never have rest, yea rather they shall be tossed to and fro with doubting
and superstition. Therefore Paul says, Blessed is he that conde^neth not
himself in that which Romans 14. 22
he allows: that is to say, which is certainly persuaded with himself, what
is allowed or disalowed of God. Concerning the spiritual worship due unto God,
as it is defiled by a superstitious abstaining from the creatures, so it is
much enlarged by a lawful use joined with his fear, and without offense: yea
rather in this part, there is a certain testimony of the spiritual worship
which we desire to give unto him, when as we will not submit our selves to the
superstitious commandments of men. Therefore Paul speaking of his Christian
liberty, says: Gal. 5. 1.
In the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, continue or stand you, and
be not again entangled with the yoke of bondage.


Theoph. What meantest thou, when thou saydest, we were to use the creatures of
God in his fear?


Mat. That it is to say, soberly, and reverently, as it were before him.


Theoph. Why made thou mention of offense?


Mat. Because it must specially be taken heed unto, that by our liberty we
give no offense to the weak: For, the doctrine of Christian liberty, is not
against the rule charity.


Theoph. What is an offense?


Mat. Of offenses.
The word properly signifies something laid in the way, upon the which he that
walks may stumble and fall. In this place by translation, or a borrowed kind
of sense, it is taken for that, by the which we are hindered from receiving the
doctrine of the truth, or else be turned from it, after we have received it. In
which sense he is said to offend one, which either says or does any thing,
whereby the salvation of his neighbor is hindered. Now that is a most grievous
sin: For Christ says; Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that
believe me, it were better for him that Mat. 18. 6.
a mill stone were hanged about his neck, and he drowned in the depth of the
sea.


Theoph. May there not be some certain rule set down, whereby it may be
vndoudtedly known, in what things and how we are to beware, that we give not
offense to our neighbor?


Matthew. There is. But that we may rightly understand it, we must know, that
there be two kinds of offenses. The one is called an offense taken, which
falls upon the head of the taker, forasmuch as none occasion was given. As
for example, if any take offense because his neighbor does somewhat that is
commanded of God, or refuses to do some evil thing, forbidden of God. For,
even as our liberty must be subject unto charity, so charity ought to be
subject to the purity of faith and righteousness of the law. Therefore thou
may not offend God, to avoid the offense of thy neighbor. The other kind of
offense, is called offense given, the fault and condemnation whereof, lights
upon him of whom it is given: as when one gives offense to his neighbor, by
doing something forbidden of God, or else offends the unskillful and weak,
by using indifferent things ill.


Theoph. What understand thou by the name of indifferent things?


Mat. Those which of themselves be neither good nor evil, such as it is known
these be; to eat flesh or fish. Now I said, that the weak were not to be
offended for the use of them. For the Apostle says; Romans 14. 15
Destroy not thou him with thy meat, for whom Christ died.

1. Cor. 8. 13.
And again in another place; If meat offend my brother, I will eat no flesh
while the whole stands, that I may not offend my brother.


The. But why do thou me^tio^ the weak only, when thou speak of an
offense given in different things?


Matthew. Because we must abstain from them only for the weakes sake, until
they have been taught and confirmed in the knowledge of Christian liberty, but
not for the malicious men, and mockers of Christian liberty; among whom also
sometime it is profitable, that we claim and take our liberty, that it may be
known what doctrine or Religion we profess.


Theoph. The third part of this commandment is behind, I would have that
declared in few words.


Mat. It begins at these words; I am the Lord thy God, strong, jealous, etc.
He calls himself our God, both to oppose himself unto Idols, as especially
to show, that it is he alone, to whom we ought to cleave, seeing that he is our
God, that is, merciful and good. He calls himself strong and jealous, to
teach us, that he both can and will revenge so great an injury, and indeed
with so grievous vengeance, that it shall stretch it self to their children,
even to the third and fourth generation, of such as follow the ungodliness of
their fathers. Even as also he shows his perpetual mercy and goodness, to
many generations unto them which love him and keep his law.


Theoph. There be three things in this thy exposition, of which I think it fit
to ask thee.

Why God is called jealous.
First, in what sense God is said to be jealous, forasmuch as the affection of
jealousy does not any way agree to his majesty.


Mat. The Lord gives himself this title, having respect to the covenant made
with us: Now this he often co^pareth unto marriage, as well for the union which
we have with him, as for the mutual fidelity which we also have promised unto
him. Hereof it comes, that by the Prophet he says; Hos. 2. 20.
I will marry thee unto my self in faithfulness. As if he did say, that as
he performed to us all the duties of a faithful and true husband, even so he
required again by covenant of us, love and chastity, required in marriage. And
for this cause he complains, and not seldom by his Prophets; Ierem. 3. Hos.
2.
that Israel committed fornication with Idols, and was polluted or defiled
with adultery. When therefore he calls himself jealous, he does it, that
with one word, he may cut of all the vain excuses, wherewith Idolaters seek
to hide themselves. For this he means, that he cannot by any means bear it,
that under any color, we should give the love and reverence due to him unto
Idols; as an husband that religiously and holilie loves his wife, cannot
endure it, whatsoever she pretends, that his wife should bestow the signs of
her friendship and love upon another. Moreover, by this title he warns us,
that at last he will execute no less punishment upon Idolaters, then a jealous
husband upon his wife often taken by him in adultery.


Theoph The other thing comes to my remembrance, whereof I said I would ask:
how it agrees with the justice of God, to require the punishment of the
fathers offense of his posterity.


Matthew. The Lord means not, that the children should be punished for the
sins of the parents, for as much as he says by his Prophet; That he will
not, Eze. 18. 20.
that the son should bear the iniquity of his father, or the father bear
the iniquity of the son. But this visitation is fulfilled, when the Lord
takes from the house of the ungodly his grace, the light of his truth, and
the other helps of salvation. Now then, nothing else can be looked for, but
that the children being forsaken of God, should live most wickedly, and move
God to take vengeance upon them. From hence is that preposterous and disordered
desire of the children, to follow the Idolatrous way of their parents,
whereupon it comes, that they excuse their Idolatry by this one pretense,
namely the example of their fathers. But if the Lord do threaten so great
punishment Against the Nicodemits.
to Idolaters so much blinded, that they think God is rightly worshipped of
them: how much more fearful judgment ought they to look for, that be
illuminated with the light of his truth, and notwithstanding defile themselves
with Idolatry and superstitions against their consciences?


Theop. Those men are wont to answer (which also my self have heard of them
more then once) that they acknowledge no sin in that, seeing they lift up
their minds unto God in the midst of those ungodly superstitions, which also
they hate with all their hearts.


Mat. It is a most vain excuse, which the Devil has prompted them, to lull
their consciences a sleep, and so to hold them in his nets.


Theoph. But how can they be convinced of Idolatry, for as much as we ought to
judge of the outward actions of men, by the inward affection of the heart?


Mat. That indeed is true, in such things as of themselves be good or
indifferent, and which be made ill by an ill intent, as if one prayed to God
to be praised and well thought of. But concerning actions of their own nature
evil, and expressly forbidden of God, as is outward idolatry, there is no
inward affection of the mind which can make them good, and acquit them from
sin.


Theop. In what place is outward idolatry forbidden?


Matthew. In the second commandment, where by name the Lord forbids, that no
man bow himself to Idols or worship them. Which thing is every where often
repeated in sundry places of the Scripture.

Moreover, it may be gathered of that, which the Lord answered Elias, when he
noted, and as it were by outward signs marked the Israelites, which had not
fallen away from his religion. For he says; Romans 11. 4.
I have reserved to my self seven thousand men, which have not bowed the knee
to the Image Baal. In which words he declares that all such as worshipped Baal
with the outward gesture, were Idolaters, notwithstanding they pretended the
inward affection of their mind to be otherwise. Is it not also just and right,
that God should be worshipped of us in our bodies, as well as in our minds,
for as much as he is the maker of both?


Theoph. Again, they do allege for themselves the example of Naaman the
Syrian: who being lightened with the knowledge of the true God, by that
miraculous cure, said unto the Prophet; Herein the Lord be merciful to thy
servant, when my Lord shall go into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and
shall lean upon my hand, and I bow my self in the house of Rimmon, in this
bowing my self in the house of Rimmon, the Lord I beseech to forgive his
servant in this thing. To whom the Prophet answered; Go in peace. Of which
words they gather, that the Prophet gave his consent, he should do that thing.


Matthew. This example makes more against them, then for them. For that Naaman
the Sirian, the chief Captain of the host of the king of Aram, and most
dear to the King himself, when he was first converted to the religion of the
true God, knew that he sinned, if he did but only apply himself in his
service, and bowing to the King while he worshipped, and he prays God to
forgive him that sin. But these our Nicodemits, which have so many years
been taught the knowledge of God and of his spiritual worship, and indeed
far more clearly, then the Fathers under the Law ever were, cannot be brought
thus far: to confess that they sin, when every where of their own
voluntary accord, and without any inforcement of the kings authority, that
uses their service, they be partakers of Idolatry and superstitions. Verily
the confession of Naaman the Syrian shall be sufficient to condemn them in the
day of judgment: so far off therefore is it, that by it they can by any
means defend themselves. Concerning the answer of the Prophet; Go in peace, he
does not by it allow the sin of Naaman. Neither was it his mind to flatter
Naaman, but when he saw him in so little space of time to have profited so
well in the knowledge and fear of God, so as freely he confessed and condemned
his own infirmity, he encouraged him, and puts him in hope, that God would
strengthen him, and bring that to perfection, which he had begun in him.

For this cause he says; Go in peace. But if he had had to do with the
Nicodemits of our age, he would have used far other manner of speech, and
would have alowd cried out the same thing, which Elias that went before him did
to the Jews of his time, mingling the worship of Idols with the service of
God; How long 1. Reg. 18. 22.
do you halt between two opinions? if the Lord be God, follow him: but if
Baal be he, go after him.


Theoph. I am not a little glad, that I have gotten the meaning of that place:
for sometimes I have been troubled about the loosing or untying of that knot,
I do not therefore now think, that the Nicodemits have any excuse, wherewith
to clear themselves from the crime of Idolatry. For as much as it is plain,
that this excuse of theirs is nothing worth.


Math. Add hereunto, that there be against them the examples of Daniell and
his fellows, and of innumerable Martyrs, who rather chose to suffer most
cruel death, then never so little to make sh^we that they worshipped Idols.
For as much therefore as they dare not accuse these faithful servants of God
of rashness, of whom the Scripture it self reports honorably, this one
thing remains, that they condemn themselves, because they fear men more
then God, of which fault, there is no doubt but their own conscience accuses
them. Let them therefore think upon that sentence pronounced by God against
the fearful, that is, such as knowing the truth, do for fear dissemble it,
whom he joins with unbelievers, abominable murderers, whoere-mongers,
sorcerers and liars, to whom he says; their part is appointed in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Let them I
say remember Apoc. 21. 8.
that sentence, that if they have any care of their salvation, they may prevent
the wrath and judgment of God by true repentance.


Theoph. Let us now return to the words of the commandment, why did he
rather say, to them that hate me, then, to them which do not obey me?


Math. That he might make the ungodliness of such as obey him not, especially
which break this commandment, more manifest For, by that disobedience, they
do declare the inward hatred, which they have against him. But contrariwise
the godly, by keeping of his commandments, do witness the love and reverence
they carry him. Whereby it is apparent, how much Idolaters and superstitious
persons be deceived, when they think to declare their love toward God, by
their mad Religions. For as much as God himself testifies, that those devises
be signs of extreme hatred against him. And indeed by these Of good intents.
things is overthrown that most false and hurtful principle of Idolaters,
wherein they affirm, that all things which be done with a good intent, that is
with a mind to serve God, are well done.


Theoph. But surely it seems necessary, that good intents cannot be ill.


Math. True, if thou understand them of such as be good indeed.


Theoph. What are they?


Matt. Such as are grounded upon the express word of God. For, the other which
be against the word of God, howsoever men esteem them to be good, yet are
they most naught and displeasing unto God. Therefore the good intentes, as they
call them, of Idolaters and superstitious persons, are no better then the
intents of the Jews, which put Christ to death, or of them which have slain
almost innumerable faithful servants of Christ, of whom Christ himself
witnesses, Ioh. 16. 2.
that they thought they did God service.


Theoph. Let us go forward. Why does God speaking of punishment, mention only
three or four generations, and of reward, names thousands?


Math. To teach us, that he is more inclining to gentleness, and doing of
good, then to severity. Notwithstanding, the sentence pronounced of God is not
so general, but he keeps this free unto himsefe, to show himself merciful
when he pleases to the children of the wicked, and also to refuse and cast
off, of the children of the faithful, whom it shall seem good unto him.
Nevertheless he so tempereth it, that it may be known, that his promise and
threatening are neither vain nor deceitful.


Theoph. But these things seem to agree rather to the whole Law, then to this
one commandment.


Matthew. Right, for the Apostle witnesses, Ephesians. 6.
that the fifth commandment is the first with promise, namely special.


Theoph. Wherefore then are they put into this commandment?


Mat. Because the breach of the whole law follows upon the breaking of this:
For where any goes about to set up another, besides the true God, the whole
law is now broken of him. For whatsoever may be performed or done by him,
cannot be judged to be the obedience of God, but of the Idol which he has made.

Moreover, Idolaters are so wholly occupied in their superstitions joined most
nearely with Idolatry, and do so swell with a vain opinion of merit, that
they easily despise and set light by the lawful keeping of Gods commandments,
which daily experience does plentifully witness.


The third commandment.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain. Theoph. We have been
long in the exposition of the second commandment, because the matter it self
required it. Now we are to come to the third. And first let us see how many
parts there be of it.


Mat. Three, as of the former. In the

1 First is forbidden, the rash use of Gods name.

2 In the second is commanded the sanctifying of it, and this is contained
under the prohibition.

3 The third is a threatening against the breakers of this commandment.


Theoph. That the exposition of this commandment may be the easier, I will
demand three things.

1 First, in what sense the name of God is taken in this place?

2 Secondly, what it is to take the name of God in vain.

3 Thirdly, how many ways it may be taken in vain; declare what the name of
God signifies.


Mat. The first part of the third command. of Gods name.
It is first taken for God himself, as it easy to gather out of the words of
Moses; Deu. 28. 58
If you shall not keep to do all the words of this Law, which are written in
this book, to fear that glorious and terrible name, the Lord thy God, the Lord
will make thy plagues wonderful. Secondly it signifies all those things,
which concern his glory, as his word and works.


Theoph. But now what is it to take the name of God in vain?


Mat. How the name of God is taken in vain.
To speak of God, or his words, or works, contemptuously, lightly and
rashly, that is, to misuse and to do wrong to his Majesty. For this cause he
said rather, the name of the Lord thy God, then my name. For, this he meant
that seeing the Lord is our God, we ought to think so reuere^tly of his
Majesty, that to us it should be most holy, and without all pollution or
disdain.


Theoph. How many ways it is taken in vain.
Now we are to see how many ways the name of God is taken in vain, which is
the third point of the first part of this commandment.


Mat. It may indeed be taken in vain sundry ways, which notwithstanding I
will reduce unto five.

1 The first which is also the most grievous, is blasphemy, that is railing,
namely when a man does not only speak contemptuously of God, but does also
use reproachful words, and such as savor of contempt against his Majesty: as
they do that renounce God To whom also we do join all those, that trample
under their feet the most holy mystery of our salvation that Christ has
wrought for us, and every where do swear by his death, blood, body and parts
thereof, as his head and belly, and that most commonly, purposely, not being
stirred and moved by anger, although indeed there be no anger, which can excuse
so horrible blasphemy before God.


Theoph. Such men verily be far off from giving those thanks which we owe unto
him, that he vouchsafed to take upon him our humane nature, and that in it to
deliver us from everlasting death, he would be abased to the death of the
cross full of reproach.


Mat. Thou say true And therein they show themselves worse then the very
Jews, of whom he was crucified. For if they had known him, they would not have
1. Cor. 2. 8.
crucified the Lord of glory, says Paul. Therefore except they repent, it
will atogether come to pass, that to their great evil, they shall feel his
most just wrath and judgment, for as much as they do purposely so profane the
benefit of redemption, procured unto us by him.


Theoph. Let us examine another way, by the which the name of God is taken in
vain.


Mat. The profaning of gods word.
When we do abuse the holy Scripture, which is done specially three ways.

1 First when it is profaned by ridiculous scoffs and mockings, as drunkards
and ungodly persons are wont.

2 Secondly, when it is corrupted, that is, wrested otherwise then the true
sense is, as heretics do.

3 Thirdly, when any abuses it, to enchantments or sorceries, for the healing
of men or beasts, and such like.


Theoph. But they which heal diseases especially of men by that means, say
that there is no sin in it, seeing they use good works, whereof there
follows a very good effect, namely good health, for the most part restored
to the sick.


Theoph. The devil uses to assail men disguised, that is to say, he changes
himself into an Angel of light, to the end he may be the better received: 2.
Cor. 11. 14
For he knows that if he were known, all would abhor him. Therefore he can
find no better color, then if he make show of the word of God, which
nevertheless is both corrupted by him, and wrested from the true meaning, even
as he does with heretics, or else it is turned from the right and lawful use,
namely doctrine, reproof, correction, and instruction, to the healing of
bodies, and such other delusions, wherewith both it is profaned, and the name
of God is taken in vain. Whereupon it is plain, that the healing which
sometimes follows those deceipts and iuglings, be not of God, against who^
there is that way great sin committed, but from the Devil.


Theoph. Can thou prove that those kind of healings be of the Devil?


Mat. Yea indeed, and that most easily. For, God uses only two ways to the
curing of diseases, whereof one is natural and ordinary, namely by the help
of medicines, whereinto he has put that virtue and force: the other is besides
the course of nature, miraculous, when God him self does it by his own power.
But that way of healing by rehearsing words of the holy Scriptures, cannot be
called ordinary or natural, for as much as the word of God is not given to
heal bodies but souls; neither can it be reckened among the miracles, which
proceed from the power of God. For, the power of God is not tied to the
uttering of certain words, notwithstanding they be very good: or else there
were not any which might not do miracles at his pleasure, which in very
deed is most absurd. For, thereupon it should follow, that God declares his
power not according to his own will, but according to our pleasure. Therefore
no man ought to doubt, but that these kinds of healings be of the Devil, and
not of God.


Theoph. They object that it is not like, that the Devil the enemy of
mankind, should regard and care for the good health of men.


Mat. That which traitors and poisoners are wont to do, namely to flatter thee
for a time, to the end they may afterward lay hands upon thee the more
easily, the same uses the Devil: For, if he heal the diseases of cattle, he
does it with no other mind, but to bind the owners of them to him self: if he
bring any case to our bodies, he does it to bring the soul in bondage to him
self, and for that cause; that at length he may thrust body and soul with
him self into hell. Finally he does always usurp dominion and Lordship over
them, to whom he makes show of serving for a time.


Theoph. It were therefore better for a man to serve himself, then to have
such a servant.


Matthew. It were so, and indeed to be holden with sickness all the time of our
life, rather then to recover our health by his help.


Theoph. I will yet demand one thing: whence has the devil this power, that
he can heal the diseases of our body?


Matthew. God permits it unto him by his judgment, as it has been said of
us, that they should more and more be blinded, which fly to the devil, that
by their own desert they may perish in their errors.


Theoph. The third manner of taking Gods name in vain is behind.


Mat. Gods name taken in vain by dissoluteness of life.
It is, when a man professes him self to know God, but denies him in his
deeds, that is, whose whole life yields nothing but offenses and stumbling
blocks. Of whom there is mention in the Prophet* for thus the Lord chideth with
them; Why do thou declare my statutes, and take my law in thy mouth,
seeing thou hate Psalm. 50. 16.
to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee? The same also is to be
thought of hypocrites, which are far worse then these: for, in words and
outward deeds they do vainly make show of the fear of God, but their heart
is very far off from him. To this number also they may be reckened, whose
mind wandreth about other matters, while they are praying.


Theoph. Let us come to the fourth manner of taking Gods name in vain.


Mat. When we speak of god without consideration.
When this word God, or the name of Jesus, is used of us either rashly or
without cause: as many do, with whom it is ordinary, that in the way of
maruelling or wondering, they often use these speeches, my God, Jesus.


Theoph. But thou shall hardly persuade these, that they take the name of God
in vain, notwithstanding it be often used of them: for they say, it is better
to name God then the Devil.


Mat. Our nature is so corrupt, and so used to sin, that we see not any but
the greatest, which indeed if they be weighed by our judgment, shall be
taken for very small. For this cause, God gave unto us his Law, which is as
it were a glass, and a most perfect pattern of holiness, that by comparing
our actions with it, we might acknowledge our sins, and study to amend.
But of these things shall be spoken more at large, when we shall come to the use
of the Law. Now we are to examine that most damnable manner, and to compare it
with this commandment of the Law; Thou shall not take the name of the Lord
thy God in vain.

What is this, in vain? do we only then sin against it, when it is set upon
by us with blasphemies and renouncings of it? No in no case, but then also,
when it is named either with contempt or rashly. But what is he, that being in
his right mind, sees not, that it is both co^temptuously and rashly used in
these manners of speaking? If any have bin at a feast, which peradventure has
not bin without riot and other sins, he will not fear to utter these words,
according to the custom among us; O my God, how excessiuely have we laughed? O
my God, how richly and daintily were we entertained? If any of our servants
disquiet us, by their unskillfulness or slownesse, straightway he shall hear,
O God how foolish thou art? O God how slow thou art? If we find any place
filthy and unclean, or if we smell any ill savor, by and by shall the name of
God be mingled with these things, in these words: O God what a filthy place. O
God what an ill savor do I smell?

These examples most common among our countrymen, were to be alleged, that we
might so much the more plainly show, how greatly the name of God is used
contemptuously and rashly of us. A certain ancient left it written, that if we
have a costly garment, we do then only put it on, when we go to the company
of great personages, and do most carefully look unto it that it be not
spotted: in so much as we shun and avoid all such things as might soil it. But
the most holy name of God, with the excellency and worthiness whereof, no
garment, no not any creature is indeed to be compared, is so little esteemed of
us, that it is continually intermedled, with vain and idle speeches, with
raylings, and filthiness.


Theoph. I do acknowledge that the name of God is abused with very great
contempt, in the speeches which thou have reckened up: but that sin is so
common, that in very deed the godly themselves, and such as desire to reform
their lives be not free from it: for, a man shall find very few, that sin not
in this point.


Mat. It was the cause why I have handled that sin more at large, to the end
it may the better be known, especially to such as be touched with any fear
of God, that by the reverence wherewith they honor his name, they may be moved
to amendment, which they shall with very small labor attain, if they give
their minds unto it.


Theoph. Let us come to the fifth and last way, whereby the name of God is taken
in vain.


Matthew. When any swears by him vainly.


Theoph. Of swearing
Before I demand how any swears by the name of God vainly, I would have thee
to declare what an oath is.


Matthew. It is the calling of God to witness, for the confirmation of the
unknown truth of our speech.


Theoph. How many kinds of oaths be there?


Mat. Two: For, the one is of things past, the other of things to come, namely
when any thing is promised with an oath: which promise, if it be made unto God,
is called a vow.


Theoph. Let us consider how a man swears by the name of God in vain.


Mat. That is as often as those circumstances, which are required in an oath,
are not kept.


Theoph. How many are those circumstances?


Matthew. In an oath which is of things past, there are three, without which, the
oath shall be altogether vain.

1 The first is: that the thing whereupon we are about to swear, be not only
true, but also that the truth of it be certainly known to us.

2 The second is: that the thing be of some weight, as well to the glory of God,
as to the love of our neighbor.

3 The third is: that the truth of that thing, by any other means cannot be
brought to light, for otherwise the very name of God is contemptuously used.

But as an oath respects things to come, there be five things to be observed.

1 First, that the thing be of some importance.

2 That it be just and lawful.

3 That it be in our power.

4 That we be prepared to do it.

5 Finally, that in time we perform it indeed, although it should be to our
loss, as we be taught of the Prophet. Psalm. 15. 4.



Theoph. What if all these circumstances be not observed, is not the name of
God taken in vain?


Mat. It is, and very great reproach is done unto him, especially, if that
whereof we swear be not true: for then he that does that, accuses God of
lying and falsehood, and therefore so much as in him lies, takes from him his
Godhead, and makes him like the devil, that is the father of lies. John. 8.
44.



Theoph. But if we have taken our oath to do some ill thing, as for example to
kill, are we bound to perform that?


Mat. No not so: for in our Baptism we vowed unto God, that we would serve
him, and obey his will. And that oath cutteth off all other contrary unto it.

Sin therefore is committed, in that an unlawful oath was taken vainly and
rashly, and contrary to the will of God: howbeit the sin should be far
greater, if it were kept. But if we be not bound to do ill things, although we
have expressly promised them, much less if they be required of us under the
color of some general promise; For secretly they be excepted which are not
lawful, no less the^ those which cannot be done, or be impossible. And
therefore Herod was not bound to cut off the head Mat. 14. 7
of John Baptist, by his oath taken to Herodias.


Theoph. The second part of the third commandment of sanctifying Gods name.
We have spoken sufficiently of the first part of this commandment; let us
come to the other. Now, that pertains to the sanctifying of Gods name. By
what ways therefore may the name of God be sanctified or hallowed of us?


Mat. By five, even in a like number with those, whereby it is taken in vain.


Theoph. Declare severally every of these ways.


Mat. The first is, that we sing his praises, read his word, and speak
reverently of him.

2 The other is, that in adversity he be praised of us, both in heart and
mouth: as we read Job did in these words; Job. 1. 2.
Let the name of God be blessed.

3 The third is, that so often as need shall require, we do make a most frank
confession of his truth: and lead a life agreeable to that confession.

4 The fourth is, that we pray unto him, and from our heart give him thanks.

5 The fifth, that when it shall be necessary, we swear by his name.


Theoph. How is the name of God sanctified, when we swear by it?


Matthew. Because by an oath lawfully taken, he is acknowledged of us for the
true God: forasmuch as we confess him to be the searcher of the hearts and
secret thoughts, when we call him to be a witness of the things that be hidden
from men.

Secondly, because we fly to him as a most earnest defender of truth, and
therefore a most severe revenger of liars, and such as forswear themselves.
And these indeed be the proper offices of God alone.

Finally, by an oath his name is sanctified, seeing that by it controversies
which hurt Christian charity, be ended, as the Apostle speaks. Heb. 6. 16.


Against Anabaptists, that wholly condemn swearing.
From whence we may gather, how wonderful the kindness of God is toward us,
who does so far abase himself, that he will be present at our controversies,
and make an end of them. Therefore there is no cause, why we should doubt, to
swear by his name, in the place of judgment, or elsewhere, so as all the
conditions be kept. For whosoever refuses to swear, refuses to give glory
unto God.


Theoph. But Christ commands that we swear not at all, neither by the
heaven, nor by the earth; Mat. 5. 34.
and that our communication be yea, yea, nay, nay: affirming further, that
whatsoever is more, is of evil, which also is confirmed by Saint James. Iam.
5. 12.



Mat. That indeed is true. But Christ in the same Chapter plainly says; That
he came not destroy the law or the Prophets, but to fulfill them. Therefore his
purpose is not to condemn the right use of an oath, expressly commanded of God
in these words of Moses: Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and shall serve him only, and swear by
his name.


Theoph. In what sense therefore, did Christ forbid swearing altogether?


Mat. That he might bring again this commandment to the true understanding of
it, which had been much corrupted by the false gloses of the Scribes and
Pharisees. For, they taught it was no sin, when any swore in vain by the
creatures, as by heaven and earth, seeing that the name of God was not
expressed. But Christ means to show, that although the name of God was
suppressed, or not mentioned, yet secretly it was sufficiently expressed in
such oaths: and that therefore therein sin was committed against this
commandment. Therefore his purpose is not to forbid the lawful use of an oath,
but the abuse: as when a man swears vainly, by what name, or in what manner
soever it be done.


Theoph. It follows therefore, that it is lawful to swear by creatures, so
as it be not vainly, forasmuch as the name of God is secretly understood in
them.


Matthew. Yea verily; yet with this condition, that those creatures be avoided in
swearing, which have been commonly abused to Idolatry. Thus this learned man
and some other have thought of this matter.
For then the name of God is not understood under them, but it is even
suppressed, that they may have his room, the honor being given unto them,
which belongs to the Majesty of God alone. But this do they, which swear by
the names of Saints departed. In which respect the Lord is bitterly angry with
them that swear by other Gods, and takes that kind of swearing, to be an
argument of manifest falling away from him. Whereupon he complains of the
Israelites in Jeremy, in these words: Ierem. 5. 7.
Thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by those which are not Gods. And
that indeed very justly, for the breaking of the second and third commandment,
is a sign of breaking the first.


Theoph. How so?


Mat. Even as he worshippeth God with spiritual worship, and swears by his
name so often as the Lord shall require, which spiritually has conceived and
comprehended him in his mind: so whosoever has imagined to himself a false
God, or many Gods, does forthwith declare it by worshipping of Idols, whose
names he has in his mouth, when he swears. It is therefore truly said, that
Idols be first in the heart, before they be brought forth either with the hand
or mouth.


Theoph. Let us come to the third part of this commandment, which is the
threatening against such as break it.


Mat. The third part of the third commandment.
It is contained in these words; The Lord will not hold him guiltless which
takes his name in vain. Whereby it appears, that the transgression of this
commandment is accounted a most heinous sin before God, notwithstanding it be
thought light of men, and that therefore he will with grievous punishment, be
avenged upon such as be guilty of it.


Theoph. Is there any thing that does so much aggrauate this sin?


Matthew. Yea verily. For there is no commandment, in the breaking whereof there
is seen such insolent contempt of God.


Theoph. Why so?


Matthew. Because we are brought to break the other commandments, either upon a
false opinion of worshipping God, as when we give over our selves to Idolatry
and superstition; or for our own estimation, when we yield our selves to
revenge: or for our pleasure, when we commit fornication; or for our profit,
when we steal; or for some fear, as when we tell a lie: but for the breaking
of this commandment, we can pretend neither the worshipping of God, nor our
profit, nor our pleasure, neither any fear. Therefore the transgression of
this commandment, but especially blasphemy, has no other beginning, but a
most manifest contempt of Gods majesty.


Theoph. Some are wont to excuse the matter by custom, to clear themselves of
the sin of the contempt of God.


Math. But I would demand, whence that custom sprung: Did it not come from
the very impiety and mad contempt of God, wherewith our minds were wholly
taken up and possessed before? For it is certain, when at the first the mind
of man is lightened with the least sun-beame of the fear of God, that that bad
custom is presently changed, howsoever it might go about to defend it self,
by prescription of very long time.


The fourth commandment.
Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy; six days shall thou labor, and
do all thy work, but the seventh day shall be the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God; in it thou shall do no manner of work, thou. nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, thy man servant, nor thy maid servant, nor thy cattle, nor the
stranger that is within thy gates, for in six days the Lord made the heaven
and the earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day,
wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it. Theoph. The fourth
commandment of this first table is yet behind: to the exposition whereof,
that we may make an easier way, let us see of how many parts it stands?


Matthew. Of four.

1 The first contains the sum of the whole commandment, in these words;
Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy.

2 The second shows, which that Sabbath day is, when he says; Six days
shall thou labor, and do all thy work: but upon the seventh day, shall be
the Sabbath to the Lord thy God.

3 The third teaches, how that day is to be kept holy. Thou shall do no work,
neither thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy man servant, nor thy
maid servant, nor thy cattle, nor the stranger that is within thy gates.

4 The fourth renders a reason, why he appointed the seventh day, rather
then any other day, unto this rest. For in six days, God made heaven, the
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, therefore
he blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it.


Theoph. These four parts are to be followed of us in order. Declare therefore
the meaning of the first.


Matthew. When the Lord says; Remember the Sabbath day, he teaches us, that
this commandment is of very great weight. Which to be most true, appears
even by this, that the keeping of the rest of the commandments, depends
upon the keeping of this. In respect whereof, the Lord every where by his
Prophets, obiecteth to the Israelites the transgression of this commandment,
when he means to signify the breach of the whole Law. He adds after: that
thou sanctify or hallow it; that is, cease and abstain from bodily works,
that thou may apply thy self earnestly to spiritual and heavenly.


Theoph. Which call thou heavenly and spiritual works?


Mat. Why the Lord under the Law, commanded the sabbath.
That we may understand that point, we must know, that the Sabbath was
commanded of God for two causes, the first whereof was ceremonial. That
ceremony also is considered in two respects. For, by that bodily rest, the
Lord meant to warn the people of Israel, to abstain and rest from their own
works being carnal and defiled, that they might suffer the holy Ghost to
work in them. This does he himself witness in these words; See that you
keep my Sabbath, because it is a sign between me and you in your
generations, that you may know, that it is I the Lord, which sanctify you. Out
of which words it is plain, that that ceremony, was a type or shadow of our
regeneration.

Secondly, that ceremony served, to signify the everlasting rest of the
kingdom of heaven, which was as it were a part of the former. For that cause
the Lord calls the land of Canaan, rest, because it was a sign or token of
eternal life, according to the interpretation of the Apostle to the Hebrews.

The other end of the bodily rest, is this, that we may wait upon the
ministry of the Church: for that is established by God in this commandment.
Moreover, that we may meditate upon his works, and dilgently apply our
selves, to the love of our neighbor, and the instruction of our household and
family. These are the two ends of this bodily rest, the first whereof
together with the rest of the ceremonies, is taken away by the coming of
Christ, which is the truth of it. But the other is perpetual and to continue
for ever. Therefore that rest belongs unto us, and is every week to be kept
one day.


Theoph. Let us come to the other part.


Mat. After that the Lord had commanded one day for rest, now he shows which
day he will have kept, and that is the seventh, namely the last of the week.
He does also teach, how we should spend the rest of the week, namely in
working, that is, in doing our earthly businesses, to the end we may be the
fitter for the rest of the seventh day, and to the performance of such things,
as he him self has commanded.


Theoph. Which was the seventh day?


Mat. That which we do yet call Saturday. For, the Lords day properly, is the
first day of the week, according to the distinction made by God himself. But
that seventh day the Apostles changed, to teach that the ceremony was done
away, and the rest they put off to the Lords day, upon the which, Christ by his
resurrection had put an end unto that ceremony.


Theoph. How did Christ by his resurrection, put an end unto that ceremony?


Math. Because, by the virtue and power thereof, we are spiritually raised up,
that we may serve God, and mortify our concupiscences all the days of our
life, so as for this purpose, we do not now stand in need of the observations
of any day.


Theoph. Is not this to observe days, which thou co^demnest as a superstitious
thing, in the exposition of the former commandment?


Matthew. To observe days and times, is nothing else, but to think one day or
time holier then another, which agrees not to the hallowing of the Lords day.
For, we do not attribute unto it greater holiness then to another. But when
the Apostles would take away the ceremony of the seventh day, they appointed
this, which came first in place to that use. And as another day had been as
fit, so neither is this less fit or conuentient, then any other.


Theo. Declare the third part of the commandment.


Mat. It teaches that no work concerning this life is to be done, unless it
be necessary, upon that day. But it is to be marked, that such works were
then judged to be faulty and sinful among the Jews, because they were
contrary to the ceremony which they were bound to keep: But now that ceremony
being taken away, they are not forbidden as evil in themselves, but because
they hinder us and call us away from holy studies and meditations.


Theoph. But why is there mention of the rest of men servants, and of maid
servants, of cattle, and of strangers?


Matthew. Concerning men servants, and maid servants, God commanded this, as well
that they might have some ease from labor, as also that they might attend
upon the ministry of the Church, and so to care for, and look to their own
salvation, no less then their masters. The rest of beasts God does therefore
mention, because they work not but with the service and help of servants. He
speaks also of strangers, because if they be of the same profession with us,
they also are bound to keep the law of God, if not, yet at least heed must be
taken that they be not an evil example to the rest.


Theoph. The fourth part is remaining.


Mat. The Lord sets before us his own example, the more earnestly to prick
us forward to the keeping of that rest. He does also call to our remembrances
the creation of the world, that we might remember of whom we have our
beginning, and the innumerable benefits that we enjoy. The Sabbath day
therefore should be unto us as it were an image of the creation of the world:
and upon that day ought we to mediditate and think upon that creation, least
we be guilty of that fault, which God in former times by Moses vpbraided the
Jews with; Thou have forgotten that strong God which has begotten thee, the
God which made thee thou have not remembered.

Hereuppon it is, that by name he reckeneth up every of his works by it self,
for in six days the Lord made the heaven and the earth, the sea and all that
is in them. But here is mention of the Lords resting, not because he has
cast off the care of his works, fer he continually works to preserve his
creatures, and to guide them by his providence. But this he would teach us,
that he has ceased from making of the kinds of things. Finally the blessing
and hallowing of the Sabbath day is after added, not because that day is in it
self holier then others, but for that it is of God, appointed for this
purpose, that we should rest from our own works, and diligently give our
selves to holy works.


Theoph. The Sabbath day therefore is sanctified of God, in that he did
appoint it to holy and religious works: It is also sanctified of us, when we
give our selves carefully to perform those works.


Matthew. It is true.


Theoph. But are not the rest of the days so hallowed of God, namely that they
be appointed to holy and religious works?


Matthew. Altogether, so far forth indeed as may be for our businesses. But
upon the Sabbath, all other things are to be set aside, that we may with
earnestnes apply our selves to those works. And verily men be without all
excuse, except they do this. For whereas the Lord has divided the week into
seven days, he gives one only to himself, but the other six he has left
unto us, to look to our own matters.


The second Table of the Law.
Theoph. The four commandments of the first table being expounded, order
requires that we come to the six last. But before we go to the exposition
of each by it self, I desire that thou propound a general declaration of
them, and that brief, which may show how they agree together, as thou did
when thou handledst the first table.


Mat. As in the first table the Lord does teach true religion, that is, the way
whereby he may be truly worshipped The sum of the last table.
of us. So in the last he prescribes a holy policy or government unto men,
that they may keep peace among them selves, and serve God with united minds.
But for the upholding of that policy, it is necessary that some be
superiors, and other some inferiors, and that the superiors be armed with some
authority, wherewith they may keep the subjects within the bounds of their
duty, and provide that the mightier do no wrong to men of mean quality. Now
all these things does the Lord ordain in the fifth commandment. For by little
and little he does in continuance of time bring us to all lawful subjection,
beginning with that which is most easy to be borne. Having settled and
appointed Magistrates, he does presently join laws, by the which they ought to
govern their subjects peaceably, and keep them in equity and justice: From
whence also every one should seek the rule of love, that they may live with
their neighbors according to the will of God.

And first, because nothing is more necessary for the safeguard of humane
society, the^ that the life of man be preserved, in the sixth commandment the
Lord forbids murder, and also commands that every one preserve the life
of his neighbors, no otherwise then their own. When he has taken order for
the safeguard of men's lives, because men are mortal, in the seventh
commandment, forbidding whoredom, he enioineth marriage to all men that have
not the gift of continency, to the end mankind may be preserved and increased.
And because a family or household follows marriage, to the sustaining whereof
riches are required, in the eight commandment he appoints to every one
propriety of goods, while he forbids theft wherewith quiet possession is
disturbed and troubled. And does also command, that we labor to get riches,
both for our own use, and by us to be given to the poor. Afterward because it
cannot be (such is the desire and covetousness of men) that goods can be
enjoyed of us, but that oftentimes there arise strifes and controversies, which
the Magistrates cannot appease, except they do plainly know the truth of the
matter, in the ninth commandment the Lord forbids false witness bearing,
which is no small hinderance to the ending of controversies, and does command
that we speak the truth, both before the Magistrate, and elsewhere in all
kind of matters. Finally, because the Lawgiver is spiritual, he would teach
us that his law also is spiritual: that is, that not only outward obedience
is required by it, as the laws made by men do, but even the inward affection
of the heart. Therefore under the name of concupiscence, which he forbids in
the last commandment, he requires also this, that we obey him with all our
heart, so as there be not any thing in us, be it never so little, that is
contrary to his will.


The fifth commandment of the Law.
Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may belong in the la^d, which
the Lord thy God gives thee. Theop. Let us go to the particular exposition of
each commandment of the last Table. And let us begin at the fifth, which is the
first. These be the words of it; Honor thy father and thy mother, etc. Of how
many parts stands it?


Math. Of two, the first is a precept, namely that we honor father and mother:
the other is a promise made to the keepers of this commandment, which is that
they shall live long, wherein secretly is contained a threatening against such
as break it.


Theoph. That we may clearly understand the former part, two questions are to
be determined of us. First, whom God comprehe^deth under the name of parents.
Who be comprehended under the name of parents.
And secondly what is to be understood by the name of Honor. Answer therefore
to the first question.


Matthew. Under the name of parents they all be comprehended, who by any means
in respect of their office are bound to do the duty of parents toward us,
namely they that ought to have care for our instruction, health, life,
preservation of our goods, credit and peace. For in these things is contained
the duty of parents toward their children. Therefore under the name of
parents, are to be understood, first:

1 Gardia^s and tutors, that be to us in stead of parents.

2 Magistrates, who also be called fathers of the country.

3 Ministers of the Church, and Schoole-maisters, which be our spiritual
parents.

4 Husbands toward their wives.

5 Masters toward their servants.


Theoph. What is the cause, that God has comprehended all these above
mentioned under the name of parents?


Mat. Because such is the naughtiness and pride of man's nature (for it is puffed
up with the desire of highness and excellency) that it hardly suffers it
self to be subject unto any. For this cause that superiority is spoken of
for an example, that is by nature most amiable and least envied, because it
might more easily softe^ our minds, and bow them to the custom of subjection.


Theoph. What the word Honor signifies.
Let us come to the other question. What contains the honor which we are
commanded to give to our parents?


Matthew. It stands upon three parts, First:

1 Upon outward salvation proceeding from the inward reverence which we ought
to yield unto them; which shall be done, if we acknowledge them to be the
ministers of God for our good.

2 The second is, the obedience that we perform to their commandments, so as
they be not contrary to the will of God: for then by the rule of Peter, Act.
5. 29.
we ought to obey God rather then men.

3 The third is, that when they be poor, we do help them with our goods. It
is in the mean time to be observed, that God does not only prescribe a rule
to inferiors, whereby they may give due honor to their superiors, but does
also teach superiors their duty which they ought to do to their inferiors.


Theop. What if the superiors fail in their duty, are not the inferiors
discharged from the honor due to them?


Matthew. No not so: for our sins are not excused by the sins of others.
Moreover the obedience we give them is directly referred unto God, of whom it
is commanded, and not properly to them selves.


Theoph. We have stayed long enough upon the former part of this commandment,
let us therefore come to the other: It is the promise, the words whereof be
these; That thou may live long in the land which the Lord thy God gives
thee. To the exposition whereof there be five things, whereof I will ask thee.

1 First, why the Lord joined a promise to this commandment, rather then to
the rest of the commandments of this later table?

2 Why he promises long life, rather then any thing else?

3 What good we have by long life, that is subject to so many troubles?

4 What that land is, whereof mention is made in this place?

5 How this promise is fulfilled, forasmuch as it is certain, that sometimes
obedient children be taken away by untimely death, and the stubburne and
disobedient live long? Now therefore answer to the first. What is the cause
that the Lord joined a promise to this commandment?


Matt. He teaches superiors by his own example, how they ought to behave them
selves toward their inferiors, namely to allure them to obedience rather by
gentleness and promises, the^ by severity and punishments.


Theoph. Go forward, and in like sort answer to the second. Why is long life
promised by God, rather then any thing else?


Matthew. The promise is very fitly applied to the commandment it self: for, it
teaches modest and obedient children, while they honor the instruments of this
life granted to them, namely their parents, that they shall long enjoy it. But
on the contrary side, it threatens death to the disobedient, because they be
altogether unworthy to have the use of that benefit, the instruments whereof
they honor not.


Theoph. The third point follows. What profit have we by a long life, seeing
it is subject to so many afflictions?


Math. I grant indeed that this corporal life, if it be separated from the
favor of God, is most miserable and unhappy: but it is a blessing to the
faithful. For, continuing in it, we serve to his glory, and sometimes he
grants us this, that with great peace and quietness, we enjoy sundry
temporal benefits. Moreover this promise is applied to the common opinion of
men. For they account long life for a great blessing.


Theoph. Let us come to the fourth point. What is that land, whereof the Lord
makes mention in this place?


Matthew. In respect of the Israelites, it is to be understood of the land of
Canaan, which they had received of the Lord to possess it; but in respect of
us, it is extended further. For wheresoever we be in the world, we have right
of dwelling there, from the Lord whose the earth is.


Theoph. The last point is behind. How this promise is fulfilled, seeing it is
certain that in many places obedient and sober children dye being young, and
the disobedient live long?


Matthew. It is taught by the examples of Absalom, Core, Dathan, Abiron, and of
the sons of Helie. Experience also confirms the thing, of stubburne and
disobedient children; for they be for the most part seen, either in prisons or
upon the gallows. Contrariwise the well advised and obedient, for the most
part have long life, with great quietness and peace. But if at any time it
fall out to be otherwise, we must remember that all the promises of God
concerning earthly things be with condition, namely, so far forth as he shall
know them to be expedient, both for his own glory, and for our salvation.
When therefore God does betimes call his out of this life unto himself, he
provides far better for them, then if he gave them long life. For he takes
them from the miseries of this world, and puts them into the possession of
eternal life. On the other side, sometimes he gives the wicked long life, but
so weak and full of misery, that it is more grievous then death it self. For
this cause Moses repeating the law of God, Deuteronomy. 6. 2.
declares that promise in these words: That it may be well with thee upon the
land which, etc. But, if it fall out otherwise, it was for the cause which was
at large set forth by us, when we entreated of afflictions For, in that place
we taught wherefore the Lord will have the wicked sometimes to live long and
happily in this world, and the godly to suffer all kind of afflictions. Yet
notwithstanding, that saying of Solomon abides true: Although Eccles. 8. 12
the sinner commit evil an hundred times, and God prolongeth his days, yet I
know that it shall be well with them that fear the Lord.


The sixth Commandment.
Thou shall not kill. Theoph. Having finished the treatise of the fifth
commandment, we are now to come to the sixth. How many parts be there of it?


Mat. Two.

1 First, the forbidding of murder.

2 The commanding of keeping peace and friendship with our neighbors.


Theoph. How large is the word, killing?


Mat. The exposition of the first part.
It contains all the degrees and steps by the which we come to it: yea indeed
all those things, by the which we are procured and stirred to commit murder,
according to the third rule.


Theoph. Rehearse those steps or degrees.


Mat. They be three. The first whereof is hatred conceived in the heart,
forasmuch as it is in plain words forbidden in Moses; Thou shall not hate thy
brother in Leu. 19. 17.
thy heart.


Theoph. What if our enemy be a wicked man, is it not lawful to hate him?


Matthew. We may indeed hate his sins, but not his person. But we must
diligently beware of two extremities wherein we do sin on either side.

The first is, that we hate not the person of the sinner.

The other, that we love not the sin for the persons sake.


Theoph. Let us come to the second degree, by the which we come to murder.


Matthew. It is anger: for it is a declaration of the hatred lying hid in the
heart.


Theoph. Think thou it to be altogether unlawful to be angry with any?


Mat. I do not think so: for, anger is a natural affection, wherein if
moderation be kept, it deserves as much praise, as the two extremities deserve
disprayse.


Theoph. What is that moderation?


Matthew. When, with zeal for the glory of God, or with just sorrow we be angry,
because injury is done unto us without our desert, and that keeping a mean,
and with this caution, that we neither speak nor do any thing, that is against
the honor of God, Christian modesty, and the love of our neighbor. In which
sense Paul commands; Ephesians. 4. 26.
Be angry, and sin not.


Theoph. Let us consider of the two extremities of anger: and first let us
speak of that, which sins in exceeding.


Mat. We do then fall into it, when we be angry rashly, that is, without a
lawful cause: or else when being moved for a just cause, we do pass the
bounds of moderation, speaking or doing the things that be against the honor
of God, neighbourly charity, and Christian modesty. But that falls out,
when we be so taken up with that affection, that the judgment is troubled, and
reason it self is darkened, for then for a time, we are like unto mad me^,
that know not what they do. For this cause James says; Iam. 1. 20.
The wrath of man performs not the righteousness of God.


Theoph. Let us come to the other extremity. How do we sin in the defect or
want of anger?


Matthew. When, perceiving that God is offended, or our credit hurt without
cause, we are notwithstanding not moved, as our duty requires: which would
have us not to suffer evils, but that according to our callings we should set
our selves against them. Hence it was, that Moses was so angry in the
wilderness with the Israelites, whom he saw worshipping the golden Calfe with
the Idolatrous worships, John Baptist with the Scribes and Pharisees and Jacob
with his father in law Laban. Moses indeed being moved with most just anger,
drew out the sword, because he was a Magistrate. John used most sharp and
vehement reprehensions, because he was a minister of Gods word, and had to do
with hypocrites, and men hardened in their sins. Jacob deals with moderate
and gentle admonitions, because he was a private person, and his own matter
was in question.


Theoph. The third step by the which men come to murder is behind.


Matthew. It is, every hurt offered to the person of our neighbor, whereupon
also, sometimes ensues murder it self, which fault is indeed most grievous
in the sight of God, as appears by that which the Lord says, that he
abhors the manslayer, and by the penalty appointed by himself unto
men-killers. For, he ordained, that not only men, but also the very brute
beasts that had slain man, should be put to death. For which cause he forbad
his people the eating of blood: Leuit. 7. 26.
for, by that ceremony he would show how much he abhorred the shedding of
blood, and therefore murder.


Theoph. Is there any special cause, which makes murder to be esteemed so
heinous a sin before God?


Matthew. There is: and he does declare it himself in the ninth Chapter of
Genesis. For, after these words; Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man's his blood
shall be shed: presently he adds, because in the image of God made he man. By
which words he teaches, that his own image which he has engraven in man, is
wronged and misused by manslaughter.


Theoph. But whether was that image or likeness of God blotted out in man by
original sin, as it has been said by thee in the second Chapter of the
former book?


Mat. It was indeed, but not so far, that there be no steps of it at all
remaining: for, the spiritual gifts (as one of the ancients says) given of
God to men for their salvation, were by original sin taken away, such as be
the true knowledge of his Majesty, and of the worship due unto him: But the
natural gifts, that is, such as concern this life, were only corrupted, as
understanding and reason, so far forth as they respect humane things, but
they were not altogether taken away, as experience it self does sufficiently
witness.


Theoph. Let us come to the other part of this commandment, and together let
us consider of the virtues, which are commanded in it.


Mat. The meaning thereof is this, that we be meek, loving peace and concord,
gentle, peacemakers, and desirous of reconciliation. Briefly, in this
commandment, God requires four things of us, the first two whereof do show
what is to be avoided, and the later two, what is to be done of us, to the
fulfilling of it.


Theoph. Rehearse the first two.


Matthew. That we hate no man, much more that we hurt not either by words, or
deed. Secondly, that if we be offended, we follow the counsel of Paul, Romans
12. 19
that we avenge not our selves, but suffer the injury patiently, leaving
vengeance unto God, that claims it to himself. Vengeance is mine, I will
repay it. For this Psalm. 94. 1.
cause also in another place he is called the God of vengeance, or God the
auenger.


Theoph. But while we bear injuries patiently, do we not give our enemies
occasion to be more cruel and fierce upon us, according to our manner of
speech: that wolves be more fierce upon such as follow sheep?


Mat. It is indeed certain, that our enemies sometimes wax the prouder, and
more insolent, because of our meekness: but this is nothing to the matter.
For we ought to be ready rather to bear diverse injuries, then to revenge that
which we have received, and that by the commandment of Christ; Mat. 5. 39.
Resist not evil: but who so shall strike thee on thy right cheek, turn to
him the other also. And this is the true sense of that place. For the Lord
would not have us, when we have received one injury, to pull another upon our
selves, as the words at the first sight seem to require. For it were a sin,
not to take heed of an injury foreseen, especially, when opportunity is
offered us. For, Christ himself, and after him Paul, when they were stricken
upon the one cheek, did not turn the other: but did greatly find fault and
complain of the injury done unto them. But concerning that proverb, that the
wolves be fierce upon such as follow sheep, it is a very devise of the
devil, and therefore most false: For, whosoever in that behalf does imitate
sheep, is safe from the assaults of all wolves, being protected by the crook
or staff of that chief shepherd of our souls. But on the contrary side,
whosoever reue^ging his injuries, follows wolves, he goes out of the fold of
Christ (in which they at the last be admitted, that be indeed sheep) and
offers himself as a pray unto Satan, of whom Peter says, 1. Pet. 5. 8. Why
God claims vengeance to himself.
He goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom to devour.


Theoph. Why does the Lord challenge to himself the office of revenging, and
so earnestly forbids us, that we revenge not?


Matthew. It seems to be for three causes; the first, because he himself is
specially offended with the injury done unto us.


Theoph. Why so?


Mat. Because, being our chief Lord, he ought much more to be reverenced of
us, then man which is his creature. As often therefore as we despise and break
his commandments, doing injury unto any, is not the offense especially done
against God?


Theoph. Declare another cause.


Matthew. Because he does a great deal better know the greatness of the
injury, then does he that is injured: for he pierces into the hidden and most
secret thoughts of men.


Theoph. Declare the last cause.


Matthew. Because he has the chief power to revenge injuries, as he shall know
to be right and expepedient, which we cannot do. For he sometimes, increases
the injury, which thought to have revenged it. But although we had that power
in our selves, the affections that rule us, would carry us beyond the bounds
of moderation. For these causes has the Lord challenged vengeance to himself,
and promised that he will indeed repay it, and so he has freed us from that
labor, and those discommodities, which might hurt us in revenging. But that he
might take from us all excuse, he has appointed the Magistrate, which in his
name should execute vengeance, and has for this purpose armed him with
strength and authority, that with a stayed mind he should consider the
greatness of the offense, to punish it without any troublous passion, and
repress the boldness of those which have hurt us.


Theo. It is therefore lawful to fly to the Magistrate, and to pursue the
punishment of them that have hurt us?


Mat. It is lawful, for we seem after a sort to fly to God himself, when we
crave the help of his ministers, so as it be done without any affection of
revenge, having this only in our minds, to help forward common peace, while
we call those to punishment, of whom it was disturbed and broken.


Theophilus. What if the Magistrate refuse to help, or if we cannot go to him,
what think thou then to be done?


Matthew. The whole matter must be committed to God, which one day will take
vengeance, both upon him that has done us the wrong, and also upon the
Magistrate, which in this behalf has failed in his duty. And indeed this is
the best way: for, if we our selves will revenge when we be able, we shall do
far more hurt to our selves, then to our adversary. For, we shall hurt but
the goods or the body of our enemies: but we so hurt our conscience, that we
bring our own soul into extreme hazard of utter perishing. I omit the
discommodities that are wont to arise of it, while the Magistrate demands an
account of the fact. Therefore the best is to bear injuries pariently, for by
that means we do not only turn away from our selves many inconveniences,
and innumerable troubles and dangers, but also the Lord, to whom our moderation
and obedience is seen, gives us his favor and all kind of blessings. And yet
the revenge that is deferred, is not taken away: for the Lord will repay it
far more grievously, then if we our selves had assayed to do it.


Theoph. It is therefore monster-like, that we be so desirous of revenge, and
that there be so few, which in this behalf suffer themselves to obey God.


Matthew. It is indeed: and thereby it appears, that we be the children of
Adam, and heirs of sin, while we doubt not to make our selves equal with
God.


Theoph. Wherefore?


Matthew. Because the Lord challenges revenge to himself alone. But there is
nothing that man desires so fervently, forasmuch as many times he offers his
own life unto all dangers, that in this point he may have his desire.
Therefore, they only that have put off the old Adam, and put on the new, be
able to overcome these evil affections, and to leave vengeance unto God.


Theoph. Let us come to those two last things, which the Lord requires of us,
to the fulfilling of this commandment. Declare the first.


Mat. That we should go to him, with whom we be at variance, to be reconciled
according to the commandment of Christ; If thou bring thy gift unto the altar,
Mat. 5. 23.
and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave thy gift
there before the altar, and go thy ways, first be reconciled to thy brother,
and then come and offer thy gift. Now he teaches by that ceremony of the Law,
which was then in use, that all the worship which we offer unto God, is
displeasing unto him, so long as we be at vaniance with our neighbors.

Moreover, Paul warns, that this reconciliation is soon to be made, and not
to be put off from day to day, For he says; Ephesians. 4. 26
Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath. Which indeed is the most fit
remendy to break off hatred, and to bridle revenge. For, even as diseases and
sores at the first easy to be cured, by delaie are made incurable, and that
more is, deadly: so hatred will grow past cure, if thou repress it not
speedily. For this cause Paul after these words, let not the Sun go down upon
your wrath, by and by adds, neither give place to the Devil.


Theoph. Wherefore does he add these words?


Math. Because hatred if it be never so little a time hidden in our minds,
makes an entrance for the Devil, who having entered upon our hearts, does so
wholly possess them, that refusing reconciliation, he stirs us up to the
desire of revenge, till at length he have thrown us headlong to destruction.

Seeing therefore he is so hurtful a guest, there is cause that betimes we
shut the doors against him, by unfeigned reconciliation.


Theoph. The other point is remaining of the thing which we are bound to do
for the fulfilling of this commandment.


Mat. It is, that after we have diligently done our duty, if our adversary
do obstinately refuse reconciliation, we leave not to love him, to pray unto
God for him, and in all things to pleasure him, according to the commandment
of Christ; Love your enemies, Mat. 5. 44.
bless those that curse you, do good unto them that hate you, and pray for
them that hurt you and persecute you, that you may be the children of your
father that is in Heaven. Hither also may be referred the exhortation of Paul;
Romans 12. 20 21.
If thine enemy hunger, give him meat if he thirst, give him drink: For, if
thou do this, thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head. Finally, that
also is to be marked, that Paul presently adds; Be not overcome of that which
is evil, but overcome evil with goodness.


The seventh commandment.
Thou shall not commit adultery. Theoph. Let us come to the seventh
commandment of the Law. How many parts be there of it?


Mat. Two. In the first he forbids adultery, in the last he commands
chastity.


Theoph. What does the Lord understand by the name of adultery?


Mat. The exposition of the first part.
Not only the company of man with woman out of marriage, but also all kind of
filthiness, by the which man may be defiled. Moreover, all the affections of
concupiscence and finally whatsoever stirs up unto lust, and nourishes it.
Of which sort are:

Unlawful touchings.

Wanton apparelling of the body.

Filthy speech.

Unclean songs.

Filthy reading.

Too familiar company with those, of whom it is very like that they be
tempted with lust.

Wanton looks.

Idleness, that is the mother of all vices, and namely of whooredome.

Dancings, which are most manifest stirrers and prouokers of lust.

Seeing therefore it is certain, according to the saying; Eccle. 3. 27.
He that loves danger shall perish in it, that we are by nature prone unto
lust: except we diligently take heed of all these prouocations, it will
verily come to pass, that at length we shall be driven to the very act it
self: which sin notwithstanding is before God esteemed most heinous,
especially in those, that profess the name of Christ.


Theoph. Why so?


Matthew. Paul gives a reason in these words; 1. Cor. 6. 15.
Do you not know that your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I therefore
take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid.
Know you not that he which is coupled with an harlot, is one body with the
harlot? For he says, they which were two shall be one flesh. But he which is
joined to the Lord, is one Spirit. Fly fornication: every sin that a man
does is without the body: but he that commits fornication, sins against
his own body.

But if the injury be great that is done unto Christ, verily that must not be
thought little that is done to our neighbor. For, there follows upon this,
the stain of honest families. Moreover maidens otherwise to have been well
bestowed, are thus not seldom brought to an heinous offense, to their dishonor
and punishment. But the injury shall be greatest if adultery be committed that
is, if either the man or the woman, or both of them be married. For so the
faith of marriage is shamed, and the band broken: the whole family is
overthrown, and sometimes bastards be suborned for lawful children, unto whom
the inheritance comes. For this cause the Lord ordained in the Law, Leu. 20.
10. Deu. 22. 22.
that the adulterer should die the death.


Theoph. The exposition of the second part.
Let us come to the other part of this commandment. Is there any other thing
to be observed in it, besides the chastity which we ought to keep?


Mat. There is. Namely that God commands marriage to all those, that are not
even inwardly endued with the gift of continency. For as Paul says, 1. Cor. 7.
9.
It is better to marry then to burn.


Theoph. Seeing thou have made mention of marriage, I will have thee show the
causes, why it was ordained.


Math. They be three.

1 First procreation of children.

2 Mutual help one to another.

3 The avoiding of fornication.


Theoph. Which is the chiefest of these causes?


Mat. The first, in respect of God, namely the increase of mankind, but in
respect of us, the last, namely the avoiding of fornication.


Theoph. Why say thou, that this is the chief in respect of us?


Mat. Because it lays upon us a necessity of marying, which the other two do
not. For this cause, Paul says; For the avoiding of fornication, let every
man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband. Howbeit he
speaks to those that have not the gift of continency, whom he expressly
commands in those words to marry. Notwithstanding heed must be taken, that
we defile not so holy an ordinance, by dissolute wantonness. Of the which
thing we be warned by the Apostle, when he says; Marriage is honorable amongst
all, and the bed undefiled.


Theoph. What notes he in this testimony?


Matthew. We are by it admonished, that although the Lord has ordained marriage
to be a remedy against our infirmity, it may not therefore be abused to
unbridled pleasures, for as much as the chastity of marriage forbids it.
For, if the honesty of marriage do hide the filthiness of incontinency, it
must not therefore be continually a stirring up or provoking of it. Wherefore,
such as be married may not think all things lawful for them according to the
lust of the flesh, but let them carry them selves modestlic one to another in
the fear of the Lord, so dealing that they do not any thing at all
unbeseeming the honesty and temperance of marriage. Wherefore also Paul warns
us saying; Let every of you know, to possess his vessel 1. These. 4. 4
with holiness and honor, not in the lust of concupiscence as the Gentiles
which know not God.


The eight commandment.
Thou shall not steal. Theoph. How many parts be there of this eight
commandment?


Matthew. Two. The first, the forbidding of theft, the other a commandment
contrary to the prohibition, namely that we labor to defend and help
forward the profits and commodities of our neighbor even as our own, and to
help the necessity of others.


Theoph. What does the Lord comprehend under the name of theft?


Math. All evil trades and deceipts, by the which we hunt after other men's
goods, and seek to get them to our selves: which is usually done five ways,
First:

1 By sacrilege, when a man takes to himself the goods dedicated to God.

2 Secondly, by robbery, when any gets to himself any thing of another man's
by open or secret force.

3 Thirdly, by fraud or legerdemaine, when any sells counterfaite wares for
good: or by prattling exacteth a greater prise, or else deceives by a false
measure or weight.

4 Fourthly, by usury, when any for lending money requires gains more then
the Laws allow, which indeed hurts both lender and borrower, the former in
his goods, the other in his soul.


Theoph. Thou do not therefore condemn that gain, which is taken according
to order of Law.


Matt. I condemn it not.


Theoph. Luke 6. 35.
But how agrees it with the saying of Christ, lend looking for nothing again.


Mat. It is to be understood of the poor, to whom if we be commanded to give,
much more to lend looking for nothing. But, when we lend to the rich, which be
able to restore and that with increase, who also for the most part are wont to
borrow to make gain by it, I see not what lets but that we may follow the
law of the Magistrate, so as it be not against the rule of charity. For, he
that borrows makes more gain of it if he be thriftie, then does he that
lends it.


Theoph. There must therefore respect be had of him that borrows; it must
also be enquired, why he does it, and whether he be thriftie, or a riotous
spender.


Mat. I think so: For if it be like that he will wastfully spend that he
borrows, it ought not to be lent.


Theoph. Let us come to the fifth mean, by the which a man may unjustly convey
to him self another man's goods.


Mat. It consists in a more hidden kind of deceiving, namely, when any
under color of law steals other men's goods: which they do that pervert the
law. But under these kinds be comprehended, the favorers of theft, the
receivers, and all they which by any means give their consent unto theft.


Theoph. Is nothing else contained under this prohibition?


Mat. Yes verily, namely whatsoever may be a provocation to theft.


Theoph. Rehearse them all.


Mat. First of all, covetousness, that is, desire of riches, which the Apostle
affirms to be the root of all 1. Tim. 6.
evils, because there is no wickedness, be it never so heinous, whereunto men
are not driven and brought by that wicked desire.

Secondly prodigality, because when a man has wastfully spent his own goods,
he is stirred and moved to get the goods of other men by unlawful means.

Last of all, idleness, for by it men be brought to poverty by means whereof
they fall to theft. For this cause Paul warns, Let him that stole, steal no
more: but let him rather labor with his hands the thing that Ephesians. 4. 28.
is good, that he may give to him that needs.


Theoph. Now we are to come to the other part of this commandment: What is
contained in it?


Mat. First, that to our power we preserve the goods of our neighbor, which in
the Scripture is called judgment, where in many places it admonishes us to do
justice and judgment. For by the name of justice he understands this, that
we give unto every one his right: and by judgment, that we give no consent
to any injury done to our neighbor, but that we put it away so far forth
as in us lies.

Secondly, we be commanded to deal with our neighbors according to charity,
seeing God has given us goods, to be stewards of them, to use them ourselves,
so far forth as necessity requires, and to help the poor and needy. But
whosoever keeps not this rule, he conueigheth to himself other men's goods.


Theoph. Do thou think therefore, that they which help not the poor and
needy, be before God accounted guilty of the sin of theft?


Matthew. Yea verily. And indeeed of a far greater theft, then if a Bayliffe of
husbandry, should refuse to pay his Lord the fruits of his farm. For,
whatsoever goods we have be the Lords, and he has given them unto us upon this
condition, that we should pay a yearly rent, the gatherers and receivers
whereof he has appointed the poor. Whosoever therefore refuses or draws
back to help the poor, are guilty before God not only of theft, but also of
sacrilege, and therefore be altogether worthy, whom he may deprive of all
good things: seeing they do not according to their duty acknowledge him, from
whom they have the^ all.


Theoph. There is therefore a very great number of robbers of God.


Mat. A very great number indeed. For a man shall find very few, which in
this behalf do their duty. But this arises upon a false opinion, wherewith
rich men deceive them selves: namely, because they imagine that all the goods
they have, whether they came by inheritance, or were otherwise gotten, be so
their own, that they be wholly and altogether left to their own will. And
therefore that they be not bound to help such as need, if they list not.
Moreover, covetousness is joined to this vain imagination, which so shuts
up in them the bowels of mercy, that they become utterly unmerciful. And that
for the most part falls out with them, that are most wealthy. For, even as
covetousness most commonly springs from plenty and abundance, so is it
far more fitly nourished and strengthened by it, then by poverty.


Theoph. There want not some, which think, that these two words, mine and
thine, breed all the stirs, wherewith the world in this part of it is
troubled at this day: and do affirm, that things should be best ordered, if
there were such a community of goods, as they dream was used among the
Christians a little after the death of Christ.


Matthew. Whosoever go about to defend that community, they think them selves
to be wiser then God himself, which is the author of the propriety of goods.
This indeed is true, that the most part of men do abuse it, whereupon do arise
the innumerable confusions, which every man sees in the world. But when we
use it as it is meet and according to the meaning of this commandment, it
brings forth fruits most convenient for the furthering of Christian charity,
and the preservation of humane society.


Theoph. Now describe me those that abuse the propriety of goods against the
meaning of this commandment.


Mat. They be of three kinds. In the first place they are to be put, which say;
Whatsoever is mine, is mine, but whatsoever is thine, is mine. That is, mine
own is not sufficient for me, but I do also gape for thine. And in this number
are they all to be reckned, that by any ill means get the goods of other men
to themselves.

In the second place we will set them that say; That that is mine, is mine, but
that which is thine, is thine. That is, I will not conueigh thy goods to my
self, neither also will I give thee any part of mine. And this kind of men
refrain indeed from taking away, that which is another, but they cannot
abide to pleasure or freely to do good unto any.

In the last rank we will place them, which say; That that is mine is thine,
and that which is thine is mine. That is, I am ready to give thee part of that
I have, but with this condition, that thou also wilt pleasure me with that
which thou have.

The first of all these therefore be further off from charity then the second,
and the second further then the last, who it is manifest come somewhat toward
it.


Theoph. I see not wherein the last do offend.


Mat. In that they give no part of their goods, but to those, of whom they
look to receive the like, and therefore obey not Christ giving them good
counsel; When thou make a dinner or a supper, call not thy Luc. 14. 12.
friends, neither thy brethren, nor thy kinsfolks, nor thy rich neighbors:
lest they also bid thee again, and thou be recompensed. But when thou make a
feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame and the blind: and thou shall be
blessed, because they cannot recompense thee, for thou shall be recompensed at
the resurrection of the just. And yet Christ does not altogether forbid rich
men to feast among them selves, or to pleasure one another, so as they have
regard of the poor as it is meet.


Theoph. How then may those words mine and thine be lawfully used?


Matthew. The contrary altogether must be said unto that, that is said of those
first: namely that which is mine is thine: but that which is thine is thine
own. That is, I am ready to make thee partaker of that I have, although thou
art not able to do the like for me.


Theoph. But if they to whom we communicate our goods, have such wealth that
they be able to restore them unto us, is it not lawful to require them again?


Mat. It is lawful: so as at the first we show that that is our meaning. For
it is unlawful to demand that again which was given. Therefore altogether
with that caution we must require our goods again, which we may keep for the
poor, that by their own labor are not able to help their necessity. For
they that be able by labor to sustain their life, and in the mean time
become poor by idleness and sloth, be altogether unworthy to be relieved.
For the Apostle commands; 2 These. 3. 10.
If any will not work, let him not eat.


Th. But how much are we bound to give to the poor?


Matthew. So much as their necessity requires. For John Baptist goes so far,
that he teaches; He that Luc. 3. 11.
has two coats, let him give to him that has none. In the which sense, that
community of good whereof thou spakest before is to be taken. Namely, that
none Act. 4. 34.
of the faithful thought any thing he had to be his own, but did most
liberally make all things common so far forth as the necessity of the Church
required it. For they sold fields and houses, that they might help the poor.
This is the true meaning of that place, but we must not imagine any confusion
of goods, as if the faithful had lived in common. For although I should not
say, that they could not then do it, the words of Peter to Ananias be against
it; If so be thou had kept it, Act. 5. 4.
did not thy field remain to thy self? and after it was sold, was it not in
thine own power?


Theoph. I confess, that the community of goods is so to be taken. Howbeit
since that time charity has been very cold in the Church: for now there be
none that sell fields or houses to give to the poor.


Mat. Yea rather they be most few, that distribute anything to the poor, of
their yearly rents and superfluities. Howbeit the cause that is wont to stay
us from liberality (namely the fear of poverty, and desire to increase our
wealth) ought especially to kindle us up unto it, if we believed the promises
of God, by the which we are admonished, that they shall never come to poverty,
that have relieved the necessity of the Pro. 19. 17.
poor: but that such as have turned their eyes from them shall be full of
curses. Therefore, he that with his plenty helps the poor, lends money
unto God, who without doubt, will pay it again. Nay rather Christ adds; who
so shall give a cup of cold water to any of Mat. 10. 42
these in the name of a disciple, shall not lose his reward So that of the
things which we possess, nothing may worthily be accounted our own, but that
which we give to the poor: for, all the rest is scarce safe, at leastwise by
death, we shall be taken away from the enjoying of the^. Those that of charity
be bestowed upon the poor, are by their hands sent up into heaven, shall there
be diligently kept of God, and at the last day shall be restored, and that with
increase, for so he has promised.


Theoph. God therefore yields much of his own right, when he promises to
restore us, and that with increase, the things that have bin given unto the
poor, seeing we can give nothing, but of his own.


Mat. Thou iudgest rightly: but this he does to stir us up to the love and
desire of charity, whom he sees to be very slack and cold in it.


Theoph. What lets but that the Lord should give riches unto all, especially
to the faithful, whom he loves and has care of, so as one of us might well
be without the help of another?


Matthew. The Lord will exercise the charity of the rich, and the faith and
patience of the poor. Now by that inequality of goods, he preserves the
society of mankind, which indeed could not stand, if all men were alike in
wealth and honor.


The ninth Commandment.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. Theoph. Let us go
on to the ninth commandment, how many parts be there of it?


Mat. Two, as of the former three, for false witness is forbidden, and true
witness is commanded.


Theoph. What does God understand by the name of false witness?


Matthew. The exposition of the first part.
All the things wherewith we may hurt our neighbor with the tongue. Howbeit,
this kind it set down for an example, according to our 3. rule, because we do
most of all hurt our neighbor by false witness.


Theoph. I would have thee reckon up all the several kinds, that be contained
under this commandment.


Mat. We will therefore divide them into two sorts. The one, of false witness
that is borne in judgment. The other, that is out of judgment, concerning the
things, that we have to do with, in dealing with men. Touching false witness
in judgment, because an oath comes between, and the matter concerns either
the life or goods of our neighbor, that wickedness cannot be committed, but
three abominations come forth at one time together; namely false witness,
perjury, theft, or murder. For this cause God appointed Deuteronomy. 19. 19
the same punishment to the false witness, which he against whom he witnessed
had deserved, if he had been truly accused. Notwithstanding we must know, that
there be two kinds of false testimonies in judgment. The one altogether false,
such as was that wherewith Naboth was accused, that he had blasphemed God and
1. King. 21. 13.
the king. The other false only in part, and it is called a cavil or crafty
accusation, when something is either taken from the truth, or put to it, or
changed, as they did Mat. 26. 61
that testified against Christ, affirming that he said; I ca^ destroy the
temple of God, and build it again in 3. days. When notwithstanding his words
were these; John. 2. 19.
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up again.


Theoph. Of false witness, out of judgment.
Now we are to come to those false testimonies, that are out of the place of
judgment.


Matthew. There be diverse kinds of them, but we will bring them to three. And
they be these;

1 Backbiting or slandering.

2 Flattery.

3 Lying.


Theoph. Backbiting.
Let us therefore in the first place, speak of backbiting; What is backbiting
or slandering?


Matthew. When a man disprayseth, or mocketh his neighbor being absent, and so
empaireth his name and credit. Which is a most grievous offense, for a
slanderer hurts three at once.

1 Himself.

2 The heat: rfor he is guilty of receiving the slander, which God has
expressly forbidden.

3 Him that is mocked or slandered. Howbeit the slander least of all hurts
him, for his name only is hurt; but the conscience of both the former is hurt,
by a sin committed against God and their neighbor.

In this rank are to be placed, whisperers, or secret cary-tales, who indeed
do much aggrauate the sin they have committed in receiving the slander, when
as whispering or muttering it, they give occasion of many cuils, and
especially, if it be amplified and enlarged of them, which most commonly
falls out. For this cause Solomon says; Prou. 6. 16.
Six things the Lord hates, but his soul abhors the seventh, namely him
that sows dissension among brethren. Under this kind be all those things
contained, that minister occasion of evil speech: namely an evil or false
suspicion of our neighbor, without an evident cause given; for it is against
Christian charity, which Paul says is not suspicious. 1. Cor. 13. 5.


Also a rash judging of our neighbor, which is expressly forbidden by Christ.


Theoph. What if he that disprayseth or reports ill of his neighbor, speak
the truth, may that be called backbiting or slandering?


Matthew. It ought: for he sins in a double respect. First his mind is
estranged from the affection of Christian charity, yea rather he is moved to
that wickedness, by a desire of speaking evil; or else, that he may get
himself praise, by the disprayse of another. Which thing indeed appears even
by this, that such backbiters pass over all the virtues of their neighbor,
but their faults they reckon up, and not seldom enlarge them.

Secondly, he obiecteth those things against his neighbor, not with a mind to
amend them, neither does he make report of them unto such to whom it
appertains to admonish them, but he muttereth and whispereth it to him, that
cannot apply any remedy to the fault: yea rather he has an ill opinion of his
neighbor, which does not a little hinder Christian charity.


Theoph. Flattery.
Let us come to flattery, which thou saydest was the second kind of false
witness bearing, that is out of judgment.


Math. This vice is not so heinous as the former, for it is not so far off
from Christian charity. Moreover the flatterer hurts only two, namely
himself, and him whom he flattereth. But the backbiter as was said, hurts
three at once. Howbeit, this sin is condemned of the Lord: for the flatterer
fostereth the sins of him whom he flattereth so smoothly, and doubts not to
color or paint them over with the name of virtue. For this cause the Prophet
says; Isay. 5. 20.
Woe unto them, that call evil good, and good evil.


Theoph. There is behind, the third kind of false witness out of judgment,
namely lying.


Matthew. Lying, three kinds of it.
There be diverse kinds of this sin: for some lies proceed from
covetousness, and they be the most heinous, because they most hurt our
neighbor. Others be of infirmity and fear, such as was the lie of Abraham,
saying that Sarah was his sister. Genesis 12. 13 and 20. 2.
Others be of lightness for pleasures sake, which notwithstanding be sins,
for Christ says; that whatsoever idle word men shall speak, they shall give
accounts of it in Mat. 12. 36
the day of judgment.

There be some other lies under a color of love, and are called officious
lies, when a man by them thinks to do his neighbor good. Because he so
delivers him either from imminent danger, or from loss, or reproach; or else
when any lies for his own profit, that he may turn such disco^modities from
himself. These be the chief kind of lies, under the which also counterfeiting
and dissimulation is comprehended, when a man faineth that, that is not, as
also cloaking and disguising, when a man hides that that is indeed, to the
end the conttary may appear or seem to be.


Theoph. Whether think thou all those kinds of lies to be sinful and evil?


Mat. I think they be. For the Scripture condemns all lying, and warns us
to be true in all things.


Theoph. Is it not therefore lawful sometimes to hide the truth?


Matthew. Is is not only lawful, but also many times expedient, in respect both
of the common and private profit of our neighbors. Yet with this condition,
that we be not bound by oath before the Magistrate to declare it. For
otherwise, it should not be lawful for us to conceal the truth: except the
question were of the peace of the Church, or the safety of our brethren. For
Christian charity requires, that we should suffer any thing, rather then
bring danger to any brother, much more to the whole Church.

As for example, if a man were held prisoner of enemies, he ought rather to
suffer all kinds of torments, then to declare any thing, that might be to the
hurt of his country, or of his neighbor.


Theoph. The conclusion is, that thou think it lawful, yea sometime
expedient, to conceal the truth, but that it is not lawful to lie upon any
occasion, no not for our own safety, or the safety of our neighbor.


Mat. I think so. For, the glory of God, that abhors lies, ought to be
preferred before our own life, and the love of our neighbor. Moreover, the
rule of charity requires it not, that we should by a lie, hide the sin of
our neighbor, which by the commandment of God is to be punished.


Theoph. Now I see that there is no lie, that is not evil. But think thou
not, that it is to be accounted amongst the least sins?


Matthew. The often use of it, causes that we think it light, but the Scripture
judges far otherwise; for it says: Psalm. 5. 6.
O Lord, thou shall destroy them that speak lies. In another place also,
reckening up the sins that hinder the salvation of men, it does by name make
mention of this, and numbreth it with murders, whoredoms, and other heinous
offenses: for John says; Apoc. 21. 8.
The fearful, and unbelieving, and murderers, and whoremongers and
sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake,
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Neither does
it that without cause, for it directly fights with the nature of God, which
is the truth; contrariwise it agrees with the devil that is the father of
lying. But there is no sin whereunto we do more incline, even from our birth.
Which indeed does sufficiently show, that by original sin we have put off
the image of God, and have put on the image of the devil, as it has bin
declared before, namely in the Chapter of man.


Theoph. Enough has been spoken concerning the former part of this
commandment, that is of the prohibition; it follows therefore, that we come
to the other, that is to that that is commanded.


Mat. In it is commanded, that we help our neighbors with our testimony, if
at any time need shall so require, both publicly in the place of judgment,
and privately without that place. Moreover, that to our power we defend the good
name of our neighbor, that we put far away the slander raised up against him,
at least witness by our sower countenance, that we be not pleased with such
speeches. For Solomon faith; As the Northwind drives away the rain, so does
an angry Pro. 25. 23.
countenance the slandring tongue.

Last of all, that in all things we pleasure our neighbor, if he shall stand
in need of our counsel. To comfort him in his troubles. If at any time he go
astray, patiently, and by the rule of love to admonish him, that he may be
brought again into the right way. These be the chief points, wherein our
neighbor may be helped of us by our speech, according to the meaning of this
commandment.


Theoph. I have nothing further to ask concerning the exposition of it.
Notwithstanding before we come to the tenth commandment, wherein the inward
lust or concupiscence of the mind is forbidden, I would understand of thee, to
what commandment the forbidding of drunkenness and envy is to be referred:
which are two most common sins.


Matthew. There be some sins which for the diverse respect of the effects, may
be referred to the forbidding of diverse commandments. Of which sort it is
certain they be, which thou have even now mentioned. For, we may refer
drunkenness to the prohibition Against dru^kennesse.
contained in the second, third, and fourth commandments of this later Table.
For it brings forth brawlings, which sometimes murders and slaughters do
follow. Moreover although drunkards abstain from the slaughter of others, yet
are they guilty of the murder they commit against themselves, according to
our proverb; Gluttony slays more then the sword. Furthermore, it stirs
up men to lust. It also brings them to poverty, which theft follows. Add
hereunto, that whosoever wastes the gifts of God so intemperately, with the
want whereof many be oppressed, are in that respect holden guilty of theft.

Last of all, when they are heat with wine, the tongue by and by is set at
liberty, and vnbrideledly, by slandering and backbiting shamefully defameth
the good name of our neighbor.


Theo. Thou have indeed reckened up many sins, that spring from the abuse of a
most excellent creature of God.


Matthew. But by that it appears, how great the corruption of man is. For he is
not only an enemy unto God, but also to himself, for as much as he abuses to
his own destruction, the gifts that God has given him to his profit and
delight. As for example: God has given us wine to be nourishment, but man
turns it unto poison: God has given it to rejoice our heart, but man
changes it unto heaviness: God has given it to preserve the health of the
body, but man alters it to the sickness of body and soul. To conclude,
that which is the greatest thing of all, by it man wittingly and willingly
transformeth himself into a brute beast, when as he spoileth himself of
reason, by the which he differs from them.


Theoph. Thou say true, but I see not what it is, by the which men be allured
to that sin. For neither glory, nor profit, nor pleasure can be sought by it.
For, what pleasure is it if a man drink, not being a thirst?


Matthew. No greater then it should be, if a man after dainty cheer, did
presently eat. But therein the very brute beasts go beyond them in
moderation. For, a man shall not see any of them endure to drink more then is
necessary.


Theoph. Hitherto enough of drunkenness, now let us speak somewhat concerning
envy.


Matthew. Of envy.
It may be referred to two commandments. Namely to the second of this later
Table, and also unto this fifth. For, seeing hatred is the perpetual companion
of it, it compels men very oftentimes to murder, which is sufficiently
proved by the example Genesis 4. 8.
of Cain.


Theoph. Thou iudgest rightly. For, by envy Cain was stirred up to kill his
brother, because his sacrifice was not accepted of God, but Abels. Let us now
see how envy may be referred to this commandent.


Matthew. Because by it we are moved to pour out manifold slanders and
backbitings against our neighbor, no less then by hatred that continually
accompanies it. But this sin is most loathsome unto God, as that which
proceeds of pride, and is contrary to Christian charity, whereof Paul
says; 1. Cor. 13. 4.
charity enuieth not.


The tenth commandment.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing
that is his. Theoph. The tenth commandment is behind, the meaning whereof I
have heard before, we are therefore to come to the exposition of the text it
self. Contains it any other thing, besides the desiring of our neighbors
house and family in it expressed?


Mat. God would rehearse those things, the objects whereof for the most part
are wont to affect and move us, under which he comprehends all of the same
kind: namely all lusts, by the which we are stirred up to the transgressing
of any commandment of the later Table.


Theoph. Is not that lust only forbidden in this commandment, whereunto our
will gives consent?


Matthew. That lust was contained in the former commandments, wherein not only
wicked deeds, but also counsels, and deliberat consent of the will be
forbidden. Therefore in this commandment, the Lord proceeds further, he
requires somewhat more of us, namely that we be not tickled with any kind of
lust, although our will consent not, yea also be against it.


Theoph. But how can thou show that this is the mind of God?


Matthew. Most easily: for the Apostle says; I had not known lust, if the Law
had not said, thou shall Romans 7. 7.
not lust: But it is more clear then the light, that all men without the Law
could have understood, that concupiscence joined with consent was sin, and
therefore it is apparent, that the Apostle meant, that the concupiscence which
the will resists is forbidden by the Law. That may also be gathered by the
sum of the Law, wherein the Lord commands, Mat. 22. 37
that we love him with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our
mind: whereupon it follows, that we cannot be tickled eue^ with the least
concupiscence, but presently there is something in our mind void of the love
of God, and therefore that it is a sin against this Law.


Theoph. So far forth as I see, God in his Law requires of us most exact
perfection.


Matthew. Math. 5. 48
He requires it indeed. For he would have us to be perfect, even as he
himself is perfect. And therefore he has set before us his Law instead of a
glass, and a most perfect pattern of righteousness, that the life of man might
be conformable to the purity of his divine Majesty. In so much as if there
were any that did perfectly keep it, he should in this life perfectly set
forth the image and likeness of God.


The sum of the Law. Mat. 22. 37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind. This is the first and the great commandment. And the
second is like unto this. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. On these
two commandments hangs the whole Law and the Prophets. Theoph. I am
thoroughly satisfied concerning the exposition of the Law. Now I would have the
sum of it, which thou repeatedst even now to be declared by thee, that I may
understand it. And first why he comprehends all the keeping of the first
Table, under the love of himself.


Matthew. This was done that we might understand from what fountain that love
flows, and what effects it works in us.


Theoph. From whence flows it?


Matthew. From the knowledge of him, and the assurance of the love wherewith he
loves us. For it can not be that we should love any, except we know him,
and do certainly know that we are loved again of him.


Theoph. What effect works that love of God in us?


Matthew. Willing obedience. For, we desire to obey him whom we love, and the
more love increases, the more obedience increases. By these things therefore,
it is plain that the observation of the whole first Table, is contained under
the love of God. For, he cannot be loved of us, but we do in like manner

1 Reverence him.

2 Put our whole trust in him.

3 Call upon him when soever any necessity presses us.

4 And give him thanks for his innumerable benefits.

Moreover, if he be loved of us, we will not give the worship due unto him
alone to creatures, or to dumb Idols: but according as he requires, we will
spiritually worship him.

If he be loved of us, it will be our chiefest delight to speak of him, which
shall be done of us with due reverence and religion, diligently taking heed
that we offend not him with a word.

If (I say) he be loved of us, his Sabbath shall be our delight, because we
may, speak with him more commodiouslie, as well by the holy ministry of the
word and reading, by the which he speaks unto us, as by prayers, by the which
we speak unto him. Moreover, those delights will engraue such sweetness in
our minds, that we shall easily despise all sports and other worldly things,
wherein worldly men are wont to spend those days.

Hereuppon it is plain, that so many as love God do keep the whole first
Table.


Theoph. But wherefore does the Lord add, that God must be loved of us, with
all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our understanding.


Matthew. To the end we may know, that our mind and soul ought to be filled
with his love, and that therefore it is required, that he might be most
entirely loved of us above all others, above parents, brethren, sisters, wives,
children, friends, goods, yea and our selves also. But if at any time, a man
should be set between two loves, the one whereof is that that is due unto
God, and the other that, that is due unto parents, brethren, sisters, wives,
children, friends, and these two loves cannot stand together, so as while we
apply our selves to the one, we neglect the other, then the Lord is to be
preferred before all the other, and all other things are to be neglected that
we may follow him. For so Christ himself says; He that loves Mat. 10. 37
father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me, and he that loves son
or daughter more the^ me, is not worthy of me. As if he said, whosoever
forsakes not wife and children, and all his goods, rather then denies me* is
not worthy of me. And that more is, in the same sense he says; If any
comes unto me, and hates not his father and mother, and wife, and children,
and brethren, and sisters, and even his own life, he cannot be my Disciple.


Theoph. But unless I be deceived, the love of God does not wholly but in
part, seclude the love of our neighbor.


Mat. It does indeed wholly seclude all false love, but the true love it
establishes: now that is it, which Christ made the sum of the later table in
these words; Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self


Theoph. Declare unto me that true love which is established by the love of
God: then I will dema^d of thee why Christ made it the sum of the later Table.


Mat. Then is our neighbor loved of us, when we love him only in God, and for
Gods cause: For, if he be loved of us, either because he is our kinsman, or
friend, whithout any respect to the love God, that love is not Christian but
natural, and agrees unto brute beasts. For this cause Christ said; If you
love Luke 6. 32.
them that love you, what thank shall you have? for even sinners love those
that love them. Therefore also has he commanded the love of our enemies:
for, therein appears most manifestly that whereof we now speak: That our
neighbor is to be loved for God: for an enemy cannot be loved for his own
sake, yea rather, he ought to be hated. But when he is considered in God, then
he cease to be an enemy, and is made a neighbor. Even as therefore all
floods do come out of the sea, and do fall again into the sea: so our love
toward our neighbor, ought to begin in God, and to end in God, otherwise it is
vicious and evil.


Theoph. Wherefore saidest thou, that this true love of our neighbor, which
thou have even now expounded, is stablished by the love of God?


Mat. Because it is one love, but the difference stands in the objects: for
when God saw, that himself because he is invisible, should hardly be loved
of us, that do so much cleave to the love of things that be seen; he has
set our neighbor before us as a visible object, in whom he engraued his own
image, that we should worship him with some part of that love toward our
neighbor, that is wholly due unto himself; and bestow upon our neighbor
some of those duties and benefits, which by good right do altogether
appertain to his Majesty. Forasmuch as (according to the saying of David) our
well doing reaches not to him, Psalm. 16. 2.
and indeed he has no need of it. Wherefore as no man can rightly love his
neighbor, but he first loves God, so can no man sincerely love God, but he
does also love his neighbor, whom he has so earnestly commended unto us.
Hence is that saying of John; If any say, I love God, and hareth his brother,
he is a liar. 1. Ioh. 4. 20.
For, he that loves not his brother, who^ he sees, how can he love God whom
he has not seen?


Theoph. Now I understand what the true love of our neighbor is, and how it
springs from the love of God. It is therefore to be seen, why Christ
sets it down for the sum of the later Table.


Matthew. Because as the love of God contains the whole observation of the
first table, as has been said before: so the love of our neighbor, the whole
second Table, so that he be loved of us as our selves. Which Christ did not
omit.


Theoph. Declare these things unto me more at large.


Matthew. If we love our neighbors as our selves, we shall do to him, all that
which we would have him do unto us: and we will not do those things, which we
would not have done to our selves. And therefore we will honor parents and
other superiors: for if we were in their place, we would be honored. We will
do no despite to our neighbor, which we would not suffer to be done to our
selves. We will not by adultery defile the wife, sister, or daughter of our
neighbor, because we would not have so great an injury done to our selves.
We will not steal his goods, yea rather, if the matter so require, we will
relieve his poverty with our plenty: for so would we have it done with our
selves. We will not bear false witness against him, neither backebite him,
neither will we vex or move him, with scorns, flouts, mocks and taunts: for
we would take it grievously, if it were done to our selves. To conclude, we
will covet nothing that is his: forasmuch as if any coueted our goods, we
would condemn him. By which it appears, that the fulfilling of the second
Table is contained under the love of our neighbor, and the breaking of it,
under the hatred of him.


Theoph. But who is our neighbor, of whom there is mention in this place and
otherwise in many places in the Scripture?


Matthew. Under this name be comprehended not only friends, kinsfolks and
alliance by marriage, but also all Who is our neighbor.
others, of whatsoever sex, country, condition, or religion they be; and that
more is, our enemies also, which is plain to gather, by the example alleged
by Christ. Luc. 10. 33


But that lets not a distinction of persons, of whom we ought to help some
before others, according to the band wherewith we be bound to them, and by name
their faith. For Paul says; Gal. 6. 10.
Do good unto all, but especially to the household of faith. In which words he
teaches, that charity or love rightly ordered, begins with the faithful,
and afterward is derived unto others. For, if our love (which we taught before)
ought to be referred unto God, verily the nearer any comes to God, so much
the more high degree of it does he deserve: then, the rest we ought to
reserve to our kindred and allies, as every one shall be joined unto us by
the nearer band.


The other part of this Chapter. For what end good works are to be done, and
what is the use of them.
Theoph. We have made an end of the former part of this chapter, wherein thou
have declared, what works be worthy the name of good works: let us therefore
come to the other part, which we appointed to the discourse of their end and
use.

The faithful cannot be justified by works.
First therefore, I demand, whether the faithful may be justified by good
works, for as much as by regeneration they be made fit to do them?


Matthew. Two things let, that it cannot be so.


Theoph. What are they?


Matthew. Because justification, and therefore salvation goes before good
works. For, the way which the holy Ghost uses to make us able for them, is
this, namely, that by faith it joins us with Christ. Whereof Christ himself
is witness, when he says; As the branch can Ioh. 15. 4.
bear no fruit of it self, that is, except it abide in the vine, even so
you, except you abide in me. I am the vine, you are the branches: he that
abides in me, and he in whom I abide, brings forth much fruit: For,
without me you can do nothing.

Imputation is to have it accounted ours.
Therefore by faith being united or made one with Christ, we are justified and
saved, by the imputation of his most perfect holiness and righteousness, the
effects or fruits whereof, be the good works that we do. Therefore, good works
go not before our justification and salvation, but they follow after, as it
was well said by one of the ancients; But that which follows after, cannot
be the cause of that which goes before. By this argument Paul proves that
we are not justified by Ephesians. 2. 8.
works. For he says; You are saved by grace, through faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast
himself. For, we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which God has ordained that we should walk in them. In which words he
shows, that good works cannot be said to be the cause of our salvation,
because they be done by God himself in us through Christ, after that we be
saved by faith in him.


Theoph. Let us come to the other thing, which thou saidest did let, that we
are not justified nor saved by our good works.


Mat. It is more plain then the former, namely, because to the end a man may
be justified by works, it is necessarily required, that he have fulfilled the
whole Law, and that he be not found so much as sprinkled or wet with any eue^
the very least spot of sin before God. For, even as one little drop of ink,
staineth a whole goblet of clear water: so only one sin is sufficient to
overthrow all righteousness of works. For this cause James says; Whosoever
keeps the whole Law, and offends Iam. 2. 20.
in one point, is guilty of all. But it is certain, that the faith full in
this life, cannot at any time come to the highest degree of that perfection, no
not to the middle of it. Therefore the defect or want of righteousness, does by
many degrees exceed all the ableness unto it, which any may attain unto, by
the direction of the holy Ghost. Therefore by works they ought to look for the
curse only which the Scripture pronou^ceth, against those that have not
perfectly fulfilled the law.


Theoph. Whether the faithful can keep the law.
How know thou, that the faithful after regeneration cannot fulfill the law?


Matthew. Paul does most plainly witness it, in his own person, speaking of
the condition of a man regenerated, in these words; We know that the law is
spiritual* Romans 7. 14. 18.
but I am carnal, sold under sin: for to will is present with me, but I find
no means to persorme that which is good. For this cause David says; Psalm.
143. 2
Enter not into judgment with thy servant: for no man living shall be
justified in thy sight.


Theoph. But Luke speaking of Zachary and Elizabeth, says; They were both
just in the sight of God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of
the Lord without reproof.


Mat. Gene. 6. 9.
The same thing is also said of Noah by Moses; Noah was a just and an upright
man in his time. Howbeit, the Scripture says not, that they were without
sin: but that they diligently applied themselves unto righteousness, and
labored to walk in the commandments of the Lord. In which sense the
faithful in many places are called just or righteous, as well to note that
zeal by the which they seek to come to the perfection of righteousness, as
also that we may understand, that their obedience notwithstanding it be
imperfect, is as acceptable to God through Christ, as if it were perfect.


Theoph. But how know thou, that this is the meaning of the Scripture, and
that they, who it says were just, were not without sin, seeing the words do
sound so much?


Matthew. It is not hard to gather it, out of the things which presently after be
observed of the Scripture it self: namely, that Zachary believed not the
words of the Angel, and that Noah was drunken. Moreover, these things be
plainly expressed in it: If we say, 1. Ioh. 1. 10.
that we have not sinned, we make God a liar, and his word is not in us. And
indeed, if we do but a little more attentively consider of it, what is he that
in this life can ever,

Love God with all his heart?

Put his whole trust in him alone?

Perfectly rule his own affections?

So keep his tongue under, that it send out no idle words, whereof at the
last day, Christ says: Mat. 12.
an account must be given?

So keep his eyes in order, that they lust not, and his mind that it think no
vain thing?

If at any time he serve God, to do it with that affection, namely so perfect,
pure, and whole, as it is required of him?

Finally, which lets not many occasions of doing well, or of doing something
better then he does it, to escape him?

1. Ioh. 3. 20.
If our own heart condemn us in these, and in many other the greatest things;
God (says John) is greater the^ our heart, that is, knows innumerable
sins, which we our selves know not. Of this is that saying of David; Who
understands his faults? cleanse me from Psalm. 19. 13
secret faults.


Theoph. I have in thy speech observed four kinds of sins, whereof men are
guilty before God.

The committing of evil.

The leaving the good undone.

Hidden sins.

The imperfection of the good deeds, which in small number are done of us.

Which things, if they have place in the faithful, I do indeed confess, that
they be far off from being justified by their works.


Mat. There is no doubt, but they be in the very best, which also the Scripture
confirms, when it says; Job. 11. 16.
Man drinks in iniquity as water: as if it said, that iniquity was as
familiar and common a thing with him, as to drink. Isay. 64. 6. Psalm. 62. 9.
We be all of us as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy
cloutes The children of men are vanity, the chief men are lies, to lay them
upon a balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity,


Theoph. Do these things agree to the faithful, as well as to the unfaithful.


Mat. Yea verily: for they of whom these things were written, were faithful
and believers; nevertheless, they did reckon themselves also in that number:
as Esaias by name, for he says; We all are as unclean things: and again; all
our righteousnesses as filthy cloutes. But if our justice and righteousness be
such, how I pray thee must it be thought of our unrighteousness and sins?


Theoph. What difference concerning good works, is between the faithful and
the unfaithful.
Seeing the matter is so, it seems altogether to follow, that there is very
little difference concerning good works, between the believers, and the
unbelievers.


Mat. It follows not for sin only dwells in the faithful, but it
reigns not: Howbeit, in the unfaithful and unbelievers, it both dwells and
reigns. Therefore every believer may use that saying of Paul; I do not the
good that I would. The unbelievers Romans 7. 19.
clean contrariwise; We do not so much evil as we would: Which howsoever
they speak not, they have it in their mind. As it is to be seen in dru^kards,
thieves, fornicators, ambitious and covetous persons, whose lust ca^ never be
satisfied. Moreover, the wicked wax every day worse and worse: contrariwise,
the faithful make proceedings in goodness, by the which (notwithstanding they
be but small) it is apparent that sin is overcome of them.


Theoph. But how comes it to pass, that a believer being regenerated and
lightened with the holy Ghost, cannot perfectly obey God?


Matthew. Because our regeneration is only begun in us, but in this life is
never perfected. For by that means the Lord will keep us in humility, as
also together with it give place to his own infinite mercy. Therefore, so
long as we live here, as well our faith, as our repentance, be very far off
from perfection. For there is still behind in us, some part of our corruption,
which the Scripture calls flesh, and the old man, it resists or stands
against the part that is regenerate, which is called the spirit, and the new
man. And all these things Paul notably comprehends in these words; The flesh
lusts against the spirit, and the spirit Gal. 5. 17.
against the flesh: and these be contrary the one to the other, so as you do
not the things that you would.


Theoph. The battle of the flesh and spirit.
Wherein stands this striving of the flesh and the spirit?


Mat. 1 The flesh is puffed up with ignorance and love of the world: but the
spirit is endued with the knowledge, love, and fear of God.

2 The flesh strives to follow it own pleasures and wicked affections for it
is given unto all sins but the spirit gives it self to this one thing, that
it may obey God, and set forth his glory.

3 The flesh is full of distruct and impatience: but the spirit humbles it
self under the mighty hand of God, rests in his mercy, and fashioneth it
self unto his will.

Finally, the flesh holds us in these earthly things: but the spirit lifts
us up into heaven.

Moreover, this contrariety breeds in us a continual warfare: for the flesh
always stirs us up, and sets upon us, with so many entisements and
crafts, that except we take diligent heed, we be easily deceived and overcome
of it. For this cause Christ warns us, that we should watch; Watch and pray,
least ye enter into Mat. 26. 41
tentation (that is, least you be overcome of tentation) the spirit indeed is
ready, but the flesh is weak.


Theoph. Does the spirit at length go always away with the victory?


Mat. It does indeed, but not without great labor: for the flesh many ways
wounds us: for it causes us many times to fall into most heinous sins.
Moreover, although we do often overcome, it cease not to renew the battle.
For the devil the enemy of our salvation, joins himself unto it, who uses
that domestical or household enemy, that he may the more easily enter into out
hearts, and at length overcome us. For this cause Paul most fervently desired
to be delivered from it: for he says; Romans 7. 24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? He
calls it death, because he thought that continual battle more grievous then
death it self.


Theoph. Now I will return to the order of our discourse; For I see, that the
faithful cannot fulfill the law of God. And this also I grant, that the
faithful cannot be altogether justified by their works; but may not this be
done in part, so as Christ supply that which wants?


Matthew. I am. 2. 10.
This indeed cannot be, for James says; Whosoever keeps the whole law, and
yet fails in one point, is guilty of all. Therefore Paul entreating of the
way whereby we attain justification and salvation, excludes works, not in
part, but wholly. As for example, In the Epistle to the Romans, after long
disputation of this matter, at length he adds; We conclude therefore, Romans 3.
28.
that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the law: and in the
Chapter following; To him that Romans 4. 4.
works, the wages is not counted by favor, but by debt: but to him that
works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness. The same also he writes in another place; Ephesians.
2. 8.
You are saved by grace, through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God, not of works, lest any should boast himself. In which words he
does sufficiently Why we be justified before God, no otherwise then by faith.
declare, that good works be of no account before God, to justify and save us:
but that all is to be ascribed to the only mercy and grace of God by faith in
Christ. Moreover, grace should not be truly grace in respect of God, if it be
not wholly and altogether free, for works and it cannot stand together in the
matter of salvation.


Theoph. Why so?


Matthew. Because the one destroys the other, as the Apostle testifies to the
Romans in these words; If we Romans 11. 6.
be saved by grace, it is no more of works, or else were work no more work.
Where he shows, that there is no place for the grace of God, until we have
thrown away all trust and confidence in our own works: which thing the same
Apostle testifies, that himself did. For, notwithstanding. concerning the
righteousness which Phil. 3. 6.
is by the law, he were without reproof, he esteemed all his good works as
dung, that he might be found not having his own righteousness, which is of
the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ.

In another place also, he warns us of the same thing; Ye are made void of
Christ, as many of you as Gal. 5. 4.
be justified by the law. and are fallen from grace. Now, he speaks to those
that would join the righteousness of the law, with the righteousness of
faith.


Theoph. But some do object, that the Apostle, when soever he says, we are not
justified by the works of the law, speaks of the ceremonial law, that was
then abolished by the coming of Christ, but not of the moral law.


Matthew. That is a vain shift, which also is most easy to confute, by the
order of the Apostles speech: and first of all in the Epistle to the Romans,
before he draws out this conclusion, that is in the third Chapter; By the
works of the law shall no flesh be justified in the sight of God.

In the first Chapter indeed he proves that all the Heathen were full of all
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, and other
innumerable sins. But in the second he shows that the Jews notwithstanding
they made a fair show of outward holiness, yet were infected and stained with
the same sins they condemned in others. Whereupon it is plain that in that
place, there is only mention of moral works and not of the ceremonial. Likewise
also in the Epistle to the Galathians, where he does especially entreat of the
ceremonies, he alleges both the sentences of Moses, namely the curse to
those that fulfill not the whole law, and life to those that keep it. And in the
former indeed he teaches, that so many as trust to the works of the Law to
be justified by them, be under the curse, because they cannot wholly and fully
keep it. But in the other, he declares that there is so much difference
between the law and faith, that if any man be justified by faith, he cannot
in any sort obtain it by the Law. But it is certain, that as well the curse
threatened to the transgressors of the Law, as the promise to eternal life made
to such as fulfill it, are not to be restrained to the ceremonies alone, but
also are to be referred to the moral Law, and that too by more right: for as
much as God (as Hosea says) prefers mercy before sacrifice. Hos. 5. 7.
Moreover, after the Apostle in the second chapter of the Epistle to the
Ephesians, has affirmed, that we are saved by grace through faith, and that
not of our selves: he adds, but of the gift of God, not of works, least any
man should boast himself. Which worcester is do most evidently show, that the
Apostle speaks not of the ceremonial works, but of moral, which give men
far more large matter of boasting then the ceremonial do. Finally, when he
writes to Titus, Tit. 3. ^.
that we are saved not by the works of righteousness which we have done, but
by the mercy of God, who sees not that the Apostle does especially entreat of
moral works, to whom the title of righteousness agrees far better, then to
the ceremonial? Which things being so, there is no doubt but that the Apostle
whenever he speaks of the works of the Law, to prove that we are neither
saved nor justified by them, does no less mean the moral then the
ceremonial, yea rather that he does shut out both from the cause of salvation
and righteousness.


Theoph. But why be they so often called of him the works of the Law?


Matthew. To teach, that if the works commanded of God, and even contained in
his own law, be to no purpose to justify us, that the works commanded and
devised by men are much less able and fit to do it.


Theoph. Why God gave a Law that we cannot keep.
Now do I agree unto thee. For I perceive that we are neither justified nor
saved by works, neither in the whole, nor in part, as has been diligently
proved by thee. And verily (unless I be deceived) there is great injury done
to the glory of God, while me^ go about to darken the force and power of his
grace and mercy, mingling the same with the filthiness of our works. But
seeing the matter is so, why did God give the moral law?


Mat. Of the use of the Law.
The Apostle witnesses, Gal. 3. 21. 12.
that it was not to the end we should be justified or saved by it: For, he
says, If there had been a Law given that could have given life, surely
righteousness should have been by the Law. But the Scripture has concluded
all under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ, should be given
to them that believe. Notwithstanding it is not unprofitable to the faithful,
nay rather they do reap a double commodity by it, wherein be comprehended
the ends for the which God gave it unto us. I said to the The use of the Law,
in respect of the unfaithful.
faithful, because it has this only work toward the unbelievers, that their
condemnation may be the more heavy: for as much as coming to the knowledge of
Gods will by it, they do willingly run into the contrary.


Theoph. Let us consider of that double commodity which thou saydest the
believers reap by it: and declare the first.


Mat. It is noted by the Apostle in the Epistle to the Galathians. For after
that he has showed that we can Gal. 3. 19.
not attain salvation by the Law, he adds: wherefore then serves the Law? It
was added because of the transgressions, that is, that by the help of it, we
might acknowledge our sins, as the same Apostle in another place expounds
it in these words; By the Law Romans 3. 20.
comes the knowledge of sin. For, if we do examine our works by that
perfection which the Law requires of us, then it shall appear most evidently,
how many ways we be guilty before God, and therefore what fearful
condemnation we have deserved.


Theoph. But what profit have we by that?


Mat. Much. For, as a sick man, except he thoroughly feel his sickness, and
perceive present danger, will not go to the Physician: even so the feeling of
our sins, and the danger of eternal death, which we see hangs over our
heads, drives us to seek for that true Physician of our souls Christ Jesus,
from whom by faith we may receive the remedy offered us in the Gospel,
which otherwise we would have neglected. Therefore Paul says: The Law was our
schoolemaister Gal. 3. 24.
to bring us unto Christ. And in another place: Christ is the end of the Law,
for righteousness unto Romans 10. 4.
every one that believes. And this is the first commodity which we have by
the Law.


Theoph. Show briefly the other.


Math. After that we be regenerated and therefore made fit to do good
works, then the Law teaches us, whatsoever is to be performed of us, that we
may obey God. For, although we can not come to the perfection whereunto it
leads us, yet we must set it before our eyes as a mark whereat we are to
level continually, that daily more and more we may strive to hit it. Hereunto
appertains that exhortation of Christ; Be ye perfect, as your father which
is in heaven is Mat. 5. 48.
perfect. The Law therefore is as it were a glass wherein we may behold the
spots of our soul, and so indeed be compelled by faith to wash them away in
Christ's blood. Moreover, it is a lantern unto our feet, which guides us
that we go not out of the right way from the path of righteousness.


Theoph. Seeing good works be not the cause of salvation, it seems to follow
that they be altogether unprofitable, and therefore that we need not to be
greatly careful of them.


Matthew. It follows not. For, God has delivered us out of the hands of our
spiritual enemies, namely the Devil and sin (says Zachary) Luke 1. 74.
that we should serve him with holiness and righteousness in his sight all
the days of our life. Paul also confirms the same thing in the Epistle to
the Ephesians: Ephesians. 2. 8. 9 10.
For, after that he has affirmed, that we are saved by grace through faith,
and that not of our selves, it was the gift of God, not of works: presently he
adds; For, we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works
which God has prepared that we should walk in the^. And again in another
place; The grace of God that Tit. 2. 12.
brings salvation unto all men has appeared, teaching us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, and justly, and godly
in this present world. Thou see how diligently good works be commended in the
Scripture, as those that be acceptable unto God through Christ, by whose
holiness all their filthiness and uncleanness is covered.


Theoph. But what use is there of them?


Mat. A three fold use of good works.
The use is three-folde, and those indeed most profitable. The first, which is
also the chief, respects the glory of God, that ought to be dearer unto us
the^ our own salvation. But by them it is especially advanced, as it appears
by the words of Christ; Let your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good Mat. 5. 16.
works, and glorify your father which is in heaven. For this cause Paul
warning the Philippians to be full of the fruits of righteousness which are by
Christ Jesus, adds; Phil. 1. 11.
to the glory and praise of God.

The second use respects our neighbor. For, by the uprightness and
integrity of our life, he is provoked to the same earnest desire and exercise
of godliness. I pass over the good turns which he has by our charity and
good works. The third use stands in this, that by them our conscience is
quieted. For, they be testimonies and witnesses of our faith, and therefore of
our salvation.


Theoph. But how can it be, that good works shall be witnesses of our faith?


Mat. The cause has already been showed of us before: namely, for that the
holy Ghost does never work faith in our hearts without repentance, from whence
good works do flow, which therefore be visible or seen testimonies of our
invisible or unseen faith: even as the goodness of the tree is judged by the
good fruit, and the inward health or soundness of a man's body, by the
outward disposition of all the parts.


Theoph. Therefore, unless I be deceived, this thou say, that faith cannot
be without good works.


Matthew. I say so. Even as fire cannot be without heat, and the Sun without
light. And verily faith of it own Faith cannot be without good works.
nature brings forth good works. For how can it be, that our hearts should
be reformed by faith, so as we do embrace the love wherewith God loves us in
Christ, but that they be also stricken with love toward him again, by means
whereof they both earnestly desire to obey him, and do labor to avoid
rebellion against his majesty. I do add moreover, that faith can no more
stand together with an evil conscience, then water with fire. For it cannot
be, that so long as sin reigns in us, and we willingly offend God, that
we should be assured of his love, so as we may put our whole trust in him,
and repose our hope in his favor and goodness, notwithstanding that infinite
merit of Christ's death be known and perceived of us.


Theoph. As far as I see, faith brings forth good works, by the which it
is afterward preserved in our hearts.


M. Faith the mother of good works, of which it is after preserved.
Yea verily: even as fire causes ashes, wherewith it is afterward cherished,
fed, and maintained. But by these things it is plain, that it is so far off
that faith, (which notwithstanding some say) should destroy good works, that
rather by it they are built up and fortified.


Theoph. Seeing then faith cannot be without good works, it follows, that
all they which boast of it, and do not good works, be liers, and deceive
themselves.


Matthew. It follows: and that is the disputation of James the Apostle against
the Libertines, whom he speaks unto in these words; Show me thy faith
Iam. 2. 18.
without thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works, whereby he
shows, that no man can be certain of his faith, which is invisible, but he
has visible testimonies of it, namely good works Whereupon it is that the
same Apostle in the end of that Chapter concludes thus; As the body without
the verse. 26.
spirit is dead, even so that faith, that is without good works is dead, that
is, it is not true, but a shadow, and a vain empty likeness of it.


Theoph. Therefore we are neither justified nor saved without good works,
although neither of them, nor by them.


Mat. I grant it. For, although the kingdom of heaven be not the wages of
servants, but the inheritance of children: yet no man is reckned among the
children of God, that is not lead by the spirit of God, (as Paul speaks)
Romans 8. 14.
and therefore does the works of the spirit, such as be these; Love, joy,
peace, long suffering, gentleness, Gal. 5. 22. 23.
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, and such like. Therefore the same
Apostle in another place gives warning; Be not deceived: neither 1. Cor. 6. 9.
fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor thieves, nor
covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor extortioners shall inherit the
kingdom of God. The same thing also does Christ himself confirm, when he
says; not every one that says to Mat. 7. 21.
me: Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does my
fathers will, that is in heaven.

Mat. 5. 20.
And again in another place; I say unto you, except your righteousness
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven.


Theoph. Now do I consent unto thee, and do acknowledge, that good works be
not unprofitable, although we be neither justified nor saved by them: Yea
rather that they be of special use, and therefore that the faithful with all
their hearts should give themselves to them, for as much as they serve,

1 To the glory of God.

2 The edification of our neighbor.

3 And to the confirmation of our faith and salvation.


Mat. Add hereunto, that God to whom they be acceptable through Christ,
rewards them with sundry blessings both spiritual and temporal, according
to the promises almost without number contained in his word. Moreover hither is
to be referred, the word of Reward which is used in many places in the
Scripture, as when John exhorts the faithful to perseverance, he says; 2.
Ioh. 8.
Look unto your selves, that we loose not the things we have wrought, but
that you may have a full reward. Christ also speaking of those which suffer
persecution for righteousness sake, says, Mat. 5. 12.
Great is your reward in heaven. In another place also; Mat. 10. 42.
Whosoever shall give a cup of cold water only, to one of these little ones in
the name of a disciple, shall not lose his reward.


Theoph. The confutation of merit.
Seeing therefore God promises reward to our works, it seems they deserve
somewhat.


Matthew. It follows not: For, that reward proceeds of his mere grace and
undeserved favor, without any desert of ours.


Theoph. Do thou take from the faithful all meriting with God?


Mat. Not I, but the word of God, wherein his own mercy is established; and
merit is overthrown even to the very ground: For these two can not stand
together. Furthermore, if any a little more diligently examine the nature of
merit or desert, he shall never find that it has any place before God.


Theoph. Why so?


Mat. Because that we may deserve any thing, this is,

1 First required, that we be nothing in his debt, of whom we desire to deserve.

2 Secondly, that we bring him such things as be our own.

3 And last of all, that that which we bring or bestow be equal, or as much
worth as the thing that we seek to deserve. If but any one of these
conditions fail, it can be no merit or desert. How much less therefore if
they be all wanting together? But they be wanting in all our good works.


Theoph. Declare that unto me one after another particularly.


Matthew. The examination of the merit of works.
First, whatsoever good works may be performed of us, are due unto God, by a
double right, namely of our creation and adoption. Hereupon is that saying of
Christ warning his Disciples; Luc. 17. 10.
When ye have done all the things that are commanded you, say, We be
unprofitable servants: for we have done nothing, but that which was our duty
to do.

Moreover, it is certain that whatsoever good thing can be done of us, is from
God, which works in us both the will and the deed. Phil. 2. 13.


Therefore it was notably said of one of the ancient fathers; God rewards his
own good works in us, and not ours. Paul also says; 1. Cor. 4. 7.
What have thou, that thou have not received? and if thou have received it, why
do thou boast, as though thou had nor received it? Therefore among men
indeed there may be merit or desert: For the husbandman after he has dug
all day in the vineyard, shall receive his reward by desert. But with God, we
can deserve nothing, but that he should punish us for our offenses.


Theoph. The objectio^ of the defenders of merit
The defenders of the opinion of merits, do object, that good works be not
meritorious of themselves, but in respect of the promise of God him self,
wherein he has promised those things, which otherwise were not due.


Matthew. The answer to it.
They are not by this pretense acquit of sacrilege or robbing God. For, they
attribute that to themselves, which appertains to God alone. For, when God
made that promise unto us, he did it of his mere grace and favor, and
therefore merit or desertis shut out. But I will make the whole matter plain
by a familiar example. If any king should promise his bond-slaue an hundred
thousand crowns, upon condition that he diligently do a business committed to
him, the bondslaue having done the commandment, may require the gold, yet not
because he has deserved it. But we that have not fulfilled the condition
enjoined us, how much less have we deserved the reward promised to our works?


Theoph. What lets that we fulfill it not, when we obey the Lord from the
heart?


Matthew. Of (...) perfection (...) our works.
The cause has bin declared already before: namely for that there can be no
good thing done of us, that is not unclean and defiled. For, as the most pure
water, if it run through an unclean conduit, is corrupted with the stincke of
it: so the good works that God works in us, be soiled and stained with the
filthiness of our flesh. Therefore even as the promise of reward is altogether
free, and without respect of any desert, so is the fulfilling of that promise.


Theoph. Why therefore does God promise reward to our works, which he may by
right require of us?


Mat. That, that promise may be as a spur unto us, by the which we might be
driven forward, to the desire and doing of them: and that indeed not without
cause, for we are by our nature very slack unto them.


Theoph. There is one thing behind, which I will demand of thee: namely
concerning that which was said of thee before, that the obedience which is
undertaken upon hope of reward, is not acceptable unto God.


Mat. This also is indeed true, if that affection reign in us as it does in
the unfaithful. Howbeit, it shall not hurt, so as the love and fear of God go
before, if we be allured and drawn on to his service, by the hope and looking
for of the reward. And on the other side, be kept and held from disobeying him,
by the fear of the punishment, that is of eternal death.


Theo. But ought not the love of God to be sufficient, to bring forth that
obedience in the hearts of the faithful, without borrowing any other spur from
elsewhere?


Mat. If our regeneration were perfect, as is the regeneration of them, which
live blessedly in heaven, we should know God perfectly, whereby we should be
stirred up to obey him perfectly: But because there is always behind in us
something not regenerated, which of it own nature is in bondage, full of
ignorance, without love of God, it is necessary, that we should be stirred up
to that obedience by the hope of reward: and on the other side, by fear of
punishments be held back, and kept in obedience. Hereupon it is, that God both
rewards our good works in this life, according to his promises, and also
corrects our slacknesse and insolency by diverse afflictions which he
sends daily, whereby it appears, that he is true, as well in his promises,
as in the execution of his threatenings. But seeing thou have nothing more to
propound, I would advise, that we put of the rest of the disputation till
another time, for I see that it is now almost noone.


Theoph. I have heard thy discourse of Good works, as also the exposition of
the moral law, with so great delight, that the time of thy speech has seemed
to me very short.


Mat. Indeed it is a most pleasant thing to entreat of Good works, so as it be
done holily, and by the rule of Gods word. Howbeit, that shall be little, except
the practice be joined, which verily gets praise with men, The use of the
doctrine of Good-workes.
pleasure to the conscience, and profit with God. Therefore true and sound
virtue, is greatly commended, before vain prattling, or the unprofitable idle
knowledge of it.


Theoph. I do remember an excellent similitude, which I have oftentimes heard
of thee, and it is this. As a precious garment shut up in a chest, is
altogether unprofitable, but if it be put on, it is honor, delight, and profit
unto us: so it is with Good works; for, the knowledge and vain discoursing of
them, is of no use, except they be brought to practice.


Matthew. It is most true. Therefore I pray God and our heavenly father, that as
he has imprinted his law in our minds, so he will engraue it together with
his love and fear in our hearts, by the power of his holy spirit, that being
always clothed with righteousness and holiness, we may serve him with due
reverence and humility all our life.

1 And so he may be glorified of us.

2 Our neighbor edified.

3 Our faith and salvation may be confirmed through Jesus Christ our Lord.


Theoph. So be it.


CHAP. II. Of Prayer: which has the chief place among Good works, to
testify and confirm our faith.
Theophilus. Our help is in the name of the Lord, which has made both heaven
and earth.


Matthew. So be it.


Theoph. Concerning the doctrine of good works, I am sufficiently satisfied
(most dearly beloved brother) for I have learned, that they only be worthy
the name of Good works, which be commanded of God in his law: also, that they
be not the causes of our justification and salvation: nevertheless, that they
be profitable, both to the glory of God, and to the edification of our
neighbors, and very much to the assurance of our salvation and faith.

Which is the chief good work. A short description of true prayer.
Now I demand of thee, which has the first place among Good works?


Math. True prayer, namely that which is powered from the heart unto God, with
this confidence, that we shall be heard.


Theoph. Why give thou it the chief place among Good works.


Matthew. Because by the help of it we obtain this, The excellency of prayer.
that we be able to perform the other Good works. Moreover, it yields us
the greatest testimony of our salvation.


Theoph. Whereupon is it, that it yields a fuller testimony of our faith,
then the other Good works?


Matthew. Hereupon, because prayer with certain hope of being heard cannot be
made, but we are therewithal persuaded of the love and good will of God
toward us. For as Paul says; Romans 10. 13 14.
How shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed? For this cause,
the same Apostle affirms out of the prophecy of Joel; Whosoever shall call
upon the name of the Lord, shallbe saved.


Theoph. But from whence have we that assurance, seeing we be guilty unto our
selves of our own unworthiness, by the which we deserve, that both we our
selves and our prayers, should be driven back from the seat of his Majesty?


Matthew. By the intercession or mediation of Jesus Christ, who (as it was showed
by us in the Chapter of faith) does always offer up to God the Father the
merit of his death, for full satisfaction of all our sins. Whereupon it comes
to pass, that he is made merciful unto us, and such a one as will be
entreated of us, so as we shall receive, what soever we ask of him. And that
does the Scripture teach in these words; 1. John. 2. 1.
We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ.


Theoph. It follows therefore, that the office of the mediator, is by a most
straight band joined with the office of the redeemer.


Mat. It is so, and therefore, John after those words; We have an advocate with
the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, presently adds; and he is the
propitiation 1. John. 2. 2.
for our sins. Hereupon it is, that Paul joins both the offices together,
when he says; 1. Tim. 2. 6.
There is one mediator of God and men, the man Christ Jesus, which gave
himself a ransom for all men.


Theoph. Seeing therefore, one is our redeemer, even Christ Jesus, it seems
to follow, that he alone can also fulfill the office of the mediator for us
with the Father.


Matthew. The confutation of the error about prayer to Saints.
It follows, and that indeed necessarily, and for this cause, in the places
which we have heard, we read it written; One advocate, one mediator, for the
word one, is expressly added, to the end we might know, that besides him alone,
there can be no other.


Theoph. Therefore they deal foolishly, and without any good ground, whosoever
seek other patrons and mediators besides Christ.


Matthew. Very foolishly. For they forsake, the Creator, to go to the creature:
the Lord, to go to the servant: the most dearly beloved Son of the Father,
which is in the highest authority and favor with him, to pacify his wrath,
to go to those, which lack all the things that be required to wash away
sins, and therefore be unable to make our prayers acceptable and of force.
Moreover, they do esteem Christ, as it were not sufficient enough for the
office of the mediator, and therefore deny him to be our true Savior. For if
he be fit, and sufficient for so great an office, why do they take to
themselves other mediators beside him? If they say they doubt not, but that he
is both most power-full and most fit for this thing, but do doubt somewhat of
his will, they do therein very much bewray themselves to be unbelievers, which
refuse to give credit unto him, after that he has given us so notable a pledge
of his exceeding love. Namely, when he vouchsafed, both to take upon him our
humane nature, and to suffer the death of the Cross for our redemption. Add
hereunto, that most lovingly he calls us unto himself by his word, when he
says; Mat. 11. 28. 30.
Come unto me all that labor and be laden, and I will cause you to have ease,
and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

Finally, whither soever they turn themselves, they shall never escape, but be
found injurious against Christ, for as much as they take from him the office of
the mediator purchased by his own blood, to give it to blessed creatures that
be in heaven.


Theoph. They object, that the office of Christ is not translated by them to
the dead Saints, seeing they end all the prayers they make to God with these
words: Through Jesus Christ our Lord: whereby they say is declared, that the
chief honor is given to Christ himself.


Mat. The confutation of it.
It is a craft of Satan, by the which he would have the wickedness of praying
to Saints to be hidden, and so the manifest wrong that they offer unto Christ,
which put over his office unto Saints, while they pray God, that by their
merits and intercession, he will grant the things that they desire, and at
length ad, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Wherein they imitate and follow him,
who after he has given his Prince a blow, would humbly do him reverence.


Theoph. Is it therefore unlawful for the faithful being a live, mutually
among themselves, the one to commend the salvation of the other unto God by
prayer, seeing it cannot be, but some thing is taken away from the intercession
of Christ?


Matthew. The confutation of the objection.
Not so: for many causes may be alleged, for the which, the one is not only
unprofitable, but also forbidden, and therefore to be avoided: but the other,
not only to be lawful, but also profitable and necessary.


Theoph. Declare those causes.


Mat. I will mark four chief.

1 Because love that is so much commended unto us, is both cherished and
increased by praying one for another. But this can have no place in the dead,
of whom Salomo^ speaking says; Eccles. 9. 6.
Both their love, and their hatred, and their envy is now perished, and they
have no more portion for ever, in all that is done under the sun.

2 Because praying one for another, we think not to be heard for his sake that
prays for us, which they do, that pray to the Saints departed, and by that
means give unto them the office of Christ.


Theoph. But it may be, that the same thing may befall them, which desire to be
helped with the prayers of the godly that be alive: for why may not some
think, that they shall be heard for their holiness and good works sake?


Matthew. I grant, it is not impossible, that some should after that manner abuse
the prayers of the godly, but there is the least danger in this behalf, if it
be compared with the other. For, it cannot be in any but the ignorant and
unskillful, for whose ignorance we ought not to refuse that so holy an
ordinance of God. But the intercession of departed Saints, does bring with it
most manifest danger: for, no man can pray unto them, but he thinks for their
sakes to obtain the things which he desires of God^. The proof whereof are
all the forms of prayers written by such as worshipped them.


Theoph. Go forward, allege the third cause.


Matthew.


Theoph. Declare the fourth cause.


Mat.


Theoph. Say thou so?


Matthew. I say it, and therefore it is done of faith, for the word of God is the
only foundation of it. Wherefore Paul affirms; Romans 14. 23
that whatsoever is not of faith is sin: And this reason is sufficient to
overthrow the intercession of the departed Saints. For who can bear this, that
man should lift up himself above God?


Theoph. I do now confess that all prayers which are made to dead Saints, for
this end that they should be our intercessors and mediators to God, are to be
driven out and hissed at: and that Christ alone whose office this is, is
sufficient.


Matthew. Why Christ only suffices the faithful, to do the office of the
mediator with the Father.
Yea truly, it is extreme madness for any to seek to himself another
mediator. For as much as he can do it most perfectly, because he lacks none
of the things that suffice to pacify God, and to cause him to be merciful
unto us. Moreover he loves us most dearly, and therefore is touched with
pity upon our infirmities. He knows our prayers, presently when they be
conceived. He commands that we should come unto him, as often as we will
crave any thing at the hands of God.

Finally he tells us for a surety, that we shall obtain all the things
which we shall ask in his name, when he says; John. 16. 23
Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you shall ask of the Father he
will give it you: Hitherto have you asked nothing in my name: ask and you
shall receive. And in another place he says: John. 14. 13
whatsoever you shall ask in my name, I will do it.


Theoph. What mean these words, to ask any thing in the name of Christ?


Mat. It is to pray God to hear our prayers, not indeed having respect to our
unworthiness, but to the merit that is continually offered to him of Christ
Jesus for us. Therefore to ask any thing of God in the name of Christ, is
answerable to his intercession with the father for us, and that more is an
approbation or allowance of it, and the way to be partaker of it.


Theoph. But ought the promise of Christ, wherein he assures us, that we shall
receive whatsoever we ask in his name, to be extended to all things that shall
come into our minds, without putting any exception?


Matthew. Not so: For our desires for the most part be evil: which if they were
fulfilled, would be to our destruction rather then to our profit. Therefore
Christ understands only those things which concern the glory of God and our
commodity and salvation: all which things indeed he has in few words
comprehended in that form of prayer, which he has given to us; namely; Our
father which art in heaven, etc.


The. Must we therefore use no other form of prayer?


Mat. If thou respect the matter or substance, we may use no other: but it is
in our liberty to enlarge it, whereof the holy Scripture yields us many
examples, in those forms of prayer which it sets before us, namely the
Psalms which all verily be referred to this form appointed by Christ.


The exposition of the Lords prayer.
Theoph. Let us examine the form of prayer that Christ has delivered: how
many parts be there of it?


Matthew. The sum and parts of the Lords prayer.
In the beginning it contains a preface, and afterward six petitions. The
first three whereof do immediately respect the glory of God. But the later three
contain those things that appertain to our selves, both for the help of this
life, and for everlasting salvation. And they be therefore placed after those
that concern the glory of God, to the end we might understand, that the later
three be not rightly conceived and made, unless they be referred to the glory
of God: as it were unto their proper end: and that therefore they shall not be
heard, according to the saying of the Apostle; You ask and receive not,
because you ask amiss, James. 4. 3.
that you might consume it upon your lusts.


The Preface of the Lords prayer.
Our Father which art in heaven. Theoph. Let us consider of the Preface of the
Lords prayer.


Matthew. It is contained in these words, Our Father which art in heaven.


Theoph. Who is that Father, unto whom Christ bids us to fly?


Mat. It is the first person of the holy Trinity, namely, the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ.


Theoph. Is therefore one only person of the Trinity to be prayed unto?


Matthew. We must know, that in true prayer we are only the instruments of God,
who alone in that as in other good works, works the things that concern our
salvation. But that is to be understood of all the persons according to the
distinct propriety of every of them. For the holy Ghost prays in us, as
appears by the saying of the Apostle; The spitit makes request Romans 8. 27.
for the Saints according to the will of God. The Son offers our prayer to
the Father. This prayer the father receives and lovingly hears. Therefore
lawful and true prayer is that which is made from the heart, the holy Ghost
stirring us up, which also is directed to the Father in the name of Jesus
Christ his Son. Indeed we have an example in the holy Scriptures of a
certain prayer made to the Son, in the which this distinction of the persons
is not observed: namely in that which Steven made while he was stoned; Lord
Jesus receive my spirit. Howbeit Acts. 7. 59
this example, and if there be any such other, is not contrary to the rule of
right praying. But because we have begun the exposition of the Lords prayer,
we are to return to the issue of the speech we have in hand: and it is this,
that in this place we be taught, that our prayers must be directed to the
father, which Paul testifies that himself did in these words; I bow Ephesians.
3. 14.
my knees to the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. We may also pray unto Christ,
not only as he is God, but also as he is the Mediator, that is, as he is one
person consisting of two natures: yet so, as the deity be the object or the
thing which we set before our eyes in praying. Likewise also we may pray to the
holy Ghost, distinguished from the other persons, who with the Father and the
Son is very God. And indeed the godly that exercise themselves in such
prayers, do a thing profitable and worthy to be done, so as they be not
distracted with the deep meditation of the distinction of the three persons,
but always have their minds fixed and settled upon the unity of the essence.
This also is to be observed, that the name of God is not seldom in the
Scripture referred to the whole Godhead. And let these things be spoken by the
way. For, it is not my purpose at this time, to declare all things particularly
that appertain unto this place.


Theoph. But why does Christ command us, that coming to his Father, we
should call him by the name of our own Father?


Matthew. Not only that we should gather, seeing he is the father of Christ,
that he is also our father: but especially for three causes.

1 First, that we may call upon him with true faith, that is, that we may
believe that he which is our father, will not deny unto us the things which we
shall ask of him, according to that saying of Christ; What Mat. 79. 10. 11.
man is there of you, who if his son shall ask bread of him, will give him a
stone? and if he shall ask fish, will he give him a serpent?

2 Another cause is, that we might understand (which has been already said
of us) that we ought not to draw near unto God, but in the name of his natural
son Jesus Christ. For in him alone we are adopted and made his children.

3 The third, when we are commanded to call him our father in common, rather
then particularly and properly, my father, we be taught that true charity and
brotherly love toward our neighbors is required of us in prayer: for as much
as we be all the children of the same father, and heirs of one and the self
same inheritance. Whosoever therefore make not their prayers to God in the name
of Jesus Christ, or do carry privy hatred or enmity against their brethren,
cannot pray to God with this form of prayer.


Theoph. Why has Christ added these words; which art in heaven?


Mat. Not to signify that his Majesty is shut up within heaven, which indeed
as it is infinite, the whole world contains not. But*

1 That he may be distinguished from our earthly fathers, and that together
we might understand how much better he is then they, and more able to help us.
Therefore Christ said to his Disciples; If you therefore Mat. 7. 11.
which are evil can give good gifts to your children, how much more will your
father that is in heaven give good things to them that ask them of him?

2 Secondly, those words were added, that coming to God, we should lift up
our minds above all earthly and frail things, how beautiful or goodly soever.

3 Finally, that we might earnestly and indeed acknowledge the incomprehensible
greatness, the maruailous wisdom, and infinite power of him whom we pray
unto: which verily do far more clearly shine in the heavens, then in the
earth, to the end we might worship him with the more reverence, and rest upon
him with greater trust and assurance.


The first petition.
Hallowed be thy name. Theoph. Let us come to the three petitions that respect
the glory of God. Which is the first of them?


Matthew. It is contained in these words; Hallowed be thy name.


Theoph. What is the meaning of it?


Mat. The exposition of the first petition
We desire of God, that the knowledge of him may be spread abroad throughout
the whole world, that his name may be sanctified, that is, that all men may
give him his due honor.


Theoph. Wherefore make thou mention of the knowledge of God, which Christ
mentions not in this petition?


Mat. Because God cannot be truly hallowed and worshipped, except his
knowledge go before. For we cannot worship nor praise him, of whom we be
ignorant, and whose excellency and power is unknown to us. Hence is that
saying of the Prophet; According to Psalm. 48. 10
thy name (O God) so is thy praise unto the worlds end.


Theoph. Is not this hallowing of the name of God, the same with that whereof
thou spakest in the exposition of the third commandment?


Matthew. The very same: and therefore the exposition of that commandment, may
be in stead of an exposition to this petition, and show how the name of God is
to be hallowed.


The second petition.
Thy kingdom come. Theoph. Let us pass over to the second petition.


Matthew. The exposition of the 2. petition.
It is this; Thy kingdom come. Now in it we desire of God, that the knowledge
of his Majesty being given unto men, he will cause all to be gathered in the
Church. For in it he reigns by the scepter of his word, and by the power of
his spirit.


Theoph. That I may the more easily come to the true meaning of this petition,
I do first demand of thee wherefore that rule and dominion which God
exercises over his Church, is called his kingdom: after I will ask thee,
concerning the word, Come.


Mat. That rule is called by the name of kingdom, for the likeness it has
with earthly kingdoms.


Theoph. Of the kingdom of God.
Wherein stands that likeness?


Mat. In four heads or principal points, namely because in the Church there
be

1 One king.

2 Subjects.

3 Laws.

4 Governors, who as in earthly kingdoms, have the charge to see to the
keeping of those laws. For, in the Church there is one king, namely Jesus
Christ which of his father is appointed the Lord in it, to rule and govern it,
which is confirmed by the words of the Angel to Marie; The Lord God will give
unto him the Luc. 1. 32.
seat of his father David: and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever,
and there shall be none end of his kingdom. Therefore the kingdom of God, and
the kingdom of Christ, is one and the self same. The faithful be the people
of this kingdom, whom Christ has redeemed with his death, and set free from
the tyranny of the devil, that he might deliver them up to his own kingdom,
to become his subjects. The laws of it, are the word of God, wherein all
things be commanded and declared, that appertain both to the humble service
and obedience of that King, and to the concord of the Citizens or subjects. The
officers which are specially occupied about this kingdom, are the ministers of
the word, or pastors, upon whom this charge is laid, that they preach the
word, and see to the keeping of those laws. Who also (as the Apostle speaks)
2. Cor. 10. 6.
have in readiness vengeance against all disobedience.


Theoph. I have heard the agreement of the kingdom of God with the kingdom of
men: but I desire to understand the difference between them.


Matthew. 1 First, all things in the kingdom of God are spiritual, namely the
King himself, his glory, power, subjects, laws, reward, punishments of the
rebels. Hereupon Christ said unto Pilate; My kingdom Ioh. 18. 36.
is not of this world.

2 Secondly, Christ requires no such thing of his subjects, as earthly Kings
are wont to ask: but contrariwise does continually enrich them with his own
gifts and spiritual riches.

3 Thirdly, he makes them all partakers of his kingly dignity, which earthly
kings cannot do.

4 Fourthly, he does not only command, as other kings do, but gives us his
own spirit, which puts power into us, whereby we are made able to yield
our humble and dutiful obedience unto his commandments.

Finally, all other kingdoms be subject unto alteration and change, but this
kingdom is invincible and shall endure until the last coming of Christ.

Such is the kingdom of God and of Christ, which indeed (as has been said)
is not to be referred but to the rule, which he exercise over his beloved
children, and those that be received into the Church.


Theoph. Who therefore has the rule over the unbelievers and wicked?


Matthew. The Devil: and for that cause, he is called the Prince of this world;
The kingdom of Satan.
yet notwithstanding, the Lord has the chief power both over the unbelievers,
and over their Captain, which by his just judgment has made them subjects to
that unbelieving tyrant, to the end they may be vexed and tormented of him
according to their deserts, for as much as they have refused to obey Christ,
that is a most loving and merciful king. Moreover, that kingdom of Satan
has immortal hatred against the kingdom of Christ; the head (I say) of that
kingdom, namely Satan and his soldiers, whom he stirs up to make outward
war against the kingdom of Christ, while he in the mean time assaulteth it
within. For, both of them labor and strive with all their might, to spoil and
sack that kingdom of Christ. But they do it in vain: for, how much the more
furiously they seek to overthrow it, so much the more do they help it
forward: and at length pull upon themselves extreme destruction.


Theoph. We have been long enough in the exposition of the kingdom of God,
let us go forward to the other member. What means that word; Let it come, or
let it approach?


Matt. How the kingdom of God comes.
The office of a good king stands in two special things.

1 First to rule his subjects, namely such as yield him fidelity and
obedience, to keep in peace, defend, handle mercifully, and lovingly, and
redeem them if they be taken captives.

2 Secondly, to punish the rebels, and to destroy and throw down the enemies of
his kingdom. When therefore we desire of God that his kingdom may come, we do
as if we prayed, that he would increase the number of believers, enlarge his
Church every day, more and more heap upon it his gifts, and settle it with
right order. And contrariwise, that he would cut off all the enemies of it,
overthrow their counsels, destroy their purposes, and that the defe^ding of the
Church may beeuery day increased, til at length it come to the highest
perfection. Howbeit that shall not be before the day of judgment, at what time
al his enemies being overcome, he shall make them his foot stool. And then (as
the Apostle says) he shall deliver up the kingdom to God the father, that
is, he shall reign quietly without 1. Cor. 15. 24.
any rebellion and resistance, and we shall live peaceably in him, being
delivered from al fear and trouble of enemies.


The third petition.
Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Theoph. Let us come to the
third petition, being the last of them that respect the glory of God.


Matthew. It is this: Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Wherein
indeed we do not simply desire of God, that his will may be done, the
fulfilling whereof there is verily nothing that can let: but that he will so
guide us with his spirit, that we may be ready to do his will, revealed unto
us in his word, and that with no less desire then the heavenly Angels do. But
concerning his secret will, we desire that if when it is done, any adversities
befall us, namely loss of goods, hinderance, afflictions, whether they
concern the soul or the body, we may bear them all patiently as sent from
his hand, and so obey his will, that ours may wholly and altogether give place
unto it.


Theoph. Indeed he were happy, that after this manner should conform himself
to the will of God.


Mat. Yea surely, because he might worthily glory in this, that God did
nothing but that which he willed, seeing that he willed no other thing but
that which was acceptable and pleasing unto God. And assuredly there be many
things that call us unto that. For, if God our heavenly Father be wiser then we
(which all men do confess) it is not to be doubted, but he knows what we
have need of better then our selves, and that therefore by good right we
ought to prefer his holy and good will before our own, which is wicked and
corrupt: yea rather often like unto children, we know not what we would have.
For many times we change our purposes, and forthwith or a little after, we
disalow that, which a little before was very greatly allowed of us. For this
cause the Lord without any respect of our will or intents, as a good father
sends those things, which he knows to be necessary for us, both for his
own glory, and for our profit and salvation, which indeed are to be
received with a quiet and thankful Of Christian patience.
mind as from his hand, unless we mean to be miserable for ever, which we
shall never escape, so long as we cleave to our own will.


Theoph. I have long since labored to perform this, but as yet I have not
attained it: but especially I find by experience, that the use of this
doctrine is most hard, when any great trouble comes, whether it be of body
or mind.


Matthew. It is not only hard, but verily cannot be generally brought to
practice, especially if respect be had of our own flesh, which maruelously
pleases it self in the own will and affections, and seeks for nothing else
but delights and pleasures. For this cause, in this place Christ teaches us to
desire it of his Father: but James assures, Iam. 1. 5.
that we shall receive it, so as we ask it in faith; If any of you lack
wisdom, let him ask it of God, which gives it liberally unto all, and
casts no man in the teeth, and it shall be given unto him. But let him ask
in faith, not doubting.


Theoph. In that place James speaks of wisdom, but we speak of patience.


Mat. There is no doubt, but by the word wisdom, he understands patience,
whereunto he had exhorted the faithful in the former verse, in these words;
Let patience have the perfect work, that you may be perfect and entire, so as
nothing be wanting.

But because we cannot do it of our selves, here he shows by what means we
may have it from God, when he says; if any man lack wisdom, let him ask it
of God, which gives it to all men liberally.


Theoph. But what is the cause, that he calls patience by the name of
wisdom?


Matthew. To the end we might understand, that a man's chief wisdom stands
therein, that in his adversities and troubles he patiently submit himself to
the will of God: but on the contrary side, that it is the extremest
foolishness and madness, if any dare resist and set himself against it. For
what good does he by it? Can he change the will of God? No verily. Nay rather
he makes his own case worse, as well with inward grief that tormenteth him,
as also because he pulls the wrath of God upon himself. For by our
stubburnnesse he is compelled to lay more grievous punishments upon us. On the
other side, by our patience he is moved unto pity, so as he turns our
afflictions into kindness, and doing us good: even as good parents are wont,
when they perceive, that their children be brought into good order by their
corrections.


Theoph. I see it is a thing profitable and necessary: howbeit, I think that
the meditation of the things which thou declaredst (when we spoke of
afflictions) do make not a little for this purpose.


Matthew. Thou iudgest rightly. For in that place many things were delivered of
us, which may work comfort, and that not common in the hearts of the
faithful. Nevertheless, I will add unto them two other besides, as an
overplus.

1 First, when we be ouerladen with troubles, the evils which we suffer are not
so much to be considered, as those which we have deserved, and yet
notwithstanding be not laid upon us. Furthermore, we must think upon the
good things wherewith the Lord ladeth us on the other side: and so indeed we
shall find, that God deals most mercifully, even in the midst of our
troubles, if they be examined according to the greatness of our sins.

2 Secondly, that we are not to look upon them only, which in outward show
be a little happier then we, and whom we see to be exempted from the troubles
wherewith we are grieved: but upon infinite and innumerable others, which are
in far greater miseries, then are those that we suffer, whose sins
notwithstanding are not so great as ours.


Theoph. I do very much rejoice that I have heard these two things, for I will
daily make use of them, as occasion shall serve.


Matthew. Thou speak wisely, when thou addest the word, daily. For the Lord
our master, that we should not forget this doctrine so profitable, is wont
oftentimes to beat it into our heads, by sending of troubles, wherein we might
practice it. And verily we ought to be well acquainted with it, seeing we are
so often exercised in it.


Theoph. But I for my part do find it true, by daily experience, that I am very
little exercised in it. Nevertheless, I hope, that by the grace of God, I
shall profit better in it the^ heretofore I have done: especially, seeing now I
know the way, how I may do it, namely, to crave it of God by daily prayers,
and continually to have in mind, the things which thou have said. But now, for
as much as I have heard the meaning of this third petition, which is the last
of those that concern the glory of God, let us go forward to the rest. But
before I come to the three following, which entreat of our own profit and
salvation, I would have thee to declare the order of these petions, and with
it, how fitly they be joined together.


Matthew. The coherence and sum of the three former peritions of the Lords
prayer.
These former agree together most excellently, for as much as they be of the
same kind. For, after that we are made partakers of the knowledge of God, by
the which we are moved to enter into his kingdom, that is, into his Church,
it is meet and convenient, that this should be desired of us, that we may be
informed and taught the obedience of his will, whereunto the ministry of the
Church calls us daily.

Finally, in these three petitions, we desire of God, to give men such
knowledge of his Majesty, as they may willingly submit themselves to his
kingdom and rule, and from their hearts obey his pleasure, and so be glorified
of them, and in them.


The fourth petition.
Give us this day, our daily bread. Theoph. We are to come to the three last
petitions of the Lords prayer, wherein we said those things were The sum of
the last three petitions.
contained, which concern both our soul and body.


Mat. True: For the first of them comprehends the things that be necessary,
to the passing through or finishing of this life: but the other two, those that
appertain to our salvation.


Theoph. Recite therefore the first.


Matthew. Give us this day our daily bread.


Theoph. What is the meaning of it?


Matthew. To the end we may serve God according to our calling, in this petition
we desire of him, to give us our daily bread, that is, that every day he would
minister The exposition of the fourth petition.
unto us those things that be necessary for this life: for all those be
co^prehe^ded under the name of bread, as of a thing most necessary. Howbeit,
this is to be noted, that (while we ask of God our daily bread) we do also
desire all such things as be requisite and necessary, that we may eat it
quietly.

Therefore this petition generally contains whatsoever may be desired to live
quietly in this world. Nevertheless, we ought to depend and hang upon the
pleasure of our heavenly Father; For he will give us such things, as he shall
know to be profitable, as well for his own glory, as for our salvation. And
hereupon it may be gathered, why he would have bread only asked by us, namely,
that we might know, that bread ought to suffice us, if the Lord shall see it
good, to give us no other thing to nourish us.


Theoph. There do five principal points come into my mind, concerning this
thy exposition of daily bread, whereof I will ask thee.

1 The first whereof is this, why we pray to have daily bread given us, seeing
we are commanded to provide us by our honest labor, such things as be
necessary for this life.


Mat. Because our labor shallbe to no purpose, except the blessing of God be
added unto it; even as the Psalmist expressly teaches.


Theoph.


Matthew. The word our was added for two causes; The first, that we might
understand, that that bread is promised of God, and therefore is by good right
called ours, and so might certainly know, that it cannot be denied unto us. The
other, to the end we might remember, that that bread is to be provided by
lawful means and ways, and such as be allowed of God, but not by theft or
deceit; For otherwise we eat not our own bread, but another man's, received not
from God, but from the devil.


Theoph.


Matthew. That we might altogether, and wholly depend upon the providence of God,
so as we should not be careful for things to come, as if we did distrust, but
be content with those that be necessary for our present need, with this hope,
that the Lord will provide for the morrow.


Theoph.


Matthew. Because we must hold it for a certainty and truth, that bread of it
self cannot nourish, except the blessing of God be added: For sometime rich
men are seen worn and pined away with leanness. For this cause Moses says;
Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that comes out of the mouth
of God. In which words, the Prophet does also signify this, that the power of
God does not so cleave unto bread, that he cannot nourish us without it, as
often as shall please him. Whereof he gave the Israelites a singular proof, whom
he fed in the wilderness by the space of forty years without bread.


Theoph.


Matthew. To the end we might know, that we are to pray for it, not for our
selves alone, but also for our neighbors, of whose profit and commodity
Christian charity requires, that we should be no less careful then of our
own. Moreover, by this manner of praying, we are more and more assured, that
we shall obtain the bread which we pray for. For as much as the whole Church
does not only crave it with us, but also for us: even as we also do crave the
same both with it, and for it. For we are all the sons of one and the same
Father, even as we are taught in the beginning of this prayer, while we say in
common; Our father. For the same cause also, the two petitions following be
delivered in the same form of words: Namely; Forgive us our trespasses, and
lead us not into tentation. Howbeit, they contain all the things that
appertain to the heavenly life, even as this contains those which be
necessary for this present life.


Theoph. Wherefore are the things that concern our salvation, contained in two
petitions?


Matthew. Because our salvation stands upon two parts. The first; that we be
reconciled unto God; and this we desire in the fifth petition, which entreats
of the forgiveness of our sins. The other, that being reconciled unto him by
the forgiveness of sins, we be kept in his love and obedience, so as we
obey him, being mindful of that infinite benefit which he has bestowed upon
us.


The fifth petition.
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
Theoph. The two last petitions do remain to be confidered of us: Let us
therefore first come to the fifth, What is the meaning of it?


Matthew. Because we be all miserable sinners, by reason whereof the Lord is
justly angry with us, yea rather is so long angry, as our sins shall before
him be laid unto our charge, in this petition we pray, that for his infinite
mercies sake he will forgive them all, to the end that for the time to come he
may favor us being at one with us, namely by the forgiveness of our sins.


Theoph. But why do we crave of God to forgive us our sins, for the which
Christ has most fully satisfied: seeing there is no place for forgiveness,
where satisfaction is made?


Mat. If the satisfaction were of our selves, this were indeed true, but
seeing it is by Christ, which is freely given us of his father, forgiveness
agrees necessarily with it. And verily it is as if a man condemned in some
sum of money were to be cast into prison, until he had paid the whole sum,
and yet were not able to do it. Who^ if the Prince meant to pleasure without
any hinderance of the law, and should freely give him that wherein he was to
have bin fined, should he not have done as much, as if he had forgiven the
offense? He should indeed. But this similitude is most fit: For as much as in
this petition our sins be called debtes, to the end we might understand, that
by them we are no less debtors unto God, then if a man were in great debt unto
another, and yet had not whereof to pay any thing at all. With this similitude
agrees also that, that is written of Paul; Putting out the handwriting that
was against Col. 2. 14.
us, which was contrary unto us, he even took it away, and fastened it upon the
Cross. In which words he teaches, that Christ has most fully satisfied for
our sins.


Theoph. The more diligently I consider the mystery of our redemption, so
much the more comes to my remembrance, the infinite marvelous wisdom of
God, which by a way altogether wonderful, has knit or joined together his
perfect justice with his perfect mercy, and that as well to his own glory, as
to our salvation and benefit.


Mat. True indeed. But if thou do with a little more diligence mark that way,
thou shall find three things which the reason of man could never have devised,
and which out of Christ are found no where else, for the avoiding of the
punishment due for our sins: and they be these: That we should our selves pay
our debts unto God: or else seek another, which is both able to pay them, and
also does acquit us of them: or that God himself should forgive us whatsoever
we be indebted unto him.


Theoph. I would have these things declared by thee a little more largely.


Matthew. First therefore I will show, that these three cannot any where be
found, saving in Christ, And verily whatsoever men can imagine, they shall
never find in themselves wherewith to satisfy God. Who also (as the Apostle
says) Romans 11. 32
has shut all under sin, that he might have mercy upon all.

Neither shall they find any creature in heaven or in earth sufficient to do
this office. But if they fly unto God his mercy, to obtain forgiveness of
their sins, his perfect justice will be a let, which requires to be fully
satisfied.


Theoph. Let us now see, how God has joined these three things together in
Christ, to reconcile his exceeding great mercy with his most perfect
righteousness, unto our salvation.


Matthew. Being made one with Christ by faith, and therefore also partakers of
his goods, we our selves pay all our debtes unto God, and that of the riches
of Christ, which are truly made ours. And by this means the perfect justice
of God is fully satisfied, which indeed requires this, that he which owes the
debt should pay it. Nevertheless another has paid it for us, namely Christ,
who alone has drunk up the cup of God his wrath, (and as the Apostle says)
has 1. Pet. 2. 24
borne our sins in his body upon the tree. And therein most manifestly
appears the great mercy of God, that gave his most dearly beloved Son for
us his enemies unto a most shameful death.

Finnally, because he that has satisfied the heavenly Father for us, is his
dearly beloved Son, and everlasting God with the Father, freely given unto
us; the continual forgiveness of sins (as has bin said) is joined with his
satisfaction, and that does especially make steadfast and sure his immeasurable
mercy.


Theoph. Verily a notable discourse, and very full of comfort. Let us now
return to the exposition of our petition: Why is this clause added in the end:
as we forgive them that trespass against us?


Matthew. That is according to the promise made us of the forgiveness of our
sins, upon this condition, that we forgive them that hurt us. And Christ would
have it expressly mentioned; because he knew how hardly we forgive others their
trespasses. Therefore in this clause he calls us to remember that we shall
not obtain forgiveness of our sins at the hands of God, except we also
forgive our neighbors their offenses. Hereupon is that threatening of God by
the Prophet against the Israelites; When you shall stretch out your hands,
Isay. 1. 15.
I will hide mine eyes from you, although you make many prayers I will not
hear you: for your hands are full of blood.


Theoph. Therefore this manner of speech does not appoint an equality, as if
God forgave us so much, as we shall forgive.


Mat. No, not so: For, our forgiveness even as we our selves be imperfect, is
always imperfect, and sauoureth of the uncleanness of our flesh: whereupon it
comes to pass, that even in them that are most regenerated, notwithstanding
they do unfeignedly forgive as God requires, and desire no revenge, yea rather
be ready to do good unto such as have hurt them, and do daily pray for them:
yet there remains some bitterness, so as we do not embrace them with that
affection of heart, which we would have embraced them with, if we had always
been well pleased with them, which if God should do, we were in very ill case.

Therefore this is the meaning of this petition; o Lord according to thy
promise forgive us our sins fully and perfectly, as the most perfect God. For
as much as we as most imperfect men according to thy commandment have been
favorable unto them that have hurt us.


Theoph. In what place are this commandment and promise?


Matthew. They be presently added by Christ after this prayer in these words; If
you forgive men their offenses, Mat. 6. 14.
your heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if you shall not forgive men
their offenses, neither will your Father forgive you your offenses.


Theoph. I grant it is very right, that we should do those things to our
neighbors, which we desire to be done to ourselves. And so that God does most
worthily deny them forgiveness, that will not forgive their neighbors.


Matthew. True: especially seeing our sins against God whereof we crave pardon,
are far more grievous, and far more in number then are they which our
neighbors can ever commit against us. And this does Christ plainly teach, in
an excellent parable, when he says; Mat. 18. 23
The kingdom of heaven is like unto a king, which would demand an account of
his servants. And when he began to reckon, there was one brought unto him which
ought ten thousand Talents. And when he was not able to pay it, his Lord
commanded him to be sold, and his wife and children, and all he had, and the
debt to be paid. The servant therefore fell down and besought him, saying;
Master, appease thine anger toward me, and I will pay thee all. Then that
servants master had compassion upon him, and loosed him, and forgave him the
debt: but when the servant was departed, he found one of his follows that
ought him an hundredth pence, and he laid hands upon him, and took him by the
throat, saying, pay me that thou owe. The^ his fellow fell down at his
feet, and besought him, saying, appease thine anger toward me, and I will pay
thee all: yet he would not, but went and cast him into prison, till he should
pay the debt. And when his other fellows saw what was done, they were very
sorry, and came and declared unto their master all that was done. Then his
master called him, and said unto him: O evil servant, I forgave thee all that
debt, because thou prayedst me: ought not thou also to have had pity upon
thy fellow, even as I had pity on thee? So his master was wroth, and
delivered him unto the Iaylers, till he should pay all that was due unto him.
So likewise (says Christ) shall mine heavenly Father do unto you, except ye
forgive from your hearts each one to their brother their trespasses.


The sixth petition.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Theoph. The last
petition is behind.


Mat. The exposition of the last petition
Having obtained forgiveness of sins, we desire of the Lord to be present
with us, that we fall not again into them, when we say, lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil. For, this we pray, that he will not
give us over into the power of the devil, to be overcome of him in temptation
as we have deserved: but contrariwise, that he would strengthen us against the
assaults and deadly subtleties of so great an enemy, that so daily more and
more we may apply our selves to amendment of life, and obey him.


Theoph. When therefore God leads men into temptation, does he not stir
them up to evil?


Matthew. Not so. For that is altogether unworthy of his Majesty, and is contrary
to his divine nature.

Iam. 1. 13.
For this cause James says; Let no man when he is tempted, say, he is
tempted of God. For God cannot be tempted with evils, neither does he tempt any
man. But every one is tempted, while he is drawn aside and snared of his own
concupiscence.

Therefore as God defends the faithful with his mercy, neither suffers
them to be deceived or mastered of the Devil, to be overcome of sin: so on
the contrary side, such as he means to punish, he delivers over to the
Devil as to a tormentor, to be overcome and vanquished of him in temptation.
In which sense the Apostle says, that they which glorify not Romans 1. 14.
God, are given up to the lusts of their own hearts. Which nevertheless he
does without any allowance of sin, as has been said in his place.


Theoph. So far as I see, God punishes sins with sins.


Matthew. Yea verily: but by a way diverse from that whereof I spoke, when we
entreated of afflictions: In which place we said, that God sometimes stirs
up one, which commits that sin against us, which we our selves had
committed against another: an example whereof we have in David. He had defiled
the wife of Vriah, the Lord raised up his son Absalom, to defile his fathers
Concubines. But of all the temptations sent of God, that is the most grievous,
when God delivers men up to the devil, to be overcome of him in temptation.
For then he gives them over into a reprobate sense, that when they have
heaped sins upon sins, they may at length run headlong into eternal
destruction, except the Lord (which sometimes he does) by his mighty hand stay
the course of that down fall.


Theoph. What means the conclusion added to this prayer, For thine is the
kingdom, the power and glory, for ever and ever. Amen?


Mat. It contains the cause for the which we crave all the former things,
namely for that they concern his kingdom, power, and glory. For, by the
first three his kingome is made manifest, and by the last three his power is
exercised; whereupon follows the increase of his glory. Therefore this
conclusion is added, The exposition of the conclusion.
that we may with more boldness come unto God, and crave of him the things
we have spoken of, who only is able to give them unto us: and that with
greater assurance we might believe that we shall obtain them; For as much as
while he bestows them upon us, he declares himself to be a most mighty
king, whereupon follows his own glory.


Theoph. I can not sufficiently marvel at this abridgement or breuiarie of
prayer, as also the two former, namely of faith and the law, seeing that in so
few words, and in so exact order, they contain such hard things, and so
excellent doctrine.


Matthew. Thou do indeed not without cause marvel at them: For in them
shines the wonderful wisdom of God, and they do very well agree together
among themselves, in that order wherein we have propounded them. For faith
teaches us al things that are Faith.
to be believed unto our salvation: and I set it in the first place, as it were
the foundation of the rest. But the The Law.
law concerning al things that he required to the yielding of obedience unto
God, follows in most excellent order, as the fruit and witness of faith.
Finally in Prayer.
the last place comes prayer, because of our selves we ca^ neither believe,
or do any thing that is pleasing unto God; by the which we be taught, by what
means we may obtain both at his hands. And in these is contained the sum of
all Christian doctrine.


Theoph. Before I go to any other thing, I will ask thee two questions
concerning the doctrine of prayer.

1 First, prayer seems to be unprofitable, seeing we can by it obtain
nothing at the hands of God, besides that which he has already determined in
his unchangeable providence to give us: neither does he cease to give it,
although we pray not.

2 Secondly it seems superfluous, that we should pray unto God to show him
what things we have need of, for as much as he knows them better then our
selves: Now it is thy part to answer to the former, which concerns the
providence of God.


Matthew. Whether the providence of God should keep us from prayer.
They be much deceived which for this cause abstain from prayer: for the
providence of God takes not away second causes, such as prayer is, yea, rather
it does stablish and strengthen them, for God uses them as instruments, for
the performance of that which he had appointed before. But I remember a story,
which if I be not deceived, will bring light unto this question. A certain
noble man well furnished with horses, and armor went to war. Now it fell out
that he took his journey by the house of a very faithful Pastor of the
Church known to him long before. This man gave not over to warn him, to be
diligent in prayer, by the which he might move the Lord to favor his
enterprises. He straight way reasons concerning the providence of God, as if
he should have said, that God had already determined of all things that should
come to pass: and therefore that his decree could not be changed by his
prayers. That good minister answered; I would therefore advise thee, to send
away thy horses and thine armor as things unprofitable, for as much as the
issue of war depends upon the providence of God, so as no other thing can
come to pass, besides that which he determined. The soldier answered, that
such as went to war could not without rashness lay aside their armor,
because they were instruments, by the which God is wont to give the victory
to such as it seemed good unto him. The same also might I say of prayer (says
the Minister) by the which the Lord uses to give us the things that be
necessary, as well for the use of this life, as for everlasting salvation, and
therefore that it was no less rashness, to neglect it under the pretense of
Gods providence, especially seeing it is in so many places commended of God
with innumerable promises made unto those that did often exercise themselves in
it: and the son of God himself had given us an example thereof, who also
does command that we should pray without ceasing. By the which answer that
Noble was man not a little edified.


Theoph. I may confess the same of my self: Furthermore I do acknowledge,
that hitherto I did never know the answer of this question so clearly, as I
have understood it by this comparion of armor, which indeed I think most fit
to bring light unto this doubt. And verily in the mean time it does not a
little agree unto prayer: For prayer is unto us in stead of spiritual weapons,
by the which we may fight against and overcome our spiritual enemies, the
devil, the flesh and sin. Hitherunto is referred the saying of Paul; Romans
15. 30
I beseech you brethren for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and the love of the
spirit, that ye would strive with me by your prayers to God for me.
Moreover, this reason ought to take place in all the affairs of men, the event
and issue whereof notwithstanding it depend and hang upon Gods providence, yet
are not humane means to be neglected, which the Lord ministers unto us to do
them by: otherwise God is tempted and despised. Let us come to the other
question, what needs it to crave of God by prayer things necessary, seeing
that he knows them far better then we our selves?


Mat. That it is necessary to pray to God although he know better then our
selves what is expedient for us.
Notwithstanding he would that we should obtain them by daily prayers;

1 First, that we may be kept in some fear and reverence by this outward
adoration and worship, by the which also he means to exercise us continually
in thankfulness, that we may so much the more acknowledge him to be the
fountain of all good things.

2 Secondly, he does the more declare his love toward us, when he does so
far abase himself that he vouchsafes to hear our complaints one after an
other peculiarly, that he may provide for them, so much as he shall know to be
convenient. And by this means he enflameth us to the love of himself, and
causes us to put all our hope and confidence in him.

3 Thirdly, by that familiar commoning or talking with him, he means to make
us well acquainted with his excellent majesty, that we may be bold to fly to
him the more freely in all our necessities, as unto our most merciful father.

4 Last of all, he does this, that we may more and more confess, that
whatsoever good thing we have, comes from him alone, that we should give him
thanks, and use it to his own glory. For if he gave us good things unasked,
we should easily believe either that they were from our selves, or else that
they came to us by chance.


Theoph. While thou show me the cause, while the Lord would have us to
obtain by prayer the things that he has determined to give us, thou have by
the same labor declared the excellency and worthiness of it. For I perceive
that by it, almost the whole first table of the Law is fulfilled.


Mat. Thou iudgest right. For by it, God is acknowledged with the mind,
worshipped with the body, and sanctified and hallowed with the mouth.

Therefore also he requires prayer of us as his especial worship, and among
all the good things that he bestows upon us, it is the greatest: forasmuch
as by it, we may have access to his Majesty, so often as we please. For,
that good heavenly Father suffers us coming to him familiarly, and laying
open our wants to him, even as we might do with some familiar friend of ours.
Moreover, as the lawful use of prayer is very acceptable to God, and most
profitable for our selves: so on the contrary side, there is nothing more
displeasing unto God, and that does more provoke his wrath, then the abuse of
it.


Theoph. What is that abuse?


Mat. It may be referred to six heads.

1 First, when we make our prayers to any others, What corruptions Satan has
brought into prayer.
or unto himself in any other name, but in the name of Christ. And in this
Idolaters do offend, that fly to Angels, or to the Saints received into heaven.

2 Secondly, when the power of God is tied to some certain prayers, which
superstitious persons do, that number their prayers, who also have certain set
forms of praying, which they think unlawful to exceed.

3 Thirdly, when God is prayed to, only with the mouth, the heart in the mean
time being very far off, by the which sin, the Majesty of God is indeed
shamefully despised. But therein they are especially deceived, that pray in a
strange tongue they understand not: For, it is impossible that our mind should
attend upon the things which we understand not.

4 Fourthly, when any prays unto God with a vain opinion of his own
righteousness, so as he is no whit touched with the true sense and feeling of
his own misery. And therein hypocrites, and iusticiaries do offend; of which
number that proud Pharisie was, who in praying, gave thanks to God that he was
not like other men.

5 Fifthly, when any impenitent person, or that trauelleth not to amend his
life, prays: and this is the most common sin of prayer, and usual also
with them, which otherwise brag of the profession of the Gospel. Who
notwithstanding they avoided the four former faults, yet are not free from
this profaning of the name of God, but do most of all fall into the contempt
of it.


Theoph. How?


Mat. Do thou ask? Is not this to contemn his majesty, when they pray to
God that his name may be hallowed, which they do defile and unhallow in their
blasphemies and great oaths?

That his kingdom may come, when they make a scorn of the ministry of the
Church?

That his will may be done: which they do every day set them selves against,
and that more is, be in a great fume, if any thing fall out besides their own
will?

Crave daily bread, which they get by unlawful means?

That he will forgive them their sins as they forgive their neighbors; in
the mean time pursue them with deadly hatred, that have done them wrong, and
work them all evils and mischief?

That he will not lead them into temptation: but in the mean while purposely
seek vanities and allurements of the world, whereinto they may be led?


Theophilus. But it may be objected, that none but mere profane persons, do
the things that be against this prayer.


Matthew. I grant: But if a man be against it it in one only point, he does no
less mock God; for, that cannot spring from any where else, save from the
contempt of his most holy Majesty, so as he do it knowing it, and willingly.

Iam. 2. 10.
Therefore James says; Whosoever keeps the whole Law, and yet fails in
one point, is guilty of all. For, even as if one of the vital parts, wherein
the life is in a man's body, be hurt, it brings death unto a man, although
all the other be well. So falls he into destruction, that applies himself to
some good works, and abstaineth from many sins; nevertheless in the mean
time, he continues in one sin, and flattereth himself in it, and repents
not.


Theoph. But thou understand not this, of the sins which oftentimes through
the infirmity of our flesh, be committed of us.


Matthew. These things be understood, neither of other, nor of these sins, so
as there be repentance and a desire to amend; for then all be forgiven by the
mercy of God in Christ.


Theoph. The sixth and last fault in prayer is behind.


Matthew. When a man prays without faith, that is, without assurance of being
heard, and it is as it were the effect, and that which hangs upon the former
five. Nevertheless, this is a most grievous sin, for that distrust must
needs arise from this, that we believe that God either cannot, or will not
perform the things we pray for, or else that he hears not our prayers,
which verily cannot come into the mind of any man, but he denies either his
power, or his goodness, or his Godhead.

Iam. 1. 6.
For this cause James says, that every one should pray with faith and waver
not: for he that wauereth, is like a wave of the sea, tossed of the wind, and
carried away; neither let that man think, that he shall obtain any thing of
God. Christ also says; Whatsoever Mat. 21. 22
you shall ask in prayer, if you believe, you shall receive it.


Theoph. But why do thou call this fault the effect of the former?


Matthew. Because faith cannot be with idolatry, nor with superstition, nor with
profaneness, nor with hypocrisy. But especially, if there be an evil
conscience: for even the faithful themselves find it true by experience in
themselves, that they cannot assure themselves that God is merciful to them to
hear their prayers, if through infirmity they fall into any sin, till they
be reconciled to him by true repentance. I herfore, faith is as it were the
soul of true prayer, for it comprehends all the conditions of it. Moreover,
as by it God is glorified, so also it is always heard of him. But
contrariwise, as the fained is despised, so he not only never hears it, but
does also contemn it, and most grievously reuengeth the makers of it, as those
of who^ his most holy name is profaned.


Theoph. This morning thy discourse of good works, did not a little delight me,
but this our disputation of prayer, has very greatly edified and comforted me.
And by it in sum I have learned these things.

1 How we ought to pray: namely, that our prayers be directed unto God from the
heart: but yet so, that we be touched with the right feeling of our own
poverty and misery, and with true repentance of our sins.

2 Secondly, what is to be asked at the hands of God, namely the things that
concern his glory, and our own salvation and profit.

3 Finally, by what means we shall obtain them: eue^ if they be asked of us
with faith in the nake of our Lord Jesus Christ. But I beseech God our heavenly
Father, that the prayers that shall be made of us, may be free from all those
evil conditions which thou have reckened up, that he himself may so much the
more be glorified by them, and we daily have experience of the effect of them:
so as,

He may comfort us in our adversities.

Help our necessities.

Succor our infirmities.

Bring help to our weakness.

And strengthen us in his love and fear.

And finally, confirm us in the hope of everlasting life, through Jesus Christ
his Son our most beloved Lord.


Matthew. So be it.

But now the chief points of Christian Religion have been declared by us, and
I hope by the grace of God, that they which are behind shall be handled to
morrow. In the mean time, I pray God to give thee good night.


Theoph. And I do also pray the same for thee.


The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF Christian Religion: entreating of the outward means, by
the which God brings us to salvation.
CHAP. I. Of the ministry of the word, by the which the holy Ghost begets
faith in our hearts, keeps and increases it.
Theophilus. GOd save thee most dearly beloved and reverend brother.


Matthew. God save thee also, most loving Theophilus.


Theoph. Shall it not be troublesome to thee, for us to return to the
disputation we brake off, and to assay to bring it to an end?


Matthew. Nay rather (Theophilus) it shall be a most pleasant thing unto me.
Nevertheless, before we come to the matter, I pray God, that as hitherto he
has been with us, he will also be with us hereafter to the end.


Theoph. So be it. I will in few words repeat our former discourse, that the
things which have bin handled already, may be joined with those that follow.

1 First, hitherto has been handled the chief A brief rehearsal of the
former books.
grounds of our salvation, namely the perfect justice of God, and the deadly
sickness of man's sin.

2 Secondly, the most perfect remedy of it, even Jesus Christ.

3 Furthermore, the applying of this remedy unto us by faith, by the which we
recover spiritual health, that is, we are justified before God, in so much as
we are made partakers of eternal life.

4 And last of all faith, which is wrought in out hearts by the holy Ghost that
regenerateth us, together with repentance, from whence good works do flow:
which indeed be testimonies of our faith, but especially prayer. Therefore this
one thing remains that The sum of the third Book.
we understand by what means the holy Ghost does regenerate or renew us.


Mat. Peter affirms, 1. Pet. 1.
that we are begotten again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible,
by the word of the living God. And therefore we do by good right say, that by
it the holy Ghost begets in us, both faith and repentance.


Theoph. When has the word of God that force?


Mat. When it is preached of such as have a lawful calling unto it. For Paul
says: How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? How therefore
Romans 10. 13
without preaching? but how shall they preach except they be sent? Out of which
words he draws this conclusion; Therefore faith is by hearing, and hearing
Romans 10. 17
by the word of God.


Theoph. There be therefore diverse degrees or steps of our salvation. For it is
plain by that which has bin said, that we cannot obtain it;

1 But we must be reconciled with God.

2 But we cannot be reconciled to God, without Christ.

3 Christ without faith we can never have. Lo here three degrees, and now thou
addest the fourth.

4 That we cannot have faith without the preaching of the word.


Mat. Of the word preached and rec^ed by faith.
So it is: whosoever therefore despise the preaching of the word of God (which
is in respect of us the first step of our salvation) do despise and contemn
their own salvation. For the Apostle says; 1. Cor. 1. 21.
After that the world in the wisdom of God knew not God by his wisdom,
(that is by the frame and workmanship of this world, by the which God makes
manifest his exceeding power and wisdom) it pleased God by foolish preaching
to save believers.


Theoph. Why calls he preaching foolish, which in the former verse he had so
highly extolled?


Mat. He does that according to the opinion of men, of who^ for the most part
it is despised, no otherwise, the^ if it were foolinesse: notwithstanding he
teaches, that with God it is the greatest wisdom unto those of who^ it is
received and entertained with due reverence: which Christ confirms when he
says; Mat. 13. 44
The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hidden in the field, which when a
man found, he hid it, and for joy he has of it, he goes aside and sells all
he has, and buieth that field.


Theo. But in those parables, Christ entreats not of the preaching of the
word, but of the kingdom of heaven, which indeed he says is like unto sundry
things.


Matthew. It is not to be doubted, but that by the name of the kingdom of
heaven, he does understand the preaching of the word: and this is easily
gathered even out of the former parables wherein he speaks of the seed; for
in them by the interpretation of Christ himself, the preaching of the word is
meant.


Theoph. Why is the preaching of the word called of Christ by the name of the
kingdom of heaven?


Matthew. To the end he might show, that it is as it were a key, by the which the
gate of the kingdom of heaven is opened unto us. Which thing in another place
he confirms, when he calls the ministry of the word, the keys of the
kingdom of heaven. Mat. 16. 19



Theop. Now do I desire to hear of thee what Christ means by those parables
of the treasure hidden in the field, and of that precious pearl, to the
purchasing whereof, he counsels us to sell all we have.


Matthew. This is his mind, that the ministry of the word far excels all
earthly riches, and that therefore it is to be preferred before all our goods,
yea rather that they ought all to be forsaken, then to suffer our selves to be
deprived of it.

A most profitable admonition to such as hear the preching of the word.
In the mean time notwithstanding, we must diligently take heed of two
extremities, whereunto Satan labors all he can to throw us, that he may
take from us the fruit which we are to reap of the preaching of the word. The
one is the contempt of him which preaches the word. The other when we
attribute or give unto him more then is right.


Theoph. What discommoditie have we by the former extremity?


Mat. That we have no fruit of his preaching, whose person we despise. For the
contempt of the doctrine does necessarily follow the contempt of his person.
For this cause Paul meaning to commend Pastors in respect of the excellency of
their office, applies unto them this saying of Esaias; Isa. 52. 7. Romans 10.
How beautiful are the feet of them that preach peace, and bring tidings of
good things.


Theoph. What discommoditie arises of the other extremity?


Mat. When too much is ascribed to the person of him which preaches the word,
it follows, that the force of preaching is attributed unto his person. And
therefore when that is yielded to men that is due unto God, men spoil
themselves of the fruit of the ministry. Now that is that wherein in former
times the Corinthians offended, when one said; 1. Cor. 1. 12.
I am Paul's; I am Apolloes; I am Cephas his; and I am Christ's: which
mischief that the Apostle might remedy, he beats down the persons of the
Ministers in these words; 1. Cor. 3. 5.
Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but the ministers by whom you have
believed? I have planted, Apollo has watered, but God has given the increase.
Therefore, says he, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters, but god which gives increase. For this cause the same Apostle says;
2. Cor. 4. 7.
God has put the treasure of preaching in earthe^ vessels that the excellency
of that power might be of God, and not of us. That is to say, God for the most
partsendeth ministers of abject and base condition, that their excellency
should not darken the power, which he declares by their ministry.


Theoph. Now do I see the inconveniences whereun-those two extremities do
carry us, which that we may avoid, the mean must be held and kept, namely
that we honor the Ministers for the preaching committed unto them, and their
preaching in respect of God, whose power is manifested by it.


Mat. Thou iudgest rightly: For we must do as if a king should send us some
gift by the meanest of his servants: for we would entertain him honorably, in
consideration of the gift brought by him: but the gift it self we would
receive for the kings sake, from whom it was sent.


Theoph. Let us go forward. I desire that thou would show, what is the use
of preaching, after that the holy Ghost by it has wrought in us faith and
repentance.


Matt. What the use of preaching is, after we have faith and repentance.
That both may be preserved in us, yea rather increased. For as a young child
after he is borne, stands in need of nourishment, that life may be both
preserved and increased: so he that is begotten a new by the seed of the word
of God, must be fed by the same, that he may get strength, and spiritual
increase, till says the Apostle, we come to a perfect man, and to the measure
Ephesians. 4. 16.
of the age of the fullness of Christ, that is, till we come to perfection it
self, whither indeed we shall never come so long as we live in this world.


Theoph. Is not the reading of the word of God sufficient for these things,
although there be no preaching?


Mat. No not so: even as the use of meats is not sufficient to the nourishment
of man's body, except they be dressed and prepared. For which cause verily, God
when he would threaten an extreme punishment to his people, says; Amos 8. 1^
Behold the days come that I will send a famine into the land, not a famine of
bread, nor a thirst of water, but of hearing the word of God.

By the which words he means, that we cannot be spiritually fed without
preaching. Yet nevertheless the often reading of the word of God, brings no
little help to the preaching of it; For otherwise it should never have been so
diligently commended of God.

Whereby it appears, that the holy Ghost, after it has by the vncorrupt seed
of the word of God, wrought in us faith and repentance, confirms, and as it
were nourishes them, both by the preaching and reading of the same word, and
by the use of the Sacraments, ordained of God for the ratifying and sealing of
it.


Theoph. We will therefore speak of the Sacraments when we have handled two
questions appertaining to the preaching of the word.

Of the calling of the Ministers of the word.
1 The first is, concerning the calling of the Pastors, to whom the preaching
is committed.

2 The other is, of the word that they are to preach.

I will therefore begin with the first: For what cause saidest thou, that the
Pastors ought to be lawfully called to preach that word?


Matthew. The cause is most evident. For even as in a kingdom well ordered,
there is no man which ought or may exercise any public office but by the
commandment of the king: so none ought or can be accounted a true Pastor in
the Church of God to preach his word, except he be by him called with a lawful
calling.

For how can we believe, that God ratifieth that which a mortal man does
with us, unless it be first certainly known that he has his commission from
him?


Theoph. What is that lawful vocation or calling?


Matthew. Vocation of Ministers twofold.
It is twofold.

The one ordinary.

The other extraordinary.


Theoph. What is that extraordinary calling?


Mat. When any is called immediately of God: such as was the calling of the
Apostles.


Theoph. What is the meaning of the word Apostle?


Mat. It is a Greek word, which signifies sent, and they were called by that
name, to declare their office: namely because they were sent of God by Christ,
to preach the Gospel throughout the whole world.

John 20. 21
Therefore Christ said unto them: As my father sent me, so do I send you.


Theoph. Why call thou that calling extraordinary?


Mat. Extraodinarie calling.
Because God uses it extraordinarily, and that only for a time, namely when
the Churches are not yet settled and established: as in the time of Christ when
the Gospel was scarce known to any mortal man.


Theoph. This therefore thou meanest, after the Churches be planted and settled,
that ordinary calling should succeed the extraordinary, to the end it may
have the place in them.


Mat. Yea verily.


Theoph. Let us now therefore entreat of that ordinary calling, and first show
thou what it is.


Mat. It is twofold.

Ordinary calling.
1 Inward, and, 2 Outward.


Theoph. What is the inward calling?


Matthew. That holy desire which any has in the ministry of the Church to
serve the glory of God, wherewith he is moved to prepare himself to the
faithful execution of that office, when he shall be called thereunto with the
outward calling.


Theoph. What is that outward calling?


Mat. The lawful choice of a visible Church met together in the name of
Christ. For he has promised that if but two or three be gathered together in
his name, to be present in the midst of them. After this manner were the pastors
of the primitive church called to the ministry: and this is the true door of
Christ's sheepfold, whereof mention is made in John, in these words; Verily
verily I say unto you, he that enters not in by John 10. 1.
the door into the fold of the sheep, but climeth up another way, is a thief
and a robber.


Theoph. How many things be required, that the choice of the Church may be
lawful?


Mat. 3. things required in the lawful calling of a mimister.
Three, first, that there be a search and trial both of the conversation, and
also of the learning of him that is to be chosen. And this indeed is
necessarily required in a minister, as Paul expressly warns; Tit. 1. 7.
A Bishop must be faultlesse, as Gods steward: not frowardly pleasing himself,
not angry, nor given to wine, no striker, not covetous of filthy gain, but
given to hospitality, a lover of those that are good, temperate, just, holy,
sober, holding fast that faithful word which serves to doctrine, that he may
also be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and to convince the gainesayers.


Theoph. Is the office of a Bishop, the same with the office of a Pastor?


Matthew. Yea altogether. For when Paul calls them by that name, they be put
in remembrance of their duty, as also by other names, by the which they be
called every where in the Scriptures, as Ministers, Shepherds, Elders.


Theoph Let us therefore weigh the signification, and reason of these names.


Mat. Bishop.
First of all, the name of Bishop which signifies an espiall, or one that
watches; admonishes the^ that are called to the ministry of the Church, to
watch, and to have their eyes always set upon the flock committed to their
charge, that it be not corrupted either with ill manners, or with false
doctrine.

Minister.
Secondly, they are called Ministers or servants of Jesus Christ, that they
may understand, that they serve not men but God, and therefore ought with the
more diligence to apply themselves to the execution of their function.

Shepherds.
Thirdly, they be called Pastors or Shepherds, to put them in remembrance
that the flock of Christ is continually to be fed with the word of God, and to
be looked unto, that the devil which is a ravening wolf enter not into it.

Finally, they be called Seniors, Elders or Ancients. Elders.
to declare the gravity of manners, wherewith it is fit they should be
beautified, so as they may be free from all lightness and vanity, which for
the most part is usual in young years.


Theoph. Therefore these sundry names, are not tokens of any degrees or
dignity.


Matthew. No, not so: For Christ heretofore commanded this to his Disciples
striving among themselves for the primacie or chiefty, that he which would be
the chief among them, should be servant to all. Which indeed was not spoken
for their sakes alone, but is set forth as a rule to all Ministers of the
Church.


Theoph. Thou have now declared unto me that first condition of the lawful
calling of Ministers: I pray thee go on to the other.


Matthew. Another is this, that men come not to it by any corruptions or gifts,
but that it be free, so as they that have the power to choose, have only the
glory of God, and the edification of his Church before their eyes.

Thirdly, that he which is chosen have a Church appointed unto him for the
execution of his office, whose duty it is to look unto it diligently and
carefully.


Theoph. If it fall out that he which is chosen, do forsake his calling, is
he to be accounted a Pastor or Minister?


Mat. No verily, unless peradventure his health enforce him unto it. For
otherwise he is as worthy the name of a Shepherd, as he that has laid
aside all keeping and care of the flock.


Theoph. Is it lawful for him that is called to the Ministry of the Church,
to leave off that calling to take another?


Matthew. It is not lawful, unless it be upon some very special known and
approved occasion: For the Apostle witnesses, that a necessity lies upon
him to 1. Cor. 9. 16.
preach the Gospel, which is once called to the ministry of the Church: woe
unto him (says he) if he preach not the Gospel.


Theoph. Thou have verily reckned up worthy conditions, which whosoever has,
is indeed to be accounted a Pastor or Shepherd in the flock of Christ, namely

1 That he feel within himself an inward calling.

2 Be of good conversation.

3 Of sound doctrine.

4 Apt to teach.

5 Be lawfully chosen of the Church.

6 And finally perform his office diligently toward the flock committed to his
charge. Personal succession.
Howbeit thou make no mention of personal succession from the Apostles time,
without which notwithstanding many think that the calling is void and of
none effect.


Matthew. I do grant indeed, that Apostolical succession is required, to the
end any may be lawfully called to the Ministry of the Church: which
nevertheless is to be understood of the doctrine of the Apostles, not of
their persons. For even as heretofore Matthias succeeded Judas: that is a holy
servant of God a traitor: so also it has fallen oftentimes, that Judas
succeeded Matthias, that is schismatickes and heretics succeeded the most
faithful servants of Christ. Moreover there is no testimony in all the
Scripture, by the which it can be proved, that that personal succession is
required as necessary to the calling of the Ministers. This indeed is true, if
there be both, the calling thereby has the more authority, as it was in that
which they call the primitive Church: for in it the personal succession was
joined with the truth of doctrine. But when the truth of doctrine is
ouerthrown, then personal succession is nothing else but a visard, which Satan
uses to blindfold the eyes of men, to the end he may keep them in error.
Therefore, when it comes so to pass, as it is now in the Church of Rome,
what madness is it, to desire that the election and calling of Ministers to
preach the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, should hang upon their person
and will, that bewray themselves to be his open enemies, and whose calling if
it were examined by the former rule expressed in the word of God, should be
found to be void and nothing worth?


Theoph. I desire thee in few words to declare unto me those points, wherein
the truth of Christian doctrine is overthrown in the Papacy.


Matthew. A short rehearsal of Popish impieties.
It stands chiefly in two heads and principal things.

The first, is in that the sincere and true worship of God is defiled with
innumerable superstitions, yea with Idolatry. The other in that which
respects the benefit of Christ, which indeed is ouerthrown, with the
doctrine.

1 Of free will.

2 Of justification by works.

3 Of the merit of works.

4 Of the intercession of Saints.

5 Of the Popes supremacy.

6 Of the works of supererogation.

7 Of Pardons.

8 Of Purgatory fire.

Of which wicked opinions, the Mass was at length framed of them.


Theoph. The first five of these have already been declared by thee: but the
sixth, namely of works of supererogation, I scarce understand what it means.
I would therefore have thee show it me briefly.


Mat. Works of supererogation.
To supererogat in Latin signifies so much, as in the business of another
man to lay out a greater sum then we received of him, by means whereof he is
made bebter unto us.

But these me^ dream, that men may do more good works then God has
commanded: and those according to this similitude, they call works of
supererogation, signifying that in respect of them they account God to be in
their debt; then which doctrine, what is there more monster like? for any to
believe, that a mortal man can bind his creator unto him, to whom
notwithstanding, whatsoever good thing he is able at any time to perform,
that all he is indebted and bound to do, according as has been showed of us in
the chapter Works. But what a mischief is it, that a great part of these
works of supererogation, is nothing else but idolatry or superstition, such as
be religious pilgrimages, monastical life, and such other of that kind,
wherewith God is even offended? Wherefore seeing they have set them selves
against his will, the Lord is not only nothing in their debt: but
contrariwise, they are so much the more holden guilty before his judgment
seat.


Theoph. Popish pardons.
Verily till now I knew not that opinion, as neither the other concerning
pardons, which I desire thee to declare unto me.


Matthew. It is no less absurd then that, forasmuch as it hangs upon it.
Howbeit, these doctrines do lean and stay them selves, upon two most impious
and ungodly foundations.

1 First because they think that Christ by his death has satisfied, not for
the punishment, but for the fault only of those sins which are committed of
us after baptism: and therefore that we our selves must ^atisfie for it,
either in this life, or in purgatory fire, till it be fully paid.

2 Or else that one drop of Christ's blood was sufficient for our redemption.
And that whatsoever he suffered besides, which is indeed an infinite merit, is
laid up in the treasury of the Church, together with the innumerable works of
supererogation wrought by hee-Saints and she-Saints, for the which God is
indebted unto them. Of this treasure (say they) the Pope is the disposer and
steward, whereof he gives to such as he sees good, that is, to such as pay
money. That gift they call indulgences or pardons, because they serve to remit
or lessen somewhat of the punishment, to be otherwise suffered in Purgatory
fire.

As often therefore as the Pope by his indulgences grants, ten, twenty, or
an hundred years of pardon, this he means, that so much is diminished of the
time of that punishment, which we had deserved for full satisfaction to be
suffered for our sins, either in this life, or in the life to come. Yea they
say further (such is the height of their impiety) that these pardons do profit
the dead, namely such as be in the fire of Purgatory; in so much, as that if the
Pope would seriously and in earnest, draw forth that his treasure of Pardons,
he could (say they) empty it, and send the souls tormented in Purgatory the
right way into the heavens.


Theoph. Why therefore does he it not, according to the pattern of that
Pardon, the Vicar whereof he says that he is upon the earth?


Mat. Least that Purgatory fire should be altogether put out, by the which the
Church of Rome has gotten so great riches as it now abounds with.


Theo. I do verily see, that upon good cause it was said of thee, that the
truth of doctrine is utterly overthrown in the Church of Rome. For these two
points which thou have eue^ now spoken of, do almost altogether abolish and
take away the grace of God, and benefit of Christ. Let us now go forward to
the rest: concerning the first part of this point, namely the lawful calling
of Ministers, I require no more. Let us speak of the other, namely of the word
of God which they are to preach How many principal parts be there of it?


Matthew. Two: the Law, and the Gospel.


Theoph. What understand thou by the name of the Law?


Matthew. The Law.
That doctrine, by which is taught what is to be done to obey God; which
indeed is contained in the ten commandments, lately expounded of us.


Theoph. But what is the Gospel?


Matthew. The Gospel.
The word of it self signifies good tidings: but in this place it is taken
for that doctrine, which contains the promise of for giuenesse of sins, and
everlasting life, made unto us of God in the word by his son. And it is
called good tidings, because it is the most excellent message of all that can
be brought.


Theoph. To what end must the law be preached?


Math. That men by the knowledge of their sins may be brought to Christ, and
to repentance and amendment of life. For therefore God gave it, as we have
said in his place.


Theoph. Whereunto is the preaching of the Gospel to be referred?


Matthew. That the penitent may be assured of the forgiveness of sins, and the
enjoying of eternal life. For this cause Christ says; Luc. 24. 46.
that so he ought to have suffered, and rise again the third day: and that in
his name, repentance and forgiveness of sins should be preached unto all
nations. But he says expressly in his name, because as well repentance, as the
forgiveness of sins, have their ground and foundation in the force of his
death and resurrection, without the which we can neither repent, nor obtain
forgiveness of sins, as it has also been said in his place.


Theoph. What is the cause that Christ makes mention of repenetance before the
forgiveness of sins?


Mat. Not indeed to teach that repentance goes before forgiveness of sins,
forasmuch as this rather goes before that; for no man can repent, except his
sins being pardoned, the holy Ghost be given him, by the help whereof he may
repent: but to teach the Ministers, that the doctrine of remission of sins, is
not to be applied but to the penitent: seeing that faith, by the which we are
made partakers of Christ and his benefits, makes it self apparent and to be
seen by repentance, which also was showed in the proper place.


Theoph. The agreement and disagreeme^t of the Law and Gospel.
Seeing repentance is to be preached with remission of sins, it follows,
that the moral law is not contrary to the Gospel of Grace.


Matthew. Neither is it indeed contrary, but in respect of them which seek
their salvation, either in the whole or in part by their good works: for the
Apostle says; Gal. 5. 4.
As many of you as be justified by the law, are made void of Christ, and are
fallen from grace.

But in respect of the faithful, who know that their salvation depends upon
the only mercy of God in Christ, there is a good agreement between the law
and the Gospel. For the Law shows us sin, and the damnation that we have
pulled upon our selves by it, and so it leads us to the Gospel, by the which
sin is put away, and we be discharged of condemnation.

Secondly, the law shows what is to be done: but the Gospel by the spirit
of regeneration, ministers unto us power, both to will and to do.


Theoph. Seeing there is so good a consent between the Law and the Gospel,
wherefore does Paul say; You are not under the Law, but under grace? for it
seems he would say thus much; that the Law is abolished Romans 6. 14.
and taken away by the Gospel of grace.


Matthew. And indeed he understands it of the abolishing of the Law by the
Gospel; but only concerning How the law is taken away.
the condemnation and curse of it* as he himself in another place expounds
in these words; Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, when he
was Gal. 3. 13.
made a curse for us. Howbeit, concerning the use of it, it is no way
abolished: for Christ him self says; Mat. 5. 17.
I came not to take away the Law, but to fulfill it. Which also the Apostle
confirms in the Epistle to the Romans: for after that he had taught, that
we are justified not by the Law, but by faith in Jesus Christ, he presently
adds; Do we therefore make the Law void through faith, God forbid: yea
rather we establish the law. And indeed, why should that most excellent
benefit which the Gospel yields unto us, discharge us from worshipping and
serving of God? by the which we are rather to be stirred up to give it unto him
more and more.


Theoph. Is the Law therefore never to be separated from the Gospel?


Mat. The law never to be separated from the Gospel.
The one indeed is to be distinguished from the other, that we confound not the
mercy of God with our works, which they do corruptly, that will mingle the
righteousness of faith, with the righteousness of the Law, that is to say,
heaven with the earth: nevertheless, they are not to be separated, neither yet
to be preached a part.


Theoph. But Christ sending forth his Apostles to preach the Gospel
throughout the whole world, makes mention only of the Gospel: for he says;
Mat. 16. 15
Go preach the Gospel to every creature.


Mat. The word Gospel set by it self, comprehe^deth also under it the
doctrine of repentance, and therefore the law, no less then the doctrine of
remission of sins. Which indeed is plain, by the place of Luke alleged even
now, who expounds these words of Mark his words be these, Luc. 24. 46.
Christ ought to suffer, and in his name repentance and forgiveness of sins
to be preached. A right manner of preaching.
It is therefore the duty of ministers, in their sermons by the preaching of
the law, to bring men to the true knowledge and feeling of their sins, and to
join therewith the threatenings denounced against the breakers of the law, and
to exhort them to true repentance and amendment of life. Then they ought to
set before them the forgiveness of sins, from the doctrine of the Gospel of
grace But contrariwise, they ought to propound wrath, and the just judgment of
God, against the disobedient and stubburne, except they convert and repent. The
keys of the Church.
And these indeed be the keys of the Church, which Christ had promised to
Peter, and in him to the other Apostles, and to all Pastors: which also after
his resurrection he delivered to his Apostles, when he sent them to preach the
Gospel throughout the whole world.


Theoph. But why did he then promise those keys to Peter alone, which
nevertheless as thou say, he meant to give to the other Apostles also?


Matthew. Because then he spoke to Peter only. But as a little before, Peter not
only in his own name, but also in the name of all the rest of the Apostles,
which had that one faith, had confessed that Jesus was the Christ, and the
son of the living God: in like manner when Christ promised the keys to
Peter, he meant that they were also promised to the rest of the Apostles,
which he does sufficiently declare in the delivery of the^, for he says to
all at once; Receive the holy Ghost. Whose sins you remit, they be remitted to
the^: whose sins you retain, they be retained. I same also did the other
Apostles, and all Pastors confirm, when exercising their ministry, they used
those keys.


Theoph. Wherefore does Christ call the ministry of Pastors by the name of
keys?


Matthew. To the end we might understand, that the kingdom of heaven (as we have
declared before) is by the ministry of the Church, set open to the believers
and penitent, and that it is shut against the unbelievers and stubburne, namely
when as by it the former have their sins forgiven, that so they may come to
eternal life: but to the other they be retained, that so they may be shut from
it. For God does ratify that in heaven, which the Ministers upon earth
pronounce out of his word, eue^ as it appears by the words of Christ himself
unto Peter: for after promise of the keys, presently he adds; Whatsoever
thou shall bind in Mat. 16. 19
earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth,
shall be loosed in heaven. And the self same thing he repeated after to all the
Apostles, to show that they had like authority of binding and loosing, given
to them with Peter.


Theoph. Therefore to bind and loose, is nothing else but to declare the
remission of sins, or to retain them.


Matthew. What it is to bind and loose.
Indeed nothing, as it is plain by the interpretation of Christ himself: for
he said to his Apostles in the place which even now we recited; Receive the
holy Ghost: whose sins ye remit, they be remitted unto them: whose sins
you shall retain they shall be retained. For there is no harder bond then
sin, forasmuch as being bound with it, we be held, and indeed willingly,
under the power and tyranny of the devil and death, and it cannot be loosed
by any strength of man, but by the only might of Christ.


Theoph. Why then does Christ commit the office of binding and loosing to the
ministers, seeing he himself alone, has the power of binding and loosing?


Mat. It is, that we may understand, that the Ministers be as it were
Ambassadors, and proclaimers of the will of God, which Paul teaches in these
words; 1. Cor. 5. 19
God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not imputing to them
their sins: and has put in us this word of reconciliatio^. Therefore we are
ambassadors in the name of Christ: as God by us did exhort you, we entreat you
in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God.


Theoph. I see not therefore that the Ministers have more power of binding and
loosing granted them, then any other private man. For there is none that may
not assure the believer and penitent of the forgiveness of his sins:
contrariwise which may not set the judgment of God before the unbeliever and
obstinate except he repent. And that verily shall be confirmed in heaven, as it
was pronounced by that private person, for that is the will of God revealed in
his word.


Mat. Of the authority of the Ministers of the Church.
That is right indeed, but there is some special thing to be considered, in
the promise of Christ made to the Ministers: namely that by his spirit he will
give more efficacy and force to their words, the^ to the words of any private
man, so as they shall by faith be received of the believer, but shall terrify
the conscience of the unbeliever, and set before his eyes the wrath and
judgment of God. For otherwise the name of the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, should falsely be given unto the ministry of the Church: seeing, that
we may enter into it, it is not enough that the doctrine of forgiveness of
sins, beat our ears, but especially that it enter into our hearts, and be
received of us by faith and obedience. Whereunto is referred that saying of
Paul; Neither my 1. Cor. 2. 4.
speech, nor my preaching stood in the entising words of man's wisdom, but in
the demonstration or evidence of spiritual power. For this cause also Isaiah
calls the preaching of the word, the arm of the Lord, Isay. 53.
that is, the instrument, by the which he declares his might and power, that
he may bring us to salvation.


Theoph. I do see indeed, that the force and fruit of preaching the word of
God is very great: For those three steps by the which we obtain spiritual
health, whereof thou did entreat in the Chapter of Faith, are by it daily
called to use and practice.


Matthew. Thou iudgest right For first the law is preached, that we may
acknowledge our deadly disease, namely sin: Secondly the Gospel is preached,
wherein the saving remedy is offered unto us in Christ.

Last of all, faith which is wrought in us, and increased by the preaching of
the word, applies that medicine unto us, so as we obtain salvation, even the
full forgiveness of all our sins.


Theoph. The article of remission of sins in the Creed, unless I be deceived,
is therefore set after the article of the Church, to the end we might know,
that it is offered unto us by the ministry of it.


Mat. It is indeed: and therefore there is no forgiveness of sins, neither
salvation without the Church; as in the flood there was no safety out of the
Arc of Noah, wherein also at that time the Church of God was then shut up,
that being as it were a type of it.


Theoph. Thou have hitherto largely enough taught, that by the ministry of the
word, we do truly obtain forgiveness of our sins. Notwithstanding there be
two things behind whereof I will ask thee, before we come to the other
treatise.

1 First whether God do wholly (as they say) forgive to the repentant all their
sins?

2 Secondly, whether he forgive them perfectly, namely remitteth the
punishment and the fault, so as they be not any more imputed unto us.


Mat. Let us speak of the former in the first place. John says, 1. John. 1.
7. All sins be forgiven to the penitent.
that the blood of Christ does wash us from all sin. He that says (all)
excepteth nothing. Now repentance yields unto us a more certain testimony
of our faith, by the which as has been said, we be made partakers of Christ,
and of his gifts. Whereupon it follows, that whosoever repents may most
certainly determine, that all his sins notwithstanding they be grievous, are
forgiven and done away. Which also is taught by the examples of that sinful
woman, and of the thief.


Theoph. But Christ says, Math. 12. 32.
that the sin against the holy Ghost shall never be forgiven.


Mat. Of the sin against the holy Ghost.
He says so indeed: But the Apostle to the Hebrews shows, Heb. 6. 4.
that it is impossible that such as fall into it should be renewed by
repentance: for that is the gift of God, granted to them only, of whom he has
determined in Christ to have mercy.


Theoph. But what is that sin against the holy Ghost?


Mat. These words: Against the holy Ghost: do sufficiently declare what it is:
namely, when any after that he has by the holy Ghost been lightened with the
knowledge of the truth of the Gospel, stands against that truth, not for
fear or through infirmity, but upon wilful malice. For then wittingly and
willingly he resists the holy Ghost, and makes war against him.


Theoph. How know thou that this is the sin against the holy Ghost?


Matthew. First, it may be gathered of that, which gave our Savior Christ
occasion to speak of it: namely, that he might prove the Scribes and Pharisees
to be guilty of that horrible sin, who said, that the miracles which he did
were wrought by the Devil, whereof notwithstanding they were not ignorant that
God was the author, and Christ himself by most certain arguments did declare.
And his miracles they did maliciously disprayse in the hatred of his doctrine,
which they perceived was manifestly confirmed by them. From thence therefore it
is plain, that they sin against the holy Ghost, that upon set malice stand
against the known truth. Ad hereunto that by sundry places of the Scripture it
appears that every other sin is forgiven, not excepting that which is
against the doctrine of faith, so as it be done of ignorance, as it was with
Paul when he persecuted the Church: or through infirmity and weakness, as
when Peter denied Christ.


Theoph. It is verily a wonder, that so horrible wickedness can enter into the
minds of men, upon purposed malice to strive against the known truth.


Matthew. It comes to pass by the just judgment of God, unto those that have
long and much despised and set light by his most precious gifts, namely his
loving kindness and mercy in Christ, the knowledge whereof notwithstanding he
had vouchsafed them: and at length they be delivered to the power of the
Devil, that by steps and degrees they may fall to that extreme and final
apostasy. And because they are by it become like unto Satan, namely, when
upon knowledge and wilful malice they resist the truth, they be no otherwise
then himself deprived of all hope of salvation.


Theoph. Let us now come to the other question. When God forgiueth sins,
whether does he it perfectly so as he remitteth the punishment and the fault?


Mat. Whether God remitteth the punishment and the fault.
As God is perfect, so does he perfectly forgive sins, so as he never
remembers the^, nor imputes the^ unto us. Fo so he says every where by his
Prophets; Isay. 1. 18. Isay. 44. 12. Mich. 7. 19.
If your sins were as crimson, they shall be made whiter then snow, if they
were as red as scarlet, they shall be as woll. I have put away thy
tra^sgressions as thick clouds, and thy sins as a mist. He will lay aside our
iniquities, and cast all our sins into the bottom of the sea. Ps. 103. 12.
As far as the East is distant from the West, so far does he remove our sins
from us. Neither is this any marvel, for seeing the forgiveness of our sins
is grounded upon Christ, in whom they be fully punished, God should be unjust,
if he required any thing further for them.


Theoph. But we read that David suffered many punishments, after that by the
message of Nathan, he was certified of the forgiveness of his adultery. An
objection against the doctrine of remitting the punishment and fault.
For the child that was borne unto him of Bethsheba, died. Moreover also his
son Absalom was raised up against him, which both made war upon him, and
defiled his wives. Which punishment was indeed denounced against him by the
Prophet: whereupon it seems to follow, that God forgiueth the sin, but
retains the punishment.


Matthew. The answer to the objection.
This is the doctrine of the Romanists, from whence came the dream of Pardons
and Purgatory fire, as has before been declared of us. Nevertheless I am glad
it is so come to pass, that we may fitly speak of it in this place. For I
will show that it is most absurd, in as much as it separateth those things,
which of their own nature do wholly hang together. For if thou take away the
fault, there is no place left for punishment, otherwise God should be unjust,
if he should punish whom he accou^teth not faulty. Moreover seeing Christ
himself in his own body suffered the punishments due to our sins, it is not to
be doubted but that he has discharged us from the same: even as Esaias expressly
affirms, in these words; Verily he has borne our griefs, and has Isa. 53.
4.
carried our sorrows, and we thought him stricke^, wounded of God and humbled:
but he was wounded for our iniquities, and broken for our sins. The
chastiseme^t of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed. All
we as sheep have gone astray, every one has turned to his own way, and the
Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all. For this cause also Paul
says; Romans 8. 1.
That there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Whereby it
plainly appears, that God when through Christ he forgiueth sins, does no
less remit the punishment of them, then the fault For otherwise our case were
most miserable, yea rather eue^ now we were utterly undone, and the
forgiveness of our sins is unprofitable to us, if the punishment be retained.


Theoph. Why so?


Mat. Because we be unable to bear the burden of it, for as much as it is
infinite no less then the fault, for they be of the same nature.


Theo. What think thou of the afflictions which God sends unto us, even
after the forgiveness of sins?


Matthew. I say they be not sent to be punishments of sins: but to be unto us
in stead of chastisements and corrections to humble us, and that we may be the
wiser after: for the Apostle says; 1. Cor. 11. 32.
When we are chastised, we are instructed of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world.


Theoph. Therefore the nature of afflictions be changed, when as they be sent
to the godly: for they be not punishments of sins to satisfy the judgments of
God.


Matthew. Thou say well and he same is to be thought of the infirmities of the
body, which we know be left us, not to be punishments of sins, but an
exercising of patience. The same also is to be said of death, which to us is as
a bridge, by the which we pass over unto everlasting life, and a way is made
for the resurrection, which nevertheless of it own nature is a punishment of
sin and puts us in mind of it. But it is not sent to the faithful to call
them to account for their sins, as it comes to pass to the wicked.


Theoph. Whether the declaration of Gods mercy give men occasion to continue in
their sins.
By the solution and answer of these questions, me thinks I understand this,
that by the ministry of the Church, all sins of what kind soever be forgiven
to the penitent. Moreover, that there is no other satisfaction for them
required of God, besides the most precious blood of Jesus Christ, by the which
both the fault and punishment of them is wholly taken away, which doctrine does
indeed bring the greatest consolation. Howbeit before I make an end of this
speech, I will ask of thee, whether that indulge^ce of God or easiness to
forgive, ministers unto men occasion to flatter themselves in their sins,
and to continue in them?


Matthew. Yea rather clean contrariwise: for the hope and assurance of obtaining
pardon, does stir up the godly, that they do not cloak or maintain
themselves in their sins. Whereunto that saying of the Prophet is to be
referred; With thee there is mercy, that thou Psalm. 138. 4
may be feared. For from whence is obedience, but from love? and again,
whence is love, but from the knowledge and assurance of Gods goodness toward
us? Moreover this doctrine of the forgiveness of sins, pertains not to any
save to the penitent. But concerning the rest, the Scripture denounces to them
the wrath and judgment of God. Yea rather the Lord says by the Prophet, that
even as he will forget the Ezech. 3. 20
sins of him that repents, so he will not remember the righteousness of
him that shall turn from the right way. Whereupon it is plain, that this
doctrine does not only bring very great comfort to the faithful, but also
does continually spur them forward, to apply themselves to amendment of life.


CHAP. II. Of the Sacraments, ordained of God to be as it were seals of the
word, that we may with more assurance embrace the promises by Christ, revealed
in the word.
Theophilus. HItherto we have sufficiently spoken of ^he ministry of the word.
Now we are to come to the sacraments. And first declare unto me, what
Sacraments be.


Mat. What Sacraments be
They be signs and Sacramental rites, ordained of God in the Church, to be
adjoined to the preaching of the word, that the promises of Christ made in it,
may be confirmed in us more and more.


Theoph. Why are those signs and Sacrame^tall rites called Sacraments?


Mat. The ancient teachers of the Christian church, called them by this name,
in respect of the affinity or nearenesse between them and a Sacrament, that is
to say, that solemn oath, by the which soldiers bound themselves to the
Emperor or chief Captain.


Theoph. Show me that affinity or agreement.


Mat. First, as soldiers when they received their pay, bound themselves to the
Emperor by solemn oath, to live and die under his government: so we when we
are partakers of the signs, which God has appointed in his Church, by the
which he bestows upon us spiritual gifts, do bind our selves to him by
the same oath. Moreover, as soldiers when they took upon them this oath,
received the Emperors badge, that by it they might show themselves to be as it
were addicted and given unto him: so also we when we are publicly partakers
of the Sacraments, which God has instituted in his Church, do as it were take
upon us the ensign or arms of Christ, that it may be known we serve God, and
profess true Religion.


Theoph. I understand the meaning of the word. Now we are to come to the thing
it self. Thou saidest they were ordained of God, for the confirmation of the
promise made of God through Christ in his word. What is that promise?


Matthew. It is expounded of Christ himself in these words; So God loved the
world, that he gave his only John. 3. 16.
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have
life everlasting.

The Sacraments therefore be as it were visible pledges of the love of God
toward us, by the which we are confirmed in it. But because that love is
grounded in Christ alone, the Sacraments represent unto us no other thing, but
the vnio^ and fellowship (...) we have with him and his gifts.


Theoph. Of whom ought the Sacraments to be ministered?


Matthew. Of who^ the Sacraments ought to be ministered.
Christ committed that office to them alone, to whom the preaching of the word
is committed, without the which the Sacraments ought not to be ministered, for
they be as seals of it.


Theoph. There is therefore a very great likeness and agreement between the
word and the Sacraments.


Matthew. Very great. For by both of them God does offer unto us Jesus Christ
his son with all his gifts, and we are made partakers of them, if they be
not refused of us by unbelief. This is one difference, that the preaching of
the word affects the hearing, but the Sacraments affect the other senses:
whereupon of a certain father, they be most fitly called, visible words: for
they do present Christ and his benefits, as it were before our eyes, and
deliver them into our hands, that our faith might be confirmed by those
sundry means, we come so much the nearer unto him, and feel the greater
working of his spirit within us.


Theoph. What conditions be required in the Sacraments?


Matthew. Three, without which they cannot be truly Sacraments, but false.


Theoph. What are those conditions?


Matthew. What conditions be required in Sacraments.
First, that they be ordained of God.

2 Secondly, that there be a commandment of God for us to use them.

3 Thirdly, that there be also a certain promise, by the which it is assured,
that we shall be partakers of the things that are represented by them.


Theoph. Why say thou it is necessary that they be ordained of God?


Matthew. The first condition.
Because as there is none besides himself, which can assure us of the love he
bears toward us in Christ: so is there not any man that may ordain visible
signs to confirm it. Moreover in the institution it self, there be three
things to be noted.

1 The signs, and Sacramental rites.

2 The spiritual and invisible things signified by those signs.

The second condition.
3 The analogy or agreement of the signs with the things signified.


Theoph. I do acknowledge it to be necessary, that Sacraments be ordained of
God, but I desire to understand this, why this also is necessary, that there
should be a commandment of God, to use them.


Matthew. Because nothing is to be done in the Church of God, except there be
first the express commandment of God, who in it is Lord and master:
especially when the question is of things that concern our salvation, such as
the Sacraments be.


Theoph. Why is it again required, that there be a promise added?


Mat. The third condition:
Because unless there be a promise, the Sacraments shall be unprofitable unto
us. Now that promise which on the behalf of God, has the effect, is as it
were the soul of the Sacraments, whereupon all their force and efficacy
depends, and not upon the holiness or worthiness of him of whom they be
ministered, or upon the virtue of some words pronounced. Therefore without that
promise, the Sacraments shall be nothing else but vain and fruitless
ceremonies.


Theoph Think thou that the Sacraments if they be ministered of some wicked
man and hipocrite, have as much efficacy and force, as if they were ministered
by some good man?


Mat. I think it, so as on our part, we bring nothing to hinder it: as good
seed if it find good ground will bear fruit, notwithstanding it be sown, of
some naughty Upon who^ depends the efficacy of the Sacraments. The number of
the Sacraments.
and wicked man. For the virtue of it hangs not upon the lower, as the
Sacraments do not upon the Minister, but upon the blessing and grace of God
alone.


Theoph. Let us come to the number of the Sacraments. How many be there in the
Christian church?


Mat. Two, namely baptism and the Lords supper.


Theoph. Seeing they declare unto us one thing, even as the word does, namely
the love of God toward us in Christ, what is the cause that they be two in
number?


Matthew. Because by Baptism God does witness, that we be received of him into
covenant through the communion of Christ and his gifts: but by the supper he
assures that we are held and kept in, until we be received into the
heavenly life. And for this cause Baptism is only once ministered, but the
Supper oftentimes.


Theoph Declare this reason to me more at large.


Matthew. Yet to me it seems easy. For seeing Baptism is the assured
conueyance unto us of the covenant made with us in Christ, if it should be
iterated or used the second time, or oftener, it were all one, as if we said,
that God had abrogated or disanulled the first covenant to ordain or appoint
another, which indeed is altogether contrary to the very nature, truth, and
constancy of God: For the Apostle says; I am. 1. 17.
With him there is no changing, or shadow of turning. But concerning the
Supper, it is altogether required, both for edifying and for comfort, that it
be often repeated (...) ^sed of us, for as much as (such in the wea^nesse of (...)
faith) we do every moment call into doubt whether God will continue in his
love toward us, or no, especially when we look unto our daily sins by the
which we are indeed worthy to be excluded by (...) by this Sacrament, God
would assure us of hi^ (...) the which he does both offer and exhibit or give
Jesus christ unto us with his treasures, in whom alone as has bin said, that
covenant and love has the foundation.


Theoph. Whether the Sacraments be necessary to salvation.
I will yet demand of thee one question generally pertaining to the Sacraments,
before we begin the particular exposition of them both. Whether are they so
necessary to salvation, that no man can be saved without partaking of them.


Matthew. It is a most absurd opinion of them, who think that God has tied his
grace to the Sacraments: for they be only for this end ordained, that the
grace and favor yielded us before in Christ, should be confirmed and ratified:
therefore it was most excellently said of an ancient father; Bernard. epist.
77.
That the want of Baptism did not condemn, but the contempt of it.


Theoph. But Christ says; Mar. 16. 16
Whosoever believes and is Baptized shall be saved. Out of which words it
seems may be gathered, that Christ determines Baptism to be necessary to
salvation, no less then faith: and that the same may be concluded concerning
the Supper, out of that which Christ himself said in another place; John 6. 53.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, except you eat the flesh of the son of man,
and drink his blood, you have no life in you.


Matthew. In the first place I will answer to those things which thou saidest of
Baptism: whereof I say, that in that place Christ does not set down the
necessity of Baptism, but rather, what is that true faith, by the which we
are saved namely that it is not dead and hidden, but lively and declared by
outward confession. Insomuch as the believers be joined to the church, and be
partakers of the preaching of the word, and administration of the Sacraments:
whereunto that saying of Paul ought to be referred; We believe with the heart
Romans 10. 10
to righteousness, and confess with the mouth to salvation. And that this is
the mind of Christ, it is gathered by the member following: for he says; But
whosoever believes not shall be condemned. For if this had bin his meaning,
that no man could have bin saved without Baptism, he would have said thus; But
whosoever shall not believe, or shall not be baptized, shall be condemned. Seeing
therefore he says, that unbelief is the cause of comdemnation, by the
contrary he means that faith is sufficient to salvation, which he himself
oftentimes confirms, when he says; John. 3. 36. and 5. 24. and 6. 4.
He that believes in the son, has life everlasting: but he that believes
not in the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him.
Concerning the other place of eating the flesh of Christ, and drinking his
blood, he does not there entreat particularly of the Supper, but generally of
the union that we ought to have with his body: which indeed is altogether
necessary unto salvation, as has bin showed of us in the first book. But
that union is wrought no less by the word received by faith, then by the
Sacraments, as it has been said already.


CHAP. III. Of Baptism: by the which God testifies that we are received into
covenant of him, whiles he does communicate Christ Jesus unto us together with
his benefits.
Theophilus. NOw we are to weigh those two Sacraments each by it self, and in
both, those three conditions are to be searched out, that are required to make
them truly Sacraments. Let us therefore begin with Baptism: what is the
institution of it?


Mat. The institution of Baptism.
First indeed it was instituted of God, by the ministry of John Baptist, which
thereupo^ had his name. Afterward it was dedicated and sanctisied of Christ in
his own body, when he would be baptized of him, and when he commanded the
Apostles to baptize.


Theoph. Let us see those three things which thou saidest were required in the
lawful institution of a Sacrament, namely:

1 The sign and sacramental rites.

2 The signification of them.

3 The likeness and agreement between both.


Matthew. The sign.
The sign of this Sacrament is water, which signifies the blood of Christ,
that is, the force of his death, because it has that effectual working in
cleansing our souls from the filthiness of sin, which material water has
in clensing our bodies. Thereupon this Sacrament has the name of Baptism, for
it signifies washing. Now thou have the sign.

The sacramental rite.
But the sacramental rite is, that he which is to be baptized, be sprinkled
with water, or dipped in it, which was used in formet times, and by it two
things were signified unto us.

1 First, that our souls are sprinkled with the blood of Christ, that is, be
indeed partakers of the merit of his death, by the which we obtain full
forgiveness of all our sins.

2 Secondly, that we be regenerated into a new life. Therefore Baptism of
Paul is called the lauer of regeneration: by the which words those two gifts
of God, that we have by Baptism are excellently noted.


Theoph. How can the sprinkling of water, be a sign or token of our
regeneration?


Matthew. The scripture is wont to set down two parts of it, namely the
mortification or death of the old man, and the rising again of the new man, as
it has been said of us in his place. But this mortification which has the
force and working from the death and burial of Christ, is most fitly
represented by the sprinkling of water: for it is all one as if our old man had
the death, wound given it, or being swallowed up of death it self were buried
with Christ. Then follows the resurrection of the new man, which hangs
upon the resurrection of Christ, and is represented by the waters making
clean. For by it is signified, that together with him we do rise from the
grave of death, to become new creatures.


Theoph. There be yet behind, the promise and commandment of this Sacrament.


Mat. The promise and commandment.
The words of Christ set down by Matthew, do contain both; Mat. 28. 19
Go teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost.


Theoph. The commandment I see, but not the promise.


Matthew. It is contained under the commandment. For when any is baptized in the
name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, it is as if it were said unto him;
By this visible sign I do assure thee, that all thy sins be washed away, and
that thou art regenerated, not by any power, or by the force of this water
wherewith thou art forinckled, but by the mercy of the heavenly father, who for
this purpose, does be the power of the holy Ghost, communicate unto thee Christ
Jesus his son, with all his benefits, and does unite thee unto him. so as
thou art made partaker of him Seeing therefore Christ commands, that these
things should be preached, it is not to be doubted, but that he promises the
thing it self. Baptism therefore is given us of God, as it were writings
sealed by the which he assures us of the full forgiveness of all our sins.


Theoph. What sins think thou be done away by Baptism: only original
sin?


Matthew. What sins be put away in Baptism.
That indeed is first done away, not that it does not remain in us, but
because it is not imputed. The same also we may affirm of other sins that
be effects of it: for they be put away by this Sacrament, they be put away (I
say) both those that be past, and those that are to come. The words therefore
delivered of the Minister in Baptism, by the commandment of God: namely, I
Baptize thee in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost should always be
in our ears, even until the last gasp, and by them ought we to be assured of
the full forgiuesse of our sins. For the blood of Christ in the which we are
once Baptized, is never drawn dry, but is always fresh, (as the Apostle
speaks) that is, full of officacie and strength, to the continual washing
away of all our filthinesses and iniquities.


Theoph. Of our union with Christ.
Thou saydest in the exposition of this promise, that in this Sacrament, the
Father did communicate Christ and his benefits unto us. But both the sign of
it, and the Sacrame^tall rites, do only represent unto us the participation or
fellowship which we have with his death, but not the community we have with
his body.


Matthew. We have taught in the first book, that no man can be partaker of
Christ's benefits, which is not made one with him; the one therefore follows
upon the other. By these things therefore it is proved, that by Baptism we
be truly made partakers both of Christ's body, and of his benefits, which also
Paul confirms in these words; So many of you as be Baptized Gal. 3. 27.
into Christ, have put on Christ.


Theoph. I come again to the institution of Baptism, wherein Christ says to
his Apostles; Go teach all nations, Mat. 28. 19
Baptizing the^ in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. What is the
cause that Christ commands his Apostles, to teach first before they Baptize?


Matthew. The reason is most evident: for, seeing the Sacraments be as seals of
the word, it is sit that every Why Christ would have the word preached, before
Baptisine he ministered.
one should be first instructed in the doctrine, before he be Baptized, or
confirmed in the same doctrine: excepting only the children of the saithfull,
of whom there is another reason, which causes, that they be to be Baptized
presently after they be borne.


Theoph. What is that reason?


Matthew. Because God has promised in the person of Abraham, that he will be the
God of the faithful, and of their seed, which self same thing, God
confirms in the law, when he says; Evod. 20.
That he is such a one, as shows mercy to a thousand generatio^s, of those
that love him, and keep his commandments. Seeing therefore the children of
believers appertain to the covenant of God, it is not to be doubted, but that
the Sacrament of it, namely Baptism, is to be ministered to them. Which is
again confirmed by the example of the Israelites, who by the commandment of
God Circumcised their children the eight day.


Theoph. Is there the same reason of Baptism and of Circumcision?


Matthew. The agreement between Circumcision and Baptism.
Yea altogether: and in very deed it is one and the self same Sacrament as
concerning the substance. For Baptism came in stead of Circumcision after the
coming of Christ, by the which the gifts of God were not diminished, but
increased unto us. For even as the Sacraments of the new Testament are far more
easy and more significa^t then the Sacraments of the old Testament: so the
force and working of them is far greater.


Theoph. But what profit can there come by Baptism to a child without
understanding and knowledge?


Mat. Much, if thou consider both the glory of God, the comfort of the parents,
and finally the edification and salvation of the child.


Theoph. Why so?


Mat. First of all God is glorified, for that he shows himself true in his
promises, by the which it is that he has mercy upon the faithful eue^ to the
thousand generation. Moreover the parent himself is wonderfully comforted, and
confirmed in the love of God, when he sees that not only he himself is
beloved of God, but also that the love and grace of God is derived unto his
children, which God assures him of by that visible sign. Finally concerning
the child, it has a marvelous benefit bestowed upon it, that he does so soon
obtain the partaking of Christ and his benefits, by the which he has the
inheritance of eternal life. By the remembrance whereof when he comes to
age, he is wonderfully confirmed in the love and fear of God, namely when he
calls to mind, that he is so much esteemed of God, that even from his coming
into the world, he obtained fellowship in his covenant.


Theo. How the children of believers lacking faith be partakers of Christ.
But how can a young child by Baptism be partaker of Christ and his benefits,
seeing it is certain that he lacks faith, without which thou affirmedst
before that no man can have that fellowship?


Mat. That indeed is true in those that be of years, and in such as for their
age may believe. But God works in the children of the faithful belonging to
his covenant, another way unknown unto us, who^ also the Apostle doubts not
to call holy, 1. Cor. 7. 14.
in so much as they cannot perish, seeing they have in them the seed of faith,
which verily in the due time works the effects, in some sooner, but in other
later, as it seems good to the Lord to call them.


Theoph. How the children of the godly be borne in original sin.
I do now see that the children of the godly are to be Baptized.
Notwithstanding I will yet propound one question, before I go from the speech
which I have begun. How can it be that those children of the faithful, should
be borne defiled with original sin, whose parents be cleansed from it?


Mat. Austen by an excellent similitude, Austen. de penit. merit. and remis.
li. 3. cap. 18.
answers this question in these words; Even as the chafe which by the help
of man is severed with great diligence from the wheat that is threshed,
notwithstanding remains in the fruit which grows of the said cleansed
wheat being sown: so sin that by Baptism is cleansed in the parents,
remains in those whom they have begotten. Therefore our children except they
be borne again by a spiritual birth, cannot be accounted the children of
God, nor heirs of eternal life.


CHAP. IIII. Of the Supper of the Lord. By the which God witnesses that his
covenant is most certain toward us, for as much as by it he makes us more and
more partakers of Christ and his benefits.
Theophilus. HItherto has bin spoken of Baptism, let us now come to the
Supper of the Lord, and let us begin at the institution of it.


Mat. Of the word Supper, and the institution of it.
The Evangelists show that it was instituted of Christ, the same night he was
betrayed after he had supped, and had eaten the Easter I am be according to
the Law.


Theoph. I think it was thereupon called Supper.


Mat. It is called Supper of the Apostle, not so much for this cause, as to
show that it is indeed a spiritual Supper given of God unto the faithful,
wherein he feeds them with the body and blood of Jesus Christ into the hope
of eternal life.


Theoph. The three heads of the institution are to be examined of us, namely:

1 The signs and Sacramental rites.

2 Their signification.

3 And finally the likeness or agreement between both.


Matthew. The signs of the supper.
The signs are bread and wine, which indeed do signify the body and blood of
Christ. Because the body and blood of Christ have that force and efficacy of
feeding, in our souls, which bread and wine have in our body. And for this
cause Christ often calls himself the bread of life. John. 6.



Theoph. What difference make thou between the bread and wine of the Supper,
and the bread and wine which we use for our ordinary meat and drink?


Mat. In substance indeed none, but in the use and ministering of the Supper,
concerning which this I hold, that the one are set before us for the
nourishment of the body, but the other be ordained of God to be signs of the
body and blood of Christ. The same also is to be thought of the water of
Baptism.


Theoph. Why there is a double sign in the Supper.
Why be there two signs in the Supper?


Matthew. To the end we might know, that in Christ we have whole and perfect
spiritual food, that is, whatsoever is requisite to our salvation. It was also
done for a fuller remembrance of his death. For the wine that is the sign of
his blood, does as it were represent it before our eyes.


Theoph. Let us come to the Sacramental rite and signification of it.


Mat. It is double or twofold.

1 For the one respects the Minister.

2 The other him which is is partaker of the Supper.

The Sacramental rite of the Supper. What is the duty of ministers in
ministering the Supper.
The first is this, to take the bread and to break it, whereby is signified,
that Christ with sufferings was broken for our redemption, which himself
declared in these words; This is my body that is broken for you After to give
it being broken, and to deliver the wine in the cup, by which rites is meant,
that God does offer and give Christ unto us, together with all his benefits.
The duty of them that come to the Lords Table
The later rite is, that he which comes to the Supper, should receive, eat
and drink, the bread and wine given unto him, which indeed does signify,
that in the Supper we do truly receive Christ, eat his body and drink his
blood, by the which we are nourished into the hope of eternal life, if we do
not cast him from us through unbelief.


Theoph. What is it to eat the body of Christ?


Mat. To be so nearely joined with his body, as is the meat which we eat with
our own body.


Theoph. What is it to drink the blood of the Lord?


Mat. To be as truly partakers of his death and passion, as if we our selves
had suffered the same. And this does our Savior of Christ mean when he says;
Verily, verily I say unto you, except you eat the flesh of the son of man
and drink his blood, you have no life in you. He that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, has eternal life. But this is to be remembered, which we
spoke before in the Chapter of Faith, namely, that by the merit of Christ's
death represented in the holy Supper by wine that signifies his blood, the
Scripture understands all the benefits of Christ: but for the most part
makes mention of that only, because it has as it were the first and chief
place.


Theoph. Let us go forward. What understand thou by that spiritual food,
which thou saydest came by the eating of Christ's body, and drinking his blood?


Matthew. Our spiritual food in the Supper.
First, peace of conscience, namely, because we are more and more assured of
the forgiveness of our sins promised by baptism. Secondly, the daily growth
and increase of the new man, begun in us in our Baptism, so as we have power
given us to serve God better, and to resist the temptations, that are wont to
call us away from his obedience. Whereupon follows an effect of this
spiritual food, by name, that we are confirmed daily in the hope of eternal
life. And by these things appears that, which I have said of the difference
of the Sacraments, that Baptism does testify the beginning of our partaking
with Christ and his benefits, and the Supper the continuance and increase
thereof.


Theoph. Now we are to come to the commandment and promise of the Sacrament.


Mat. Both be added presently after the words of institution. Take, eat,
drink you all of this, do this in remembrance of me. Lo, the commandment it
set down, the^ the promise. This is my body. This is my blood. For the meaning
of these words is as much, as if Christ said; This bread and this wine do so
represent unto you my body and blood, that they assure you receiving the
visible signs, to be indeed partakers of those things that be signified by
them, eue^ my body and blood.


Theoph. But the words of Christ seem not to have that meaning, but rather
that the bread and wine are transubstantiated or turned into his body and blood.


Matthew. The exposition of Christ's words.
The words themselves cannot bear it. For if Christ meant to have signified
that, he would have said thus: Let this be made my body, or let it be changed
into my body.


Theoph. What then were the meaning of Christ's words, if they were to be
expounded according to the letter, as they say?


Matthew. They should rather signify, that his body and blood were changed into
bread and wine. For if any saw the pillar of salt, whereinto Lots wife was
turned, out of all doubt he would say; This thing, that is, this Pillar of salt
is Lots wife, that he might declare that she was turned into that Pillar, and
such as heard those words, would take them in that sense.


Theoph. I perceive indeed that those words if they were to be expounded
literally, do properly signify as thou say: Howbeit that sense agrees not
to the words of Christ.


Mat. Thou think rightly, and that former agrees nothing more, namely,
whereby transubstantiation is builded: which indeed the very words do not
bear, yea rather out of it four absurdities do follow.


Theoph. Rehearse them.


Mat. A consutation of the absurdities following upon Popish transubstantiation.
1 First, if the bread and wine be turned into the body and blood of Christ,
there shall be no signs in the holy Supper, and therefore it shall not be a
Sacrament, which indeed cannot be without a visible sign.

2 Secondly, Christ's blood shall be separated from his body, which is most
absurd, and can never be. Moreover, the body of Christ should be infinite, and
therefore he should not be a very man, neither should he have truly ascended
into heaven, by which opinion the chief points of our faith should be
overthrown.


Theo. Some do object that Christ's body is now glorified, and at one and the
same time may be in diverse places.


Mat. This objection is vain, for when Christ instituted the Supper, his body
was not glorified. Add hereunto, that the glorification has not taken from it
the nature of a true body, but has taken away the infirmity and weakness of
it: which was very well observed of one of the fathers. For this cause Peter
says; Acts. 3. 21
The heaven must hold him until the time of the restoring of all things. And
the Angels in another place; Acts. 1. 11.
So shall he come, as you have seen him go into heaven.


Theoph. Show the fourth absurdity.


Mat. It is this; that the wicked and hypoerites coming to the Supper, should
be indeed partakers of the body and blood of Christ: which verily were
nothing else but to join God and Satan together. Moreover, contrary unto
that which the Scripture expressly teaches, the vnbeeleuers should be saved.
For Christ affirms; John. 6.
Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has everlasting life.


Theo. Against those who say the reprobat^ (...) the Supper, be partakers of
Christ's body and blood.
But Christ understands those which eat his flesh and drink his blood
worthily: For the Apostle says; 1. Cor. 11. 29.
He that eats this bread, and drinks this cup unworthily eats and
drinks to himself damnation.


Mat. The Apostle says not, who so eats the body of Christ, and drinks the
blood of Christ unworthily, but he that eats the bread, and drinks the
cup. For Christ should offer his body to be profaned, if he made the unworthy
partakers of it. Moreover, his gifts be inseparably joined with his person, and
therefore it is impossible, that any should communicate with his body, but the
same also must be partakers of all his benefits, and eue^ of everlasting
life. For this cause John says; 1. Ioh. 5. 12
He that has the son, has life: He that has not the son of God, has not
life. Those four absurdities rec^ned up by us, do most manifestly overthrow
the opinion of transubsta^tiation, against the which experience it self it,
for as much as the bread and wine of the Supper, if they be kept long do
corrupt. Whereupon it is plain, that their substance it not changed.


Theoph. I do indeed perceive that the words of Christ do not establish
tra^substantiatio^ or the turning of the signs into the things signified, both
because the words themselves cannot bear it, and especially in that most
gross absurdities do follow thereupon. But by what arguments can thou prove,
that the exposition brought by thee does express the sense of Christ's words,
and that that was his meaning?


Mat. Of the exposition of Christ's words in the Supper.
Seeing there must be an exposition of them, it is not to be doubted, but that
is true and proper, which may be confirmed by the testimony of the holy
Scripture, and whereof no absurdity follows But that which I have brought is
such: therefore it is true and proper.


Theoph. If thou prouest these two points, thou shall verily overcome.


Mat. First, that exposition is confirmed by the testimony of the holy
Scripture: For, Paul thus expounds the words of Christ instituting the
Supper; The cup of 1. Cor. 10. 16
blessing, which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? the
bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? Which
words do indeed signify no other thing, but that we should understand the
bread and wine to be most certain signs of our Communion and fellowship with
Christ's body and blood. And that does altogether agree with my exposition.
Moreover, that is the meaning of these words; This is my body, which is of
these; This is my blood: But Luke expounds them thus; This cup is Luc. 22. 20.
that new Testament by my blood, which is shed for you. The same exposition
also did Paul follow, repeating the words of the institution. And this manner
of speech, can not admit any other sense without injury and violence done to
the words, but that we say, that the wine offered in the up is a most sure
pledge of the new covenant, which God has made with us by the precious blood
of Christ. The same therefore is to be said of the bread, namely that it is a
most sure pledge of the union which we have with the body of Christ.


Theoph. Concerning the first part thou have satisfied me, it follows that we
come to the other.


Mat. In it I said, that the exposition which I brought had no absurdity: For
there is no let, but that we may truly eat the body of Christ, and drink his
blood to our salvation: Yea the four absurdities which I spoke of even now be
avoided.

For the signs retain their own nature.

The blood of Christ is not separated from his body.

The truth of his humanity, ascension, and sitting at the right hand of the
Father remains safe.

Finally, the unbelievers are not partakers of his body and blood.


Theoph. Why Christ used those words, and no other in the institution of the
Supper.
If that were the meaning of Christ, why did he not express it in plainer
words and less doubtful?


Mat. He could not express that promise in fewer and more significant words:
for if he had said, This is a pledge or sign of my body, there had been no
promise. It had therefore been necessary for him, to have used long
circumstances of words after this manner; I do assure that this bread, and this
wine do represent unto you my body and blood, that as often as you receive
these visible signs, you shall be truly and indeed partakers of the things,
whereof they be signs. And this kind of speech had not been of such force
and weight, as that is which he used; This is my blood, for it compasses all
those things under it, but with a greater majesty. And for this cause the holy
Ghost used a like The confirmation of the former interpretation.
kind of speech in the Sacraments of the old Testament, in that it gives the
name of the thing signified to the signs themselves, to teach us, that such as
receive worthelie, be truly partakers of the thing signified.


Theoph. Declare that unto me particularly in some Sacraments of the old Church.


Matthew. Genesis 17. 9 10. 11.
First, God meaning to assure Abraham and his posterity, that Circumcision was
unto them a most certain sign that they were reckened in his covenant,
calls it his covenant. The same also says Moses of Exo. 12. 11.
the Sacrament of the passover: For he calls it the Lords passover, to
give us to understand, that it was a most certain token of the good will of
God, which the Israelites had experience of, when the Angel destroyed the
first borne of the Egiptians, and passed over their houses without touching
them, whereof the passover was a Sacrament.


The. Indeed these kinds of speaking, do come somewhat near to the words of
Christ used in the institution of the holy Supper. But I ask of thee, if there
be any altogether like unto them, and that have the same meaning with that,
which thou have alleged?


Mat. There be. For the Apostle speaking of the Sacraments, which the fathers
used in the wilderness, says; 1. Cor. 10. 4.
that the rock, that is the water, which Moses had (not without miracle)
brought out of stone, was Christ: To teach that it was unto them a most
effectual Sacrament, of the Communion and fellowship which they had with
Christ. For the same Apostle affirms: that the fathers did eat the same
spiritual meat with us, and drank the same spiritual drink. Lo therefore a
manner of speech altogether like to that, which Christ used in the institution
of the Supper, and which has the same interpretation, with that which I
brought a little before. Yea and that more is, there is use of this kind of
speech, not only in the Scripture, but also in our common talk: for; if a
king will forgive an offender the punishment of his faults, delivering unto
him his letters patents, confirmed by his hand writing and seal, he will say;
behold thy pardon. And yet he means not, that the letters patents be his
pardon, but only a certain testimony of his pardon. And this similitude very
excellently agrees with the sacraments, that be as it were seals of the word,
as the Apostle testifies, speaking of circumcision: for he calls it the
seal of the righteousness of faith.


Theoph. I do now see that thy interpretation does express the true meaning
of Christ's words: I do also grant that by those words Christ assures us, that
we are as verily partakers of his body and blood, as we do receive the bread
and wine. But how can that be? understand thou that his body is shut up or
enclosed in the bread, and his blood in the wine?


Matt. Against the error of consubstantiation.
No not so: for the words themselves cannot any way bear it: for Christ must
have said, my body is with this bread, and my blood is with this wine.

Secondly, we should make a carnal eating, which should lead us to the three
latter absurdities, reckened up of us, when we spoke of transubstantiation;
namely that the blood of Christ, should be severed from his body, that his
body should be insinite, and finally, that the wicked coming to the supper,
should communicate with the body and blood of Christ, and therefore should
obtain everlasting life. Moreover, Christ himself does teach the contrary:
for unto his disciples judging the speech which he had of eating his body to he
hard, he answers thus; It is the spirit that gives life, the flesh profits
nothing. The words that I speak unto you are spirit and life. By which words he
declares most evidently, that he speaks not of any carnal but of
spiritual eating.


Theoph. Thou have affirmed before, that Christ in that place did not speak of
the eating which is in the supper, but of that which is spiritually by faith.


Matthew. Of the eating of Christ's body and drinking his blood
Ever as the Scripture does set before us one Christ, so it shows one way how
to eat his flesh and drink his blood, that is, whereby we may be made one
with him, to be partakers of all his benefits, and this is spiritually by
faith. Seeing therefore this spiritual eating, is abundantly sufficient to
our salvation, and is grounded upon the word of God, it ouerthoweth that
carnal eating, which men by the example of the Capetnaits have devised to
themselves: from the which also if it could be, there is no other profit to be
looked for, but that which we do receive by spiritual eating.

Therefore, notwithstanding Christ in that place, speaks not of the
sacramental eating, but of that which is by the word received by faith:
nevertheless it may and ought to be referred unto that, because it is one and
the same eating, and therefore whatsoever is said of the one, must necessarily
agree to the other. And indeed seeing the question is of the food of our
souls, which is spiritual, and the meat is spiritual, it follows of
necessity, that the eating is spiritual; even as we can not nourish our
bodies, except earthly food be visibly and sensibly eaten, for the
preservation of this life.


Theoph. What do thou properly understand by spiritual eating?


Matthew. How we that be in the earth, be partakers of Christ his body which is
in heaven.
That Christ, although (concerning his humane nature) he go not out of the
heavens, yet by the power of the holy Ghost, does communicate unto us his body
and blood, and that by faith, which is in stead of a spiritual hand and mouth,
by which we receive him, and apply him unto us, as has bin more at large
declared of us, in the chapter of Faith. And this is the spiritual eating of
christ by faith, contrary to the carnal, which some have dreamed was with the
bodily mouth, insomuch as the very substance of the body and blood of Christ,
was eaten with it. Which is a most absurd devise, and yet it is no marvel that
some are fallen unto it. For as the spiritual man when he hears, that the
body of Christ is to be eaten, and his blood to be drunken, understands it
spiritually, for his spiritual hunger and thirst, and therefore prepares his
heart by faith so contrariwise, the carnal man thinks nothing but carnally
in all this matter, and therefore prepares the mouth of his body to devour
Christ. But the saying of Austen is notable; Why do thou make ready thy
teeth and belly? believe and thou have eaten.


Theoph But how can it be that Christ which is in heaven, should truly
communicate his body unto us, that be conversant upon the earth?


Matthew. That ought not to seem marvelous unto us: for if the sun being a
creature without life, do by his beams communicate the effect and power of it
unto us that live upon the earth, by a much more strong reason may Christ
which is the sun of righteousness, by the immeasurable power of the holy
Ghost, truly make us partakers of his body in the Supper, to whom it is not
harder to join things together far distant the one from the other, then
those that be most nigh. Which indeed appears even by that, that it joins
together all the faithful, notwithstanding they be scattered here and there,
to become one body, whereof Christ is the head. That also is shadowed in the
Supper, for the Apostle says; 1. Cor. 10. 17
We which are many are one body: for all of us are partakers of one bread.


Theoph. An objection against spiritual eating.
But some object, that if in the supper of the Lord, we do only spiritually and
by faith communicate with the body of Christ, there is no great profit of it,
seeing that is daily fulfilled in us by the ministry of the word received by
faith.


Matthew. It follows not. For there be diverse helps ordained of God to the
same end, namely to further our salvation in Christ, by the holy Ghost. Even as
a good Physician helps the health of the patient committed to his trust by
sundry means. Wherefore, notwithstanding Christ received in the word by faith,
be already spiritually eaten of us, yet nevertheless it is more and more
fulfilled in the Supper, by the which the Lord so works according to his
promise, that our hearts be more abundantly inflamed with his love, and
confirmed in the hope of everlasting life.


Theoph. Seeing then it is certain, that we are not otherwise partakers of
Christ in the supper but spiritually and by faith, it follows that all they
which come to it without faith, have no fruit or benefit by it.


Mat. That indeed is most true: for by their unbelief they refuse Christ whom
God oftereth to them in the Supper. Wherefore they be only partakers of the
signs, and that to their condemnation: seeing that (so much as in them is)
they profane and unhallow that most holy spiritual banquet provided of God for
his children, whiles they come unto it not furnished with that most precious
garment, namely faith, whereby we are justified before God, made the sons of
God, and be accounted worthy to sit down at his table. For this cause the
Apostle commands: that every 1. Cor. 11. 28
one should prove himself, and so eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.


Theoph. What is the way, whereby each ought to prove himself?


Matthew. Let him try himself, and see whether he have faith, which shall be
easy to perceive by repentance, as it has been said of us in the proper
place. Whosoever therefore is not any way touched with repentance, is
altogether unworthy to be admitted to the Supper of the Lord.


Theop. But what think thou of him, that has some feeling of repentance,
notwithstanding it be little?


Matthew. If it be so little that it show not it self by turning unto God, and
amendment of life, it ought to be suspected for true repe^ta^ce notwithstanding
it be weak, does always show it self by the outward works.

In the mean time it is not to be doubted, but that as our faith is always
very weak, so the same is true concerning our repentance. And this indeed is
so in the most regenerate, although diversely, for in some it is more, in others
it is less. Notwithstanding it is so far off, that that weakness should
drive us from the holy Supper, that it ought rather to spur us forward to
come unto it, that by it we might be strengthened in faith and repentance.
Even as the sick man, the weaker he knows himself to be, should so much the
more earnestly desire meat, both to receive nourishment, and to refresh his
strength. Therefore they only be unworthy to come to the Lords Supper, that
be ignorant, and delight in their sins, and continue in them: for that
spiritual food does not as yet belong to them.


Theoph. But if such men come to the Supper, what think thou is to be done?


Matthew. Ecclesiastical discipline.
If their unworthiness be secret and hidden, they ought to be left to the
judgment of God, which will one day take vengeance upon them: but if it be
known, by the order of Ecclesiastical or Church discipline, they ought to be
kept from it.


Theoph. What call thou Ecclesiastical discipline?


Matthew. The order in the church instituted of God, specially for two ends.

1. Cor. 14 40
The first, that the ministry may be preserved, that (as Paul says) all
things may be done in the church, decently and in order. Also that sermons may
be made, and the sacraments administered upon certain days, at certain
hours, and with due reverence frequented and resorted unto of such as have
joined themselves to the Christian church.

The other end is, that the conversation and doctrine of every one may be
looked into, that such as have given offenses, may be amended, according to the
degrees prescribed by Christ. Yea if they be stubburne, Matthew. 18.
to be at length excommunicated, that is, cut from the body of the Church, that
God himself be not reproached, and the flock infected by their evil
example. Moreover, that if it be possible (as Paul teaches) they may by that
shame be called to repentance.


Theoph. Of whom ought that ecclesiastical discipline to be ministered?


Mat. Of the Pastors of the Church, whereunto are to be adjoined certain
Seniors or ancients, for this end as necessity shall require, chosen of the
Church.


The sum of all Christian religion, declared by a threefold method or order.
Theoph. Thanks be to God, from whom we have received this benefit, that we
have happily in my judgment handled all the parts of Christian religion. Now I
would that thou should draw the chief heads of it into a short sum,
before we make an end of this our disputation.


Matthew. That abridgement or breuiarie may be done in a triple or threefold
method, so as the first may be profitable to the instruction of the godly: the
other to their comfort: and the third to consist of both, by making an
opposition or contrariety of true religion, with all other religions.


Theoph. Go to therefore, declare the first.


Mat. The first epitome.
It shall declare the order of the whole book, which indeed may be brought to
five heads or principal points, the conjunction or joining together whereof,
shows what is the certainty and truth of every one of them, and so of all
Christian religion, as it has been declared of us.


Theoph. Rehearse those chief points.


Matthew. 1 The first entreats of God.

2 The second of man.

3 The third of Christ.

4 The fourth of Faith.

5 The fifth of the holy Ghost.


Theoph. It shall be so much the more easy to remember them, because each of
them may be applied to each finger of the hand. Declare them therefore to me in
order, and show me the coherence and agreement which thou did attribute
unto them.


Mat. God.
First, we must hold this principle, that God seeing he is perfectly just, and
perfectly merciful, does not only show his mercy, but does also declare his
justice.

Man.
This foundation being laid, it follows that man who o^ his own nature is a
wretched sinner, can not be saved from eternal death, which he has deserved,
except he have some fit mean, by the which the perfect justice of God is
satisfied. But there cannot be Christ.
found any other mean, besides the merit of Christ's death. For by it the
wrath of God being appeased, there is a way made for us unto his mercy, and
therefore unto eternal life. But Christ shall profit us nothing, Faith.
except we be members of his body, and so be partakers of his benefits. And
both of these we obtain by faith, which indeed shows it self by good
works, but namely by prayer. Finally, the holy Ghost The holy Ghost.
works this faith in the hearts of the godly, by the preaching of the word,
and confirms and keeps it, as well by that preaching as by the use of the
Sacraments, till at length he bring us to everlasting life.


Theoph. This is an excellent breuiary, for in most few words and fit order,
it contains the sum of Christian doctrine, to the instruction of the godly.
Now The second Epitome.
therefore let us come to the other, which thou saydest was profitable for the
comfort of the faithful.


Matthew. That shall be set out in an order diverse from the former, but it may
also be brought unto five heads.

1 The first is of repentance.

2 The second of faith.

3 The third of Christ.

4 The fourth of God.

5 The fifth of eternal life.

And these also be joined together between themselves by a most near ba^d,
for the confirmation of the salvation of the godly.


Matthew. Show me that band.


Mat. Repentance.
First, whosoever does truly repent (and that is easily perceived, when we
serve God from the heart) he has faith. But whosoever has Faith, is partaker
of Faith.
Christ and his benefits. And again, whosoever is partaker Christ.
of Christ and his benefits, is justified, and made the child of God. But
whosoever is justified and made God.
the child of God, shall be delivered from comdemnation, and be partaker of
eternal life. Whereupon it follows, Eternal life.
that he which by good works is assured of his repentance, shall never perish
but have life everlasting. And those five stairs or steps may be in stead of a
ladder, by the which we may clime eue^ up into the heavens, to understand
certainly, whether our names be written in the book of life or not: but the
first only is hard.


Theoph. Why so?


Mat. Because there is no little labor to be bestowed in the denial of sin,
that we may serve God from the heart, but when a man by the grace of God has
profited so far, there is very little labor behind. From hence it is, that
sometimes the Scripture attributes our salvation unto works, namely to note
unto us this order: as when he says; Romans 2. 6. John. 5. 29.
God will give to every one according to his works. They shall come forth that
have done well, to the resurrection of life. Whereunto also that ought to be
referred, which is said in another place; Psa. 119. 1
Blessed are they that walk in the Law of the Lord.


Theoph. There is one doubt behind within me, which seems to let, that the
godly cannot be sure of their salvation: namely because thereunto is required,
that they be sure of perseverance and continuing to the end, without which
Christ affirms that none ca^ be saved. Nevertheless there be many found,
which in show begin happily, yea also have long continued in the knowledge and
confession of the truth, who notwithstanding do so fall from it, that they
never return.


Matthew. It is true indeed that perseverance is necessary to salvation howbeit
the Apostle affirms; that Phil. 1. 6.
he which has begun the good work in us, will perfect the same eue^ unto the
day of Christ, that is, to the end of the battle. And concerning them that
fall away, the words of the Apostle be manifest; They went out from 1. Ioh. 1.
19.
us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they should have
continued with us. But this is done that it might appear, that all were not of
us. Moreover they be those of whom Christ speaks, when he says; They which
received the seed (that is the doctrine of the truth of the Gospel) in stony
ground, are they which Math. 13. 2 22.
hear the word, and straightway receive it with joy, but they have no root in
themselves, but are for a time, and when trouble or persecution arises for the
words sake, they are by and by offended. But they which received the seed
among thorns, are such as he are the word, but the cares of this world and the
deceitfulness of riches choaketh the word, and it is made unfruitful.


Theoph. This therefore is thy meaning, that they which so fall from the
profession of the Gospel, that they never return again, did never truly
believe the Gospel, notwithstanding for a time, outwardly in show they made
profession of it.


Matthew. Thou think right: For true faith has the place in the heart, and
there takes root by the effectual working of the holy Ghost. which he
bestows not upon any, but those that be chosen of God in Jesus Christ unto
salvation. And by this means he opens unto us the counsel of God, which we
otherwise know not, concerning saving us. Whosoever therefore by their true
repentance be assured of their faith, ought not to make any doubt either of
perseverance, or of eternal life.


Theoph. Of the eternal election of God.
Thou have touched a doctrine, which to some seems difficult and hard.
Nevertheless, I desire it may be briefly handled of us: for I account it among
those things, which the more they be searched into, the more they be obscured
and darkened.

First show me what is the foundation of it.


Mat. First it may be gathered out of the whole Christian doctrine, but
especially out of the doctrine of justification by faith, and of regeneration,
by which we are taught that our salvation is freely given unto us in Jesus
Christ, and that it cannot spring from our selves. Seeing therefore God
bestows not so great a benefit upon every one, it follows necessarily,
that they which obtain it, were chosen of God himself according to the good
pleasure of his will. And therefore that the eternal election of God cannot be
taken away, but together with it be overthrown the principal foundations of
Christian Religion and our salvation made void.


Theoph. Is there not some express testimony of it in the Scripture?


Mat. There is, and not only one, but more, and those most plain: among the
which the words of Paul writing Ephesians. 1. 4. 13. 14.
to the Ephesians be the chief; God has chosen us in Christ before the
foundations of the world vere laid, making known unto us the mystery of his
will according to his good pleasure, which he had purposed in himself. And we
are sealed with that holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance.


Theoph. A few words indeed, but by the which the Apostle brings light unto
this doctrine: for it is made the easier by the distinction which he uses,
namely according to the persons of the Trinity, whiles he attributes the
beginning of it to the Father, the matter to the Son, and the manifesting of
it to the holy Ghost.


Matthew. Thou iudgest rightly: And so indeed is that doctrine to be considered
to our edification and comfort. For they that look to it as it were lying hid
in the counsel of God, reap nothing by it, but trouble of mind and vexation
of conscience. For, they do as if one to see the better, should fix his eyes
upon the globe of the Sun, by the beholding of which light, it is not to be
doubted, but his eyes would wax dim. Who if he looked upon that light in the
Sun beams, might have use of it, and see all things offered to his sight,
and how and what way to direct his steps. Likewise also this doctrine while it
is considered in Christ, in whom we are chosen, and we seek for in our selves,
the testimony that the holy Ghost yields us by our effectual calling, then
it affoordeth us especial comfort, and assures us of our salvation, otherwise
doubtful and unknown unto us.


Theoph. Of the calling of the elect.
What meanest thou by that effectual calling by the which thou say, that we
are by the holy Ghost assured of our election?


Matthew. I called it so, to put a difference between the true calling of the
faithful, and the false, which is always weak and unprofitable. For they
which are called by the later, will not hear the voice of God, or if they
hear it, yet refuse to draw near unto him, or if they draw near, it is with
a double and an hypocritical heart, and not long after they fall from him. But
they that be called with the other, are lightened by the holy Ghost, so as the
word of God enters into their hearts, they come unto God, and follow him with
obedience of faith. And such kind of calling as this, is always joined with
election, for it is the judge and declarer of it.


Theoph. Of regeneration.
But that effectual calling seems to be nothing else, but the regeneration,
which the holy Ghost works in us, whereof we have spoken before.


Mat. Thou say true: for by it he opens our ears, to hear the voice of
God that calls us. He lightneth the eyes of our mind, to know him in Christ
sesus. He disposes our hearts, to believe his doctrine, to embrace it,
confess it, and follow it by true faith. He confirms our will, to love and
fear him, and so to keep our selves in the reverence and worship of his
Majesty.


Theoph. Therefore whosoever is assured of his effectual calling by the fruit
of regeneration, he ought not to doubt of his election and salvation.


Mat. Of the assurance of salvation.
He ought not yea contrariwise he ought to be sure of it, which also we
profess in the last article of the Creed: when we say, I believe the life
everlasting. For by it we not only understand, the we believe there is an
everlasting life: but that we are assured, that we our selves shall one day be
partakers of it. And that article is set at the end of the Creed, as a
necessary consequence of the things going before, but especially of the article
concerning the holy ghost, for the which we have that assurance. That also does
the Lord confirm unto us, both by the ministry of the word, whereby he
assures the penitent of the forgiveness of their sins, as also by the
Sacraments, which be as seals and pledges of that love, wherewith the Father
loves us in Christ.


Theoph. Does not that assurance of our election and salvation, which thou art
about to persuade the faithful, make them slothful to good works?


Mat. The assurance of salvation, is cofirmed by sanctification begun.
How can that be, seeing it is certain, that our election and salvation is
confirmed by good works, without which as has bin said it can no way be? For
which cause, Peter warns us thus; Pet. 1. 10
Wherefore brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure: For
if you do these things, you shall never fall. Moreover the holy Ghost, which
seals that assurance in our hearts, cannot dwell in us, but it causes good
works. Whereupon John says; 1. John. 3. 9.
Whosoever is borne of God sins not: because his seed remains in him,
neither can he sin, because he is borne of God: because he cannot so give
over himself to sins, to continue in them, for as much as he is raised up
with true repentance by the holy Ghost.


Theoph. The second Epitome brings no less comfort to the minds of the
godly, then the first did instruction. For by it, both the conscience is
appeased, and the mind comforted by a most certain hope and assurance of
eternal salvation. Now the third is behind, which thou saydest consisted of
both.


Matthew. The third Epitome.
It contains an Antithesis or contrariety of Christian Religion with all
other. For in the difference between the^ a faithful man shall see, as it
were a new breuiarie of all Christian doctrine, which indeed shall be both to his
comfort and instruction.


Theoph. Let us therefore consider of that difference.


Matthew. It consists especially in five heads or principal points.

1 First, that Christian Religion makes all the chief points of the doctrine
of it, to agree with the nature of the true God, in the knowledge of whom it
strengthens and keeps the godly.

2 The other is, that it establishes the glory of God in the salvation of men,
and so the godly are more and more confirmed in the certainty of their
salvation.

3 The third, that it joins good works with our salvation by a most near
band, although it be no way grounded upon them, so that the faithful cannot
take any matter of boasting in them.

4 The fourth, that it opens a way for us unto God, to crave of him all
things necessary.

5 The fifth, that it yields the godly matter of patience in adversity, and
assurance in dangers. These be the true notes of Christian Religion, which
indeed all other Religions do utterly overthrow, because they admit not
Christ, or else do only receive him in part.


Theoph. We are therefore to weigh these notes, to the end we may show they be
established of true Religion, and overthrown of the rest. Let us therefore
begin at the Christian Religion keeps the faithful in the knowledge of the
true God.
first: I would have thee declare unto me, how it keeps the faithful in the
knowledge of the true God.


Matthew. It does specially appear by this, because it makes his perfect
justice to agree with his perfect mercy. I say his perfect justice, in as much
as it sets before our eyes, no other way to satisfy it, but the infinite
merit of Christ his son, wherein also his perfect mercy is manifested unto
us, in that of his mere grace and favor he gave him to the death of the
Cross joined with extreme reproach to be our redemption: as also that for his
sake, he gives us freely everlasting life, having no respect to our works.
For this cause Paul calls Christ the Image of the invisible God. In which
Col. 1. 15.
words he shows, that God cannot be known, so as his perfect righteousness
should agree with his most perfect mercy, but in Jesus Christ alone. Whereunto
also ought to be applied the words of Christ unto Philip; John. 14. 9.
Philip, he that sees me, sees the Father.


Theoph. It remains that thou show, that all other Religions do overthrow
this foundation.


Mat. False Religions overthrow the knowledge of the true God.
I will do that with a very little labor: for this is common to them all, to
say, that men by humane works and inventions may satisfy the judgment of
God: and so they do overthrow his righteousness, which they think they can
satisfy with vain devises, by the which he is displeased. Moreover that men
by their works be able to deserve eternal life. But whiles they set up their
own righteousness, thereby to obtain salvation either in whole, or in part,
they overthrow the infinite mercy of god, so as they worship an idol in stead of
the true God. Whereupon is that saying of Paul; Ephesians. 2. 12
The heathen be without God in the world. For as John says; 2. Epist. 9.
whosoever abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God. And again
Christ affirms; John. 14. 6.
no man comes to the Father but by me.


Theoph. Let us come to the other difference, and let us see how true Religion
establishes the glory of God in the salvation of men: and moreover does assure
the^ of it.


Mat. That is by the same doctrine, namely because it teaches, Christian
Religion assures men of their salvation.
that we have eternal life of the mere grace of God, without any respect of
our works. For by this means all occasion of glorying is taken from men, and
is given unto God alone, which the Apostle witnesses. Ephesians. 2. 9.
For after that he has taught, that we are saved by grace through faith, and
that not of our selves, it is the gift of God, not of works: he presently
adds; least any should boast. And in another place he says; Ephesians. 1. 5.
he has adopted or taken us to be his children through Jesus Christ according
to the good pleasure of his will. But whatsoever serves to set forth the glory
of God, is a true and sound foundation of our salvation. For seeing it leans
upon the everlasting and unchangeable good pleasure of God in Christ, it is so
sure to those that by true faith be made his members, that it ca^ never be
overthrown, eue^ as Christ himself witnesses in these words; Ioh. 10. 27.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: and I give unto
the^ eternal life, neither shall they perish for ever, neither shall any take
the^ out of my hand. My father which gave the^ unto me is greater the^ all,
neither can any take the^ out of my Fathers hand. And for this cause he says
in another place; He John. 5. 24.
that believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come
into condemnation, but has passed from death to life. Which things being so,
the faithful may rejoice with Paul in these words; I am persuaded that
neither life nor death, neither Angels, Romans 8. 36.
nor principalities, nor powers, neither things present, nor things to come,
neither height, nor depth, nor any other creature can be able to separate me
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.


Theoph. It is now thy part to show that this fundamental point is overthrown
of other Religions.


Mat. False Religions overthrow the glory of God.
And this also shall be done most easily. For they overthrow the glory of God,
and set up the glory of man, in that they give unto men the glory of their own
salvation. Yea rather their own salvation is also by this means overthrown,
seeing that it leans upon so weak a foundation, as their own good works and
merits. Whereof their own conscience is a witness. For notwithstanding they
deceive themselves with hypocrisy, it is continually in doubt and troubled
with distrust, but especially when they perceive death to draw near unto them.
For then they are so disquieted, that they cannot tell where to turn them.


Theoph. Yea but the faithful themselves sometimes be stricken with the fear
of death and Gods judgment, no less then the wicked.


Matthew. I would not deny, but they be oftentimes stricken with it, namely when
they set before their eyes, the infinite number of their sins, and the
greeuousnesse of them, together with the depth of Gods most perfect justice:
nevertheless when they cast their eyes upon Christ crucified for them, they
be presently delivered from that fear, by the which indeed the wicked be
swallowed up, so as they are not helped with the benefit of Christ. The godly
therefore in that combat may be compared with a man upon the top of a tower,
whose foundation and walls are most strong: For he if he look downward, is
stricken with some sudden fear, from the which he is presently delivered, when
he perceives the strength of the building. But the wicked are like unto one on
the top of a tower but such a tower as threatens falling, yea rather is shaken
with the winds, which indeed presently falls.


Theoph. Thou have also sufficiently satisfied me concerning this difference.
Let us come to the third.


Matthew. True religion contains the doctrine and practice of good works
It stands herein, that good Works be joined with our salvation by a most
near band: although it do no way hang upon them, as it has been declared of
us before in the Chapter of Works. For it cannot by any other means be, that
we should be partakers of Christ to the obtaining of salvation, but by the
power of the holy Ghost dwelling in us: by the which we are not only made fit
to do well, but also kept in the fear of God, so as we run not headlong into
sins. Notwithstanding, although the godly do good works, Phil. 2. 19.
yet ca^ they have no cause from them to boast, for it is God that works in
us, both to will and to perform, according to his good pleasure. Wherefore
they be altogether referred to the glory of God, as also our salvation it
self, whereof they be most certain marks. False religions be against those
that be indeed good works.
False religions establish superstitious works, which indeed be refused of
us, but good works they put away: for they so busy their followers and
scholars in the observation of men's precepts, that they set light by, and
despise Gods commandments, even as experience does abundantly witness.
Whereof this seems to be the special cause, that the wicked to perform
their own works, trust to their own free will, that is, to their natural
strength, which in very deed is none at all, and so they go away from Christ,
who nevertheless says; Even as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self,
that it, except it abide in the Vine: even so you, except you abide in me. For
without me you can do nothing.


Theoph. True religion calls upon the true God purely, through the only
mediator: but the false do far otherwise.
Declare the fourth difference.


Matthew. It may be taken from those things, which were said before of us in
the Chapter of prayer, namely, that Christ being made ours by faith, does
continually make intercession for us with his father: whereupon it is that he is
merciful unto us, and hears our prayers. The wicked contrariwise, while they
come to God in their own name or any other name beside Christ's, they do
nothing with their prayers, as well because they be unworthy to be heard, as
also because their intercessors are not sufficient for that office: for they
have not wherewith to appease the wrath of God most justly kindled against him
that prays. Therefore the ungodly can never obtain any thing at the hands
of God, unless it be in his anger, and that which falls out unto their own
condemnation.


Theoph. Declare the last difference, and together show, how Christian
religion ministers to the godly matter of patience in adversity, and for
things to come puts them in good assurance.


Matthew. That is, by the doctrine of Gods providence, wherewith when the godly
understand, that all things be governed, although they seem to be compassed
about with all adversities, yet they do from thence take comfort, because they
know they be loved of God, and therefore that adversities be not sent but to
their salvation, as is was at large declared by us in the Chapter of Faith.

For this cause, David did bear the railings and evil speeches of Semei most
patiently; he commanded the soldiers to forbear to kill him: for says he;
He 2. Sam. 16. 10.
curses, because God has commanded him to curse David. In another place also,
being most greeuouslie oppressed of his enemies, he says thus; I was dumb,
Psalm. 39. 10
neither opened I my mouth: for thou o Lord did this. Job also having lost
his goods, being destroyed Job. 1. 30
partly by thunder, and partly taken away by the Chaldeans, took comfort of
this, that the Lord had given, and the Lord had taken away. By the same means
also we are comfortable concerning things to come: for the Apostle says; Romans
8. 30.
If God be with us, who can be against us? He that spared not his own Son,
but gave him for us all, how shall he not also with him freely give us all
things? As if he said; Seeing God is our most merciful Father, and also
omnipotent, we ought to believe that he will deliver us from all dangers, so
far forth as he shall know it to tend to his glory and to our salvation, and
will also help our necessities: which verily is confirmed by the Prophet in
these words; Behold the Psa. 33. 16.
eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him, which trust in his mercy, to
deliver their souls from death, and to quicken them in the time of famine.

The same Prophet also in another place, warns us, saying; Cast thy ways
upon the Lord, and trust in him, and he will bring it to pass. But other
religions Psalm. 73. 5. False religions drive me^ to impatience and desperation.
take from men all matter of patience and confidence, whiles they make the
wisdom or foolishness of men, the causes of all the things that befall us.
Or else do imagine a certain bare permission or sufferance of God, separated
from his will, or else do admit fortune.

All which things do overthrow the providence of God, being the ground work of
comfort, to those that be assured of their salvation. It cannot therefore be but
the unbelievers are stricken with impatience, as often as troubles draw near:
for it falls out to them as unto dogs, that bite the stone, letting him go
that threw it. But concerning things to come, they be always distrustful,
wherewith they are continually disquieted, so as they never be at rest.


Theoph. Thou have sufficiently satisfied me with this opposition between true
religion, and all other false religions. But before we end this our speech, I
would have a comparison made between the followers of them both.


Matthew. What is the happiness of the godly even in this life.
It may be easily gathered of the former, yea rather in most of the special
points, both of them were to be joined together of us: nevertheless, seeing it
seems so good unto thee, I will handle it by it self, to the end it may
appear, that the godly that follow the true religion, are in a far more
happy estate, then the ungodly, foolishly given over to most fond
superstitions. And that not only in the life to come, but also in this present
life: although thou should reckon up all the troubles, which we are
compelled to suffer for the profession of the Gospel.


Theo. But how agrees that with the saying of Paul? If in this life only we
believe in Christ, we are of all 1. Cor. 15. 19
men the most miserable.


Mat. These words of Paul are not contraie to that which has been said of us
of the happiness of the godly even in this life: for I do not mean a
happiness that stands in pleasures, riches, no nor indeed in earthly
commodities, for in these for the most part they be far gone beyond of the
wicked: but rather in spiritual goods which God gives unto us, namely when we
be assured of his love and good will, and that more is, of our salvation by
Christ. I do therefore think with Paul, that of all men we are most
miserable, if there were not hope of a better life, especially considering the
afflictions, which we are constrained to suffer for the profession of the
Gospel, from the which in the mean time the wicked be free. But on the other
side, we are of all men most happy, when we have before us the assurance of
the love and good will of God, and the hope of our salvation. For it skilleth
little if the wicked excel us in riches, honor, and other commodities of this
life: for they be things vain and fleeting, which also commonly bring with
them more disprofite then profit. But we contrariwise have spiritual riches,
that can never be taken from us, which also bring with the^ sound and true joy,
and that everlasting. Hereof it is that Paul affirms; Godliness is
profitable to all 1. Tim. 4. 8
things, as that which has the promises of this present life, and of that that
is to come. By which words he shows, that the fatherly love of God toward
his children, is manifested both in this life and in the life to come.


Theoph. Show me therefore, wherein that happiness of the godly in this life
stands?


Matthew. I say that it leaves upon four foundations especially.


Theoph. Declare the first.


Mat. That the faithful being justified by faith, have peace with God through
Christ Jesus, through whom (says the Apostle) Romans 5. 1. Wherein the happiness
of the godly in this life stands.
we have by faith an entrance to that grace wherein we stand, and do glory in
the hope of the glory of God, whereby it comes to pass, that death it self
is not fearful to us: when as contrariwise, it strikes horrors and terrors
into the wicked, by reason of the torment of conscience, wherewith they be
continually vexed.


Theoph. Go to the second.


Mat. That the faithful by Christ being set free from the service of sin, do
overcome their affections and lusts, whereunto the wicked be bond-slaues.
Hereof it is, that whereas the godly lead an unreprovable and quiet life, the
wicked contrariwise, are tossed with sundry perturbations of the mind, because
they cannot satisfy their lusts: and oftentimes they both vex themselves to
come by them, and after they have them, they be tormented both with poverty
and sicknesses: sometimes also they become infamous, and are punished of the
magistrate.


Theoph. Declare the two last points.


Mat. The third is this, that the godly have always an entrance to the mercy
of God through Christ, and that which more is, by prayers obtain of him
whatsoever is necessary* but the wicked are never heard. Finally, the godly
that be assured of the good will and favor of God through Christ, do wholly
commit themselves to his providence, and by the power of the holy Ghost
dwelling in them, do patiently bear all adversities, yea rather do meekelie
receive them, as at the hand of a most kind Father. The wicked contrariwise
abide overwhelmed under the burden of their afflictions, because they can
never be assured of the love of God, of whose providence they be altogether
ignorant: and therefore be deprived of the spirit of comfort, and do run
headlong either into blockish sencelesnesse, or else indeed into desperation.
Which things being so it is not to be doubted, but that the state of the
faithful even in this life, is far more happy then the state of the wicked.
For this cause David, which had more then once tried all the things which have
been said of the godly, speaking unto God, says after this manner; Behold o
God our shield: and look upon Psalm. 8. 4.
the face of thine anointed. For one day in thy courts, is better then a
thousand elsewhere: I had rather be a doorekeeper in the house of my God, then
to dwell in the tabernacles of wickedness.

The reason whereof he presently renders in these words; Because the Lord
God is the sun and shield, he gives grace and glory: he keeps back no
good thing from them that walk uprightly; O Lord God of hoastes, blessed is
the man that trusts in thee.


Theoph. Now it remains, that we consider of the difference that shall be
between the faithful and unfaithful after this life.


Matthew. The difference between the believers and unbelievers after this life.
It shall be very great, insomuch that it shall far pass that which we
said even now, concerning this life for so long as we live upon this earth, our
happiness lies hidden under the shame of the Cross; and the wicked on the
other side in this life, commonly have all things according to their desire,
for they be rich, and be in honor and favor. But their case shall be far
otherwise, when they come to the judgment seat of the highest Judge: for then
all the reproach of the godly shall be turned into everlasting glory: and on
the other side, the glory of the wicked shall be turned into everlasting shame.


Theoph. Show the cause of this.


Matthew. It might have been gathered by thee from our discourse,
notwithstanding for memory sake, I will in few words repeat it in this place:
which is that being clothed by faith with the most perfect righteousness of
Christ, we shall find the tribunal seat of God full of mercy and grace, so
as we shall be received into eternal glory, together with Christ our head,
the angels and all Saints, that as well of us as of them God may be praised,
and we live happily for ever.

On the other side, the wicked being void of righteousness, yea rather
infected with innumerable sins, shall find the judgment seat of God severe,
insomuch as they shall be overwhelmed with the horrible wrath of his just
judgment, and shall at length he cast into eternal hell fire, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. The conclusion of the former discourse.
Out of these things therefore thou may gather, that there is no religion
worthy of this honorable name, beside that which is grounded upon Christ:
forasmuch as all superstitions, which teach men not to come to God, but to go
away from him, reconcile them not unto him, but do more and more provoke him
unto wrath, do not only not bring the^ unto salvation, but do lead them away
unto everlasting destruction.


Theoph. Hitherto we have sufficiently heard of the antithesis or contrariety
between religion and superstitions, and the followers of both. I do indeed
see that the Christian Religion is the only true Religion, and that the
followers of it alone are happy and blessed, whether we look to this life,
or that that is to come. For all other men are on every side most miserable,
yea they are more unhappy then the brute beasts, which while they live be
free from all cares, and after death be delivered from all labor and pain.


Mat. That indeed is true: But as the Prophet says; A foolish man knows not
this, and an unwise man Psalm. 92. 7.
understands not this.


Theoph. I am verily sufficiently satisfied, with this thy holy instruction,
wherein thou have run over all the chief points of Christian Religion.
Notwithstanding I will commit them to writing when I have leisure, in the order
they were delivered by thee, that both my self may be edified and comforted
with the reading of them, and that I may communicate them with my brethren. In
the mean time I give thee as great thanks as I can, for the pains which for
my sake thou have taken in this behalf.


Matthew. Nay rather let us give thanks unto God our heavenly Father, that has
given unto us this knowledge of the truth, and has granted that we have been
able to declare it. Let us also entreat him, that as this The sum of the
duty of Christians.
truth is grounded only in Jesus Christ his son: so by the power of the holy
Ghost it may be grafted in our minds, that we may sincerely believe it with
the heart, constantly confess it with the mouth, and express the effects of it
by outward works, even to our last breath. Which that it may be, he grant us
this also, that we may join our selves to the militant Church, and by the
ministry thereof be confirmed in the love and fear of God, that so we may at
length be received into the triumphant Church, together with our head and Lord
Jesus Christ.


Theoph. I do therefore pray thee (most mighty God and heavenly Father) to
grant us these benefits, and to cause that the knowledge of thy truth may be
spread abroad throughout all the world, that al may acknowledge thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ thy Son the only Savior and Mediator of mankind.
And to thee alone be praise and glory both now and for ever.


FINIS.

