

A IOVRNALL OF ALL THE PROCEEDINGS of the Duke of BVCKINGHAM his Grace, in the
Isle of Ree, a part of France.

Whereunto is added the names of the French Nobility that were slain.

Set forth by a Gentleman of special note who was a Spectator of all that
happened.

Published by Authority.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Eagle
and Child in Britaines-Bursse. 1627.

A IOVRNALL OF ALL the proceedings of the Duke of BVCKINGHAM his Grace, in the
I Will of Ree, a part of France. 1627.
June the 24. 1627. being Sunday the Duke being in the good Ship of the Kings
called the Triumph, weyed Ankor in Stodes Bay, and sailed so far as St.
Hellens Point; and on the Wednesday following, set sail from that place, and
was followed by 100. sail of Ships, little more or less. That day we tackt to
and again, until we had recovered the point East of the I Will of Wight: And on
the Thursday we stood on our way toward the West, until we were come almost
to the height of Plymouth; and then about 8. of the clock at night we stood
off to the Sea East and by South, and upon the Friday we did see a point of
Land on our Larboard bow in our judgments 12. leagues off, called the Vshing,
in 47. degrees, or thereabout (a part of France.) Then we stood off to the Sea
that day, and Saturday, and Sunday, and Monday: on Monday toward night we did
see 14. sail of Ships a head of us, which stood in toward us about one hour,
but by that time they had deserved what we were, not liking to speak with us,
they stood away to the West before a wind: The Lord Admiral with 60 sail of
ships stood after them, some 24. hours, but could not come up to them, but did
perceive them to be Dunkerks; and then again stood on his way for his
intended Port.

Having lost the Lord Haruey in the Repulse, with some 40. Sail of ships with
him, which did not follow the Admiral at the first pursuit of Dunkerks, but
stood still to the East, and there they plied to and again for 8. days; So
that the Admiral was come to Anchor near the East end of the I Will of Ree on
the Monday: and the Lord Haruey came thither on the Wednesday, being the 10. of
July: but both had one part of one storm.

For the Nonsuch of the Kings had spent her Fore mast, and some of the ships
that were with the Repulse lost their long Boats (being towed at their stern)
but our happy meeting again made our loss to seem the less. So we spent two
nights and one day in Counsel, and determining what was to be done to our best
advantage; and so at last it was determined that the Soldiers should be landed
on thursday at the East end of the I Will of Ree, which was done about 3. of the
clock in the afternoon, the Duke in person with the foremost, and causing
them to recover as much ground as they could on the side of the hill: Did take
his Barge again, accompanied with master Grimes Gentleman of the Horse, and
goes from one Shipp to another, to pray them to make all the have they could
possible: but returning to the Land again, he found them in such a desperate
manner running into the Sea, to catch hold of any Boat to be gone, that they
drowned themselves and others: but tht Duke to appease these Reuolters, stands
in the head of the Barge, with his Sword drawn in his hand, praying some, and
taxing othersome with fear and cowardice, to return to their Commanders on
the shore, which were in great danger: for had not Coronell Borowes and
Coronell Brett bestird themselves like valient men, and keeping their Regiments
from Routing, the Enemy had had the honor of the day to all likelihood, (for
never was seen so brave a Charge as this.

They did suffer us to land some 2000. men, and then did the French Horse in 3.
troops, some 200 or more and some 1200 foot so valiently charge into the
midst of our Army up to the saddle into the Sea, and so valiently behaved
themselves, that very few of the Horse that came one did ever get of. If their
Foot had bin as desperate as their Horse, without question we had lost the
honor of the first encounter: but God the disposer of all things, struck the
Enemy with such fear, that they made as much have as they could to be gone,
and left us to land all our men, and order them in battle array: the which was
done that day, and the next all our Forces both men and horse were landed, and
making good that Fort, we did not stir from thence before Saturday night, and
then advancing forward not more then half a mile, we rested that night.

On the Sunday Morning we marched up into the Island at least 3. miles to a
town called Allaflote where the Minister and some of the chief Protestants of
the town came to our general (the Duke) and did deliver themselves and Town
into his hands: praying him that he would be favorable unto the Papists, and
not put them to the mercy of the Soldiers, for fear least heareafter the day
that was lost might be recovered and so the Protestants should be put all to
the sword, the which the Duke taking into consideration did charge all the
Soulders upon pain of death, not to stir from their collors, so they rested
all that night in the field and the Duke did take part with them, lying in the
head of Coronell Borowes Regiment on a canuas Horse covered with two cloakes,
his followers lying on the ground about him:

The next day a council was called, and it was agreed on, that we should
martch toward St. Martins on the Tuseday morning, which was done; the Duke and
Mounsier Sebuesa, accompanied with some Lords and Knights did accompany the
corpse of Sir William Hayden to the Earth with much grief, for the unfortunate
death of so worthy a man, he was buried at Allaflota, the Duke returns to
lodge in the field, but that night it did so Lighten, Thunder, and Reign, that
I have seldom seen the like.

On the Tewsday morning we marched on our apoyinted way although the morning
was but little fairer then the night, but it pleased God that before twelve of
the clock the sun did show it self favorable in drying our wet clothing,
the enemy did send out many scouts to look upon us, but I think the longer
they looked on us, the worse they liked us, for I think our Army from Front to
Rear did take up at least one Mile and half: Yet then did march out of their
fort some troops of Horse, and some companies of foot and did make a show as
if they would give us a battle, but beeter aduising with themselves they
suffered us to Martch until we had gained both Sun and Wind of them.

The Duke did at that instant time so courageously martch in the foremost
companies, that it did so animate the Soldiers, that I have hard many of the
Soldiers wish that the French would stand one Encounter, that they might show
their love unto their General (but that would not be at this present,) after
we had martched up to the East side of the town so far as the Sea would give
us leave: we began to come nearer to the town, our Drakes performing their
parts on the Horsemen that came forth to see us, and killed one gentleman and
two Horses.

About five of the clock at night, some of the chief men of the Town came
forth with a flagge of truce, and did offer to deliver themselves and town
into the hands of our General: they being Protestans that were left, the Duke
accepted of their offer, and so marching into the Town, and quartring his
Soldiers in several parts of it, did ride up to the Prison house, to see if
any English were there, but finding none he returned to the water side, where
Collonell Borowes quarter was, there did he see the malice of the enemy in
burning of three good ship in the Harbor that had bin taken from the English:
and then taking his barge, he went aboard the ships, commanding all them to
send victuals a shore for his Soldiers, so that there was no want of any
thing, although the Enemy had taken all their own provision, and the
Protestants away with them into the Fort: and now do they begin to batter
night and day upon the Town with their Ordnance; but although they had
battered from Tuesday until Friday night, I could not hear of more then one
man that was killed: although the Fort be within Musket shot of the Town, and
the shot flying into all parts of the Town as on Thursday as the Duke and
Sabuesa were talking, there came two shot so near them, that they were feign
to go to end their discourse in some other place: It was appointed that on the
Saturday twenty field-Peeces at least and nine Drakes should be mounted against
the Fort, with our Pyoners and our Soldiers to make some Trenching work: but
that I cannot speak of, but will pray for a good success to their intent and
purpose: and so for England with the good Ship of the Kings called the
Charles, whom God preserve. Saturday the 20. of July. 1627.

A note of such Commanders and Officers as were slain in the first encounter
at the East of the I Will of Ro^, the 12. day of July. 1627.
Slain.
Sir William Haydon Master of the Ordnance. Mounsier Blankart he was Chief for
Mounsier Sabesa. Sir Thomas Thornax Lieutenant Coronell. Sir Thomas York
quarter Master General. Captain Babington. Captain Glinne. Captain Goring.
Captain Blundon. Captain Country. Captain Woodhouse Corporal of the field.
Captain Heatley. Captain John Powell. Captain Morgan Powell. Lieutenant
Anderson. Lieutenant Sidnam. Lieutenant Grimsham. Master Johnson Enginer.
Ensign Champernone. Ensign Goardon. Master John Temple. Master Netherton
quarter Master.
Hurt.
Sir George Blundon Sergeant Mayor General. Sir Charles Rich Coronell. Sir
Edward Conoway Coronell. Sir Richard Grinfild. Sir Edward Halley. Captain
Abraham. Captain Rainsford. Lieutenant Welcome. Lieutenant Marcome. Lieutenant
Thornax. Ensign Bennet. Sir Edward Conawayes brother.
There was slain of the French that day 125. Horsemen, of them was 23.
Marquesses, and Barons, and Knights, and the rest all Gentlemen of note in
France: and of the foot Companies some Commanders slain of note, and common
Soldiers the number uncertain: this Battle did not last much more then half
an hour.

There is in this thing to be noted the Dukes Nobleness, in that he gave them
leave to take away the slain Bodies of these Noble men, without paying one
penny for them, although they did offer largely as 1000. pound for one body,
and in giving them leave to carry their wounded bodies over to the maine land
to look for cure, and himself did employ his own Chirurgions to dress some
of them abord the Triumph.

Slain of the Nobility of France.
Monsier du Plessis Hay. Monsier de Fueil. Monsier de Roche Tauchuyn. Monsier
de la Chantebouchere. Monsier de la Quichachere. Monsier de la luniere. Monsier
de la Touch Vuchere. Monsier de la Pitneytiere. Monsier de la Leruantiere.
Monsier le Baron de Cauze. Monsier de Souigny. Monsier de Noudille. Monsier de
Bossonide. Monsier de Montaigne. Monsier de Lorboby. Monsier de Tablay. Monsier
le Baron Chantail. Monsier de la Laud. Monsier de Nuelle. Monsier St. Surin.
Monsier de Conte Tamini, etc.
With other Gentlemen of note in France who were slain with these French
Noblemen in all amounting to 125.

A Iournall.
WEdnesday the 26. of June we set sail, but having the wind very contrary, we
beat up and down the Sea until the second of July, when we discovered 14.
Sails of Dunkerkers, (as we afterward understood;) My Lord General appointed
some of his Ships to chase them, who pursued them all night and next day, and
followed them so close as they were forced in the night to fling ouerboord some
of their Ballast and their Stuff, and to put forth studding Sails, and go
right before the wind, having lost ground upon a tack and at veering, and so
not without difficulty escaped us.

From that day we beat up and down the Sea until the eight of July, when the
wind came good.

On wednedsday the tenth, we had a great tempest and very thick weather, and
so obscure, as being driven by the wind near the coast, and in the morning
(not being able to make land) we ran a great hazard: But God be thanked, about
noone the weather growing more clear, we discovered the I Will of Retz, and the
same day we entered into the Pertuy Breton.

The chase of the Dunkirkers did separate the Squadron of the Rear Admiral
from us (together) with some other Ships, so as my Lord Duke staying for the
arrival of the rest of the Fleet, did nothing on tewesday at night, and on
wednesday morning but compass the Island with his Vessels, and stop all the
entrances into the Island.

On wednesday at night arrived my Lord Heruey very happily with the Reareward,
and next day at noone we landed.

After we had put on shore upwards of one thousand Foot, the Enemy (who had
lain in certain hollow grounds) began to appear, with about 300. or 400.
Horse, the greatest part Gentlemen well quallified, and near one thousand
Foot of the Regiments of Champagne. The Horse were divided into five
squadrons, whereof three gave on very furiously, and made three Ralim^^s and
charges again; and by the report of all that saw them, never Caua^liere did
better; So as they drove some of our new Men, who were the last landed, and the
least in order, into the Sea, where some of them were drowned; and they
overthrew some Boats and drowned some Gentlemen of quallitie of our side who
were pressing on to get on Land, and came within Pistol shot of my Lord
General, who was all the while close by the Shore in his Ba^g^, calling forth
and disposing of the Boats as they went on land, for the second discharge of
the Boats after he had been on land with the first, and caused them to be
drawn into a fit place: But of those who gane on, there were about 120
slain, of the principal Gentry, and the most forward, with Pikes, Swords, and
the but end of the Soldiers Muskets; the rest got off, most of them or their
Horses wounded and utterly routed: And the two other Companies coming to give
on, just as they were routed, were so astonished, as they wheeled about, and
never gave stroke. The Infanterie came on in an other part, and gave their
first Fires as near and with as much resolution as was possible; But after
they had tasted of our Pikes, they gave quickly over, and ran away in the
foulest disorder that could be, and did not that day answer the opinion that
all France has of the Regiment of Champagne.

My Lord General had ordered certain Ships to scour the landing place with
their Ordinance, but the assault was so sudden as they did little hurt to the
Enemy; and in the very heat of the Combat, it fell out that one of our own
Ships had engtangled himself between our battering Ships and the Land, by
which means they were hindered in performing of their charge.

The Enemy lost so many Noblemen and Gentlemen of Marque, as the Horse have
hardly ever since showed themselves, nor never attempted any thing with effect:
And the Foot have kept themselves wholly retired in their Cittadell.

That night and the next day was spent on our side in retrenching and in
putting necessaries for our Soldiers on Land, and in landing of our Horse.

The Enemy sent a Trumpet with the Barron of Ambleuille, to demand the Dead,
who was received with such courtesy, and the Dead rendered with such Military
honors, as they confess themselves no less vanquished by my Lord Generals
Favors, then by his Arms.

The 14. day a Council was kept, and the rest of the day was spent in
vnshipping of the Ordinance and Munition, and preparing of eight Drakes to be
drawn along with our Forces by Men for want of carriage: And at night the
Army was drawn into Battle, and seven Companies, with Colonel Bartu were
left in the retrenchment.

On the 15. day, our Army marched by five in the morning, and took in Saint
Marie and la Flote, where they lodged that night: In which places my Lord
General left the Inhabitants in as great suerty and more liberty then they
were before; the Soldiers taking nothing but what they paid for.

Mounsiere de Toyras had sent a brauing complement that he would visit him that
day; for which, my Lord General gave the Bearer a good reward, but it proved
but a Complement.

The 16. his Grace reposed the Army, and buried the Body of Sir William
Heydon, with all Military honor, himself and M. de Seabise accompaning the
Corpse.

On the 17. the Army marched to Saint Martines, the principal Town of the
Island, as great as Plymouth, where the Enemies Cauelerie did appear again,
whom our Infanterie had so great a wind to be dealing with, as hardly the
Officers could keep them from setting on them in disorder: But as they
advanced, they were s^^^ted with one of our Drakes, which killed two or three
Horses, and hurt some Men.

Here one of our Cauelerie advanced himself and proffered a single Combat, but
no Man answered him.

This evening our Army lodged as peaceably in Saint Martines as if we had been
in Voyage and not in War; the Inhabitants receiving us with great
cheerfulness, embrasing M. de Sub^ses feet, and calling him their good
Prince.

There were taken some hurt Men and some Prisoners in the Town; and the Enemy
quitting their Baricadoes, wholly retired themselves into the Ci^tadell. And our
Army is now wholly employed in landing of our Canon, dressing our Batteries,
and preparing our Trenches.

FINIS.
A Continued August 17 IOVRNALL OF ALL THE PROCEEDINGS of the Duke of
BVCKINGHAM his Grace, in the Isle of Ree, a part of France.

Jn whom are combined Religion, Fortitude, and Clemency; being the true
Characters of a noble General.

Published by Authority.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Eagle
and Child in Britaines-Bursse. 1627.

A Iournall of the proceedings of my Lord DVKE in his Voyage.
June the 24. 1627. being Sunday after Divine Service and Sermon, the Lord
General took his Barge, and enjoined all the Officers and Commanders to
attend him to the Fleet, lying then at Anchor in Stokes Bay, which he weighed
the same day, and fell down toward Saint Hellens point, where he cast Anchor
again, and stayed there for want of wind till the 27. of June. The same night
hearing there were some Commanders behind in the Town, who kept disorder; he
went a shore himself, and searched all the houses in the Town, where he found
some Captains that had been disorderly: Amongst the rest there was one that
gave an unmannerly answer, who was casheered for his labor.

That night the Lord General lay a shore: the next morning betimes he went a
board. On Wednesday the 27. we weighed Anchor with 100. sail of Ships, and
tackt to and again until we recovered the Point East of the I Will of Wight.

Thursday the 28. we stood on our course toward the West, until we were
come to the height of Plymouth, about eight of the clock at night: we stood
West, and East, and by South. And on Friday the 29. we sailed with a slack
wind; but before night we got sight of land on our Larboard, seeming to be
12. leagues off a part of France, called the Vshant, in 47. degrees or
there-abouts. We stood on to Sea that night, with a fresh gayle of wind,
which served us until the next morning at two of the clock, and then we were
becalmde till Monday the first of July, at four of the clock. At which time
we sent a Boy to the top of the main Mast, to see what he could discover, he
spied on the head of us 14. sail of Ships some four leagues off, and very
fortunately within a quarter of an hour after there arose a good gayle of
wind fully with us, so that the Admiral and all the rest made have to hoyst
up sail and chase these Ships. Before nine of the clock at night a Catch of
his Majesty's ouertook them, which was commanded by Captain Dunning, he called
to them and asked what they were, they told him a contrary tale: he desired
then to wind about, and come aboard and speak with our Admiral. They bid him
go before to their Admiral, and what he did they would follow: he came to
their Admiral and desired him to wind about and speak with our Admiral.
Their Admiral asked Dunning what Fleet it was, he told him it was the King
of Englands Fleet, he asked what they were doing there: he told them they
were Tacking to and again to scour the Seas. No (says he) I know you are
going to Bordeaux, but there you will find them prepared for you, and they
will give you hot service. He asked who was our Admiral, he told them my
Lord Duke of Buckingham. Whereupon he fell in railing, and called us all
Roagues and Rascals, and commanded the Gunner to shoot; he shot half a dozen
shot at him, and shor him twice through the sail, hard by the middle of the
main Mast: so that Dunning fell a stern of him, and tackt about to us, and
told us what had past, and that he conceived them to be Dunkerks men of War,
very well appointed, which did much comfort our General, and all the rest. We
chased them all night: and on Tuesday the 20. of July at light day, we had got
near unto them with some of our Ships. The Lion had ^ot the Winde-ward of
them. Three of the Collyers, and the Maria, with the Catch, was got almost
within shot of th^^, ^ut in this time they were throwing out their Ballest, and
making themselves light: and when they had done that, they hoysed up studding
Sails, and after outsailed us quite; We followed them so far, as there was
no hopes, and then wound about to our intended course: At four of the clock
the same day, my Lord caused to send up to the maine Mast, to tell how many
Ships we were in company, and we found we were then no more then three score;
for we had lost in that Chase my Lord Haruey, with forty sail of Ships, who
met not with us till wednesday the 11. of July.

We were kept from the place where we intended (with contrary winds and
calmes) till tewesday the 10. of July; About two of the clock, then fell a
violent storm, with a thick mist, so that we were put into great danger.

The Nonesuch in this storm had spent her Foremast, and many of the other
Ships lost their Long-boates, being tied at the Stern. About eight of the
clock the storm broke up, and it grew to be clear; Then we discerned the
Isle of Ree to be within three leagues of us, whither we steered our course;
And about ten of the clock cast anchor over against Saint Martines, the prime
Town in that Island. The Next morning being wednesday, we weyed anchor, and
sailed down lower to a point of the Island next to the maine-Land, and over
against Rochell. There we cast anchor, and placed our Ships round about the
Island, that the Enemy might neither export nor import any thing for their
advantage.

That done, being the 11. of July, we had very good sport in chasing those
Barques and Hoyes which were offering to go from the Island to the maine-Land,
and from the maine-Land to the Island: We took many of them, and there were
none that got either in or out. About six of the clock that day, my Lord
Haruey appears with his forty sail of Ships, which was unto us a great
comfort: About eight of the clock the same day, the Lord General called a
Council, and resolved to land our Men the next morning, upon that point which
lay just to us, as being the most safe place; At which time he gave order to
some Ships to batter a Fort, which lay a league off on the right hand, and
continued the battering till ten of the clock the next day; then we found
there was no resistance in the Fort, whereupon, the Lord General commanded to
give over.

On tewesday the 12. the L. General was up and ready by three of the clock in
the morning, and received the Communion that morning at five of the clock, and
after took his Barge and went aboard the Nonsuch to Monsiure Subcesa, and
returned from thence at six: At seven of the clock, Monsiure Sabuesa,
Monsiure Blancarte and Sir William Becher went to Rochell: At eight of the
clock, the L. General sent Master Grymes (the Gentleman of his Horse) with a
Foote-boy of his that could both run and swim well, and six Muskatieres
(to the point of the Island, where they were to land their Men) to see if they
could discover any Men or Ordnance, that they had planted there to encounter
us: When he came to the shore, he caused the Foote-boy to strippe himself,
and to run along, and he run three quarters of a mile into the Country, and
found all that Coast clear, saving three Horsemen, that the Enemies had set
out to be Scoutes, which chased him back to the Sea side; The Boy was releiued
by the Ship Ordnance and the Muskets in the Boat: At ten of the clock, he
turned back to the Triumph, and gave the L. General an account what he had
discovered; Whereupon, the L. General gave present order for all Officers to
be in a readiness, and to meet him aboard the Kings good Ship (called the
Lion) lying next the Point, where they were to land their Men, for there he
would keep his Randeuous for that time: At twelve of the clock, he took his
Barge, accompanied with Sir George Blundell Sergeant Mayor, attended by M.
Grymes and M. Ashburneham, and went to all those Ships that had Land Soldiers,
and commanded them that they should presently draw themselves as near that
point of the Island as they could; After that, he went to all the Ships, and
appointed the Captains of them, how and where to attend with their Ships,
and commanded them presently to provide their Barges and long Boats, to land
their Land Soldiers, and to send them to the Lion. He then made choice of
ten Ships of lesser burden, and directed them to draw their Ships as close
as they could to either side of the point of the Island, where the Soldiers
were to be Landed, and commanded them that if the Enemy did appear within
shot, they should presently play upon them.

He being aboard at the same time of one of these Ships, went up to the top
of the main Mast, and discovered of the Enemies three Troops of Horse, and
16. or 18. hundred Foot, all ready in Battalia some English mile or more off
the place, where we were to land our men: he came presently down and told
us what he had discovered, and shot at them himself two or three Pieces of
Ordnance, and commanded the rest of the Pieces to play upon them still: with
that took Barge and went to the Lion, where he found all the Officers ready
with their long Boats to land their men.

In this time came back from Rochell Monsieur Sabuesa, and Sir William
Beecher, who stayed there till Saturday following. Monsieur Saint Blancart
dissuaded the Lord General to forbear the Landing of his men until the next
morning: but the Lord General fearing it would give time to the Enemy to
strengthen himself. He would by no means hear of any delay. Whereupon
Monsieur Saint Blancart like a brave man, choosed himself a Pike, and put
himself into Sir John Burrowes Regiment.

By this time it was three of the clock when the Lord General commanded to
land two Regiments, that were of the old Companies, whereof Sir John Burrowes
and Sir Alexander Brett were Commanders, he went with them himself on shore,
and appointed the two Colonels in what place they should land their men. And
being landed, commanded them to put their men in Battalia with all speed,
fearing the Enemy would give them a sudden assault.

The men being weary in lying on Shipboard, lingered washing their hands in
the Sea; but the Lord General with a Cudgel run to and fro amongst them,
beating some, and threatening other-some, and got them thrust up three Pykes
length to the skirt of the bank, where they were to be.

There was a third Regiment that was ready to land: in the mean time came
Sir William Courtney to the Lord General, and told him, that unless he
should do the same courtesy for him which he did for the other two
Collonells, he should not get his men landed, and that his were old
Soldiers, and would do good service if the Enemy made assault.

Whereupon my Lord called Sir William Courtney, and went into his Barge, with
an intention to hasten a shore his Regiment, and as soon as he had gone about
fourscore from the shore, he presently heard the fight begun, and turning
back, he saw three Troops of French Horse, charging our Foot with all the
fierceness that might be: And the third Regiment, those that were vnlanded,
pressing themselves amongst the Ships to succor themselves: the rest of that
Regiment that were landed he saw pressed into the water by the French Horse;
and Sir William Haydon being carried violently to the Sea by the Reuolters, was
there drowned.

Whereupon he set S. William Courtney into another Boat, with command to make
all expedition to get his Men landed; And very bravely himself drew his Sword,
and turned his Barge (attended by Master Grymes and M. Ashburneham) and thrust
himself upon the Reuolters; and rebuking some, and encouraging others, told
them, he hoped they came not with any intent but to adventure themselves so
far as he would lead them: Whereupon, he thrust himself on to the shore,
(and they followed slowly) and animating of the other Foot which were run into
the water they most of them leapt out of the water, and upon the Lord Generals
words threw themselves forwards as if they would have fought bravely, but
before we could get where the blows were, the Battle was ended.

My Lord General had ordered certain Ships to scour the Landing place with
their Ordnance, but the assault was so sudden as they did little hurt to the
Enemy; and in very heat of the combat, it fell out, that one of our own
Ships had entangled himself between our Battering ships and the Land, by
which means they were hindered in performing of their charge.

If the French Foot had come on to have charged presently upon the discharge
of the Horse, it had been impossible that we could have withstood them; But as
God would have it, the Horsemen made more have then in judgment they should
have don: Before the Foot came we had killed most of their Horses; But when
the Foot did come, they came very orderly and bravely, being 1500. coming
within a Pike and a half of our Men before they discharged; and the Leader of
the Foot (being a brave and goodly Gentleman) took off his hatte, whereupon
all their Foot discharged their Muskets, and after they fell to it with Swords
and p^^h of Pike, until they were breathless on both sides: The French
finding our Pikes to be longer than theirs threw away their Pikes, and went to
it with Stones, and so did our Men, but ours beat them out, and made them fly
away very disorderly, that happy was he that got first off his Armor to betake
him to his heels.

This Battle did not continue in all much above half an hour, but our Horse
were not yet landed; But if we had had twenty Horse to have followed them, we
had killed them up every Man. That night we entrenched our selves in that
place, fearing the Enemy would give us an assault in the night. My Lord
General spent that evening in viewing of the dead Bodies, and visiting those
that were hurt on our side, and giving great charge to the Chirurgions to take
special care of them.

We took four of the French Gentlemen, but they were all hurt before; two of
them dyed the next day, one of them is alive yet in the Triumph, his thigh
being shot to pieces, the other, being a Page, the Lord General sent him to
his Master.

The next morning very early, the Lord General came on shore again, and
spent all the whole day there, calling the Commanders to him, and ordering
them to bring him notes of every several Company, how many they were, and how
many were perished in the conflict; By which we found, there was nineteen
Captains, Ancients and Lieuetenants killed, and twelve other Officers hurt,
but in no danger of death, and some thirty five common Soldiers drowned, but
none killed; for the French men discharged all on our Gentry, and never looked
at the Common sort. Our Gentry (when the common Soldiers began to route) clapped
themselves together, and showed themselves the brauest Men in the world,
espetially Sir John Burrowes, Sir Alexander Brett, Sir George Blundell, and a
Brother of Sir Alexander Bretts: There was not one Gentleman of our Nation in
the field that did not act his part bravely.

This being Friday, the day after the Battle, the 13. of July, Monsieur de
Thorax, Governor of the Island, sent the Barron Ambleuile with a Trumpet to
speak with the Lord General: His Message was, to desire my Lords favor to
give them leave to fetch away their dead bodies: they being so suddenly
demanded by them, my Lord made scruple in granting it. Whereupon the Gentry
made means by some of our Officers to buy the bodies, and offered for one
1000. pounds. When my Lord General had considered, he gave leave that they
should take them away.

Within four hours the Governors sent another Trumpet, with one of his
Pages, to give him thanks for his favor, and to report to him that he would
never after harbor an ill thought of the English, for he judged the Gentry of
them to be the brauest men in the world. Although before the Battle he made
no more account of us then if we had been all Beeues: and enquiring what
number we were, we told him 6000. He said he would kill us and salt us, as
we did Oxen in England.

At the same time he sent my Lord General word, that he would wait on him
himself, so that we made full account that he would give us Battle. The same
day we put our selves in Battalia, and expected them all that day, yet he
came not. The next day being the 14. of July, we made our selves ready to
Martch, and at 6. of the clock we marched an English mile further into the
Country, leaving Sir Peregrine Bartue in the place with some Companies.

The 15. by 6. of the clock in the morning, we marched on to a Village
within an English mile, and took in that without any disturbance. Then we
marched on two English miles further, to a Town called St. Mary's, when we
came near to the Town, the Protestants came out and yielded the Town to the
Lord General, so he went with some Gentlemen with him, and took possession,
and made the Soldiers martch by, and not suffer them to come to the Town,
fearing they would pillage and disturb the people; so we marched on the same
day, to a Town called La Flote. In the mid way the Enemy appeared with 120.
horse and 1500. Foot, the which were left vnkilled. We did verily think they
would have given us Battle, but it did not prove so: for as soon as they
viewed us, they returned back again.

We were ready for them, for our men were very forward to fight, so we
marched on within half a mile of La Flote, where the Protestants of that
Town met us, and surrendered the Town and themselves with a suite they had to
the Lord General, which was that he would for their sakes show favor to
the Romish Catholics: for that they had lived long together in that Town,
and ever received good Quarter and usage from them: And that now seeing he was
become Master of both, he would requite it on their behalf to the
Catholics, which he very Nobly consented unto, and went with them to the
Town, and took possession, and presently turned back to the Soldiers, and
Encamped them round about the same, and would not suffer any of them to go
into it, fearing they would make Pillage, and that night lay amongst them in
the open Field, with no other bedding, save one Cloak under his head, and
another upon him.

The next day being the 16 he went into the Town, accompanied with Monsieur
Subesa, and some other Lords, to bury Sir William Heydon, and returned into the
Field at night, and lay as he did before. But that night about two of the
clock, there fell very miserable vveather, with Thundering and Rayning, and
continued so till twelve of the clock the next day.

The next day, being the 17. we martched on toward St. Martyns, though it
Rayned very fearfully: and about 12. of the clock it grew fair; at which
time we were within three English miles of the Town.

By that time we had marched a mile further, we could see the Enemy sally out
of the Fort with Horse and Foot: so they Martched toward us, and were
within the distance of an English mile: and we thought they would take the
advantage of our weary Martching, and give us Battle.

Therefore it was holden fit by the Lord General, that we should take all
advantage we could in that place, which was only to gain the Sun and the
Wind of them. We marched on toward the end of the Town, that lay next unto
the Sea side, and furthest from the Fort. And by that we had advantage both of
Sun and Wind. Within less then an English mile of the end of the Town, we
could see the Horse approach very fiercely, as though they would come suddenly
upon us.

Whereupon the Lord General gave order to the Master of the Ordnance, to
shoot some of our Drakes at them; which he did, and killed a Gentleman and two
Horses, and put all the rest in fear and disorder.

Here Captain Coningham (Lieutenant of the Horse) advanced himself on
horseback, and proffered a single combat, but no Man answered him. Whereupon
they presently put out a Flagge of Truce, and sent some of the Protestants to
us to render the Town, without any condition; So that we presently marched
into it in Battalia, and quartered all our Soldiers therein. The Lord General
rode to every Company, and desired them to be careful of themselves and not to
wrong the Town, and that they should take nothing but what was given them and
what they paid for, and that he would go aboard the victualing Ships, and
told them they should want nothing, which contented them very well, and
thanked God with a loud voice that they had such a worthy Lord General.

He took his Barge, and accordingly went, and as he was going, there was a
poor Englishman in distress in a Sandbed, where the Tide had locked him
about, and had no means to save himself, but must run toward the Fort,
where the Enemy was retired with all his Forces: My Lord hearing him so cry
out, caused to stay his Barge (although the Barge-men told him he would
endanger the casting away of himself; and the Gentlemen persuaded him also,
that he should not hazard himself in the danger, yet would he not stir
before he had relieved this Man and got him into his Barge; So after went
aboard of the Victualing Ships, and saw all the proportions of the Victuals
sent to the Soldiers; and after went aboard the Triumph. And on wednesday the
16. made a dispatch for England, to acquaint the King with his fortunate
proceedings.

The Enemy was retired into the Fort a Musket shot, with 1500. Men, of which
number, there was 120. Horse left; they had neither Water nor Wood in their
Fort, and had but some eight or nine Pieces of Ordnance, and the Fort too
little for so great a Company, so that it was not likely that they could hold
it long, and we hope to be Masters of it, as well as of the Island, within a
very short time.

Thurseday and Friday, we were raising a Mount to plant our Ordnance against it.

Saturday the 21. we planted twenty one pieces of Ordnance, and eleven Drakes,
and the Master Gunner was very confident to batter them from the Fort in a very
short time: We were working with our Pyoniers, and our Soldiers trenching
against the Fort.

This is all I was an Eye witness to. So God send them good success, and I
for England, in his Majesty's Good Ship, called the Charles.

There was slain that day in (the Battle) of the French 125. Horsemen, dead
on the ground, besides a great many that were deadly hurt, of which number,
there were 23. Marquesses and Barons; all the rest Knights and Gentlemen, of
the best quallitie in all France: Some Commanders of their Foot were killed,
with 100. or 120. Common Soldiers.

Received at Court the 5. of August.
THe Cittadell in the Isle St. Martins, holds out still, the Walls and
Fortifications thereof being made so strong and substantial, that our Cannon
that beat on it perpetually could do little hurt to it, in so much as my Lord
wrought by Mines, and has cut off two Pipes that carried water to the same,
but finds that part of the ground which is penetrable near the Cittadell, to
be loose sandy ground, which will not Mine, and the foundation of the
Cittadell, and the part near the same is Rocky, not to be wrought: so as my
Lord having beaten the Enemy out of his out-workes into the Fort, is resolved
to endeavor to recover the same by famine, there being 3000. men in the Castle,
and they wanting Firing and Water. My Lord has planted above 20. Pieces of
Ordnance by Sea and Land against the Cittadell: and the third shot that the
Kings Cananere made, killed 41. French men, as some who were then in the Fort
related.

My Lord lately intercepted two small Vessels laden with Victuals, and one
laden with Munition, which were in the night, passing from the main over
the River to relieve the Cittadell, that which was laden with Munition, was
in the taking sunk with a Shot, and 37. French men in one of the other
Vessels slain, which made the third yield without resistance.

My Lord walks the round most nights, to see the Watch perform their Duty:
And Sunday last was seven days lay in our Trenches all night, upon
aduertisements, that the Enemy would sally, and assault the men in our Works.

My Lord Montioy (chief Commander of the Horse) very happily surprised 28. of
the best of the Enemies Muskatieres, who were sent out of the Fort for a
guard to some who were sent to fetch water at a Well, not far distant from
the Fort: as soon as they perceived our Horse to approach, they ran into a
Mill, and there (upon quarter demanded and granted) they yielded.

My Lord has by Proclamation given permission to the Inhabitants of the I Will to
make Salt, with which Commodity his Grace intends to satisfy the Dutch men
(who were taken up to transport Horses and Provisions for the Army) for the
hire of their Ships, and likewise to furnish England with Salt.

The Governor of the Cittadell and I Will of St. Martins, sends every day some
Messenger to speak with my Lord: And about ten days since under color of a
Parley, sent a Disciple of the Jesuits to have mischieued his Grace: the
Villain being come to act his Villainy, when he began to speak to my Lord,
changed his color, and so trembled, that he could scarce speak: whereupon his
Grace commanded one that was with him, to search him, and there was found in
the Sleeue of his Doublet, a long Rauilliack-like Knife poisoned, which at the
first he said he carried for his defense: but that being no place to carry a
Weapon for defense, he was that night committed, and being threatened to be
tortured, he desired to be brought before the Lord General, which was
granted; and then he confessed that the Governor had dissiplined, and hired
him to murder my Lord: and being questioned how he durst undertake such a
mischievous work, since he could not hope to escape death, or enjoy the reward
he was to have: he said he did believe it would cost him his life; but being
persuaded, it was a meritorious work, and promised, his Wife and Children for
it should be advanced, he undertook the same; and falling down at my Lords
feet, besought his pardon. My Lord sent him back to the prison, and after
three days pardoned him, and sent him over into the main.

All Soldiers cry out against the Governor for this treachery, and say, he
deserves not to have any Quarter, that would offer the same to one who has in
all points carried himself so Nobly toward him, and all the French that have
been at his mercy, for my Lord sent him back his Brothers Page, which was
taken in the day of Battle; and having found the Governors brothers Gentleman
of his Horse wounded in the Field, caused him to be sent a board his own
Ship, and looked unto by his own Surgeon.

Sir George Blundell is lately dead of the wounds he formerly received in the
day of Battle.

There is News from Paris the French King is very sick, and no man dares tell
him of his Graces landing in that Island; he lies at Villeroy, and Monsieur
(that Kings Brother) at Paris.

The Duke of Sauoy, and Count of Soissons, are in Arms upon the Froutiers of
Daulphine, and the Dukes of Roan and Mountmoreney are in Arms in Languedoc.

Monsieur, the Marshall Crequi (Governor of the Daulphine) sent Post to Paris
for a Commission and money to leauie men; returned with a Commission but
without any money.

I must add this, which (I believe) makes my Lords actions to prosper, that
his Grace does duly every morning and evening serve God, either privately in his
Chamber, or publikly in the whole Army, and has caused a strict course to be
held with such as neglect the service of God.

Thus ends the Journall at this time.
Received at Yorke-House. August 15. THE RELATION OF Mr. Garetson, Master of
the Ship called the Bread and Beere-pott of Horn in Holland, made and taken
at Plimmouth the 12. of August 1627 by Sir James Bag, knight, who reports
the same as follows. Videlicet.
THat he was that day chased with a Ship, (as he supposed, to be a Man of war
of Dunkerke) and to free himself, did put into the port of Plymouth, this
present evening, being the 12. aforesaid, and that he was at Bordeaux about
the 29. of July last, where the Governor and People were taken with such a
fear of the aproach of the English, that they destroyed the Cloisters and
Warehouses, and all the Suburbs of the said City, to the end the aproach of
the English might be the more difficile.

And from Bordeaux he went to Southers, and from thence to Rochell, where he
arrived the first of August; And from thence he went to St. Martines, where his
Excellency was besieging the Cittadell, and making a Trench to impeach the
sallying forth of the Horse; And for as much as all passages by water were
stopped, (except the intercourse between Rochell and St. Martines.)

He was enforced to return for Rochell, and from thence went over land to
Southers, where he laded his Ship with Salt; And sailing from Southers, came
within half a League of St. Martines, where being by the lee, there came out
three English Ships to understand what he was, and finding him to be a
Hollander, gave him relation, that the 5. day of this month the Cittadell was
by his Grace taken, and the French men permitted to depart thence, only with
Bastinadoes in their hands: And the Captains of those Ships told him, that
the 6. of this month there was an English Ship dispatched, with information
of his Excelencies full proceedings, and conquest of that Island.

He further says; that at Southers it was reported, that the French King sent
to Rochell to require them to declare whether they would abandon the English,
and serve him or not: To give answer to which, the Rochelers desired seven
days respite; But he says, that diverse of the Principal and others of
Rochell, daily repair to his Majesty's General.

He also says, that there is a command given, that none speak with the
French King, and it is muttered, that he is dead.

He says, that there was a French man apprehended in the Dukes presence, with
a knife in his sleeue, who waighted an opertunitie to attempt the murder of
his Grace.

FJNJS.

