The XII Aeneids of Virgil, the most renowned Laureat-Prince of Latine-Poets;
Translated into English deca-syllables, By John Vicars. 1632.

Are to be sold by Ni: Alsop at the Angel in Popes head ally.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and thrice noble, the Lord George, the Lord Io^n, and
the Lord Bernhard Stewart, sons of the gracious and illustrious princess
Katharine, Duchess of Lenox, John Vicars wishes all increase of true
nobleness and honor here, and eternal happiness in heaven hereafter.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THe boundless bond of sincere gratitude,
For savours multitude and magnitude,
My self and second does so firmly tie
To you and your illustrious family,
That what I can or do, or speak, or write,
Comes short of your demerits infinite.
Yet that I be not totally ingrate,
At least (at last) in mind to memorate,
What I and mine to you and yours do owe,
I long have longed, fitly forth to show.
And thus at length my hopes being happifi'de,
And kind occasion caught, as soon as spi'de;
My humble hand and thankful heart accords,
To you thrice noble and illustrious Lords,
To dedicate and consec^ate, as due,
My self, my service, and my all to you.
In this translated prince of poets rare,
Disrobed thus from's Latin vestures fair,
Into a homespun english gray-coat plain,
Its vital warmth, not worth, safe to maintain:
Yet in its self a princely poem sweet,
For your true princely patronage most meet;
Not for my manner, but its matters sake,
Wherein much various pleasure you may take.
Fully and fairly to affect and fit
Your pregnant promising, fair sprouting wit,
And cedar-like high growing nobleness,
In learning, virtue, grace and godliness.
O as your years, so may these in you flourish,
Your king to affect, the church and state to nourish!
So fair paire-royall of young nobles high,
Here to adorn, in heaven to glorify.
Thus from his heart (best part) most humbly prays
He, who in him and his does rest always
Your honors most humbly devoted servant, JOHN VICARS.

TO THE COURTEOUS not curious Reader.
THou have here (courteous and candide reader) the weak issue of my many
nocturnall travells; a work fitter (I confess) for one of Apolloes elder
bay-browed sons: But thus you see, it has ple^sed Urania to make choice of
one of the meanest and most unworthie younger brethren of Parnassus. In which
my (though poor, yet painful) travel, I must entreat thee, kind reader, to
take notice of two things touching the translation; namely the motives
thereunto, and the manner thereof. The motives, whereby I first undertook this
task, were first, the instigation and in^itement thereunto, by a no less
learned then loving friend. Secondly and especially the common good and public
utility, which I hoped might accrue to young scholars and grammatical Tyroes.
The manner, wherein I have aimed at these three things, Perspicuity of the
matter, fidelity to the author, and facility or smoothnes to recreate thee my
reader. Now if any critical or curious wit tax me with a Frastra fit per
plura, etc. and blame my not curious confinement to my author line for line; I
answer, (and I hope this answer will satisfy the moderate and ingenuous) that
though peradventure I could (as in my Babels Balm I have done throughout that
whole translation) yet in regard of the lofty majesty and gravity of this my
authors style, I would not adventure so to pinch in his spirits, as to make
him seem to walk like a livelesse ghost. But thinking on that of Horace, Brevis
esse laboro, obscu^us fio, I presumed (yet still having an eye to the genuine
sense as I was able) to expatiate with poetical liberty, where necessity of
matter and phrase enforced. And so much the rather, being backed with so good a
warrant therein, as the authority and direction of the foresaid au^hour in his
Art Poetica: whose words run thus; Publica materies privati juris erit, ^i
Nec circa vilem patulumque moraberis orbem;
Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere fidus
Interpres, etc.


If then (gentle and ingenuous reader) these my poor endeavors may either
prodesse, or delectare* then give God the praise, his due deser^, my true
desire* But if thou can find^ neither of either, but can find in thy heart
to find fault withal, then I say to thee, or rather Martial in his Epigrams
for me, Carpere vel noli no^^^a, vel ede tua.

Thine JOHN VICARS.

THE LIFE OF VIRGIL, written by Tiberius Claudius Donatus, as Servius in his
commentary upon Virgil relates it.
PUblius Virgilius Maro was (as antiquity testifies) born of mean parentage,
especially on the fathers side, whose name was Maro, who, as some say, was by
profession a potter. He was (as many suppose) at first, servant to a certain
wandering wizard or southsayer; and by his sedulous industry in ru^ick
affairs, husbandry, keeping of catt^ll, working in woods, and tending of
bees, raised up his mas^^rs small means to a good estate, and afterward
marrying his daughter, became his masters son in law. He was born the 15. day
of October in a country village called Andes, near Mantua, in the year of
the consulship of Cneins Pompey the great, and Marcus Licinius Crastus, and was
a citizen of Mantua, as says Servius M^urus Honoratus, a learned Grammarian.
His m^ther Ma^a, being great with child of him, dreamed that she was delivered
of a (...) branch, which being set in the ground, grew up immediately into a
great spreading tree, fairly fraught with variety of fruit and fr^grant
flowers: And the next day she and her husband walking into the next
neighboring country, she stepping aside, was delivered of him in a ditch. It
is said, that being born, he never cried; but was of such a sweet and amiable
countenance, that he gave great hope of a m^st flourishing future condition.
His infancy, till the age of about seven years, was spent in Cremona. From
Crem^na he went into Millain, and from th^nce shortly after passed over into
Naples, where with great indu^^rie and utilitie studying the Greek and Latin
^ongues, he addicted himself principally and most seriously to the study of
Physic, and of the Mathematics, and in both exceeded all others of his time,
insomuch that he planted himself in Rome; where falling into f^miliaritie and
acquaintance with the master of the horse to Augustus the emperor, he cured
many of his horses diseases, who rewarded him with a daily allowance of bread,
as to the rest of the officers of his stable.

Afterward the Cretonians presented to the emperor a gallant colt, which in
the opinion of all the beholders was like to prove a nagge of rare spirit and
pace: but when Virgil saw him, he told the master of the horse that it was bred
of a very faulty mare, and would prove neither quick spirited nor nimble
paced: which afterward fell out so indeed. Which the master of the horse
relating to Augustus, he commanded that Virgils allowance of bread should be
daily doubled. Again, certain hounds being sent as a present out of Spain to
the emperor, Virgil told both of what kind they came, and how they would
prove dogs of admirable use and swiftnes: which also being made known to
Augustus Caesar, he again gave order that his allowance of bread should be
re-doubled. Shortly after, Augustus growing doubtful of himself whether
Octavi^s were his father, and persuaded that Virgil, who so well knew the
nature and kind of hounds and horses, could also resolve this doubt,
separating all other company, and retiring into a private room, he taks Virgil
with him, and asks him alone, whether he knew who he was, and what power h^
had to make men honorable and happy. Whereunto he answered, I know that thou
art Augustus Caesar, and that thou have power almost equal to the immortal
Gods, and that thou can^t happifie whomsoever thou please. Surely, said
Caesar, I have now a mind and purpose to make thee most happy and honorable,
if thou can give a full answer to my request unto thee. Sir, says Virgil, I
wish it were in my power to tell you the certainty of whatsoever your majesty
could demand of me. Some men (says Caesar) think that Octavius was my father,
others think some body else: Whereunto Virgill with a smile, thus replied,
Sacred sir, if I may freely and without offense answer your majesty's demand,
I am persuaded I shall easily resolve this doubt. Caesar hereupon assured him
with an oath, that whatsoever he spoke he would not take it amiss, and that
withal, he would not leave him unrewarded. Now then Virgil fixing his eyes
seriously on the emperors face, said; It is easy in other creatures (by rules
of philosophy and the mathematics) to discern the qualities and conditions of
their prog^^itours and parents, but in man it is not so easy a matter; yet as
touching your sacred majesty, I am able to make some probable conjecture what
profession your father was of. Hereat Caesar began to li^ten the more
attentively what he would say. Then says Virgil; So far forth as I can
collect and understand, thou wast a bakers son. The emperor hereat amazed,
presently began to wonder within himself how that could be. But Virgil
instantly interrupting his thoughts, said; Hearken sir, I beseech you, on what
ground I build this my opinion: Your majesty knows, that when I formerly
foretold diverse things which could not be seen into nor foreshown, but by men
of great learning and understanding, that your majesty the great monarch of
the world again and again rewarded me with a lot and allowance of bread, which
surely is the property eith^r of a baker or a bakers son. This facetious
conceit pleased the emperor wondrous well: who thereupon said unto him, Thou
shall now be no more rewarded by a baker, but by a munifice^t and magnificent
king: and ever after the emperor highly esteemed him and commended him to
Pollio. He was big of body, and tall of stature, of a shallow complexion, hard
favored and of a sickly constitution, a moderate drinker, and of a spare diet.
It is reported that he was given to the filthy and lu^^full love of boys, but
the honestest sort of men of his days were persuaded he loved them no
otherwise then as Socrates loved Alcibiades, and Plato his scholars: and that
above all other he loved Cebetes and Alexander best, whom in the second Eclog
of hi^ Bucoiicks he termed Alexis, whom Asinius Pollio gave unto him. And it is
reported also that he kept Plotia Hieria, but Asconius Pedianus affirms the
contrary from Virgils own s^rious d^niall thereof. In all other demeanours of
his life he was both in speech and conversation so honest and upright, that
throughout all Naples he was called Virginity; and if at any time (as that was
but seldom) he walked the streets of Rome, and observed himself to be noted
and followed by any in the streets, he would retire himself immediately into
the next house he came unto. He in his moderation of riches refused the goods
and estate of a banished man, which Augustus Caesar proffered to him; having a
good competent estate of his own, and a house in Rome in the Exsquiliae near
Mecoenas his gardens. He used much, and most frequently, to retire himself into
Campania and Sicil. In any request to Caesar he never had denial. He was
annually helpful to his parents in great measure, who died when he was himself
grown to a ripe age; his father being blind ere he died. His two brethren Silo
and Flaccus being dead, he bewailed under the name of Daphnis. Melissus
reports, that he was slow of tongue and sparing of speech, as if he hadbeen a
very ignorant and illiterate man. When he first addicted himself to poetry, he
made this distich upon one Balista a master of fence, who f^r report of
robberies was covered with a heap of stones: Monte sub hoc lapidum tegitur
Balista sepultus;
Nocte, die tutum carpe, viator, iter.
This heap of ^^ones, Balista's corpse interre;
Then night or day pass safely, passenger.


After this he wrote Moretum, Priapus, Epigrams, Dirae, Culex, and other Poems,
when he was but about sixteen years of age. He wrote Aetna also: and after
that, writing of Roman affairs, yet misliking the sharpnes and rigidnes of the
matter and names thereof, he fell upon his Bucolicks: especially to celebrate
the names of Asinius Pollio, Alphenus Varius, and Cornelius Gallus his great
friends. Afterward he wrote his Georgi^ks in honor of Mecoenas. Last of all,
he t^ok these Aeneids in hand, a work of a various and multifarious argument,
and in a manner, resembling both Homers works. When he wrote the Georgicks, it
is reported, that every morning he was accustomed to write a certain number of
verses, which he would all the day long overlook and so abridge, and refine
them into a f^w, that it might not be unfitly said, that he brought forth
verses ursino more, as the female-be^re does her young, bringing them into due
form by licking. This his work called the Aeneids, he wrote first in twelve
books in prose (as some think) and afterward digested it into verse; and some
think, that had he lived he would have enlarged it unto twenty four books,
even unto the time of Augustus. Of his Aeneids (scarcely yet begun) there was
spread such a fame, that Sextus Propertius doubted not thus to write of them;
Cedite Romani scriptores, cedite Graii;
Nescio quid majus nascitur Iliade.
Give place, give place Greeks, Roman writers wise;
Some worthi^r work then Ilias now does rise.


When Augustus Caesar, who by chance was absent from the Cantabrick expedition,
requested Virgil, partly by entreating, partly by merrily m^nacing letters, to
send him, if it were but a very little, or (as his own words are) some one
perfect sentence of his Aeneids, he refused it: but afterward, when it was
fully perfected, he recited to him three of the books, namely the second, the
fourth, and the sixth, and this especially for Octavia's sake, who being there
present at the recital of those verses of her son, Tu Marcellus eris etc.
Thou shall Marcellus be, it is reported she fell into a swound with sorrow: and
being with much ado recovered, she commanded that Virgil should have to the
value of five pound for every verse. He read his book also to diverse, but not
often, and those places only, whereof he made any scruple or doubt; thereby to
hear men's judgments of them. He fully perused his Bucolicks and Georgicks:
and when he was about 52 years old, with a desire to finish his Aeneids, he
resolved to have withdrawn himself into Greece and Asia, and there to have
spent three whole years in correcti^g and perusing it, that he might bestow
the remainder of his days only in the study of Philosop^ie. But being in his
journey, at Athens he met Augustus returning out of the East-countreys toward
Rome; whereupon he purposed to have returned home again with the emperor: but
traveling to Megara, a town near Athens, only to see it, he took a sickness
there, which with continual travel by sea so increased till he came to
Brundusium, that within few days after he there died, on the 22 of September.
Cneius Plautius and Quintus Lucretus being Consuls. When he felt himself sick
unto the death, he called often and very earnestly for his desk, that he might
burn his Aeneids: which being denied him, he notwithstanding* ordered by his
last will and testament, that it should be burned, as a work both faulty and
imperf^ct. But Tucca and Varrus told him that Augustus would by no means suffer
it. Whereupon he bequeathed that work and his other writings to Varius and
Tucca, upon this condition, that they should set forth nothing but that which
he would have set forth; and such verses as were imperfect, to leave so still.
He desired that his bones should be translated to Naples, where he had lived
long and merrily; which at Cesars command was accordingly performed, and he
buried in the way to Puteoli. Upon his tomb, at the second stone was engraven
this distick, made by himself, Mantua me genuit, Calabri repuere; tenet nunc
Parthenope; Cecini pascua, rura, duces.
Mantua gave life, Calabria death, a grave
Parthenop: I sang fields, lands, captains brave.
Plotius Tucca after Virgils decease (as he had requested) at Cesars command,
corrected the Aeneids; for no man judged them to be burnt; whereof these verses
of Suspitius the Carthaginian, are extant. Jusserat haec rapidis aboleri
carmina flammis
Virgilius, Phrygium quae cecinere ducem.
Tucca vetat, Variusque simul: tu maxim Caesar,
Non sinis; and Latiae consulis historiae.
Infelix gemino cecidit prope Pergamos igni,
Et pene est alio Troia cremata rogo.
Virgil these verses vowed to fires fierce flame,
Which sweetly sang the Trojan princes fame.
But Tucca, Varius, Caesar, to his glory,
The fact forbad, preserved the Italian stori^.
Unhappy Troy, twice (near) with fire consumed;
Near Pergame perished had, to fire twice doomed.
There are extant also many other and most excellent verses written by Augustus
Caesar himself, to the same effect: which begin thus; Ergone supremis potuit vox
improba verbis
Tam dirum mandare nefas? Ergo ibit in ignes,
Magnaque doctiloqui morietur Musa Maronis?
And must so vile a voice of last-will stand,
And such a foul nefarious fact command?
Must Maro's marrow of pure poetry,
Most learned lines in furious fire so fry?
And a little after; Sed legum servanda fides; suprema voluntas
Quod mand at fierique jubet, parere necesse est.
Frangatur potius legum veneranda potestas,
Quam tot congestos noctesque diesque labores
Hauserit una dies, etc.
But law, and what last-will does will, must stand,
And that must be obeyed which laws command:
Nay rather we will infringe laws awful power,
Then such rare nights and days toiles in one hour
Suffer to suffer shipwreck, etc.


Pedianus reports, that Virgil was very courteous, and a lover of all good
and learned men, and so unspotted with the foot of envy, that if he heard or
saw any thing wittily or worthily said or done by any others, he as much
rejoiced therein, as if it had been his own: That he used not to dispraise any
man, but ever praised good men; and that he was so courteous and affable, that
there was none (except he were most rudely and barbarously inclined) but both
much favored, and most ardently affected him. He seemed utterly unglued from
strict meum and tu^m; for his library stood still as open to the scholars, as
to himself, and oftentimes used that old adage of Euripides, (...), Communia
amicorum esse omnia, All things are common among friends. And therefore he so
lovingly respected all the poets of his time, that when they were emulously and
enviously jarring and snarling at o^e another, yet they all with an unanime
consent ever loved and reverenced him, as Tucca, Varius, Horace, Gallus, and
Propertius.

He so much despised glory, that when some had ascribed and arrogated to
themselves certain of his verses, and were therefore had in the greater
reputation for their learning, he not only showed himself no way discontented
therewith, but much rejoiced at it. For when once he made a couple of v^rses
containing the praise and prosperity of Cesars emperie, which were set upon
the gates without name, (these were the verses; Nocte pluit tota, redeunt
spectacula mane,
Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.
All night it rains, next morn sights glut the eye:
Caesar with Jove has equal emperie.)
Caesar having made inquiry for the author of them, yet could not know him, at
length Bathyllus a certain plain poet (when none would father them) took upon
him to be the author of them; and was therefore both well rewarded and much
respected by Caesar. But Virgil not taking this very well, set upon the same
gates, this beginning of his conceit fouretimes, Sic vos, non vobis, which
Augustus Caesar would have had made up: but when many had fruitlessely
e^deavoured it, Virgil himself rep^yed thus to the foresaid distich: Hos ego
versiculos feci, tulit alter honores.
Sic vos non vobis nidificatis, aves:
Sic vos non vobis vellera fertis, oves:
Sic vos non vobis mellificatis, apes:
Sic vos non vobis fertis aratra, boves.
These verses I did make,
Others my palm did take.
So you not for you, birds, build nests in trees:
So you not for you, sheep, wooll-fleeces bear:
So you not for you gather honey, bees:
So you not for you, beeves, plow-yokes do wear.
This thus known, Bathyllus was for a long time an occasion of jest and
laughter to the whole city of Rome. Once Virgil having in his hand the works
of Ennius, and being demanded by one, what he did with them, he answered, that
he gathered gold out of Ennius his dung: for that author expressed worthy
sentences and matter under homely words and phrases. Augustus Caesar asking him
how a city might be best governed, he answered, If the wisest men were placed
at the helm of government, and good men authorized to overruled the bad; and
that thus men of desert might have their due honor, and men of mean condition
not oppressed with injury. Mecoenas also asking him what it is that procures
least loathsomenesse and tediousness to a man, he answered, The multitude and
similitude of all things offends every man's appetite and affection, except of
understanding. Mecoenas asked him again, how a man might conserve from ruin a
fair and flourishing estate? To whom Virgil answered, If he excel others as
much in liberality and goodness, as in riches and in honor. He was
accustomed to say, that none of all the virtues was more laudable or more
profitable for a man then patience; and that no estate or fortune could be so
terrible or untoothsome, but that a wise man by discreet sufferance might
overcome it. Which he excelently urges in the fifth of his Aeneids, thus; Nate
Dea, qua fata trahunt, retrahuntque, sequamur;
Quicquid erit, superanda omnis fortuna ferendo est.
Fair^ Goddess son, let us follow fates where s^ere;
Worst state or fate by bearing let us o'rebeare.


There are many other worthy and memorable things written by this author, of
this our poet, and his other excellent works; which, partly to avoid
prolixitie, partly also as not being peculiarly pertinent to this work, I have
of purpose pretermitted, and refer the reader, for farther satisfaction (if
he require it) to Donatus himself in Servius his Commentary upon that our
Prince of Poets, Virgil.

TO MY GOOD COSEN Mr JOHN VICARS.
GOod cosen, as far forth as my other serious studies would give leave, I
have read your Virgils Aeneids translated into english decasyllables. Wherein
(that I may be just, and give you your due) I know not whether you have
performed better the part of a good poet or of a good interpreter. In my
judgment, I will speak it without fear or flattery ( quorum causas procul
habeo) your great pains in transplanting this worthiest of latin poets, into a
mellow and neat english soil (a thing not done before) deserves great
applause and good acceptance of all scholars, both such as are under the ferula
in Grammar schools, and such as have their brows bedect with laurel in the
Universities. If I were of a perfect wit, or a poet but of an inferior alloy,
I would have sent you some verses as an encomiastick: but I must not mount
above my sphere, nor step beyond my last.

Invida me spatiis natura coercuit arctis,
Ingenii vires exiguasque dedit.
Nature, a shallow wit in narrow brains
That pent, forbids me all poetic strains.
And therefore in plain prose I bid you heartily well to fare, and shall ever
rest

Your assured loving cosen Thomas Vicars. B.D. Ox.

TO HIS WORTHY FRIEND Mr JOHN VICARS.
WHy do thou (Maro) doom unto the fire
Those lofty raptures, which all times admire,
Hugging thy genius? Ah, unhappie verse!
Must thou needs burn? No; Caesar does reverse
That fatal verdict; fitter far to be
In this, thy sire, than who gave life to thee.
Let reverend sway and awful majesty
Of laws, before those high-flown poems die,
Cries great Augustus: So, who ever reads
Thy lines (thou best interpreter) must needs
Cry, Live for ever such smooth strains as make
The world to doubt, whether famed Maro spoke
The British or the Roman language, best:
How-ere, in one, then; now in both he is blessed.
Who scans, shall freely tell, Rome owes not more
To his, then fairest Albion to thy store.
Idem ad eundem.
The soul ( Pythagoras did teach) does go
From body unto body; and if so,
The paradox may pass. Who reads will swear
The Roman Maro's soul inspired were
Into thy breast; so smooth and sweet thy strains,
So high thy language, full of sweat thy pains.
Thomas Drant, M. A. Ca^^.

TO THE LEARNED TRANSlatour of VIRGILS AENEIDS.
Lofty was Maroes muse, feathered his pen,
Which raised so high the acts of Gods and men.
Yet that but hovered on the Roman sphere:
Thine soars, as chanting, in the British air.
The story great, in both the luster clear.
There shines the sun, but the reflection here.
What days were those, when Attick streams did swell
Higher at Rome, then at the Thespian well?
What days, said I? why 'twas Augustus reign,
When arts and arms advanced in equal train:
When fate was acting fame: and then 'twas meet
That such a poet such a prince should greet.
But change the times: Is not the state as free?
Does art or nature faint in pedigree?
No, perch Romes eagles now, the quills are gone
From them to us, and so the conquest won.
Tongues have their several orbs; that spangles bright,
Whose flame is native, not a borrowed light.
So spangled Homers, Maroes so: so thine
With rays embellisht splendid and divine.
The author's crowned before with Roman bays,
Then rob not the translatour of his praise.
A matchless piece of such exact a frame
Will envy hush, and criticisme shame.
On then, if poetry pythagorize,
Virgil in Vicars sacred breast survives.
W. Sq.

THE ARGUMENT of the first Book.
A man for valor, virtue, rare,
Aeneas, pressed with woe and care,
By angry Juno's unjust spite,
To Italy taking his flight
Through rocky rough Sicilian seas,
At last in Libya found great ease.
Where wandering with Achates kind,
By mothers guide themselves they find
IN the kingdom of Elisa queen.
Then closed in a cloud unseen,
Aeneas to the city bound,
There his lost ships and fellows found.
Whom Dido kindly entertains,
And of Troyes wrack to tell constrains.
I Who on slender oat-pipes once did sing
My songs, and leaving leavy woods did bring
Each neighboring field to yield obedient gains
(A country welcome-work) to greedy swains:
But now I sing fierce wars, and that brave knight
Who forced from Troy, came first by fatal might
To Latium and Lavine, tossed to and fro
By angry Gods, with lands and seas much woe,
And jangling Juno's old remembered frown,
Much warre-woe felt he ere he built his town,
Or into Italy his Gods could bring,
Whence Albane peers, and royal Rome did spring.
Show me, my Muse, why angry destiny,
Or why the queen of Gods implacably
Should force this pious prince such straits to see,
Such woes to feel: Can Gods thus angry be?
There is an ancient town, Carthage by name,
By Tyrians built, and over against the same
Stands Italy, and Tybers mouth most wide,
For wealth and feats of arms of peerless pride:
Which only Juno held then all more dear,
Even before Samo's self. Her armor here,
Here was her chariot: This the imperial throne
(If fates were pleased) she minds, maintains alone.
O but she heard a Trojan plant would spring,
Which once t'her Tyrian towers would ruin bring:
That hence a potent people would arise,
By Libya's loss: so pleased the destinies.
She fearing this, and mindful of the old broile,
Whereby for her dear Greeks she Troy did spoil:
Nor had she yet quite quenched old angers flame,
Forgot fierce griefs: to fresh remembrance came,
Her beauty scorned, by Paris judgment base;
That hateful stock stole Ganymeds great grace:
For these, all these, great Juno all-displeas'd,
The Trojans poor by tossing waves diseased,
(Of Greeks and fierce Achilles the remains)
Enforced far from her Italian planes,
Long times through seas by fates they driven were:
So hard it was Romes empire up to rear.
Scarce had they cheerly from fair Sicils fight
Hoist sails, and plowd the foamy waves outright,
When Juno, stuffed with ancient imbred ire,
Says thus; Must I vanquished vail my desire?
Can I not keep Troyes king from Italy?
Cause fates forbid: Could Pallas potently
Fire all the Grecian fleet, the Greeks all drown
For one man's fault, even Ajax mad love known?
Jove's nimble lightning she from heaven soon darted,
The waves wound up, the ships dispersed and parted:
And him himself, heart wounded, spuing fire,
With whirlewindes dashed on rocks she made expire:
But I the queen of Gods, sister and wife
To mighty Jove, have many years had strife
With one poor nation: who will henceforth adore
Great Iunoes Godhead, or her aid implore?
This Goddess thus pumps forth her fiery spite,
And to Aeolia swiftly takes her flight
To Winde-land, full of furious Southern blasts:
Where Aeolus their king most fiercely casts
The blustering winds and tempests turbulent,
Into vast caves, as slaves in prison pent.
They rumbling make huge noise in the hollow pits,
Where Aeolus enthroned with scepter sits,
And tames their tumults, overrules their rage,
Which if he should not powerfully assuage,
Swiftly they would sweep both heaven, earth, seas, and all,
And whisk them through the air without recall.
But mighty Jove kept them in dungeons black,
(This fearing) and main mounts laid on their back:
Gave them a king, who being charged, should see
To curb or loose the reins, by firm decree.
To whom now gentle Juno humbly said;
Great Aeolus, (for so great Jove thee made,
Potent to still the waves, to stir the wind)
On Tyrrhean seas do sail my foes unkind,
Troy into Italy (in hopes) transporting,
Their petty conquered Gods with them consorting.
Strike strength into thy winds, their ships all scatter,
Or drown, or on rocks, sands, their bodies batter.
Foureteen fair lovely lively Nymphs I have,
Of whom the rarest for her beauty brave,
My Deiopeia, thy fair bride shall be,
And in firm wedlock wedded unto thee,
In lieu of all thy love, eternally:
Making thee ^ire of sweet posterity.
To whom thus Aeolus; Great queen, but say:
For what you bid I Am bound straight to obey.
By you I have this kingdom, whatsoever,
By you my scepter and Jove's favor dear
I do enjoy, and with the Gods do feast,
Over winds and storms by you's my power increast.
This was no sooner said, but straight he stroke
His spear into the hills side; forth, forth with broke
Huge blustering winds, as all in uproare raised,
Through that small postern, making earth amazed.
Then nestling on the sea, they rouse the waves
Quite topsie turvie, East, South-east, outbraves:
Yea, stormy Africa puffs upon the ocean,
Making floods flow to shore with strange commotion.
Hence follow, straight, men's shreeks, and creaks of cable,
Storm clouds from Trojans sight; daylight disable
Claps up the sun: black night the sea hugs over,
And all the heavens sound with Jove's thunder roar:
With thick quick lightning flashes the aire's repleat,
And all things present death to the Trojans threat.
Forthwith Aeneas joints with chilling fear
Benumbed, he sighs, and's hands to heaven does rear,
Venting these sad events; Blessed, oh thrice blessed
Were they, whom before friends face, home death gave rest.
O Greeks great Diomedes, tell me why,
Why by thy hands in Troyes camps died not I?
Where by Achilles blade Sarpedon stout,
And our warre-wondrous Hector with death fought.
Where swift Simois did ingurgitate
Helms, shields, and valiant corpse inanima^e.
Whiles thus he spoke, a whistling N^r hern puff
Whiffs up the waves, gives his sails such a cuff,
As brake their wingy oars, turned the foredeck,
And lays the ships broad side to the b^llows check.
Then follows, flows, a mountanous burst wave,
These, turret like, on floods tops station have;
Those, 'twixt two gaping seas seem sunk to the ground,
Whom boiling, fomie, frothy floods surround.
A Southern blast three against hard high rocks mall'd,
(Rocks which in the deep Italians Altars called;
Huge swelled up heaps amidst the sea:) and three
East wind on shallows cast (woeful to see)
And dashed on foards, engulft in thick quicksands:
One which Or^ntes held, and Lycian bands,
Was sorely shaken by a furious wave,
Even in his sight, which the ship-master drove
Headlong over board: The ship it self at last,
Thrice whirling round, was on a whirlepool cast,
And so devoured: Men, riches, writings, arms,
Were here and there seen floating (helples harms)
Above the waves, Ilion's and stout Achates,
Brave barks, and that of Abas, old Alethes:
All these the storm had torn; all leakt full sore,
And at the leak sucked dangerous draughts in store.
Neptune meanwhile sees the seas huge commotion,
Foul winter weather overspread his ocean,
Waves upside down o'return'd: highly offended,
With a calm countenance the main ascended:
Looking about, sees all Aeneas fleet
Dispersed, his Trojans naught but wave-woes meet,
Heavens hot combustion: Iunoes rage and guile
Not being to her brother hid the while:
East and West winds to him he called, and said;
Proud winds, has your high stock so stout you made?
Thus heaven and earth without me to molest?
To dare, my streams with such fierce floods t'infest?
Whom I: but first it is best the storm to stay:
Then with unpattern'd plagues your pride I Will pay.
Be packing quick, and tell your king from me,
The three-tooth'd scepter, and seas soveraigntie,
Are mine, not his: let him his hard rocks hold,
Your dens, puffed winds: let Aeolus be bold
In that his craggy court to rule and reign,
His winds in that close prison to contain.
This said, he swiftly swag'd the swelling streams,
Dispelled the cloddy clouds, cleared Sols bright beams.
Cymoth and Triton strenuously do strive
The ships securely from hard rocks to drive.
Neptune's self nimbly with his trident mace,
Helps from the sands and seas all fears to chase,
And over the seas surface his chariot glides.
And like as when sedition rudely rides
Amongst the ignoble madhead vulgar hindes,
Then sticks and stones fly thick; wrath weapons finds:
But if some grave great man they happily spy,
Straight they stand hushed, listening attentively:
Whose words their wills reform, their rage appease:
So at great Neptunes sight all sea-storms cease:
And being ceast, in's chariot cheerfully
He turns his steeds, gives reins, to heaven does hie.
The tired Trojans now seek the next strand,
And soon arrived on fair Libya's land.
There is a place in a long creek, where the i will,
By cast-up banks does a safe haven compile,
Broke from the main, whence does the stream divide
Into safe creeks: here, there huge rocks reside:
Two chiefly, whose high tops seem heaven to threat,
Under whose hieght the sea makes still retreat.
A shade there is with beauteous boughs over head,
Made by a well-grown wood, with leaves outspread:
Under the hanging boughs a rocky cave,
Wherein fresh waters were, and seats most brave,
Of art-like stone, the wood-nymphs habitation;
Where yet no fangy anchor made ship-station.
Hither Aeneas seven of's barks had brought
Of all his fleet; and now to shore (long sought,
And by his Trojans ardently desired)
They came, and rest their faint limbs quite sea-tired.
And first Achates from a flint strikes fire,
Leaves were for tinder; and, more strength t'acquire,
Dry fuel added, kindles to a blaze.
Then, hungry, baking instruments they raise,
And fit their sea-harm'd corn and balace grain
To grind and bake, their lost strength to regain.
Meanewhile Aeneas an high clift ascended,
And the vast sea in's sight far comprehended,
To see if he could spy Antheus stout,
Or Trojan galleys weather-driven about,
Capys or Caicus flags. No ship he eyed,
But three tall straggling stags on shore he spide:
The whole herd following fed upon the strand.
Here he stood still, wi^h bow and shafts in's hand,
Which his most kind Achates for him held:
And first their high-horn'd leaders soon he felled:
Then all the rest of the horned troop he forced
With his sharp shafts into thick woods; where coursed,
He left not off till (shooting) he had got
Seven stately stags, to his seven ships t'allot.
To the haven he hastes, them amongst his mates imparted,
And wine, which kind Acestes, when they parted
From Sicils shore, most generous, frank and free
In hogs-heads laded gave, divided he;
And with these words their drooping hearts does cheer;
O mates, (for yet past-perills fresh appear)
O partners, in far worse perplexities,
God will at last end these our miseries.
You Scylla's rage, rock-roaring dreads have past,
You have Charybdis gulf escapt; at last
Recall your courage, and let go faint fear,
A time may come these things your thoughts may cheer.
By diverse dangers, various hard events,
To Italy we sail; where sweet contents
Fates will afford us: there Troyes throne we will build.
Hold out, with these hopes let your hearts be filled.
Thus he with words: with cares his soul's deprest,
Hope sat on's face, but grief his heart possessed.
They then to their good cheer themselves address;
Some flay the skins, some do the umbles dress;
Some cut it into joints, some the meat spit,
Some set on pots, some make great fires for it:
Then on the grass set down, they cheerly eat,
And with old wine, fat ven'son are repleat.
All hunger stancht, the tables taken away,
Long talk began of their lost friends decay:
All anxious stood, betwixt much hope and fear,
Whether fallen by fate, or yet alive they were,
Or that the invocated Gods would hear.
But good Aeneas chiefly did lament
His brave Orontes fatal hard event,
Valiant Amycus, and Cloanthus high,
Lycus and Gyan, slain by destiny.
And now it was that Jove from starrie sky
Sail-bearing seas, near neighboring lands did eye,
The ports and people all abroad commixt,
On Libya's realm from heaven his sight had fixed.
And as he thus did muse on men's affairs,
Venus, with eyes of tears, heart full of cares,
Says to him, O great king of Gods and men,
Whose datelesse laws, and lightnings hamper them,
What so foul fact has mine Aeneas wrought?
What my poor Trojans to such ruin brought?
From all the world for Italy thus driven.
Surely from hence a promise great was given,
That once times revolution forth should bring
A Roman branch from Teucers stem to spring,
Which should be conquering Lords of sea and land:
And why, great sire, does not this sentence stand?
With these fair hopes Troyes hardest haps I staid,
And with these fates I crossing fates repaid:
But still their former turmoils them distress:
Great king, when will thou their great toiles redress?
Antenor could escape Greeks thickest strength,
And piercing through Illyria, safe at length
Pass through Liburnia, and Timavus swift:
Whence nine great streams issuing with headlong drift,
And from the mount with mighty din descending,
Make a burst sea, the banks and fields transcending.
Yet he strong Padua built, and planted all
His Trojans, and did them by's own name call.
In's temples thus advancing Troyes brave arms,
In peace his people settled free from harms.
But we thine offspring, placed by thee in heaven,
Our ships (most woefully) lost, from us driven
For ones displeasure, are betrayed to wrack,
And far from Italy are forced back.
Is this the palm, the prize of piety?
Are we thus raised to regal dignity?
On whom great Jove casting a courteous smile,
With lovely looks, which heaven, earth reconcile,
Kissing his daughter kindly, thus he said;
Sweet Cytherea, cease to be afraid:
The fates are firmly thine, and thou shall see
Thy promised Latine-cities built to be,
Thy great Aeneas lifted to the skies:
Nothing shall revocate these destinies.
He (for since this thee grieves, I Will tell thee all,
And our old hid fate-records will recall.)
Shall wage fierce wars, the Italians shall subdue,
Build them strong towns, and make them statutes new,
Until Sol thrice the globe has circled round,
And three year^s king of Lati^es he be crowned.
But his Asc^nius young, I^lus named*
(For Ilus 'twas, whiles the Ilian state stood framed)
Full thirty years shall reign, and from Lavine
Transfer the throne, and Alba's strength combine.
Here shall great Hectors race to rule be seen
Three hundred years: till Ilia priestly queen,
With child by Mars, two at a birth shall bring.
Whence wolf-nurst Romulus shall reign as king,
Build martial towns, and Romans call by's name:
Whose state no date, whose strength no time shall tame:
A boundless empire I them give: Beside,
Fierce Juno, who molests the whole world wide,
Shall reconciled be, and with me nourish
The Roman gowned Lords over all to flourish.
Thus we decree, yea in times due process
Tro's sons Achilles race shall much distress,
To bondage brought, and conquered Greece suppress.
Then shall great Caesar spring from Troyes high race,
Whose throne the seas, whose fame shall heaven embrace,
Julius so called from Iulus grave,
Whom crowned with Eastern spoils, thou glad shall have
In heaven, who shall with votes be invocated.
Fierce war shall then on earth be moderated.
Pure Faith and Piety, Remus and's brother
Shall reign, give laws, and wars rage smoothly smother,
With bolts and bars locked fast in Ianus gates,
Base civil broiles chained in resistlesse straits:
And shackled there with hundred fettering gyves
Sits bound, with bloody mouth frets, fumes, and strives.
This said, he sends from heaven swift Mercury,
To open the earth and Carthage courteously
To Trojan guests, le^^ Dido of their ca^e
Ignorant, should them from her confines chase:
Through the air he winged glides, over Carthage hovers,
Gives Libyans tender hearts, and there discovers
Great Jove's command: Chiefly the queen expressed
To the Trojans her benign and bounteous breast.
But good Aeneas, full of thoughts by night,
Goes forth next morn as soon as day grew light,
To search new corners, see what shores he found,
Who dwelt there (for 'twas all rude untilled ground)
Or men, or beasts; and to his mates made known
What he found out. His ships tied safe; each one
Under a concave rock, tall trees, did hide,
With mighty boughs: Achates by his side,
A brandisht lance in's hands with strong steel lin'de.
Whom's mother Venus met in the wood most kind,
With Spartane virgins arms, coat, count'nance-grace:
Or like horse-tiring Harpalace of Thrace,
Or like swift Hebrus in its nimblest flight:
For on her shoulders hung she (huntresse right)
A comely bow, her hair dangling in the wind,
Knees bare, breasts open, her coat tuckt up behind.
And first she says; Sirs, saw ye, show me, pray,
Any of my sisters wandering by this way?
Armed with their quivers, clad with leopards hide,
The foaming boar with loud noise to outstride.
Thus Venus: and thus Venus son, Fair dame,
None of thy sisters by us this way came,
Or hard, or seen. O whom may I thee deem?
For by thy voice and face I thee esteem
No mortal: but a Goddess sure thou art:
Jove's sister, or some nymph? O let thy heart
Pity our piteous toils; show us, we pray,
Under what clime, and in what parts we stray:
(Of place and persons ignorant we be,
By winds and waves forced hither as you see)
Thine altars shall with offerings loaded be.
Then Venus; Sure such grace for me's too great,
Our Tyrian damsels wear their quivers neat,
High on their legs, they purple buskins lace.
The Punick realm, Tyrians, Agenors place,
Are these: but Libyan bounds, a warlike nation,
Whereof Tyres Dido has due domination,
Fleeing her brother: long's the injury,
Long the discourse: but of the heads briefly.
Her sponse Sichoeus was most rich in ground,
To whom, poor soul, her love did much abound;
To whom she soon a virgin pure was married:
But (as his right) Tyres crown her brother carried,
Pygmalion base, in ill surpassing all,
'Twixt whom great wrath and discontent did fall:
Whence blind with love of gold, he impiously
Supine Sichaeus made before the altar die,
Careless of's sisters love, this fact long hid:
With base fair shows, and much false hope he fed
Her lovesick heart: Till in her sleep by night
Her dear unburied sponses ghastly sprite
To her appeared, showed his thin death-pale face,
Sword-pierced corpse, the altars foul disgrace,
And all his houses hid-ills known did make:
Wished her to take swift flight, her land forsake:
Of unknown earth, hid treasures he her told,
Way-helping wealth, much silver and old gold.
Dido herewith provokt, for flight and friends
Makes way: And all whom hate of the tyrants ends,
Or s^avish fear kept down, combined, and preyd
On ships found ready, where their wealth they laid,
And fled with what Pygmalion hoped to have:
A lady foremost in this fact so brave.
Hither they came, where now strong towns thou see,
And Carthage kingdom new, now fair increast,
And, whence 'twas first named, Byrsa's well bought ground,
So much as one bulls hide could circle round.
But who are ye? whence came ye? whither bent?
To whom he first a deep fetched sigh did vent
From's heart, then forced these words; O Goddess fair,
If I should all from first to last declare,
And thou had time to hea^e our toils related,
Ere I could end, day would be terminated.
We from old Troy (if ere of Troy the have heard)
Upon these Libyan shores by tempests reared,
Through rigid seas are here arrived: And I,
Whose fame transcends the skies for piety,
Am good Aene^s: in my ships I have
My country Gods, whom I from foes did save.
I of Jove's race, Lati^e my land would find,
With twenty ships Troyes shores I left behind,
A Goddess mother guide, following my fate,
Scarce seven ships left from wea^her-torn esta^e.
I a poor pilgrim range through Libyan woods,
From Europe, Asia forced. These plaintive floods
Venus here stops, and midst his moan says thus,
Who ere thou art (for sure most gracious
Thou art to the Gods, who thus art come to Tire)
Go on, and for the queens fair court enquire:
For all thy fleet and followers most kind,
I thee assure, ^ail safe with prosperous wind,
Unless my heaven-^aught angurie me blind.
Behold ^welve swans flu^^'ring their w^ngs with joy,
Escapt from the eagles sw^^ping claw^ annoy,
In The open air pursued, now downward bent,
Landed, or landing with a joint consent.
And as they (safe) sport with spread silver wing,
And circular assembled swan-songs sing:
Even so thy ships, and thy associates brave,
With full sail near, or now the haven have;
Go on then, as the path leads, take thy way.
This said, she turned, her roseall necks bright ray
Glistred, sweet sents from her Ambrosian hair
Distilled, her robe hung down her feet most fair,
And by her gate she showed a Goddess right.
He with these words follows his mothers flight.
(Now known) Oh why do thou thy son delude
With often false shapes? why might we not include
Kind hand in hand? and words for words have changed?
Thus he her blamed, thus to the town he ranged.
But Venus with a mist these trav'lers clad,
And in a coat-like cloud o'respread them, glad
That none might see them, ^urt them, force them stay,
Or ask the reason why they went that way.
Herself to Paphos flies, glad to revise
Her mansions, temples, where, at sacrifice
An hundred altars smoke with frankincense,
And fragrant smell with garlands excellence.
They the meanwhile presented paths pursued,
And now they clim'd a hill, which over-view'd
Most of the town, towers, turrets multitude.
Aeneas wonders at the fabric fair,
Once cottages; the ga^es, states, streetwayes rare.
The Tyrians busy some thick walls to make,
To raise strong forts, stones up in heaps to rake,
To dig enclosures, house foundations fit,
Magistrate^ making laws in counsel ^it.
Some shippy havens contrive, some raise fair frames,
And rock hewn pillars, for theatrick games,
Like busie-buzing bees in flowery May,
Working most nimbly in a sunshine day;
When they thick swarms put out, with honey sweet,
Their waxen combs to fill and furnish meet:
Unburthning loaded bees, combining strong,
To drive out drowsy droans, their hives which wrong.
Hot grows their waxie work, sweet grow the smells
Of their mellifluous odoriferous cells.
Oh, says Aeneas, men most fortunate,
Whose walls thus rise, whose town so full of state!
Thus (strange to tell) clothed with the cloud he enters,
And all unseen, midst the thick rout adventers.
In The heart of the town was a fair shady grove,
To which place first, winds, waves the Tyrians drove;
And driven, set a sign by Juno shown
A horse-head found in the ground; they should be known
A potent people, a most warlike nation,
There therefore unto Juno's adoration,
Sidonian Dido raised a temple fair,
Garnisht with gifts, and riches wondrous rare,
Sacred to Juno, with brass steps ascending,
Brasse-joynted beams, brass doors on hinge depending.
Here first in the wood new matter tempered grief,
Here first Aeneas hoped for hearts relief,
And better learned to trust afflictions frown;
For as he viewed the temple up and down,
Finding the queen minding this cities state,
Which curious Artists did delineate,
He wonders; most, to see his Trojan story,
Their wars and woes, spread with world-wondrous glory,
Atrides, Priam, and unkind Achilles.
He weeping staid, and said, See, kind Achates,
What place, what parts abound not with our woes?
Behold king Priams pay; his praise here grows,
These are material tears, crosses come near.
Cease fears: for from these palms does hope appear.
Thus says he, and him gluts with pictures vain,
Sighs deep; and floods of tears his cheeks do stain.
For here he saw how 'bout the walls of Troy,
Brave Hector did fierce Greeks affright, annoy:
There, how Achilles Trojans did destroy.
Hard by he weeping, knew white Rhesus tent,
Which soon in the night betrayed by hard event,
Cruel Tydides with much blood did spoil,
And his fierce horses forced to's camp recoile,
Before they grazed on Troyes unhappy grass,
Or Xanthus streams to taste cold safely pass.
Young Troilus flying there, whose sword him failed,
Unluckie lad, unequally assailed
By Achilles, soon should out of's chariots chair,
Yet held the rulelesse reins: his comely hair
And deadly wounded corpse dragged on the ground,
And after him his spear he drailing found.
Then how Troyes dames, with hair about their ears,
With veiled heads, eyes full of brinish tears,
Beating their breasts, to Pallas temple went:
Who frowningly to the ground her fixed eyes bent.
How Hectors corpse thrice 'bout Troyes walls were dragged*
And by Achilles sold for gold, upbag'd.
Heartbreaking sighs he fetched, to see the spoils,
The current chariots, and friends deadly foiles,
And how king Priam prayed with weak-rais'd hands:
Yea he himself saw, 'midst the Grecian bands,
The Indians troops, and Memnons black array,
How that Virago, brave Penthesil'a
Led her Amazones armed with moon-like shields,
And bravely fighting in Troyes Martial fields,
Her breast laid open, bound with a golden belt;
Proud foes the blows of this fierce female felt.
Whiles these rare objects Troyes Aeneas eyed,
With serious sight of them even stupifi'd,
Unto this temple fair queen Dido came,
Tended with many a stately youthful dame,
Most like divine Diana and her train,
On Cynthus hills, or on Eurota's plain.
About whom thousand Faries fair do cluster,
About her neck a quiver; whose bright luster
And stately pace all her Nymphs far exceeds,
And in Latona's heart prompt pleasure breeds.
Thus lovely lively Dido seemed to be
'Midst all intent her throne stablisht to see.
Then (guarded) she, just at the Goddess gate
Sat down, high seated in a chair of state.
Where she made laws, and labors did requite,
Allotting all, by lots or laws, their right:
When suddenly Aeneas saw a throng
Approach to him, which was Cloanthus strong,
Sergest, Anthea, and the Trojans all,
Whom raging seas forced on strange shores to fall.
Amazed he stood, astonished with him were
Achates and the rest, with joy and fear,
Longing for sweet reciprocal embraces,
But, a hid hap, this from their heart first chases.
They coucht it, and clothed in a concave cloud,
What fate their friends, what haven their ships did shroud,
How they came thither then expostulating,
They some selected, who themselves prostrating,
Came to the temple pardon there to crave;
Where entered, they to speak full freedom have.
Then fluent fair Ilioneus sweetly said,
Great queen, whom Jove this cities foundresse made,
Whose justice proudest people makes afraid;
We, weather-tyr'd, poor Trojans thee desire
To spare our ships from fierce nought-sparing fire:
Pity a pious race, propitious be
To our affairs. For we are all most free
From least intent to rob or spoil thy land,
Or on fair Libya's Gods to lay foul hand.
Poor captives cannot harbor hopes so high.
But there is a place, which Greece called anciently
Hesperia, ancient, powerful, plenteous, known:
Where the Oenotrians dwelt: by fame now shown,
Italia named, from Italus renowned.
Thither we all have our intentions bound.
When straight stormy Orion tympanizing,
And surly Southern fierce blasts tyrannizing,
Brought us upon black seas, seas overflown,
Drove us on rocks unpassable, unknown:
Hither we few have swumme. But what be ye?
What rude conditions on this soil see we?
To be debarred harbor on your land;
From setting foot on shore wars countermand.
If mortal men and earthly arms ye slight,
Yet fear the Gods, mindful of wrong and right.
Aeneas was our king, more just then he,
More pious, potent prince there could not be:
Whom if the fates preserve, if yet alive,
If gaping grave him not of life deprive,
We fear not, nor need'st thou thy love repent,
Primely expressed: In Sicils continent
Are Trojans and Troyes arms, Acestes great,
A Trojan born. Let us (we thee entreat)
Our weather-beaten barks to harbor bring,
Repair our oars, fit masts in the woody spring;
That so we lively may to Latium sail,
Our king, companions, safe, if fates don't fail.
But if they do, and thee, great prince of Troy,
Libyan seas hold, withhold our hoped joy
Of young Iulus: let us at least regain
Fair Sicils shores, where king Acest does reign,
From whom we hither came. Thus Ilion said,
And all the Trojans humming, reverence made.
Then Dido with grave countenance briefly spoke,
And said; Brave sirs, false fears, vain cares forsake:
Novell necessity of our late reign
Does us to this strict watch and ward constrain.
Who knows not Troy, and brave Aeneas race?
The men, their might, and dire warre-wracked case?
Our Punick hearts are not so dead, so dull,
Nor from our parts does Sol his steeds so pull;
But that ye may Hesperia fair enjoy,
Timanus, or Sicilian plains employ,
And go to king Acestes at your pleasure:
I Will safely free you, furnish you with treasure.
Or if you will in our dominions bide,
Our citie's yours, our havens your ships may hide:
Trojans and Tyrians I Will alike embrace.
And oh that king Aeneas, whom storms chase,
Were present! Sure I Will send to search each shore,
And Libya's utmost confines to explore,
To see if happily in strange town he stray,
Or in some uncouth woods have lost his way.
Aeneas and Achates hearts revived
With these sweet words, to break the cloud long strived:
And first Achates to Aeneas said;
Great heaven-born prince, what thoughts thy mind invade?
All things are safe, our ships and mates all found.
One onely's lost, whom we our selves saw drowned:
All things thy mothers words firm ratify.
Scarce spoke he thus, when into the open sky
The clothing cloud brake, and dissolved straight.
When fair Aeneas in illustrious state
Did shine, and show like Phoebe in face and feature,
His mother making him a matchless creature,
For graceful hair, and youthful azure eyes,
For countenance sweet, which beauty happifies:
Like damsels hands with ivorie braclets graced,
Or sparkling stones with gold plates round embraced.
Thus then, unthought on, quick to the queen he spoke;
See here I stand, for whom such care you take,
Trojan Aeneas, freed from Libyan flood.
O thou, who only Troyes true friend have stood,
Tendering our toiles, us, lands, seas, Greeks-remain,
Drawn dry with woes, most poor, do entertain
In towns and tenements: O how shall we
Repay condign deserved thanks to thee?
Fair queen, we cannot; nor has Troyes spoiled nation
Ought left wherewith to make gratification.
The Gods (if good men they a jot regard,
If justice, or good conscience they reward)
Reward you worthily. What Halcyon days?
What honored stemmes so rare a branch could raise?
Whiles floods shall flow, while Sol gives mount-beams bright,
While spangling stars in sky give twinkling light;
Thy noble name and fame I Will glorious make
In all parts, as I pass. As thus he spoke,
Aeneas in's right hand Achates took,
With His left Serest, Gyan, the rest he shook.
Dido at first astonished with the states
Of such brave men, thus them exhilarates:
What churlish chance (fair Goddess son) what might
Has thee on barbarous banks forced in such plight?
Art thou Aeneas, whom Anchises old
On Venus got, by Phrygian Simois cold?
How Teucer came to Sidon now I mind,
Forced from his state, hoping good help to find,
To be by Belus repossest of's crown,
My father Belus then with high renown
Warring on wealthy Cyprus, won the same,
And from that time I knew Troyes fate and fame,
Thy great renown, thy Grecian princes high,
And how Troyes foe Troyes fame did magnify,
Wishing himself sprung from Troyes progeny.
Go on therefore, fair Sirs, inhabit here;
For I have not of such like woes been clear:
But forced by fate am settled in this place.
Thus knowing woe, I pity a woeful case.
This she recounts: and to her princely court
Aeneas brings, and then she does resort
To the temples sacrifice, sending by scores
Twenty fat ox, an hundred rough hair'd boares,
An hundred ews and lambs, to the ships to's mates,
God-pleasing gifts, heaven-cheering delicates.
But the inner rooms with princely pomp were dressed,
And with a bounteous banquet love expressed,
Rich hangings of most rare wrought tapestry,
Cupboards of massy plate, where curiously
Were graven the famous facts, continued story
Of potent peers, and of her nations glory.
Aeneas (for paternall love now may
No longer linger) swiftly sent away
Achates to Ascanius, to the shore,
To show these things, and bring him them before.
All fathers joy in's gemme Ascanius lay,
And bad him bring Troyes rich saved garments gay:
A costly coat embroidered thick with gold,
A mantle wrought with flowers rich to behold,
Fair Helens vestments which from Greece she brought,
When Troy, and unchaste nuptials there she sought:
Her mother Leda's gorgeous gifts they were.
Beside, the scepter which Ilion fair,
King Priams eldest daughter used to hold,
A neck-pearle bracelet, massy crown of gold.
Achates, this rich present to present,
Skips to the ships with joy and high content.
But Venus new inventions, new plots finds:
Her Cupids countenance first to change she minds,
And him for young Ascanius to bring in,
The lovesick queen with gifts to love to win.
For why? the Tyrians double tongues she feared,
Their hollow hearts, and Juno's wrath uprear'd.
These nightly thoughts she thinks. Her winged child
Cupid she therefore calls, with terms most mild,
And says, Sweet son, my sole, my sovereign might,
Jove's darling dear, who thunderclaps do slight,
To thee I fly, seeking thy sacred aid.
Thou see, my son, thy Trojan brother made
The scorn of seas and shores, by them still chaste
Through Iunoes wrath, which thou condoled have.
Him Dido has, and holds with speeches fair,
Yet I, lest Carthage courtesies ensnare,
Much fear: In active times delays are vain,
I therefore plot how first by some sly train
To catch the queen, with love-flames her to heat,
Lest Juno change her love, which now seems great:
Thus with me mine Aeneas still t'affect.
Which how to do observe, I Will thee direct.
The Princely boy, my joy, mine only care,
By's fathers will for Carthage does prepare;
Carrying rich gifts preserved from flames and floods
Of Troy. Him fast asleep in Cythers woods
I Will hide, or on fierce Ida's holy h^ll;
That none preview, and so prevent our skill.
Assume his shape but for one only night,
And the child's childish face in's fathers sight;
That when the joyful queen shall thee embrace,
And at her princely bounteous banquet place,
Hugging thee in her arms, give kisses sweet;
Loves poisonous potion, hid-fire, her may greet.
This love-lad straight his mothers mind obeyes,
Goes like Iulus, wings away he lays.
But Venus laid Ascanius fast asleep,
And in her bosom tend'red did him keep,
Laid him in Ida's grove, on shadie bed,
With fragrant thyme and Marjoram o'respread.
And now goes Cupid to discharge his charge,
Led by Achates, with his gifts most large,
And princely presents. And now come to court,
The queen on carpets rich in regal port
Sat in the midst of her magnifique state.
Next grave Aeneas, then conglomerate
The Trojan troops, on purple carpets spread:
Water for hands, fair towells, salt and bread,
The servants brought. Fifty fair maids beside
Tended within, whose care was to provide
And dress the meat, and fires on altars make:
An hundred damsells more, and men care take
To set the banquet, and to see cups filled,
And troops of Tyrians, as the queen had willed,
Sat on th'embroidred beds, wondering to see
Aeneas gifts, Iulus raritie,
His God-like shining face, words quaintly coined,
His coat and covering richly wrought and lined.
Chiefly Sidonian Didoes mind and sight
On nothing else could muse, or take delight,
Unsatiate to behold her after-bane,
The lovely lad, and gifts which proved her pain.
He having hung on fathers neck and arms,
And fed, yea filled him with feigned loving charms,
Runs to the queen. On whom she clasps her eyes,
Clings to him in her heart, sometimes likewise
She hugges him in her bosom, ignorant
How great a God her Love came to supplant.
But he now minding what his mother willed,
Makes her forget her good Sichaeus killed
Slily and slowly: blows dead coals, fresh burning,
Her love-dull'd heart to loves delights returning.
Their first feast finished, tables taken away,
They bring huge bowls and wine-pots garnisht gay.
With mirth their rooms all ring, and loudly sound,
In golden lamps great lights are placed round:
Which burn so clear, that light does night confound.
Here the queen caused a wine-bowl rich and great
Forthwith to be filled up with wine complete.
(The same which Belus used, and all his race)
Then silence made, she said with comely grace;
Great Jove, (for thou guest-laws, men say, do frame)
Do thou the day, on which the strangers came,
To Tyrians and to Trojans happifie,
And blissful make to our prosperity.
Mirth-making Bacchus help us, Juno dear,
And you my Tyrians strive these guests to cheer.
This said, the wine-bowl in her hand she took,
Temp'rately touched it (first) with princely look.
With checking charge to Bit^as she it gave,
Who quickly quaft off the whole cupfull brave
Of foamy wine: after him all the rest.
Hairy Iopas also did his best
VVith's golden harp to make them music svveet,
As ancient Atlas taught him songs most meet.
He sang and played Moons monthly vagrant change,
The Suns diurnall toiles, man's stock most strange,
Whence birds and beasts, whence fire and water were,
How stars do rise and fall, and bright appear,
The stormy seven-stars, double plough-stars bright,
Why Sol runs Southward in his VVinter flight,
And why the Summer makes so short a night.
The Tyrians do their joy ingeminate,
The Trojans echoing. And the night in prate
Poor Dido spends: whose love-draughts deep her touch,
Much talk of Priam, and of Hector much
She makes: and of Auroras sons brave arms,
Of Diomedes horse, Achilles harms.
Tell me good guest (^ayes she) the total story,
Greeks treason great, which quenched Troyes great glory:
Yea tell us all thy toiles, which (as appears)
Thou have endured by land and sea seven years.
An end of the first book of Virgils Aeneids.
THE ARGUMENT of the second book.
When all were silent, Troyes brave knight
Troyes fates, friends, states, does here recite:
The guilefull Greeks, Minerva's gift,
La'coons smart, sly Sinons shift,
To open the hollow horses side:
I dream of Hectors death discry'd,
Troyes fall, king Priams destiny:
Aeneas forced thence to fly,
With His father on his back he fled,
And in his hand Ascanius led,
His wife Creusa following fast,
But all in vain, was lost at last.
He thus escapt, his fellows finds,
Who flock to him with cheerful minds.
ALl silent sat, attentive heed to take.
Then grave Aeneas from's high bed thus spoke;
Great queen, thou bidst me wondrous woes renew,
How Greeks Troyes realm and riches overthrew:
Which I most woefully distressed did see,
And whereof I had share in high degree.
O what hard-hearted Greek, Ulysses, could
From tears, large floods of tears his eyes withhold?
And now being night, stars summon us to rest.
Yet since you so desire to hear expressed
Troyes final fall, our woes: though extreme grief
Makes me abhor those thoughts, yet I Will be brief.
The Grecian captains tired, retired from fight,
With many a years fierce war wearied outright,
By Pallas art a mount-like horse they built,
And with strong wooden ribs his sides they quilt.
This fictious vow they leave: so flies the fame.
In the huge concave belly of the same,
Closely contrived, select brave youths they hide,
And armed soldiers in its belly bide.
In sight of Troy lies Tenedos fair isle,
A wealthy place, whiles fates on Troy did smile:
Now but a bay, sheep-shelter, unsecure,
Here in a wood, retired, they hid them sure.
We, thinking they were fled, for Greece all bound,
And Troy from her late toiles refreshment found,
Set open our gates, let all go in and out,
The Greeks forsaken camps to view about.
Here Grecian troops, there fierce Achilles might:
Here lay their ships, there armies used to fight.
Some wondered at Minerva's gift accursed,
The horses hugeness: and Thymoetes first
Would have it set in the city, placed in the tower,
Whether by fraud or force of fatal power.
But Capys, and the part more provident,
Wished that those Grecians grins, gifts fraudulent,
Were either sunk in the sea, or burnt in the fire,
Or's hollow belly boar'd, truth to enquire.
The commons carried were with cross desire.
La'coon first with troops attended then,
Runs from the tower, fiercely cries out, Poor men,
What follie's this? think ye your foes are fled?
Or Grecian gifts want sly Ulysses head?
Either this wooden pile does Grecians hide,
Or against our town some stratagem provide,
Or some hid harm: Trojans, trust not these drifts:
What e're it is, I fear Greeks bringing gifts.
Thus having said, a strong spear with great force
He struck into the ribs and side of the horse:
Which trembling stood, and deeply pierced did sound,
The hollow vault even groaned with that great wound.
And had the fates been friends, our hearts been wise,
The spear had spide out Greeces treacheries:
And Troy had stood, and Priams turrets high.
But now, behold, Troyes shepherds hastily
Brought to the king a young man with great shouts,
His hands pinyond behind, found thereabouts:
Who of set-purpose gave himself to them,
Troy to destroy by this sly stratagem;
A fellow bold of heart, for all feats fit
To work his wiles, or to death to submit.
Our Trojan lads do flock about him fast,
To see his face, and scoffs at him to cast.
Now hear and see Greeks grins, and by this on^
All other their sly juglings may be known.
For as unarmed amongst them he trembling stands,
Glancing his eyes upon our Phrygian bands.
Alas (says he) what seas, what shores me hold?
What tends me wretch, but mischiefs manifold?
To whom nor Greeks permit poor habitation,
And angry Troy in's blood seeks expiation.
With which sad sigh our hearts relented straight,
Passion suppressed, we vvill'd him to relate
Both whence he was, and what strange news he brought:
What hopes he had, being now thus captive caught.
He, fear at last forsaken, thus replied,
Great king, I Will tell thee all, what e're betide:
It Is true (says he) I am a Grecian born:
This first: though fortune Sinon made forlorn,
Yet fond and faithless shall she make me never.
If by relation to thine ears came ever
The name of Palamedes, of much fame,
Against whom guiltless, Greeks a snare did frame
Of treachery ('cause he these vvarres forbad)
To put to death, for whom now dead they are sad:
His man and kinsman near allied, am I;
And of a child, through parents poverty,
VVaited on him in the vvarres; vvhiles in good state
The kingdom stood, and he was fortunate.
For then we lived in fame and reputation,
Till by Ulysses envious emulation,
(I speak: but what I know) he dead, poor I
Was forced to live in obscure misery,
The loss lamenting of my guiltless friend.
Nor could I, frantic fool, to silence bend,
But vovv'd, if fates did me to Greece reduce,
I Would be revenged on him for this abuse:
Hence rose Ulysses envy, hence did spring
First harms to me: hence he new crimes did bring
Against me, and hence rash reports were spread,
His guilty heart raised broiles, not quieted,
Till I by Calchas. But why stay I you?
Why things unsavourie do I thus revievv?
You have the Greeks all in one condemnation,
It Is enough you hear, take on me vindication.
In this the Atrides, Ithacus would joy
Hereat we ardently our thoughts employ
To search the end, ignorant utterly
Of so foul facts, Pelasgan policy.
Faintly and falsely on he tells his tale.
The Greeks (says he) from Troy often sought to sail,
Would have reti'rd, ti'rd with that weary war.
O that they had! But bitter winters bar
Debarred them, and fierce winds their flight denied,
But chiefly when that high built horse they spied,
And thundering skie-noise all the seas over sounded.
TO Apollo's oracle (our thoughts confounded)
Eurypylus we sent, quick, to enquire:
Who with these words of woe did soon retire;
With Iphigenia's blood, a virgin slain,
You Greeks got winds, the Trojan shores to obtain.
With blood you must obtain safe to depart,
A Greek soul sacrificed. This to the heart
Struck the astonished Greeks: as soon as heard,
Through all their joints was trembling terror reared,
To think, whom thus Apollo meant should die.
Ulysses then pulled Calchas forcibly,
The southsayer, before the Greeks, bad him disclose
Whom 'twas the Gods required: then forthwith rose
Much mutt'ring, me to be this mischiefs aim,
Some this fear'd-ill to tell me closely came.
Calchas beside was silent ten days space,
And would not show the man must death embrace.
At last Ulysses urging instantly,
He purposely burst out, said I must die.
All were unanimous, what all did fear,
The weight of deadly woe ones back must bear.
My dying day drew near, deaths vestments sable,
My heads death-co^f, fatal fruits deplorable,
Were all prepared. But I ('it is true) evaded,
And death to escape, by night a mud-lake vvaded,
And hidden, lay in the flags, till they did flee,
If happily so. No hope yet left for me
My soil to see, children, or parents dear,
Whom thus exposed to punishment, I fear,
For mine escape, guiltless to bear my smart.
Wherefore by the Gods, friends to a truth-venting heart,
By faith unfeigned (if firm faith yet do stay
Amongst mortal men) I thee submissely pray:
Pity my grief so great, so unjust wrong.
At these his tears our mercy staid not long,
But Priam presently life freely gave him,
Unbound his hands, and all offense forgave him:
And said, Who e're thou art, (lost Greeks forgo)
Thou now art ours: the truth then fairly show.
What means this huge horse? who did it invent?
What plot? what pious end? vvarre-instrument
Is coucht in it? He straight, instructed well
With Grecian craft and guile his tale to tell,
His loos'ned hands to heaven lifts up, and said;
I you adjure, you quenchlesse shrine-fires made,
Your Godhead great, altars, death-swords, (now fled)
You fatal head-bands, vvorn when I seemed dead:
Witness how justly sacred vows I break,
How justly hateful against my Greeks I speak,
Opening their secrets, of all oaths now free.
Thou then, fair Troy, keep promised faith with me;
If truths I show, if love I largely pay.
All Greeces hope of wars, good hap still lay
On Pallas power: since which Tydides still,
And vile Ulysses, author of all ill,
Assayed to assail her temple, thence to take
Minerva's image, and did slaughter make
Of the towers guard, and desperately stole thence
Fair Pa^^as statue, with strange impudence
Daring to touch, to take with bloody hands
The Virgin-Goddesses unstained headbands:
From that time Greeks great hopes 'gan ebb and end,
Their force waxt feeble, Pallas not their friend,
No showing anxious issues by strange sights.
Scarce had her statue station, but flash-lights
Of glist'ring flames came from her angry eyes;
She swet all over, and thrice with jumps did rise:
(Fearful to see) and shoke her shield and lance.
Calchas quick flight advised them to advance:
And told them Greece could never see Troyes shipwreck*
Unless their Gods, and all else they brought back:
Which they with them to sea in barks do bear.
And now that they to Greece to sail prepare,
To make the Gods their friends, arms, all things fit,
Unseen sail back: thus Calchas orders it.
Vision-advis'd, they framed this fabrication,
Pallas to appease, and make due expiation.
And of so high, so huge skie-magnitude,
Calchas contrived it with oak-fortitude:
That through Troyes walls and gates it might not go,
Left men their ancient superstition show.
For if your hands should Pallas presents spoil,
Much mischief (which heaven bring on him the while)
Would light on Priam and his Trojan train:
But if your helpful hands do it sustain,
And place in the town, Troy would all Greece subdue,
And make our children this fierce fate to rue.
These Sinons snares, false fetches, perjuries,
Troy trusts, being caught, o'rematcht with false forced cries;
Whom nor Tydides nor Achilles great,
Nor ten years wars could tame, nor thousands cheer.
And, which made more, to make them yet more blind,
A fearful object troubled their dull mind.
La'coon, Neptunes priest, as 'twas the guise,
Offering a bull in solemn sacrifice,
Behold, two snakes (I tremble to declare)
With wondrous wraths from Tenedos repair,
Gliding from silent seas to shore, extending
Their speckled breasts, and flamy mains all bending*
Above the main, their uglie odious tail,
And backs with fearful folds, do wrigling trail.
The waves they shove to shore, with foamie dinne,
And up the land to crawl and creep begin,
Their gogling eyes flashing forth blood and fire,
Their hissing mouths, sharp tongues do stench expire*
This sight put us to flight: they jointly crawl
To La'coon, and two of's children small
They first affront, and 'bout their bodies wound
With clinging clasps and bites, their corpse confound.
Then him their fierce assailant they assail,
With sword in's hand, and over him they prevail:
And twice about his body, twice his neck,
They twine and twist and hist, with hideous check,
Their scaly corpse, long necks, his height excelling.
And he with struggling hands stiffly repelling,
Pulling their knots, with poisonous filth besmeared,
Most horrid screeks and cries to the skies he reared*
Much like an altar bull, beat down, broke out,
To save his neck from the ax, roares, roaves about.
But the serpentine dragons thence did glide
To the temple, and to Pallas palace hide,
Under whose feet and shield they lurking bide.
New shivering fear our quivering hearts hence caught,
For, all La'coon justly punished thought,
Because his spear had pierced the sacred oak,
And's lance had lanc'd the horse with impious stroke.
To fetch the fabric (therefore) all consent,
Into our town, Minerva to content.
Then straight we brake the wall, a wide gap made.
All with their helping hands bring nimble aid,
By's wheely feet and stiff stuffed neck to draw it,
And ceast not till over walls ascent they saw it.
The fatal foe-fill'd fabric thus brought in,
About the horse young boys and girls begin
To sing their holy hymns, to touch the cable
Delighted much. Troy (now) the horses stable,
In The heart of the town, to the town most formidable.
(O country dear, Gods seat, victorious Troy!)
Yet often it stumbled, hazarded annoy,
Entering the porch, arms often in's paunch were heard;
And yet blind, blockish we were not afear'd,
But in the sacred tower the horse thus housed.
Yet we were by Cassandra's cautions roused.
Whom we would never trust, by fates decree.
Poor we, to whom this must the last day be,
With festive flowers and boughs our temple strew.
Meanwhile the sky 'gan change, the day withdrew,
All darkning night her curtains black did spread,
And heaven and earth and Greeks grins covered:
Dreadlesse Dardanians silent, soundly slept.
And now the Grecian troops had slily crept
Out of their ships from Tenedos, and soon
Assisted by the still kind-shining moon,
Closely they landed: then their Admiral
Hung out a lanthorn-light, and therewithal
Sinon, base Sinon sheltred by bad fates,
Closely unclasps the wooden-belly gates,
Wherein the Greeks lay locked: this opened Jade
Lets out his armed intralls, all is displaid:
Tisander, Sthenelus, Ulysses sly,
Athamas, Thoas, down by ropes 'gan hie,
Ne'ptolemus, Achilles, Mach'on first,
Menelaus, and Epeus the accursed
Horse-enginer: The city they surround,
And set upon it with sleep and drink all drowned.
The watch they did destroy, set open the gates,
And thus rush in their armed confederates.
Just now were men in their first dead sleep cast,
Gods grateful gift for man's most sweet repast.
And now, behold, me thought in dream I saw
Before me Hector weeping; whom foes draw
Along in piteous plight, at's chariots tail
Besmeared (as once) with blood and dust most pale,
Under's wound-swelling feet his horse reins trail.
Ah how he looked! how changed from that brave Hector,
Which wore Achilles spoils, our States protector,
Or, darting Trojan-flames in Grecian barks!
His beard now smeared, hair glew'd with bloud-wound marks,
And skarres seen plain, taken at the siege of Troy.
And I, me thought, condoling his annoy,
Seemed him to call, and sadly thus to say;
O Dardanes light, O Troyes true staff and stay,
Why have thou lingered long? whence, Hector brave,
Long looked for, came thou? that we, weary, have
Thy company so late, so many slain,
The city spoiled, the people put to pain?
O what dire deed has soiled thy lovely cheeks?
Why art so wounded? Not a word he speaks,
Or stays a jot, or answers what is desired.
But when he had a deep fetched sigh expired,
Fly, heaven-born prince, he says, O fly this flame,
Foes have our forts, fallen flat is Troyes high frame.
Our king and state were well, if Troy could stand:
And stand it should, had strength been in our hand.
But now her Gods and pious rites to thee
Troy recommends, let these thy fates mates be,
With these seek out those walls and turrets high,
Which thou (seas voyage ceased) shall edify.
This said, our country Gods, holy headbands,
And altar-fire he put into my hands.
Meanwhile much woe our town inhabited,
And more and more (though trees surrounding hid
My fathers house, which stood far in) yet still
Wars rumbling roaring noise did sound most shrill.
I startled out of sleep, did soon ascend
Our highest turret, listening ears to lend:
Even as fierce blasts fling flames, and cornfields burning*
Or mountain floods with swift careere o'returning,
Overflow fair meads, o'respread crank corn, plowed lands*
Tumble down headlong trees, naught upright stands:
Which the poor silly shepherd stupifies,
When from's high hill this rumbling stir he spies.
Thus, O even thus truth shown, Greeks craft we knew*
First Deiphobus fair house they o'rethrew
By flames represselesse; then they set upon
His neighbors house, our kind Vcalegon:
Sigaea's shores glistred with fiery blaze.
Men's screeks and cries trumpets shrill sound did raise.
I raging run to arms; armed, rashly fought,
Rudely rusht headlong into thickest rout,
Ran to the tower; hurried with wrath and rage,
Held it true honor, life in death t'engage.
But now, behold, Panthus, fled from Greeks power,
Panthus Apollos priest, keeper of the tower,
Frantickly ran to sea, to fly the land,
Our Gods, their sacred rites, his son in's hand:
To whom I cried, O Panthus, where is wars worst?
What tower may taken be? This said, he burst
Into deep sighs, and spoke thus as he past;
Troyes fearful fate is come, this day's our last:
We once were Trojans, once this was fair Troy,
And Trojans grace: now angry Jove our joy
Gives to the Greeks: Greeks lord it over us,
Out city fired, we most calamitous.
The hiddie horse standing within our town,
Has armed men disgorg'd: fire up and down
Sinon triumphant throws: some strongly stand
To keep our gates wide open:never did our land
So many Grecian swarms behold: some guard
Our narrow lanes; strong troops keep watch and ward
With sharp drawn swords, to the death to fight most stout;
Our guards confusedly fight, hardly hold out.
Thus Panthus: straight my heaven-spurr'd spirit me threw
Into the hottest flame, and fight; I view
Angry Erinnys, noise, annoise me guide
Rhipheus and valiant Iphitus, beside,
My Martial mates agglomerate to me,
Hypanis, Dymas, way by moonlight see:
Great Mygdons son, young Choroebus most stout,
Who in those days by chance to Troy came out,
Caught with Cassandras captive love: both he
And his great Sire brought aid to us Phrygians free.
Unhappy, who the counsel would not hear
Of his Cassandra prophetizing dear.
Whom when I saw boldly to battle bent,
I thus bespake; Brave youths of high intent,
O, but in vain, if flames of Martial fire
Kindle your courage, honor true t'acquire,
Alas our cities fortune here you see:
Our Gods, best goods, all quite extinguished be,
Which propt our state, a city burnt you would save:
Let Us die, and rush through thickest rank most brave.
It Is captives comfort no helps hope to have.
These words the Gallants hearts with rage did fire,
And straight (as ravening wolves at night desire,
Their whelps being left, their paunch being hungerbit,
To range abroad to find a prey most fit)
Through spears and spite of foes, fearelesse to die,
We pass, and to the midst of the city hie:
Black night with sable shades does us surround.
O, who that nights great slaughter, vvoes great wound
Can explicate? what tears equal those toiles?
A town of fame is fallen, long, rich with spoils,
Her streets are strewn most thick with bodies slain,
Troyes unrevenged blood, temples, all does stain.
Courage in conquered hearts was once made known,
Now-conquering Greeks we once had overthrown:
But now where e're we look, we naught can spy,
But fears and tears, and much mortality.
Androgeos then, a Grecian captain stout,
We first affronted, with his Grecian rout;
Who taking us for friends, thus friendly said;
Make haste, brave Sirs, what loytring has you staid?
VVhiles others sack and take all-fired Troy,
You scarce your ships have left, help to employ.
This said, he soon perceived: (for no reply
Fitting his mind was made) that the enemy
Had close enclosed him unawares: afraid,
With heart and heels he made swift retrograde.
Like one that unawares t^eads suddenly
On an earth-creeping snake which close did lie
Amongst pricklie thorns, he quick starts from (in fear)
The rage-swoln snake, which his blew neck does rear.
Feare-dampt Androgeos thus flevv from our sight,
We follovved close, closely maintained the fight:
On all sides fel'd our foes, strangers to the place,
And filled with fear: fates did our first facts grace.
Choroebus courag'd with this good success,
Cries out, Brave mates, let us this fair path-vvay press,
Let Us hold fast fortune by her friendly hand.
Let Us change our shields vvonne from this Grecian band,
And wear their arms: What courage cannot, craft may.
Slain foes will furnish us. This said, straightvvay
Androgeos helmet fair, and shield he bare,
And a brave Grecian blade by's side he vvare.
The like did Dymas, Rhipheus, and the rest.
And with Greeks spoils themselves they joyful dressed.
Then flew we amongst the Greeks, not by self-guide,
And in dark night we many a skirmish tried,
And many a Grecian soul we sent to hell,
And some to ships and shores we did repel:
Some with base fear to the horrid horse retire,
Reclimbe his back, known belly holes to acquire.
But fates displeased, alas, there is nothing stable,
For now behold Cassandra amiable,
A virgin pure, king Priams daughter fair,
Dragged out of the temple by her tender hair,
Lifting her starrie eyes to heaven in vain,
Yea eyes: for her soft hands bands did restrain.
This spightfull spectacle Choroebus fierce,
Hating to see, with love-rage straight did pierce
Into the rout, resolved there to die:
After whom we do all most fiercely fly.
Here from the temples top by our friends darts
We were confounded, suffered sorest smarts,
By our changed arms, changed Grecian shields and shouts,
And then the Greeks enraged, since from their routs
The maid was freed, from all parts hither throng,
And fiercely us assail: there Ajax strong,
The Atridas twain, and Grecian bands among.
Like adverse winds burst out with fierce cross puffs,
Eastern with West, West winds with Southern shuffs.
Trees therewith tremble, Nereus foamie voice
Makes tumbling waves roll up with roaring noise.
So they, and those whom we (by dark night veiled
With shieldie shades) ensnared, to death assailed,
And chased about the streets, appear: first find,
Our changed shields and arms, yea then they mind
Our different dialects. Straight numbers die:
And first Choroebus, by Peneleus high,
At the altar of Pallas omnipotent,
Did loose his life: next Rhipheus eminent,
One of the justest and the most upright
Of all our Trojan peers, fell in this fight.
So destiny disposed: then Dymas di'd,
And Hypanis, by friends (as foes) defied:
Nor thee, good Panthus, could thy piety,
Nor Phoebean function save, but thou must die.
I call to witness (here) the spirits of mine,
And Trojan flames, that I did never decline
(In their distress) a Greek, a sword, a shield:
But, had fates pleased, to death was pressed to yield,
As my Greek-slaying hand and heart did merit:
Thence brake out I, and Pelias of stout spirit,
And Iphitus with us; Iphitus old,
And P^lias, perished by Ulysses bold.
Straight friends loud cries did us to court incite,
Where we did find so fierce and furious fight
As none had been before, as none had di'd
In all the town, but what did there reside.
There did we see unmastered Mars rush on,
Bloud-glutted Greeks our houses leap upon,
And block up fast, and scaling ladders set
Against our walls, and scaffolds up to get,
By posts and pillars striving to ascend,
And with their shields in left hands them defend
From darted shafts, their right hands grasp the tops
Of highest holds, the Trojans seek strong stops,
And from uncovered roofs pull tiles and slates,
And, as last helps, hurl them down on their pates,
A while to keep off death, which properates.
Some gilded beams plucked up do tumble down,
Which were forefathers facts of high renown:
Some with sharp brandisht blades their houses guard,
And in thick troops keep them with watch and ward:
Those regal rooms resolved with hand and heart
To save, and to tired friends best aid impart.
There was a wall with privy doors and ways
To pass unseen, which Priam (in the days
Of Troyes triumphant state) did use to walk,
Unhappy now, and for sweet private talk
Andromache did use alone to meet
Her father in law: and where, with lovely greet,
Astyanax her child his gransire saw.
I by this passage did my self withdraw
To the top of an high house; whence, all in vain,
The conquered Trojans showred darts amain.
A tower we then assailed, placed on a hill,
With skie-topt turrets built, with curious skill:
Whence total Troy, Greeks ships and camps we might
Prospectively behold: this with war spite
We set upon with swords, and hack in twain
The joined cross beams, and raised the ground-pins main
From firm foundation, shaking it so sore,
As that we forced it fall, falling to roar:
Whose sudden ruin fiercely ruinated,
Huge troops of Greeks about it congregated.
But others us assail, nor stones for harms
Are spared, nor any kind of deadly arms.
Before the porch, even at the door without,
In glistring brazen armor, Pyrrhus stout
Insulting stood, a brandisht sword ^^'s hand:
Much like a snake, basking on Sunnie land,
With poisonous grass full fed (late) lurking in
The frozen-earth, cold-swoln, now his old skin
Stripped off, and he thereby made fresh and fine,
His slipperie rolling back breast high does shine
Against the Sun, with his mouths three-forked tongue.
Great Periphas, Antomedon among,
Achilles page, horse-rider, present were,
And all the lusty Scyrian youths were there.
All thick do throng to the house, and wildefire cast
Up to the top. Himself first comes on fast,
With a tough two-edged tool cuts doors in sunder,
And pulls down brazen posts with Martial thunder.
Thus the beams broke, boards cleft, ruptures made bare
The rooms within, great halls and parlours fair,
Where Priam, and Troyes ancient princes rare
Delighted were: all lay to open view,
All were displayed. Thence fear and frights ensue,
To see armed soldiers stand before the doors:
Loud screeks and cries, tumultuous uproares
Do fill the rooms within, which loudly ring
With women's wailings: whose shrill clamours ding
The golden starrie skies. The ladies fair,
O'reloaded with laments, run here and there,
And clasped posts embrace and kiss in fear.
But Pyrrhus with paternall power breaks in;
Nor walls, nor warders can protection win:
His battering ram breaks open doors and gates,
Pushing down pillars, all things devastates.
The Greeks do find, or force their way at will,
Kill all they meet, all parts with soldiers fill.
The foaming flood, when banks are open brast,
O'rerunning obvious mounts, runs not so fast,
When its resistlesse stream the field o'reflows,
And swallows sheep and sheep-coats, as it goes.
Thus did I Neoptolemus behold
Even drunk with blood, and both the Atridas bold
Entering the entry, and fair Hecuba
Her diverse daughters, and king Priam gray,
Defile the fires with blood, once consecrated:
His fifty concubines accommodated
With fifty hopeful sons; columns ore'laid
With barbary gold, with spoils most specious made,
All woefully laid waste; and Greeks do share
Amongst themselves what ravening fire did spare.
And now perhaps you will ask how Priam fared,
When he beheld his city so ensnared,
His building burnt with fire, houses pulled down,
And in the midst of's palace foes fierce frown.
The good old king his long left-arms resumes,
And with age-feeble joints, sword, shield assumes,
Buckles all on, but all in vain, and so
His dying self in midst of foes does throw.
In The heart of's court, just in the open air,
A mighty altar stood, a bay tree fair
Did by it grow, ancient, and ample spread,
Whose shade the shrine and carved Gods covered.
Here Hecuba, and all her daughters mild
Like doves driven headlong by a tempest wild
All in a heap; in vain the altar hold,
And in their arms their helpless Gods enfold.
But when she* saw her aged Priam armed
In youthful arms, wherewith once foes he charmed,
O woeful, oh unhappie spouse, she said,
What mood, what motive dire has thee aray'd?
Nay, forced to wear such weapons? why do fly?
Alas, grave sir, there is no necessity
Of such assistance, such a Guardian grave:
Chiefly if here we had my Hector brave.
Oh then come near: this shrine will shield us all,
Or else we will here together dying fall.
Thus Hecuba; and to her him she takes,
And in a sacred seat to sit she makes
Her aged spouse. And now behold we hear,
Polites, one of Priams sons most dear,
Escaped from the slaughter, which fierce Pyrrhus wrought
Through hostile fire and sword, some safeguard sought,
Flying the galleries and empty places,
Searching, sore wounded: whom so Pyrrhus chases,
And prosecutes and executes most fierce
His rage on him, and now o'reta'ne does pierce
His body with his lance, who new now fled
Into his parents presence, fell down dead
Before their face; and much blood spilt, expired.
Priam hereat, though hedged with death, yet fired
With aged rage, could not abstain, but straight
His wraths revenge does thus evaporate:
Ah, but the Gods (if heaven loves holiness,
And hates foul facts) for this thy wickedness
And daring deed, with condign guerdon quit,
And pay thee home with recompense most fit,
Who thus have slain my son before my face,
And by such death wrought's parents great disgrace,
But he did not do thus, whom thou do lie,
And say to be thy sire, Achilles high
Was no such foe to Priam: but desired,
Kept faith and promise in that I required
Humbly of him, and did restore to me
Brave Hectors corpse, interred for to be:
And me into my state did re-estate.
This said, old Priam did ejaculate
A feebly flying dart, which gave a clang,
Yet did no hurt, but on his helmet hang.
Whereat thus Pyrrhus; I Will thee recompense,
And as my messenger dispatch thee hence,
To tell my Sire Achilles this sad news,
That Neoptolemus, of his issues
The bastard was: so let him understand.
Die therefore now. And with those words, with his hand
He trembling Priam to the altar drew,
And did his corpse in his sons blood embrew.
H^s left hand wrapped up in his locks most gray,
His right hand with a naked sword made way
Into his fide, to give his life last pass,
Which up to the hilts in's body sheathed was.
This was king Priams end, this his hard fate,
To live to see Troy fired, quite ruinate:
Even he, who once was Asia's Keisar great,
Mightiest in men, and spacious regal seat:
A despicable trunk (now) dead on ground,
His head cut off, his carcass no name found.
But I with hideous horror thus begirt,
Amazed, my thoughts began straight to revert
Upon the visage of my father dear,
As I beheld the king massacred here,
Just of my fathers age: I thought upon
My sweet Creusa, from whom I was gone;
On my forsaken house, and the feared fate
Of young Iulus. 'bout me I looked straight,
To see what hope of liberty I had.
But all had me forsaken, tired and sad,
Some leaping down, themselves precipitate,
And some themselves in flames do conflagrate.
And now I left alone, at last did spy,
(Bright fires gave light to me, who wandringly
Peep into every nook) I saw, I say,
Fair lady Helen, how she closely lay
In Vesta's temple, on the sacred stairs,
Her head and heart full of just fears and cares,
Both for the Trojans wrath, their city spoiled,
And grudgefull Greeks, their marriage bed defiled.
She being Troyes sole firebrand, fierce flame,
At the altar therefore lay she hid for shame.
Revengefull coals hence kindled in my heart,
To vindicate my countries woeful smart;
To pay her for her cursed wickedness:
Shall she, said I, to Sparta have regresse
In safety? and her country Greece regain?
There, as a queen, her triumphs to maintain?
Her parents, children, husband, home to see?
With Trojan lords and ladies there to be
Attended on? shall she old Priam slay?
And Troy by furious flames bring to decay?
And make our shores so often sweat streams of blood?
Not so: for though there be no true manhood,
Nor glorious conquest in a woman's wrack:
Yet to have extinguished such a deed so black,
To take so just revenge, is worthy praise:
'Twill be some ease to quit my countries blaze,
And my friends ashes by revenge to raise.
As with mad mood these things I cast in mind,
Ready to run at her, my mother kind
Offered her self to my most joyful sight,
And glistring far more gloriously by night
Then formerly she did, a Goddess plain,
Such, and so great, as with her heavenly train:
And holding me by my right hand, she staid,
And with her roseall lips she spoke, and said;
Dear son, what untamed wrath boiles in thy breast?
Why fretst thou? why's no care of us expressed?
Will thou not first thy feeble father find,
Left in much woe? seek thy Creusa kind,
And child Ascanius? whom in Grecian rout
I found (with wondering) wandering all about:
And had not I peculiar care employed,
Fierce flames and foe-mens swords had them destroyed.
Nor hated Helen, nor your Paris blamed,
Did Troy subvert: but fates with wrath inflamed.
Behold (for I Will all cloudy mists expel,
Which dim thy sight, and make men not see well)
Fear not thy parents precepts to obey,
Nor from their regulating rules once stray.
Here where thou see broad scattered heaps to lie,
And stones by stones removed, and up on high
A foggy fume to rise, mixed with dust,
And Neptune with his trible fork to thrust,
And shake the walls, and rouse up the foundation,
And utterly subvert the cities station:
Here chasing Juno chiefly guards the old gates,
And, wrathful, her choice ship-troops animates,
And steel-arm'd soldiers to her congregates.
Yea see how Pallas on the high towers walks,
And with storm-brightnes Gorgons fury stalks:
How Greeks great patron strength and spirit infuseth
Into their hearts, and all his projects uses,
To make the Gods Troyes foes. Therefore depart,
Fly hence dear son, cease here thy toiles of heart:
I never will be absent from thy side,
But safely in thy country cause thee 'bide.
This said, she quick in nights thick mists was closed,
The great Gods frowning face being plain disclosed,
And all their fury to poor Troy opposed.
And now, me thought, I saw all Ilium flame,
And quite o'retumbled Nerean Troyes fair frame:
Like an old oak upon a mountain high,
Which rustic clowns do labor lustily
To hack and hew with ax and chisils strong,
By frequent blows at last to lay along.
The oak makes threatening nods, and tremblingly
Does shake and quake its leafie tops on high,
Till chopping vvounds do make it give last crack,
Which in its fall does all about it wrack.
Then I retreat, led by my Goddess guide,
And through both foes and flames away I glide:
Weapons give way, and flames do back recoile.
And now being come into my native soil,
Unto my fathers ancient mansion fair,
My father (for whom was my special care,
To carry thence over the mountains high)
Loathing to live, Troy lost, does flat deny
To go with me, and exile to endure:
And said; O you whose blood is fresh and pure,
Who young and strong can of your selves subsist,
Shift you for life, you may fly, if you list.
But as for me, if fates would I should live,
They (sure) this place would me for safeguard give.
But it is enough, more then enough, I see
One ruin, and our city lost, yet we
Survive: even thus, oh thus my corpse laid well,
Departing, give it a sad Vale knell,
These hands shall find out death: foes may be kind,
They Will take but spoils, small loss, no grave to find:
Heaven-hated and earth-loathing fruitless me,
My years till now too long protracted be,
Since first the father of Gods, and man's great king,
Did on my corpse his blasting lightnings fling.
Urging these arguments he fixed remains.
But we with cheeks all wet, with tearie stains,
I with my wife Creusa and my child,
And our whole household with entreats most mild,
Prayed he would not all with himself overthrow,
But yield to forcing fates. Still he said no.
Who holding his intentions, sitting still,
To arms again I fly with eager will,
Willing to die a most perplexed wight.
For what advise, what fortune help me might?
Think thou, dear father, I Will thee leave and fly?
May a fathers tongue vent such indignity.
Iffates conclude, naught shall of Troy be left,
And that to min'd Troy of help bereft,
Thou art resolved thy self and thine to add,
The gate stands open, death may be quickly had.
Pyrrhus with Priams blood all-soil'd, makes haste
The sons blood in his fathers sight to waste,
The father at his sacred shrine to slay.
For this, dear mother, have thou been my stay,
And refuge from all darts and deadly fire?
That I should see in the heart and heat of ire,
My father, wife, and my Ascanius tender,
In one another blood, their lives surrender
By furious foes? Arms, arms, bring arms, dear friends,
This last day calls us, conquered* to our ends,
Show me the Greeks, set me afresh to fight,
We will at least some of our deaths requite.
Hereat I buckled on my arms again,
And on my left-arm did my shield retain.
But to the field I ready now to fly,
Behold my dear Creusa suddenly,
Just at the door about my heels hung fast,
And in my presence my Iulus cast;
Saying, If thou wilt fly and die, let us die with thee:
Or if in arms, lest hope of help there be,
Bestow thy strength, first to defend this place:
To whom else do thou leave us in this case?
To whom thy father, thy Iulus dear?
To whom me thy late wife do thou leave hear?
Weeping these words, she fills the house with cries:
When (strange to tell) there suddenly did rise
A hideous chance: for even amongst us all,
In my sad fathers sight bright beams did fall
Upon the top of young Iulus head,
Which lightly licks his locks, and hurtlesse fed,
And grew about his brows. We much afraid,
Frame burning hair to strike the flames, assaid
To quench the sacred fire with water cast:
But grave Anchises joyful, lifts at last
His eyes, his hands, and voice to heaven on high,
Saying; O great Jove, if prayers do pierce the sky,
And move thee ought, regard us in this thing:
If piety to mortals profit bring,
Great father, grant thy favor, stablish right
All these so fair predictions, in our sight.
Scarce spoke the old man thus, when sudden sound
Of rattling vvelcome thunder did rebound;
A streaming star from heaven most nimbly fell,
Whose lustrous brightness rarely did excel.
Which from our houses top we saw to glide,
Its shining self in Ida's wood to hide,
Pointing our path: whose furrow with long streams,
Shone all abroad, with sulfure fuming gleams.
My father hence overcome, the sign respects,
Adores the star, thanks to the Gods directs,
Forthwith cuts off delays, says, Here am I,
Lead on the way, I Will follow readily.
Dear Trojan Gods, my house and grandchilde save:
This was your augur, yet you seem to have
Some care of Troy. I yield, good son, with thee
To go along. This said, we hear and see
Upon our walls a more clear flashing flame,
And scorching heat more near us rolling came.
I therefore said; Dear father, take fast hold
About my neck; for I with courage bold,
Willingly on my back will bear you hence.
How e're things hap, one common exigence,
Ones welfare shall be boths: Iulus we
Will take with us, my wife may follow me.
And you my servants, mark well what I say:
Being out of the town, you will find a h^ll in the way,
And now forsaken Ceres temple old:
Whose ground an ancient Cypress tree does hold,
Many years kept for our religions sake,
Thither we will all from all parts us betake.
Our Gods and sacred things, father, hold you:
But as for me that now this war eschew,
Still stained with hot bloodshed, it is impious (sure)
Them once to touch, till in some fountain pure
I may me lave, and cleansing fit procure.
This said, I with a lions skin arayd,
Clothes on my neck and shoulders fitly laid,
I took my burden up: my right hand fast
My young Iulus gript, and on he past;
But not with equal pace to's fathers flight:
My wife comes after, forced: through darkest night
We thus are hurried on: and I, whom late
No clouds of flying darts could trepidate,
Nor swarmie troops of adverse Greeks could wound,
Now fear each puff of vvinde, each smallest sound.
Most for my little mate, grandvveight, thus feared,
And now to the city gate my way thus cleared,
Thinking all safe, I seemed most suddenly
To hear a thick quick noise of feet hard by:
And straight my father through a glimmering shade
Looking foreright, O son, dear son, he said,
And hast'ly cride; Fly fast, our foes draw nigh,
For I their shields and glittering arms do spy.
Hereat, I know not what unfriendly fate
Made me amazed, did me precipitate,
Into strange by-ways, lanes, and lawns until,
Whether by fate fetched thence she lived still,
Wretch that I am, I lost Creusa kind;
Or whether, being weary, left behind,
Or having lost her way, I am unsure,
But sure no search her sight could reprocure.
And e're her lost my minds reflect respected,
To Ceres sacred seat, the place directed,
Even to the hill we came, where we all met,
One only wanted, whose mistake did fret
Her mates, her son, and me her husband dear.
And whom herein did frantic I hold clear,
And not accuse? Or Gods, or men, or what
In all Troyes wrack held I more harsh then that?
Ascanius, and Anchises my dear sire,
Our Trojan troop and Gods, with zeals hot fire,
I to my mates commend, and did them hide
In a deep vale: my self to th'citie hy'd,
Appointed, with my shining shield and arms*
I now resolved to reinforce all harms,
The city thorough to perambulate,
My life in dangers to precipitate.
And first I mount the walls, and as I past,
I pried into the cities backwayes, fast,
And back returned: the way I came by night,
And into every crook I cast my sight,
Horror my heart, silence my sense amazed;
Thence to review my house, my thoughts me raised,
If happily there I gladly might her see:
But it I found by Greeks destroyed to be,
And whole possessed. For why? devouring fire
Blown by fierce winds did to its top aspire,
Yea overtopt it, flames flying into the air:
Hence then to Priams palace I repair,
The tower I did review, which all decaid,
With empty rooms: and by fierce Iunos aid
I found Ulysses vile, and Phoenix fell,
Guardians thereof; keeping their prey too well:
Hither being brought, our Trojans treasures kept
(Our temples burnt) from flames, which all quite swept
The tables of our Gods, great cups of gold:
Our captived royal robes this tower did hold.
These, all these thither brought: and their young boys
And frightfull matrons making woeful noise,
In heaps enhedg'd it. And though 'midst my foes,
I with my voice adventured to disclose
My heavy loss, and through the nightly shade
I filled the ways with woes, and swiftly said,
Nay cride, Creusa, O Creusa dear,
Once, twice and thrice (in vain) for she would not hear.
Thus as I ceaselesse, easelesse pri'd about
In every nook, furious to find her out,
Me thought the woeful ghastly ghost I saw
Of my Creusa near mine eyes to draw,
In bigger shape then wont: I stood aghast,
My hair did stare: my tongue to's roof stuck fast.
And straight she seemed to say, my plaints to end,
What good is got, such fruitless pains to spend,
Dear Pheere? these things fall out by fates decree:
Nor may thy mate Creusa go with thee:
For so great Jove gainsayes: and says beside,
That thou by sea long banishment must 'bide.
And plowing Neptunes waves to Latium glide,
And there arive, where Lydian Tybers torrent
Through fertile soiles does pass with facile current.
There joys attend thee, there is a crown, a queen
Thy wife to be: then cease this sorrow seen
For me thy lost Creusa thus affected.
For I the Grecian dames, all disrespected,
Will neither serve nor see in their proud places,
But I now go to enjoy the joyful graces
Of Dardan Ladies, sacred Venus niece.
Here now the mother of Gods plants me in peace.
O then farewell, my love to our son supply.
This having said, she weeping woefully,
And willing to have said much more, departed,
And into the open air quick from me darted.
Thrice in my arms her neck to clasp I tried,
And thrice her form from my hands hold did slide,
Like a swift wind, or slippery dream by night.
Night thus being spent, I went to take a sight
Of all my mates: where such a confluence
Of followers I found, since I went thence,
As made me much admire their multitude
Of men and women, youths and vulgars rude,
From miserable exile there collected;
With goods and good wills freely all affected
To follow me wheres'ere by sea or land.
And now the tops of Ida's woody strand
Bright Lucifer with sweet Aurora's face,
Began with days fair rays to guild and grace:
The Greeks our blockt up gates and houses held:
And we from hope of help being quite expelled:
I therefore, on my back my father taken,
Departed thence, the mountains thus to gain.
An end of the second book of Virgils Aeneids.
THE ARGUMENT of the third book.
Troyes kingdom thus quite ruinated,
And they for flight accommodated,
Aeneas first ariv'd in Thrace,
And built a city in that place,
The death of Polydore him frighted.
The kings great harbrous love recited,
And Phoebus oracles declared,
To sail to Creet he is now prepared.
Where he again new fortunes found,
And shipwreck did him sore surround.
Whence fled, the Harpyes frights he shows:
Helenus left, his fates he knows.
He Achemenides befriends,
His father dies: his tale so ends.
AFter the Gods had ruined Asia's state,
And Priams throne, unworthie so great hate,
Neptunian Troy like blazing brands of fire:
We were constrained, by signs of fatal ire
Exiled, to wander through strange woods and ways,
And on Antander and Ides banks we raise
And build our navy, being all unsure
Where fates would force us, where to sit secure.
Our men we muster: Summer scarce comen on,
My father bad us hoise up sail, be gone.
I then my native countries loss bewail,
And planes where Troy late stood. I banished sail,
With me my son, my mates, Gods small and great.
Far off th^re lies a spacious Martial seat,
( Thracians it plant and plow) Lycurgus wise
Once did it rule; Troyes ancient firm allies.
Their Gods as ours, whiles fortune made us rise.
Here I ariv'd, here first I built a town
In a cross crook, entering by fatal frown:
And from my name, I did it Aeneads name.
And to my mother Venus I the same
Did dedicate, and offer sacrifice
To my kind Gods, that blessed mine ente^prize.
And Jupiter great king of Gods to adore,
A fat bull I did offer on the shore.
By chance hard by a woody hill I spide,
Upon whose top white horny rods did bide,
And tall thick shady myrtle boughs did grow.
Thither to pluck off some of them I go,
Our altars with green branches to bedeck:
But as I plucked, a fearful chance did check
My first attempt: for the first branch I tore,
There issued thence thick drops of muddy gore,
Which stained the ground with blood. This did me fright,
And chilling fear shook me in piteous plight.
Again another tender sprig I pluck,
Longing to know the cause and lurking luck:
Straight from the bark more bloody drops did sprout.
Whereat much moved, the wood Nymphs (in great doubt)
I did adore, and Mars great Thracia's king,
To th'omen good, to the sight delight to bring.
Then when a third branch I more strongly tore,
And with both knees to the ground me struggling bore,
(Speak may I, or be still?) A grievous groan
From bottom of the pit to heaven up thrown,
Seemed thus to cry. Aeneas, why do tear
Distressed me? my buried body spare,
O spare, thy holy hands thus to bestain,
For Troy did me thy kinsman know most plain:
See how out from this stump does gush my gore,
O flee this barbarous land, this sharking shore.
For I am Polydore; who here being slain,
My corpse a bush of sharp shafts does remain.
My heart was straight with dubious thoughts dejected,
Speechless, amazed, my hair's upright erected.
Unhappy Priam (once) this Polydore
With store of gold did secretly send over
Unto the king of Thrace for education:
Who when he saw Troyes troops in desperation,
The city round besieged, our valor vail,
Our weal grow weak, our fortune us to fail,
Following great Agamemnons conquering arms,
He fled from us, burst out into base harms,
Poor Polydore he slew, usurpt the gold.
O cursed thirst of gain! what, uncontrould,
Will thou not force man's mind to undergo?
But now, fear past, this fatal sign I show
To my choice Peers, but to my father first,
Prayed them to say their minds, or best, or worst.
All were unanimous, 'twas best to fly,
To save that hateful harbor, instantly
To sail away. A tomb we therefore made
To Polydore, great heaps of earth up laid:
About this woeful hearse blew clothes were placed,
With cypress boughs, and sable garments graced:
Our Trojan women (as we used) stood round,
Their hair about their ears hung all unbound*
Then on it we warm pales of milk do throw,
And bowls of sacred blood: and e're we go,
We at his hearse do ring his souls sad knell,
And with loud cries give him his last farewell.
Thence when first fittest serene seas gave way,
And gentle fanning blasts made dandling play
Upon our sails, our troops the shores do fill.
My mates put forth to sea with free good will,
And past the port, the lands and towns us leave.
Thus sailing, we aloof (at length) perceive
In The sea a lovely land lie situated,
To the mother of the sea Nymphs dedicated,
And to Aegean Neptune: which fair land
Straggling abroad, pious Apollos hand
Did with restrictive bands and bounds confine,
With Gyarus and fair Myc^^ combine,
And thereby it most strong and stable made,
Fearlesse when winds and waves did it invade.
Here I ariv'd, here we our weary state
In a most pleasant port did recreate;
And comen on shore, adore Apollos town,
VVhither to meet us speedily came down
King Anius, king and priest to P^oebus great,
And to those people, he with kind receipt
(His h^ad with headb^^ds and green la^^ell decked)
Anchises his known friend does much respect.
Then hands we shake in lo^^, and home are h^ad
Into their houses* where I then ^ost glad
In the old rock-founded temple made ob^ation
Unto Apollo, with this supplication;
Grant, Thymbr^^n Ph^^us, to (...) Troj^^^ ti^ed,
A proper place, an issuing race desired,
And settled city: yet preserve, I pray,
Another Troy, the relics which yet stay
Of conquering Greeks, and of Achilles stout.
Whom follow we? whither range we about?
Where shall we seat our selves? Great father, say,
Show us some signs our anxious minds to stay.
Scarce said I thus, when all seemed suddenly,
The doors and bays of Phoebus majesty,
Yea all the mount about, to move and shake,
Apollos private Tripos roares did make.
Hereat to earth we prostrate fell, and heard
A voice saying thus; Stout Trojans, be not feared:
The land whence first ye sprang from ancients race,
Shall safely you receive in copious case:
Seek your old granmother. For surely there
Aeneas house shall spacious empire rear;
And all his childrens childrens offspring fair.
Thus Phoebus: we with clamours joyful are,
Desirous all to know what towns he meant;
Whither he would call us* whither we wandering went.
My father then old stories recollecting,
Said; Hear brave peers, your hopes I Am now detecting,
Mark then: In The midst of the sea lies Creet, Jove's nation,
There Is Id^, our countries cradle of education;
Whose large rich realm an hundred towns does hold:
Whence our great Sire king Teucer sprung of old.
(If hearesay fail not) He on Rh^^t^ans shore
Did first arive, a fit seat did explore
To plant his throne: as yet no Ilium fair,
Nor Pergams pinacles stood beauteou^ rare,
But then low valleys they inhabited.
Hence was wood-haunting mother Cybel bred,
Sage Corybantes bells, and Ida's wood:
Hence sacred secrets found safe silence good,
Goddesse-yokt lions hence their chariots drew.
Go on then, and let us pass where Gods us show,
Let Us calm the winds, and get to Candies land:
The ways not far: if Jove do for us stand,
Creet shall our fleet receive within three days.
This said, he sacrificed to the Gods due praise,
One bull to Neptune, one to Apollo kind:
To storms a black, a white sheep to Southwinde.
There flies a fame, that Idomeneus duke
Forced from his native state his Creet forsook,
That all his lands lay void, to foes a prey.
To sea we fly, from Delos part away,
Leave green Donysa; Naxon, Bacchus pride,
Olearon, white marbly Paron wide,
Sea-spreading Cyclads, pass those lands about.
With various noise our mariners cries out.
My mates me move for Creet, forefathers seat;
And as we sail, rough winds our ships do beat;
So that at last Candies old coast we held.
Where gladsome I, long wished for town-walls build,
And Pergam named: my glad mates Trojans called,
Wished them to grace the Gods, see cities walled,
And houses framed: our ships in ports secure,
Out youths new wedlock rustic works inure.
I laws and lands allot: when suddenly
Through corrupt air a foul mortality
Did on us seize: a murrion miserable
Our trees and plants did spoil most lamentable,
A deadly year. For, or men quickly die,
Or sickly languish in much misery.
The dog-starre burns our barren fields and plants,
Denies us grain, complies our pain and wants.
My father hence to Delphos wills us send,
And back by sea Phoebs oracle to tend,
Pardon to pray, these toiles and cares to cease,
To know their course, and labors longed peace.
Now night was come, sweet sleep shut up men's eyes,
And now me thought in sleep I saw to rise,
Before my face the sacred images
Of Trojan Gods, our countrey-Deities,
Whom I, from Troyes fierce flames saved, brought with me:
These by much light I seemed most plain to see,
Like Cynthia fair, when windows open be.
And thus they seemed to say, to cheer my heart,
What Delian Phoebus means to thee to impart,
Behold by us sent to thee: thus he sings;
We who, Troy burnt, thee and thy armies vvings
Have followed, we who through rough seas have past
With thee, will thee and thine to the heavens at last
Exalt, and give thy city soveraigntie:
Prepare great vvalls for great posterity.
And leave not thy long labors progress fair*
Thou must seek other seats: Apollo's care
Called thee not hither thus to rest at Creet.
But there is a place for thee held far more me^^.
Which Greeks Hesperia call, of pristine state,
Potent in arms, with fertile soiles ornate.
The Oenotrians dwelt there once, now younger fame
Does it from Italus, Italia name.
Here is our proper place, hence Dardan springs:
Hence father Iasius, and our chiefest kings.
Rise then, and this, as sure as sweet relation,
Show to thy aged sire with exultation:
Seek out fair Corits coasts, Italia's bay:
Jove thee denies in Candie longer stay.
This voice and vision of the Gods me frights,
(Nor was it sound sleep, for I their perfect sights
Did plainly know, their faces, hair bound neat
I surely saw: whereat a chill could sweat
O'respread my limbs) from bed I started straight,
To heaven my hands and heart I elevate,
And to the Gods give a pure sacrifice:
Which honor done, I, as they did advise,
Unto Anchises all the vision tell.
The ambiguous branch, and fathers both, full well,
He straightway knows, and sees his new mistake
From places old: and therefore thus he spoke;
Dear son, long seasoned with our Trojan toiles,
Only Cassandra told me these turmoiles.
That these things now our nations due portend,
I right recount, and often did apprehend,
Hesperia spoke of, and fair Italy.
But who'd have thought Trojans should e're come nigh
Those parts? or who did then Cassandra trust?
But to Apollo now submit we must,
And follow better fortunes. This thus said,
We all his words most joyfully obeyed.
And parted from this place, few left behind,
Our ships do plow the seas with pleasant vvinde.
As thus our vvingy sails through waves do fly,
No land now seen, all sea, all air, and sky;
Then over my head a black blevv cloud did stand,
Whereby in the flood night^storms seemed near at hand.
VVindes quick wind up the waves, huge billows rise,
Floods make our fleet to float: day from our eyes
Dark clouds roll up, wet night takes sky from sight,
And from cleft clouds flash out quick lightnings bright.
We wander through blind seas, our course crossed quite.
Yea Palinurus did himself deny:
He could or day or night by heaven discrie,
Or know his way in the sea. Three days together
In foggy mists we strayed in stormy weather,
And three nights never having seen a star.
The fourth day first we land discri'd afar,
Mountains peept up, and chimney smoke ascended.
Our sails we slack, our oars we close attended:
No stay we make, our shipmen strenuously
Slice up the foam, sweep the blew floods on high.
And first Strophadean shores from sea me save,
The Greeks these isles Strophades named have,
Isles in the great Ionick sea, where dwell
Celaeno fierce, and ravenous Harpyes fell:
E're since Phineus house was from them shut,
And they from their first table-feares were put.
Then these were ne'remore hideous monsters found,
Then these the Gods great wrath did never more wound,
When raised from Stygian pools. Birds of strange shape,
Foul fowls with virgins faces, mouths which gape,
Still hunger-starved, with most insatiate maws,
Which filthily hang loose, hands with huge claws.
Here now in the port we safely set, behold,
We saw great droves of lusty fat beefs bold,
And flocks of goats feeding, no herdsman by.
On whom with swords we set, and instantly
The Gods, yea Jove himself we invocate,
Part of our prey with his to participate:
Then on the ground, beds spread, we eat our meat.
But from the mountains with a bluster great
And horrid noise, the Harpyes on us light,
And with huge din clap their wings in our sight:
Snatch up our meat with filthy fists defilde,
And make most odious smells and screekings vvilde.
Again, in a remote most private place,
Under a rock which shades and boughs did grace,
Our table set, on shrines we sacrifice.
Again, from hidden holes a cross way flies
Another troublous troop, with hooky claws,
To catch the prey, and fill their filthy maws.
Then straight to take up arms I charge my mates,
And to fierce fight each one accelerates,
Against that odious army; as I bad,
Their swords and shields in the grass they hidden had.
Thus when to the shore to us with noise they grew,
Misenus from an high hill did them view,
And with brass trumpet sounds the alarm straight:
My mates make head, thick blows reduplicate,
Those foul sea-fowls to foil and profligate.
But nor their wings nor backs our blows could hurt,
For into the air they swiftly fly and flurt,
Leaving the half-got prey and prints behind,
Of their foul feet. Only alone I find,
Set on a steepie cliff, Celaeno fierce,
Unluckie wizard, who, our hearts to pierce,
Brake out into these words; Is It war indeed?
Perfidious Troj^ns, must fierce war proceed
For our slain beeves and goats? quite to expel
Us harmless H^rpyes from our native cell?
Then hear me, and my words imprint in thee:
What mighty Jove to Phoeb, Phoeb showed to me,
I chief of furies will reveal to thee:
With wind and tide to Italy you go,
To Italy (at last) you shall do so:
But first, e're you your city edify,
Fierce famine and our slaughters injury,
Shall cause you quite devour your store of meat,
And bring you to distress, naught left to eat.
This said, away into the woods she flies.
Whereat bloud-chilling fear does us surprise,
Our hearts did faint: now not with powers, but prayers
We labor to make peace, to cure our cares;
Whether bad birds, or sacred fouls they be,
And old Anchises, most devoutly he
His hands stretched forth, the great Gods invocates,
And to them their due honors dedicates.
Great Gods (says he) spare threats, avert these ills,
Appeased, save good men that do your wills.
Then straight he bids us loose the ship from shore,
And hale the cables in. The winds up boar
Our fair spread sails: and so we cut the seas,
And make our way where puffs and pilot please.
And first at sea we woodie Zacynth spy,
Samey, Dulichium, rockie Nerite high:
Ithaca's rocks we pass, Laertes strait,
Ulysses native soil we execrate,
As we it pass. To stormy Leucas hills
We came, and to Apollo's point, which fills
Poor shipmens heart with fears. Here we at last,
Tired, at a little town ariv'd; and fast,
To come to shore, our anchours out we cast.
Thus having found an unexpected land,
To Jove we expiated out of hand,
Made vows and sacrifice, and manly sport
On Actium shore, used in our Trojan court.
Our nak^d youths suppling their joints with oil,
Our countrey-vvrastling use: ^o see our toil
And danger past, passing so many towns
Of adverse Greece, and midst of foe-mens frovvns,
This joy'd our hearts. Now a full summer past,
By Northern icy blasts floods frozen fast:
On a brass shield, which on a post I hung,
Great Abas famous facts in verse I sung.
Saying; Here Aeneas consecrates these arms,
Won from the conquering Greeks most fierce alarms.
Then from these shores to the oars I bid them fly,
And they the seas beat, brush, most Iustily.
Soon we lost sight of high Corcyra's towers,
And bare up by Epirus pleasant bowers.
Where entering Chaons port, our course we bend,
To brave Buthrotums city to ascend.
Here we rare things of note did understand,
How Trojan brave Helenus did command
The Grecian towns, who Pyrrhus wife did wed,
And wore his crown, and after married
Andromache, both of them Trojans bred.
I vvondred, and my heart burnt with desire,
To greet the man, and of these things t'enquire.
So on I past, shores, ships, safe left behind,
When as by chance I saw (with mournful mind)
Before the city in a grove most green,
Near Simois stream, Andromache the queen,
Offering sad gifts, an annual sacrifice,
To Hectors ashes, calling up likewise
The ghosts to's tomb, 'bout which green turfs did grow,
And two more shrines (her greater grief to show)
She consecrated had. When me she saw,
And Trojan troops with me near her to draw,
Distracted, straight she seemed strangely afraid,
At this so sudden sight she stood dismayed:
All vital heat her corpse did quite forsake.
And down she sunk, long first, at last she spoke:
Is It a true face? bringst thou true news to me?
O God desse son, liv'st thou? or if thou be
Raised from the dead, tell me; where is Hector dear?
This said, a flood of tears from her appear,
And every place she fills with clamorous woes;
Nor scarce could I (briefly) her rage oppose:
But moved with grief, these abrupt words breathed out;
Indeed I live, through all straits born about.
Thou see a certainty, then do not doubt.
Alas! what chance thee chased from such a Pheere,
Now resustains? what fate does thee recheare?
Great Hectors Dear, art (still) stout Pyrrhus mate?
Hereat with hung down head, words temperate,
And submisse voice she said, O blessed and best
Priams fair daughter, happy 'bove the rest,
Whom foes did force under Troyes walls to die:
For whom no lots were ever cast, to tie
Thee to the captive-bed of conquering foe!
We, Troy destroyed, have been tossed to and fro
Through diverse seas, and traveling have tried,
In bondage base, the Achillean youths great pride:
Who after loved and married Hermion brave,
And me his maid to's man Helenus gave.
But then Orestes in fiecie jealousy
For his stolen wife vexed with his villainy,
And roused with rage, did unawares him catch,
And at his fathers tomb, of life dispatch:
And by the death of Neoptolemus,
Part of the kingdom came to Helenus:
Which he from Chaon a brave Trojan state,
Did totally Chaonia nominate:
And this Troyes tower and Pergams walls erected.
But what fair winds, what fates thee thus directed?
What God did thee thus to our confines drive?
Where Is young Ascanius? does the lad yet live?
Whom Troy to thee for future hopes did give.
Of his lost country has the boy a thought?
Or have the ancient noble virtues wrought
In his young pregnant heart, of's father (...)
Aeneas, or of's uncle Hector brave?
These words she spoke, and speaking wept full sore,
Though all in vain; and e're she could give over,
Trojan Helenus from the city came,
Attended with a train of Peers of fame.
His contrymen he knew, acknowledged,
And joyful, us into his city led:
And as we went, spoke much, as much he wept.
Thus on to Troy-novant our way we kept,
And to his Pergam patterning our great,
Where was the drie-brook, Xanthus called, whose seat
I knew, and hugd the posts of Ianus gate,
My Trojans with me do participate
In this kind harb'rous town. The king also
In royal rooms did them great kindness show.
In his great hall they drank full bowls of wine,
And with choice cheer, in golden dishes dine.
And thus two days at least we there did spend,
Now fair Southwindes our wingy sails did tend.
Then to this kingly prophet humbly I
With these beseeches, do my suit apply;
Trojan-interpreter of Gods decree,
Who Phoebus power, Delphick stools, stars do see,
Who Clarian bays, birds chirps, swift flights do know*
I pray thee, plainly to us all to show,
(For all religion has my course made fair:
And all the Gods advise me to prepare
For Italy, that promised land to gain:
Harpyck Celaeno only seems to feign
New and nefarious frights, and does us threat
With a most foul and fearful famine great)
Show us, I pray, what dangers first to fly,
And how such toiles to vanquish valiantly.
Helenus here, first, as he used, did slay
His heifers, and to the Gods of peace did pray:
Loosning the fillets on his holy head,
He by the hand me full of fear and dread,
Unto thy temple, great Apollo, brings,
And from his sacred mouth the priest thus sings:
Great Goddess son, (for'tis a truth most clear,
That thou shall sail to the sea by gods most dear:
So Jupiter guides fates, so lots do light,
So he the wheel of fortune orders right)
I in few words amongst many things will show
How thou through serene seas may safely go
To Italy: Further to know, unfold,
The fatesand Juno have my tongue controld.
First, Italy, which thou think near at hand,
And ignorant, would rest in neighboring land,
Far off, long ways, long rigid reaches yet
It does contain: and first thou down must sit,
And set thy bending oars smoothly to sail
In Sicils seas; and after, with free gale
Pass with thy ships through Italies salt seas,
And through the infernal flood, and isle Circes,
Before thou can secure thy city build:
Mark well, for I will thee some tokens yield:
When careful thou 'bout Tyberinus shore
Have that still silent stream quite passed over,
Thou on those banks a huge white sow shall see,
With thirty white young pigges late farrowed be:
And on the ground sucking the sows white ^eats,
There is the place for thy fair cities seats.
Nor for the foretold famine be afraid,
Phoebus will help, the fates will find good aid.
But see thou shun these parts, our neighboring land,
Though near some part of Italy it stand:
For there the greedy Greeks all cities hold,
There lie in garrison the Locrians bold,
There Idomeneus on Salentine plains
His Grecian army musters up, and trains:
And there duke Philoctetes safely sleeps,
And in Petilias vveak vvalls closely keeps.
Besides, the seas safe past, thy ships at rest,
Thy altars built on shore, thou ready pressed,
Then pay thy vovvs, with purple-hood thy head
See thou adorn, that no disordered
Or adverse fact be found, in the sacred fire
Made to the Gods due praise, t'incensetheir ire,
And all molest. This custom thou and thine
Keep firm in sacred rites, at sacred shrine.
After, when vvindes to Sicil bring thee near,
And strait Pelorus banks smally appear,
Sail to the left hand sea, the left hand side,
Steer, by a long circumference, the tide:
Be sure to shun the right hand sea and shore.
These parts (they say) were by a tempest sore
(Such a strange change makes long antiquity)
And rupture great, long since most vehemently
Broke forth; both lands did once together lie:
For with great force came a huge inundation,
Whose overflowing stream made separation
'Twixt Italy and Sicil, tumbling down
With swift represselesse rage each field and town:
Yet running with a narrow furious flood,
On whose right side pernicious Scylla stood;
Implacable Charybdis on the left,
The midst whereof so hellishly is cleft,
That its deep gaping gulf with treble swallow
Sups up huge waves, which broken in do follow:
And thrice again disgorgeth them on high,
Dashing its wavie vomit up to the sky.
But Scylla lurketh in his covered caves,
And to his sharp-tooth'd mouth sucks ships from waves:
Upward a man, downward a comely maid,
His lower parts like a huge whale are made,
All of wolves wombes and Dolphins tails are said
To be engendered. But Pachynus point
Is far more safe for thee, at ease t'appoint
Thy courses in and out, though farther it wind,
Then formidable Scyllas fangs to find,
And rocky roares of his cursed curres unkind.
Beside, if any wit Helenus have,
If him least faith or truth Apollo gave;
This one thing, and but only this for all
(Dear Goddess son) to thee I motion shall
And mention, yea and move most ardently,
'Bove all adore great Iunos deity:
Make vows to Juno with a willing mind,
And overcome with sacrifices kind
That mighty Goddess. Thus, thou victor may,
Sicilia left, in Italy be placed
To Cuma thou being come, and on that shore,
Where sacred floods, Avernus woods do roar;
There thou the frantic prophetess shall see,
Who in her deep steep rock does prophecy.
And all her notes and names in leaves she writes,
And what in leaves she written leaves, indites
In metre-modules, and locks in her cave,
And there untoucht, they lie in order brave.
But if, the door being open, the wind displace them,
And out of doors the whisking puffs do chase them,
She never cares to catch them in again,
To recollect their strains, or place them plain,
Rudely they run, and Sibyls seat disdain.
Nor think it loss of time there to abide,
Though thy companions thee to ship may chide,
And though to launch out thou have wind at will,
Which with most prosperous gales thy sails may fill,
Yet prove the prophetess, her humbly pray
Thy fates by word of mouth plain to display,
She Will show thee Latium lads, fierce future broiles,
And how thou may forsake, or take thy toiles:
Thy journeyes joyful sacred-she will make.
Of these things I Would have thee chief note to take.
Go on then, and to the heavens Troy magnify
By famous facts. This said, most courteously
The prophet gave him ivorie gifts, and gold,
And made his ship huge massy silver hold:
Dodonaean basins, and a coat of arms
Richly beset with hooks, to save from harms,
And treble-guilt with gold; a helmet fair,
With a rich crest, and dangling plume, like hair:
The arms of Neoptolemus they were,
And to my father he great gifts did bear:
He gave us horses, gave us captains there:
Gave us new oars, and armor for our men.
Achilles my old father bad us then
To fit our ships with sails, for winds swift chase:
To whom Apollos priest said, with great grace,
Anchises, whom fair Venus to embrace
With wedlocks royal rites, did kindly 'dain,
Whom Gods regard, and twice did safe sustain
From Pergams spoil, behold fair Italy,
Then sail thou thither with celeritie,
And needs thou must from these our parts depart.
For very far remote from whence thou art,
Are those Italian plains, by Phoebus shown:
Then go (he said) thou who art happy known
In a most pious son: But why thus still
Does my talk stay thee? wind blowing now at will.
Andromache likewise at our farewell
Most sorrowful, brought gifts that did excel:
Garments with gold embroidered, rich and deep,
And a rare Trojan coat, which she did keep,
She to Ascanius gave, equal to any,
And rarely woven gifts she gave him many,
And said; Take these brave child, and let them be
Pledges of my hands and hearts love to thee,
Let them Andromaches, great Hectors mate,
Largely extended kindness demonstrate:
Yea take them as friends gifts in last extent,
O thou who only much do represent
My dear Astyanax! for so had he
His eyes, his hands, his countenance like thee;
And, had he lived, he had been just thine age.
Then parting, I with a sad carriage
And many tears, said unto these my friends;
O happy you, whose toil already ends:
Whereas new and alternate fates us call,
You sit at ease, no seas to sail at all:
You seek no Latian retrograding plains,
You Xanthus and Troyes figure safe contains,
Which your own fingers framed: I trust, more blessed,
Then e're to be by Greeks again distressed.
If ever I fair Tybers floods and field
Do enter, and my nations city build,
And kindred countries and our neighboring nations,
Epirus and Hesperias combinations
In amity, who both from Dardane came,
And both in blood and fortunes were the same:
Then both shall be one Troy in sweet affection,
And our posterity have one protection.
By sea we to Ceraunia sail, hard by,
Whence by short cut lies way to Italy.
Meanwhile the Sun goes down, shades hide the hills,
We on the longed for land with cheerful wills
Lie down and choose our oars, and scattered wide,
We for our weary limbs on shore provide:
And tired, quickly fell full sound asleep,
Nor yet did midnight season from us creep,
When Palinurus nimbly rose from rest,
To watch the wind; his ear to the air most pressed,
He marks the gliding stars in serene sky,
The Plow-starre, Wain, Hyades waterie,
Golden Orion, full of tempests great.
And finding all to be both fair and neat,
From shipboard gives a sign: we change a station,
And steer our way with sail-yards elevation.
The stars now fled, ruddy Aurora smiles,
And we dark hills discry'd some distant miles,
And Italy lying low: when first of all
Achates Italy aloud did yaull,
Our mates do Italy salute with joy.
And old Anchises does himself employ,
A bowl of wine brimfull to coronate,
And all the Gods divine did invocate.
And thus, advanced in the ship, did impetrate:
You Gods of sea and land, who storms do cease,
Prosper our journey with all joys increase.
And straight fair blasts do blow, the ports appear
To our approach, and we beheld most clear
Minervas temple in her sacred tower.
My mates their ships to shore with all their power
Put in, to land, and quick let down their sails,
The haven hooks in, by Eastern seas avails,
Much like a bow; and rockie banks cast up,
The foaming-swelling salt seas waves do sup.
The haven lies hid, the rocks, like turrets high,
Stretch out two walley-arms, and back does fly
The temple from the shore. Here did I see
(The first omen) four snow-white steeds to be
About the field, and on the grass to graze.
Then grave Anchises thus his mind did blaze;
O harbrous land, bring thou battles great?
By these warre-horses thou fierce war do threat.
And yet these beasts chariots were wont to draw,
And in kind couples bits to champ and chaw.
Here Is hope of peace, says he: then submissely
We pray to Pallas powerful deity,
Who us most glad received, before whose fires
Our heads with hoods we vail, and Trojan tires:
Holy Helenus charge we discharge now,
Which chiefly he enjoined us, and we bow
And sacrifice to Greeces Juno high.
Without delay, our votes paid orderly,
We turn about our covered cross yards all,
And from Greeks feared towns and fields we fall.
And hence we saw Herculean Tarents bay,
(If fame be true) against which in full sight lay
Lacinian Iunos temple, Caulons towers,
And shipwracking Scylacaeums stormy powers.
Then far from sea, Sicilian Aetnas hill
We saw, and heard the seas huge roares most shrill,
And battering stones clattering against the clift,
And abrupt sounds at shore, waves loudly lift,
And sands and seas boiling with furious drift.
Here Is that Charybdis (sure) Anchises said,
Helen these rigid rocks, these clifts displaid.
Hence then brave mates (says he) ply close your oars.
Straight they what is bid obey, shove from those shores:
First Palinure the stern steeres to th'lef^ side,
The whole fleet rows to the left with wind and tide.
Huge bow-backt waves do toss us up to the sky,
They shrink, we sink to hells profunditie.
Thrice threatening rocks in the clifts made clamorous jangles,
Thrice we the foam did slice, see dewy spangles.
Meanwhile both wind and sun us tired forsake:
Unknown on Cyclops banks a stay we make.
The haven is huge, unstur'd by sturdy wind,
But Aetna's horrid roares there (near) we find.
Whence a black cloud sometimes is belched out,
Whose pichy fume and fiery sparks about
Vent flakes of flame, and seem the stars to lick,
Vomiting up unbowell'd mount-mould thick,
Working up rocks to the sky, and heaps of stones,
From's fierie-boyling paunch venting great groans.
Encelads lightning-half-burn'd corpse, it is said,
Under this mighty mountain Aetna's laid,
And through those chimney breaches breaths out fire,
And when that weight his vvearie limbs does tire,
All Sicil shakes with rumbling noise and cries,
And mighty fogs and fumes do dim the skies.
That night in vvoods strange sounds and sighs us fright,
Yet on the cause of them we could not light.
For neither we the light of stars did see,
No nor the starrie pole discerned could be:
But mungy clouds o'respread the sky most black,
And the dark night made us moonlight to lack.
But now the next days light sprang from the East,
And Sols bright rays nights devvy shades decreast:
When suddenly out of the vvoods we spy
A man's strange shape, hunger-starved, like to die,
In piteous plight, his hands humbly stretched out,
Whom we behold, see him soiled all about,
His wild grown beard, his garments all thorn-torn,
In all things else he seemed a Greek forlorn,
Who once in Grecian troops to Troy was sent,
He spies far off Troyes arms and vestiment;
Which sight him somewhat startled, made afraid,
And stopped his pace: at last he headlong made
To us to shore, with woeful treats and tears.
By stars, by Gods, life-breathing air, he swears,
Take me hence, Trojans, to what parts you please:
And this, this only gives me ample ease:
My self a Grecian soldier I confess,
That by that war Troyes Gods we did distress:
For which, since so great harms our arms have wrought,
Fling me to the floods, let sea bring me to naught.
If so I die, by man to die I Am glad.
This said, he staid, kneeling on knees most sad:
We bad him tell us who he was: where born:
And what dire fate did cause that state forlorn.
Yea and my sire himself, Anchises old,
Without delay the young-mans hand did hold
In his right hand, a pledge of hope to's mind.
VVhereat he thus began, fear cast behind,
Of Ithaca I am, Ulysses mate,
My name is Achaemenides, and late
I came to Troy from Adamast my father,
A man (then) poor (and oh I wish much rather
That state had stood) here, my unmindfull mates
Fearfully fled, left me within the gates
Of the huge Cyclops den, foul den indeed,
Wherein they on dire bloody dai^^ies feed:
As deep as dark within, the masters self,
An ugly, odious, tall, starre-touching elf:
(Heaven grant, like plagues mortals find never more)
Fierce in his sight, furious to speak before,
Fed with the flesh and blood of wretches poor.
For I my self saw him most slightly take,
And grasp in his foul fist, and fiercely shake,
Two of the bodies of my mates at once,
And dash them both against the rockie stones,
Sprinkling their putrid filth thick on the walls:
Yea and I saw the beast, how close he falls
To eat and gnaw their flesh and issuing blood,
How with their hot joints 'twixt his teeth he stood.
And yet not altogether unrewarded,
Nor of himself Ulysses unregarded.
For loathing life, Ithacus, in this fear,
Whiles he was stuffed with wine and his good cheer,
His head bent down to sleep, he laid on ground
In his huge den, and in his sleep most sound,
Disgorging guts and gobbets, bloud-mixt wine,
We all do call upon our powers divine,
Each man in's turn, closing him round about,
His gogling eye we with a club dashed out,
His only eye, fixed on his frowning brow.
Like Sol, or Grecian shield in's au-all bow.
Thus we our fellows deaths revenged at last.
But fly, oh fly, poor souls, from hence full fast,
Your cables cut, and loose, and quickly brast,
From such, so huge, as Polypheme in's den,
Who men and beasts in's clutches close does pen,
Of Cyclops monstrous full an hundred more,
Do rove and rage about this crabbed shore,
And haunt about these hills. Now Cynthia bright,
Had thrice increast, decreast her hornie light,
Since we in woods and deserts vvilde did range,
And wild beasts dens: when the huge Cyclops strange
Descending the rough rocks, I saw in sight;
Whose roaring voice and pace did me afright.
Wild stony berries, rural heps and haws
They foulely fed on, roots, herbs, fill their maws.
Sculking about, first I beheld this fleet
Sailing to shore: which I (thus) vowed to meet,
What e're it was: enough I had that I
Had escaped these barbarous beasts immanitie:
By you more willing any death to die.
Scarce had he done, when from a hill we saw,
Much like a vvalking-mount, to us to draw
Huge Polypheme himself amongst his sheep,
And to the well-known shore his way to keep:
Monstrous, misshapen, horrid, huge, stark-blinde.
His hand a pine tree grasps, firm way to find,
His flocks him follow, this his only joy,
His pipe tied at his neck, to ease annoy.
Who entering now the deep, and come to shore,
Of his boar'd eye he vvasht the running gore,
Gnashing his teeth with rage; in the main he goes,
And yet above the waves his sides he shows.
We fearful, quickly skudding thence do fly,
Taking with us the wretch, and vvorthily
Slily our cables cut; with nimble oars
We brush the flood, and glide from off the shores.
Which so perceiving, follows our ships din,
But seeing he no reach of us could vvin,
To gripe us in his paw, finding likewise,
The Ionick seas he could not equalize,
Us to pursue so huge a howl he raised,
As earth, and seas, and shores were all amazed.
All Italy stood trembling, Aetna's hill
With hollow holes resounded echoes shrill.
VVhereat huge troops of Cyclops from the vvoods,
And mountains tall, flock to the shores and floods:
Whom with their fruitless frowns we safely eye,
Those Aetnaean elfs, whose pates even touch the sky,
A hellish heap: much like a forest rude,
Where grow old oaks and trees in multitude,
Or cypresses tall boughs, on hills that stood
In fair Diana's groves, or Jove's tall vvood.
Fear forced us thence confusedly to sail,
Wheres'ere the winds would blow with prosperous gale.
But grave Helenus hests us countercheckt,
'Twixt Scylla and Charybdis to direct,
And keep our course 'twixt both, as we could best,
From being by least fear of death distressed:
But, if not so, then backward to retire.
But see, a happy Borean blast did spire
From fair Pelorus parts, which brought us right
Unto Pantagia's rockie mouth and sight,
Of cape Megarus, and of Tapsus low.
All these did Achaemenides us show,
Ulysses mate, as by those banks we go.
Against sower Sicils bay an isle does lie,
Called foul Plemmyrium by antiquity;
But modern times do it Ortygia name.
Alphean-Elis current (so says fame)
Here undermines the sea by secret pass,
Which now into thy mouth, Arethusas,
Falling, confounded is in Sicils flood.
There we (advised) adore those Gods so good.
Thence from Elorus fruitful plains we put,
And through Pachinus rocks and crooks we cut:
And sailing, see unmoved Camarina,
Gelo's large towns, and torrent fierce G^la.
Then ample Agragas struts stately high,
Of prauncing horses (once) a nurserie.
By thee, date-bearing S^linus, I sailed,
And Lilybeums hid rocks rough streams hailed.
And thence I came to Drepanus sad shore:
Where having all my toiles at sea past over,
(Alas!) my father, cure of all my care,
Anchises, here I lost: O father fair,
Here do thou thy poor tired son forsake?
Alas! did heaven thee from such turmoiles take?
And all in vain? And, nor Helenus wise,
Who many hardships to me did premise,
Foreshew'd me this mishap, this sorrow great,
Nor fierce Celaeno, who much fright did threat.
Is this my labors, this my travells scope?
Has heaven me hither brought, for this poor hope?
Thus grave Aeneas did himself relate
To all their listening ears his God-given fate:
And all his voyages at large expressed,
And here did end, and ceast, and so took rest.
An end of the third book of Virgils Aeneids.
THE ARGUMENT of the fourth book.
The queen incensed with lovesick fires,
Her sister Annes advise desires:
Who blows the coals more ardently.
Whereat to Juno's deity
They sacrifice: A hunting ride,
And Venus to their votes applide.
Fame spreads the fact: by fates decree
Aeneas charged thence to flee,
Prepares his shipping and his mates,
And thence to part he properates.
This Dido saw, his stay assayd,
With tears and treats; but all denayd,
On her built shrine, in sacrifice,
With woeful words and wounds she dies.
BUt all this while the queen with love sore wounded,
Hugs her hearts harm, with imbred flames confounded.
The man's rare parts she minds much, much does trace
His noble nation: and his words and face
Engraves in heart: Care cuts off all sweet rest.
Next morn, when Sols bright rays the earth had dressed,
And Phoebus fair made moist mists heaven forsake,
She lovesick, thus t'her siding sister spoke;
Dear sister Anne, what dreams me thus molest?
Who is this our so noble new-come guest?
How fair he seems! how rare in power and grace!
I think (nor vainly think) he is of Gods race.
Fear shows a cowards heart: ah how has he
Been tossed by fates? what warre-woes showed he me?
Were he not in my heart fixed movelesly,
With nuptial bands none living should me tie.
Since my first Love, deceasing, has me failed,
Had I not hence marriage bed rites quite veiled,
I could perhaps this one love-slip embrace.
I Will tell thee (Nan) since poor Sichaeus case,
My spouse, slain by my brother at his shrines,
This only winds my will, my heart inclines
To a forced fall: I feel loves old flames power.
But may the earth gape wide, and me devour,
Or mighty Jove by lightnings force me die,
Yea die to hells black nights profunditie,
Before I thee, sweet chastity, do blot,
Or wrong thy rites. He which my love first got,
He has it, holds it in his grave with him.
This said, her eyes with tears stood full to the brim.
Anne straight replies; Sister, to me more dear
Then lovely light, shall I thee only hear
Still to bewail thy youths continuance,
Void of sweet sons, or Venus dalliance?
Think thou that graves or ghosts will this supply?
Say, though all suitors (once) in nicitie
Thou did put off, and Libyan lords neglect,
And king Iarbas, whom Tire did reject,
And other princely Peers, whom Africa land
Enricht with spoils: do still sweet love withstand?
Regard'st thou not whose land thou now do hold?
Getulian towns, a warlike people bold,
By proud Numidians hedged, and swallowing Syrts,
Whereby unharbourous land thee round begirts,
And barbarous Barceans blustering all about.
Why talk I of our Tyrian wars burst out,
And of thy greedy brothers threatenings stout?
Truly I trust, fair fates and Juno kind
Drove t'us those Trojan ships with prosperous wind.
O what a city (sister) shall we see?
How rare a realm, by such a spouse as he?
If Trojans trim our troops, what matchless praise
Shall Tyrians to their noble actions raise?
Only get thou the Gods good will, then offer
Thy sacrifice, thy guest all kindness proffer:
And work out ways him with thee to retain,
While tempests rage at sea, while clouds drop rain,
While ships are rigging, storms in sky remain:
These words loves kindled fire highly inflame,
Strengthen her straggling thoughts, dissolve all shame.
First then to church they go, favor to find
By sacrifice: fat beasts to shrines they bind,
As used to Ceres their lawmakers sweet,
To Phoebus, Bacchus, and (as was most meet)
To Juno first, Goddess of Nuptial rite.
Here dainty Dido's self in beauty bright
Holding in hand a cup of sacred wine
'Twixt the white heifers horns, upon the shrine
Poured it out before the Gods statues fair,
At the altars walks no gifts that day they spare:
And the beasts inwards opened, inly eyes,
And seeks in the smoking intralls auguries.
O shallow sight of priests, what good do votes?
To lovesick souls what good do temples notes?
When all this while sly flames my pith consume,
And creeping Cupid holds my hearts best room.
Enflamed is doleful Dido, like one mad,
And up and down the city does she gad.
Much like a silly dear pierct with a shaft,
At unawares by hunters cunning craft,
And with quick arrows chased through Creets thick woods,
Away (the huntsman knows not where) she skuds
Over large Dictaean downs, and springs, her side
The deadly arrow fixed fast does hide:
So Dido now with her leads to and fro
Her dear Aeneas, shows him, as they go,
Her Tyrian treasure, city ready made.
Ready to speak, yet stops in the midst she made.
Now day declining, to like banquets great
She him invites, and fondly does entreat,
Again to hear his Trojan toils related,
And all the while her fixed affections waited
Upon the speakers face. But Cynthia pale
Upon their parting having but a vail
Of darkness over daylight, and pendent spangles
In skies, men's eyes with drowsy sleep entangles,
In her void palace she alone laments,
And his forsaken seat her now contents:
Whom absent she as present hears and sees,
And young Ascanius dandles on her knees,
Caught with the countenance of the father right,
If thus her lawless love she lessen might.
She builds no towers, begun; no spirits brave
Trains up in arms: and now, least care they have
To raise strong forts for war, fair ports to land;
All Is interrupted, all laid out of hand;
Their walls, for height threatening the skies, lie still,
Now Jove's dear Juno finds this festring ill,
Not suffering fame her fury to restrain,
She with these words to Venus does complain;
A proper piece of praise, and pompous prize
To you (forsooth) and to your yonker rise!
A goodly Godhead must you both hence clame,
If you two Gods one silly soul do tame!
Nor am I ignorant you fear our powers,
And much suspect high Carthaginian towers.
But to what end is this? why do we strive?
Let Us rather practice peace, at long-love drive;
And them in wedlock joined, make live, love thrive:
Thou have thy hearts desire. Poor Dido burns
With extreme love, which her to frenzy turns.
Let Us then this people into one unite,
Let Us rule them both with equal love, delight:
Let her her Trojan true-love serve, obey,
And total Tire to thee large dowry pay.
To whom (for well she saw she subt'ly spoke,
The Italian kingdom frustrate thus to make,
The imperial throne to Carthage to procure)
Thus Venus said; Who'd be so senseless (sure)
This to deny? or strife with thee to endure?
If that thou say the fates would ratify.
But by them I Am distracted diversely,
If Jove to Tyrians and to Trojans grant,
Themselves in this one city safe to plant,
To live together, like the combination.
Thou art his wife, try thou by impetration
What he will do. Go first, I Will follow thee
Straight says queen Juno, Leave that work to me.
Now how what I desire we may effect,
Listen, I pray, I briefly will direct.
Aeneas and poor Dido do intend
Next day in the woods in hunting sport to spend:
As soon as ever Titans lustrous ray
Begins to beautify the lightsome day,
I on them both a black thick cloud of hail,
And on his hastening followers will not fail
With thunder to shower down, whiles in great fear
They wind the woods, and search to chase the dear.
Their gallants gone, enclosed in clouds most black,
The Trojan prince and Dido I Will bring back
Into one cave: we will both be present there,
And if with me thou like good liking bear,
She shall be Bride, and I Will them firmly wed.
Here shall their nuptials be, their marriage bed.
To these desires fair Venus with a smile
Gives her consent, glad to have found the guile.
And now from seas arose Aurora bright,
And Lucifer, days harbinger, in sight:
Young gallants nimbly flock about the gates,
And in their hands boar spears with iron plates,
Their nets, gins, grins, troops of Massylian sparks,
Kennels of senting hounds with loud-mouthed barks,
Prime Punick peers at the queens chamber wait,
Who there herself was dressing in great state:
Her steed in stately trappings proudly stamps,
And in his mouth his foamie bridle champs.
At last the queen comes forth with tendance great,
Adorned with a Tyrian mantle neat,
Most richly wrought, a golden quiver hangs
Behind her back, her hair tied up with spangs
And knots of gold, buttons of beaten gold
Her purple garments neatly clasp and hold:
The Trojan troops do also follow near,
Amongst whom comes young Iulus with brave cheer:
But yet the first and fairest of them all,
This hunting-game does prince Aeneas call,
Them to associate, make the train complete:
Like fair Apollo, when his Delphick seat
He glad revisits, leaving Lycia cold,
And Xanthus streams, and sacred feasts does hold
With his Epirian, Cretian, Scythian rout
Of lords and lowns, Parnassus round about:
Himself on Cynthus tops does stalk in state.
His fragrant hair laid in a curious plate,
He binds with tender boughs, and wreaths with gold;
At's back his quiver clattering shafts does hold.
Lovely like him was (now) Aeneas pace,
Such sparkling splendor shone from his fair face,
Thus when the high hills they ascended had,
And searched beast-couching holes and haunts most glad,
Behold, a herd of wild goats they epsy
Run down the tops of rocks, and fast to fly.
From other parts he saw in the open plain
A herd of dear to skip and skud amain,
And with their thick quick race to raise the dust,
Leaving the hills, themselves in thickets thrust.
The lusty lad Ascanius, 'midst the plains,
On's nimble courser races runs, maintains,
Outriding all, ardently long to spy
Some foaming boar amongst the mean beasts to fly,
Some lusty lion from the mountains high.
Meanwhile the heavens with stormy clouds are cloy'
Huge showers of hail the hunters soon annoyed.
Whereat the Tyrian troops and Trojan train,
Yea Venus son himself, flock all amain,
Dispersed and scattered all, with fear to hide
Themselves in what next shelter they espi'de:
Great rainy floods from hills do whirling glide.
In one cave Dido and Aeneas meet:
And first the earth and nuptial Juno sweet
Work wedlock signs, conjugall fire and air
Show forth, and wood-nymphs loud their loves declare*
This day began first cause of death, of woe,
For neither future fame, nor present show,
Does Dido move; nor to consulting came
This surreptitious love, which she did name
Wedlock, and under wedlocks name did hide
This faulty fact, which soon over Libya wide
Fame blows about, even fame, that fluttering ill,
Which thrives by flight, and as it goes, grows still.
Small first, by fear, strait, stuffed up, wondrous high,
First goes on ground, then hides its head in the sky.
Whose mother earth (men say) did her beget
On extreme fury, which the Gods did fret:
Sister to Caeus and Enceladus,
By light-fleet, quick wings, expeditious:
Huge, horrid elf, with feathered corpse so thick,
Such unseen eyes (most strange) for sight so quick,
So many tatling tongues, and railing lips,
Such listening ears, such nightly nimble skips
She makes in the air, and in dark shades so squeaks,
That rest she takes none, but sweet slumber breaks,
By day strait watch she keeps on supreme seats,
Or palace turrets, and towns fright and threats:
More full of fiction, fraud, then faithfulness,
With various voices, in mere wantonness,
Stuffing the vulgar sort, tatling about
Things done or undone, without fear or doubt.
The Troyes Aeneas was arived here,
That Dido fair wedded him as her Pheere;
That now a winter long their lusts they nourisht,
Careless of crowns, they filthy folly cherisht.
This godless Goddess spreads these men's minds.
Which to Iarbas king access soon finds.
Wherewith he is vexed, perplexed, exasperated.
From Ammon he by birth was generated,
And the deflor'd nymph Garamantide;
To Jove an hundred temples builded he
Through his large realms, an hundred shrines beside,
Where sacred unextinguisht fires did 'bide,
For days and nights incessant sacrifice
Unto his Gods, fraught with fat beasts likewise,
For burnt oblations, all the doors throughout
With flowers and garlands garnished about.
He, mad with love with the harsh hearsay stung,
Forthwith ('it is said) unto his altars flung,
And 'midst his Gods, his hands high elevated,
Jupiter (thus) he humbly invocated:
All powerful Jove, whom we black Moors adore,
To whom we our Lenaean liquors pour
On right embroidered beds; see thou these things?
Or, when (great Jove) thou on us earthly kings
Do flash forth lightnings, fear we this in jest?
Do those cloud-hid flames vainly fright man's breast?
Make but a skarre-crow sound? A woman (late)
Who straggling to these parts, did at a rate
Purchase and plant a poor, a petty town;
Whom, subject to the statutes of our crown,
We license gave to plant and plow our land,
Our princely wedlock (now) does stiff withstand,
And in her kingdom kindly entertains
One sir Aeneas, who her solely gains.
This petty Paris and his straggling trains
Of beardlesse boys, effeminately gay
With coifs and perfumed hair, these steal the prey:
But we who fill thy temples with oblations,
Seem only fame to feed with vain frustrations.
Jupiter hears him venting these events
Before the altars, views his discontents:
And to the princely palace turns his eyes,
Sees how these lovers fairer fame despise:
Mercury therefore straight he called, and said;
Be gone, fair son, with wings and winds swift aid
Haste to the Trojan prince (who now at Tire
Wastes time, and does not fate-given crowns acquire)
Haste through the air, and tell him this from me:
His sacred mother promised not that he
Should such a person prove, nor for this cause
Was he twice ransomed from Greeks griping paws:
But that he should once rule all Italy,
Italy big with crowns, with conquests high:
And should advance brave Teucers noble race,
And the whole world under his orders place.
But if these glories great him naught inflame,
And that he is loath to labor for such, fame;
Yet shall the father envie's sons renown?
And must Asc^nius loose his Rom^ne crown?
What means he? what is his hope in a foes lands?
Why his Ausonian race, Lavinian strands
Neglects he thus? Let him to sea: here is all,
For this I thee my messenger do call.
Thus Jove. His sacred sire he straight obeyes,
His charge to discharge, shakes off all delays:
His vvingy shoes of gold he buckles on,
Which with fair plumes, for expedition,
Bare him aloft, quite over sea and land,
With a swift gale. Then quick he takes his wand,
With which he calls the hideous souls from hell,
And others sends to Tartars dungeon fell:
He gives, bereaves sweet sleep, from death preserves.
Therewith he drives the winds, and with winged nerves
Swims through the clustring clouds: and now in's flight,
Of craggy Atlas tops and sides has sight,
Of Atlas, whose huge height the heavens does prop,
On whose pine-bearing head black clouds do stop,
And daily's girt, often dashed with wind and rain.
Thick drifts of snow do on his shoulders drain:
Then down his aged chin quick floods do flow,
With frosty ice his beard does grisly grow.
Cyllenius fluttering vvings first staid him here,
And headlong hence to the waves his corpse does bear:
Much like a bird, which 'bout the shores and sides
Of fishfull rocks, with hoverings smoothly glides
Above the waves, about the banks: even so
Cyllenian Mercury did to and fro
Flutter over sea and land, and vvindes did slice,
And Libya's sandy shores touched in a trice.
His vvingy feet no sooner did alight
On Tyrian towers, but straight he saw in sight,
Aeneas forts to raise, rooms to repair:
And he himself girt with a hanger rare,
With yellow jasper stones like stars bedeckt,
And a rich sword, in clothes of rich respect:
A mantle on his corpse cast carelessly,
Which rarely showed, of Tyrian purple die:
Which gorgeous gifts rich Dido's self had made,
And in the vveaving, threads of gold in-laid.
Him he encounters thus; Do thou build high
Great Carthage towers? do thou uxoriously
Settle this city fair? O careless mind
Of thine affairs, a promised crown to find!
The king of Gods, whose power shakes earth and heaven,
Sent me from skies to thee, this charge was given,
Thus now to say; What buildings do thou rear?
What loytring hopes in Libya's land appear?
Though thou thy self neglect so glorious fates,
Though so high honor thee naught animates,
Yet for high springing young Asc^ni^^ sake,
Thy hopeful heir Iulus, some care take:
To whom fair Iliums crown, Romes royal fear,
As debt are due. This said, Cylleni^^ great,
Amidst these words, from mortals view departed,
And far from sight into the air was darted.
But yet this sight Aeneas mad amazed,
Made him stand mute, his hair with horror raised,
In staring state, burnt with desire of flight,
And quick to leave this land of high delight,
With these fore-vvarnings and the Gods command
Stunded. Alas, what should he take in hand?
With what circumlocutions might he dare,
This to the enamoured queen now to declare?
Where might he first begin to break his mind?
His thoughts now here now there were puffed, like wind,
In strict distractive parts turned all about:
At last, these vvrastling thoughts thus end the doubt:
Mnestheus, Sergestus, and Cloanthus wise,
He calls to him, and closely did advise,
The fleet to fit, his mates to send to shore,
Arms to provide, and this to color over
With some pr^text, himself in the mean while,
Since his dear Dido knew not of this wile,
Nor feared least fraction in such settled loves,
Labors access to her, fit seasons proves,
Kindly to treat with her, a gladsome end
To gain to his designs. They all them bend
Swiftly and gladly their due tasks to tend.
But Dido found (oh, who can love delude?)
Foresaw these guiles, and their first motions viewed;
All stillnes still mistrusts: That impious fame
Blabbed to her the increase of furies flame:
Told her the ships were rig'd, the voyage vowed.
Her deaded heart incensed, she raves aloud,
Does madly through the city drunkardize,
Even as it is the Bacchanalian guise,
When at great Bacchus his trienniall sport
Rude troops in drunken dances do resort,
And so solemnize every sacred rite,
Cithaeron echoning clamours loud by night.
At last she thus, even of her own accord,
Speaks to Aeneas; Faithless, oh, abhorred,
And did thou hope to play the counterfeit?
And could thou work so great, so gross a cheat?
Would thou so slily hence have stolen away?
Could neither our love, nor plighted faith thee stay?
Nor woeful Dido dying stop thy flight?
But even in vvinter weathers dangerous plight
Thou must to ship, and (oh hard heart!) set sail,
Driven on with many a boystrous Northern gale?
What though thou sought'st no other unknown place,
Or foreign parts? or Troy stood in best case?
Must thou thy Troy through furious waves procure?
Fly'st thou from me? Ah, now I thee adjure
By these my tears, and by thine own right hand,
Since I poor soul have naught else at command.
O, by our wedlock nuptial rites begun,
If I have well deserved by ought yet done,
Or ought of mine were ever sweet to thee,
O of my tottering state now tender be.
If yet my prayers may penetrate thy heart;
Ah, change thy mind, oh do not hence depart.
For thy sake Libyas land, and tyrants fierce
Of Africa, would me with mischief pierce:
For thee my Tyrians are with me offended,
For thee, my shame, my fame's extinct and blended:
My fame, by which I once was raised to the sky.
To whom do thou me leave, now like to die?
Ah unkind guest. For now no more I may
Thee husband call: Why longer do I stay?
What? till Pygmalion all my towns destroy?
Or till Iarbas captiv'd-me annoy?
Oh yet at least had I before thy flight,
Enjoyed a child by thee: oh if I might
Have had a young Aeneas fathers face,
To play withal in court, 't would ease my case.
Then (sure) I should not altogether seem
So woeful, or my self forsaken deem.
This said, she ceast. He on the other side,
His eyes on Jove's command fast fixed tide;
And strenuously did strive his hearts great grief
Close to suppress, and spoke these words in brief:
Fair queen, what e're thou can recount, recall,
Yea and much more, confess I ever shall
Thy merits infinite, nor shall I shame,
Gladly to memorize Eliza's name:
Whiles here I live, whilst I my self may know,
The truth herein let me thee briefly show.
I never hoped to hide (feign not) this flight
Clandestinley, nor minded marriage rite,
Nor hither came such vows and pacts to plight.
Yet I, if friendly fates had so decreed,
Aimed at a life from all perturbance freed,
In sweet repose to accommodate all cares,
And chiefly to my Trojan towns affairs:
To yet remaining friends to yield supply,
Priam's fair towers once to re-edifie;
And to my conquered kin to re-advance
Poor Pergams walls. But now such is my chance,
Commanded, charged by Gods and great Apollo,
That Latium I, fair Latium now must follow.
O there is my love, there is my country kind:
And since thou bear to Carthage such a mind,
Though a Phoenissian, yet do Libya like,
Why should pale envies dart thy heart so strike,
At Trojans liking, loving Italy?
For us to seek forth, it is like equity.
As often as nights moist shades the earth do hide,
And fiery twinkling stars in skies abide,
Anchises my dear fathers ghost appears,
And in my dreams me much afrights and fears.
Yea my Ascanius young, whose brows I wrong,
Keeping Hesperia's crown from him so long,
And fate-given lands call me to haste away;
Yea now of late Jove's messenger, I say,
Sent from himself, (all whom I here appeal)
To me Jove's mind and message did reveal.
And I the God in a clear vision saw,
E ntring thy town, and near me quick to draw;
And with these ears I heard his voice and words.
O then forbear to wound me with tongue-swords,
And thou thy self with plaints: For Italy,
Alas, I seek not voluntarily.
Him answering she did all this while behold
With discontent: Here, there her eyes she rold,
Viewed him throughout with sullen silent eyes,
And thus at last she vvrathfully replies:
Thou art no Goddess son, perfidious thou,
Nor e're did Dardan thee his child avow;
But thou on cruel Caucasus hard mounts
Wast bred; or suck'st some Tigers milky founts.
For why should I dissemble now with thee?
Or dream that better fates attend on me?
Did thou once sigh at all my floods of tears?
Did thou with sorrowing eyes behold my fears?
Shew'dst thou teare-passion, least compassion kind,
Overcome with sorrow at my lovesick mind?
Which (first) may I says vvorst? Nor Juno fair,
Nor father Saturn has of me least care.
Oh, where is firm faith? I took him in adoores,
A straggling beggar, out cast from his shores:
And like a frantic fool, my kingdom shared
To unkind him, his navy naught repaired,
And all his followers I from death set free.
Alas, with fury he has fired me.
Now fate-saying Phoeb, now Lycian lots are cast,
Now Jove commands, and thou must follow fast
His messengers quick heels, in his harsh hest.
What else? for thus the Gods do hold it best;
This toil perturbs poor silly souls at rest.
I hold thee not, nor do thy words withstand,
Go with the winds, seek Italy thy land,
Away through floods to find thy kingdoms fair.
But sure I hope (if Gods yet able are)
Amidst the rocks thou due revenge shall bear,
And Dido's name invoke with frequent fear.
Absent I Will thee pursue with frightfull fires:
And when by chilling death life's breath expires,
In every place my ghost thy guest shall be:
And thus (vile wretch) I Will be revenged on thee.
This I shall hear below, fame will me show it,
And hearing, I shall be most glad to know it.
Abruptly here in the midst an end she makes,
And malcontent, to flight her self betakes:
Out of his sight away she turns and winds,
Leaving Aeneas in a thousand minds:
Stopping for fear, striving to utter more;
Her damsels, her, fallen in a sound, in bore:
And laid in princely bed, with clothes over spread.
But good Aeneas (though he labored
With consolation to allay her grief,
And with kind words to give her woes relief;
Much sighing, much with love perplexed in heart)
Yet minds Jove's charge, fits his fleet to depart.
The Trojans busy be, and hale to shore
Their stately ships and barks, well pitched over,
Their leafy oars, and oaks from woods unwrought,
Through haste to fly with expeditious thought.
Thou might them see the city skud about,
And swarm in heaps much like a nimble rout
Of pretty pismires, when with strenuous pain
They prey upon a mighty heap ofgrain,
(Mindful of winters want) and up it pack,
Quick goes and comes i'th'field this army black:
And through the grass, by a straight path their prey
They bear along, some the great grains assay
To shove before them with their shoulders stout:
Some from delays correct their lazy rout:
Their lusty labor heats each hole about.
What thoughts had thou, poor Dido, at this sight?
How did thou sigh, when from thy turrets height
Thou saw far off hot toiles the wharfs to fill,
And before thy face shores stuffed with clamours shrill?
Impudent love, what is it thou wilt not enforce?
Sometimes to shower ou^ tears of much remorse,
Sometimes to try b'intreaties most demure,
Sometimes again to yield to loves allure:
That naught (though all in vain) before she di'd,
Might be neglected, might be left untri'd.
See (sister Anne says she) what haste they make
About the banks, flocking us to forsake:
And how their vessels wait but (now) for wind,
Their tacklings fit, by mariners refined
O had I at the first feared this great shame,
I, sister, better could have born the same.
Only this one thing (Anne) for my poor sake,
Let me entreat thee now to undertake:
For faithless he was wont to wish thee well,
And his hearts secrets unto thee to tell,
And thou alone in him know well to find
Fit time and flexibilitie of mind.
Go sister, go, humbly tell this fierce foe;
With Greeks at Aulis Troyes dire overthrow
I never conspired, nor sent a fleet to Troy,
Nor old Anchises ashes did annoy.
Why then turns he deaf ears to my request?
Where rashly runs he? Let this last bequest
Be given to his poor love; to watch fair flight,
And winds to sail away with smooth delight.
I do not press or pray sweet marriage rite,
Which he has wronged; nor would I him bereave
Of's longed-for Latium, him of's crown deceive.
I only ask a little fruitless stay,
Some small repose, repast, for loves allay,
Until my fate me vanquished make to moan.
Grant this last vote, in this request alone
Pity thy sister; which if thou me grant,
My death shall bid this wretched life avaunt.
Thus did she treat, entreat her sister sad,
Who to and fro bears weeping errands bad.
But none of all her treats or bitter tears
Remove his thoughts, do move his dam'd-up ears:
For fates forbade, and Jove his ears had closed.
As an old oak most furiously opposed,
Which Alpine pushing puffs now here now there
Tossing and tumbling, strive to over-beare,
The blast flies on, bends the high boughs to ground,
The stock sticks fast on a rock firm and sound;
And as the more to th'winde top-branches bend,
The more the root does ground-hold apprehend:
No otherwise with words and woes this prince
Is tossed, turmoil'd, here, there his heart t'evince:
But he is unmoved, teare-flouds flow out in vain.
Whereat poor Dido, full of grief and pain,
Desires to die; and hates the skies clear sight,
Fitlier to slay herself, and leave the light.
Then laying gifts, on incense-smoaking shrines,
She saw (fearful to say) her sacred wines,
And pour'd-out liquors turned to putred blood:
Which none, no not her sister, understood.
Beside, there was within her palace fair,
Her former husbands marble temple rare;
Which she did honor with most high respect:
And with white fleeces, and gay garlands decked.
From whence she seemed to hear her husbands call;
And that, when nights dark curtain covered all;
Yea and to hear the scritch-owl all alone
On houses tops, often times to make strange moan,
With fearful fatal noates, long screeks and cries;
Beside, feare-threatning ancient prophesies
Her terrified: in nightly visions she
Aeneas cruel self does seem to see,
Pursuing her enraged. She (still) alone
Left to herself, not waited on by one,
Is seen to stragle far in deserts strange,
To seek her Tyrians, seems abroad to range
Much like mad Pentheus, scared with haggs of hell,
And oftwo suns, two Thebes, feigned (then) to tell:
Or like Orestes, vexed with furies dire,
When from his mother armed with ragefull fire,
And stinging serpents, mad, he made away,
Revengefull furies at the threshold lay:
So she enraged, overcome with grief and woe,
Resolves to die; how to this work to go,
Thinks with herself for fittest time and way,
And thus to her sad sister does she say;
(Cheer in her cheeks, her fact hid in her face)
I have the way, dear sister, (in this case
Now joy with me) either to keep him here,
Or from his love my self firmly to clear.
Near the oceans end, upon the Western side
Lies Aethiopa, far from us and wide:
Where heaven-upholding mighty Atlas stands,
And ardent sunshine scorcheth up the lands.
A grave Massylian priest came hence to me,
His sisters temples keeper said to be;
Who fed the dragons, kept the fruit divine,
Whose humid honey does to sleep incline,
Even soporiferous poppie. She assures
By charms to lovesick minds, she cures procures
In whom she lists; and whom she lists, makes love
Extremely; stops swift streams, yea stars above
Turns retrograde; she nightly ghosts can raise,
Can make the ground to groan with strange amaze,
And trees to run down hills, she frights and frayes.
Now by the Gods (dear sister) I protest,
By thee and thy sweet soul, I am thus pressed
To use these magic spells against my will.
Thou then, good sister, build up with best skill,
A pile of wood in the inner court on high,
And lay thereon the sword, which impiously
He stuck up by our bed his garments all,
Yea my bride-bed, where I took fatal fall:
For so this priest bad me bring all I can,
Belonging to that false nefarious man,
And bad me burn them. This thus said, she ceast,
And death-pale color in her cheeks increast.
Her sister Anne suspecting naught herein,
That she new sacred death dues did begin,
Nor could conceive she such rage did retain,
Or greater grief then for Sichaeus slain,
Does not therefore her sisters charge refrain.
But now the queen (the pile in the open air
In the inner court erected, fitted fair)
Great boards and billets, pitch and tar lays on,
Flowers, cypress boughs and branches ties upon
This fatal hearse, his clothes, sword, left behind,
His picture eke she to this bed does bind,
Knowing the issue. Altars stand about;
And now the priest, her haire-spread loose, cries out
On her three hundred Gods, Erebus deep,
Chaos and threefold Hecates to weep,
And triple-fac'd Diana, sprinkling wide
The feigned liquors which in Styx abide.
Then tender herbs are sought out by Moonlight,
And cropped and cut with sithes and sickles might,
And with white milk, black poisons pestilent;
Andfrom a young Foals front incontinent
They pluck the Mares poisonous beloved bit,
Before the mare from's brow devoureth it.
Dido herself with sacred gifts in hands,
One foot unbound, clothes loose, at the altar stands,
Ready to die, the Gods she obtestates,
And powerful planets, patrons of her fates:
Yea whatsoever sacred power there were,
That just and tender mindefulnesse did bear
To lovers, which unequal yokes did wear.
And now 'twas night, when weary limbs at ease
Slept sweetly, woods were still, and calm the seas,
And now stars course came to their middle height,
And every field and bird and beast, by night,
Yea every liquid lake, and whatso'ere
The wide sharp thorny country coasts did bear,
Lay still, all fast asleep, devoid of cares,
Their slumbring hearts forgetful of affairs.
But woeful Didos heart no nap could take,
Nor all the night one nod or wink could make.
Her cares increase, her raging love reboiles,
And with huge flames of fury her turmoiles.
And thus she stands, and thus breathes out hearts woe;
What shall I do? shall I derided go
Back to my wonted wooers? meek must I
Marriage desire with those whom scornfully
I often refused? or must I not apace
Fly to the Trojans fleet, quickly embrace
Their last and worst commands? will it not (sure)
Do well, help to their helper to inure?
Old favors ought with thankfulness be paid:
But say I would, who herein would me aid?
Or scorned me to their proud ships admit.
Alas (fond fool) know'^t thou not fully yet?
See thou not sensibly the perjurie
Of Trojans? And what then? shall only I
Fly to those jocond sailours? shall I fall
Upon them with my Tyrian armies all?
And cause them whom with me I scarce could force
From their Sidonian city, take recourse
To sea again? and make them sail with me?
No rather die, as it is most fit for thee,
Thy self from sorrow with thy sword set free.
You sister, you overcome by my first tears,
My love-pierc'd heart now load with these fierce fears,
And ^e exposed unto my flying foe:
Might I not well have lived unyoked, so
As do bruit beasts, unstung with such sharp woe?
Not having kept faith to Sichaeus plighted,
With these complaints her heart she sore affrighted.
Aeneas in's tall ship resolved to sail;
Yet lies a sleep; all fit for his avail.
To him in sleep appeared the Gods form right
That formerly he saw, the same face bright;
In all like Mercury, color and voice,
With yellow hair, his corpse of youthful choice.
Who seemed thus him to advise again:
Can thou, O Goddess son, asleep remain
In such a state as this? Do thou not see
How many dangers do environ thee?
O brainsick man, see thou not friendly blasts
Breathing abroad? see thou not how she casts
In heart some impious part, resolved to die?
And how she swells with furies tympanie?
Fly'st thou not hence in haste, whiles thou may fly?
Soon thou shall see to sea her sh^ps to hie.
Bright burning brands, fierce flames on shore shall be,
If morning sun thee loytering here do see.
Be gone, I say, shake off delay: for still
Most light and loose thou wilt find a woman's will.
This said, in the dark he vanished out of sight.
Which vision did Aeneas much afright,
Who starts from sleep, his mates in haste does call,
Saying, Rouse your selves, brave sirs, and closely fall
To fluttering oars, hoise up your sails amain,
The God was sent from heaven to me again.
Quicken our flight, cut knottie ropes with speed,
The God again urges me to proceed.
Who e're thou art, great God, we follow thee,
To thy recharge we glad obedient be.
Be friendly with us, help us, O we pray,
Grant us thy present aid, a pleasant way.
This said, he soon unsheathed his glistring sword,
With his sharp blade he cuts each cutting cord.
The rest, as hotly pressed, do rush and run,
And shove from shore, and leave not ought undone,
Until they see their barks the billows hide,
Closely they wind the waves, and swiftly glide.
Aurora now left Tithons broidered bed,
And first with fresh fair light earth overspread.
The queen as soon as through her glass she spi'de
Daylight clear up, and all the fleet to slide
With smoothfull sails, and saw the ports and shores
Forsaken quite, empty of men and oars;
Her comely breast she struck, and struck again
With herwhite hand, and in fierce grief and pain
Tearing her tender yellow hair from head,
Cries out, O Jove, and shall he thus be fled?
And shall that stragler in my realm me flout?
Shall not mine armies help, and all fly out?
And prosecute, and persecute him flying,
And tear their ships, and burn them where they are lying?
O follow, follow, bring, bring forth fierce fire,
To ship set sail, row on with restless ire.
What say I? where am I? what mad mood's here?
Unhappy Dido, now thou art stung most near
By furious fates: then it had better been,
When he was here, and thou did rule as queen.
See now his hand, his heart, of whom men prate,
His countrey-Gods do him concomitate;
That he on's back his aged sire did bear.
O could I not his corpse in pieces tear?
And shatter them in the sea? his mates destroy?
Yea even Ascanius that young Trojan boy
Slay with the sword, and mince in mamacks small,
And dish on's fathers board to feast withal?
O but the fortune of a fight's unsure:
What then? whom should I fear? since death to endure
I have resolved, I would have firebrarnds cast
Into their tents, and filled with flames (at last)
Their hatches, and the father, son, and all
Have burnt up, and in the flames my self let fall.
O thou clear sun, which all men's facts do view,
And thou fair Juno, sounder witness true
Of these my woes! Hecate, who by night
In cross paths, howling noise do make to fright,
Revengefull furies, and you spirits all
Of dying Dido, hear my dying call.
Pour out your power, worthy such wicked men,
And entertain this my request, that when
(Ifthat vile wretch must needs) he does obtain
Harbor, and sails to land, if firm remain
Jove's high decrees herein; then here is an end:
Yet let fierce wars of furious foes offend
And vex him still, and him, an exile made,
Pulled from Iulus sweet embrace, beg aid,
And see his friends ignoble dire decease:
Nor when he stoops to yokes of forced peace,
Let him enjoy or crown or joys increase:
And let him die untimely, lie untomb'd,
In the open air, of birds and beasts consumed.
This vvish, these last words with my blood I vent.
And oh my Tyrians, let your wrath be bent,
Even yours and all your future progeny,
Against him and his: to my dead dust apply
These pleasant presents: let there never be
'Twixt you and them love or confederacy.
Let some vindicative revenger rise,
Sprung from our loins, those Dardan enemies
With sword and fire to vex now, and full long
Hereafter still, as time shall make them strong.
O may lands strive with lands, waves war with waves,
Friends fight with friends, armies with arms outbraves.
This said, her heart to thousands thoughts did roll,
From loathed life striving to snatch her soul.
Then she Sichaeus nurse, Barce bespake,
(For in her own hand hers did her forsake
By death) O my dear nurse, call straight, says she,
My sister Anne, bid her come quick to me;
And water with her bring our limbs to lave,
And beasts and cleansing offerings, as I gave
Order therein. Thus let her come to me,
And thou thy self, good nurse, attired must be
With holy headbands on thy head: for I
To sacrifice to Pluto, seriously
Am minded, as it is fit, to end my vvoe,
The Trojans head in flames to burn up. So
This said, with aged pace, yet eager bent,
She hastens to climb up the piles ascent.
But trembling Dido mad, full mischief-minded,
Her bloud-swoln eyes up and down rowld and winded,
Her shivering cheeks with brinish tears are spread,
And hastening death made her seem, living, dead.
When through the doors to the inner court she brake,
And ragefull haste, to mount the fire, did make:
And being up, unsheaths the Trojan blade,
A gift, not for so woeful uses made.
Here having viewed the Trojan garments gay,
And well-known bed, a little pausing stay
With tears and thoughts she made, laid on the bed,
And these last words of woe she uttered:
Sweet ornaments, whiles Gods and fates did please,
Embrace this soul, me from these sorrows ease.
I lived; now fortunes life-given course I end,
And now my great ghost to earths cells does bend.
A brave town I have built, strong vvalls erected,
Revenged my friend, due punishment inflicted
On a false brother. Blessed, ah too much blessed,
Had Trojan barks never on our banks took rest.
She ceast; her face flat on the bed did lie;
And shall we (says she) unrevenged die?
Then let us die: Thus? thus to go fits well
To obscure shades. And let that Trojan fell
See with his eyes at ^ea this dying fire,
And sail with all signs of our death most dire.
Thus ended she, and ending (thus) this word,
Her tendants saw her fallen upon her sword,
The sword all smeared with gore, her hands spread out.
Whereat they raised loud screeks the court about:
The fame whereof through the sad city flies,
And rudely ranging, fills each house with cries,
With griefs and groans, and vvomanish sad sounds,
Which the echoing air with yelling roares rebounds*
Even as if foes let in had Carthage 'stroy'd;
Or like old Tire whose buildings fair, employed
To use of Gods and men, with fires fierce flame
Were quite con^^m'd. The noise whereof soon came
To her death-daunted sister, who in fright
With panting pace ran thither with fierce flight.
Her nails her cheeks do tear, fists beat her breast,
Amidst the rout rushing, screeks out (distressed)
Her dying name. O sister, was this it?
Have thou me thus deceived? And did I fit
This pile for this? these fires and altars frame?
For what should I forsaken, thee first blame?
Why did thou me reject for thy deaths mate?
Thou might have me invited to like fate:
That same smart, with the same sword, that hour
Might both of us have griped in deaths power.
These hands did also help to build this frame,
I called upon our countrey-Gods great name;
And yet could cruel I be absent hence,
And not behold thy fates fierce violence?
O sister, sister, thou have quite undone
Thy self, my self, and all renown, begun
In city, subjects, Carthaginian lords:
O who me now some cleansing streams affords,
That I may vvash her vvounds? And if as yet
Any last breath there stray, that I may it
Sup up at length. This said, she soon ascends
The steepy steps, and in her heart contends,
And on her breast, to hug with many a tear
The half dead body of her sister dear,
And with her clothes the black blood wipes and dries.
Whereat she seems to heave her heavy eyes.
But down again the dead lids fall and fail,
And at her heart the death-smart does prevail.
Thrice she her self raised up, and strove to rest
Upon her arm; and thrice by pain oppressed,
She sownding rolled back upon the bed,
And with her straggling sight endeavored
To see the skie-light, groaning when 'twas found;
Then mighty Juno pitying her deaths vvound,
Protracted vvoe, difficulty to die,
Sent Iris quickly from Olympus high,
Her struggling soul, and fast bound life to unbinde,
(Because she not by fate, nor deaths due kind
Did die, but immaturely) she poor heart
With sudden rage enflamed, wrought her own smart.
As yet, Proserpina took not away
Her yellow locks, which on her head grew gray,
Nor her designed to the Stygian lake.
Dame Iris therefore from the clouds did take
Quick flight to her, with vvatrie colored plumes,
Which against the opposite bright sun assumes
A thousand various curious colors clear:
And lighting on her head, said; Charged, I bear
Thy parted soul to Pluto dedicated,
And free thee from thy corpse excruciated.
This said, she clipped her locks; at once does slip
All vital heat, life into the air does skip.
An end of the fourth book of Virgils Aeneids.
THE ARGUMENT of the fifth book.
Aeneas sails, to Sicil hies,
Where he his fathers obsequies
Does celebrate: Acestes kind,
About the grave brave games designed,
A prodigy, a fiery dart.
Then Iris plays old Beroes part,
In old-wifes weeds the fleet does flame,
But sudden showers do quench the same.
Anchises ghost in sleep does show
What wars his son must undergo:
And by whose guide to pass to hell.
He builds a town, wherein to dwell
He leaves the wives and men unfit:
For Palinure, he will steeres-man sit.
MEeanwhile Aeneas half way keeps his course;
His ships with soft winds cut the waves black source;
Reviewng poor Eliza's walls on fire,
The cause unknown of such combustion dire:
But bitter grief he feared for abrupt love,
Knowing how lovesick passions women move
With these sad thoughts the Trojans forward sail,
Least sight of land at sea their fleet does fail.
On all sides sea, on all sides only sky:
He over his head a watery cloud does spy,
Full stuffed with storms, whose blackness frights the seas,
And in his ship did Pal^nure displease.
Whereat he cries, A^as, what clouds o'respread
The heavens? What means God Neptune by this dread?
He bids them play the men, their oars to plie,
Sails to the lee, and thus aloud does cry;
Dauntlesse Aeneas, though great Jove our guide,
Should promise we in Italy should 'bide;
I could not in this case his words confide.
Such counter-cuffs, cross puffs us turn and vvinde,
Such dark dim clouds arise, as the air quite blind.
Nor do our reluctations us avail:
Since fortune forces, let us with fortune sail,
And go wheres'ere she guides; for sure think I,
Thy brother Eryx trusty towns are nigh,
And Sicils shores: for I have certain sight
Of noted stars, if I remember right.
Surely, says good Aeneas, so I see
The winds require, thy labors all to be
In vain I view. Then bend thy course that way:
For a more pleasing place could I, I say,
To rest our weary fleet, vvish to attain,
Then whereas Troyes Acestes kind does reign,
And where my fathers buried bones remain?
This said, they fetch the haven, a Western blast
Stretching their sails, the navy nimbly past
The channel, and at length with joy each one
Gets to the shore, unto them all well known.
But from a lofty hill, aloof in's eye
Acestes, wondering, did their fleet epsy,
Their friendly fleet: which he runs down to meet
Fierce with his bears hide and dart, them (thus) to greet:
Whose mother Troy him at Crinisus flood
Begat: He mindful of's forefather good,
Them safe to enjoy much joys, with country cates
And friendly gif^s, receives, cheeres, consolates.
Next day, so soon as Eastern Sols bright face
Had banished stars, Aeneas from each place
And part of the port assembles all his mates,
And from a tombs top thus expostulates;
Renowned Dardans, sprung from Jove's high race,
It Is now a full and complete twelve-moneths space,
Since here our sacred parents bones were laid,
And relics left, and sad death-altars made.
And this (if I mistake not) is the day,
The doleful day which I resolve for aye
To solemnize, and sad to celebrate:
(For so, ye Fates, ye do it destinate)
Yea this, though Africa me an exile hel'd,
Though Grecian seas or shores me captived quel'd,
With annual votes and due solemnities,
And altar-decking gifts, I Would memorize.
Now are we gladly (and, as I conceive,
Not without heavens direction and good leave)
Come to our fathers bones and sacred dust,
And in to a fair and friendly port have thrust.
Come on then, let us glad triumphs celebrate,
Let Us get fair gales; and when my cities state
Is stablisht, I Will my sacred rites each year
To him, in temples to him builded, bear.
Troy-born Acestes two fat bullocks great
Bestows on every bark throughout the fleet.
Then at the feast our countrey-Gods let us place,
And those which kind Acestes holds in grace.
Besides, if Sol the ninth day with bright rays
His fair face over the universe displayes.
First, for our Trojans flying-fleets sea fight
I Will prizes have: for him, whose nimble flight
Best runs a race: for him, whose courage stout
Wrastles most rare: who best flings darts about:
Or, fight with plummet-clubs does best affect:
Let all be pressed, and purchased palms expect.
Lend us your clamours loud, with bays all crowned.
This said, himself his brows with laurel bound:
The like Helymus, old Acestes do,
Lively Ascanius; all the youth so too:
He leaves the parle; with thousand tendants brave
Environed, he comes to's fathers grave.
And here (as due) two bowls of wine most good
He poured on ground, and two of sacred blood,
Two of new milk, and strewn blew flowers, and said,
Hail, sacred sire, once more all hail, safe laid,
You sacred bones, sires soul, saved all in vain,
Since Italy we could not both attain;
Nor see those fatal fields, nor seek together
Ausonian Tyber* flowing, who knows whither?
This said, a mighty slipperie snake he spi'de,
With seven huge wreaths and foldings forth to glide
From under the earth, and smoothly crawling by
The altar, girts the grave, whose back like sky
Was colored right, and full ofspecks like gold,
His glassie scales most bright for to behold;
Much like the rainbow placed against Sols rays,
Which thousand various colors then displayes.
This sight amazed the man: the snake among
The cups and platters crawling thus along,
At last he tastes the dainties tenderly,
And back recoils to th'tombe most harmlesly,
Leaving the full-fed shrines. Hence much the more
He plied his father with oblations store;
Uncertain whether it were the Genius fair
Of The place, or's fathers spirit did thus repair.
Five sheep, five hogs, five heifers black he slew,
And bowls of wine upon them forth he threw,
And invocates the soul of his great sire,
And ghosts now raised from the Acherontine fire.
His mates likewise bring copious costly gifts,
And lively each loads on the altars lifts,
And kill their kine, and pots and pans they place,
And, spread on ground, make fires to the spits apace,
And roste their midriffs, and to feasting fall.
And now is the day long-lookt-for of them all:
And Phaethons coursers drew Sols chariot bright
Upon this ninth day, with resplendent light.
When fluttering fame and brave Acests renown
Called neighbors in from each near neighboring town:
Whose joyful troops filled all the plains about,
To see the Trojan lads, and sport it out.
But first fair prizes placed were on poles
In The midst in open sight; fair three-leg'd bowls,
And fragrant garlands bound in beauteous wise,
And costly crowns, palms for the victours prize;
And glistering arms, wrought-coats, rich to behold,
And many talents both of silver and gold.
Shrill trumpets sound amidst those thick consorts,
And summon them to those propounded sports.
And first, four choice barks of the fleet begin,
With stiff strong oars by sea fight fame to win.
First Mnestheus with his galleon, Pristis swift,
With his courageous master makes first drift.
Next him Italian Mnestheus, from whom came
The race of Memmius: Gyas, next for fame,
Brought his huge bark, the fierce Chimaera named,
A town-like ship, with treble-oare banks framed,
Which Trojan lads with three-rankt oars did guide.
Next in's tall centaure Sergest forth did glide,
From whom the family of Sergeus rose,
In skie-like Scylla fierce Cloanthus goes,
Whence, Roman Cluent, thy great kindred grows.
Far off, in the sea, just against the foaming shore,
There lies a rock, which often is covered over
With swelling waves; when Western Corus blows,
And hides the stars, a calm it plainly shows:
And in still tides it is all a shelfie plain,
Where sea-birds, basking in the sun, remain.
Here grave Aeneas oaken boughs did place,
To show the mariners their pointed race:
How far to rove, and where to wind about:
And now each one his station chooses out.
Each champion's on his hatches richly clad.
Each youth on's head a poplar garland had;
His shoulders bare, 'nointed with glistring oil,
Sitting on's bench, his arms pressed to the toil
Of tugging oars: to th'wisht for sign addressed,
Whiles leaping joy and lumpish fear in breast
Makes imbred broils, striving for masterie,
Pricked with the spur of praise, by victory.
And now the trumpet sounds the shrill alarms,
Straight all the ships start out to sportive arms,
Hate least delay, loud sea-shouts dash the sky,
Th'oares slicing strokes make folding waves run by.
At once all furrows plow, the struggling streams
Over all the main gape wide, boil foamie streams,
With flaly-oares and slicing foredecks fierce,
Which through the bustling billows proudly pierce.
The furious duellizing chariots swift
Burst from their bounds, use not such headlong drift
In field careeres: nor horseman half so fast
Runs, jets, curvets, or shakes the loose reins cast
On's horses main, nor loudlier jerks his whip.
Then shouts, clapped hands, both from each shore and ship
And siding partners acclamations shrill,
The woods, fields, shores, with mighty clamours fill;
Whose quick redoubling echoes answer still.
Thus (first) flies out, before the rest, in the rout,
Courageous Gyas, whom Cloanthus stout
Follows at heels, with better oars indeed,
But slow-paced pinie barks make no great speed.
After them, nimble Pristis, Centaure, fly
With equal struglings for prioritie.
And now flies Pristis, Centaure gets the best,
Now both are ma^cht, and side to side addressed:
With even foredecks, they brinish billows plough:
And now their barges to the bounding bough,
And regulating rock nimbly draw nigh;
Which when in the floudie field victoriously
Gyas first spi'de, he to his master cried,
Menoetes, why to the right have thou so ply'de?
Hale in this way, and quickly shove to shore,
And to the left hand clifts wind in thine oar:
Let others move in the main (says he) for us.
But yet Menoetes too solicitous
Of wave-hid rocks, his foredeck winds to the deep,
Whiles Gyas still cries out, To land-ward keep,
Pull back (Menoetes) why do still go wrong?
And now behold, he spies Cloanthus strong
Close at his heels, and (next himself) the first,
Who stiffly 'twixt the rattling rocks being burst,
And the left inner way of Gyas ship;
Passing the best, and bounds, to sea does whip.
Hereat deep rage young Gyas did so flame,
That not without some chafing tears he came
To slow Menoetes, and (regardlesse quite
Of his mates welfare, or's own luster bright)
He casts him headlong over th'board into th'deep,
Himself as master at the stern does keep,
And cheeres his men, and steeres the helm to shore.
But from the bottom (now) Menoetes poor,
In sea-drencht clothes, floating above the flood,
Crawls up a rock, and on a dry cliffe stood,
Whiles on the shore the Trojans him deride,
And laughed to see him swim, and slip and slide,
And how his stomach did salt water spue.
Here the two hindmost gamsters gladly view,
A spur to prick them on, Sergestus stout,
And valiant Mnestheus nimbly cast about,
T'outstrip slow Gyas: Sergest gets prime place,
And to the rock to get, now rows a pace.
But he is not firmly first, though's barge go on,
For perking Pristis nose lies close upon
His foredeck: Mnestheus trudging to and fro
About the ship, his men cheeres on to row:
Now, now, Hectorean mates, row close (cries he)
For you from Troyes last lot I chose to be
My faithful followers: now power forth that might,
That courage brave, which yerst in Grecians sight
And Argine sturdie streams you have expressed.
I strive not to be first, nor get the best:
(Yet O!) but let them win and wear it well:
Whom thou, great Neptune, wilt, shall bear the bell.
Yet let it shame us to be last of all:
Win this (brave lads) let not that shame be fall.
Hereat they all most stiffely tug and pull,
And with their oars strong strokes, thick, quick, and full,
The brassy-poop they shake, no land they see,
They gape for breath, all over most sweatie be:
And friendly fortune grants wished victory.
For while Sergestus frets and fumes in mind,
Whiles, inmost, his foredeck to the rock's inclinde,
Unhappie by desire of nearest cut,
On unseen cliffes his vessel fiercely put;
The rusht on rocks a rattling noise do make,
While on sharp snags, cleft oars the foredeck struck.
The boatmen bustle up, with clamor stand,
And hooks and steel-tipt poles they snatch in hand,
Gathering their split oars floating on the waves,
Whiles Mnestheus happi^i'de, with bold out-braves
For's good success, with nimble oars, fair gales,
And full sea-room, from sea to shore safe sails.
Much like a dove soon startled from her nest,
That in some house or hollow roof took rest,
Flies forth to field, fluttering her wings full fast,
Quick through the transient air is nimbly past,
And with smooth swooping flight does glide along:
So Mnestheus, so his Pristis, from among
The utmost waves most clearly cuts his course,
And seems to fly with rushing furious force.
And first forsakes Sergestus struggling hard
Amongst the rocks, by shallows, shelfs, debarred
Of vain desired help, now taught to row
With broken oars, and now he does outgo
Young Gyas, and his huge Chimaera foiled,
Which soon gives way, being of his master spoiled.
And now at last none but Cloanth remains,
Whom to overtake he duplicates his pains,
Reduplicates loud clamours. All him cheer
With their skie-cuffing votes, as he draws near:
Those strive to keep their purchased praise and fame,
Vowing to loose their lives to keep the same:
Good luck spurs these; there is hope therefore they will win,
And evenly matched, they (sure) had victours bin,
Had not Cloanthus fallen to prayer devout,
And thus with heav'd-up hands to's Gods cried out;
Great Gods of sea, whose liquid soils I sail,
If I be victour I Will without all fail
On shore-built altars sacrifice a bull,
And your due debtor, forth his midriffe pull,
And pour on these salt seas, with wine good store.
This said, the sea-nymphs whom he did implore,
All heard him from the bottom of the main;
Phorci, Nereides, the Mermaides train:
Yea, old Portunus self, with his strong hand
Shoving his ship (like blast, bird-bolt) to land,
She flies full fast, and safe in the haven does stand.
Aeneas then (as custom) congregates
His troops, and by a crier demonstrates,
Cloanthus victour, crowns his brows with bays,
And gives large gifts, true trophies of great praise:
Three heifers to three ships, and wine great store,
And a large silver talent thence they bore.
But to the chieftains he chief prizes gave,
A golden mantle wrought about most brave
With fair Meander-like rich purple plates,
And crinkling folds, wherein art personates,
In curious work, the princely lively lad
Fair Ganimede, like a young hunter clad;
In woody I Would chasing the skipping dear
With dart in's hand, breathing with swift careere.
Whom (thus) in's hooky claws the eagle swift
Soaring swoops up, and quick to the sky does lift.
His guardians grave to heaven heave hands in vain,
And all his dogs bark at the clouds amain.
But him, whose worth deserved the second place,
He with a rich-wrought coat of arms did grace,
Set with gold hooks, which he victoriously
From Demoleus wan, in Troy, hard by
Swift Simois: this he bestows most free,
A grace, a guard to him in arms to be.
Whose ponderous weight two servants scarce could bear,
But Demoleus did it easily wear,
And with it chased the Trojans in great fear.
His third gifts were two cauldrons brave of brass,
And silver bowls, whose workmanship did pass,
For graven figures fair. Thus all rewarded,
All pleased with prizes to their worths afforded,
Their fronts with roseall headbands bound about,
Along they pass, and passing spied out
Sergestes, whose best skill and utmost strength,
Hardly the hard rocks made him 'scape at length,
His honor sharelesse ship full fraught with shame,
His oars all lost, one rank of rowers lame.
Much like a snake which cross the way does lie,
Crushed by a wheel suddenly passing by:
Or by a passenger bruised with a stone,
Sore battered and half killed, there left alone;
Long wrigling wreaths does force, in vain to fly,
One half stares up, and puts forth furiously
Its hissing neck: the other half bruised withholds,
And in close knots and wreaths its members folds:
With such weak work his slow ship forward past,
Yet still sailed on, and got to the haven at last.
Aeneas glad to see his ship and mates
Comen safe to shore, Sergestus decorates
With promised prize, also a maiden fair,
Skillful to spin, of Cretian lineage rare,
And 'twixt her paps of sucking twins a pair.
These sea-sports finished, good Aeneas went
Into a grassie mead, on all sides pent
With groves and craggy banks, in the midst of it
A circled plain, for theater most fit;
Where he, with many thousand gallants tended,
A rare erected throne prince-like ascended.
Here all that could most swiftly run a race,
Invited were, with praises, prizes grace:
VVhereat Sicilians, Trojans, all about,
Euryalus and Nisus first in the rout,
Do thither flock: Euryalus most fair,
A lovely lively youth; and Nisus rare,
An honest modest lad: next comes apace
Princely Diores, of king Pri^^s race:
After him Salius came, and Patr^n good:
The One of Epire, the others untainted blood
Sprang from Tegeus. Then two striplings came,
Panopes and Helymus, of much fame
For gallant huntsmen, peers to old Acest:
And many more whom fame has not expressed.
To whom in the midst of them Aeneas said;
Hear me, brave youths, be sure, and well apaid*
Not one of all this rout but gifts shall have.
I Will give two glistring Cretian arrows brave,
Headed with steel, a silver damaskt bill:
You all with equal gifts reward I will;
Save the three chief, who three choice palms shall have,
Their heads adorned with olive-branches brave.
A gallant horse with trappings I Will bestow
Upon the first: and on the next also
An Amazonian quiver, furnished fair
With Thracian shafts, hung at a belt most rare,
And richly wrought with gold, and buttened fast
With a rich stone: The third reward and last,
Shall be a Grecian helmet. This being said,
They chose their stations, and the sign being made,
They suddenly and swiftly forth do fly,
Most like a furious storm, to the goal they hie,
And first most fast, leaving them all behind,
Runs nimble Nisus, swifter then the vvinde,
Or flashy lightning. And to him the next
Ran Salius swift, but with large distance 'twixt.
Euryalus was third, but with some space,
Whom Helymus pursued with rapid race.
By whom, behold, Diores fiercely flies,
And foot by foot close at his shoulders lies,
And if enough space for the race remain,
Is like, the best from all the rest to gain.
And now vvell-nigh they to the goal were got,
And weary all, when Nisus with hard lot,
(The grass made slippery with an heifers blood,
Which had been slain there, and congealed stood)
Suddenly slipped, just as he skipt for joy
Of hoped prize, and could not right employ
His staggering feet, but fell flat on the flore,
Upon the slimy mud and sacred gore:
Yet mindful of the love he ever bore
Euryalus, he Salius does oppose,
Trips up his heels, just as himself up rose.
Who grovelling on the sand, Euryalus
Starts forward, and by's friend, victorious,
Gat the prime place, with acclamations high,
And joyful shouts, and before them all does fly.
After whom Helym hastes; and in third race
Diores ran. Here in the open face
And huge concourse of plebeians and of peers,
Supplanted Salius mighty clamours reares,
And claims his prize, forced from him by deceit.
But bashful tears and partial favor great,
And virtue in fair forms most gracious,
Plead and prevail for young E^ryal^s:
Diores also with loud exclamation
Craves his reward, and fears his fames frustration,
In the last prize, if Salius have the first.
But grave Aeneas soon his fear off burst,
And says, Brave youths, your prizes are your own,
Your promised palms shall altered be by none:
Yet let me moan my innocent friends fate.
This said, his Salius he did munerate
With a fair lions skin, with hair most rough,
And goldy claws: which Nisus took in s^uffe,
And said; If vanquished shall be thus rewarded,
If foiled be favored; what shall be afforded?
What proper prize to Nisus will you yield,
Who did deserve first honor of the field,
Had not fierce fate, as Salius, thwarted me?
And at these words he stoutly lets them see
His dirt-bedawbed clothes, besmeared face.
Which made Aeneas loudly laugh apace.
Then straight he called for the stately targe,
Which Didymaon made, both rich and large,
Which once the Greeks to Neptune consecrated,
And was hung up: And then remunerated
The noble youth with that most noble prize.
The race thus run, the palms disposed likewise,
Now says Aeneas, If there is any here
Strong and courageous, let him now appear,
And his club-armed arms advance and lift;
To whom he did allot a twofold gift.
The conqueror awarded was to have
A bull aray'd with gold and garland^ brave:
The conquered, a gallant h^^m and sword,
To him well beat^n comfort to afford.
Delay laid by, Dares dar^s first come forth,
A mighty man, whom for his strength and worth
The people much applaud: for single h^
Antagonist to Paris used to be.
And he victorious Buten gigantine,
(Who from B^bryoian Amycus great line
Derived his race) him he at Hectors grave
Did fell and foil, and's curelesse death-wound gave.
Such dauntlesse Dares him in the forefront shows,
Advancing both his big arms, as he goes,
And shoulders broad, jerking the air with blows.
His like they look for, but not one they find
In all the troops, to fight with him inclined,
Or take the club in hand triumphant then,
Hoping to bear the prize from all the men,
Placed at Aeneas feet, scorning delays,
The bulls horn held in's left hand, thus he says;
Great Goddess son, if none dares fight the field,
What means this stay? why to me don't you yield
The prize? and bid me bear the palms away?
And all the Trojan troops the same did say.
Then grave Acestes calls Entellus great,
Who next him sat on a green grassy seat,
And chides him thus; Entellus, once esteemed
The stoutest of our peers, in vain so deemed,
Can thou be patient, and without one blow
Suffer such palms so easily hence to go?
Where Is now great Eryx, our warre-master stout,
Vainly renowned? where is thy fame, spread out
Through Sicilie? and house adorning spoils?
To whom he said; No love of land recoiles
In me, nor thirst of fame, enforced by fears:
But my chill blood and dull declining years,
Whereby my youthful powers exhausted be.
But were it now as it was once with me,
And as it is with this Braggadocia bold,
Were I so young again, naught should withold
Me from the fight, no prize should prick me on,
No beauteous bull; gifts I Would not stand upon.
This said, two clubs he threw down in their sight,
Heavy and huge, wherewith in such like fight,
Fierce Eryx used to combat with strong hand.
At sight whereof amazed they all did stand,
To see them stuffed with lead, and lined besides
With iron plates, covered with seven bulls hides.
Amongst the rest Dares being damped most,
Stiffely refused them (maugre former boast)
Yea great Aeneas poysed with his hands
Their weight, and up and down rolled their huge bands*
Whereat the aged champion thus did say;
What if you all had seen that furious fray
Fought in these parts, with great Alcides arms,
And these our clubs? wherewith in fierce alarms
Thy kinsman Eryx formerly had fought,
Stained still thou see with blood and brains dashed out.
Wherewith he haughty Hercules withstood:
Which I my self have used in youthful blood;
When yet gray hairs in emulous old age
Did not my head o'respread, nor valor swage.
But if Troyes Dares these our arms deny,
And good Aeneas and Acest complie
Me to excuse, who me first moved thereto;
Let Us match our weapons, I remit to you
Eryx his clubs: fear not, and lay you by
Your Trojan clubs. This said, immediately
He doffs his double coat from's shoulders wide,
And his huge bodies bulk: all present eyed
His mighty bones, strong sinews naked be:
Thus giant-like, most tall and stout stood he.
Then grave Aeneas equal clubs chose out,
And vvell-mach't weapons; bound their hands about.
Straight hand to hand, and foot to foot both stand,
And fearelesse, each aloft lifts up his hand,
And banging blows make each ones head bend back:
Fiercely they fight, and each gives thwack for thwack.
He nimbler skips about in youthful heat;
This keeps his standing with his limbs most great:
Yet moves his trembling legs, but faint and slow;
And like one sick, he thick does breathe and blow.
Thus (though in vain) with might and main they fight,
With toyling, foiling cuffes each other smite,
And beat and bang about each others hides,
And make redoubled thwacks sound on their sides:
About their ears their hasty hands do fly,
Whose thumps their chaps make chatter gnashingly.
Thus great Entellus stiffely stands it out,
With watchful eyes observes the blows about,
And viewing, voids* Dares industriously,
Like one which scales a town with engines high,
Or with stout troops begirt, a castle strong,
Now this way, that way, every way does long
By fraud or fierce assaults a breach to make:
But all in vain he all this toil does take.
For strong Entellus roused up does lift
Aloft his rough right hand, which Dares swift
Foresees, and shuns the furious falling blow,
And with a nimble skip avoids it so.
Whereby Entellus, frustrate, beats the wind,
Whose mark thus mist, his heavy corpse inclinde,
Prone to the earth with fury of the stroke,
Much like a hollow, great, and o're-grown oak
In Erymanth or Ida's wood most great,
Even by the roots o'returned from its seat.
The Trojans and Trinacrian lads in zeal
Start up hereat, and raise a clamorous peal:
Acestes first to's fallen old friend does hie,
Grieves, gets him up. The old champion speedily
Reared, nothing feared with this his sudden fall,
Flies to the fight more fierce, rage feeds his gall.
Disgrace gives fire to force, and foreknown might:
And fiercely he does Dares headlong smite,
And bang about the field with both his hands,
Redoubling boystrous blows; nor quiet stands,
Nor takes least rest: but as thick showers of hail
With rattling noise do houses tops assail:
Even so this chafing champion thrashes out
With both his hands young Dares stomach stout.
Then grave Aeneas hastens to allay
Entellus furious rage, his wrath to stay,
And ends the fight, gives tired Dares rest,
And comfort in kind words he thus expressed:
Unfortunate! what phrenzie blindes thy mind?
Feel'st thou not mightier force and fates unkind?
Submit to God. This said, the combat ended,
But him (alas!) his faithful mates attended,
Dragging his feeble feet, and to and fro
His weak head dangling, vomiting also
Much gore-bloud from his mouth, his teeth dashed out,
Thus to the ships they bore him from the rout:
Bidden to take the sword and helm away,
Entellus had the praise and prize of the day.
He victour, vanting of his bull for joy,
Says thus, Fair prince, and you rare troops of Troy,
Ye now may see what strength my young years had,
And how ye saved Dares from death most sad.
This said, against the bull, his prize he stands,
Ties it, and takes his club in both his hands,
And 'twixt the horns gives it a blow so fierce,
As made the broken bones the brains to pierce.
The beast is slain, lies grovelling on the ground.
Whereat these words he vents from's heart profound:
This fitter soul, then Dares death, to thee
Great Eryx, I being victour, offer free,
And now my club and art relinquisht be.
Then straight, Aeneas those that would invites
To shooting games, and them with gifts incites:
In Sergests ship erects a mighty mast.
To the top whereof he ties a pigeon fast,
Hung by a dangling rope, their mark, or white.
The archers come, and int' a helmet bright
The lots are cast, and with a joyful voice,
Hippoc'on had the first affected choice.
Whom Mnestheus follows next, at sea fight best;
Mnestheus his brows with olive-branches dressed.
The third Eurytion was, thy brother kind,
Rare Pandarus; who biddden, with brave mind
Did first, once charged the truce to terminate,
Through thickest Greeks thy dart make penetrate.
The last and lowest in the harnesse-cap,
Fell out to be noble Acestes hap;
Even he himself would venture valiantly
With those brave sparks this shooting-task to try.
Then with stiff strength they bend their crooked bows,
And each for's use shafts from his quiver choose.
Hippoc'on first made from his clanging string
His arrow cut the air, and flying, sing;
And singing, pierce, and stick fast in the mast.
The mast was shook, the fluttering foul aghast,
And through them all loud acclamations past.
Next Mnestheus stout stood with his bow full bent,
His eye and arrow aim at high intent.
But yet (good man) he could not hit the white,
And yet the coard he did in sunder smite,
Wherewith the dove by's feet was tied to the mast:
Straight with the wind through the air the dove flies fast.
Eurytion then already ready pressed
With bow and shaft, set to, to shoot addressed,
His brother invocates for aid auspicious:
In the open air spies the dove most conspicuous,
Cheerfully sporting with her wings for joy,
Whom his quick shaft did nimbly pierce, destroy.
Under a cloud the dove in the air thus dead,
Falls down, and fallen, the shot-shaft rendered.
Acestes only fails of's palms desert,
Yet into the air he shot his whisling dart,
Proud of his expert art, and clanging bow.
But here behold, a most prodigious show
And anxious augurie came soon in sight,
As the strange issue did demonstrate right,
And omens great which frighting prophets write.
For in the clear air the flying dart did flame,
Which gliding on, a fire consumes the same,
And wastes in the fanning winds: just as we see
The falling stars, when as they gliding be,
To bear long fiery streams. Amazed they stand,
Trinacrians, Trojans, lift up heart and hand:
And wise Aeneas marks the omen right,
And sweet Acestes greets with great delight,
Loads him with love-gifts, and (thus) to him said;
Receive, grave sir (for thee great Jove has made
By this strange sign, though prizelesse, worthy praise)
Receive this gift, in old Anchises days,
Bestowed on him by Cisseus king of Thrace,
A pledge of his great love and friendly grace,
A goblet great, engraven with figures fair.
This said, he binds his brows with garlands rare,
And does Acest prime conqueror declare.
Nor did Eurytion kind this honor grudge,
Though he alone (as all might justly judge)
The pigeon felled from sky: The next reward
He therefore had, for he 'twas cut the coard:
He had the last, whose dart the mast did cleave.
But brave Aeneas, e're the sport they leave,
Epitides Ascanius guardian there
And mate, he calls, and whispers in his ear,
And says, Go quick, bid my son come away
(If all the childrens troops be in array,
And horse-race ready) with his bands to go
Unto his grandsire, and in Martial show
To show himself: Aeneas self mean space
Commands the folk, flocking about the place,
To gather in a ring, the plain to clear.
And now the lively striplings all draw near
Before their fathers, on bright bridled steeds,
Which in the Trojans and Trinacrians breeds
Great admiration, exultation great.
All had their hair (as custom was) cut neat,
And helmets on their heads: in's hand each kept
A pair of horny spears with steel well tipped.
Some at their backs wore quivers, dainty, light,
About their necks: gold chains their breasts bedight.
Three coronets of horse three captains have,
Twelve children glistring in their arms most brave,
Attending them, and masters, them to guide;
One brave battalion, which with Martial pride
Thy noble son Polites, (Priam fair)
Who did his kingly grandsires surname bear,
And must the bounds of Italy advance;
Who on a stately Thracian steed did prance,
All partly colour'dwith fair specks o^ white,
His forefeet so, his proud head born upright,
A white star on his brow, a comely sight.
Another band young Atys lively led:
From whom the Roman Atyan race was spread:
Young Atys, to Iulus young most dear.
The last and best for beauty without peer,
Was fair Iulus, on a courser brave
Of Carthage, which to him queen Dido gave,
A sign and symbol of her love to him;
The rest being grave Acestes yonkers trim,
Come on Trinacrian steeds. The Trojan rout
Receive them, full of fame-affecting doubt,
With great applause, and taking great delight
In sweet conceit of grave ancestors sight.
Their stations (now) with joy all viewed about,
And much affected with this friendly rout.
Epitides seeing them all addressed,
With a loud lash and sound the sign expressed.
Straight all break out, and three by three disperse,
And back again revoked their reverse:
And at there breasts their nimble spears they set,
Fetching careeres, and thence cross courses met:
And with cross distance fetch cross compass round,
Rushing on adverse rings, like war profound
In hottest skirmish; now turn backs to flight.
VVhereat enraged, their darts they at them smite;
And yet (anon) in peaceful wise shake hands.
Much like the Laborynthick maze which stands
In Creet, enclosed with walls most intricate,
With thousand anxious ways to ambulate,
Whose unfound paths do weary walkers tire,
And in and out, Meanders all admire:
Even so the Trojan striplings skip about,
And flights and fights by sporting in and out
Neatly contrive: like Dolphins in the main,
Whose frisks and skips much sport in the waves maintain.
These courses, combats, and this custom rare,
Ascanius first did found, and new repair,
When spacious Alba he with walls did frame,
And taught old Rome to celebrate the same:
As he a child, as Trojan lads had shown,
The ancient Albanes they to theirs made known.
This pretty sport from them the Romans old,
Long after did forefathers honor hold:
This children (now) call Troy, Trojan troops name.
And thus far (now) unto his fathers fame,
These pleasant sports performed and celebrated,
Here fortune her fair face first transmutated.
For whiles they sport about his fathers tomb,
Juno send Iris in a pelting fume,
Unto the Trojan fleets, and gives her wind,
Much moved, and (still) old grudges born in mind,
Iris in the rain-bows thousand colors speeds,
Unseen of any, virgin-like proceeds
With expeditious haste, huge troops does meet,
Sees the forsaken shores, ports, naked fleet.
But yet the Trojan wives far off did keep
In private banks, and for the loss did weep
Of old Anchises; weeping as they stood,
They all beheld the mighty ocean flood,
Crying, Alas! what sea-toiles yet remain
To us tired souls; all sighing, in one strain
Wishing a city, loathing more sea-pain.
Dame Iris amongst them slilie thrusts in place,
Suspectlesse of abuse, her Goddess face,
Gesture and vesture, from her laid aside,
She Is now Beroe, Doryclus old bride,
Mother of children, late of note and fame:
And thus amongst them, like a Trojan dame,
Speaks to the Trojan wives: O woeful we,
Whom Grecian power might not massacred see
In bloody war under the walls of Troy!
Unhappie nation! kept from more annoy.
This now is the seventh year since our land was lost,
Since we strange seas, lands, rocks, and sands have crossed,
And stormy stars have escaped, whiles through vast streams
And tumbling waves, we follow flying dreams;
We fly to fleeting Italy: yet here
Our kinsman Eryx borders do us cheer,
And kind Acest^s. Who Will us then deny
T'inhabit here, a town to edify?
O country, O in vain saved deities!
Shall no town yet old Troy rememorize?
O shall I never Hectorean rivers see?
No Xanthus, Si^ois? no? come on with me,
With me come burn these ships inauspicate:
For I Cassandra's ghost in sleep saw late;
Who gave me these incendiarie brands,
And said, Here seek your Troy, here in these lands
Fix your abode: now is time the work to ply,
Why stay we, since we see so great a tie?
Four flaming altars unto Neptune great,
And fates themselves give fire, and valors heat.
Thus speaking, she ran first, and snatched a brand
Of furious fire, which flaming in her hand,
Into the fleet she flang it furiously:
The Trojan wives much startled were hereby,
And 'maz'd in mind: whereat one amongst the rest,
Grave Pyrgo, Priams nurse, who had expressed
Much loyalty and love to's children dear,
Said, Trust me (matrons) I dare boldly swear
This is not Beroe, our late neighbors wife:
For I see signs of sacred Godhead rise:
Mark you her glistering eyes, her spirit divine,
Her looks, her voice, her state and gate most fine:
And I my self left Bero^ sick of late,
Much grieved, that she was so unfortunate
Not to be present, horrors due to have paid
To old Anchis^s tomb. This though she said,
Yet at the first the women doubtful be,
As blind in eyes as mind, their ships to see,
And held with deep desire of this lands rest,
And fate-assigned realms, which should b^ best.
But when they saw the winged Godd^ss^ fli^,
And flying cut the cloudie bow in sky,
Provoked by this prodigious accident,
With rage transpo^ted, they loud clamo^rs vent,
And fires from ^orth the^r (...) and chi^^eys snatch:
Some the altars tear, some boughs and br^n^hes catch,
And ought combus^ible, and fir^brands throw
Into their ships: Vulcan the flame does blow
Of fierce unbridled spoil on planks and ^are^,
Hatches and painted decks. At these uproares
Eumelus posteth to Anchises grave,
To bear sad tidings to those bands most brave,
Of this combustion: and the gamesters spy
Black smoke and sparkling flames fly up to the sky.
And as first horse-careeres Ascanius led,
So fiercely first to th'troubled tents he fled:
Nor could the m^zed masters make him stay,
But on he comes, and thus to them does say;
O what strange wrath is this? what mean ye now,
O wretched women? against whom do ye vow
This mischief great? Here is no adverse foe,
No Grecian t^nts; your hopes you will burn up so.
O see me your Ascanius, your delight!
Whereat he pulls off's helmet in their sight,
Wherewith in field his Martial sports he plied:
To whom Aeneas, all the Trojans hy'de.
But all the wives pursued with fear and dread,
To the woods and groves all straglingly were fled,
And michingly to caves and rocks they run,
Hating the light; shamed of their work begun:
And changed in mind, in grief their friends they know,
And hate great Juno, cause of all this woe.
But what of this? hereby they quench no fire,
For flames increase with most represselesse ire,
And pitch and ^ow, kindling a smoothering heat,
Sly fires increase, and raise combustion great.
Through the ships great bulks, nor by the peers best power,
Or force of floods, do flames cease to devour.
Then good Aeneas rent his clothes with grief,
With stretcht-out hands implores the Gods relief.
And thus he prays* Great Jove, if Trojans all
Thou have not yet quite cast off, left to thrall:
If long devotion helps men's miseries,
O free our fleet from flame-calamities:
And now from ruin raise Troyes tottering state,
Or else (great sire) if it be my due fate,
Strike me (all left) to death with lightning fierce,
And let thy hand my heart profoundly pierce.
Scarce had he spoke, when mighty showers of rain
Most thick, most quick, came powdring down amain:
A mighty storm, and rattling roaring thunder,
Making earths most obdurate creatures wonder:
All over the sky the furious tempest grows,
And plenteous streams into the vessels throws,
Which washed the half-burnt wood, stints all the flame,
All Is ships but four being saved by the same.
But grave Aeneas dampt with this dire chance,
His thoughts now here now there in mind do glance;
Musing, unmindfull of the fates decree,
Whether 'twere best in Sicil still to be,
Or bend his courses now for Italy.
Then aged Nautes, whom most expertly
Tritonian Pallas made an artist rare,
Resolves him thus; both what great Juno fair
Enraged would act, and destinies dispose,
He kindly thus to Aeneas does disclose:
Fair Goddess son, where fates us call, re-call,
Thither let us go, what ever us befall:
Fortune by sufferance best is overthrown.
Trojan Acestes is thy kinsman known,
Make him of counsel with thee, to him cleave,
Thy burnt-ships surplusage of people leave
Unto his care. Such as thy high designs
Do disaffect, whose heart to ease inclines,
Feeble old men, sea-tyred maids and wives,
All that are faint, and fearful of their lives,
Select them out, a town here let them frame,
And, from Acestes, it Acesta name.
Encouraged thus by his grave friends advise,
Yet still one care does on another rise,
And now nights curtain black the skies did vail,
When from the heavens his fathers image pale,
Anchises ghost, came down, and suddenly
Said thus to him; Dear son, to me more nigh,
More dear then life, (whiles life with me did last)
Dear son, on various Troy-fates long time cast;
I come to thee from Jove, who quenched the flame
Of thy fired fleet, pitying thee in the same.
Obey old Nautes wholesome exhortations,
And take with thee in thy perambulations
To Italy, choice youths of courage stout:
For with fierce people thou must fight it out,
A nation hard to tame. Yet before this,
Thou must descend the dungeons dark of Dis:
Yea thou, dear son, must pass Avernus lake
To come to me: yet no abode I make
In torturing Tartar, or in darkness sad:
But in Elysium, where delights make glad
Sweet troops of sacred souls: hither, I say,
Fair Sibyll shall thee by much blood convay
Of sacrificed black beasts. Whence thou shall know
Thy city sought, and race from thee to flow.
And now farewell, moist midnight hastes away,
Sols puffing steeds begin to breath out day.
This said, like smoke he flies in the fleeting sky.
To whom Aeneas; Whither do thou fly?
Why hastes thou hence? From whom do thou take flight?
Or, who does thee from our embraces fright?
Which spoke, he stirs the embers, rakt up fire,
And worships with a reverend hearts desire
His Trojan Gods, and to them consecrates
Pure flower and frankincense. Then calls his mates,
But chiefly grave Acestes speedily,
And Jove's command to them does signify,
And his dear fathers charge, what he designed,
And now resolved. Whereto Acest inclined.
And counsel straight they take, and measure forth
Towns for their wives, and men of meanest worth,
Whose most ignoble minds regard not fame.
But they new sailing barks begin to frame,
And half-burnt ship-planks, oars and ropes repair;
In number, few; in war, for service rare.
Meanwhile Aeneas with a plough sets out
The cities scope, 'points houses round about:
Here Iliums towers, there he sets Troyes fair gates:
Thus his new realm Acest congratulates.
Then courts and laws he gives the fathers grave,
And near the stars, on Eryx high would have
A temple founded unto Venus fair,
A sacred grove, and priest, whose special care
Should only be, Anchises tomb to tend:
And now the nations nine days feast had end;
And on their altars offerings all were made,
And fanning gales upon the ocean played,
And f^equent puffing blasts to sea invite.
Then on the shore at their departing sight,
Full floods of tears are shed, and night and day
In mutual kind embraces still they stay.
And now those wives, those folk effeminate,
To whom the sight of sea was frightfull late,
That toil intolerable; now most fain
Away they would to sea, all toil sustain.
Whom good Aeneas with kind words does cheer,
And weeping leaves to Acest his kinsman dear.
To Eryx then three calves he bids them kill,
And to the storms a lamb he offer will.
Bids them the cables loose, and order right,
Himself with olive-boughs his head bedight,
In's hand a bowl, aloof on shipboard stood,
Flasht out pure wines, spread entralls on the flood.
A whisking gale puffs on them as they sail:
His men row close, and thrash the floods with flail*
Meanwhile fair Venus, full of tender care,
To Neptune speaks, does thus her plaints declare:
Fierce Juno's wrath, and quenchlesse indignation*
Force me (great Neptune) to pressed supplication.
Which rage of hers no length of time, or days,
Nor piety or pity stops or stays:
Nor Jove's command, or fates decree can still
Her most unbrideled rage: nor Troyes great ill,
Bespoil'd of towns and nation, with strange spite,
Can satisfy, but with all rancourous might
She plagues poor waste Troyes (as yet) remains;
Yea their dead bones and ashes she disdains.
The cause of so great wrath her self can tell,
And how she lately raised, thou know it well,
Strange sudden storms over all the Libyan seas,
Confounding heaven and sea with rough disease:
All by her friend Aeolus puffs most vain,
All this she durst in thy vast realm, the main.
Behold, beside the Trojan wives (foul fact!)
With rage enflamed, foulely (by her compact)
Fired their fleet, forced them, their ships decayed,
In a strange land to be detained and stayed.
This then remains; I pray thee let them sail
Thy vvatrie soil in safety, with smooth gale
Let them arive where Tybers stream does flow:
If our desires thou grant, if fates also
Grant us our promised realms, then speak, I pray.
Then Neptune, seas great sovereign, thus did say;
Fair Venus, thou may in my bounds be bold,
For thence thou do thy blood and lineage hold:
I always also have been kind to thine,
And heavens and seas joint wrath, which did combine,
And fury fierce, I have restrained for thee,
Nor have I ( Xanth and Simois witness be)
Of thine Aeneas had less care on land:
But when Achilles fierce with furious hand
Did prosecute and execute with might
Troyes troops, and from safe vvalls forced them to flight;
When thousands dead did fall, when floods did groan,
Filled with killed bodies; when no way was known
For Xanthus course to sea, being damned with dead:
I then in misty clouds quite covered
Aeneas, cha^ed by Achilles strong,
When fates and force left him to hostile vvrong:
Even then when I could well have found in heart,
Mine own built faithless Troy quite to subvert.
Then fear not, for I have the same mind still:
He and they all desired, shall safely fill
Avernus port: one only shall be drowned,
Who sought for in the sea, shall not be found:
His life the rest shall ransom. Thus most kind
He strokes and cheeres the Goddes^e cheerful mind,
Then yokes his horses to his chariots drift,
And gives the foamy reins to's coursers swift,
The bridle laid most loose: and thus he slides
In his blew chariot over the surging tides:
Down wind the waves, ^ow the rough billows bend,
Under his thundering wheels clouds quick descend.
Then various troops appear above the main,
Leviathans most huge, old Glaucus train,
Mankind Palaemon, nimble Tritons thick,
And foamy Phorcus his attendants quick.
The left hand Thetis, and the Mermaids keep,
Nisaee, Spio, all sea-nymphs that sleep,
And love to live in waves. Aeneas here
His drooping thoughts with joy does now re-cheare,
And bids his men their masts to raise with speed,
To stretch their sails. Whereto they all proceed,
Their feet and force, their hands and heart conjoyn
To the larboard, or to the starboard to incline:
Their sail-yards then they wind, unwinde again:
All things concur to make them sail amain.
But primely Palinurus guides them all:
All bend their course to his least beck or call.
And now was midnight near, when all took rest,
Spread on hard hatches thus, from toyling ceast;
When as soft sleeps slipped down from starrie skies,
And glancing through the aires darkness way discries
To pitch on thee, poor harmless Palinure,
On thee to force sad sleep who sat'st secure,
Presenting to thee thy friend Phorbas face,
And speaking thus to thee in dreaming case;
See Iasian Palinure, the very tide
Makes thy ship sail, fair gales it friendly guide.
Here Is time to rest, lay down thy head and sleep,
And I for thee thy stern will careful keep.
To whom with drowsy eyes says Palinure;
Would thou me make in calmie seas secure?
And in fair streams fallacious dreams to trust?
And great Aeneas on false blasts to thrust?
With skies fair face have I so often been gulled?
For this? This said, his helm more close he pulled,
Keeps fast his hold, on's stars fast fixed his eyes.
But now behold, this God of sleep from skies
Whisks a wet branch of soporiferous dew,
Whose Stygian strength he over his eyebrows threw:
Which soon his rolling eyes with sleep o'relaid.
Whose first loose lids on sudden nod scarce made,
When to himself the helm too closely stayed,
He pulls the poop aside, the rudder brast,
And overboard in the sea he is headlong cast,
Crying for help unto his mates in vain,
And then this sleep-god flies to the skies again.
The fleet, for all this, sails in safety
By Neptunes promise, in security.
And now Sirenes rigid rocks drew near,
Which with huge heaps of bones did white appear:
And then far off the rocks rough roares they heard,
When grave Aeneas from his sleep up-rear'd,
Perceived their master lost, the fleet to stray,
Himself by night the pilots part did play,
Lamenting much his old dear friends decay.
Ah too too credulous of sea and sky!
Dear Palinure in unknown sands must lie.
An end of the fifth book of Virgils Aeneids.
THE ARGUMENT of the sixth book.
Aeneas safe at Cuma's lands,
By Sibyll strange things understands:
Misenus found, and buried there,
From whom the hill its name does bear.
The Gods appeased, a branch of gold
He bears along: His course does hold,
By Sibyls guide, to Avernus lake;
Knows Palmure, great care does take
To comfort Dido, there being found.
Sees Deiphobus cruel wound.
Sibyll him shows the pains of hell,
Anchises meets him, knows him well.
Rare things of Rome to him relates:
Which done, he thence returns to's mates.
THose weeping words so uttered, swift he sails,
And gets to Cumas coasts with prosperous gales.
Foredecks they wind from sea, sharp anchours tie
Their settled ships, which 'bout the shores do lie:
Out leap their nimble youth, with high desire
Of Latium land. Some seek for sparks of fire
Hid in hard flints; some range the woods about,
The wilde-beasts dens, fresh springs and floods find out*
But good Aeneas to the towers did hie,
Where great Apollo has supremacy,
The dungeon dark and cells of Sibyll grave,
To whom a heart and mind Apollo gave
Inspired with wisdom, future things to know;
Then to Diana's groves, guilt rooms, they go.
Fame says, when Daedalus from Creet did fly
On wax-swift wings, he boldly flew in the sky,
To the cold North gliding by uncouth way,
On Cumas turrets he at last did stay.
Here first ariving safe, great Phoebus, he
Offered his wings, built temples fair to thee.
Upon whose gates Androgeus death does stand:
And how (oh woe!) the Athenians by command
Seven sons and daughters year by year did slay:
There pots for drawing lots behold we may.
Above the sea, their Candy countrey's seen,
And there was portrayed Pasiphae the queen:
And by her stood her loathsome love, a bull;
With whom by art her lust was served at full:
Whose monstrous mixture foulely did produce
A two-form'd Minotaure, of base abuse,
A monstrous monument. That house was here,
Whose Labyrinthick labor did appear
In its amazing maze. But Daedalus
Pitying the queens love most notorious,
Found out the houses sleights; Meanders strange,
Led by a thread, through all the crooks did range.
And thou, O Icarus, had had great share
(Had not grief hindered) in this work so rare:
Twice he assayed thy fate in gold to paint,
And twice in the work thy fathers hand did faint.
Yea all those famous facts they had survay'd,
Had not Achates, sent before, them stayed,
And with him Deiphobe brought, no less,
Apollo's and Diana's Prophetess:
Who thus says to the king; This time requires
No pleasing spectacles to the eyes desires:
But now out of thy droves seven heifers fair
Go sacrifice, and seven good sheep prepare,
According to old wont. This to him said,
Her holy hests Aeneas straight obeyed.
The Trojans then she to the huge temple calls,
Into a cave cut out of the mighty walls
Of Cumas mount: an hundred ways most wide
Leading thereto, an hundred doors beside,
Where hundred voices roar Sibylls replies.
To the porch they came, when as the virgin wise
Says, Now Is the time the fates decrees to know:
Here Is God, ah see the God! who saying so,
Her visage straight was changed at the door,
And her complexion was not as before:
Her hair did stare, her heart did pant with fear,
Strange ecstasies her swelling thoughts did rear;
She greater personage seems, no voice humane
She seems to have, since she did near remain
Unto the Gods great power, therewith inspired:
And stand'st thou still (says she) when prayer's required,
Trojan Aeneas? stand'st thou still, I say?
Shall not these fearful rooms (till thou do pray)
Open their wide mouths? This having said, she ceast.
Straight on the Trojans trembling fear increast.
Then thus the king humbly did supplicate;
Great Phoebus, who do still commiserate
Troyes tedious toiles, who Paris hand did guide,
And made his shaft to pierce Achilles side;
By whom so many land-enclosing seas
I entered have, and passed with sweet ease;
And through most far remote Moroco lands,
Through many deep and dangerous quicksands;
And now at last in shrinking Italy
Have safe ariv'd, and hitherto past by
The various fortunes which have us still tended:
O now it is time, your indignation ended,
Great Gods and Goddesses, whom Ilium brave,
And glorious Dardan much provoked have:
And thou, most sacred priest, which do foresee
Future events, grant (for I ask of thee
But kingdoms due by destinies consent)
Us Trojans rest in Latiums continent,
And to Troyes wandering Gods, who with us went.
Then I Will to Phoebus and Diana raise
Fair marble temples, and to Apollo's praise
Make days of triumphs; and within our state,
Thee as our God, we all will venerate.
And here thine anxious oracles I Will place,
Thy secret sacred rhymes, my nations grace.
To thee, fair priest, choice men I Will consecrate;
Only in leaves do not thy rhymes relate,
Lest puffed with winds, they fluttering fly away.
And thus he ends; Speak thou thy self, I pray.
But here the priest pelting impatiently,
Wrathfully raged at Phoebus deity
Within the cave: if she could from her breast
Shake off the Gods great power, which her suppressed,
And which so much the more did curb and tame
Her madding mouth, her fierce heart fitly frame.
And now the temples hundred mighty doors
Open of themselves, by orizons; the roares
Of Sibylls answers thus the air do beat;
O thou who have escapt seas dangers great!
Yet still on land far greater thee attend.
The Trojans shall (then let this care here end)
Into Lavinus realms arive, but there
They Will soon repent: wars, wars full fraught with fear,
And Tyber foaming streams of blood I see.
Ah Simois and Xanthus there shall be,
And second Grecian camps: there thou shall find
A new Achilles of as fierce a mind,
Born of a Goddess great: yea Juno fierce
Will still the Trojans with much anguish pierce.
When thou in straits shall be, what nations great,
What Latian towns shall not thou lowly entreat?
A another harbored wife will cause this smart,
A foreign wedlock on the Trojans part.
Yet shrink not for these ills, but stouter be:
For the first hope (thou wilt scarcely credit me)
Of comfort, wherewith fortune will thee crown,
Shall surely issue from a Grecian town.
Thus from her cell Cumaean Sibyll sings
Ambiguous ambages, the cloister rings
With the shrill sound thereof, in most dark strains
Wrapping up truths with such o'reruling rains,
Apollo's spurs her furious stirs restrains.
As soon as ere her rage began to cease,
And her mad mouth began to be at peace,
Noble Aeneas thus begins to say;
Fair virgin, no new stirs thou do display,
No strange unheard of change, unknown to me,
All these in heart long since I did foresee.
This one thing I desire (since men relate,
That hard by is the infernal kings wide gate,
And Acherontine darksome plashie lake)
O may I enter, for my fathers sake,
To see his lovely face. Open, I pray,
Those dreadful doors, and lead me the right way.
Him I through flames and thousand fluttering darts
Bore on my back, and saved from hostile smarts:
With me he went, with me all seas he sailed,
All storms, where with skies, seas, shores, us assailed,
Beyond his strength, and lot he feebly bore.
He when I hither came, charged me before,
That humbly I should pray for free access
Into thy courts: fair lady, now express
Compassion to the father and the son:
For by thy power what ere thou will is done.
Nor thee in vain has Hecate set thus
Over Avernus groves: If Orpheus
With His Thracian harp and rarely sounding voice
His wifes soul could regain, with longed choice:
If Pollux could by death alternately
His brother free, go, come most frequently:
What talk I now of Hercules most strong?
Of Theseus stout? even I my self belong
To mighty Jove's high race. This being said,
He held the altar: then the priestly maid
Did thus reply; Brave Trojan, born most high,
The way to hell is found most easily:
Pluto's black gate stands open night and day:
But to return, and thence find heavens hard way,
O here is the toil, this is a work indeed;
^ew can do this, and they of heavenly breed,
And such as are beloved of Jove most just,
Whose virtues rare to the skies exalt them must:
Dark woods, black floods, the midwayes overspread:
Yet if thy mind be with such longing led,
To swim twice over Styx, twice to behold
Tartars dark dens, and that thou art so bold,
So hard a task, so free to take in hand:
Then what thou first must do now understand:
In huge wood shades there is a golden tree,
Whose leaves and tender twigs all golden be,
To fair Proserpina being consecrated,
Which by the whole thick wood is obumbrated,
And with dark dikes and banks immured about:
But none can under earth get in or out,
Till he a branch of that gold tree obtain,
Which must to fair Proserpina remain,
As her choice gift. A first branch pulled away,
Another sprig springs out of gold most gay:
Then search it seriously, which when you spy,
Carefully crop it; for if destiny
Intend thee to befriend, 'twill follow fair,
With a slight slip; if not, no toil or care
Can break the branch, no ax it loose or lop.
Besides, there lies upon the earths bare top,
Thy friends unburied corpse (alas, thou sure
Know it not) whose smell none can endure
Through all thy fleet: then whiles thou here do stay
To ask deep counsel, take his corpse away,
And lay him in his grave, and with thee take
Fat beasts, thy first black sacrifice to make.
So shall thou Sty^^^n groves behold at last,
And hard-found courts, which (yet) no mortals past.
This said, to silence she her lips confined.
Aeneas, he goes on with careful mind,
His eyes fast fixed on ground, the cave forsaken,
By thousand thoughts of strange events o'retaken.
With whom his trusty kind Achates went,
To share with him in all hard straits full bent.
Thus as they pass, much various talk they find;
What corpse t'interre she meant; what dead friend kind:
And going on, they on dry-land did spy
Misenus good, slain most unworthily:
Misenus nobly born, then whom was none
A braver bolder trumpeter ere known.
With expert art t'inflame men's hearts to fight,
In whom great Hector rarely did delight,
Made him his mate; for in his battles brave
With spear and trump he did him well behave.
But when Achilles victour vanquished
His Hector dear, he forthwith followed
Trojan Aeneas, as his noble mate,
To no less fame himself to associate.
But (once) when on an hollow rock, by chance,
He unadvis'dly did his trump advance,
And with shrill notes did seem to vindicate
The sea-nymphs; Triton him did emulate,
And (if we may believe it) in disdain
Precipitately in the foamy main
Drowned him amongst the rocks. They all therefore
A bout the corpse his fatal end deplore,
Chiefly Aeneas: then without delay
They Sibylls charge to discharge haste away,
And weeping went to work, to fell down trees,
A grave pile to erect, which by degrees
Should touch the skies. To an old wood they go,
Where fierce wild beasts did lurk: there down they throw
Firre-trees, and beech resounding hatchets blow,
Ash-trees and oaks they cut and cleave with wedges,
And from the hills huge elms they roll on sledges^
Aeneas chiefly all their works o'reviews,
Prays them to ply it, nor does he refuse
To work with them; yet whiles in his sad breast
He ruminates these things, his eyes addressed
To the huge wood, thus happily prayed he;
O that in this wide wood, that golden tree
So hard to find, it self would to me show,
For surely all the prophets said (I know)
Is too too true of thee, Misenus dear!
Scarce said he thus, when to him did appear
A pair of pigeons, flying before his eyes,
And on the grass alighting from the skies.
The noble prince his mothers birds did know,
And joyful prays, O be my guides, and show
The way if any be, and through the air
'Point me a path by which I may repair
Into the wood, and find the fertile ground,
Which with that rare rich golden branch is crowned.
And thou dear mother, do me not forsake
In such anxieties: as thus he spoke,
He steady stands, watching the doves aright,
What signs they would show, which way they would take their flight.
They only pecking meat flew fast away
As far as e're man's sight could after stray.
Thus flying over Avernus stinking lake,
They swiftly hovering up, their way do take
Through the transparent air, and gliding sit
Each on a tree, upon their branches fit.
Whence on the boughs gold glistering glimpses lay,
Like as when on a pinching winter day
The mistle-tow does flourish fresh and gay
With new sprung leaves, which never grew from the tree,
On which it hangs, whose yellow berries be
'Bout the tall trunk thereof, a clinging shade:
Even such a show the golden branches made,
On adverse oaken boughs, which a soft blast
Made dangling leaves a twinkling luster cast.
At it straight leaps Aeneas, pulls it quick
Greedily, thinking it too long did stick.
Which to the Sibylls cell away he bore.
Meanwhile the Trojans did lament on shore
Misenus dead, and his neglected dust
They now adorn with funeral rites most just.
And first, fat-heart of oak in shivers cut,
And pitchie chips of wood together put,
They built a mighty pile, and thereto add
In graceful wise his arms and cypress sad.
Some get warm water, some set on the flame
Brass boiling cauldrons, some with ointments came,
And wash and 'noint his frozen body there,
And weeping much his woeful corpse they bear
Unto the bed; then over him were thrown
His purple robes, rich vestures thoroughly known.
Some on their shoulders bear the mighty beer
(Sad piece of service) as to parents dear
Young men do use; their torches turned behind,
Their frankincense and oils, given with free mind,
They heap together, and together burn.
Thus when his corpse and all to ashes turn,
And the flame slakes; what ever did remain,
His unburnt bones, hot cinders, up were taken,
And washed with wine, and by Chorineus laid
Into a brazen coffin, by him made:
And thrice pure water on his mates he threw,
And with an olive branch sprinkles sweet dew.
And thus due expiation makes for all,
And bids farewell, last knell, to the funeral.
But good Aeneas the sepulcher raises
To a huge height, and to the man's due praises
Lays on his arms, his oar, and trump of fame,
Upon the skie-top mount, which from his name
Was called Misenus, aye to bear the same.
This done, he speeds to do the Sibylls charge.
There is a dungeon deep, with mouth most large,
Lined with stones, fenced with black pools, boughs thick,
Over which no fowl dares fly, though never so quick,
Without destruction; such foul stinks arise
Out of its mouth, and putrify the skies:
Whence Greeks that place Avernus nominate.
Here four fat heifers he did ordinate,
Upon whose front the priest pure liquor threw,
And pulled the hairs, which 'twixt their horns thick grew,
And cast them in the fire, first expiation;
Making to Hecate due invocation,
Whose sovereignty in heaven and hell was great.
Some kill the beasts, and in their basins neat
Save the warm blood: Aeneas self also
A black-wool'd lamb to the dam of hagges below,
And her great sister, with his sword did slay;
And unto thee, sacred Proserpina,
A barren cow. Then to the Stygian king
He built night-altars, and to them did bring
Fat flesh of bulls, to sacrifice in the flame,
Pouring on fatty oil to increase the same.
But now, behold, before Sols first arise,
Under his feet the ground made muttering cries,
Wood-mountains moved, dogs seemed to howl in the shade,
Just as the Goddess came, foul stir was made:
The priest cries out, Avaunt, be gone, profane,
And clear these groves, not one must here remain.
Force thou thy way with naked sword in hand,
Be strong, Aeneas, stoutly to it stand.
This said, her self into the cave she cast
Most furiously; he stiffely follows fast,
So good a guide, at heels, and thus he prayed;
Great Gods, which rule each ghost and silent shade,
Phlegethon, Chaos, rooms dark, dumb and deep;
O let me not of these things silence keep:
O let me with your leave speak what I hear,
Disclose hid secrets, which do here appear,
Deep under ground, and in black darkness drowned.
Then in dark night, black shades, they ramble round
Through Pluto's palaces, and regions void:
Much like, when men (the moon with clouds being cloyd)
Walking in woods but by a glimmering light,
Jove having hid with fogs the skies clear sight,
And colors fair being dampt by darksome night.
Before the porch, in the first gape of hell,
Foul mournings and tormenting cares did dwell;
Deadly diseases old age anguishes,
Fear, faulty famine, wants lean languishes;
Affrighting-forms, fierce death, and deadly toiles,
Deaths kinsman, sleep; false filthy joy, that soiles
Men's souls. On the other side were deadly wars,
The Furies beds of steel, and desperate jarres,
Her viperous hair tide up with bloody bands.
In The midst a mighty shadie elm there stands,
With weather-beaten boughs and aged arms*
Where usually (they say) vain dreams and charms
Made their abodes, and 'bout the leaves did 'bide,
And many furious fierce vvilde beasts beside.
Two natured Scylla's, Centaures stabled were
About the doors, monsters of hideous fear:
Briareus hundreth-handed, Hydra's ire,
Teeth-gnashing Chimaer's armed with flames of fire;
Gorgons, and Harpyes, hagges with shapes threefold.
Here sudden fright Aeneas forced to hold,
And shake his naked sword to all he met:
And had not his wise guides advisement let,
And made him from those corps-lesse souls to fly,
And pass in peace, those thin shapes subtlety
He had assailed, but vainly beat the air.
Thence then he to the right path did repair,
Which leads to the Acherontine filthy flood:
Whose troublous stream boiles up with mire and mud,
And from Cocytus sands evaporates.
Charon, hells frightfull ferryman, there vvaits,
And plies the passage over this filthy flood,
With crabbed countenance, hoare hairs, which stood
Most roughly overgrown over all his chin,
His gogling eyes star'd, as they flames had bin;
In ragged robes and tattered old attire.
Thus, a strong long pole thrust into the miro,
He drives his boat, assisted with one sail,
And, as his charge, in's barge souls over does hale.
Much grown in years, yet lusty for his age;
To whom to the shore souls flock for their passage,
Women and men, yea all whom death destroys,
Great potent peers, unmarried maids and boys,
Count youths, which die before their fathers face,
Like leaves in vvoods, falling from trees apace,
Pincht off by autumnes chilling, killing cold:
Or like conglomerated birds that hold
And fly together, forced over the main,
By vvinter vveather, to some pleasant plain.
Thus stand they striving, first, to be past over,
With hands and hearts longing for the other shore.
The fuming ferryman takes these, leaves those,
And others fiercely far from shore o'rethrows.
Aeneas (with this noise much moved, amazed)
Says to the priestly maid, Pray, whence is raised
This flocking to the flood? what seek these souls?
What strange adventure to these banks them toules?
And why do those the livid waves with oars
So swiftly sweep, to get unto you shores?
To whom the aged priest says briefly thus*
Anchises, and Jove's offspring generous,
This is Cocytus deep black Styxes lake,
By which to swear, forswear, Gods conscience make*
Unburied souls, that ragged-rabble be,
And he the boatsman, Charon, whom you see.
Those whom he rows in's boat, due burial have;
Now may they, till their bones do rest in grave,
Over those rough streams, those banks have transportation,
But make about those shores perambulation,
And wandering walks, at least, an hundred years,
Then pass they over those ponds, which them re-cheeres.
Aeneas then with fixed feet stood still,
Full of deep thoughts, pitying their case most ill:
There he beheld Leucaspis amongst them all,
And brave Orontes, his fleets admiral,
Mourning their want of honorable graves,
Whom boystrous blasts o'rewhelmed in the waves,
And sunk both ships and men, sailing from Troy.
Behold, he now beheld, with more annoy,
His ship-master, his Palinure, perplexed:
Who sailing Sicils seas, his eyes fast fixed
Upon his stars, fell overboard, was drowned;
Whom scarce for mists, his sad friend having found,
Thus he says to him; My dear Palinure,
What God our loss of thee did thus procure?
And drench thee in the deep? I pray thee tell,
For never till now did falsehood with him dwell:
Apollo with this one unsure reply,
Did much deceive my vain credulity;
Who told me, thou seas safe should pass, and see
Fair Italy, and there should landed be:
And is this (now) the faithful promise made?
But he on the other side repli'de, and said;
Brave Trojan prince, nor Phoebus thee deluded,
Nor any God me to the seas obtruded:
For I my self holding my helm too fast,
Where I sat pilot, did me headlong cast
Into the sea, guiding the ship. I swear
By all rough seas, naught did me so much fear
As thy great ships and ship-masters decay,
Lest on thy bark rough swelling seas should prey.
Three vvinter-nights, fierce vvindes me blew about
The ocean vast; the fourth day I found out,
With much ado, the banks of Italy,
Keeping my head still 'bove the waves on high:
At last, by small degrees I got to land,
And thereon safely I a while did stand,
And so had staid, but for a barbarous crew,
Who to me (dropping wet) in fury drew:
And as I crawled up on hands and feet
A craggy bank, with swords they did me meet,
Slew me, and of me hoped to make a prey:
Now vvindes and waves me near the shore do lay,
Yet keep in the sea. Wherefore by heavens light clear,
By this fair air, and by thy father dear,
And young Iulus hopes, I thee entreat
Free me from this ill state, thou captain great;
And either put me (as thou may) in ground,
(For I in Velines haven may be found)
Or else, if means there be, if Goddess great
Have shown thee any supernat'rall fear,
(For I believe, not without heav^nly aid
Thou swam'st this flood, this Stygia^ lake did vvade)
Lend me poor wretch thy hand, and help me over,
That I, at least, may rest in you ^weet shore.
Thus he; and thus the priest her mind expres^;
Whence, Palinure, comes this thy rash request?
Would thou unburied, Styxes stream pa^^e over?
The furies floods, unbidden, leave thy shore?
Cease to expect by prayers to change heavens fates.
But hear and mark what thy case consolates.
The nearest neighbors, bordering 'bo^^ those parts,
By heavens prodigious signs perplexed in hearts,
Shall take thy bones, and with solemnities
Interre, entombe thee: from which grave shall rise
Unto that place an everlasting name
Of Palinure. Hence he more glad became,
His care had cure, his grief in part was past,
That that land should his name retain at last.
Then on they pass, and to the pool draw nigh,
Whom Charon straight on Stygian streams does spy,
How slily they the wood walk, haste to land:
Thus he with checks and taunts them takes in hand.
Who e're thou art, that armed would sail this way,
Say, what is thy will? why come thou? thou shall stay.
These be souls seats: here night and sleep do sit:
In Styxes boat live bodies it is not fit
To carry over, nor did it me well please
To carry Theseus, or great Hercules,
Or Pirithous, though they were heavenly bred,
For strength and stomach most unconquered.
Alcides bound fierce Cerberus in bands,
Hells great grim-porter, and with his strong hands
Him quaking dragged from Pluto's princely seat;
The rest did plot our king of 's queen to cheat.
To whom the Amphrysian priest replied again;
Trust me, here is no such tricks; from rage refrain;
Our weapons wound not, Cerberus may bark,
And ever fright poor souls in's dungeon dark:
Proserpina may keep her uncles bed;
For this our Trojan prince much honored
For piety and prowess, but intends
To go to's father, to deep hell descends.
If so great goodness in the man moves not,
Yet know this branch of gold, which he has got:
(Which she pulled forth, being hid under his gown)
Whereat his rage and wrath of heart sank down.
Silent, that sacred gift he did adore,
The fatal branch not seen long time before,
And shoves to shore the blew boat them to take,
And other souls which sat beside the lake
He thrusts aside, and lays the hatches fit,
And great Aeneas sits in the bulk of it.
The joynted barge groaned with their pondrous weight,
And through the chinks took in much puddle straight.
At length the priest and prince pasto're the flood,
And escaped the flaggy gray-grasse, mire and mud;
Hells porter Cerberus, through his triple throat
Through all those regions raised a barking note.
Couching, huge curre-like, in his kennell by,
Whose snake-like swelling neck the priest did spy,
And cast^ to him a soporiferous sop,
With drugs and honey mixed, which he did slop,
And through his treble throat it quickly snaps,
In dogged-hunger, with his meager chaps.
Whereat his mighty back croucht, down he lies,
And spreads himself in the cave, with slumbring eyes.
The porter laid, Aeneas whipped in brave,
And got to shore from the irregressive wave.
Straight in's first entrance piteous cries he hears,
And loud laments of infants 'bout his ears,
Of tender babes snatched from their mothers breast,
Deprived of longer life by deaths arrest.
Next these, were those who by false sentence died,
Yet lot and law these to their place applied.
Minos the inquisitour the lots does cast,
And spies and tries their lives and follies past.
Next, they lie mourning, who with guiltless smart,
Hating their lives, their own hands pierce their heart:
Then though they spilt their blood, yet now'd be glad
To suffer earths worst toiles, then hells pains bad.
But fates forbid, and hells most loathsome lake,
And Styxes nine-fold streams tie them to the stake.
Not far from thence lie all the fields about
(For so men call them) of the weeping rout.
Here all, whom tyrannizing love did slay
With piercing passions, these in bypath lay,
Hid under myrtle boughs, whose grief of heart
Still stings them, and in death does not depart.
Here he beheld Procris and Phaedra fair,
Eriphyle her sons wounds laying bare.
Euadne he, and Phasiphe did find,
And Laodamia, to her pheere most kind:
Caeneus now a woman, once a lad,
Yet re-transfigur'd for her follies bad.
Amongst whom he spi'de Sidonian Dido there,
Wandering in the wood her love-wound fresh to appear.
Who^ Troyes brave prince approaching near, scarce knew
Through the thick shade: (like Luna, whose first view
A man through clouds does see, or thinks he sees)
He weeps, and speaks such sugared words as these;
Distressed Dido, ah, that sad report
Was too too true, brought to me from thy court;
That thou wast dead, and with a sharp sword slain.
Alas! sweet lady, I did cause thy bane.
Yet I protest by stars and deities,
And by firm faith, if under ground it lies,
I left thy land (fair queen) against my mind,
And here the Gods commandments me do bind
To traverse up and down these foggy shades
Through thornie paths, and deep, dark, dumpish glades:
Nor could I e're believe that it could be,
That my departure could so cruciate thee.
Ah st^y with me, fly not away so fast,
Whom shun'st thou? since this talk must be our last.
Thus spoke Aeneas, thinking therewithal
To swage their grief, and floods of tears let fall.
She frowning fixed her angry eyes on ground,
Nor was more moved with all he could propound,
Then is hard flint, or Parus rock obdure.
At last she from him breaks into obscure
And bushy vvoods, flying most angrilie,
Where her first spouse Sich^^^ courteously
Answered, her vvoes with equal love repayd.
At this hard hap Aeneas was dismayed:
Yet weeping follows her aloof, apace,
Lamenting much her absent woeful case.
Thence on he goes, and at the last they came
To the utmost fields, where men of Martial fame
Did walk about: here he Tydeus meets,
And Mars-like Parthenopeus kindly greets;
Adrastus ghastly ghost: and here he spies
Such Trojan lords as caused full weeping eyes:
They being slain in war, he knows them all
In their rare ranks, and many a tear lets fall.
Glaucus, Thersilocus, Medon, all three
Antenors sons, he sadly there did see,
Polybetes, great Ceres priest most stout,
Idaeus still in's chariot drawn about,
Still brandishing his blade: souls thick do flock
On both sides, making him their gazing-stock.
One sight suffices not: they stay, stand still,
Make near approach, and know the cause they will
Why, how he came. But Greeces peers most stout,
And those of Agamemnons warre-like rout,
Spying the man, and his drawn glistering blade
Through the thick mists, extremely all afraid,
Some fly away, as once to ship to get:
Some gape to speak, whose gapes their speech do let.
And here at last he saw in woeful case
King Priams Deiphobus mangled face,
And all over wounded corpse most cruelly,
Yea, his fair face defaced uncomelily;
His broken brows, both hands, both ears, and nose,
All quite cut off by his most barbarous foes.
Scarce he him knew, trembling in woeful wise,
Laboring to hide those dire deformities.
Yet in a well known tone thus he cries out;
Dear Deiphobus, valiant, stern and stout,
Sprung from Troyes royal stem, what savage mind
To take such foul revenge in's heart could find?
O who had power to use, abuse thee so?
Fame did report, and I naught else did know,
But that in dead of night, thou wearied,
With slaying Greeks did fighting fall down dead
On heaps of them. Then I in vain did frame
On Rhetian shores a tomb unto thy fame:
And to thy soul sent three salutes most deep,
And made that place thy name and fame to keep:
Thy body there (fair friend) I could not see,
Nor as I would (my country left) give thee
A worthy burial. Deiphobus here
Says, Nothing's left undone, O friend most dear;
To Deiphobus thou all dues have paid,
All burial rites: but here alas I Am stayed,
And drowned in this distress by fates decree,
And base Lacaena's fatal villainy:
She left me these sad monuments of woe.
For as we all (you cannot choose but know,
And too too well remember) that last night
Did spend in frolic, but most false delight;
When first that fatal horrid horse o'releapt
Our Trojan walls, when from his paunch out stepped
His swelling troops of armed footmen fierce,
She feigning votes in Bacchanalian verse,
Led up and down our quaffing Phrygian dames,
And in her hand held forth bright burning flames:
And from their camps called out the Grecians bold.
Then cumbring cares and sleepiness did hold
Me pressed to rest, in my unhappie bed,
And sweet deep sleep had me (now) vanquished,
And laid like one quite dead. This worthy wife
(Meanwhile) my arms, the safeguard of my life,
And trusty sword, purloyn'd and stole away,
Set my doors open, called in without delay
Her Menelaus, hoping (thus) to endere
His love to her, and all past ills to clear.
What needs more words, they burst into my bed,
Together with Ulysses, mischiefs head.
Great Gods, repay those Greeks with vengeance due,
If it be just which I request of you.
But what strange chance has brought thee (thus) alive
To us? Tell me likewise; what seas did drive
Thee to these parts? or was it the Gods decree?
Or to these toiles has fortune forced thee?
To tread these sad and sunlesse wearying ways?
Thus with this talk Aurora's radiant rays
Had gilded half-o're heavens huge axletree,
And happily all their time thus spent might be:
But that the Sibyll his most watchful mate,
Said, Good Aeneas, night does properate,
And we with weeping waste the time in vain:
Here see the way divides it self in twain.
(...) way, which leads by Pluto's gate,
Will bring us the right way to Elysium straight:
But the left leads to Tartars torturing cell,
The place where damned souls are plagued in hell.
Then Deiphobus said, Prime priest, be still,
If I offend, I Will back; my number fill,
And shelter me in shades. Go thou, O go,
Thou glory of our land, the heavens bestow
Better good luck on thee. This having said,
As soon as spoke away from them he made.
Aeneas quick looked back, and soon espi'de
A spacious castle on a rocks left side,
With a strong threefold mighty wall surrounded,
Which Phlegethons fierce fiery river bounded;
And did thick rattling stones evaporate.
Before it stood a mighty open gate,
With adamantine pillars set in view,
Such as nor Gods nor men could cut or hew
By strength or art: a brazen tower stood high,
Where Tisiphone fierce sat usually
In bloody robes, and night and day did guard
And watch the way. From hence was easily heard
Great groans and moans of screeking smart and pains,
And rumbling noise of shackling iron chains.
Aeneas stood amazed, dampt with that din,
And said; Fair lady, tell me, what is within?
What damned souls? what plagues? what hideous cries
Are those I hear? To whom she thus replies;
Brave Trojan prince, no upright man may dwell
In this nefarious nest of damned hell:
But me, when as Proserpina me made
Hells governesse, she taught, and open laid
The plagues which Gods inflict, showed me them all:
Here Is (says she) Rhadamanthus horrid hall,
Where he corrects and finds out knaveries,
Forcing confession of all villainies:
And when they hope to escape with foolish joy,
At last in death he plagues them with annoy.
Then Tisiphone, in one hand a whip,
Revenge fully makes guilty souls to skip,
With furious lashes, holding stinging snakes
In the other hand, which greater tortures makes,
Calling for all her furious sisters aid.
At last the sacred gates huge screeking made,
And opened wide. See thou (says she to him)
What looks look on us? what a guard most grim
Sits at the porch? see horrid Hydra's seat,
With fifty snaky heads and gape-mouths great:
Then hell it self, full twice as broad and deep
Downward, as heaven, upward beheld, is steep.
Here Titans youthful troop, earths aged race,
By thunder thrown down, sunk to the deepest place.
And here the bastard-giant twins I saw,
Which with their hands meant heaven to scale, and draw
Great Jupiter from his supernall seat.
I saw Salmone^s suffering tortures great:
For he Jove's lightning needs would imitate,
And rattling thunder: being born in state
Upon four horses, shaking flames of fire,
Making Greek towns and countries him admire,
In triumph drawn, in frantic arrogance,
Himself with Jove's due honor to advance;
Whiles he heaven, inimitable fire,
By sounding brass, and horn-hooft steeds desire
To counterfeit in their most swift careeres:
But mighty Jove, to whom this soon appears,
Through thickest clouds dashed out a deadly dart,
(Nor could his torches, nor bright fiery art
Assist) and headlong in a storm him slew.
There also might you mighty Tityus view,
Fructiferous Terra's son, whose body great
Stretched out, in breadth nine acres is complete:
A foul devouring vultures bending bill,
Gnawing upon his wastelesse intralls still:
Whose guts him ever glut with horrid pains,
Thus feeding on his breast it still remains,
And restlessely pulls his regrowing veins.
Why speak I of Lapitha, Ixion,
And Pirithous? on whom a huge flint-stone
Does always hang, and always seem to fall;
Before whom stand rich lustful beds most tall;
And costly cates to feed their luxury,
Stand ready disht: but nestling over them nigh
Stands the prime Fury, and them strict commands
Not once to touch the table with their hands:
And if they stir, she starts up in great ire,
Rattles them up, bangs them with flames of fire.
Here brother-haters whiles they lived, I saw;
Parents despisers, cheaters of just law:
Rich churles who got great wealth, but for themselves;
The greatest troops being of these impious elves)
Such as for foul adulteries have been slain;
And who in jurious jarres do entertain;
Who rob their masters, traitors are to the state.
All these with plagues hell does incarcerate.
Nor need'st thou ask, what pains and tortures fierce
These various vicious men do sting and pierce.
Some 'rowl huge stones, so^e hang fast ty'de to wheels,
Thus woeful Theseus torments sits and feels,
And e're shall feel. Thus Phlegyas most of all
With hortatorie cries in hell does yaull;
Be warned, be just, the Gods do not despise:
For gold of's country he made merchandise,
And brought in an usurping powerful lord,
Old laws annulled, made new laws for reward.
Another did his daughters bed defile,
Using forbidden copulation vile.
All did foul deeds, and what they willed, enjoyed.
Had I an hundred tongues to be employed,
An hundred mouths, and iron elocution,
I could not show the diverse distribution
Of all the kinds of hells impieties,
And every plague which on them heavy lies.
This when Apollo's Sibyll sage had said,
Let Us now go on (says he) all stays evade,
And our intended task begun conclude:
Come, let us make haste; for I far off have viewed
The Cyclops shops, strong walls, high chimneys stand,
Where we to leave our present, have command.
This said, together they blind paths pass by,
Taking the midway, to the gates drew nigh.
Aeneas first rusht in, with water clear
Sprinckles himself, and on a post most near
Unto the gate, the branch of gold sticks fast;
Which done, his gift given to the Goddess, past;
They came at length into these pleasant places,
Those fragrant fi^lds and groves of all the Graces,
Those sacred seats, where is larger, purer air,
Bright light, true sense of stars, and Phoebus fair.
Where some delight in grassy plains to sport,
To skip and leap in sand in wrestling sort;
Some dance and sing, and trip it on their toes,
VVhiles Orpheus in his priest-like long gown goes
About, and plays on's sevenfold sounding lute*
And strikes the strings with quill and skill acute.
Here he beheld Troyes ancient noble race,
Her potent peers, born in more blis^efull case;
Ilus, Assaracus; first king of Troy,
Dardan; their arms put off with peaceful joy.
He useless chariots (wondering) sees set by;
Their spears fast fixed in ground, and carelessely
Their steeds let loose, feeding in pastures wide;
And look, what chariots love, what Martial pride,
They living had, what care to feed and dress
Their gallant coursers, now 'twas here no less.
Again, on's right and left hand he does eye
Some, feeding on the grass, sing merrylie
Rare panegyricks amongst sweet laurel trees,
Where fluent Po^ through groves to flow he sees.
Here patriots good, who for their country died,
Here priests, who lived most modest lives, did bide;
Here pious prophets, who pure truths did preach,
Here expert artists, who rare arts did teach*
And here were they, who, mindful of their state,
Made others their true goodness gratulate.
All these were crowned with fragrant garlands gay,
By whom environed, thus did Sibyll say;
(But chiefly to Musaeus amongst them all,
For he was in the midst, and fa^re most tall)
O say, sweet souls, and thou priest most divine,
What parts, what place does old Anchises shrine?
For for this cause this toil we undertake,
Are hither come, have swumme hells mighty lake.
To whom this Hero this reply did make;
No soul has certain seat, here we all dwell
In shady groves, flower-beds, in fields that smell
Most fresh and fragrant, graced with rivers clear:
But ye (if thereunto such joy ye bear)
Climb over this hill, your way I Will easy make.
This said, by his good guide, their way they take:
And as they pass, he shows them fields most fair;
Thus high hills left, they to the plains repair.
But grave Anchises was most closely bent
To see, observe in valleys excellent,
The souls reserved for more supernall places,
Recogitates all his own kindreds cases:
Their number, nature, fates, and fortunes all,
Their customs, courage, he to mind does call.
And when he saw Aeneas come to meet him,
Through the green grass he joyful runs to greet him;
Lifts up his hands, lets fall thick tears on's cheeks:
Yet thus unto his son he cheerely speaks;
And art thou come? by power and piety?
Have thou (as I had hope) got victory
Over this hard task? see I thy face again?
Shall I my son hear and reply most plain?
Thus truly I supposed, and cast in mind,
Counting the times, and now all true I find.
From what strange parts (dear son) what dangerous case!
What seas turmoiles, do I thee now embrace!
O how I feared thy harm in Libya land!
Straight he replied; Dear father, thy command,
And ghastly ghost in visions often beheld,
Has, for thy sake, me to these parts compelled.
My fleet lies safe in the port, on Tyrrhene sands:
Ah, grant good father we may now join hands,
Grant me: ah fly not from our sweet embrace.
At which words tears ran down his cheeks apace.
Thrice 'bout his neck to clasp his arms he tries,
Thrice from his frustrate holds his image flies,
Like fleeting blasts, or flashy dreams by night.
Meanwhile Aeneas had full in his sight,
In a by-valley, an enclosed wood,
With rattling boughs and sprigges, where Lethe flood
Ran through Elysian fields; 'bout which did stand
People and nations, an innumerous band.
Like bees, when summers sunshine does them warm*
Who in fair meads 'bout flowers and lilies swarm:
So over the field a muttering noise was raised,
Whose sudden sight Aeneas much amazed.
Being ignorant, he does the cause enquire,
What flood that was, and what so great desire,
About those banks did cause such troops of men.
Then old Anchises answered thus again;
Those souls to whom new corpse are due by fate,
About the banks of Lethe flood do vvait
To drink deep draughts of dull forgetfulness.
Long since I longed these things to thee to express,
And ou^ old stock to thee to numerate,
The more with me thee to exhilarate,
Latium once found. O father dear (says he)
Can sacred souls from hence translated be
To heaven? and there resume dull corpse again?
Can wretches such dire love to earths light retain?
I Will tell thee son (says he) and clear thy doubt.
And thus began Anchises to set out,
And punctually each circumstance to explain:
At first one abstruse spirit did maintain
Heaven, earth and seas, bright moon and twinkling lights:
That spirit infused through all parts, moves, incites
The total bulk; diffused over the whole frame.
Hence men, beasts, birds, and all sea-creatures came,
And take life-feeding heat; and to their seed
Celestial birth, if corrupt bodies breed
No obstacles, nor terrene tumors ill
The corpse with dull and heavy humors fill.
And hence they fear, weep, have a longing mind,
Regard not heaven, closed in flesh prisons blind.
Besides, when they their life's last breath forsake,
Yet death from them (poor souls) does not quite take
Each blot and blemish, or all corp'rall ills,
Which long in the body grown, it strangely fills.
Wherefore they purging punishment endure,
To make them from old evils clean and pure.
Some frisking souls in the whisking winds hang high,
Some in huge streams wash their impurity,
Or el^e are purged in refining flames:
Thus these our pains each soul here fits and frames.
Thence then we are to large Elysium sent,
Few are in those fair meadows resident,
Till times long progress quite expired be,
And we from imbred, long-fed faults are free;
Our souls all simply pure in due degree.
And then all these (a thousand years full spent)
In troops to Lethe floods by God are sent:
There made unmindefull of their former state,
They long to ascend corpse to re-occupate,
This said, Anchises his Aeneas brings
With Sibyll into the midst of the troop, which rings
With rattling rumors: to a hill conducts him,
Whence all now coming, he to know instructs him.
And now go to (says he) I Will to the show
Our Albane peers, the glory which shall flow
In Italy, on our fair families,
The imperial princes which from us shall rise;
Yea all thy fates and fortunes I Will declare.
See thou (says he) that princely youth most fair,
Which leans on's headless lance? He first shall spring
From Latins blood and Thine, and be first king;
Sylvius an Albane name, thy posthume birth,
Whom thy Lavinia to thy long-lifes mirth
Shall in the woods bring forth a royal king,
From whom a regal race of kings shall spring,
From whom our line over Alba long shall reign:
And Procas next Troyes glory shall maintain,
Capys and noble Numitor, and he
Whose name shall personate, re pattern thee,
Sylvius Aeneas, rare for arms and arts,
If ever he reign over those Albane parts.
Behold, my son, those youths, what powers they show,
Those which with peaceful oaken garlands go,
These shall for thee Nomentum, Gabi^, tame,
Fidena fair, Collatia's towers reclaim;
Towns famous for their chastities report:
Potent Pometia, Bola, Cora's fort,
And Inuus camp, towns once of noble fame,
Now only lands, but of no note or name.
Besides, to's grandsire Martial Romulus
Shall be a prop, whom from Assaracus
His mother Ilia shall produce at last:
See thou not on his head two crests stand fast?
And how great Jove on him his favors poures?
Behold (fair son) his high imperial towers,
Renowned Rome, whose magnanimity
Shall rule the earth, and raise their fame to the sky:
And on their wall she shall seven towers erect,
Happy in famous peers of high respect;
Such as from Berecynthia, Gods fair queen,
In chariot drawn through Troy, to spring were seen:
Triumphant in her hundred God-births fair,
All heaven-inhabitants, all starre-kings rare.
And now look this way, view this nation great,
Thy Romans rare, and Roman Caesar's seat,
Iulus royal race, the whole earths Keisar.
There Is, there is the God-sprung man, Augustus Caesar,
Whom I so often have promised unto thee:
By whom the golden age Latium shall see.
As once by Saturn 'twas the whole earth over,
His empire shall lie past the Indies shore,
And Garamants, and where Sols prying eye,
And the celestial signs yet never past by:
As far as e're heaven-propping Atlas high
Bears on his back the beauteous starrie sky.
At his approach all Africa soon shall quake,
And at his God-decrees great Nile shall shake,
Maugre his sevenfold mouth. Nor so much ground
As he shall win, could Hercules surround,
Though light-foot hindes as winds he could outflie,
And boares and bears in Erymanth make die:
Nor Bacchus that vine-victour with vine-chains,
Who tigres fierce to draw his coach constrains
Over Nisa's steepie tops. Now then shall we
To spread our fame by facts base cowards be?
Shall fear affright us from Ausonia land?
But what renowned prince does yonder stand,
Crowned with a sacred olive branch? oh now
I know him by's gray hairs on beard and brow,
Even noble Numa the first Roman king;
Who shall establish laws, and make Rome spring
From a poor land, by simple Sabines aid,
Unto a mighty monarchy, firm laid;
Whom Tullus shall succeed, his men to make
Their lazy lives to leave, arms up to take,
And wonted triumphs now again to gain.
Next him shall rise Ancus with ampler train,
Too much affecting popularity:
And, if thou will, hither reflect thine eye,
And see the kingly Tarquines haughty heart;
And Brutus, acting the revengers part,
Shall first accept the consuls dignity,
With bundles born, and axes fatally.
This father first his own sons shall destroy,
Raising rebellions to the states annoy;
And slay them, for his country liberty;
Unhappie, howsoever posterity
May elevate and much commend the same,
Overcome with his countries love and thirst of fame.
See there where Decii, Drusi, stately stand,
And fierce Torquatus with his ax in's hand;
And brave Camillus stoutly does regain
Romes ensigns lost. But that most royal twain
Whom thou see glistring in like-arms most plain,
And now seem loving souls, kept in deep shades,
Ah! what fierce wars, with slicing bloody blades,
Shall they raise up, when once they rise to life?
What battles shall they fight? what stintlesse strife?
The fath'r in law passing the Alps altitude;
The son in law with his Eastern multitude
In battle ray. Not so, dear son, not so,
Use not uncivil civil-warres of woe,
T'embrew your honored hands in countries blood.
And thou, O thou C^sarean son, most good,
Great seed of Jove* sprung from a sacred line,
With such foul wars stain not those hands of thine:
The Capitol he shall triumphant take,
And in hi^ chariot make Corinthus quake.
The Grecians slain, he Argos shall subdue,
And trample down proud Agamemnons crew,
And victour, vanquish Pyrrhus self most strong,
Armipotent Achilles lay along:
And thus old Troyes great wrongs revenge shall have,
And Pallases polluted temple brave.
And who can thee, grave Cato, here omit?
Or of courageous Cossus silent sit?
Of Gracchus great? those two rare Scipios,
War wondrous thunderbolts, to Carthage woes?
Fabricius, mighty in his mean estate?
Serranus, plowman, yet Romes potentate?
Why am I tired to tell of Fabius gr^^t?
That mighty man, whose wisdom to retreat,
And grave cunctation shall Romes wrack repair.
Some for their skill in brazen statutes, rare;
Some able (I think) hard marbles so to cut
And carve, as if they life had in them put:
Some famous for facundous oratorie,
Some for the Math'maticks deserving glory.
But thou, rare Roman, rule with might and right:
Let this be thy chief art, thy choice delight,
To plant good laws in peace, to use most kind
Good subjects; but to curb the haughty mind.
Thus grave Anchises: and, to their more wonder,
Behold (says he) mighty Marcellus yonder:
How he with spoils most richly loaded goes,
And all transcending, him great victour shows.
He, he shall Rome from ruins re-advance,
Curb and crush Carthage, and subdue all France*
A third time shall to Jove, in sacrifice,
Hang up the captive arms, his Martial prize.
And here Aeneas (for he saw in's sight
A lovely lively youth in armor bright,
But with a heavy look and cast-down eye)
Says, Father, pray, who is that in's company?
His son? or some of his renowned race?
What noise they make? see his most portly pace.
Why do such dark black mists his head so hide?
To whom Anchises, weeping, thus repli'de;
Dear son, long not to know thy countries woe:
The fates this child to the world will only show,
And only so: Rome (sure) seemed too too great
To you high Gods, if her imperial seat
Had been perpetual. O what sighs and cries
Shall by his death unto great Rome arise
In The field of Mars! what frequent funerals
Shall thou, swift Tyber, in thy fluent falls
Behold, as thou do by his new grave glide.
N^'re shall a sprig sprung from our Trojan side,
Exalt Italian ancestors so fairly,
Nor Rome triumph in any race so rarely.
Alas, for his connative piety!
Alas, for faith spread by antiquity,
And Martial spirit! what do these avail?
Who, unrevenged, durst him in arms assail?
And or on horse or foot durst him encounter,
But he was ever found his far surmounter?
Ah prince to be deplored! if fates decree
(Hard fates) thou escape, thou shall Marcellus be.
O give me (now) handfulls of lilies fair,
And let me strew, with store of violets rare,
Those odoriferous gifts about the grave
(Though all in vain) of this our kinsman brave.
Thus in these sad complaints they stray about,
And pry and spy all in those fields throughout.
And when Anchises all to's son had shown,
And fire of future fame in's heart had blown,
At last he shows what battles he must fight,
Latinus towns, Italians warre-like might;
And how to bear, or forbear, hazards all,
Which could or should in the future him befall.
There are (says he) two dormitive great gates,
The One made of horn (as fame to us relates)
By which true spirits have a passage right:
The Other of elephantine ivorie bright:
But false and fictious dreams souls this way send.
When thus Anchises did his conference end,
Both to his son, and to the Sibyll grave,
Through the ivorie gate he them free passage gave.
He hastes to's fleet, revisits his old friends;
And to Cateta's port his course he bends.
Where they with joy their anchours all do cast,
And there the fleet at shore is fixed fast.
An end of the sixth book of Virgils Aeneids.
THE ARGUMENT of the seventh book.
Caieta dead, here buried lies.
Aeneas to Laurentum hies:
Which he did plainly understand,
By his Ascanius, was the land
By fates assigned. Then straight he sent
An hundred legates eloquent,
With presents to Latinus great,
A peace and pardon to entreat.
The king with peace does them dispatch,
And for his daughter makes a match.
Juno displeased, Alecto's sent
From hell, i'th'peace to make a rent.
A wounded stagge breeds all the jarre:
Confederates fit themselves for war.
ANd thy death, nurse Caieta, in this strand,
Eternally has memoriz'd our land:
And now thine honor there, thy bones and name,
Great Italy maintains. (If this thy fame
May ought enlarge) but her due obsequies
Rightly performed, her grave made high to rise,
Seas smooth and calm, Aeneas hoyst up sails,
And left the port, with prosperous nightly gales.
Nor did dame Luna's light impeach their pace,
But made a shivering shine on seas surface.
Thus Circes next adjacent shores they slice,
Where Sols rich daughters daily songs entice,
In groves unpassable: where she by night
In her proud palace burns fires most bright
Of odoriferous cedar, watchfully
With nimble spindle spinning curiously.
Hence we might hear by night fierce lions roar,
Struggling in rage against the bonds they bore:
Wild bears and bristly boares rage in their stie,
And shapes of mighty wolves howl hideously:
Whom furious Circe by her sorcerie
And potent potions, metamorphis'd had,
Of comely men, into wild beasts most bad.
Now that these honest Trojans might escape
These havens, and such prodigious bestiall shape,
And not approach that hurtful hateful shore;
Neptune with prosperous gales their sails up bore,
Forced them from thence, them from those dangers ^^ave.
Now Thetis breasts waxt red, Aurora brave
In The azure sky with golden rays shone bright,
And suddenly the winds were calmed quite:
The rocky seas their oars did nimbly smite
And beat about. And here a mighty wood
Aeneas spide, through which fair Tybers flood
With nimble goldie streams to sea did glide,
And yellow sands the current beautifi'de:
And various birds, which did those banks frequent,
And the floods bubling falls such notes did vent
Above, about, as did delight the sky,
And in the woods with chirping chants did fly.
And here he bids his mates their voyage stay,
To wind the fleet to land: then joyful, they
Enter the shady river. Now relate,
Urania fair, what kings, what times, what state,
Old Italy retained, when this thy fleet,
Thy new-come army brought to Latium sweet:
I Will all set forth, and wars first grounds recite.
Thou, O thou Goddess fair, teach me to write
Those bloody broiles, fierce troops, warre-thirsty kings,
The Tyrrhean and Italian Martial wings,
All in an uproare: here is new work indeed,
A mighty task, to which I now proceed.
Old king Latinus over those realms did reign,
And them in peace and plenty did maintain.
Faunus and Marica (old writers gather)
His parents were, king Picus, Faunus father;
And thou great Saturn, thou art said to be
The utmost basis of his progeny.
No son, or issue-male fates did him give,
Death on one s^az'd as soon as he began live.
One only marriageable daughter fair
Upheld his court and state: to whom repair
Many Italian peers and potentates.
All whom brave Turnus chiefly emulates
For's famous ancestors most eminent;
And him the queen with love most vehement
Did like and long to make her son in law;
But heaven-diverting prodigies she saw
Crossing her thoughts. A spreading laurel tree
Grew in the midst of the court, whose branches he
Had many years preserved with reverend fear,
And which Latinus, when he first did rear
His stately towers, there found and consecrated
To great Apollo (as it is related)
And from it did the land Laurentum name.
A thick quick swarm of humming bees there came
(Strange to be spoken) out of the open air,
And to this lawrells tops did all repair,
And on the boughs close by their feet they hung,
All in a sudden swarm in clusters clung.
Their augur straight cries out, I plainly find
A foreign prince t'approach; with him conjoined
Are strong confederates, who with partners bold
From these same parts this tower shall take and hold.
Moreover, as lady Lavinia good,
In sacrifice, hard by her father stood,
Her hair (strange sight) was all on a light fire,
Whose cinging flames burnt all her rich attire:
Her locks were burnt; burnt was her diadem,
Beset with stones most rich, and many a gemme:
Up flies the fume, abroad the flame extends,
And Vulcans violence to the roof ascends.
This was a hideous sight, hard to endure:
For fame and fates did glorious things assure
From her; yet that she should fierce battles breed.
But these strange sights the careful king with speed
Brings to his father Faunus auguries,
In great Albuna's grove, there to advise:
In which wide wood a sacred spring did glide,
Misty mephitis with foul fogs does bide.
Hither all Italy, Oenotria land,
Do still repair, dark doubts to understand.
Here when the priest (the presents being paid)
On slain sheeps skins by night to sleep is laid,
And falls asleep, in sleep strange visions views,
Hears various voices, conference does use,
And speech to sprites from the Acherontine lake.
Here, when as grave Latinus prayers did make
For fair replies, and many sheep being slain,
Prostrate upon the skins he did remain,
And from the wood these words he heard most plain,
Fair son, forbear thy daughter dear to wed
To native Latins, shun their marri^ge bed:
I have new foreign sons in law, whose race
Our name and fame unto the stars shall grace:
Whose noble seed each sublunary thing
Which Sol beholds, shall to subjection bring,
And rule and overruled. These plain replies
Of's father Faunus, and his counsel wise,
Latinus locks not up in silent sort,
But of it flying fame makes loud report
Throughout all Italy. And now at last
The Trojan youths their fleet made firmly fast
Against the grassy banks. Aeneas then,
And fair Iulus flower of all his men,
With his courageous captains in degree,
Repose their bodies under a great tree.
Then on the grass they set their cheer, and cakes
Made of good meal; whereof each one partakes:
But (for so Jove by the Harpyes had decreed)
Were fain at last on mountain-fruits to feed.
And this food failing, they were forced to eat
The crumbs and scraps of refuse bread and meat,
And with their hands to break (all hungerbit)
The sacred food, for other use more fit:
Nor spared they their trenchers broad: whereby
Iulus said, See, sirs, strange penury,
Which even our tables has devoured quite.
Nor more did he allude: but with quick sight,
At his first words his father did foresee,
Of all his travells now an end to be.
And intercepted the first words he spoke,
And at his fates amazed, forth straight he brake
Into these words; Fair fate-given land, all hail:
And you Troyes Gods, whose faith never yet did fail:
Here Is, here is our country happy habitation,
(For now I well remember) this relation
Of these hid fates my father made to me:
When thou dear son, (says he) ariv'd shall be
On a strange land, and famine thee shall force,
Thy meat all spent, to have sharp-set recourse
To sacred cates; then there thou may expect,
To ease thy vvearie limbs, there to erect
Safe seats, and with strong hand thy state protect.
This was that dearth, that last affrighting ill,
Which should all future fear and mischief kill.
Be stirring (then) betimes by break of day,
And scout about, each part and place survay,
What houses and inhabitants you find:
Thus from the port all several vvayes let us wind.
And now full cups to Jove let us drink, and pray
To old Anchises, and in goblets gay
Set wine upon the board. Thus having said,
With gallant garlands he his head aray'd;
Then invocates Apollo, Tellus fair,
The mother of the Gods, and nymphs most rare,
And the yet unknown floods, and obscure night,
And nightly rising stars, by solemn rite,
And Ida's Jove, and's Phrygian mother fair,
His parents both, in hell and heaven which are.
And now all-potent Jupiter on high
From heaven thrice thundered, but auspiciously:
And in his hand a fiery cloud did shake,
Which did a radiant golden luster make.
Here amongst the Trojan troops (straight) rumors rofe,
That now is the time they cities should compose.
Busily therefore banquets they prepare,
And full of wine by th'sacred signs they are.
Next day, when Sols light lamp had earth made bright,
They strayed abroad, about them cast their sight,
To see what confines, cities, shores these were;
And straight they found the river Numick there:
Here current Tyber, there the Latins stout.
Anchises son then straight selected out,
Of all his troops, an hundred legates wise:
Their brows with olive-boughs in most grave guise
Adorned, he to the kings great palace sent,
And gifts unto the king for to present,
And for the Trojans peace to mediate.
With this commission forth they properate.
Meanwhile Aeneas meats his walls extent,
With shallow trenches fits its continent;
Most like a camp on first approached land,
With dikes, forts, bulwarks, makes his city stand,
And now those Trojan youths so far were past,
That they the Latins turret spi'de at last,
And then their houses tops, and quick they came
To the town walls, where they saw children game;
And lusty youths their prancing horses ride,
Some making chariots through the dust to glide;
Some were a shooting with their arrows swift,
Some slender lances brandish, toss and lift:
Some were a wrestling, running-matches making,
All of their best affected sports partaking.
Straight to the aged king a post reports,
Brave strangers in strange clothes came to his courts.
He straight gave charge to entertain them all,
Himself on's kingly throne sat in his hall:
A hall most fair and large, born up most high
With full an hundred pillars, anciently
The stately palace of king Picus grave,
For groves and parents piety, most brave.
Hence kings were wont their crowns and powers to take,
This they their temple, court, and hall did make:
Here, many sacred sacrifices slain,
The peers were wont constantly to remain.
Besides, here stood rare statues carved in vvood,
In solid cedar, of ancestors good:
Great Italus and grave Sabinus king,
Who first in Italy made vines to spring:
Old Saturn also holding in his hand
A crooked sicle, portrayed there did stand:
And two-fac'd Ianus at the entry stood,
And other kings sprung from most royal blood:
Who vvarres deep wounds did for their country bear.
And on the posts rich spoils there hanged were,
And captives chariots, axes used in wars;
And helmet-crests, huge bolts and iron bars,
And shields and darts, and ships foredecks most fair:
King Picus self, for horse-breaking most rare,
Sat holding in's right hand his regal rod,
In's left a shield, enthroniz'd like a God.
Whom, led with l^st, Circes his wife so charmed,
And with her golden rod and druggs so harmed,
That she into a bird transformed him,
And made a Jay with colored feathers trim.
Latinus sitting in that sacred seat,
And inmost parlours of ancestors great,
Bad them the Trojans to him to bring in:
Who entered, with these kind words did begin;
Tell me, brave Trojans (for we all do know
Your land and lineage, and heard long ago
Of your sea-voyage) tell me what you would have:
Or what hard straits your barks to Latium drove:
Whether you have lost your way, or weather-beaten,
(For such like ills at sea do seamen threaten)
From other parts and ports hence far remote,
You safely now 'bout Latium banks do float.
Shun not your safeguard, know that Latins all,
Of Saturn seed, were never yet in thrall
To laws or leagues; but voluntarily,
By our Gods pattern, we love equity.
Indeed I think on it (time has fame obscured)
And Italies old men have thus assured,
That Dardan, who did from our nation spring,
Was first Idaean Troyes victorious king.
And Thracian Samo's streams did penetrate,
Which Samothracia now men nominate.
Whom now deceast, from Corits Tyrrhean seat,
Heavens regal court, starre-canopie most neat,
Enthroniz'd has, and made a God most great.
He ceast: And thus Ilioneus made reply;
Great king, whose race did rise from Faunus high,
No tempest fierce did force us on your land,
Nor ignorance of stars, or unknown strand,
Has us misled; but we deliberately,
And with unanime votes did all apply
Our thoughts unto these parts, from realms expelled,
Which all that Sols broad eye beheld, excelled.
From Jove we sprang, Jove was Troyes joyful sire:
From Jove our king himself does kin acquire.
Aeneas Troyes great prince us hither sent.
O that stern storms did cruel Graecia vent
On all our Trojan fields! what furious cloud
Of angry fates did Europe, Asia, shroud?
I know, fames trump these things has sounded loud,
To utmost lands, from sea the most remote,
And where the torrid zone (as writers note)
By Sols intemperate heat does much displease
Our obvious world, called the Antipodes.
We, driven about by that vvarre-inundation,
Humbly desire a peaceful petty-station:
First, for our country Gods a seat secure,
And for our selves free air and waters pure.
VVe'le to your kingdom bring no foul disgrace,
Nor slightly your deserving fame abase,
Nor this fair fact in foul oblivion smother,
Nor Latins grieve, that they did Trojans mother.
I swear by great Aeneas destiny,
And by his Martial hand, who e're will try
His virtue, valor, or by faith or flight,
As many have, and many (do not slight
This voluntary tender of true peace,
Or that we our submisse desires increase)
Many, I say, to us have sought and su'de,
'Twixt them and us like friendship to conclude.
But sacred secret fates, and heavens command,
Has us enforced to seek out thy fair land:
Hence Dardan sprung, hither does us invite;
And grave Apollo's great commands incite
To Tyrrhean Tyber, sacred Numicks spring.
And here I thee present, from our great king,
With these small gifts, of better former fate
Remains, reserved from Troyes combustive state.
This bowl of gold Anchises sacred used:
This Priams princely robe, which still he chus'd
To wear, when he in councels, laws wrote down,
A regal scepter, sacred priestly crown,
And royal robes, the Trojan wives rare skill.
And thus Ilioneus ceast. The king sat still
With settled countenance, eyes fixed firm on ground,
And rolling downward, full of thoughts profound:
Regardlesse of the gifts, the robes most rare,
Nor did the king for Priams scepter care
So much as for his daughters nuptial state,
And Faunus foretold fate to ruminate:
Strongly persuaded, this was he should be
His son in law, sent by the fates decree,
From foreign parts, to be his realms rel^ef,
To raise a famous race, and be earths chief.
Here at he joyful says, Heavens happifie
Our high intents, and their own augurie:
Thou have (brave Trojan) what thou do desire,
Nor do I slight thy gifts: till life expire,
And whiles Latinus reigns, you shall enjoy
A wealthy soil, and fatness of rich Troy.
As for your prince himself (if he desire,
And do our love and league so much require)
Let him come hither, nothing fear his friend:
To peace, in part, we soon shall condescend,
If he, your king, and I, kindly shake hands:
You therefore show your king these our demands.
I have a daughter, whom the whole consent
Of our domestic oracles full bent,
And many a fearful heaven-shown prodigy,
Marriage with any native prince deny:
But that fair son in law, from foreign parts,
(Thus writers say to cheer Italian hearts)
Whose blood and birth our name should stellifie.
And this your prince (if e're with verity
I ought could augurate) I hope and pray,
May be the man. This said, without delay,
Out of three hundred stately steeds that stood
In faire-built stables, at their manger-food,
To every Trojan he a choice horse gave,
Most swift of foot, in purple trappings brave,
With dangling rich embroidred breast-plates fair,
And champing in their mouths gilt bits most rare.
And to their absent prince he also sent
A chariot, with two coursers excellent,
Of heavenly breed, who breathed out flames of fire,
Engendered of that kind, celestial sire,
Which quaint Daedalian Circe did contrive,
On mortal mares bastardly to derive.
With these rare gifts and sweet words of the king,
They bravely mounted, peace to Aeneas bring.
But now behold, still jangling Juno fierce
From Grecian Inachus the air does pierce:
And from Sicilian Pachyns parts espi'de
Aeneas joyful, all his fleet to 'bide
In supine safety, all his men intent
'Bout buildings fair, of confines confident,
His ships forsaken. Hereat angrily
Shaking her head, in sharp perplexity
These words she thundered from her boiling breast;
An hateful brood! fates against our fates addressed!
What, were not all in Troyes fierce battles slain?
And were they captived, yet could not be taken?
And was Troy fired, yet could not burned be?
Could they through thickest troops and burnings flee?
Now (sure) my supreme power as tired must lie;
And must I rest, yet wrath not satisfy?
Yet I have them pursu'de, quite chased from Troy,
And on those vagrants brought all seas annoy,
And on them spent my spleen by sea and lands;
And yet, alas, what good do deep quicksands?
What Is Scylla sharp? Charybdis vaste, to me:
Since they in their wished Tyber lodged be,
In spite of seas and me? Mars had the power,
The mighty Centaures nation to devour.
Diana could obtain my Jove's consent,
On ancient Calydone her rage to vent.
What so foul fact could Centaures perpetrate?
Or Calydone, such plagues to tolerate?
But I Jove's mighty spouse, who all means try,
Which angry I could use, or each way spy,
Am vanquished by Aeneas. If my might
Be still too weak, I Will seek where-e're for right:
If heaven refuse to hear, I Will rouse all hell.
And since from Italy (I see right well)
I cannot keep him, since fates firm decree
Is, that Lavinia shall t'him married be:
Yet I all rubs and remoras will use,
Yet I fierce flames of discord will infuse
'Twixt both those nations. With this precious prize
The son and father in law shall sympathize;
And Trojans and Rutulians blood shallbe
The damsells dowry, and Bellona she
Shall be her bride-maid: nor fierce Cissean flames
Shall only be the birth of Trojan dames.
But why may not dame Venus brat prove so?
A second Paris, Troy-novant with woe
To set on fire. This said she angriely
To earth descends, and raised up instantly
From deepest darks, the furies fearful seat,
The hag Alecto, hell woe-worker great,
Whom bloody battles chiefly do delight,
And impious acts, snares, slanders, and despite:
Whom even her father Pluto loathes and hates,
And all her hellish sisters, for debates;
Such frowning faces and such mouths she makes,
So serpentine she seems, full of foul snakes.
Whose madness Juno thus incites, and says;
Great maid, black midnights imp, thy choice assayes
And proper projects lend me straight thou must,
Lest my renown sore shaken lie in the dust;
Lest Trojans work Latinus to a match,
And all Italia's confines thereby catch.
Thou can belovedst brethren force to fight,
And overturn whole families by spite,
And cast from house to house combustious flames,
Assume a thousand shapes, false, feigned names:
And thou a thousand cheating tricks can use:
Then pump thy plenteous breast, break off abuse.
Their peace compacted, sow thick seeds of wars,
Their youths do look, like, long for Martial jarres.
Alecto straight swollen with Gorgonean spells,
And pest'lent poisons, flies to L^tiums cells,
And Laurents kingly court, and silent sits
Close at Amata's door, which place best fits.
Whose breast began to boil with discontent,
With female fears and cares most vehement,
That Trojans and that Turnus wooers came.
The hag that quickly did observe the same,
From off her head one of her blew snakes drew,
And at her breast into her heart it threw:
By which this hag the whole house might molest.
The snake slips slily 'bout her tender breast,
Roules up unfelt, and her with fury fills,
And viperous venom to heart burning ills.
Then like a chain of gold her neck he twists,
And wreathes about her hair, like hairelace lists,
And sliperily about her body frisks.
But e're first power of pour'd-in poison had
Soakt through her senses, kindled flames most mad,
Or all her intellectualls quite possessed,
With wonted motherly mild terms addressed,
She spoke unto her spouse, and much complained,
About her daughter, that he entertained
Those Trojan wooers. Must, great king, said she,
Our daughter dear Lavinia married be
Unto those Trojan vagrants? carest thou not
For thine and mine, and her more noble lot?
Whom that perfidious wretch will soon forsake,
With the first winds that blow, and him betake
To sea, and like a pirate false make prey
Of our dear daughter? was not this the way
That that base Trojan shepherd took, when he
With Helen did from Laced^mon flee
To Troy? And where is thy faith so often plighted?
Thy wonted care of kindred? All now slighted?
Thy promise to our cosen Turnus great?
Say that the Gods bad thee from foreign seat
To seek a son in law; and say thou art
By Faunus his commands much touched in heart:
Yet I suppose, each state from our state free,
May be held strange; and so it (sure) may be
The Gods did mean. And if you please t'enquire
For Turnus pedigree, you will find his sire
Acrisius and great Grecian Inacus.
Whiles all these words in vain she vented thus,
To try Latinus, whom she found averse;
And that all over wraths poison did her pierce:
Then full of monstrous fury, spite, and spleen,
She madly 'bout the streets to rage was seen.
Much like a scourged gygge, box-top, or ball,
Which boys are wont to scourge about a hall
Or open yard, with lashes whipped about,
Which with quick spinnings winds, works in and out,
The boys whip close, the top about does fly,
And roundly frisks, and never still does lie:
The lively lads make sport and wonderment,
From hand to hand to see it nimbly sent:
The more it spins, the more they whip it on,
And laugh and leap to see it comne and gone:
With such fierce flutterings up and down the streets
She rangeth, rages, as she people meets.
Moreover, fiercely to the woods she flies,
Does feigned feasts of Bacchus enterprise,
(Attempts more frantic mischief, plays mad pranks)
And hides her daughter in the woodie banks,
The Trojans nuptial rites (thus) to protract:
And, Ho, ho, Bacchus cries, with rage distract;
Thou, thou alone, must wed thy virgin fair,
For unto thee small ivy javelings rare
They bear about: thou love (they say) to dance,
And sacred hairs, thine altars to advance.
Like-furious madness does possess the waves,
To leave their own, to seek new dwelling drives.
Their dangling hair, necks bare, they spread to the winds,
And some loud howlings raise, with trembling minds,
And clad in skins, vine-lances bear about.
The queen her self, in midst of all the rout,
Bearing a flaming pine tree, tunes her voice
To Turnus, and her daughters marriage choice:
Yet suddenly, with frowning bloud-red eyes,
Ho mothers, maids and wives, aloud she cries,
Who-e're she be, that pity yet retains,
When poor unhappie Amata complains,
Who-ever tenders tender mothers grief,
Unlace your head-attires, afford relief,
Advance with me my Bacchanalian rites.
Thus in the woods with madded frantic frights,
Through damping deserts fierce Alecto had
Stung and stirred up the queen with passions mad.
Who, for this first time now, seemed fired enough,
To give all first contracts a counter-cuffe.
The hellish hag therefore with frightfull wings,
Straight to the walls of Rutuls kingdom flings:
Which city first Danae was said to build,
And with Acrision colonies it filled,
Driven there on land by tempests violent:
Antiquity did call that continent
Ardea, and still it is great Ardea named,
But once it was by fortune much more famed:
Here great king Turnus, in his palace fair,
In the dark night slept sweetly, void of care:
And here Alecto doffes her frowning face,
And is transformed into an old-wives case;
And her old brows with aged furrows plowes,
And wears white hairs, close coifs, and olive-boughs:
Seems Calybe, great Juno's sexton old,
And priest of her fair temple, to behold:
And to the princely youth thus comes, and says;
Brave Turnus, will thou suffer thy assayes
And many labors to be spent in vain?
Shall Trojan strangers thee supplant, and reign?
The king denies thee marriage, dowry due
By birth and blood, seeks a successor new
To rule his realms. Go thou thus laughed to scorn,
Now cast thy self on thanklesse dangers born;
Go slay the Tyrrheans, Latins, rule in rest.
These things (since thou did all in sleep digest)
All-potent Juno bid me tell thee plain.
Rise therefore quick, thy soldiers muster, train:
Arm, arm them all, to all thy havens make haste,
And let those Trojan captains all be chased,
And burn their barks, which 'boutfaire Tyber lie:
Thy warrant's good confirmed from on high.
And let king Latins self (if he refuse
To grant thee marriage, kindly thee to choose)
Feel thy fierce force, and utmost Martial might.
Here the brave spark the southsayer seemed to sleght.
And thus replied; I Am not (as you suppose)
So unacquainted how this business goes:
Their ships in Tyber left affright me not,
I know queen Juno has us not forgot.
But over thee (old beldame) old-wives tales,
And doting doubts too much in vain prevails:
And kings affairs thee with false fears do flout.
There Is work enough for thee to look about,
And tend thy temple, thy Gods image fair:
Leave peace and war unto the warriers care.
These words Alecto made with rage to burn.
But whiles the prince did him to prayers turn,
A sudden trembling all his joints possessed,
His sight grew dim, fierce snakes much din expressed,
With raging hissings, frightfull visages,
Him staying, praying her, her wrath to appease.
She forced back, with flames his eyes do stare,
And two choice snakes she plucked from her hair,
Lasht him therewith, and thus in rage she rails;
Behold thy beldame, with her old-wives tales,
Whom kings affairs do with false fears so flout.
Mark these thy words. See me come from the rout
Of hellish furies, bearing in my hand
Both war and death. This said, a flaming brand
She at the prince with rage and fury flings,
Which in his heart with quenchlesse burning stings.
Fierce fear did straightd isturbe the princes sleep,
A sudden sweat over all his corpse does creep.
Arms, arms, in rage he cries, and strives to find:
Mad heat of wars and jarres inflame his mind:
Fury foams up: much like a cauldron great
Which makes huge bubling noise with boiling heat
By store of flaming sticks, whose crackling fire
The seething liquor swells, and boyles up higher,
The scumme about the cauldrons brims contends,
And into the air black foam and froth ascends.
Choice youths therefore unto Latinus came,
Their peace-infringer, wars for to proclaim,
To safeguard Italy, t'expell their foes,
Or else he would with potent power oppose
Trojans and Latins both. These words thus spoke,
His Gods he did to his high votes invoke.
Then straight the stout Rutulians to the fight
Do one another readily incite.
His beauty, brav'ry, this man stimulates;
His kingly kindred that man provocates:
His former famous facts a third does spur.
Whiles Turnus thus to arms his men does stir,
Alecto lewd to the Trojans flies full fast,
For her new tricks fit place she spies at last,
Where brave Iulus was about the shore,
Busily hunting some wild bear or bore.
And here hells hagge a sudden foil infused
Into the dogs, and much their sent abused,
With fierce pursuit to prosecute that dear,
Which did the first cause of much ill appear,
And to fierce broiles the rustic clowns did steer:
A high-horn'd stately stagge was tamely bred,
By Tyrrhus children from the damme so fed.
This Tyrrhus from Latinus had the charge,
To keep his dear in parks and forests large.
Their sister Sylvia dear that dear kept trim,
And on his horns with flowers adorned him:
And combed his locks, and kept him clean and slick,
And he to hand would come, and meat would pick
Out of his masters hand, and forth would stray
Into the woods, yet find the ready way
Unto his masters house, though late at night.
Iulus dogs had of him sudden sight,
And at him flew, as he was wandering there,
Cooling his heat in woods and waters clear.
Ascanius also, who did fame affect,
A sharp shaft from his bow did straight direct;
Nor did fate fail to help, the mark to hit:
But through his paunch the whistling arrow split.
The heart pierced near the heart, homeward made haste,
And with deep groans him in's known stable placed:
And like one mourning, seemed much to complain,
And every room his bleedings did retain.
Sad Sylvia first the sister beats her breasts
Cries out for help, the rusticks rude requests
To come together. They (for yet in the wood
The mischief lurking lay, not understood)
Rashly run to her: this brings in his hands
A knottie clubbe; that with bright fier-brands
Is stoutly armed; each one what first he finds
Snaps up: Wrath armeth peevish testy minds.
Tyrrhus calls troops also, as he was cleaving
Oaks in four parts, them with stiff wedges reaving,
His ax snatched up in furious puff and snuff.
Here then the hellish hagge sat high enough,
To spy this mischiefs opportunity,
And from the ridges of the stables high,
A past'rall summons on her horn she sounds,
Whose rattling noise in the trembling groves rebounds,
And made the mounts and thickest woods to quake.
Far sounding shrill, even to Diana's lake,
And Nars white flood, sulphurous streams it heard,
And Velines fount: And mothers much affear'd,
Their tender infants hugged close to their breast.
Then to the call which the hags horn expressed,
The rigid Corydons, unruly clowns,
With snatcht-up weapons flockt from all the towns.
The Trojan gallants also forth do flow,
And from their camps to aid Ascanius go.
Their army they draw out, but not to fight
With country clownish clubs, brands burning bright;
But with their slicing swords: and all the lands
Tremble to see their glistring blades, brave bands:
Their brazen shields reflected luster bright
Against the sun, which seemed the clouds to smite.
Like as when waves seem white by winds first blast,
But by degrees the sea swells up at last,
The waves work from the bottom up so high,
As that they seem fiercely to dash the sky.
Here, at first onset, Tyrrhus eldest son,
A lusty youth, Al^on by name, begun
To taste of death, by a swift arrows flight,
Which stuck in's throat, and did him deadly smite,
Stopping his vocal breath, locking up fast
His vital spirits, by much blood forth cast.
Many more bodies lay about him slain,
And grave Galesus, striving to obtain
And mediate peace between them; one well known,
For's upright dealings, to give place to none,
The richest landed man in Italy:
Five flocks of sheep he kept most constantly,
Five herds of cattle, and to till his land
An hundred plows. Now whilst with equal hand
The field they fought, and that the hagge did find,
The issue answerable to her mind,
The war with both sides blood initiated,
And mischief firmly at first machinated:
She Italy forsakes, mounts up to the sky,
And like a conqueresse, superciliously
Speaks thus to Juno; See, great madam, see,
With deadly discord they so fired be,
That though thy self would them reduce to peace,
Yet they from mutual bloodshed would not cease.
So soyl'd are Trojans with Italians blood.
Yet this I Will add, if so thou think it good,
The adjacent towns I Will so incense to wars,
By rumors raised, and to most frantic jarres:
So move, promove their minds, that all about
To auxiliarie broils they shall burst out.
O no, says Juno, thou have shown thy self,
With art and smart enough, the furies elf.
Wars seeds well sown, well grown already be,
What chance had dipped, fresh blood has died, I see.
Such marriage matches may Latinus wise,
And Venus godly offspring solemnize.
But as for thee, great Jupiter, heavens Lord,
No longer liberty will thee afford
To fly about the air. Back to thy place:
If any work remain in this like case,
I Will see to it my self. Thus Juno spoke.
Alecto then her forthwith did betake
To her snake-fluttering wings, leaving the sky,
And to Cocytus swiftly she does fly.
In The midst of Italy there is a place,
On mountains high, of noble name and grace,
Deep sacred valleys with huge leafy shades,
Which woody banks upon both sides invades:
In midst whereof a rough swift stream did glide,
Which did with rattling noise from rocks down slide.
Here fearful Pluto's gaping gulf was found,
A dungeon dark, there 'twixt deep cleaving ground,
Was a huge hellish hole, whose chaps most wide
Did fierce Alectos hateful presence hide;
Where she, to heavens and earths content, did 'bide.
Meanwhile queen* Juno plies her helping hand,
TO increase the furious war throughout the land:
Great troops of shepherds to the city throng,
And slain Galesus body bring along,
And youthful Almons; and their Gods for aid,
And king Latinus urgently they prayed.
Turnus was present at their exclamation,
Ingeminating threats, makes protestation,
With fire and sword to ruinate them all,
Since into league he did the Trojans call,
And join himself unto the Phrygian race,
But him rejected, with indigne disgrace.
Those wives also, whom Bacchus frantic dance
(For they queen Amata did high advance)
Led in mad measures, through the woods most wide,
Flocking in troops, would not be reconciled,
But urge for arms, and instantly require
With peevish spirits ('against the Gods desire,
And former fatal omens) bloody fight,
And thus hedge in the kings court with fierce might.
He like a rock resistlesse, firm, stood out,
Like a sea-rock, when stiff blasts blow about,
Making such mountain-waves with bellowing sound,
And rattling stones, and boiling foam surround,
And wash and dash, in vain, the rocks hard sides,
And floating flags and weeds about it glides.
But when no might might their blind wills subdue,
And to her beck fierce Juno all things drew;
The king to's Gods and empty air complains:
Alas! (says he) we suffer piercing pains,
We run to ruin, fatal storms us beat,
But fierce revenge does you, vile wretches, threat;
Your sacrilegious blood shall for it pay,
And woeful smart does for thee, Turnus, stay;
And thou in vain unto thy Gods shall pray.
But I, at rest, my house, my haven, who thought,
Am robbed of rest, to woes sepulcher brought.
Hereat he ceast, and him to's house betook,
And public rule and regiment forsook.
The custom was throughout all Italy,
Which custom Albanes towns kept sacredly,
And now great Rome conserves, when first they wage
Fierce vvarres, and Mars in battles brave engage,
Either with Scythians or Arabians bold,
Or eastern lands, or Indies fraught with gold,
Or Parthians proud to purchase glorious fame:
There are two vvarre-gates (for so is their name)
Of sacred use, of Martial terror great;
An hundred brazen locks and bolts most neat,
And iron bars do shut them sure and straight,
And two-fac'd Ianus, porter, there does wait:
These gates, when once the peers do war declare,
The noble consuls self in robes most rare,
In princely pomp, Gabinian garments tide,
With mighty screeking noise does open wide,
And war proclaims; then troops of youths do follow,
And sound assent with brazen trumpets hollow.
Latinus thus was charged urgently,
With furious vvarres Aeneas to defy;
To open those fatal gates; which he deni'de,
And would not that offensive office 'bide
But hid himself (good man) in discontent:
In secret shades, would give no such consent.
Then jangling Juno, gliding from the sky,
With her own hands unlocked instantly
The lazy doors, and breaks the iron bars,
And turns the hinges, and sets open vvarres.
Thus Italy, which lately lay at rest,
Now unincited, is to war addressed.
Some flock as footmen to the field to fight,
Some hasty horsemen make dust dim the light.
All ask for arms, some take their spears and shields,
And with fat tallow scour them for the fields;
And whet their bills and blades on whetstones strong,
For ensigns spread, and trumps alar'ms, they long.
Five powerful cities do in forges frame
New weapons for the war: which five, by name,
Were potent Atina, and Tybur bold,
Ardea, Crustumer, and Antemnae old,
Strong for its bulwarks brave. Some helmets make,
And buckler bosses wreath, some corslets take
Of strong-proofe steel, light boots with silver lined:
And now the plough, sicle and sithe declined,
No love, delight in tillage, country toil,
Their peaceful blades in furnace they reboyle.
And now the allarums sound, vvarres sign is given,
This man, his helm from home in haste is driven
To snatch away: that man his horse constrains
To wear his traces, foamy bit and reins:
A third, his shield and treble coat of mail
Put on, and wears his trusty sword, to assail.
And now ye sacred nine, set open, I pray,
Sweet Helicon, and let my Muse display
The mighty kings, heroic captains stout,
And Martial bands, these bloody fields that fought;
With what most potent peers and armies great,
All Italy was fraught in Martial heat.
You ladies fair, you best can show the same,
For scarce* fames whisperings to our knowledge came.
The first that waged war with Martial bands,
Was fierce Mezentius from his Tyrrhene lands,
A stout contemner of Troyes deities:
And with him came Lausus his son likewise,
A count, accomplished prince, without compare,
Only excelled by Laurents Turnus fair:
Lausus, I say, famous great horse to ride,
And tamelesse beasts to tame, of peerless pride,
From Agylla unhappie troops he trained,
Worthy o're's fathers empire to have reigned,
Unworthie to be called Mezentius son.
Next these Aventine brave due honor won,
Son of Alcides, victour-like proceeds,
Drawn in his chariot with his conquering steeds;
In's hand a shield with his fathers scutchion fair,
Wherein an hundred poisonous snakes he bare,
Environed with Hydra's serpentine.
Whom in Aventine mount, the priest divine,
Rhea, by bastard birth conceived and bred,
The victour being with the priest coupled.
When Geryon was deceast, and Laurents lands
Hercules had obtained with conquering hands,
And Spanish spoils, fat beeves, had brought with him,
And them in Tyrrhene streams had washed most trim.
His soldiers held in hand a Roman spear,
And hacking halberts to the field did bear,
And fought with rapiers and Italian dart,
Himself (to strike more terror to the heart
Of his beholders) wore a lions skin
Full of rough hair, whose fangs did seem to grin
In manner of a helm above his head.
Thus like his father fierce apparrelled,
Feare-smiting Hercules, he stat^ly st^ulks,
And to king Latins court on foot he walks.
Two brethren then, Catillus, Coras stout,
Two gallant Grecian youths, went bravely out
From Tybur strong, which from Tyburtus name,
Their brother, was so called. They bravely came
In The armies vantguard, hedged with weapons thick:
Much like two cloud-begotten Centaures quick,
Running in rage from some hills steepie height,
Leaving Thessalian Othrys, Homol white,
Whose rapid race makes trees and woods give way,
Whose furious flight huge rattling boughs obey;
Strong Caeculus, Praeneste's founder fair,
Was also there, whom pristine times declare
To be black Vulcans son, a king of kine,
Found in the fire, with whom huge bands combine
Of country Corydons, much men, beside,
Of high Praeneste, and of those which 'bide
About Gabinian Juno's pleasant plains,
And icie Anio, and the waterie trains
Which Hernicks rocks inhabit. And the swains
Whom rich Anagnia, Amasenus fields
Do feed: they had not all strong arms or shields,
Nor rattling chariots; but the greatest part
Fought with black leaden bags, with swinging smart:
Some others strong two-handed slings did bear,
And on their heads rough wolfs-skin hats did wear.
Their left legs bare, raw skins their right did hide.
Messapus also, famous horse to ride,
Great Neptunes son was there; whose fury great
None could with sword or fire abate or beat.
His peaceful people, unaccustomed
To bloody broiles, he on a sudden led
To battle, and to handle sword instructs.
One from Fescinium mighty troops conducts,
From just Haliscus and Soractes towers,
And from Flavinium fair leads forth great powers,
And from Cyminus mount and flowing spring,
Capenas woods, who in array did sing
Their princess praise, as snowy swans do use,
When in the air themselves they broad diffuse,
Flying from pastures, and with chattering shrill,
Through their long throats with notes the skies they fill,
And make Cayster and moist moors to sound,
And Asia wide, nor could a man be found
To think the arms of so great bands would fail,
But that the airie clouds of swans prevail,
Singing and swooping from the sea to shore.
And now, behold, great Clausus adds yet more,
Clausus from ancient Sabines sprung, who brought
Great troops, himself a mighty troop being thought:
From whom fair Claudias stock and race arose
In Italy, when Romans Sabines chose.
With him came troops from Amiternums town,
And antique Sabines, all to reap renown;
Eretums powers, Mutuscas might, where spring
Olives great store: Nomentum bands did bring.
And Velines rosean regiments were there*
And hilly Tetricus, and high Severe:
From Foruli, Casperia Himell's flood,
From Tybers and Fabaris rivers good,
From frigid Nursia, rigid Hortines bands,
And many troops from utmost Latins lands.
From Allia's odious streams great armies go,
As thick as Libyas marble floods do flow,
When winter-waves do fierce Orion hide,
Or standing-corne by parching sunshine dry'de,
Or Hermus floods in field, or Lycia's lands
Fruitfully overflown: So martial bands,
So clattering shields, and soldiers confluence fast,
Make the ground grunt, and dusty clouds up cast.
Again, great Agamemnons Halesus,
The Trojans ancient foe most furious,
Drawn in a chariot, unto Turnus brought
A thousand soldiers with warre-furie fraught:
Who Bacchus his vine-bearing Massica
With spades eradicate, without delay:
And soldiers from Arunca's hills most high,
From Sidicinums seas and Cales nigh,
And from Vulturnus adjacent fair flood,
And dwellers in Saticulus thick wood:
And Hoscies powers, who with short darts do fight,
Fitted with leather-holds, more deep to smite;
Their left hand held a targe, their right a blade
Or faulchion fair, much like a sicle made.
Nor may our lines in silence pretermit
Oebalus, whom (as ancient times have writ)
On Sebethis the nymph Telon begat,
When aged, king of Caprea he sat.
But when this son his fathers throne rejected,
And larger limits for his rule affected,
He overran Sarastes people strong,
And Sarnus, which lies sea-ward all along;
And those which Rufae, Batulum, do hold,
And all Celenna's fields and fertile mould;
Fruitful Abella, and her walls and plains,
Who cast a kind of dart much like Germans;
Their heads, for hat^, covered with cork-bark light,
Armed with swords and shields of brass most bright.
Great Vfens also to this warfare came,
Mountanous Nursa left, of matchless fame,
And fortunate in fight: whose natives brave
Themselves to arms, and hunt in forests gave:
Their Aequiculians armed, would till their land,
Delighted most, by furious force of hand
To live by catching preyes and robberies vile.
Moreover, from Marrubia's ancient isle,
King Archippus renowned Vmbro sent,
A famous priest, who as along he went,
Wore on his helm a branch of olive fair:
He able was, by skill and cunning rare,
Both with his hands and words to cast a sleep
Vipers, and poisonous snakes from hissings deep,
And tame their rage, and heal their stingings fierce.
But when the Trojans lance his heart did pierce,
He could not cure that wound, nor to that grief
His soporiferous charms could yield relief,
Nor herbs that grow on Marsian mountains high.
For thee Angitias woods weep woefully,
For thee clear floods and lakes do mourn and cry,
Hippolytus brave son, young Virbius came
Unto these wars, a man of Martial fame:
Whom full of glory, nursed in savage woods
Of fair Aegeria, near Hymettia's floods,
Where great Diana's full fraught altars are,
With pleasing and appeasing offerings fair,
Aritia his most a^gust mother sent:
For thus it is said, after with ill intent
Hippolytus by's step-dame slanderous train,
Being by his father most unjustly slain,
By horses drawn in pieces, through the care
Of great Diana, and the cunning rare
Of Aesculapius, was revived again.
But mighty Jove hereat took high disdain,
That any mortal man such power should have,
To raise a man to life from's fatal grave:
With thunder-smart he smote the authors rare
Of such great art. Whereat Diana fair
Hippolytus preserved, him closely gave
To fair Aegeria, him in the woods to save,
Where he unknown, in the groves of Italy
Spent his remaining days in privacie:
Him now therefore they fi^ly Virbius name,
As who should say, he twice a man became.
Hence therefore horn-hooft horses are deny'de
About Diana's sacred groves to 'bide;
For from those shores sea monsters do affright
Both horse and riders, putting them to flight:
But yet his son that used great horse to ride,
In's chariot came to the wars with Martial pride.
But chiefly Turnus self amongst the best,
Of stately stature, him to the wars addressed,
Armed Capape, by's head then all more tall,
Upon whose hairie helm did seem to crawl,
A fierce Chimaera, breathing flames of fire.
The more it raged, and flashes did expire,
The more the field was filled with bloody mire.
Upon his shield in gold was pourtrayed
Io into an ox transfigured,
O'regrown with hair, but no horns on her pate.
The story would be tedious to relate
Of her and Argus, with his hundred eyes,
Her keeper, who did over her tyrannize:
And now her father Inachus poured out
A flood from's golden pitcher all about.
A cloud of clustring footmen followed fast,
Whose armed armies clouds of dust up cast:
With them brave Grecian youth Aruncus bands,
Rutulus powers, ancient Sicanus hands.
Sacrana's troops, Labicians all proof shields,
Tybers banks dwellers came into the fields:
And they which dwell by Numacks sacred shores,
And on Cir^aean hill, and all the Bores
Which plough Rutulian tops, and Anxur's train,
Where mighty Jove does ever Patron reign:
Woody Feronia, where Satyra lies
With blackish streams, where Vfens swiftly hies
And hides it self in sea. And with these came
Camilla queen of Volscia, of rare fame,
Leading strong troops of horse, and footmen brave
Glistring in arms: her self she did behave
Most like a warlike woman stout and stern:
Nor did she of Minerva list to learn
To handle flax and distaffe, but was strong
Wars to endure, and in swift races long
T'outstrip the rapid winds, and nimbly she
On tops of untoucht standing corn could flee,
And never press down the tender ears in the race:
Or over the swelling waves could run a pace
In midst of the sea, yet scarcely should her heel,
Or sole of the foot seas superficies feel.
All men and maids ran forth of doors to see,
And with amazement to behold, how she
In most majestic and most Martial guise
Riding about her troops, most bravely ties
Her royal purple robes on shoulders light,
And with gold buttons did her hair unite:
And at her back a Lycian quiver wore,
And in her hand a strong steel spear she bore.
An end of the seventh book of Virgils Aeneids.
THE ARGUMENT of the eighth book.
King Turnus from Laurentums tower
Sounds wars alarm: sends for more power
To Diomede by Venulus,
Who shows the cause most hazardous.
Aeneas by advise divine,
With King Euander does combine:
Who lends him aid, and sends his son,
By angry fates, in fight undone.
And now Aeneas fitted fair
For war, and with a harness rare,
Procured by his mother dear,
His fates and fortunes do him cheer.
His arms do much delight his heart,
Chiefly his shields admired art.
AS soon as Turnus from Laurentums fort
Flags of defiance hung forth, made report
Of open war, with trumpets trembling sound:
As soon as horse and foot fierce arms had found:
Their hearts forthwith are flamed, all Latium strong
In hot spurred hasty troops together throng.
Th'unbridled youths with hairebrain'd rage are led:
Captain Messapus, Vfens first makes head,
Mezentius great, God-scorner, next makes haste,
Collects his powers, lays all the country waste:
Venulus to great Diomede was sent,
To ask his aid to show their discontent:
Namely that Troy built nests in Italy,
Aeneas and his conquered deity,
With all his fleet, was on their borders brought,
And must (forsooth) Italia's king be thought;
And that, by fates decree. To which effect
Great power to the Trojans do themselves connect,
That his great fame o're-spread all Latiums land.
And what strange structure may he take in hand,
If fates befriend him? what event may he
Expect from this great war? it is plain to see,
That he through Turnus and Latinus lands,
At Diomedes crown spreads forth his hands.
And these were now Italia's fair affairs,
Which Troyes brave prince overwhelmed with floods of cares,
Soundly survayes, his thoughts here, there, revolving,
Distractively thinks this, that, naught resolving.
Like as the quivering shadow of the sun,
In a brass pan of water quick does run,
By suns or moons most radiant rays inspection,
And flutters all about with quick reflection.
Now high in the air it nimbly leaps and skips,
And suddenly to tops of houses whips.
And now 'twas night when toile-repelling rest,
Over all the earth, men, birds and beasts possessed;
When grave Aeneas in the open air
Lay on a bank perplexed with his warfare:
Whom thus reposed, and laid in slumber sweet,
Fair Tybers God himself does kindly greet.
And from the poplar leaves the aged sire
Seemed to ascend, clothed in gray grave attire,
Of a sail-vail, his head arrayed with reeds
Thus courteously to comfort him proceeds.
Great offspring of the Gods, by whom old Troy
And everlasting Pergame we enjoy,
From foes preserved. O thou long looked for peer,
To all Laurentums land and Latins dear;
Here Is thy sure seat, here thou thy Gods shall place,
Depart not hence, nor fear foes threatening face.
Heavens former fury now is laid aside,
And now (think not vain dreams do thee deride)
Thou shall the mighty white sow great epsy,
With thirrie pigs under the oak-roots lie
Upon the ground, sucking the sowes teats white,
And there is thy cities seat, thy toiles delight.
And hence it is sure that thy Ascanius shall
Within these thirty years build Alba's wall,
And from that noble name, that country call.
I speak but what I know: now by what course,
What yet remains, thou victour may enforce,
Observe it, and I will it briefly show.
The Arcadians, who from Pallas race do grow*
Following their king Euanders ensigns fair,
Did in these parts a place select prepare;
And built a city on the mountains small,
Which they, from Pallant, Palanteum call.
These with the Latins war continually;
Make these thy mates, link in confederacy.
My self will thee right through my streams conduct,
Ane with thine oars all stops to shun, instruct.
Then rise fair Goddess son, by peep of day
So gentle Juno then discreetly pray,
With submisse votes and treats her threats and rage
Endeavor to evince or to assuage:
Having thy hearts desire, pay me my rite:
I am even he, whom there thou see in sight
O'reflowing fertile meads, by banks, smooth fleeting
Skie-colour'd Tyber, whom with kindly greeting
The Gods embrace: Here Is my large habitation,
Here to high towers my head has first foundation.
This said, the river in the pool is hid,
Sunk to the bottom: night and sleep are slid
From grave Aeneas. Up he starteth straight,
And Sols brave shining face does contemplate:
And from the stream his dipped hands lifting high,
These words he vented to the azure sky;
Fair nymphs, rare Laurents nymphs, whence springs do spring,
And thou dear Tyber, rivers sacred king;
Accept Aeneas, all his dangers end,
Where-e're thy pitying spring her streams extend,
Where-e're thy beauteous billows flow apace,
Ever, oh ever shall my gifts thee grace.
O thou horn-headed Italies fair flood,
O now propitious be, streams guider good,
And make thy power appear. This having said,
Two ships out of his fleet he ready made;
His friends he fits with oars, and arms his men.
But here, behold, in sight appeared then
A sudden and an unseen prodigy,
A white sow with her white piggs there did lie
Upon the shore, under roots of a tree:
Which good Aeneas killed, and said, To thee,
To thee, great Juno, this I sacrifice,
And all the brood bring as thine altars prize.
Kind Tyber all that night his floods allayed,
And all their swelling stir most calmly stayed;
And like a lake, or standing-water fair,
Was a still sea, fit for their oars affair.
A way they therefore haste with joyful no^es,
And by the banks the pitched bark smoothly flo^ts.
The waves and woods unused to such rare sights,
Admire the glistring shields of the Trojan knights,
And such rare carved and painted ships to see
Float on the flood. Thus day and night they be
All tired with rowing, and the reaches large
They swiftly pass, and boughs often hide their barge*
And thus they slice calm seas, and pass woods green.
And now in the midst of sky hot Sol was seen
Swiftly ascend: and now they gladly spy
Walls, towers, and tops of peeping houses high,
And Roman power, which now should equalize
The starrie sky: but now in most vveak wise
Euanders realm and regal state did stand.
They nimbly vvinde their vessels to the land,
And to the city haste. By chance that day
Euander unto Hercules did pay
His honors due, a solemn sacrifice,
In a great grove, which 'bout the city lies:
Pallas his son was there, and there were more,
All their choice young men, and a senate poor,
Offering their incense, and hot streaming blood,
Upon the altars in amaze they stood,
Fearfully frighted at the sudden sight
Of such tall ships entering their harbors right,
With silent strokes of oars, and with great dread
They in a fright, all from their ^able^ fl^d.
Whom valliant Pallas did prohibit straigh^
Those sacred rites not to contaminate.
Himself with his drawn sword to shore does fly,
And from the bank aloud aloof does cry;
Young men, what forced you to this unknown way?
Where would ye land? what is your nation? say,
Where do you dwell? What? bring ye peace, or war?
Then grave Aeneas in his ship, a far
Showed forth an olive peaceful branch in's hand,
And friendlily thus answered his demand;
Thou see, brave sire, Trojans and weapons bent
Against the Latins, whom they insolent
Have forced to flight, by proud and unjust war.
We seek Euander: Favor us so far,
As to relate and tell him what I say,
That Dardan peers are come his aid to pray.
Pallas amazed, to hear that famous name,
Says straight, Come forth who'ere, whences'ere ye came,
And speak your self before my fathers face,
A vvelcome guest you are unto this place,
And to our Gods. Then hands they shake and greet,
And on the shore with kind embraces meet.
The river left, into the wood they walk,
And thus Aeneas to the king did talk;
O thou far best of all the Grecian train,
To whom my fortunes do me now ordain
Thy humble suitor, with fair boughs of peace
To seek to thee: and sure all fear did cease,
Although I knew thou wast a Grecian lord,
And that in kindred thou did never accord
With both the Atrida's, Troyes two deadly foes;
Yet on mine own vvorth I did me repose,
And oracles divine of destiny,
And ancestors true consanguinitie,
And thy renown throughout all countries found,
Have me to thee with wished good fortune bound.
Dardan Troyes founder first, and first great king,
(As Greeks relate) did from Electra spring,
Great Atlas daughter, and to Trojans came,
Yea that most mighty Atlas, who heavens frame
Props on his back, begat Electra fair.
Mercury was your sire, whom Maia rare
On Cyllens frigid tops did generate:
And (if we may believe what men relate)
Atlas, even that same Atlas which does stay
Heavens twinkling stars, begat fair Maia.
Thus from one stem our branches both do sprout.
With these strong reasons armed, I thus came out,
Sent not ambassadors, nor used quaint art,
To filch affection from thy friendly heart:
But I, even I my self unto thee came
In mine own person, submisse suits to frame.
The same Rutulian bands which thee infest
With cruel vvarres, do us as much molest:
If us they vanquish, then they think all sure,
To make all Italy their yoke endure:
And all the seas that East or West do lie.
Then take, and give us interchangeably
Firm faith and furth'rance: We have valiant hearts,
Stout stomachs, and brave sparks to act their parts.
Aeneas ceast. The king with steadfast eye
Observed the speakers countenance curiously,
His eyes, and total parts; and briefly thus
Replies; O thou the most magnanimous
Of Trojans brave, O how I thee embrace!
How glad I bid thee vvelcome to this place!
O how thou do thy parents personate!
And great Anchises amply imitate
In face and feature, in thy words and voice!
For I remember, and therein rejoice,
How when king Priam in his progress went
Unto his sister Hesions continent,
To visit her, from Salamina past,
To cold Arcadia's confines came at last.
My youthful chin that time began to bud
With hairie down, and then I wondering stood
To see your Trojan peers, yea I admired
Great Dardans self, and was with joy even fired,
To see Anchises taller then the rest.
Youthful affection boiled in my breast
To talk with him, and hands with him to shake.
I to him went, and joyful did him take
Along with me to my Pheneum fair:
And he bestowed on me a quiver rare,
At his departure, fraught with Lycian shafts,
And a fair mantle wrought with curious crafts,
Richly in gold, two fair guilt bits with reins;
Both which my young son Pallas yet retains.
The peace therefore desired, I ratify:
And here is my hand for firm confederacy.
And when to morrows sun renews earths light,
I Will you dismiss, and aid with means and might.
Meanwhile these annual rites (since here you are
So friendly come) to omit I may not dare.
Pleases you them with us to celebrate,
And at our tables us to associate?
This said, he bids bring back the cups and cates,
And on grass seats, sets down the Troj^^ states.
Chiefly Aeneas on a bed he seated,
Spread with a lions skin, and him entreated
Unto a stately throne. Then youths selected,
Yea and their altars priest their charge effected;
And busily brought in their bull-beef dressed,
Baskets of well baked bread, wine of the best.
Aeneas and the Trojan peers did dine
Upon those entralls, and bull-beef divine.
Their stomachs staid, and hunger qualifi'de,
Thus king Euander to them testifi'de;
This annual feast, and this accustomed cheer,
This great Gods altar, which we year by year
Observe, is not through silly super^tition,
Or error of our antique Gods condition;
But we do this (most noble Trojan guest)
And yearly these due honors are expressed,
Because we were preserved from dangers great.
For proof whereof, behold this rockie seat
Hanging with craggy nooks, whose ruined weight,
Of an old mount seems to precipitate.
Here was a huge and large retiring cell,
Wherein inhumane Cacu^ used to dwell,
Whose filthy face was in so black a plight,
As that Sols rays could never afford it light:
Fresh murders still lay reaking on its flore,
And heads ofmurthered men besmeared in gore
With ghastly looks hung on the odious gates.
Black Vulcan father was (as fame relates)
Unto this monster belching fumie fire
From his foul mouth, who seemed then mounts much higher.
At last, as we desired, heaven sent us aid,
And time thereto most fitly for us made:
For why? Alcides that revenger great
Having performed his conquering retreat
From treble-formed Geryons dire decay,
Enricht with spoils, his beasts all brought away,
And 'bout our fields and floods scarce had they fed,
But Cacus with his theevish fury led,
Whereby no fact most foul, no cunning cheat
He feared to effect, by force or sly deceit,
Four of his fatted oxen stole from's stall,
And four faire-horned heifers therewithal:
And lest their feet the way to's den should show,
By the tails he pulled them backwards to and fro,
Into his den: the caves mouth with a stone
He shut, whsoe way could by no search be shown.
Mean while, when from those stalls great Hercules
To move his full-fed herds of kine did please,
To other parts, the beasts going on along,
Began in the woods to bellow loud and strong.
Where at the caves, beasts lowed loud again,
And Cacus craft was thereby made most plain.
Hereat Alcides, full of furious gall
And griping grief, does to his weapons fall:
His tough and knotty club he fiercely takes,
And with swift pace way to the mountain makes.
Where first our men saw Cacus full of fright,
Swiftlier then wind to's den to take his flight.
F^^re winged his feet. When he himself had closed
Within his cave, and the strong chain unlos'd,
The mighty stone fell down, which by the chain
And Vulcans art, before did fast remain,
And with strong bolts the gate did fortify.
Behold, great Hercules did thither hie;
With rage enflamed, observing every nook,
He this way, that way, up and down did look,
Gnashing his teeth, hot with intestine hate:
Thrice through Aventines mount he does lustrate,
Thrice at the stony gate in vain he beats,
And from the hill, thrice tired, he retreats.
A flintie rock, cut sharp on every side,
With concave back, raised high, hard by he spi'de;
'Bout which were holes, and ravenous vultures nests.
This on the streams left side, he fierce infests,
As it lay bent unto the mountain side,
To loose it on the right, he strongly tried;
And shoving with his shoulders strenuously,
At last it shook: whereat he by and by
Put forth his strength, and roused it from the root,
And it removed: whose movall with loud shout
Did fill the echoing air, the rivers bank,
Leapt up and down, and fearful backward shrank.
And then the den, and Cacus court most wide,
Lay open, and all her duskie deeps were spide.
Much like the earth, enforced deep to cleave,
His bowels dark do yawn, in sunder reave,
And show their shadie cells, irksome to light,
And upward seems of horrid hell full sight:
And souls, the light let in, are sore affright.
By this unlookt for light Cacus thus caught,
And suddenly shut up in the stony vaut,
And made to breathe and bray with unused weight,
Alcides still more loads does congregate,
And all the trash and trump'ry there about,
And boughs and blocks, and mil-stones huge seeks out.
He then (for hope of flight was quite expelled)
Belcht from his throat (most strange to be beheld)
Huge smothering smoke, which filled the rooms with fume,
And from their eyes all light did quite absume,
And made the cave throughout as dark as night,
Thick mists being mixed with fiery flashes bright.
Which Hercules himself could not abide,
But through the flame in rage he headlong hi'de,
Where thickest flakes offume, dark clouds of smoke
Did belch and boil, all in the den to choke.
Thus Cacus in his cave evaporated
Vain flashie vomits, fast incarcerated,
Was by Alcides bound in griping bands,
His fiery eyes squeezed out with his strong hands,
And cloddie blood his chimney-throat did choke.
Then straight the dens black doors being open broke,
All the stolen cattle and base theeveries
Were open laid to Sols all-seeing eyes.
The uglie carcass was by the heels drawn out,
And people never had done to pry about
His odious eyes, foul face, and beastlike breast,
O'regrown with hair, with flames his chaps oppressed.
E're since our joyful youths did celebrate
A day of triumph for this happy fate.
Potitius was first founder of the same,
And keeper of Pinarius sacred frame,
And for him did to Alcides sacrifice,
And in this grove this altars edifice
Did fairly frame, thus stately as you see,
Which is our best, and so shall ever be.
Therefor brave youths, such honors due to pay,
With boughs dress all your brows, shunning delay,
Take your full bowls in hand, pour wine most free,
And let our Gods in common called on be.
This said, he with Herculean poplar boughs,
Fair, double-colour'd, decks his head and brows:
Whose branches dangled down, and wine in's hand,
In sacred bowls, all suddenly do stand
About the altar, pouring plenteous wine,
And joyful votes vent to the powers divine.
Meanwhile the evening drew on duskie sky,
And now the priests, Potitius specially,
Went (as they are wont) in skins apparrelled,
With tapers in their hands, and ordered
The banquets brave, with second courses meet,
And load the board with store of juncates sweet.
The singing Salii then stood round about,
With poplar boughs their heads adorned, set out:
The young men here, the old men there were seated,
And Hercules his praise in songs repeated,
And all his famous facts: First, how with ease
His stepdames snakes he with both hands did squease,
And strangle dead: And how he did destroy
Brave cities strong, Oechalia and old Troy:
How in king Eurystheus troublous land
A thousand toils, by Juno's fierce command,
He underwent. How thou, unconquered knight,
Did ruinate, by thy resistlesse might,
Those cloud-begotten mongrell Cent^ures great,
Hylaeus and foul Pholus, and did beat,
Yea kill the Cretan Minotaure most fierce,
And a huge lion mortally did pierce,
Upon Nemea's banks. Thou hideous hell
Did make to tremble, and hells porter fell,
Lurking in's bloody den, on bones half gnawn,
Who by thy might was from his kennell drawn.
Nor could misshapen shapes thee once affright,
No nor Typhoeus self with armed might.
Nor wast thou then of wit and worth devoid,
When Lerna's dragon fiercely thee annoyed
With horrid heaps of heads. All hail therefore
Thou son of Jove, with Gods, whom we adore,
Accept us and our gifts: propitious be.
And thus his praise in lays they sang most free.
But Cacus den they chiefly memorize,
And how from Cacus mouth the fire out flies;
And all the woods, and hills and dales resound
This famous fact of Hercules renowned.
These sacrifices done, all now retreat
Unto the town, the king in state complete,
Full of grave years, went on, and on each side
Aeneas and his son with him abide.
And thus he past, and past the time in talk.
And good Aeneas wonders, as they walk,
And glanced his eyes about on every sight;
Affected with each place full of delight,
He questions every object, and must know
How every ancient monument did grow.
Then king Euander, Romes great founder, said,
In these woods Pauni and fair wood-nymphs stayed,
And kinds of men, of trunks of trees begot,
And of hard oaks, whom nature did allot
No nurture good, nor customs commendable,
And working oxen how to use, unable:
Riches to get, or got to keep, unskilled;
And heps and haws and hunted cheer them filled;
Old Saturn first came from Olympus high,
Shunning Jove's power, banished from's emperie.
He those untutour'd people, straggling wide
About the woods and mountains, beautifi'de:
He gave them laws, called their land Italy,
For there he lived in long security.
Under whose rule and regiment most sage,
Was then (as men report) the golden age:
In such sweet peace he did them regulate
Till by degrees times did degenerate,
And a more vicious age began to reign,
And bloody broiles, and greediness of gain.
Then came Ausonia's powers and nations strange,
And fair Saturnus lands name often did change.
Then kings came in, and Tybers torrent main,
From whose surname, the river did retain
That name, by us Italians having quite
Lost the true name of Albula most white.
I exiled from my land, did float along
In seas extremities, till fortune strong,
And fierce resistlesse fate did fix me here,
Moved by monitions of my mother dear,
Goddess Carmenta, and Apollo wise,
Whose oracles thereto did me advise.
Scarce said he thus, when walking on in state,
He showed her tomb, and Romes Carmentall gate;
Which men in honor of Carmentis fair,
A Goddess nymph, and prophetess most rare,
Erected had, who first did sing the praise
Of famous Trojans, to ensuing days,
And noble Pallant^u^. And showed us
The mighty wood, which warlike Romulus
Made a safeguarding sanctuary fair,
And on a rock the Lupercall most rare,
Of Lycean Pan, unto him consecrated,
And in the Arcadian custom dedicated.
Beside, he showed Argilets cursed grove,
And against the place, disgrace (protest by Jove)
Of faithless Argus his injurious guest.
Hence to Tarpeia's tower he us addressed,
And the now rarely gilded Capitol,
Which once with shadie shrubs being covered all,
Excessive fear of that affrighting place
Did terrify the hearts of the Bores most base;
Even then they gave the rock and grove great grace.
This grove (says he) this bushie hill so steep
Some God (but who, uncertain it is) did keep.
The Arcadians think they Jove himself did see,
When often fierce storms and crackling thunder he
Made fly about the sky. Besides, behold
These two demolisht towns, the fragments old
And rude remains of ancient men of fame:
Old Ianus this, Saturn did the other frame.
Ianiculum was this, Saturnia that.
And thus along they past with this kind chat,
To poor Euanders buildings, where they view
About the Roman courts a scattered crew
Of cattle, 'bout the edifices fair.
Thus when they did unto his court repair,
This court (says he) great Hercules did hold,
This palace him received. Brave guest, be bold
To spurn at worldly pelf, thy self to show
Like a great God, not scorning fortunes low.
He ceast: and brave Aeneas he brought in
Into his court of princely state most thin,
Placed him upon a leafie quilted bed,
With a fierce Libyan beere-skin overspread.
Dark night rusht down, whose black wings earth did hide:
But Venus, as a mother, terrifi'de,
And at Italia's troops sorely perplexed,
And with Laurentums threats in mind much vexed,
Thus from her golden bed to Vulcan speaks,
And in love-charming words thus silence breaks;
Whiles Grecian kings with wars well wasted Troy,
And for men's fires did her fair towers destroy,
I sought no succor for those woeful men,
No arms nor art of thine to help them then,
Nor thee (my dearest love) could I in vain,
Nor thy rare skill, to exercise constrain,
Though much I ought to Priams sons relief,
And my Aeneas toiles cost me much grief.
Now Rutuls land by Jove's command him holds,
Me therefore now (sweet heart) thy love embolds
To supplicate: I only arms do crave,
A mother for her child: Dame Thetis brave
And fair Aurora could thee move with tears.
My dearest heart, see, see, what frighting fear,
What troops are mustred, cities up are shut,
Sharpning their horns, at me and mine to but.
She ceast: and with her snowie arms most white
About the neck she clasps him soft and light.
He seems to shrink, she clings and toys the more:
He on a sudden felt loves honey-rore
Soak in, and wonted flames to heat his heart,
And to o'respread his bones and every part:
Much like fierce thunder from clouds rumbling ripped,
When flashie flames through the air have nimbly skipt^
She gladly found her fraud and face most fair
To Have pierced her husbands heart, and cured her care.
Then father Vulcan bound in loves sweet chains,
Replied, and said, Sweet soul, what thee constrains
To use such far fetched phrases unto me?
Sweet Goddess, where is thy trust 'twixt me and thee?
Alas dear heart, had former care been so,
Even then we might have armed Troy from woe.
Nor Jupiter, nor fates Troyes bliss denied,
But Priam might yet other ten years 'bide.
Now if thou will to war, if here thou art bent,
What e're my art can add for adjument,
What steel and iron, brass or silver plate,
What fire and blasts can best consolidate,
(Cease needless prayers) distrust not thine own strength,
It Is all for thee. This having said, at length
He gave her long embraces, loving greets,
And on her bosom tasted all loves sweets.
Thus when sweet midnights rest was past and spent,
Like a good huswife, thriftie, provident,
Who timely rising closely cards and spins,
Her cinders builds, to make her fire begins,
Blows the quick coals, working, turns night to day,
And makes her maids their bones to work to lay,
With toyling tasks, her self well to maintain,
And all her charge and children to sustain:
Even so, uxorious Vulcan, iron-tamer,
Ignipotent, most excellent arms framer,
Early starts up, his basking bed forsakes,
And him to's iron instruments betakes.
Near Sicili^ an isle aloof there lies,
Lipara and Aeolia; whence there flies
Much fire and wind, much fume and furious din*
Under which lies a cave and deep within:
The Cyclops Aetnaean forges grown in the rocks,
Do through the chimneys vent such thundering knocks,
And bouncing blows upon the anviles smit,
And tinkering strokes with nimble hammers hit,
As loudly echo out with clanging sound
Of steel and iron, battered long and round
Upon the anviles shrill, into broad plates,
The forge-fire sputtering puffes evaporates.
Here Is Vuloans house, here is vaste Vulcania town,
Hither from heaven this fire-fierce god came down.
In this large cave the Cyclops iron frame;
There brangling Brontes fast does file the same:
There streporous Steropes makes sparks to fly,
Naked Pyracmon does at the anvile lie.
A yet unfinisht fiery work they wrought,
But in some part, to some perfection brought,
Some thunderbolt, which Jove from heaven did smite,
(As on the earth do many of them light)
Some part unpolisht was. Three clattering showers
Of winter-hail upon the work he poures,
And three of springtide rain, three flashes swift
Of summer flames, three puffes of autumn drift.
Thus at their work fierce frightfull flashes fly,
Bright rapid lightning rage, and by and by
With fearful rumbling, thumping thwacks of art
They beat about. Then on another part
A chariot with swift wheels for Mars they made,
Wherewith he town and townsmen makes afraid,
A coat of arms for angry Pallas they
With snake-like scales and gold did overlay:
And in the breast plate of the Goddess fair
Serpentine Gorgons heads in wreaths there are,
Chopped from the neck, whose gogling glarie eyes
Rouling in rage, beholders stupifies.
Away (says Vulca^) lay away with speed
All other works, you lads of Aetnaean breed,
And hither bend your thoughts, rare arms to frame,
For a renowned prince of matchless fame.
Now show your strength, your nimble hands, rare art,
Come, come, make haste. This said, each plays his part,
And fast they fall to work, each takes his place,
Gold, silver, brass, steel-mettals, boil apace:
And being melted, run like streams about.
And first a goodly targe they forged out,
Even one against all the adverse Latin shafts,
With fourteen folds and crosse-barre turning drafts:
Some at the bellows put in, puff out blasts;
Some hissing hot-iron into the water casts:
The whole shop rings with thick quick anvile blows,
And each his arms in order fiercely throws,
To give his stroke, and with the tongs to turn
The massy metal, which red-hot does burn.
Whiles Vulcan in Aeolian puffy plains
Thus busy was, the rising sun constrains
Euander from his palace poor to rise,
Wakned by morning-chanting birds in skies:
Who gravely risen, and apparelled meet,
And Tuscanes sandals laced on his feet:
Then his Arcadian blade he hangs by's side,
Which on his left hung by a panthers hide.
A lease of lusty dogs did on him vvait,
Guarding their master from the palace gate.
Thus to his guest Aeneas lodgings went
This Hero brave, mindful of's high intent,
And of his promised aid. With no less care
Aeneas in the morning does prepare.
With Pallas young the king associated,
Achates kind Aeneas comitated.
Met, they shake hands, and down together sit,
And having time for talk, and leisure fit,
The king thus first began; Great prince of Troy,
I never shall think (whiles thou do life enjoy)
Troyes crowns and comforts to be brought to thrall*
Our forces, I confess, are too too small,
To give so great a prince aid competent:
On one side we by Tuscanes stream are pent,
On the other side troops of Ru^ulians stout,
With clattering arms our walls do hedge about:
But I am mustring for thee mighty bands,
A people strong, and very rich in lands:
Which happy hap, unlookt for luck has given,
And thou art come, by fates decree, from heaven.
Not far from hence the city Agylla,
An ancient stony basis does display,
Once Lydia called, famous for battles bold,
Which once did all Etruria mountains hold.
This land, which fairly flourisht many years,
Proud king Mezentius ruled with cruel fears.
Why should I mention all his murders fierce?
Or why this tyrants facts most foul rehearse?
The Gods repay it on his impious head!
Besides, he bound live bodies unto dead,
Coupling them hands to hands, and face to face,
(Ah horrid torment) in which foul embrace,
Them all-besmear'd with putrefaction ill,
He with a lingering death thus used to kill.
His people tired with this tyranny,
At last in arms him and his family,
Plotting more impious pranks, they close surrounded,
Slew all his mates, with fire his house confounded.
He in these broiles to Rutuls realm did fly,
To Turnus harbor, for security.
Then all Etruria in just fury came,
Their king with arms, for due revenge, they claim.
Thou great Aeneas, of these thousands brave
The leading and the Martial guide shall have.
For all their ships stand ready ridg'd at shore,
And fluttering flags do hang the decks before:
An aged southsayer singing secret fates,
Does them withold, saying, O choice Lydian mates,
Of pristine potentates the cream and flower,
Whom just revenge incenseth with strong power
Against your foes, and whom Mezentius base
Has stimulated, with just wrath to chase:
No native of Italia may such bands
Conduct; then seek a captain from strange lands.
These things did all Etruria much dismay,
Yet still in field their ensigns they display:
And troubled at these heavenly destinies,
Tarchon himself sent orators most wise
To me* with regal robes and presents rare,
Desiring I would to their tents repair,
And of great Tuscanes state take tutelage.
But me, my feeble and congealed old age,
And faint unfitnes to activity,
Denies that proffered state and sovereignty.
My son I would have sent: but mixed blood
With His mothers fair Sabella, thus withstood,
By whom part of those parts to him inclined.
But thou, whose years, and whose heroic mind
The fates do favor, and the Gods provide:
O thou Troyes and Italia's valiant guide,
Do thou assume this charge. And here my boy,
Pallas my son, my hope and future joy,
To thee I will commit, to thee commend,
On thee his Martial master to attend;
VVarres burden great with thee to undergo,
Rare feats of arms from thee to see and know,
And from his childehood thy rare parts to admire.
And (as the present case does now require)
Two hundred brave Arcadian horsemen strong,
All chosen youths, I give to go along:
Pallas in's own name likewise does the same.
Scarce to an end of's words the king yet came,
And that Aeneas and Achates kind,
Their eyes fixed on the ground, their troubled mind
Full of afflicting thoughts: when suddenly
Fair Cytherea in a serene sky,
Gave them a sign: for why, a sudden sight
In the open air of wondrous glistring light,
With rushing rattling noise, quick over them came,
And seemed to shake the universal frame:
And they supposed the Tuscane trump they heard,
And more and more the rattling roar was reared.
And then between the clouds in pleasant sky
Bright-shining and loud-sounding arms they spy,
With thundering noise, which did the rest affright:
But Troyes brave prince discerned the sound aright,
And thought on's sacred mothers promise made:
And therefore to them thus at last he said;
Kind host, fear not, nor seek what accident
These signs fore-show, for me heaven has them sent.
Venus, divine creatrix of each thing,
Promised she would this sign upon me bring,
If wars were waged: and that for my protection,
She Would bring me Vulcans arms, with sweet affection.
Alas! what woeful wars are imminent
Unto Laurentums nation turbulent!
What vengeance on thee, Turnus, shall I take!
How many helms and targets shall I make,
And bodies of brave captains, to be rould
About thy banks and brims, fair Tyber old!
Thy armies making, yet still marring peace:
This said, from farther talk he now did cease,
And from his seat himself he raised higher;
And first of all he kindled the sleep-fire
On Hercules his altars, and renews,
With joyful heart, yesterdayes sacred dues,
Unto the petty Gods, and both the king
And Trojan youths, slain sacrifices bring.
This done, his ships and mates he goes to see:
Amongst whose troops, those whom he found most free
With active hearts his wars to undertake,
He chose to him; those that would him forsake,
Down the declining river thence he sent,
Who without sails homeward most smoothly went*
To carry to Ascanius future news
Both of his father and his facts issues.
Then horses to the Trojans given were,
To Tyrrhene territories them to bear,
But to Aeneas they a choice one gave,
Clad with a lions skin, with gold claws brave.
Fame quickly flew over all the city small,
That to the king, through Tuscan^ horsemen tall,
Did posting ri^e. Women with extreme fear
Did double their designs: in men appear
Doubts of the worst and wars more open face.
Then grave Euander, with a kind embrace,
Tears gushing out, his parting guest held fast,
And lovingly into these speeches brast;
O if my years of youth Jove would restore,
(As once when at Praeneste heretofore
I routed my foes ranks, and victour stout,
Burnt heaps of captains targets all about.
This hand king Herils soul sent under earth,
Whose mother, fair Feroni^, at his birth
Infused in him three souls (ho^rid to tell)
By which three weapons he could handle well:
And therefore must be three times vanquished,
Thrice slain, and thrice of's arms disfurnished.)
O then, sweet son, I Would never disjoined have been
From thy sweet greets, nor have endured to have seen
Mezentius proud, my bloody borderer,
Such vaunts and villainies 'bout me to infer,
Such murders to have made, a town so good
By husbands loss to weep in widow-hood.
But oh great Jove, and ye the Gods on high,
Pi^ie Arcadia's kings great misery;
And hear a parents prayers, and your great love
Let me in my poor Pallas safety prove:
And if I live to see him safe again,
Life thus I crave, for this I Will bear all pain.
But if, fierce fates, you threaten dire distress,
Now, oh now end these days of wretchedness,
Whiles thoughts are doubtful, hope of hap's unknown,
Whiles thee, my child, my sole, sure joy alone,
I yet may clasp in these mine aged arms,
Before sad news my heart pierce with thy harms.
Thus this good father these sad words poured out,
At parting; and his tendants round about,
Him, fainting, falling, carried in with care.
And now Aeneas on his courser rare
Mounted, rode foremost forth, Achates kind,
With all his Trojan peers, with cheerful mind,
And princely Pallas in the midst of all
In rich-wrought arms, conspicuously tall,
With a short coat: like Lucifer most bright
Shining upon the oceans waves at night,
(Which Venus loves above each ignean star)
Whose lustrous beams are the most bright. by far.
The women on the walls stood fearfully,
And clouds of dust, and glistering arms did eye.
The next way they through bush-paths armed ride,
The fields even quake with horse-hoofs prancing pride.
Near C^rits flood a mighty wood does lie,
Which ancients far and near religiously
Held in great honor, closed on evey side
With hollow banks, 'bout which thick firre-woods 'bide.
Fame says, the ancient Greeks did sacred yield
Unto Sylvanus, God of beasts and field,
The grove and solemne-day, that in old-time
That they first held the Latins lands and clime.
Not far from hence brave Tarchons army stout,
Of his Etruria troops lay campt about:
And from a high hill he might see their bands,
How they lay spread about their fields and lands.
Hither Aeneas with his choice youths addressed,
And there their weary selves and horse they rest.
But beauteous Goddess Venus through the skies
With her rare gifts unto Aeneas hies,
And in a separate valley by a brook,
As soon as on her son she cast a look,
She to him comes, and these words uttered*
See here, dear son, the gifts I promised,
By my kind husbands art thus perfected:
Now fear no Laurent strong, nor Turnus stout,
In field to fight with, and to single out.
This said, fair Venus did her son embrace,
And under an oak the glistering arms did place.
He overjoyed, and wondrously affected
With such the Goddess gifts to be respected,
And highly honored, gluts his gazing eyes,
And with strange wonder every parcel spies,
And turns and winds betwixt his arms and hands,
The horrour-striking helm, like flaming brands
Vomiting fire, and the death-wounding blade,
A brazen breast plate very richly made,
Big, and bloud-red of hue: like Sols bright rays,
When its fair shine abroad it self displayes
Upon some rainbow cloud, full opposite.
Then he admires his silver-boots most light,
With gold and ammell wrought, and well refined,
His lance and shield most strangely stuffed and lined.
For here Italian facts, Romes victories,
Fire-furious Vulcan, seen in prophesies,
And future strange events, had graven fair:
And here Ascanius issuing offspring rare,
And all his famous fights, were pictured brave:
How a great she-wolf in stout Mars his cave
Brought forth her young, and how two chopping boys
At mothers dugs lay dandling, mothers joys;
Who did her fearelesse twins, most loving, lick,
And with her tongue make necks and bodies slick.
Hard by stood Rome, and ravished Sabine dames
By troops assembled at Circean games.
And how new wars did suddenly arise
Unto the Romans, Cures, Tatius wise,
And how (at last) contentions laid aside,
Those armed kings about Jove's shrine did 'bide,
W^^h bowls in hand, and having slain a swine,
As kind confederates, did in league combine.
Not far from thence Metius was pictured,
By horses torn, and quit dismembered;
(But thou Albanus stoodst not to thy word)
And all the bowels of that lying lord
Tullus tore out, and dragged them through the wood,
And all the briers besprinckled with his blood.
How king Porsenna charged Rome to re-take.
Their banished Tarquine, and how for his sake
The city with a hard siege he did crush,
When on their swords, for freedom, Romans rush.
There you might see him rage, and threat and fret,
'Cause Cocles durst the bridge break down and get.
How captived Chlaelia, having broke his bands,
Swamme over the river stoutly with her hands.
How on the top of high Tarpeia's tower
Brave Manlius stood, and with undanted power
The temple and the Capitol defended,
And all the reed-thatcht palace that ascended,
Did tumble down, and the white-feathered goose
In the guilt gallery, cackling, fluttering loose,
Frighted the French, and their approach discride,
Whom clambering up, thick bushes did so hide,
And benefit of black night, aid therein,
That they got up, and so the tower did win:
Whom goldy locks and golden garments decks
With purple jackets, and their milk-white necks
With bracelets graced, in hand two Alpine spears,
A long shield over his corpse each soldier bears.
The dancing Salii, P^ns priests, naked quite,
VVool-wearing Flamines, Numa's target slight,
Which fell from heaven, were curiously set out,
And how the modest matrons bare about
In easy coaches, their most sacred rites:
Aloof from these were horrid hells affrights,
Black Pluto's gates, and damned souls dire pains:
And thou, base Catiline, hungst there in chains,
On a steep tumbling rock, with Furies jaws
Frighted: But Cato, giving wholesome laws,
Sat amongst the good: in a sequestered place
Betwixt both these, sea-waves with golden face
Did run abroad, and boyl'd-up froth most white;
About were dolphins engraved in silver bright,
In circles with their tails the billows sweeping,
And cutting through the waves, their course^ keeping.
In midst of whom you gilded ships might see:
How Martial sports yearly solemnized be:
How all Leucates with fierce wars did sweat,
And waves of seas like gold to glister neat:
And how Augustus Caesar by wars might
With Latiums peers and people ruled right,
His small and great Gods his tall ship ascending,
From his fair brows two glistring flames extending,
And over his head his fathers star most bright.
On the other side, Agrippa with great might
With friendly Gods and gales his army led,
His Martial ensigns being bravely spread,
Sea-conquest garlands garnishing his head.
How with Barbarian aid Antonius great
In various conquests did Romes foes defeat,
And amongst the Indies black and Egypt long,
By red sea shores, and orient forces strong,
To Increase his strength, all Asia to him drew,
Whom Cleopatra (shameful) did pursue.
All rusht together, the whole sea did seem,
Wrought up with winding oars, thick froth to steam;
The foredecks one another dashing fast:
And to the ocean thus they get at last.
Thou Would think the isles roused up did swim and meet,
That mighty mountains did high mountains greet.
With so great strength men strenuously did strive,
Their towering vessels close to force and drive.
Wildfire from hands, steel-shafts from bows are sped:
New broiles on Neptunes soiles do die seas red.
The queen in the midst her troops with trump does cheer,
As yet her fatal snakes do not appear.
But all the rout of monstrous Gods, mere fiends,
Yea barking Anubis his weapons bends
Against great Neptune, Pallas, Venus fair.
Amidst their troops mad Mars does stamp and stare,
Carved in a garb of steel, and horrid hagges
Sent by great Jove, and Discord in torn rags
Skips jocand amongst them: whom Bellona fierce
Follows with bloody whips their hearts to pierce.
Actian Apollo these things well did eye,
Straight bent his bow, at them from heaven let fly.
Whereat in terror all the Egyptian rout,
Arabians, Indians, and Sabaeans stout,
Turned backs and fled: the queen herself also
Was heard to wish for winds, hoise sails, and go,
Yea fly full fast, slackning the ropes and sail.
The black-fire furious God with Western gale
And tydie-waves, her, looking ghastly white
With fear of future death, amidst the fight,
Did drive along: but yet against the same
With mighty body weeping Nilus came,
Opening her bosom, calling back again
Her thus surprised and quite conquered men
Into her livid lap and unfound springs.
But Caesar, conqueror of these adverse things,
Thrice born in triumph 'bout Romes royal walls,
His everlasting vow to mind recalls,
To his Italian Gods does sacrifice,
And through the city with great joy likewise
Three hundred temples built: the streets throughout
Do ring with sports and peoples joyful shout:
Each temple filled with dancing matrons fair,
About the altars singing songs most rare,
And every altar fraught with heifers slain.
Caesar himself in the temple did remain
Of pure Apollo, in the porch most white,
And of the nations gifts taking full sight,
Fits the rich posts with choice of royal spoils.
The captives conquered in the wars turmoiles
Are led along, in speech as different,
As in their habits, arms and ornament.
Here mudling Mulciber had cast in brass,
Fierce Scythians and black Moors in gowns to pass:
Here Caraeans, Lelages, Gelonians stout,
Skillful in casting darts, he pictured out.
And here Euphrates streams did smoothly glide,
And French Morinians, who remote reside:
Two-corner'd Rhine, undanted Daians stout,
Araxes swift over his bridge swelling out.
These rarities of Vulcan in his shield,
His mothers gift, cause of much wonder yield:
The things unknown, the figures him affect,
Friends fame and fates he bears with choice respect.
An end of the eighth book of Virgils Aeneids.
THE ARGUMENT of the nineth book.
Whiles on both sides the state thus stands
Of their affairs, Juno commands
Turnus to hasten against his foe,
The Trojans ships to overthrow,
By flinging fire into the fleet:
But Jove does with their project meet,
And turns the ships into nymphs shapes.
Two friends go forth, but neither scapes.
Trojans their camps do bravely hold,
A scanius kills Numanus bold.
Pell-mell they fight, but Turnus stout
Bitias and Pandar puts to rout,
And Trojans from their trenches beats:
But tired with troops, he thence retreats.
ANd now, whiles thus the ^ffaires on both sides stand,
Juno from heaven sent Iris out of hand
To supine Turnus, who took up his seat
In The sacred dale of Pilumns grove most great.
To whom Thaumantias with fair face thus said;
Turnus, behold, what none of the Gods, though prayed,
Durst ere have promised, time now profers free.
Aeneas leaving all behind for thee,
C^mp, mates, and fleet, to king Euander's gone:
Yet rests not so, but farther is past on,
To Corits utmost confines, Lydians strong
With rustic wrath in arms to lead along.
What fear thou? it is high time, leave all delay,
With horse and chariots now to make thy prey
On their confused camp. Thus having said,
With well-poys'd wings to the heavens herway she made;
And in her flight she cuts her mighty bow
Under a cloud. The young prince did her know,
And lifting both his hands up to the skies
After her, flying, with these words he flies;
Fair Iris, heavens great grace, who did thee force,
Thus from the clouds to me to have recourse?
Whence is this sudden storm, so bright and clear?
Me thinks I see heaven cleft in the midst appear;
And straggling stars from proper pole declines:
Who e're me call^ to arms, so sacred signs
I Will follow fast. This said, to the stream he hastes,
And of the water a deep draught he tastes,
Loading his Gods with prayers and protestations.
And now his troops to field made properations,
Rich of rare horse, embroidered clothes and gold.
The valiant vantguard by Messapus bold,
The rereward by brave Tyrrhus youths was led,
The main battalion Turnus marshalled,
Advancing his brave arms far 'bove the rest:
Like flowing Ganges with seven streams addressed,
And silent running; or like fertile Nile
O'reflowing fields, yet couching close the while.
A sudden black-dust cloud the Trojans spide,
Growing far off, darkness the fields do hide.
Whereat first Caicus from a cross bank cries,
Fair friends, what cloud-like troop does yonder rise?
Fly to your swords and spears, get up the walls:
Alas! our foe on us already falls,
Hereat the Trojans raise a piteous cry,
But close about the wall and gates they lie.
For so, at's parting, wise Aeneas had
His army charged, if any fortune bad
Should them befall; and not in battle ray
In field to try the fortune of the day,
But keep their camp with forts and trenches strong.
Though therefore shame and rage provoke them long,
Battle to join; yet they do fortify
And guard the gates, and do obsequiously
As they were charged. Thus well prepared in arms,
They in their forts expect their foes alarms.
Now Turnus all his tardie troops out-^iding,
Twenty choice knights about his body biding,
Was on a sudd^n to the city nigh:
Whom a white spotted steed most prancingly
Of Thracian breed did bear; upon his head
A golden helm with a crest beauteous red.
O who is he, brave sparks, amongst you all,
(Says he) with me first on our foes dares fall?
With that he cast a dart into the air,
(The onset to the fight) with courage rare;
Entering the field himself, his mates in arms
Following him fast with clamorous loud alarms,
Wondering to see the Trojans cowardice,
(As they supposed) not daring t'enterprise
To fight the field, in arms to play the men,
But keep their camps: he in a fury then
Does gallop up and down the wall about,
For fierce assaults, a fit place to spy out.
And as a ravening wolf all hungerbit,
Does roave and rave, and 'bout the sheepfold sit,
At midnight dark enduring wind and weather,
To watch and catch the prey; the lambs together
Keep with their dammes, and do securely bleat;
The wolf without rages about for meat,
Extremely vexed to see the sheep so pent,
And he so long to suck their blood so bent:
Even so Rutulian Turnus hunts about
The walls and trenches, extreme rage flames out.
Hate heats his heart, to know by what means best,
To find a way the Trojans to infest*
And flying out of their forts, compulsively
To force them to the field: then does he spy
Their fleet, which did behind their camp lie sure,
And which strong walls of waves did safe immure.
This he assails, and all his mates desires,
To bring in haste store of consuming fires:
And first himself cast in a pine-board flame;
And all his soldiers forthwith do the same.
Their princes presence stimulates their hearts,
Thus all the youth with firebrarnds play their parts,
And fling about fierce flames, and to the skies
Made mighty fumes with pich and tar arise.
Tell me, fair Muses, what so mighty power,
Permitted not such fierce flames to devour?
And turned to ashes all Troyes navy great?
Though future times may former facts repeat
With hard belief; this facts fame never shall die:
When first in Phrygian isle most carefully
Aeneas did a fleet for sea prepare,
The Gods great mother, Berecynthia fair,
Is said, her son great Jove thus to entreat;
Dear son, since thou now rul'st olympus great,
Grant thy entreating mother this request;
A pine tree wood long time I loved best,
In The height whereof a gallant grove there stood,
Whither were brought me sacrifices good;
Shadowed it was with firres and maples brave:
These to the Trojans use I freely gave,
When they to build them ships had special need:
Now anxious fear much care does in me breed.
Of this fear free me: grant me this request,
That by no nimble course they be distressed,
Nor overthrown by fire or furious wind,
Let all that thence do grow this favor find.
Her son, which rules the world and starrie sky,
Unto his mother made this brief reply;
Whither (dear mother) would thou fates incline?
Or what request for them is this of thine?
Can mortal things immortal states possess?
Or can Aeneas sail free from distress?
What God so great can in this case be free?
Nay, when Troyes princes sailings finished be,
When Trojans Latiums ports and parts have gained;
Whats'ever ships from storms shall have remained,
I Will take from them their mortal shape and form,
And them into sea-nymphs I will transform;
Like Nerean Clotho, Galatea fair,
Cutting the foamy waves with breast most bare.
He said it, swore it, for more confirmation,
By's brother Styxes foul floods inundation;
By pichy streams, and Pluto's black gulfs banks,
And nods, whose nods whole heaven affrights and blanks.
The promised day wa^ come, fates now fulfill
The due designed time to Jove's great will;
When Turnus turbulent, injurious deed,
Moved the great mother of the Gods, with speed
To free her sacred ships from his fierce flame.
Here first to sight a sudden brightness came,
A mighty cloud from the Eastern sky did glide,
And all the Idaean damsells were discride.
Then from the skies a thundering voice was heard,
Dear Trojans, of my ships be not afraid,
Nor struggle ye to shield them with strong arm.
Ere Turnus does my sacred ships least harm,
He sooner shall with fire burn up the seas:
Go sea-nymphs, go (says she) swim loose at ease,
Your mother bids you. Straight at her commands
Each ship from shore most nimbly brake their bands;
And presently, like dolphins, duck and dive,
And like so many virgins fair alive,
(Strange to behold) in sea they all appear;
So many ships, so many nymphs were here.
All the Rutulians hereat stood amazed,
Messapus self hereat with terror gazed,
And all his frighted horse: the stream stands still,
Tyber retreats, and vents out voices shrill.
Yet for all this Turnus turns all to the best,
His courage and his confidence are pressed:
Boldly he cheeres them, boldly chides them thus;
These monstrous signs are surely ominous
Unto the Trojans: Jove himself, you see,
Takes from them thus all hope and help, to flee:
Rutulians need not sword or fire to infest,
From sea fight, sea-flight Trojans are distressed.
Thus part of their protections from them taken,
All the land-power does in our hands remain.
For many thousands armed in Italy
We have: Troyes scarre-crows cannot us terrify.
If Trojans of the great Gods answers boast,
The fates and Venus have them given the most
They can desire, Latiums fair land to see:
On the other side, are not my fates to me,
That cursed stock with sword to ruinate,
Which would a wife perforce praeoccupate.
Nor Agamemnons kin this sole concerns,
Nor Greeks alone this grief due caution learns,
To arm themselves: Enough one wrack had been,
If they enough had held it, once to sin.
Should not all women to them hateful be?
What trust in trivial trenches can they see?
Delays by ditches, thus to pride their mind?
Which they small distances from death shall find.
Have they not seen Troyes walls, by Neptune wrought,
(Maugre their might) to ashes to be brought?
But oh brave sparks! who of you will with me
Break through their trenches, and most fiercely flee
Upon their quaking camps? I have no need
Of Vulcans arms, or thousand ships ofspeed
Against these trembling Trojans: Let them get
All their Etrurian mates with them to abet:
I Will seek no shades, no shelters of dark night,
No theevish horses paunch, by Pallas slight;
Let them not fear their watch-towers to be slain:
For we by day most stoutly will maintain
The battle brave, and girt their walls with fire.
I Will make them know, that now with Grecian ire,
Or Greekish spirits they do not contest,
Whom their great Hector ten years did molest.
But now since more then half the day is past,
What yet remains, but that with sweet repast
Every one fit himself to play the man,
Bravely to end what he so well began?
Meanwhile the care of keeping watch and ward
By Sentinels, with vigilant regard
About the gates, is to Messapus granted,
Who about the walls with sword and fire is planted.
Fourteen Rutulian captains were chose out,
Each guarded with his hundred soldiers stout
In glistring azure arms, adorned with gold:
And these their quarters 'bout the trench must hold.
They spread themselves, change turns, laid on the ground,
And wine in bowls they all carouse profound,
Making huge fires, in mirth and much delight
Breaking their sleep, and wasting (thus) the night.
These things the Trojans from their trenches spy,
And armed, all do keep themselves on high:
Yet with great care and fear the gates they guard,
With bridges and strong barricadoes barred,
Still armed: brave Mnestheus and Serestus stout,
Whom in all straits and cases of great doubt,
Aeneas over his youth chief guidance gave,
And made commanders bravely them behave.
Each band abode in watch upon the wall,
And took his turn as dangers did them call.
Courageous Nisus strongly kept one gate,
Whom Ida's huntresse sent, Aeneas mate,
By Hyrtacus his father bravely bred,
At bow and arrows well experienced.
Next him Euryalus, his faithful friend,
Whose beauteous countenance did him commend
Past all the Trojans, but no arms did bear,
For yet smooth unshaven down his chin did wear.
Each loved alike, and each for other fought,
Each kept the gate by course with courage stout.
Thus then says Nisus to Euryalus;
Dear brother, have the Gods enflamed thus
Our hearts with love? or is man's genius high
A God unto himself? Long time have I
Been moved in mind, some fight or fact most great
To enterprise; nor can I quench this heat.
Thou see those proud Rutulians hopes most high,
Their various fires, how they even buried lie
In wine and sleep, how all all-o're is still:
Now mark, I pray, what doubts my heart do fill,
And whereon now I muse and meditate:
Does not our army now expost^late?
Both peers and people, with a joint consent,
To call Aeneas home incontinent,
Send men and messages of our estate,
Him to enform. If they will remunerate
Thee for the fact which now I Will undertake,
(For to my self fame shall requital make)
Me thinks I could break through our enemies,
And by that bank a passage enterprise
To Pallanteum. Fair Euryalus
Hereat astonished, yet most valourous,
With love of la^d enflamed, says with brave mind
To his endeered friend; My Nisus kind,
Would thou thy mate in great facts leave behind?
Should I in such great straits leave thee alone?
No sure, my father (as it is well known)
Opheltes, well in wars experienced,
Has me not therein so absurdly bred,
In all our Grecian terrors, Trojan toiles,
Nor has mine honor yet received such foiles,
Following Aeneas brave in's utmost ill.
I want not courage, no, I want not will,
To scorn this light, yea life it self for thee,
To welcome death, that thou may honored be.
Surely, says Nisus, never did I fear
Such things in thee: oh no, it impious were
So to suspect. O may great Jove above
So link me firmly to thy faithful love:
Or any equall-sighted deity,
Observing herein my sincerity.
But if there should (as such things often fall out)
If there should happen any adverse doubt
Or fatal danger; oh may thou survive
Rather then I! worthier to rest alive:
May one remain to snatch me from the fight,
Or to redeem me to a funeral rite:
Or, if this favor fortune me deny,
Yet to me dead to frame an elegy,
My hearse with some death-dues to dignifie:
Oh never may I to thy mother bring
Cause of such woe, her wretched hands to wring:
Thy mother dear, of many matrons best,
Who durst for thee (fair youth) refuse sweet rest,
Neglect the welcome of Troyes kind Acest.
Euryalus replied, Thou ply'st in vain
These vain excuses, constant I remain.
Let Us then (says he) make haste; and therewithal
They stir about, and the next watchmen call;
Who straight gave way, changed turns, and left their station;
And thus with Nisus he makes properation
To call their king. Now all the rest took rest,
Their day-toiles (thus) with sweet sleep were redrest.
Now Troyes prime peers, and youths of best respect,
In council sat, state-businesse to direct;
Consulting what to do, who news should bear
Unto Aeneas. Leaning on their spear,
They carefully do stand, in hand their shields,
Just in the midst both of their camp and fields.
Then Nisus and Euryalus most brave,
Hast'ned unto them, and admittance crave,
Saying they had a business great to impart,
Delay whereof might turn unto their smart:
Ascanius first them careful did receive,
And unto Nisus to begin, gave leave.
Thus then he spoke; Attend, brave Trojan peers,
With moderate minds, and judge not by our years
The motion we now make. Our Rutule foes
Overcome with wine and sleep, do them repose
All snorting on the ground: and we have spi'de
A place where we an ambush safe may hide,
Open to the gate which to the two-paths guides,
The gate I say, near which the sea resides.
Their scattered fires, huge fume and smoke up-cast,
Show that this happy hap may not be past
Or pretermitted: and if you give way,
TO Aeneas to Pallant'um pass we may:
And this brave youth you will see return again
Enricht with spoils of foes defeated, slain:
Nor can we (by this means) miss of our way.
We saw and knew, by hunting every day
In The bottom of deep dales, the river fair,
And much of the town to which we would repair.
Alethes, ripe in years, both grave and wise,
Said, O our Gods, who Troy do patronize,
As yet I see ye mind not to blot out
Poor Trojans name, since such brave youths, so stout,
Such valiant hearts ye still unto us raise.
Thus speaking, on their necks his hands he lays,
And holding both their hands, with tears of joy
He thus says on; What praise, what prize can Troy
Repay to you brave youths, of so rare parts?
The Gods will best requi^e your due deserts:
And good Aeneas will not be behind,
Nor ripe Ascanius blot out of his mind
Such meritorious deeds: yea and I will,
(Says young Ascanius) for my joys ye fill,
In my dear fathers safe return to me:
By our great Gods ( Nisus) I swear to thee,
And thy kind mate, by all our sacred kin,
And by the aged Vesta's rites within,
That whatsoever fate or fortune's mine,
Into your bosoms it shall full incline:
Call back my father; let me see his sight,
And nothing then can me molest, affright.
Two silver bowls richly engraven and wrought,
Both which my father from Arisba brought,
When it was ruined by Achilles bold:
Two three-leg'd cups, two talents of pure gold,
A basin brave, given by queen Dido fair:
And if Italia chance to be our share,
And we by conquest do enjoy that crown,
And amongst us part the prey with high renown,
Thou saw what horse, what arms, rich Turnus had:
All those thou saw, thy valiant heart to glad:
Assure thy self, brave Nisus shall be thine.
Besides, my father has twelve matrons fine,
And captives twelve, with all their ornaments,
And all king Latins lands and continents:
All these my father shall bestow on thee.
For thee, fair youth, whose years come nearest me,
Thee in my bosom of best love I take,
Thee my companion in all states I Will make.
No fame by facts will I without thee gain,
In peace or war thy counsel shall be taken.
To whom Euryalus made this reply;
Fair sir, no time shall find me falsify
My promise in such high designs as these:
Yet fortune good or bad (as heaven shall please)
May on us fall. But thee, this one thing I,
'Bove all thy gifts, entreat most earnestly:
I have a mother sprung from Priams race,
Whom neither Troy through its now captived case,
Nor kind Acestes realm (poor heart) could stay,
But with me she has traveled all our way.
Her I (alas!) now unsaluted leave,
Ignorant what dire fate may to me cleave:
By this dark night, and thy right hand I swear,
That I could not her tender weeping bear,
Upon our parting. I thee therefore pray,
In her distress to be her staff and stay,
To help her in her need. If this request
Thou to me grant, my heart will be at rest,
And I the boldlier shall all hazards try.
The Trojans hearts hereat melt instantly,
Who fell aweeping: but Iulus chief,
Touched at the heart, between great joy and grief,
At this rare copy of connative love,
Which in's affection this reply did move;
I promise and protest, all said and done,
Is highly worthy such an honored son.
Thy mother shall be mine, in all the same
With my Creusa, save alone in name:
Nor such a son to have is honor small,
Whats'ever issue do this fact befall.
Now by this head I swear, by which before,
My father upon often occasions swore,
What I thee promised, safe returned again,
Shall to thy mother and thy kin remain.
Thus weeping spoke he, and from's neck did take
A rare gilt sword, which Lycaon did make
With curious art, in ivorie scabbert rare,
Which he bestowed upon Eury'lus fair.
To Nisus Mnestheus gave a lions skin,
Huge rough with hair, which had a conquest bin:
Friendly Alethes did his helm exchange.
And thus they armed, valiantly forth range:
Whom to the gates the Trojan gallants guide
Both young and old, and them with prayers plide;
Chiefly Ascanius, grave beyond green years,
Expressing wisely manly filial fears,
Follows them fast, with prayers and messages,
Unto his father in their passages:
But all (alas! they spoke) flew into the air,
And to the clouds in vain they vented are.
Thus (then) gone forth, they over the trenches past,
And by dark night to foes camp came at last;
To many of them (first) dire death to bring.
There all-about neglected lies each thing,
The men laid on the grass, with wine and sleep
Over whelmed all, no watch their carts do keep.
Men amongst horse-harnesse lay: here wine-pots stood,
There armor lay: nothing in order good.
Nisus hereat first to Euryalus said,
Dear friend, our way must now with blows be made:
This way we must; and lest assaults behind
Do us infest, have thou a watchful mind,
And keep a distance off, wide way I Will make,
And all these vast impediments hence take.
This said, he silent was; and instantly
Upon proud Rhamnes he set furiously,
Upon a rich wrought Arras carpet stretched:
Who in a deep-drunk sleep, his last breath fetched:
A king and southsayer, which king Turnus joy'd,
But southsaying could not this great mischief void.
Three of whose servants lying near were slain,
And Rhemus page and coachman quickly taken,
Under his horses. Both whom he left dead,
Cut both their throats, cut off their masters head,
Leaving his headless trunk tumbling in the mire,
Soiled with black blood his soul and breath t'expire,
And to sigh out: the beds and ground about,
Reaking warm fumes, with gore that gushed out:
Besides, Lamirus, Lamus, Serranus
A brave young spark, that night most riotous,
With Bacchus drunken bands his body bound:
Happy, had he all night been playing found,
Even until day. But rav'ning lion-like,
(For famine fierce made him the sheepfold strike)
Infesting all the flock, he tears and spoils
The silly sheep, and chaps with blood besoiles,
Whiles they lie mute for fear: no less also
Euryalus with slaughter on does go:
And he in wrath raging, about him lays.
And numbers of the namelesse vulgars slayes:
Hebesus, Fadus, Rhoetus, Abaris,
He unawares did cause deaths cup to kiss.
But Rhoetus was awake, and all this eyed,
And (base) behind a huge bowl did him hide
From his fierce foe: who seen, was followed fast,
And with a fierce full wound his weapon past
Into his sheathing corpse, with which deep blow
His crimson gory soul does belching flow,
And fly away, mixing his blood and wine:
Thus hotly he by stealth does on incline.
And now unto Messapus mates he came,
And found their fires lifting their latest flame,
And all their horse at grass about them tied.
Then briefly thus says Nisus (for he spi'de
Euryalus to too much wrath inclinde,
And naught but blood and slaughter still to mind)
Let Us now surcease, says he, for tell-tale day
Hastens upon us, and we must away.
Enough revenge we now exhausted have,
And through our foes our passage purchased brave.
Much wealth they left behind, silver and gold,
Rich arms, rare bowls, fair carpets to behold.
Euryalus had from king Rhamnes taken
Rich gold-bost trappings, when he had him slain,
And golden girts, which wealthy Caedicus
At the league linking, sent to Remulus,
As friendly gifts; and which he dying gave
Unto his nephew, after death to have:
But he being dead, the Rutuls got that prey
In war: Euryalus took these away,
And, but in vain, upon his shoulders strong
With courage brave bare them with him along;
Messapus handsome helm, with comely crest,
Fitting him well, he wore. Thus then addressed,
They past the camp, and on securely went.
Meanwhile a troop of horse, which forth were sent
Out of Latinus town, whiles all the rest
Of the armed bands stayed in the camp addressed,
Past on unto king Turnus, to declare
The message sent: three hundred men there were,
All bravely armed, Volscens their General.
Who now drew near the camp approacht the wall,
When those far off did both those two perceive,
Hastily them on the left hand to leave:
And young Euryalus his helmet gay
By the nights glimmering light did them betray.
He most unmindefull of the glist'ring brightness,
The helmet did reflect against least lightness.
Which fairly seen, Volscens aloud did say;
Stay, masters, stay, why pass ye on this way?
Why are ye armed? and whither are ye bound?
They answered naught, but swift away they wound,
And scud into the wood, hoping dark night
Would them advantage, thus to escape by flight.
The horsemen 'bout known-turning paths do lie,
And here and there each passage fortify
With a strong guard. The wood was wide, o're-grown,
Full of great oaks and prickly bushes known,
And scratching briers and brambles: and thereby
VVayes were shut up, and paths most hard to spy,
And shade of trees and heavy weight of spoils
Molest Euryalus with tedious toiles,
And ignorance of the way did him delude.
But Nisus got away, his foes eschew'd,
And unadvised had escapt that place,
(Not thinking on Euryalus his case)
Which afterward was called from Alba fair,
Albanus, where king Latins stables rare
Were situated. Nisus here made stay,
And (but in vain) finding his friend away,
O where (says he) Euryalus, have I,
Unhappie I, thee left in misery?
O whither should I go to follow thee?
Straight hereupon, away he back does flee
Through those perplexed paths, pries all about
The crooked woods false creeks and nooks throughout:
Observes each passage as he backward goes,
And through thick thickets, where no way he knows.
Horses he hears, he hears a noise at last,
And signs of some at heels him following fast.
Nor was it long ere clamours came to's ears,
Nor ere Euryalus poor case appears;
Whom all the band (through error of the place,
And darksome night, and coming-on apace*
Of the enemy swiftly and suddenly)
Had now surpised, yet fighting valiantly.
And what should he do now? what strength express?
What force to free the young man from distress?
What? should he dying rush in the midst of's foes?
By honored death make haste his life to lose?
Advancing straight his arm, shaking his lance,
Thus to the Moon he did his votes advance;
Fair Goddess, thou, thou see our present woe,
Help us this danger great to undergo;
O thou stars state, woods warder, daughter fair
Of Titan bright! if on thine altars rare
My father Hyrtacus did e're for me
Presents present; if I my self to thee
In hunting have augmented thine oblations,
And on thy scutchion hung due adornations,
Great graceful gifts on sacred posts made fast:
Grant then, I pray, I may (at least) at last
Vex and perplex this troop most turbulent,
Do thou my darts direct to that intent.
Thus having said and prayed, with all his might
He cast a dart, which pierced black shades of night,
And flying, lighted on and brake in twain
Great Solmons targe, piercing with mortal pain
His vital part, his heart, he is overthrown,
And with a deep* and heart-string-breaking groan
Disgorg'd a flood of lukewarm blood, and straight
He waxed cold, because inanimate.
The soldiers diverse ways do look about,
And see a fiercer then the first fly out:
For he by's ear levelled another dart;
Which, whiles they troubled stood, with fatal smart
Whistlingly flying, Tagus temples twain
Did penetrate, and stuck fast in his brain.
Volscens hereat grew violent and mad,
Not knowing the author of these facts so bad,
Nor upon whom deserved revenge to take.
But as for thee (says he) I Will surely make
Thy blood requite the death of both my friends:
Thus at Euryalus his sword he bends.
Straight noble Nisus thereat much molested,
In rage cries out (seeing his friend infested,
Himself not willing longer now to hide,
Or so great sorrow in his friend to 'bide)
'Twas I, Rutulians, I that did the deed:
Here, here I am, against me, me proceed,
And set your swords on me, revenge to take,
My hand and heart did all this mischief make:
He durst not do this deed, alas not he,
Nor could he do it (by these heavens you see,
And testifying stars, I truth protest)
Only his love he has too much expressed
Unto his friend, me his unhappy friend.
These words he spoke, but they their swords do bend
With utmost force against Euryalus:
And through his sides with rancour venomous
They pierce his heart, and he falls down stark dead:
Whose hearts gore-bloud does all his parts o'respread.
His neck between his shoulders doubled lay:
Even as the plow, to make his furrowed way,
Cuts down a violet fair, which withering dies;
Or like tall poppy, which by showers from skies
O're-laid, from its weak neck hangs down the head.
But Nisus nobly shaking off all dread,
Burst into thickest foes, and singles out,
From all the rest, their leader Volscens stout.
With whom alone he would the combat try:
About both whom the total troop does fly,
And near at hand, still Nisus they molest,
Who nimbly still stomach and strength expressed:
And bravely whiskt about his bloody blade,
Till this Rutulian crying loud, dismayed,
He sheathed his sword in's mouth, thrust down his throat,
And made his soul sing a harsh dying note.
Himself being wounded mortally also,
Over his friends body he himself did throw,
And so at last in pleasing rest expired,
Both fortunate, both in their love admired.
If my poor lays their praise could dignifie,
No age should e're blot out their memory,
As long as brave Aeneas kin remain,
And Rome her Capitol shall firm sustain,
And Romans over the world have emperie;
So long my lines their loves should magnify.
The sad Rutulians with their spoils and prey,
(Though ^onquerours) unto their camp convay
Their Volscens slain, with many a weeping eye,
And for king Rhamnes fatal destiny,
And for Serranus and stout Numa slain,
As they the first assault did well maintain:
A mighty confluence of people came
About the corpse, flocking to see the same,
To see their half-dead friends, the bloody place,
And streams of foamy gore flowing apace.
They know the spoils, Messapus helmet bright,
The trappings fair re-gain'd with sweaty fight.
And now Aurora rare relinquished
Her earthly Tithons saffron-colour'd bed,
And with fresh light the earth had garnisht gay,
And Sol, now up* all hid things did display.
Turnus completely armed, his men i^cites
To arms, and to fierce skirmishes invites.
Each soldier calls his mate, and various words
Of those last facts whet both their hearts and swords.
The heads besides (a woeful sight to see)
Of Nisus and Euryalus fastened be
To the tops of two tall poles, and carried high
With mighty clamours of the armies cry.
The Trojans indefatigabely stand,
And on the citie-walls to the left hand
They bend their armed bands (for on the right
The river running hedged them in with might)
The ditches they defend, and on high towers
In mournful manner stood their Martial powers,
Before their eyes the men's two-heads being placed,
(Sorrows too well known signs) both much defaced
With filth and blood. Meanwhile does winged fame
Throughout the trembling town divulge the same,
And to the mother of Euryalus
Relates these things: she most calamitous
Straight fell into cold sweats and shivering fears,
Let fall her wheel and spindle, lets fall tears,
And woefully flies out, cries out apace
With womanish loud screeks, in piteous case
Tearing her hair, and frantickly ascending
The citie-walls, her hasty courses bending
To the first watch, regardlesse of whats'ere,
She neither men, nor darts, nor death does fear.
But thus she fills the heavens with plaints and cries;
On thee, Euryalus, cast I mine eyes?
And art thou he should be the staff and stay
Of mine old age? and could thou run away,
(Hard-hearted boy) and leave me all alone?
Might not thy woeful mother first have known
Thy parting hence, and taken last sad farewell,
Before such bitter dangers thee befell?
Alas! thou unknown land, alas for thee,
That thou a prey to birds and beasts should be:
I brought thee not to this sad funeral,
Nor shed salt tears to rensh thy corpse withal,
Thy body in pure linen clothes to lay,
Which thriftily I wrought on night and day,
My aged days and cares to pass away.
Whither, dear son, shall I now follow thee?
Tell me where thy dismembered members be.
Where are thy parted parts, thy joints disjoined?
Where, in what land may I thee buried find?
Bring'st thou (my son) this woeful news to me?
Have I for this, through sea, land, followed thee?
You rough Rutulians, if least love you have,
Least pity you possess, on me, I crave,
On me, I pray you, shower out all your darts:
Let all your swords end all my living smarts.
Or else do thou, great Jove, now stand my friend,
And with thy stroke, my hateful life now end,
Since I no otherwise can end these vvoes.
From her great grief, over all the camp arose
An universal sorrow, loud lament,
Their former courage now seems dull and spent.
As thus her sorrows did incense their grief,
Actor, Idae^s, two brave Trojans chief,
Advised thereto by wise Ilioneus,
And sorely weeping young Ascanius,
Took her up straight, and in their arms her bare
Into the house, and there of her took care.
But now brass trumpets sounded shrill alarms,
Cries fly to the skies, and blustering stir to arms,
The Volscians close their shields together knit,
To hide their heads; and hastily them fit
To fill the dikes, the trenches down to tear:
For passage, some to the vvalls their ladders rear,
On that side where the army was not great,
And where their troops were thin, and not complete.
The nimble Trojans, on the other side,
Accustomed long besieged br^nts to 'bide,
Do all their engines and their arms retort,
And with strong pikes thrust them from vvalls and fort.
And with huge ponderous stones tumble them back,
Thus, if they might, their pendhouse shields to crack,
And break in sunder, they now having tried
All hazards, under their thick shields to 'bide.
But all too vveak: for where most heaps collected,
The Trojans there a poudering pile dejected:
Which rouling, rumbling down, with vvondrous weight,
Did beat and batter the Rutulians straight,
Their targets tou^h and strong unbound and brake;
Forcing Rutulians (maugre former crake)
To fear, forbear sight under blindfold shields:
And leaving stratagems, in the open fields,
With vvingy shafts, they now with courage stout
Contend, and from their trench to beat them out.
On one side, proud Mezentius, with fierce look,
His huge Etruscan flaming pine-lance shook:
On the other side, Messapus, rider rare,
Whose royal race sprang from great Neptune fair,
Brake into th'trench, for scaling ladders calls,
To keep his hold, and to ascend the vvalls.
O see fair Nine, Calliope, I pray,
Grace with your graceful aid my warbled lay,
That ^ may sing and show what slaughters great,
What grave heaps Turnus made in Martial heat,
What souls he sent to hell: help me, I pray,
These mighty battles issues to display.
For ye, fair ladies, can them promptly tell,
And ye have power to express them well.
There was a skie-topt fort, with scaffolds high,
And situated adventagiously,
Which the Italians with their utmost strength
Assaulted fiercely, to overthrow at length;
And which the Trojans on the other side,
With thrown-down stones to safeguard did provide,
And through the loop-holes shooted showers of darts.
But Turnus chiefly, and his Martial hearts,
Fierce fireballs threw, which against the walls did stick,
And helped with winds, burnt up the boards most quick,
And on the weather-beaten posts took hold.
The troubled Trojans hearts within vvaxt cold,
And fain they would these pressing ills have fled,
But savv in vain they all endeavored.
They drew up then in heaps, retreating straight,
Whereas no fire was flung; then with huge weight
The thus assaulted fort praecipitate,
Came tumbling down with thundering noise to the sky,
In whose fierce fall with extreme misery
Men were dashed down half dead, unto the ground,
And their own weapons did themselves confound,
And wooden splinters did them pierce and vvound:
Helenor only and Lycus likewise
Did hardly escape, and from that mischief rise;
Helenors years him eldership allot,
King Maeons son, upon his maid begot,
And by her nursed in secret; after, sent
To Troy to the wars, without allowed consent:
He escaped (I say) with his naked sword, most poor,
And on his arm a shield ignobly bore.
Who when he saw himself surrounded quite
With Turnus troops and Latin bands, in bright
And glistring arms, on both sides spread about:
Like a wilde-beast, whom huntsmen with great shout
Do hedge in round, seeing himself beset,
Against their tools and toils does rage and fret,
And on expected death does rudely lip,
And desp'rately on snares and grins does skip:
So this (now) lusty lad, fearelesse to die,
Into the midst of's foes does fiercely fly;
Even where he saw their swords and shields most thick.
But Lycus being of foot more light and quick,
Betook him to his heels, through thickest bands
Fled to the walls, strove there with feet and hands
To clamber up, hopeful of help from's friends:
Whom Turnus following, at him fiercely bends
A deadly dart: and like a conqueror stout
With these like chafing terms to him cries out;
Thou frantic fool, think thou our hands to flee?
Supposest thou from us secure to be?
And with those words (as he did upward crawl)
He pulled him down, and with him, part oth' wall:
Much like an eagle preying on a hare,
Or some white swan rising up into the air,
Fiercely pulled down by the eagles tallons strong:
Or like a rav'ning wolf, whose chaps do long
To lick the blood of the poor bleating lamb,
And therefore in the stall pulls him from's damme.
From all parts clamours rise, assaults are made,
With rubbish heaps the dikes are level laid.
Fierce flaming brands to houses tops are cast.
But as Leucetius to the gates came fast.
To fire the same, Troyes Ilioneus brave
With a huge stone a deadly pelt him gave:
When valiantly Liger Emathion slew:
Asylas made death Chorineus due;
The one at darts, the other at shafts excelled:
Caeneus stout by death Ortygius quel'd:
Turnus, the victour Caeneui did slay;
Clonius and Itys he with death did pay:
Dioxippus and Promulus most stout,
And Sagaris and Ida holding out
Worthily on the wall: but Capys brave
Privernus killed: and him Themilla gave
A light wound with his lance, who instantly
Threw his shield from him, and most foolishly
Claps his hand on the wound; whereat most fierce
A winged shaft his left-side ribs did pierce,
And nailed his hand unto his wounded side,
And bored his breathing lights, wherewith he died.
Brave Arcens son stood there in battle ray,
Clad in a coat of needle work most gay,
Of a dark Spanish-purple color rare,
Himself of lovely look and countnance fair:
Whom Arcens, his great sire, to wars had sent,
Bred up in Mars his grove, near the current
Of Sym^ths flood, where is the altar fair,
And full of presents, of Palicus rare.
Mezentius bold, his lance being laid aside,
A whisling sling up took, with Martial pride,
And swung it thrice most fiercely 'bout his head:
The leaden bullet, as it swiftly fled,
Melted in the air, and dashed him on the pate,
And dead, upon the sands laid him prostrate.
Ascanius then for his first enterprise,
Is said to fling a shaft in Martial wise,
Who formerly wilde-beasts was wont to fright,
Wherewith Numanus he did deadly smite,
Who was surnamed Remulus: this same,
Turnus his younger sister, a fair dame,
Did lately wed: he in the forefront loud
Vanting vain and vile things with spirit proud,
Unworthie our relation, struck with fear
Of kindred new, the kingdoms rule to bear,
Went up and down, boasting with haughty din,
As if some princely pers'nage he had bin:
Twitting the Trojans thus; Base cowards all,
Shame ye not to sit mewed up in a wall?
To be immured in trenches now again,
Twice captived Phrygians? think ye (but in vain)
By walls to escape from death? I pray behold,
What gallant lads are these, that dare be bold
By wars to get our wives! what destiny?
What madness great drove you to Italy?
Here are not Greeks Atrides tired rout,
No false Ulysses tongues to feign and flout.
We are a people tough from rough stocks stem:
Our children at the first we make to swim
In frozen floods, and harden them thereby:
Our boys are bred to rare activitie;
In hunting beasts, and them in the woods to tire,
To ride great horse, is sport which they desire;
And horny darts to cast they much affect.
But constant at their work without neglect,
Small wealth our youth contents; and either they
With rakes and plowes do make the ground obey
Their thriftie wills, or towns with war suppress.
Thus every age does it to steel address:
Yea even in peace our spears we hold in hand,
Working our cattle plowing up our land:
Nor does weak old age weaken our stout minds,
Make valor vanish: but each gray-haires binds
His helm unto his head, fresh spoils and prey
With sword and shield daily to bear away.
But as for you, your cloathsare rich and rare,
Of purple hues, embroidered all most fair,
Signs of your lazy minds* and your delights
In wanton dancings are, fond carpet-knights:
In jackets short, with sleeves most delicate,
And hairelace, bongrace, most effeminate.
Fond Phrygian females (masculines you are none)
Gad to your Dindyms high hills every one,
Whereas your various-vain pipes sounds do call
You to your wonted wanton dancings all:
Your Idaean mother, Berecynthia fair,
To make you sport, does taber and pipe prepare:
Let arms alone to men, touch not steel-swords.
Him vaunting thus with bold and bitter words
Ascanius brave no longer could forbear,
But he his horse-hide bow straight up does rear,
His shaft set ready: and his arms stretched out,
To Jupiter he prays with courage stout;
All-potent Jove, my bold beginnings aid,
And on thine altar shall vowed gifts be paid;
A fair fat bull with gilded horns most high,
And a young calf like his damme, lustily
Bearing his head, whose pace makes dust to fly.
Jove heard from heaven, and from a sky most clear
Ascanius did a prosperous thunder hear.
Whose bow therewith set ready at full bent,
A deadly arrow fiercely forth he sent:
The whistling shaft through the air took nimble flight,
And on proud Remulus his pate did light,
Piercing his brains: Go (says the young prince stout)
Go on, true virtue with vain brags to flout.
Twice-captiv'd Phrygians send Rutulians thus
This answer. Thus did brave Ascanius.
The Trojans with loud cries second the same,
Fiercely fly on, spurred with affected fame.
As then it hapt, Apollo sagely sitting
Upon a cloud in the open air befitting,
Beheld the Italian troops and Trojan town,
And thus to Iulus said, to's high renown;
Go on, brave spark, rare virtues to augment,
Thus fame shall raise thee to heavens firmament:
Fair son, and future sire of Gods most great,
All following bloody broiles most boistrous heat,
Shall by the fates most due decree decrease
Under great Dardans line, and end in peace:
Troy can thee not contain. And this being said,
Down from the skies his way he smoothly made:
And doffing all aire-puffing vapors quite,
He kindly came into Ascanius sight,
And on him took old Butes shape and face,
(He heretofore enjoyed the honored place
Of Troyes Anchises page, and guardian just
Of temple rites) and as a mate of trust
The aged sire Ascanius sociates.
In every thing Apollo imitates
An old man right, as he along did go,
In countenance, color, and gray locks also,
In rattling Martial armor dressed; and thus
And thus he spoke t'enflam'd Ascanius;
Let it suffice thee, brave Aeneas son,
What thou have freely on Numanus done;
He slain, thou safe: now then for thy first praise,
Apollo great does crown thee with due bays,
And envies not thy imitating arms;
Yet wills thee, war forbear, from future harms.
Thus spoke Apollo; having spoke, departed,
And from man's fight into th'cleare air he darted.
The Trojan peers knew him a God to be,
When they his arms divine and shafts did see
In's rattling quiver, as he flew away.
Wherefore Apollo's words and will to obey,
Ascanius, fierce to fight, they all restrain,
And to the encounter they return again,
Trusting their lives in dangers imminent.
A mighty clamor through their trenches went,
They bend their trusty bows, fierce arrows fly,
And thick upon the ground they strewed lie:
And shields and hollow helms make clanging sound
With clattering shafts, whose blows from them rebound.
And now fierce fight begins, like mighty showers
Which boedean Western stars upon earth poures,
And thick as clouds of hail, quick rattling down,
When Jupiter with winter storms does frown,
And with a thunderclap the clouds does pierce.
Even so the Trojans shower out shafts most fierce;
Bitias and Pandarus, whom Hiera fair
A wood nymph, to Idaean Alcnor bare,
In Jove's great grove, two brethren strong and stout,
As tall as trees; as mounts, hard to hold out.
These two were set the gate to guard, set open,
And both well armed, they voluntarily
Their foes with them t'encounter did defy.
They on the right and left hand stoutly stood,
In stead of two great bulwarks strong and good,
Armed with their swords and glistring helms on head,
Like two most mighty oaks with boughs o'respread*
Whose unlopt tops ascend up into the air,
About moist Padus banks, Athesis fair.
No sooner saw Rutulians open way,
But rashly they rush in without delay.
Querceus and fair Equicolus, all armed,
Tmarus, stout Haemon, but all sorely harmed,
Headlong they haste with all their troops and strength:
But either were all beaten back, at length,
Or at the gate did gasp their latest breath,
And, maugre all their might, were pressed to death.
And as their rage increast, so Trojans stout
Did valiantly assemble thereabout,
And bravely skirmish, and adventure far:
And as elsewhere stout Turnus hot did war,
Fretting, affrighting them, news was him brought,
That with fresh slaughters Trojan foes were fraught,
And flesht, and had their gate set open to fight.
Hereat his work in hand forsaking quite,
Enflamed with quenchlesse rage, he thither flies,
And to the Trojan open gate he hies,
And those proud brethren both but first of all
(For he first met him) Antiphates tall,
Born of a Thebane dame, but the base son
Of great Sarpedon, on whom he did run,
And smote him with his dart, the Italian horn
Whistling through the air, pierced through his corpse forlorn:
Whose hollow wound vented much black gore-bloud,
And in his heart the warm dart fixed stood.
Then Meropes and Erymantha strong,
Aphidnus stout, by death he laid along*
Bitias, with frightfull face and fretfull heart,
He then did make to taste deaths direful smart,
Not with a sha^t (a shaft could him not kill)
But with a mighty dart, thrown with strong skill;
Which stuffed with wilde-fire, flew like lightning fierce,
And through two tough bulls hides would stiffely pierce,
And penetrate double steel-folds, in shields,
Though lined with gold: herewith to death he yields.
His mighty members ruinated fall,
And make the earth to tremble therewithal,
And crushed his target with a thundering din:
Much like the stony pile, when men begin
To build the Baian banks by Cuma's town,
Which suddenly all tumbles headlong down:
And all the former frame and mighty heap
Fallen plump in the sea* makes the waves dance and leap*
And thus sunk down in the waves, it sticks and stands,
Rowls billows up, and cleaves and heaves the sands.
The noise whereof Prochyta's ^sle made shake,
And all the adjacent huge mounts to quake.
Here Mars armipotent poured courage great
Into the Latins hearts, and Martial heat;
And filled the Trojans minds with fear and flight.
And now they flock together to the fight,
And now the God of war and Martial spite
Reigns in their hearts. But now, when Pandarus
Saw his dear brother to be conquered thus,
How their affairs and fortune ticklish stood;
With all the haste and struggling strength he cu'd,
Shoving with his shoulders, close he locks the gate,
And bolts and bars it fast; and many a mate
He thus locked out, and left to fatal fight:
But others he locked in, safe-guarded quite
From rage of foes. But O how mad was he
Which could not Turnus fiercely entering see
Amongst them closed, not with an army great,
But singly shut up in the thronging heat,
Like a fierce tiger, feeble flocks to eat!
But suddenly bright light their eyes did clear,
And who he was did speedily appear
By his rough rattling arms, his bloud-red crest,
And shield, which bright fire-flaming shines expressed.
The Trojans hereat stupifi'de, did know
His hateful face, and limbs that hugely grow.
Then great Pandarus unto him drew near,
Vexed for the slaughter of his brother dear,
Thus to him said; Nay sir, good sir, I pray,
This is no dowre of your queen Amata,
Nor do thy native Ardean walls thee close,
But here thou see thou art fenced in by thy foes,
Imprisoned in their camps and custody:
Whence there is no hope of re-deliverie.
Turnus, with haughty heart upon him smiling,
Says, Sir, leave off thy brags and proud reviling*
Do thou begin: if any heart thou have,
Thy spite and spirit now declare thou may:
Here thou shall tell to thy king Priamus,
That thou have found Achilles valorous.
Pandarus hereat took a knottie lance,
And with his utmost strength did it advance
Against king Turnus; which wind turned aside:
(For from least wounding Juno did it guide)
And missing him, it stuck fast in the gate.
But thou (says Turnus) shall not find the fate
To escape the force of my fierce slicing blade:
This wound and weapon thou shall not evade.
And herewithall he raised his sword on high,
And with his sword, himself, and furiously
In sunder cut his brain-pan, with the blow,
And chops his chaps, where yet no hair did grow.
With a huge gash. A noise was raised to the air,
The earth even trembled with the weight it bare.
His fal'n-down limbs and arms all-soil'd with blood,
O'respread the ground, besmeared with brainy mud*
And in two equal parts lay his cleft head,
This way and that way on each shoulder spread.
The trembling Trojans hereat fled for fear:
And had this victours vigilance been clear,
To Have broke the barred doors, let in his mates,
That day had been the last for fight and fates
To Trojans. But rough rage and rash desire
Of slaughter, did so set his heart on fire,
That he fell on his foes. And first of all,
He Phalaris and Gyges forced to fall:
And gathering up the darts from foes that fell,
He did them at their flying backs repel:
For ( Juno did his mind and might augment)
Against Halys next and Phegeus both he bent
His Martial rage, and those that on the wall
Were fighting fierce, not knowing ought at all
What he had done below, there dead he laid;
Alcander, Halius, Prytanis, he made
Deaths underlings: and whiles that Lynceus stout
Did bravely fight, and recollect the rout
Of flying mates, and over the trenches went,
He him with brandisht sword did soon prevent,
And hand to hand fighting, with one fierce blow
Cut off his head, and helm and corpse laid low:
Then valiant Amycus he set upon,
A hunter brave, then whom there was not one
More fortunate, or of more art and skill,
Who used wilde-beasts with pois'ned darts to kill.
And Clytius and Aeolides he slew,
And Cretea, friend unto Parnassus crew;
The Muses mate Cretea, whose delight
Was on rare instruments his lays to indite,
And to his harp melodious songs to sing
Of steeds, of wars, and facts of many a king.
But when at last the Trojan lord did hear
The slaughters great which amongst the soldiers were;
Mnesth^us and stout Serestus thither went,
And saw their men with frights and fears nigh spent,
And yet their foe enclosed. Straight Mnestheus said;
Sirs, whither fly ye, scud ye, thus afraid?
What better walls or bulwarks would ye have?
What? shall one single man you thus outbrave?
And even within your citie-walls surrounded,
Shall so many by slaughter be confounded
Within your town, and he unpunisht go?
Shall he so many choice youths overthrow?
Shame ye not thus extremely to disgrace
Your most unhappie woeful countrey^ case!
Your household Gods and your Aeneas great!
Do you not blush at such a base retreat?
The Trojans fired with these words, stand fast,
And in great heaps conglomerate at last.
Turnus thereat shrinks backward by degrees,
And to that side retreats, on which he sees
The fluent flood to run. The Trojans, they
So much the fiercelier force him on that way;
And with great shouts their companies augment.
Much like a troop of men, who having pent
A furious lion, and with swords beset,
He therewith terrifi'de does rage and f^e^:
Shielding all sharp assaults, he back does stride,
But neither rage nor courage can abide
To turn the back and fly, nor yet to oppose
(Being over-charg'd with troops) he hardly knows.
This though he would and could, yet may 't not be;
Therefore through foes and swords way forces he:
Directly thus does Turnus back retire,
With doubtful, yet undaunted steps; with ire
His heart is heated: as thus slow he goes,
He twice assaults the thickest of his foes:
And twice by flight about the walls them frighted:
But now from all their tents the troops united,
Against whose force not Juno's self sufficed:
Jove therefore airie Iri^ straight advised
With taunting terms to tell his sister fair,
That some should smart, if she took not quick care,
To hasten Turnus from the Trojan towers.
With targe therefore he could not shield the showers,
Nor with his hand resist the Trojans blows,
So thick flew shafts about: so hotly grows
The fight, that arrows seem him to o'rewhelm,
And tinckling tangs make on his hollow helm:
And storms of stones his brazen cap so batter,
And all his plumy crest so tear and shatter,
That all the brazen bosses prove too weak,
But that their thick quick blows it bruise and break.
The Trojans still their rage ingeminate:
With spear and shield Mnestheus does fulminate,
And all his body over is on a sweat.
Hence Turnus takes no breath from toiles most great*
But clammy drops of pichy sweat distill,
And all his tired joints with fainting fill:
So that at last himself he headlong throws
Into the river (spite of all his foes)
Whose floods him friendly took, and smoothly glide,
And set him safe with his mates on the other side.
An end of the nineth book of Virgils Aeneids.
THE ARGUMENT of the tenth book.
The Gods convoke a parliament,
'Bout man's affairs their cares are bent.
Rutulians do the fight maintain.
Aeneas now returns again
Unto his mates, with ample aid.
On both sides fierce assaults are made*
In battle Turnus Pallas slayes,
And numbers dead about him lays.
But Juno snatcheth Turnus thence,
Endangered by his violence.
Aeneas with most Martial might
Does with Mezentius fiercely fight.
Lausus his son him rescuing, dies:
Mezentius self is slain likewise.
MEanwhile olympus daylight doors stand wide,
And now great Jove, Gods sire, and man's grave guide,
A council calls in his stelliferous seat.
From whence he views vast earth and trenches great
Of Trojans, and the lofty Latins rout,
As in the two-gated hall they sat about.
Jove thus begins; Great Gods, what mean ye so
Against your own decrees thus cross to go?
Why strive ye partially against our fates?
I had forbidden Latium all debates
Against the Trojans: then, what discontent
Is this, thus raised against our commandment?
What fretfull fear does those, or these incense,
To use their swords and shields with violence?
A time will come (you need not call for it)
For just provoked battles far more fit:
When as cursed Carthage shall Rome sore infest,
And with her Alpean powers her much molest;
Then may your rage rush out, with blood embrew'd:
But now forbear, and kindly peace conclude.
Thus briefly Jove: but golden Venus fair
Replies more largely, being full of care.
Great fire of mortals and of Gods supernall,
The mighty moderatour, wise, eternal;
(For, but thy power, what else may more be had?)
Thou see how Rutuls rage, Turnus grows mad,
Amidst fierce troops of horse made proudly glad
In his successful war: the Trojans all
Scarcely secure in their enclosing wall:
Nay even within their walls and trenches strong
Their foes fight safely, fiercely on them throng,
Making their ditches gore-bloud inundations:
Absent Aeneas, of these desolations
Utterly ignorant. Ah, shall they ever
In strict besiegements restlessely persever?
And must their foes again spoil springing Troy,
Another Grecian army them annoy?
And must a second Diomedes rise
Against my Trojans? Sure (I think) thine eyes
Behold my wounds: yet I thy heaven-born child,
With mortal battles am still much turmoil'd.
But if without thy leave or fates consent
To Italy they came, as insolent;
Then let them smart, and strip them of all aid:
But if they have the oracles obeyed,
Which Gods and ghosts unto them often have given;
Why then has any thus against them striven
To cross thy great decrees? new fates to find?
O why should I our fired fleet call to mind
In Sicils shore? or how that blustering king
Did from Aeolia winds and tempests bring,
And painted lady Iris forced from skies?
And now at last she made hells hags to rise,
(For this way only unattempted stayed)
And to the heavens Alecto rise she made,
Who on a sudden through all Italy
Did madly rage, and rouse up cruelty.
I Am not much moved at's empire: that is well taken,
VVhiles fortune smiled: Whom thou will, let him reign.
But if thy froward wife no land can spare
Unto my Trojans; yet great father fair,
By Troyes yet smoaky cinders I thee pray,
Grant that my nephew, my Ascanius, may
Survive in safety, free from piercing arms:
As for Aeneas, let him feel the harms
Of unknown tossing waves and billowing seas,
And wander where thou will, if so thou please:
But let me save his son from wars dire woes.
I have fair cities fit for safe repose,
Paphos and Amathus, and Cythera,
Idalia fair, thither repair he may;
There leaving arms, lead an ignoble life:
Then may thou Carthage cause with Martial strife
To vex all Italy: naught can oppose
(If this may be) their Carthaginian foes.
To what end has he escaped wars mischiefs past?
Why has he fled through Grecian flames at last?
Why has he shunned so many dangers great,
Which lands and swallowing seas did to him threat,
Whiles he and his poor Trojans Latium sought,
And Pergams walls to have re-erected thought?
Had it not better been to have stayed in Troy,
And seen their countries burning, last annoy?
Sweet fire, let me thee for my Trojans pray,
That they to Xanthus streams, and Simois may
Return again: revert, I thee Entreat,
To Trojans poor their toils and travells great.
Hereat queen Juno grew most passionate,
And unto Venus thus she burst out straight;
Why from deep silence do you me constrain,
And force me my hid griefs rip up again?
Did any, either God or man, compel
Your son Aeneas unto battles fell?
Or for to make king Latin thus his foe?
The fates (you say) to Latium forced you go:
Well, be it so; yet I say otherwise,
Cassandra forced him with mad fooleries.
And yet did we him from his tents entice?
Endangered he his life through our advise,
By winds, at sea? did we his son incite
Fierce war to wage, or on town-walls to fight?
To make a league with adverse Tuscanes stout,
Or peaceful nations, thus with wars burst out?
What God enforced this fraud? what did our might?
Where now was Juno? Iris cloudie flight?
You say it is pity Italy should fire
Your Trojan town, which did new life acquire;
That Turnus should his native land maintain,
Where Is granfather Pilumnus once did reign*
And where his mother, fair Venilia
The Goddess, dwelt. And why is it not, I pray,
As great a pity that with bloody broile
Your Trojans should infest our Latins soil?
To plow in others fields, to catch the prey?
From mothers bosoms thus to steal a way
Betrothed virgins, wives by force to obtain?
Pray peace, by legates, yet wars prae-ordain?
You could Aeneas from Greeks arms protect,
Put for a man. a cloud; slight air inject;
And to so many nymphs transform your fleet:
Yet must it be supposed most unmeet
For ours also your way, their weal to meet?
Your son Aeneas, absent, knows not ought;
Still may he absent be, and still know naught:
You have a Paphos and Cythera fair,
Why do you not then our fierce people spare?
Whose hearts and homes are big with bloody broiles,
And once spurred up will hardly cease from spoils.
Was It we that first o'return'd Troyes trivial treasure?
Was It we, or he, that for his lustful pleasure
Brought Greeks to your poor Trojans? what is the cause,
That Europe, Asia, with wars greedy jaws
Devour each other, marriage-rites being broke
By filtching filthy lust? did I provoke
The adulterer of Troy the Spartane dame
To force with him? did I incense the flame
Of war with violence and venerie?
Then had it fitter been thus fearefullie
Their cases to condole: now it is too late
To use such coined complaints, to ejaculate
Such unjust janglings. Juno thus replied,
Whose words the sacred synod did divide
In various votes: much like the bustling wind,
First puffing in a wood, by boughs confined,
Makes a close rumbling murmr; whence, unknown:
Whereby fierce following storms are seamen shown.
Jupiter then, who had prime power to speak,
From further silence now began to break.
Who speaking, all the court of Gods was still:
Earth trembled, air did cease all echoing shrill:
Fierce VVestern-windes, rough ocean-waves were laid.
Mark well therefore (says he) what now is said.
Since Trojans and Italians may not be
With links of love, in one made to agree;
Nor any hope we have to end your jarres:
Whatever hope or hap ye have in wars,
Enjoy the same on both sides: but to me
Trojans, Rutulians, both alike shall be:
So't shall be seen, whether by destiny
The Trojans get firm ground in Italy;
Or whether by an impious error led,
And sinister conceits they ventured.
I Will neither Trojans nor Rutulians clear,
For either side shall his own travells bear,
And follow his own fortunes, shame or fame:
Great Jove their king will be to both the same.
The fates will find a way. This here I vow,
By my beloved brothers Stygian slow,
By all those pichy floods and banks most black.
VVhereat he beckt, and with a thunder-crack
Olympus total frame extremely trembled.
Here ceast the parle of all the Gods assembled.
Then mighty Jove rose from his golden throne,
By all the Gods to's station tended on.
Meanwhile the Rutules 'bout the gates were spread,
Much men were slain, the walls were often fired:
Within theirtrenches Trojan bands were bound,
And hard besieged: no hope of flight was found:
And poorly on their forts in vain they stand,
And fence their walls with a thin thrivelesse band.
Asius Imbrasius son, Thymaetes stout
Hictaons son, two Trojans stood about;
Two of king Tros his sons, and Caster old,
The forefront kept, with the two brothers bold
Of great Sarpedon; and Ethimon brave
From Lycia land: these them attendance gave.
Then Phrygian Acmon, son of Clytius great,
Brother to Mnestheus, for his Martial heat
Equal to either, with huge might and art
Took up a mighty stone, a mounts best part.
These strive with stones those to defend with shafts,
With wilde-fire balls, and bow-mens sinowy drafts.
Himself in the midst, fair Venus darling dear,
Ascanius young, bare-headed did appear;
(Much like a precious pearl fast fixed in gold,
Gracing ones head or neck, rare to behold:
Or as white ivorie in black ebonie,
Inlaid by art, glisters resplendentlie)
His milk-white neck with dangling locks o're-spread,
Yet wreathed up in folds with golden thread.
The noble nations (Ismarus) thee saw,
With poisoned shafts men's hearts-bloud out to draw.
Thou peerless prince, sprung from fair Lydia's land,
Where Pactolus yields gold, a fruitful strand.
Mnestheus was also there, whose grace was great,
Who from their forts did Turnus lately beat.
And Capys from Capua's town took name,
They by fierce blows contending thus for fame.
Aeneas crossed the foamy seas by night.
For when he parted from Euanders sight,
And to Etruria came, he met the king,
And to the king related every thing;
His name and nation, whence and why he came,
What strength Mezentius did unto him frame,
King Turnus turbulence; man's fickle state;
To shun delays, he then does supplicate.
Tarchon conjoynes his powers, firm league does make;
Then they a foreign captain to them take,
Freed from all fault therein, by destiny:
And so a shipboard went immediately.
Aeneas ships the vantguard led along,
The foredecks decked with Phrygian lions strong:
Whose poop with Ida's painted mount was graced,
A grateful guarding sign to Trojans chased.
There great Aeneas sat, casting in mind,
Wars various events he is like to find.
Prince Pallas with him sat on his left side,
And now night stars he gazed, their ships to guide:
Thinking what land and sea-toiles he did 'bide.
And now set open (ye sacred Muses nine)
Sweet Helicons fair fount, with power divine,
To raise my lays to sing and show the might
Which in Aeneas aid came now to fight,
From fair Etruria bravely armed all,
Transported over sea in ships most tall.
Prince Massicus in's golden tiger sails:
With him a thousand youths from Clusus dales,
And Cosa's confines, skillful at the bow,
Death-wounding shafts to shoot, and darts to throw.
Fierce Abas in another vessel went,
VVhereon Apollo's figure excellent
Glistered with golden rays. His total rout
Was full six hundred Martial soldiers stout,
From Populonia their fair native soil:
All expert youths, and fit for fight and spoil.
From Ilva fair three hundred gallants came,
A fertile country, metals strong to frame.
Asylas a southsayer the third place had,
Whose divinations, birds and beasts were glad,
And stars above, obediently to hear,
And rapid lightnings all his votes to clear.
An army of a thousand thick he led,
At lances long and strong experienced.
All these from fluent Alphins Pisas came,
A Tuscane town, ready to purchase fame:
Next whom came on renowned Astur fair,
Astur, for riding horses, expert, rare,
Armed with most curious, various colored arms.
Three hundred of them (prompt for fierce alarms)
Bred up in Caerets soil by Minions lands,
Old Pyrgus and ill-air'd Gravisca's strands.
Nor may I thee omit, great Cycnus strong,
Who bravely thy Ligurians led'st along;
Nor thee, Cupavo, with thy army small,
Whose helmets height was raised with swans-plumes; tall
Your love your guilt began, and cognizance.
For Cycnus (as it is said) the dire mischance
Of his beloved Phaethon bewailing,
Among the poplars and the shades him vailing
Of his dear leafie-sisters: as thus he
Sat warbling out love-sighing melody,
He turned was into a milk-white swan,
Leaving the land and company of man,
And flying up in the air with chattering voice.
His son in's ships led troops of equal choice,
And forced along with oars his centaure great,
And thwacks the waves, and seems huge rocks to threat,
Furrowing the mighty main with his vessel strong.
Whom Ocnus followed with an army strong
From's fathers realm, esteemed a southsayer wise,
Whose birth from Tuscane river did arise,
And Manto fair; and to his mothers fame
The town and towers he Mantua did name;
Mantua mighty in progenitors,
But yet not all from lineall ancestors.
This nation ruled three tribes, and under them
Four mighty states made up that diadem:
But this was the metropolis of all,
From Tuscanes blood came their original.
And hence Mezentius against himself did arm
^^ve hundred valiant sparks his pride to charm;
Whom Mincius Benacs son, clothed in ripe reeds,
In piercing pine-ships through rough seas proceeds,
And leads along. Next went Auletes brave,
Whose hundred branchie trees so slice each wave,
And roll the rising floods with restless roar,
As that they boil with foam at rocky shore.
Him terrifying Triton strongly bare,
Set in's sea-frighting coerule shelly chair,
Whose upper parts from face unto the breast,
Though rough and hairie, yet man's form expressed:
From belly downward, a sea monster foul,
Who as he swims with fins, the waves does roll
Under his half-wilde breast, with rumbling roares,
And foul slime-foamie billows to the shores.
So many peers in thirty ships did sail,
And plow the liquid soil, for Troyes avail.
And now day spent, and night comne on apace,
Night-gadding Cynthia with her whitely face
Having past half the heavens in chariot fair;
Aeneas (for he takes no rest for care)
Sitting himself, the helm holds, sails does tend.
And as they now in the midway onward bend,
Behold the troop of sea-nymphs, once ship-mates,
To whom fair Berecy^thi^ ordinates
Seas soveraigntie, of ships, them having made
So many nymphs: these swimming to him, stayed;
As many as at shore (when ships) did stand,
So many know their king, and hand in hand
About them dancing swim: of all which train,
Cymodocea, ablest to explain
And speak their minds, coming behind them all,
With her right hand holds fast the ship most tall
In The poop thereof, raising herself up^ight,
With her left hand fleering her passage s^ight.
Thus to him then unknown the sea-nymph spoke;
Fair Goddess son, Aeneas, art th'awake?
Awake then still, slacken thy ropes to sails,
Give way to wind, enjoy these goodly gales.
We once were sacred Ida's pine-trees fair,
But now to nymphs we metamorphiz'd are:
We were thy fleet, till thy perfidious foe,
Rutulian rough, sought us to overthrow
With fire and sword; whereat (though against our mind)
We brake our bonds, our safety so to find;
And now thus through the sea we thee have sought:
Thy tender mother on us this form wrought,
And made us (thus) sea-nymphs, to spend our days
Amongst the rocks in Neptunes watery ways.
As for thy child Ascanius, he is well,
And safe immured, in the town and trench does dwell
'Midst deadly darts and Martial Latins stout.
The Arcadian troop of horsemen stirs not out
From station set. One half of Turnus bands
(Lest to the town they power unite) now stands
Firmly resolved thee herein to prevent.
Arise therefore, in haste thy mates convent,
And set in battell-ray before sunrise;
Thy all-proof target take to thee likewise,
Which the ignipotent black Vulcan gave,
Impenetrable, edged with gold most brave:
For this next morning (if thou trust for true
What now I say) shall see thee to embrew
Thy sword in blood of thick Rutulians slain.
Thus having said, she should with might and main
His mighty ship, at her departure thence,
In her known way, which with fierce violence
Flew through the flood, more swift than shaft from bow,
Or nimble dart, equalling winds that blow.
And therewithal the ships fast after fly:
This fact did Troyes Aeneas stupifie:
The omen yet his heart exhilarates.
Thus then to the heavens he briefly supplicates;
Fair Ida's mother of Gods, to whom poor Troy
To save and shield is thy delight and joy;
Who towns and towers, and lions fierce and strong
Do make to yield to yokes; to thee belong
The praises of my facts, of this great fight;
Order this augure prosperously aright;
Stand to thy Trojans with auspicious aid,
Fair Goddess, I thee pray. This having said,
Meanwhile day light began now to wax clear,
And night quite banished, all did bright appear.
First he his mates commands wars signs to watch,
And to their harness strong their hearts to match,
To fit them for the fight. And now he had
His Trojans and their camp in's sight, most glad,
Standing aloof in's ship: whereat he raised
With his left hand his shield, which brightly blazed.
The Trojans from their walls, who this did spy,
Do raise a clamor echoing to the sky:
Hope kindlesse courage, darts in the air they fling,
Like Thracian cranes descending with strong wing
From the high clouds, all soaring in a train
With cackling noise, fierce tempests to refrain.
But to the Rutuls king, Italian state,
These wonders seem, and them exanimate;
Until at last to sea they cast their eye,
And see the ships fast to the shore to hie;
And with tall barks the sea all-over spread,
And burning crests and helm upon his head,
The golden bosses belching flames of fire:
Much l^ke in the dewy night a comet dire
Of hurtful bloud-red hue; or dog-starres heat,
Which drought and sickness sore to men does threat,
And makes the sky to lowre, and dimmes the light.
But none of these stout Turnus heart could fright.
But he must first the shore anticipate,
And these his foes from landing profligate.
Whereto he cheeres the hearts, he chides the stays
Of all his troops, and freely thus he says;
What ye your selves desired, now here ye have:
Now use your hands therefore with courage brave;
For Mars himself the prey puts in your hands,
Remember now your wives, your goods, your lands.
The famous facts of ancestors recount,
And praises due; let yours now theirs surmount,
And let us freely them at shore assail,
Before they land, now whiles their hearts them fail.
Fortune befriends bold spirits. These words he spoke,
And whom with him to lead, great care does take,
His sea-foes to invade, to whom to leave
The hedg'd-in town, their hopes thus to deceive.
Meanwhile Aeneas, with ship-bridges fair,
To land his soldiers takes all speedy care:
But many stayed till calm seas floods did flow;
Some leapt on studs and stakes, thus out to go
Upon their oars; some to the shore make haste.
Great Tarchon up and down the sea-banks traced,
To see if he could spy fit place to land,
Secure from shallow shelves, or swallowing sand.
And where no rigid surges did appear,
But a smooth sea with swelling floods made clear,
A harmless passage, there he suddenly
Winding his ship, thus to his mates did cry;
Now noble youths, plie close your slicing oars,
Bear up your barks, cut through these adverse shores,
And let our ship plow furrows deep in sand,
And break my bark, so we may gain the land.
Tarchon thus having said, his ma^es with oars,
Through frothy seas, their ships to Latin shores
Do bravely bring, so that their noses kiss
Drie-land: and all secure, their aims none miss,
Except thy ship, great Tarchon, which near land,
Was so assailed with stubborn shelves and sand,
As that it wavering both ways, deep stuck fast,
And struggling long, in pieces split at last,
Exposing all his men unto the waves:
VVhereat each one himself on splinters saves,
Pieces of oars, and planks, and floating boards,
Which safe assistance unto them affords:
But often the flowing streams their heels did trip,
Yet thus at last they safe on land do skip.
But all this while T^rnus ^uns off delays,
His total troops against Trojans he arayes,
At shore them to assail the trumpets sound:
And now Aeneas firmly set on ground,
Himself first set upon the rural bands,
And for first hansell, with his valiant hands
Slaughters the Latins, Ther^n bold being slain,
Who stoutly durst a bickering short maintain
Against Aeneas, whom he quickly foiled,
And through's gilt arms with his heart-bloud him foiled*
Lucas likewise he flew; who when a child,
Was cut out of the womb of's mother mild,
Whereof she died; though to thee, P^oebus fair,
He, yet a young man, consecrated were,
Yet could not escape this princes ^licing blade:
Hard by he Cysseus also slaughtered laid,
And mighty Gyas, who with clubs did fight,
But both he slew; Alcides arms too slight
Did prove, to save their lives, their hands too weak,
And sire Melampus, though he bold did break
Through hazards great, being Hercules his mate*
And Pharon, as he fondly much did prate,
He through his gaping throat pierced with a dart.
And thou stout Cydon tasted had deaths smart,
Whiles thou fair Clytius, with young douny chin
Unfortunately followedst, him to win
To new, but naught delights of love unchaste,
This Trojan prince had made thee death to taste,
Foulely affecting love of youths impure,
And thou had been deaths woeful subject sure,
Had not a troop of armed brothers stout,
All sons of Phorcus, met him in the rout,
Being seven in number, who seven darts did throw,
But to no end, which partly clattered so
Upon his shield and helmet back rebounding,
And Venus partly from his corpse least wounding
Putting them off. Aeneas herewithall
Unto his kind Achates thus did call;
Bring me those darts (for none in vain he threw
At the Rutulians) which proud Grecians slew
In Trojan fields. Then a great spear he took,
Which darted, flew; and flying, fiercely struck;
And penetrating Maeons brazen shield,
Through corpse and corslet, he to death did yield.
Whose brother Alcanor unto him hies,
And held him up as he thus falling dies:
Whose arm that stayed him pierced was also,
The bloody spear through's brauny arm did go,
And's right hand dangling did his deaths wound show.
Numitor then pulls out the deadly dart
From's brothers body, and with wrathful heart
Retorted it at Troyes Aeneas brave:
But there it could not the least entrance have;
And yet it wounded his Achates thigh.
Here Lausus, full of juvenility,
And bold, there by with troops attended came,
And throws at Dryopes with Martial flame,
Standing aloof, a deadly wounding lance,
Which underneath his chin did fiercely glance,
And pierce his throat, snatching thence voice and soul:
Whose face fell first to ground in's gore most foul.
Three Thracians more, of utmost Northern race,
And three of Ida's sons and Ismar's place,
By diverse deaths he furiously did slay.
Thither Halesus came in battell-ray
With his Auruncian bands: and thither came
Messapus bold, sprung from great Neptunes name,
Famous for riding horse: All close contend,
Now these, then those, each other to offend,
In The edge of Italy. Like two fierce vvindes
In The open air, contending in their kinds,
With cross contrarious blasts in equal might,
And neither they, nor clouds, nor sea in sight
Yield to each other, doubtful, long they jarre,
And stiffely, crossely, all maintain the war:
Thus Trojan troops and Latin bands contend,
Thus foot to foot, thus hand to hand, they bend
Their furious force. But on another part,
Where pebble-stones lay all abroad most smart,
Roul'd up by waves, and boughs and bushes thick
About the banks, most apt their feet to prick,
And so unfit for horsemen there to fight,
And such the Arcadians were, not footmen light,
Who to foot-battells unaccustomed,
They to the Latins turned their backs and fled.
Which Pallas spying (the only staff in straits)
He cries to them; some prays, and some he rates
With bitter words, their hearts to re-incite,
Saying, Sirs, what mean ye? whither take ye flight?
Now by your selves, and by your valiant acts,
By your commanders great Euanders facts,
And conquering name and fame, and my hopes great,
Which emulates our countries praise complete;
I you adjure, trust not base flying feet,
But break through thickest troops your foes to meet,
And with your swords assail them: for this way
Your country wills us all our parts to play.
No angry Gods, but mortal foes you force,
We have as many hands and hearts to course
And chase our foes; behold the seas also,
Whose waves so block us up and 'bout us flow,
That there is no hope by land away to fly,
And will ye back to Troy by sea now hie?
And with these words, himselfi'th' midst of all
Does on the thickest ranks of Rutuls fall;
Whom Lagus first by fate unhappie meets,
Whom as a mighty stone he pulled, he greets
With deadly dart, which ribs and back did pierce,
Which sticking in the bones, he pulls out fierce.
But over him he did not Hisbon slay,
Yet this he hoped to have done without delay:
For as he rusht and raged, regardlesse quite
Of his mates death, him Pallas deep did smite,
And sheathed his sword in's heart, and life forth drew,
Thus Helen^s, Anchemolus, he slew,
From Rhoetus ancient offspring sprung; who durst
Defile his step-dames bed with most accursed
Incestuous lust. You Rutuls twins most stout,
Daucius two sons, who valiantly had fought,
Both you he slew, Timber and Larides,
So like by birth they were, that 'twixt both these,
None, even their parents could no difference see,
Nor by their persons sweet deceived be:
But Pallas 'twixt them made a difference great,
Even 'twixt you both: for in his Martial heat
His sword cut off thy head, O Timber fair,
And thy right hand pared off, Larides rare,
Whose half-dead hand, sprawling, his sword lets go.
The Arcadians, who but late retired, so
With Pallas words and vvorthie deeds spurred on,
Now rage and shame arms them to set upon
Their fiercest foes. Then Pallas prosecutes,
And Rhoeteus swiftly flying executes.
Like tariance and delay he Ilus sent:
For as at Ilus he his strong spear bent,
It Rhoeteus intercepts and slayes by the way:
And there fair Teuthra, flying, it does slay;
And's brother Tyres who from chariot reels,
And being half dead beats the ground vvith's heels.
And as the shepherd, when wished vvindes do ^low
In summer, does in the woods his fires bestow,
Which by their nearenesse fire do quickly take,
And over the fields a vast combustion make:
And vvhiles thus Vulcans army spreads about,
He like a victour glad, at flames does flout:
Thus all their mates their powers in one unite,
Which sight to see, thee, Pallas, did delight.
But Martial Halesus all foes defies,
And with his shield against them his power applies.
And Ladon soon he slayes, and Phaeretus,
Demodocus; and of Strymon^us,
With his bright blade, he cut off the right hand,
Threatening Halesus throat; nor still does stand,
But Thoas brains he dashed out with a stone,
And mixed together blood and brains and bone.
Halesus father his sons fate foresaw,
Him therefore to a wood he did withdraw:
But when old age his life for death did fit,
The impartial Parcae from their hands commit
Him to Euanders darts: whom Pallas thus
Assails; but first thus prays; Grant now to us,
Grave father Tyber, that this dart I throw,
May find good fortune, and the right way go,
Through haughty Halesus obdurate breast:
So shall thy aged oak be decked and dressed
With this man's arms and spoils. The God did hear;
And whiles Halesus hoped away to bear
Imaons spoils, a strong Arcadian dart
Through's open breast pierct his unhapppie heart.
But lusty Lausus did least fear disdain,
At slaughter of so rare a prince, thus slain,
A prime part of the war; nor would admit
His Rutuls to be thereat dampt a whit.
For first confronting Abas strong he slayes,
The bolt and bar of these most furious frayes.
Down fall Arcadians, down Etrurians fall,
And Trojans thick which escaped from Grecian thrall.
Both armies meet, captains and soldiers fight
With equal force, the reeres with utmost might
Press forward, making their approach so thick,
That the whole army seems stone-still to stick,
Without least motion. Pallas hereupon
His soldiers urges and inciteth on.
Here Lausus labors on the other side,
Neither much different in their youthful pride,
Both bravely beautiful; but both gainsaid
Into their country to make retrograde,
And hereunto Jove would not condescend,
That they in single duel should contend:
But for a greater foe their fate now waits.
Meanwhile Iuturna moves and instigates
Her brother Turnus, Lausus straight to aid.
Who in a wingy-chariot swiftly made
Through thickest of their troops: and when he saw
Both Time, and's Martial mates from fight withdraw,
I (says he) I alone must Pallas find,
To me alone I see his death assigned.
I wish his father now spectatour were.
And hereupon his mates the field forbear,
Being charged thereunto. The princely spark,
As he the captains pride and power did mark
In's Rutuls quick withdrawing, stood amazed,
And ^tupifi'de, on Turnus stature gazed,
With envying eyes viewing his limbs most great,
And every part about him most complete.
Thus then unto the kings words he replies;
Sure I shall now get praise by this rich prize,
Or by a noble death. My father (sure)
Is just and wise, what fates will, to endure.
Spare then thy brags and threats. Thus having said,
(...) the midst of the Martial list he made:
The Arcadians hearts were filled with chilling fear,
Turnus from's chariot then descending there;
And now on foot was stately seen draw nigh,
Like a fierce lion, who from's den does spy
A stout big bull fitting himself to fight,
Far off in the field, he to him takes his flight:
Even such is Turnus in his fierce access.
Whom Pallas now within the reach does guess
Ofhis darts-cast, Pallas does first advance,
Unmatcht in might, but hoping happy chance.
First thus he prays; O thou Alcides great,
I by my fathers kindness thee entreat,
Who thee a stranger took to bed and board,
To my designs thy mighty aid afford,
And let my adversary half-dead see
Himself of's bloody arms bespoil'd to be:
And let proud Turnus see with dying eye,
Me win the field with valiant victory.
Hercules heard the youth, and (but in vain)
Fetched a deep sigh, which did even tears constrain.
Then mighty Jove to's son most kindly says;
To each man's given his appointed days;
Man's life is short, his time irrevocable,
But fame by facts to make most memorable,
Is virtues work indeed. Under the wall
Of stately Troy how many sons did fall,
Even sons of Gods! yea my Sarpedon fair,
My son (...) slain, the fates would him not spare:
And Turnus has a term and certain fate,
And his life's period hastes to terminate.
This said, on Rutuls fields his eyes he bent.
And Pallas now wi^h all his force forth sent
A nimble spear, and from his scabbard drew
His glistring blade. The spear most fi^rcely ^lew
To Turnus shoulder on his armor blue;
And on the brim of's shield did glance along,
And gave a clattering blow on's body strong.
Turnus hereat shaking a spear of oak,
Tipped with sharp steel, darts it, and thus he spoke
To Pallas as it flew; Go now and see
Whether more penetrable now ours be
Then his. This said, through his most mighty targe
Lined with plates of brass and iron large,
And covered over with many bulls hides thick,
With brandisht blow the spear did enter quick
Piercing his corslet, wounded deep his breast.
He straight the bloud-w^rm'd spear in vain does wrest;
Striving to pluck it out, plucks out withal
Life, blood and soul, and straight down dead does fall
Flat on his face: in's fall his ^rms do clatter,
The ground his gore-bloud-gushing mouth does batter.
Over whom T^rnus trampling, thus does say;
Go now Arc^di^ns, mind my words, I pray,
Go tell Euander, This son re-send
Unto him with a well-deserving end.
VVhat-ever buriall-honour he can crave,
Or full content and comfort in a grave,
I will bestow on him, his ^^rborous cheer
To his Ae^e^s, now does cost him dear.
Thus saying, standing on the corpse now dead,
Spoiling him ofhis belt embroidered
With the whole story of the impious act,
How Danaies daughter foulely did compact
Upon the wedding night in marriage bed
To murder their young bridegrooms there left dead:
Which things Eurytion had wrought thick in gold,
This prize most rich Turnus does joy to hold.
Man's mind is ignorant of future fate,
Knows not a mean, is puffed with prosperous state.
Turnus shall see the time when he would be glad
This prize most dearly bought, he never had
Once touched, and when, this day and Pallas spoils
Shall prove most hateful, and his hearts turmoiles.
But Pallas mates with sighs and fears all fraught,
Upon a shield his corpse in troops thence brought.
Ah, the great grief, yet grace thy sire will have,
This day the first and last to battles gave:
And yet about thee thou did make remain
A mighty heap of fierce Rutulians slain,
Nor now did flying fame this mischief show;
'Twas brought to Aeneas by a post too true,
Who told him how distressed his soldiers were,
How 'twas high time to help them fled for fear.
Hereat Aeneas mowes all down with his blade,
And like a mad man he wide path-wayes made
Through thickest troops, thee, Turnus proud, to find,
With slaughters fresh, having still in his mind
(All came to's sight) Pallas, Euander kind,
The table spread, where first he was a guest,
All, though a stranger, right hand loves expressed.
And here before him he four youths espies,
All born at Sulmo, and four more likewise
Trained up by Vfens, all alive he snatches,
And as a sacrifice, them all dispatches
To the dead ashes of his dearest friend,
And in the fires their captive blood does spend.
Thence passing on, when he next dart did throw
At Mago stout, he slyly stooping low,
Escapt the quivering dart, which flew away.
Whereat his knees he clasping, thus did pray;
Now by thy fathers ghost, and hopeful state
Of thy Iulus, I thee supplicate,
Preserve my life both to my son and me,
And in my stately house thou hid shall see,
Deep in the ground, great store of silver coined,
And much good gold, some fin'de, some unrefin'de.
My life (alas!) stays not Troyes victory,
Nor can I only work such jeopardie.
This said, Aeneas presently replies;
Those heaps of gold which thou so high do prize,
Keep for thy children; Turnus took away
This quarter, when my Pallas he did slay.
Thus thinks Iulus and Anchises dead,
And with these words, upon his helm and head
He lays fast hold; and as he so did pray,
Up to the hilts his sword in's soul made way.
Hard by he met Emonides most brave,
Fair Phoebus and Diana's priest most grave:
His head a sacred hood and head-bands tie,
Glistring all-o're in arms most gorgeously.
Whom chas'di'th' field, and overcome in the fight,
He sacrificed, and on him stood upright,
Whose mighty shade him hid: Serestus stout
Upon his shoulders bare his armor out,
Thy trophie, mighty Mars. Then C^culus
Black Vulcanes brood, and Vmbro valourous
Of Marsies mounts, the fight afresh engage.
But Dardanes prince does on them fiercely rage:
And Anxures arm his sword sliced off so round,
That arm and shield straight fell down on the ground.
This gallant had some lofty words given out,
And thought perhaps time would it bring about:
His heart was high as heaven, persuaded, sure,
Ofhoarie hairs, and life, long to endure.
Tarquitus proud in glistring arms him met,
Whom Faunus did on Driope beget,
Who furiously a strong spear at him throws,
Which through his harness and huge target goes.
His head (he craving life, but to no end,
And much about to speak) he soon did send
From's shoulders to the ground, on'strunck he stood,
And over him thus he spoke, in heat of blood;
Lie there, thou frighter fierce, thy mother dear
Shall never thee unto thy burial bear,
Nor in thy native soil entombe: wilde-beasts
Or fish in the sea shall on thee make them feasts.
Antheus then and Lycas stout, who led
King Turnus voward, he encountered,
And Numa strong, sworthy Camertes stout
Sprung from renowned Volscens race and rout:
A mighty landed man in Italy,
Who over the Amyclians had the soveraigntie;
Men for their sparing speech of special name.
And like Aegaeon, who (as blazeth fame)
Had full an hundred arms and active hands,
And fifty mouths; whence, as from firebrands,
And fiery breasts, he flames of fire forth threw,
As many shields held up and swords he drew
Against Jove's lightnings: so Aenea^ stout
Victoriously did fret and fume about
As soon as once his sword waxt warm with blows:
But then (behold!) most furiously he goes
Against Niphaeus and his coach horse swift,
And against his breast his fatal blade did lift:
But they far off, as soon as ere they saw
Him rushing, fiercely raging, against them draw,
For fear they fly, and backward madly go,
And in their race their rider overthrow,
Whurrying the chariot with them to the shore.
Mean while Lucagus also pressed on sore
With his white coach-horse, then accomitated
With His brother Lig^r, who thus regulated
The coach-horse reins, Lucagus brandishing
His glistring blade. Troyes prince not suffering
Their bold out-braves, unto them rusheth straight,
And against both did quick accommodate
A mighty spear: to whom thus Liger bold;
Thou do not here Ac^illes coach behold,
Nor Diomedes horse, nor P^rygi^n field,
But in these plains thy life to death must yield,
And end these broiles. Thus madly loud hespake:
But Troyes brave ^ero^ no reply would make
In words, but casts a dart at hisfierce foe.
And as Luc^gus reaching out a blow
With stiff intent did fetch his horse about*
And his left foot unto thefight set out,
The fly ing spear piercing hist^^get bright,
On his left groin did penetrating light,
Which did him over^hr^^ and deadly ^ound;
Where he lay grovelling dead upon the ground,
To whom in these tart terms Aeneas said;
No ghost, Lucagus, made thy horse afraid
And fly thy foe, nor did their paces slow
Thee and thy coach betray unto thy foe:
But thou thy self, leaping down from the wheels,
Thy coach forsook'st, and triptst up thine own heels.
Thus having said, the coach in hand he takes:
Th'unhappie brother prostrate fall'ne down quakes,
Holds up his trembling hands, thus does entreat;
Now by thy self and by thy parents great
Who thee begat ( Troyes prince) so great so good,
O spare thy suppliants life, spill not his blood.
O sir, says he, these words you used not late;
Die then, let brothers brothers sociate.
Then with his sword his breast he opened wide,
And from's hearts hollow caves his soul did glide.
Thus through the fields this Trojan victour made
Great slaughters: like fierce floods which banks invade,
Or blustering winds, so did he rage about:
Th'enclosed Trojans now also break out,
And leave their camps, and young Ascanius brave
With his green sparks, them valiantly behave,
Though late (in vain) besieged. Things resting so,
Jove of himself does to his Juno go,
And thus says to her; See, my sister kind,
And special spouse, most grateful to my mind;
Venus, thou see (even as thou did suppose,
Nor art deceived) supports thy Trojan foes:
Their boldest hearts, strong hands, nor patience stout
VVarres woes to endure, could not alone hold out.
To whom thus humbly Juno did reply;
Why, O my Pheere most dear, ah tell me, why
Do thou my grieved heart more grieve; which quakes,
And at thy bitter piercing words even aches?
O if thou lov'd'st me now as formerly,
If (as 'twere fit) thou had first fervencie;
Great Jove, thou this request would grant to me,
My Turnus from the fight withdrawn to see:
That to his father Daunus him I might
Safely restore. But let him fall in the fight,
And be a pious prey to Trojans base;
Yet is he sprung from our celestial race.
Pilumnus was his sire, in the fourth descent,
Thine altars he with hand munificent,
And many gallant gifts enriched has.
To whom olympus king thus briefly says;
If thou desire present deaths delay,
And the death-marked youths dire fall to stay,
And think I may the same procrastinate;
Let Turnus fly then from his present fate.
This only distance must thy mind suffice:
But if thy prayers to higher hopes arise,
And that thou think he may be wholly freed
From chance of war, or what fates have decreed
May altered be; thou but vain hopes do feed.
To whom thus Juno full of tears replies;
But what if Jove, what he in words denies,
Would grant in heart, and T^rnus life make sure?
Now he most guiltless, must hard hap endure,
Or I no truth do know: but rather I
Could wish thou would my fond fear fals^fie,
And (as thou can) convert all to the best.
Thus having now each way her votes expressed,
From heaven she forthwith flies, to earth descends:
Storms fly before her, clouds she 'bout her bends.
Thus through the air to Trojan bands she flew,
And to the Italian tents she nearer drew.
The Goddess then in concave cloud did frame
A forcelesse shade most thin to seem, the same
With brave Aeneas shape (a most strange sight)
And fraught it fair with Trojan arms most bright,
A plumy helm fit for his sacred head,
A shield which his most nearely patterned:
Yea gives it windy words, a senseless sound,
And goodly gate, like one walking profound.
Much like those shapes which walk (they say) being dead,
Or those fallacious dreams in snorting bed.
The frolic figure brags before the bands,
And Turnus tempts to show the strength of's hands,
And him with speech provokes: whom Turnus straight
Assails aloof, and with represselesse hate
A whisling dart casts at it; instantly
The shadow turns its back, away does fly.
Turnus supposing now Aeneas fled,
Nourisht vain hope, which thus he uttered;
Aeneas, whither fly'st thou? do n't forsake
Thy spouse betrothed, to whom thou vows did make:
This hand of mine shall give thee lands so sought.
And thus he follows him in word as thought,
Brandishing his bright blade; but could not find,
How these vain joys were but puff toys of wind.
As thus he past, by chance a ship he spi'de,
To a rocks rigid bank most fitly ty'de,
Whereto a ladder for ascent did stand,
For a sea-voyage fitted out of hand.
In which Osinius king from Clusium came.
Aeneas fearful figure in this same
Cast it self quickly, there it hidden lay:
Which Turnus following, cuts off every stay,
Nimbly ascends the top: scarce did he take
Footing in the ship, but Juno quickly brake
The fastening cable, launcht the ship from shore,
Which with full sail into the ocean bore.
Meanwhile Aeneas with a bloody fight,
Seeks up and down his foe thus out of sight;
And multitudes of men him meeting slayes.
But now the nimble shade no longer stays,
Hid in its holes, but vanished into the air;
And when to the midst oth' sea storms Turnus bare,
Ignorant of these things, for's life ingrate;
He looks about, to the heavens does elevate
(After this manner) both his hands and heart;
Almighty Jove, deem'st thou it my desert,
To suffer such a shame, a scourge so great?
Ah, whither go I? whence make I retreat?
What flight is this? whom do I thus forsake?
Shall I not once more yet my self betake
To Laurents walls and wars? What now (alas!)
Will to my troops of soldiers come to pass,
Which followed me in fight? whom impious I
Have left alone, a thousand deaths to die?
For now, me thinks, I hear and see them all
Dying and crying as they wounded fall*
What shall I do? what land me live can swallow?
But oh ye winds, do ye me rather follow
With pitying puffs: (this Turnus does you pray
With gladsome mind) O cast this bark away
On rocks or sands, where Rutuls may not see,
Or tainted fame may never follow me.
Thus moaning up and down, thoughts ebb and flow,
What to resolve to do, he does not know;
Or madly slay himself, for such disgrace,
And in his corpse his bloody blade to case;
Or headlong into the sea himself to cast,
And so by swimming to get land at last:
And landing, to the Trojan troops to hie.
Thrice both these ways he did attempt to try;
And thrice great Juno his attempts did hinder,
Pitying the young prince with indulgence tender.
Thus on he sails with prosperous wind and tide,
At last at's father Daunus town did 'bide.
Meanwhile by Jove's advise, Mezentius stout
Comes forth to fight, and ( Trojans all about
Joining in good success) does now invade
The Trojan troops, who to him jointly made.
And all at once at one alone they fly,
Their hands and hate do this one man defy.
But he, much like a rock against mighty waves,
Withstands the fury of winds big outbraves,
Lays open his rigid fides'gainst billows great,
And all the rage that seas or skies can threat,
It self unmoved remains: he is even so.
And Dolichaons son did overthrow,
Hebrus; with whom he Latagus did slay,
And Palmus, as he from him ran away:
But Latagus he with a stone most great,
Even with a mountains part, his brains out beat.
Palmus his hammes and legs he cut off quite,
And left him there to roll in piteous plight.
His arms he Lausus gave, on's back to bear,
And on his head his plumy helm to wear.
Phrygian Euantes, Mimas, Paris mate,
And Coaetanean, he did ruinate:
Whom to Amycus, mild Thebano bare,
Paris being born of Hecuba most fair,
Who dreamt she had a firebrand begot,
And he to die in's country had the lot:
But Mimas, ignorant of this his hap,
Did find his grave here in Laurentums lap.
Now as a boar hunted from mountains high
By barking, biting dogs, (which long did lie
Sheltered in wide pine-bearing Vesulus,
And in Laurentums fields most copious,
Of wood-like reeds, having been long time fed:)
As soon as he is in the nets entangled,
He stands and stares about, his tusks does whet,
And fretting, fiercely brissels up does set;
Nor is it wit or worth for any there,
To be too busy to him to draw near,
But off to stand, and at him darts to throw,
And with loud clamorous shouts to tire him so:
So those that to Mezentius bare just spite,
Durst not come near him hand to hand to fight;
But with their darts far off and clamours shrill,
They him provoke: the boar sits boldy still,
Gnashing with foamy chaps his tusks most keen,
And shaking off the darts from's back is seen.
From Cerits ancient coasts came Acron stout,
A Grecian forced from's country to fly out
For breach of marriage; whom, when as remote,
Mezentius saw, and seriously did note,
Amid'st the troops moving his mates to fi^ht,
Adorned with purple plumes and scarlet bright,
His kind contracted spouses goodly gift:
Much like a hungry lion rambling swift
About the mighty woods (for so indeed
Fierce hunger forces madly to proceed)
If happily he some well-grown goat may spy,
Or bravely headed stagge that way to fly,
He gapes for joy, his brissels rough erects,
Falls close unto the prey he so affects,
Washing his ravenous chaps in blood lukewarm.
Thus thickest foes Mezentius fierce does charm:
And quickly he unhappie Acron slayes,
And him with his heels beating the ground he lays
Low on the earth, his bloody spear unsplit.
But he Orodes flying scorned to hit,
Or smite to death by casting his strong dart,
And coward-like to wound him in's back-part:
But he must meet his foes all face to face,
And man to man by dreadful duells chase,
Not pleased with pilfering, but with powerful blows.
And thus he great Orodes overthrows,
His foot set on his corpse, his spear at's heart,
A man of no small worth, this wars best part.
His mates him following, panegyricks sing,
And of his conquests make the air to ring.
But he expiring, ere quite dead, thus said;
Proud conqueror, thou shall not pass unpaid,
Who e're thou art, my death revenged shall be,
Nor shall thou long from this revenge be free:
My fate thee follows, thee these plains shall hold.
To whom Mezentius with a spirit bold,
Yet smilingly reply'de; But thou shall die:
But as for me, Jove, king of earth and sky,
Will see to me. This said, the spear he pulls
Out of his corpse: then fatal rest him lulls
Into a deadly sleep, which closed his sight,
Shutting his eyes up in eternal night.
Stout Caedicus in fight slayes Alcath'us,
Sacrator kills Hidaspis; Parthen'us
And mighty Orsis do by Rapo die;
Messapus fierce slayes Clodius valiantly,
And Lyaconius and Ericates,
Whom from his skittish jade fallen with small ease
Unto the ground, on foot a footman slew:
Then Lycian Agis hotly to them drew,
Whom yet Valerius, not a jot unfraught
With sires connative nobleness, soon taught
The way to's grave: Salius Atronius slayes;
Nealces nimble dart ends Salius days;
Nealces, expert both at spear and dart.
And now like heavy hap was on each part,
And mighty Mars made equal funerals:
Alike they fight, alike catch fatal falls:
These conquer now, anon are conquered:
But neither these nor those from foes have fled.
The Gods from Jove's high hall pity the plight
Of both parts, thus overwhelmed with fruitless spite,
And tired with troubles. This way, Venus fair;
Juno looks that way with contrarious care.
Pale-peevish Tisiphon with frantic heat
Does rage and rave between the armies great.
And still Mezentius shakes his mighty lance,
And furiously does to the field advance.
Like great Orion, when with staulking feet
He walks moist Nereus pools and floods that fleet,
Slicing his wavy way, whose shoulders white
O're-top the streams: or when he does delight,
Walking the woods, a huge old oak to bear,
On mountains-tops his head to the clouds to rear:
Even thus Mezentius to the army goes,
Whom seen far off, Aeneas to oppose
Prepares himself. He dauntlessely does stay,
Waiting his mighty foes approach that way.
In's strength he stands, watching the distance right
Sufficient for his lances fatal flight.
Assist me now (says he) my right hand brave,
And brandisht lance; none other Gods I have:
And here I vow, the spoils which I shall gain
From this great thief Aeneas, shall remain
To thee, brave Lausus, as thy trophie due.
And with these words at him farre-off he threw
A whistling spear, which flying fierce did glance
Upon his shield; whence, by unhappie chance,
It pierced Anthors noble breast and heart;
Anthor, Alcides mate, who would not part
From king Euander, once from Argos sent,
But made abode in Latins continent.
Unhappie he died by another wound,
His eyes to the skies, he thinks on's native ground.
Then brave Aeneas cast a dart at him,
Which flying, pierced the hollow edge or brimme
Of's threefold brazen arms with linen lined,
And through his treble bulls hides way did find,
Or forced through into his groin most deep,
Nor could his strength the paining wound out keep.
Whereat Aeneas joy'd to see the blood
Of his proud foe, draws out his fauchion good
Which hung by's side, wherewith he furiously
Assails his trembling foe, which with quick eye
As soon as Lausus sees, due filial love
Does in him, for his sire, much mourning move,
And brinish tears provoke. Here cannot I
In silence bury thy dire destiny,
And famous facts (if future times will trust
And credit what of him relate I must)
Most memorable youth! Mezentius maimed
Unfit for fight, the battle, slow, disclaimed;
And in's retreat the wounding spear he bare,
Sticking in's shield. Then straight the young man rare
Steps in between, in the midst maintains the fight.
And as Aeneas raised his hand to smite,
Lausus his sword cross underneath it came,
And brake the force of the blow, and stopped the same.
His mates him follow with a mighty shout,
And whiles the sire, guarded by's son, got out,
They throw thick darts, incense their foe to fight:
Aeneas frets, hid under's target bright.
And as black clouds pouring down showers of hail,
The lowns and plow-men all without all fail
Scud from the fields apace, themselves to hide,
With cunning tricks, under some rivers side,
Or in some rocks deep hole, whiles it does rain;
That in the sunshine they may to work again:
Even so Aeneas, showered on round about
With shafts, this cloud of war strongly bears out,
And 'bides all brunts, and chides young Lausus sore,
And bitterly thus threatens Lausus poor;
VVhither, weak child of death, do rush so fast?
Why do thou on facts past thy strength thee cast?
Thy filial zeal does flout thee most unwise;
Lausus no less does madly him despise;
Which makes this Trojan captains rage break out.
And now the fatal sisters had spun out
Lausus last thread of life; for now with ruth
Aeneas through the body of the youth
Made his bright blade to enter instantly,
There wholly hid: his shield and arms do fly
In parts, and slasht his coat wrought curiously,
His mothers work; and filled his breast with gore:
Wherewith his soul into the air did soar,
And left his corpse. But when with ruthful eye
Aeneas did his dying countenance spy,
His countenance which waxt wondrous pale and wan,
He deeply sighed, greatly to grieve began,
Embraced him in his arms, and called to mind
The tender love to sons in parents kind;
And sons reciprocal to sires, and said;
What honor now may worthily be paid,
(Beloved and much lamented youth) to thee?
What gift may to thy goodness congruent be
From kind Aeneas? all thy arms most rare
Wherein thou joy'dst, not mine, but thine they are,
Thy corpse also for burial, I commit
Unto thy sire (if he have care of it)
Yet let this thee unhappie happifie,
That thou by great Aeneas hands did die.
Then freely he his friends checks tauntinglie
For their delay; himself lifts him from ground,
His lovely locks (in the fashion) comptly bound,
Being all-besmear'd with blood. In this mean space
His father dried his wounds at a fit place,
About fair Tybers flood, his body he
Makes clean with water, and against a tree
Refresht himself, his helmet strong of brass
Hung on the boughs, his huge arms lay in the grass.
Chief gallants 'bout him stood; he faint, takes rest,
Eased his tired neck, his beard spread on his breast,
Often enquiring for his Lausus dear,
And sending often, that he of him might hear.
They quickly do the mournful fathers will;
And on their shields, lamenting loud and shrill,
Brought mighty Lausus dead, with mighty wound
Woefully slain. Which when the father found,
His mournful mind farre-off foreseeing woe,
On his gray-haires much dust he straight does throw,
And both his hands unto the heavens does heave,
And with these words to the corpse does cling and cleave;
Oh my dear son, had I such love to live,
That thee for me I to my foe should give?
Even thee whom I begat? must I by thee
Survive secure, and thou thus murdered be?
Must I live by thy death? Unhappie I,
What now remains, but exiles misery?
O wound most deeply driven, O my dear son,
It Is I have shamed thee, and thy fame undone!
Even I, whom homebred hatred has disthron'd,
I should have died, through envy, unbemoan'd.
I by all kinds of death most guiltily
Should to my realm have paid this penalty*
Yet live I still: nor men, nor light yet leave.
Well, now I will me of them all bereave.
And with these words, up on's weak limbs he stood,
And though his strength was dulled through want of blood,
By his deep wound, yet not a jot dejected,
He calls for's horse, his horse most high affected,
His crown and comfort, wherewith evermore
In all his battles he the conquest bore.
And thus he to his mourning horse did say;
Brave Rhebus, we now long (if long I may
Say ought amongst men continues) lived have,
And either we will this day be victours brave
With bloody spoils and proud Aeneas head,
And for my Lausus loss be thus well sped;
Or else, if force no way can force or find,
My death and thine shall be in one combin'de.
For sure I think, stout steed, thou never yet
To others did, or Trojan lords submit.
This said, he mounted; and in the saddle set,
Into both hands sharp shafts he straight does get;
His glistring brazen helm on's head, and crest
Fast fixed, and with most rigid horse-haire dressed.
Thus amongst them with a fierce careere addressed,
He rushed in: his heart with shame did boil:
Madness and mourning for his Lausus foil,
Outrageous love, and secret sense of the might
Of his fierce foe, do spur him to the fight.
Aloud three times he now Aeneas calls,
Aeneas knows him, glad, to prayers falls;
So grant great Jove, so grant Apollo high,
That thou may now begin the fight to try.
This said, he with a piercing spear him met.
Whereat Mezentius, in a ragefull fret,
Cries out, Fierce wretch, why do thou thus in vain
Me vex, perplex? thou having my son slain,
Thou have the way me now to ruinate.
And surely now to die I do not hate:
None of thy Gods regard or spare will I.
Leave off thy threats, for here I come to die,
But first of all, these gifts to thee I bring.
Which said, a dart he at his foe did fling,
And then another and another, thick
He flings, which flies as in a circle quick.
But yet the gold-bost shield them all abides.
Then 'bout Aeneas standing fast, he rides
Three light careeres, still at him throwing darts,
And thrice Troyes prince with his brass target thwarts
The seeming wood of shafts. But when he saw,
And seeing shamed so many darts to draw
Out of his shield, such long delays to use,
And how he was constrained not to refuse
The combat, though unequal, musing thus,
At last with valor most magnanimous
He rusheth on, and with resistlesse force
He threw a dart which hit the warriors horse
Between his hollow temples, with which blow
The horse mounts up an end, kicks to overthrow
His rider; and at last does backward fall,
Fastening his master under him withal:
He grovelling headlong, out of joint his arm,
Trojans and Latins raise a loud alarm
And clamorous noise. Aeneas to him flew,
And from his scabbard his bright fauchion drew,
And over him said; Where Is now, Mezentius stout,
Where Is thy proud strength and stomach? all flown out?
To whom the Tuscane, having taken some breath,
Fierce bitter foe, why so do threaten death?
Why so insult'st thou? it is no crime to die:
Nor came I to the field so cowardly,
Nor for me with thee would my Lausus have
Such base conditions: Only this I crave,
(If any favor vanquished ones may get
From victours) I thee earnestly entreat,
Permit my body to have buriall-rite:
For why? I know my peoples hate and spite
Stand round about me; keep me, I thee pray,
From their great rage, and with me my son lay,
Consorting in one grave. And with this word
Expectedly his throat receives the sword.
Whereat upon his arms gusht out his gore,
And from his body forth his soul did soar.
An end of the tenth book of Virgils Aeneids.
THE ARGUMENT of the eleventh book.
Aeneas, for these victories,
To Mars does trophies solemnize.
Pallas dead corpse is sent thence straight
To king Euander, in great state.
Truce made, to bury both their slain:
Euanders grief, paternall pain
For his dead son. The soldiers dead
Are gathered, burned, and buried.
From Diomedes message came,
That he these wars did quite disclaim.
Drances and Turnus 'twixt them chide.
Aeneas to Laurentum hy'de.
Fierce fight: the day the Trojans gain:
Unawares, Camilla there is slain.
AVrora rising now the sea forsook.
Aeneas (though especial care he took,
And time, for burial of his slaughtered mates
With sedulous intents he meditates)
Yet first, like victour brave, by break of day
He to the Gods his Martial votes will pay.
Upon a hill a mighty oak he placed,
Which lopt all over, with glistring arms he graced,
Mezentius spoils (great Mars, thy trophies good)
And fitly fixed the crest, yet dropping blood,
Spears broken splinters, and his corslet strong,
Which twelve times dig'd with darts, scarce took least wrong.
His brazen shield to th'left hand up was tide,
And from his neck, his ivorie sheath beside.
Then thus his mates (for all his Martial Peers
Had hedged him in) he with these speeches cheeres;
Brave sirs, our main work done, avaunt base fear,
A rush for what remains: the spoils see here,
And first fruits of our joy, from that proud king
Mezentius, whom these hands to ground did bring.
Now to the King we must, to Laurents wall.
Prepare your hearts for war, yet hope withal
For good success; and let not least delay
(So soon as the ensigns thence to pluck away
The Gods permit, and tents their youth forsake)
In ignorance or sloth, force you to take
Feare-caused counsel. In the meanwhile we
Our mates unburied corpse interred will see:
This rite alone departed souls desire.
Go then (says he) and carefully enquire,
And search out all those worthy wights most rare,
Who this fair land to purchase, did not spare
Their dear hearts blood, for us: find them, I pray,
And hang their hearses with last gifts most gay:
And first unto Euanders city sad
Let princely Pallas noble corpse be had:
Whom, full of valor, fatal destiny
And bitter death drencht in extremity.
These weeping words he spoke, and went his way
Unto the place where Pallas body lay,
Watched by Acetes old, Euanders page,
But not by happy fate to such ripe age
Admitted his sons mate. His servants all
About him stand, mourning their masters fall.
The Trojan troops, and Phrygian matrons fair
Stood weeping (as they are wont) with unbound hair.
But soon as e're Aeneas entered in,
There straight was raised a mighty mourning din,
With loud laments, their breasts they often beat,
Whose ruthful roares filled all the palace great.
But when he saw Pallas white face and head,
And the open wound which this just sorrow bred,
Through which the Italian dart dire entrance made,
With trickling tears these woeful words he said;
Ah, woeful youth, must lot thus lucklesse be,
Even then when it smiled to envy thee to me,
Lest thou our conquered kingdoms should behold,
And brought triumphant to thy father old?
I promised not to him these things of thee,
When at our parting he dismissed me
With sweet embraces, to an empire great,
And with advise did fearfully repeat
What furious foes we had, what people stout
To fight withal. And now fond hopes do flout
The good old king, who now (sure) hopes and prays,
And for his child heapt-gifts on altars lays.
But we esteem no gifts to the Gods now due,
The dead young man we vainly 'tend and rue.
Unhappie old man, thou with grief shall see
Thy son by cruel fate returned to thee.
Here Is our returns of love, our spoils expected,
Thus thy great trust in me seems quite neglected.
Yet, grave Euander, this some joy may be,
Thou will not him by base wounds conquered see:
Nor him alive, for cowardice, wish dead.
Ah! woe is me, what fence is from me fled
For Italy, and what a noble mate
Have thou Iulus lost by his dire fate?
Thus having wept, he bids them bear away
The woeful corpse, choosing without delay
A thousand gallants brave from all his bands,
To wait upon the corpse he these commands,
As his last honor, and at hand to be,
With his sad father, whom still as they see
Shedding salt tears, to yield him comfort sweet
(Although but small) to so great sorrows meet.
Then straightway some long reeds do quickly get,
Some make a beer whereon the corpse to set,
With twisted twigs and oaken sprigs most tender,
Whose hearse-like bended boughs thick shades do render*
Here the young prince high on the reeds they lay,
Much like a flower by damsells cropped in May:
Or withering hyacinth, or violet sweet,
Not yet quite stripped of sent and semblance meet,
Though now its mother earth affords no sap,
Nor yields such strength, as hugged in her lap.
Then two rare robes of purple, thick with gold,
Aeneas straight brought forth, rich to behold,
Queen Dido's art, which in her prosperous state
She for him wrought, with gold-twist accurate.
One of these robes he in most mournful wise
Puts on the prince, last due to's obsequies;
And therewith hides his locks for fire prepared,
And naught of all these wars rich spoils he spared,
But heaps them on, which in a long array
Were born in state: great horses made a prey,
And spears and darts all taken from their foes,
And many a captive chained with them goes,
Whose blood in flames must sacrificed be:
Truncheons of broken spears commanded he
His captains in their hands to bear along,
And on their tops to bear foes arms most strong,
And on them every adversaries name.
Then aged sad Acetes onward came,
Beating his breasts, tearing his aged face,
Fal'ne faintly on the ground in piteous case.
Along they led chariots besmeared with blood
Of Rutuls slain. Aetho^, his courser good,
His warre-horse brave, came after all his train,
Stripped of his trappings; nor could he refrain
To weep, as on he went, full floods of tears:
Then one his spear, and one his helmet bears.
The rest of's arms the conqueror Turnus had:
Then followed all the troops and Trojans sad,
The Tuscane and Arcadian captains strong,
The wrong end of their spears trailing along
Upon the ground. Thus as in Martial b^nds
These gallants pass, Aeneas here still stands;
And with a deep-fetcht sigh does to them say;
Dear mates, wars self-same fates call us away
To weep for others: then my Pallas dear,
Rest safe for ever, never to be here
Re-visited, for ever then adieu.
His speech here stopped. Then he his troops withdrew
Unto the town and tents; where soon they saw
King Latins legates toward them to draw,
With olive-boughs adorned, leave to entreat,
The scattered bodies by that battle great
Slain in the fields, that they might seek and have,
And gathered up, bestow on them a grave.
Adding, No fight ought be with conquered slain;
Praying, his once kind hoasts he would not disdain,
Fathers in law, once called. To whose request
Aeneas kind him flexible expressed,
And gives them leave; adding these words beside,
Tell me (you Latins) what unworthie guide,
What blinde-fold fortune has involved you thus
Into this war? Why have ye flown from us
Your vowed friends? ask ye peace for your slain?
Entreat ye for your dead? Truly I Would fain
Far rather to your living grant the same.
And to this place, these parts, I only came
By fates decree. Nor war I with your land:
Your king our love and friendship does withstand,
And rather trusts himself to Turnus might:
Whereas for Turnus it had been more right
His life to hazard. If he do intend
By force to force us hence, this war to end;
'Twere fit he only were to me addressed,
And he should live, whom fates or facts made best.
But go, poor citizens, your slain interre.
Thus spoke Aeneas: they amazed were,
And silent stood, gazing as men aghast
On one another faces, till at last
Drances the gravest of them, evermore
Who to young Turnus wrath and envy bore,
Set forth himself, and thus his words did frame;
Brave Trojan prince, great by illustrious fame,
Greater by virtuous facts; with what due praise
May I thy worth unto the heavens now raise?
I know not which, or first, or most to admire,
Thy justice great, or quenchlesse Martial fire.
But we, thy grateful friends, these things will show
To all our mates, and towns where-e're we go:
And if success do smile, we hope to make
King Latin thee into his love to take:
Let Turnus somewhere else go seek him wives,
But when thy fate-given vvalls and building thrives,
We all shall be most glad Troyes stones to bear
Upon our shoulders, that great work to rear.
He ceast; and what he said, all hum'd assent.
Then for full twelve days they a truce indent,
And peace a space to hold. Then up and down
Trojans and Latins stray about the town,
And vvoods and fields, without control or strife.
And now to fell ash-trees strokes sound most rife;
Cloud-kissing pines and good old oaks to cleave,
To chop down cedars, which sweet sents do leave:
And having felled them, never cease, till they
In carts have carried them thence all away.
And now fame, hasty sorrows harbinger,
Sad tidings told to old king Euander,
And filled Euanders court and country round
With cross bad news, to that which late did sound,
That Pallas conqueror was in Italy,
The Arcadians (as old custom was) do fly
Unto their gates, with buriall-burning light,
Tall torches, which in long ranks shone most bright*
Whose shine dark fields abroad distinguished plain.
And thus they meeting with the Trojan train,
Unite their mourning troops: which instantly
The maids and matrons spying, they drew nigh,
And through the city sad raise piteous cries.
But for Euander, nothing could suffice
To hold him back, but to the midst he makes:
His Pallas-bearing beer quick down he takes,
And falling, fastening on it, weeps and vvails,
And scarce his voice, (which him with grief yet fails)
At last he thus unlocks, thus weeping spoke;
O my dear Pallas, ah, did thou not make
This promise to thy parent, that with heed
And warienesse thou would to war proceed?
Alas, I know my self, how far new fame,
And honyed honor (therefore I too blame)
In The first assault would spur young spirits free.
Ah, most unhappie youths first fruits in thee,
Most rigid rudiments of too soon war,
For whom my votes and vows all frustrate are!
And thou, most sacred spouse, in death now blessed,
Not kept to be by this great grief distressed:
But I, contrariwise, by life too long,
My fates do vanquish, but my self do wrong;
The father living, and the son thus dead,
The Rutuls should me first have slaughtered,
Following the Trojan troops: my blood should I
Have sacrificed, then this solemnity
Had been for me, not for my Pallas dear.
But neither blame I you, brave Trojans here,
Nor yet the league which I with you did make,
Then ratified, when as we hands did shake;
This grief (I see) to my gray hairs was lotted:
But since the fates untimely death had plotted
Against my son, some comfort it had been,
If Volscian thousands first he slain had seen,
And Trojans by him led victoriously,
Ere he had died, into Italy.
And now poor Pallas, I can give to thee
No better buriall-rites, then here I see
Done by Aeneas kind and Phrygians brave,
By Tuscane Peers and troops; thus to thy grave
Who bring rich spoils, which thou from slain did win:
And thou in the fight a mighty trunck had bin,
If so his years (proud Turnus) unto thine
Had equal been: but why do I confine
You noble Trojans, and from fight detain?
Go with this message to your king again:
Tell him, whereas I live, my Pallas dead,
It Is by his hand to be re-comforted,
In making Turnus pay the debt he owes,
Both to the fathers and the sons great woes.
This honor fates (I hope) reserve for thee,
That by thy worth I may revenged be.
I seek not sweets of life, nor fit I should,
But that the death of Turnus may be told
By me to my dead son. In this mean space
Aurora rare showed forth her shining face
To night-tyr'd wretches, day-toiles to renew.
And now Aeneas grave and Tarchon drew
Near to the shore; when fires they build apace,
On which slain soldiers carcases they place,
(As custom was) kindling black fuming fire,
Whose smoke hid heaven, as it did up aspire.
And thrice in arms they ran about the flames,
And thrice they rode about with loud exclaims,
And trickling tears on arms and earth they spill,
And with loud sounds of Martial music shrill.
Some spoils from Latins slain obtained, do throw
Into the fires* helmets, brave blades also,
Bridles, and chariot-wheels warm with quick turning:
And some cast in their gallant gifts, thus burning
Their shields most strong, weapons too weak to save:
And many oxen fat to slaughter gave:
And briefly, boares and sheep, about the plain;
And threw them into the fire, the first being slain:
And thus about the shore they see the stares
Of those their slaughtered soldiers burning mates;
Whose half-burnt urns and ashes they retain:
Nor hardly could be thence reduced again,
Till night came on, and twinkling stars appear.
On the other-side, with like lamenting cheer,
The woeful Latins many heaps do frame,
And many corpse they partly burn in the flame,
And partly bury in the fields about:
And some they to next fields do carry out
Unto towns adjacent: the rest, collected
Into huge heaps, and of them less respected,
As numberless, so honourlesse were burned,
Promiscuously thus into ashes turned.
Then all the fields with crackling flames did shine.
And now the third days light did clear decline,
And utterly expel nights darkness chill:
And sadly they their urns and pots do fill
With ashes of their bodies burned so,
Taken from the bones, on which hot dust they throw,
And now in rich king Latins town throughout,
Far greatest grief, most moan, was heard about.
Here woeful wives, daughters in law most sad,
Here sisters sweet do beat their breasts, too bad;
And children fatherless do execrate
The day of that fierce war unfortunate,
And Turnus troublous match, wishing withal,
That he alone which would be principal
And sole commander of all Italy,
Should solely with his sword the battle try.
Old testie Drances these things aggravates,
And testifies against him alone, to's mates,
And counsels and encourages (as right)
That Turnus only should be called to fight.
Much altercation was both con and pro,
But yet the queens great presence crossed it so,
And so protected Turnus Martial fame,
That to her bent she made their minds to frame.
In midst of these commotions, tumults great,
Behold, the ambassadors sent (late) to treat
With Diomedes, sadly bring back news,
That, notwithstanding all means they could use,
All cost and pains, they nothing could effect
With gold or gifts, but used with disrespect,
No prays prevailed* Latins must look elsewhere
For Martial help, or else they all did fear,
With Troyes great prince they must a peace request.
Hereat king Latins heart great grief expressed.
The Gods great wrath, and graves fresh before their eyes,
Made them conclude, Aeneas enterprise
Fatal to be, and with heavens clear consent;
Therefore in haste they call a parliament.
Straight all the empires Peers are called to court,
And thither with huge confluence resort:
The aged king Latinus, with sad look,
In honor chief, chief place amongst them took.
And now he bade the ambassadors, comne late
From fair Aetolia's town, to promulgate
What news they brought, all plainly to explain:
And all, to hear them, silent do remain.
Venulus then with due observance spoke;
Grave patriots, we a perfect view did take
Of Diomedes and his Grecian plains,
And safe have past all our great journeys pains:
We kissed that hand which Troy did ruinate,
And saw his city, Argiripa's state,
So named from native soil, which, victour, he
In Gargan-Iapyx plains would built should be.
We being entered, having audience fair,
Present our gifts, our nation, name, declare;
Who on us warred; what us to Argos drove.
These things thus heard, he, with a countenance grave
And sweet, replied; O nation fortunate,
Once Saturns throne, ancient Ausonians state:
What froward fate your peaceful minds molests?
And you with unknown wars so much infests?
All we, who-e're, that Troyes fair fields did spoil,
(I speak not of those woes which Martial toil
Under her walls didwrack, but those rare spirits
In Simois slain) we all have our due merits,
Now soundly smart for those impieties,
Such as even Priam sure would sympathize:
Witness Minerva's most tempestuous star,
Euboian rocks, which did against us war,
Caphares conquering banks. That warfare fierce
Did us to diverse seas and shores disperse.
For Menelaus, Atreus son most stout,
To Proteus pillars hurried was about;
Ulysses saw the Aetnean Cyclops fierce.
Why should I Neoptolems realms rehearse?
Idomeneus towns, and Gods destroyed?
And Libyck Locrians woefully annoyed?
Yea Agamemnon, Greeks great General,
Had by his wicked wife his fatal fall,
As soon as e're come home; and Asia taken,
Adulterous Aegisthus in's throne did reign.
Yea and even me the Gods did plainly hate,
As my returning home did intimate;
When I had hope my loving wife to see,
And Calidonia from all mischief free:
Now with prodigious visions I am vexed,
And my dear mates (which has my heart perplexed,
To see their vvoefull state) are flown away,
And with birds vvings, as birds about do stray
In vvoods and floods, filling the rocks with cries,
And I e're since fear such like miseries:
For frantic I have vvounded with my blade
Celestial bodies, and a vvound have made
In Venus hand. Move me not then, I pray,
To more such fights, which me thus mischief may;
Nor with the Trojans; since Troyes fall in fight
I never will attempt, nor take delight
To think upon their ancient misery.
As for the gifts which ye have brought to me,
Let them to prince Aene^s carried be;
For we have fought and bickered hand to hand.
And (trust me who have tried) most stout he will stand
Upon his shield, and fiercely whirling darts.
If Ida had bred two more such stout hearts,
Dardan through Graecia clearly pierced had,
And we in woe bewailed our fates as bad.
For whatsoever stout procrastination
Was in Troyes furious wars continuation,
'Twas Hectors and Aeneas Martial hand,
That ten years made our conquest anxious stand.
Both stout of heart, both were in arms most strong:
But unto this did worthily belong
Prime praise for's piety: as for you then,
By all means make ye peace with these great men:
But if ye will to arms, stand on your guard.
And thus, most mighty prince, thou have both heard
The answer and advises to thee sent,
Touching this mighty wars most dire event.
Scarce had the ambassadors thus made an end,
But that their muttering mouths forth forthwith send
Vast various humming noise confusedly;
Like stones which against a rivers current lie,
The bubling streams against them rough ratlings make,
And neighboring banks of'ts dashing din partake.
But soon as e're their mouths and minds were still,
The king, first having prayed, thus vents his will
From his rich throne; At first (as 'twas most fit,
And I, great Latins, most desired it)
I would have settled these affairs of state;
And not a council now necessitate,
When foes besiege our walls. Believe me, sirs,
We have begun represselesse, helpless stirs.
Against God-guarded, warlike men we fight,
In battles undefatigable quite,
Whose hearts, though vanquished, cannot banished be
From sword and shield. If hope of help ye see
In stout Aetolians troops, entreated late,
Let who s' will trust that hope; for it is most strait,
And small, or none at all, as it is too plain.
For other things, ye see how they remain
In tottering state, it is open in your eyes:
And fast and loose in your own hands it lies.
I tax not any, all have done their best,
What might be, has been valiantly expressed.
But give me leave, and I will briefly show,
What thwarting thoughts within my heart do flow.
There is an ancient land which large does lie
Toward the West, to our fair Tyber nigh,
And on Sicilia's boarders butting out;
Which the Aruncians and Rutulians stout
Do plow and sow, and though much out of heart,
Yet into pastures they do it convert:
All this large land, and piny mountains high
Let us give to the Trojans instantly,
And peace compound, and fair conditions make,
And them our friends and fellows to us take.
And let them (if themselves do like it well)
Amongst us build, amongst us friendly dwell.
But if they mind to seek some other land,
And that they will relinquish this our strand;
Let Us furnish them with twenty ships most tall,
Of strong Italian oak: or if they shall
Have need of more; then more we may them spare,
For all materials by the river are
Already ready: let themselves also
Their vessels number, and their fashions show:
But workmanship, and brass, and tacklings strong,
We will them give, and that to ships belong.
Besides, I think it fit what we should send
An hundred legates, these affairs to tend;
And those also of noblest birth and blood,
To show our minds, and make conditions good:
And olive-boughs of peace to hold in hand,
And precious presents of our wealthy land,
And talents of good gold and ivorie,
A chair of state, and robe of majesty,
Rites of our realm. Then let me hear, I pray,
Your counsel, our declining state to stay.
Then forenam'd wrathful Drances, whom deep spite
And oblique envy at great Turnus hight
Did vex with bitter bites, most rich in state,
Richer in words; but wars to animate
Most cold and cowardly; yet held to be
For solid counsel, in a prime degree;
A seedsman of dissension (puffed with pride
Of his nobility by th'mothers side,
His fathers stock unknown) he up does rise,
Thus poures out words, and puts in enmities;
Good king, thou counsellest things thoroughly known,
Such as will want best suffrages of none:
Such as even all do know they feel and find,
But what they wish, they wind up close in mind.
Let him then give me liberty to speak,
Let him lay by his pride, whose dealings weak,
If not most wicked, and unhappie deeds
(For though he death and danger threat, I needs
Must speak my mind) so many peers have slain,
And all our city made in tears complain:
And whiles that he assayes, scarcely assails
The Trojan trenches, and us therein fails,
Trusting his heels, thrusting all else in arms,
Even frighting heaven and earth with fierce alarms.
Let one thing more be added, I thee pray,
To all those gifts which thou to send did say,
Add this one more, great king; Let not the heat
Of any's rage make thee from this retreat;
But give thy daughter (to conclude all strife)
To such a son, most worthy such a wife,
Thus may thou tie this peace with endless bands.
But if thy heart on fear and trembling stands,
We Will him entreat, and for this to him sue,
To yield our king his right, our state its due.
And why should thou so oftentimes expose
Our wretched natives to such certain woes?
Thou head and heart of Latiums misery,
Even thou, O Turnus! no security
Can be in battles: therefore peace we crave,
Therefore we all firm pledge of peace would have.
I first, whom thou indeed do^t think thy foe,
(And much I care not, if I sure be so)
I humbly pray thee pity our poor plight,
Doffe thy high thoughts, be gone, since put to flight.
For we have seen too many bodies slain,
Too many, and too great lands spoiled and taken.
But, if thee fame so spur, strength so incite*
If in the princess thou so much delight,
Venture thy self to combat with thy foe,
That Turnus may a queen for's wife, get so.
We pessants unbewail'd, unburied train,
About the fields will silently remain.
Thou then, if any Martial spirit thou have,
Show it against him, who now does thee out-brave.
This speech young T^rnus rage exasperat^s:
He sighs, and then these words evaporate^;
Drances, thou ever drayn'st out floods of words
Even then when there is far greater need of swords:
Thou will be foremost at a parliament;
But talk is not for court convenient,
Which (thou being safe) with full mouth from thee flies,
While there is a wall 'twixt thee and the enemies,
And whiles with blood dikes do not overflow*
Thunder (as it is thy wont) with babbling so,
And taunt and tax me then of cowardice,
When Drances also has heapt in a trice
So many Trojan bodies, by him slain,
And bravely can the field about maintain,
Triumphant with rich trophies. Then thou may
Thy vigorous valor try, if ought thou have:
Nor needst thou look far off to find thy foes,
They stand about us, and our walls enclose.
Let Us out against them, why do thou delay?
What, will thou still Mars in thy mouth display?
Or in those heels of thine flying like wind?
Did I e're fly? O thou of most base mind!
Can any truly tax me so, whose blade
With Trojan blood Tyber o'r^flow has made;
Who ruined have Euanders stock and state,
And strongly did the Arcadians denudate
Of all their arms? Bitias and Pandarus,
Though e're so strong, (I think) never found it thus;
And all those mul^itudes whom in one day
(Closed in their town, and hedged in every way)
I to black Tartar sent victoriously.
In war-fare (sure) there is no safety.
But, frantic fool* go sing thy slanderous song
To Troyes Aeneas, it does best belong
To him and thy base state: Proceed then still
All things with thy most impious fears to fill:
Extol the strength of a twice vanquished nation,
And make on the other side, vile valuation
Of Latins powers. And now it must be said,
That Greeks great peers of Trojans are afraid.
And Diomedes and Achilles stout,
And that Aufidus fierce turns back in doubt,
Into the Adriatic sea to fall.
This arts-master of lies and envious gall,
Feignes himself fearful, all because of me,
My fault must by his fear imbittered be.
But (fear not, fool) such base blood never shall stain
This hand of mine; safe to thy self remain.
But now to thee (great fire) and thine affairs,
I glad return. If in our coasts and cares
And future force all hope be past and spent,
If so forlorn for one poor hard event,
If one repulse has us quite ruinated,
And fortune never can be restaurated:
Let Us then pray peace in submisse trembling fear;
Though O, I wish there yet some relics were
Of wonted valor! O, 'bove all the rest
I him admire, most fortunate and blessed,
For all his toiles, for his renowned might,
In that he lived not of these woes to have fight;
He bravely stoopt to death, feared not his wound,
But dying, conquered, when he bit the ground.
But if we have both wealth and worth, and hearts
Unstained with cowardice to fly from darts:
If Latiums towns and people can bring aid;
If Trojans pride has been with much blood paid,
And that their slain, and warre-tempestuous showers
Have (if not more) been equal full with ours:
Why faint we at the first? in the door fall dead?
Why for the alarm, seem we thus basely fled?
Much toil and times various vicissitude,
Man's mutable estate do often conclude
In sweet content; Fortune re-smiles on them
Whom she before threw from a diadem.
Will neither Greeks nor Arpians us aid?
But yet Messapus will, he is not afraid:
Nor fortunate Tolumnius, that brave king,
Nor all those lords which mighty troops do bring:
Nor is it a petty praise to have choice bands
From Italy and stout Laurentums lands.
Then from the nation of the Volscians brave,
The princess rare, Camilla fair, we have,
Leading her troops of horse in armor bright:
But if with me alone Trojans would fight,
If this will please, if I alone withstand
The public good, I never yet found this hand
So void of victory, that I should e're
For so great hope the greatest task forbear.
I full of courage, will my foe go find;
And though he had Achilles mighty mind,
And had such arms as he, by Vulcan dressed,
Yet I, even Turnus, equal to my best
Of ancestors, am here most ready pressed,
This life and soul of mine to consecrate
To you my father in law, great Latins state.
It Is me (you say) Aeneas does defy:
I wish it so, and pray it may be I.
Yet, whether I survive or end my life
By heavens displeasure or my Martial strife,
I this could wish, that Drances neither may
Insult or boast in the gain or loss of the day.
Whiles they these things contending agitate,
Aeneas tents and troops do prop^rate:
And now behold, a post comes rushing in,
Filling the court with most tumultuous din,
Frighting the city with amazement great,
And eagerly this news does often repeat,
That Trojans were by Tybers stream arrayed,
And Tuscane troops over all those plains displayed.
The peoples hearts were dampt and much perplexed,
And with deep wrath and rage provokt and vexed,
Arms tremblingly they cry, arms sparks do crave;
Much mourning, muttering is amongst old men grave*
And hereupon does clamourous noise arise,
With various votes in most contentious wise.
Much like when i^ a wood a mighty flight
Of chattering birds on boughs and branches light;
Or cackling swans by fishy Path^s lake,
Whose notes the banks about loud echoing make.
Then Turnus taking the opportunity,
Cries out, Well done, my friends, well done say I,
Sit ye in council, praise peace on your seat,
Whiles foes your kingdom foil and ruin threat.
Without more words, forth from them all he flings,
And swiftly leaves them treating on those things.
And forthwith bids Volusus arm his bands
Of Volscians brave; and instantly commands,
And orders stout Messapus to lead forth
His fierce Rutulian horsemen of brave worth:
With him his brother Coras to bring on,
And to the field forthwith for to be gone.
Some he bids block the ways, some guard the towers,
The rest, as I think best, shall strength my powers.
Straight through the city to the walls they scud.
Then from the council, king Latinus good,
And great negotiations, does arise,
Deferring them in discontented wise;
Taxing himself, that voluntarily
He took not into his affinity,
As his dear son in law, the prince of Troy.
Some busily their best aid do employ
About the walls and gates, deep dikes to cast,
With stones and blocks the gates to dam up fast.
The Martial trump now gives the bloody sound,
And wives and children 'bout the walls stood round,
All at a pinch to help the work are bound.
Then to great Pallas tower and temple rare,
The queen was born with troops of ladies fair,
With sacrificing gifts: and in great state
Virgin Lavinia did her sociate,
(Cause of these ills) her comely eyes down cast:
After, whom orderly the ladies past,
The temple they perfume with frankincense,
Thus praying sadly, at ingredience;
Tritonian maid, arms potent patroness,
Do thou this Phrygian filchers power suppress
With thy strong arm, and cast him to the ground*
And from our gates do thou his force confound.
And now fierce Turnus fits him to the fight,
His rough Rutulian arms with buckles bright
Fastened about him, with gold buskins clad,
Not yet upon his head his helm he had;
But at his side, his sword. Thus gorgeously
In glistering gold he from the tower does fly*
His heart with hope of hap his foe outstrips,
As when a pampered courser nimbly skips,
Broke out of the stable, now at liberty,
Fiercely does to fair fields and meadows fly;
And frisks about, and leaps amongst the mares,
And in his wonted waters washed, he stares,
And snorts and snuffs, and shakes his rough-haire main*
Which bolt-upright starts up, and falls again
In wanton wise, about his neck and breast.
Whom thus to meet, Camilla her addressed,
Leading along her troops of Volscians stout,
The queen alighted at the gates without:
Whom all her troops do forthwith imitate,
Leaving their horses, were dismounted straight.
And thus she first began; O Turnus brave,
If for true valor, one may duly have
Hope of good hap, I dare adventure now,
And Trojan troops I first to affront do vow*
Yea I alone dare deal with Tuscane bands.
Let wars first fortune fall upon my hand^*
Whiles thou on foot stay'st here, the gatesto guar^.
To whom thus Turnus with all due regard,
(His eyes fast fixed on this admired maid)
Replies; Fair virgin, who have full displayed
Thy self the glory of all Italy!
What can I say, or do, to gratify
So great desert? But now (since all I may
Comes short of thy brave heart) let us part the prey.
Aeneas now (since fame and scouts forth sent,
Had made the truth of things most evident)
A troop of light horse fiercely first sent out,
His foe to outbrave, and scour the fields about.
Himself ascends a craggie steepie hill,
Through uncouth combring way, with Martial skill,
And bends to the city. I Will (says he) here lay
An ambush strong close in this woods cross way,
And so block up both passages most strong,
With armed troops: do thou then lead along
Against the Tuscane horse, thy bands combin'de,
And fierce Messapus unto thee conjoined,
Together with our Latin companies,
And strong Tyburtus troops, our brave allies;
And of a stout commander take the charge.
And like encouragements he did enlarge
Unto Messapus, him to the war to incite,
And all his captains; and proceeds to the fight.
Between two hills a crooked valley lies,
Fit for defeat and Martial policies,
On both sides with thick shady boughs beset,
Passage through which 'twas difficult to get,
By narrow entrance, and dark rigid ways,
Whose mountain-top on high, abroad displayes
An unknown plain, which safe holds for retreat,
For left or right hands shifting the wars seat,
Either to skirmish stiffely on the top,
Or from on high great stones on pates to pop.
To this vantageous place, by ways well known,
Does Turnus haste, to get possession
Of the said seat, and settles secretly
Within those woods, his foes to damnifie.
Meanwhile Diana nimble Ops does call,
One of her mated maids celestial,
And of the modest crew; and sadly said
To this fair nymph her most officious maid;
Fair Ops, Camilla, whom I much affect,
Goes to this furious war vainly bedeckt
With our acoutrements: nor is this love
Which your Diana's heart thus near does move,
A new affection, or an up-start sweet.
For when as Metabus, by undiscreet
And impious envy, and insulting might,
Was from Privernus forced to take his flight,
Scaping through thickest of his fiercest foes,
With his poor exiled infant thence he goes,
And her Camilla, from Casmilla's name,
Her mother, named; a little changed the same.
He in his arms his daughter with him bare
Through long unwonted woods, with carking care:
At whom thick storms of arrows fiercely flew,
And troops of Volscian soldiers near him drew.
In whose fierce flight, behold, Amasenus,
Swiftly o'reswells his banks most copious,
So mighty showers of rain gusht down before,
That he prepared swiftly to swim over:
But tender love unto his infant tender,
And fear of this dear burden, did him hinder.
As he a thousand thoughts in mind did cast,
With much ado, he thus resolved at last;
A mighty spear of oak in his strong fist
By chance he caught, strengthened with knotty twist,
And scorcht about; wherein the child he laid,
And it with bark and cork closely up made:
And her conveniently to the staff thus ties,
And with strong hand it grasping, thus to the skies
He vents his votes; Diana, virgin fair,
Goddess of woods, I this my child, my care,
Do here thy servant to thee dedicate,
Who in her hands thy spear does elevate;
And by me humbly prays (flying her foe)
That as thine own, thou would receive her so,
Who now is left unto uncertain fate.
This said, his arms laid open, he casts straight
The twisted spear into the streams, and they
Making a dashing-sound, swift floats away
Unfortunate Camilla. But her father
Metabus, seeing foes him nearer gather
In mighty heaps, commits himself to the waves,
And so by swimming, both himself he saves,
And (victour in his votes) the child; and spear,
Diana's gift, from a grasse-turffe does tear.
No harbourous house he had, nor town walled in,
(Nor would have had though they had proffered bin)
But lived a shepherds life in the woods alone,
And here in groves and beasts dark-dens unknown
His daughter he nursed up with a mares dugge,
Who with her lips milk from the teats did tugge:
And when the babe began to go and stand,
He her enured to hold a spear in hand,
To bear a bow and quiver at her back:
And for a cawle of gold, (which she did lack)
And a long lovely robe, she wore behind
A tigers skin, loose dangling in the wind:
And pretty childish darts she used to fling,
And 'bout her head would nimbly whisk her sling;
Wherewith sometime a fat Strymonian crane,
Sometime a milk-white swan were smote and slair.
Great Tuscane dames, as she their towns past by,
Wished her their daughter in law, but frustrately,
Her sole delight being in Diana's grace,
In pure virginity to end her race:
O that she had not war so much affected,
Nor to provoke the Trojans been addicted!
Then had she lived one of my damsells dear,
But now, since she her bitter fates must bear,
Fair nymph descend, view Latins land throughout,
Where with unhappie hap the field is fought.
Take these with thee, and from this quiver pull
A dart vindicative of vengeance full;
Which, whosoever her sacred body harms,
Trojan, Italian, fatally it charms,
And gives me full revenge. Afterward I
Will in a hollow cloud immediately
Take up her woeful corpse, arms free from spoil,
And her interre in her own native soil.
This said, she fluttering flies down through the air,
A black thick stormy cloud her body bare.
But now meanwhile Troyes troops the walls drew nigh,
Etrurian-leaders bands of horsemen hie,
In well-compos'd arrayes: the steeds most stout
Curvet, and fret, and range the field about,
Churlishly champing (still) the curbing reins,
And here and there prancing about the plains:
Steel-glistring spears the very fields affright,
And all the camp seems fired with armor bright.
Messapus also, on the other side,
And lusty Latins shine in Martial pride:
Coras and's brother and Camilla's wing,
Their adverse armies brave to field do bring;
And in their right hands they their spears do shake*
And in their rests, their lances charges make.
And now both horse and men with fervor fret
To meet: and both sides now together set
In distance of a darts cast, both stand still,
And suddenly burst out in clamours shrill,
And cheer their snorting steeds, and thick darts throw
From both sides, all parts like huge drifts of snow,
Which darkly dim the air. Then instantly
Tyrrhenus and Aconteus furiously
With piercing spears begin a combat strong,
Whose first affront, with overthrowing throng,
Made mighty noise: the horses breast to breast
Battered each other as they forward pressed:
And down Aconteus fell unto the ground,
Much li^^ a thunderbolt with clattering sound.
Or like ^ pondrous stone from engine thrown,
Headlong he fell, and falling gave last groan.
The ranks are straight disrank'd, the Latins fly,
Turn back their bucklers and horse-heads, and hie
Unto the city. Trojans drive them on,
Asylas makes prime prosecution,
And execution on the enemy,
And chased the Latins to the city nigh;
There suddenly with clamours loud and great
Rein back their horses, back their foes they beat.
The Trojans* straight, re-rein their horse and fly.
Like as in the sea, when subalternately
Now on each other, billows backward rush
Fast to the shore, and with foam-waves do brus^
And overtop rough rocks and bounding sands;
And now again with furious countermands
And boiling foam re-sups roll'd-pebbles small,
Ebbing and flowing, to and fro does fall:
Thus Tuscanes twice to the walls do Rutuls force;
And twice beat back, their backs hid, foes they course.
But after third encounters skirmishing,
The whole battalions furiously begin
Promiscuously to fight it out pel-mell,
And closely to it, man to man, they fell.
Then groans of dying men drencht deep in gore,
Corslets and corpse of soldiers more and more
Tumbling down dead, mingled with half-dead horse,
Wallowing in blood, loud screeks and cries do force:
The fight grows fierce. Thus then Orsilochus
(Fearing to set upon fierce Remulus)
Darted a spear at's horse, which stuck in's care,
VVhereat the furious beast could not forbear,
But stamps and stares, impatient of his wound,
And never left kicking, mounting, till to the ground
His rider he did headlong tumble down.
Catillus then slew, to his high renown,
Iola fierce, and bold Herminius,
In corpse and courage most magnanimous,
Who with his yellow locks bare-headed fought,
Bare-neck'd, not fearing wounds or weapons stout,
So great he was in war; yet through his neck
A piercing spear did his bare-boldnes^e check:
Which in his mighty shoulders stuck most fast,
And into deadly pangs this warrior cast.
Black floods of blood on both sides flow amain;
By steel they die, by death they fame obtain.
But through the thickest of these slaughters fierce
The manly Amaz^^ian dame does pierce,
Rare quiver-bearing fair Camilla stout,
Who with one breast cut off, most fiercely fought.
Sometimes she grasps her darts or whistling spears,
Sometime her untyr'd hand a battle-ax bears.
Still 'bout her neck her golden bow hangs fast,
Diana's arms. And if by chance at last
She forced be to fly, pursued in chase,
Her bow turned back, she shoots in followers face.
And still about her her choice virgins fight,
Larina, Tulla, and Tarpeia bright,
Her brazen bill brandishing valiantly,
Fair Latium lasses, whom especially
Camilla rare chose both for guard and grace,
Affairs of peace or war t'appoint a place.
Like the Amazonian dames of Thracia land,
When warring 'bout Thermodoon floods they stand
In rich wrought arms: or 'bout Hippolyta,
Or in her coach warlike Penthesil'a.
Showing herself victour with voices shrill,
And feminine outcries, the skies that fill,
And stately strutting with their half moon shields.
O whom (fierce lady) did thou slay in the fields,
Both first and last? How many bodies slain
And gasping souls did at thy feet remain?
Eumenius, Clytius son, she first did slay,
Whose naked breast open to her anger lay:
Which with her spear she pierced, who floods of gore
Straight vomiting, with teeth the ground he tore,
And died in his own blood. On whom she slew
Liris and Pegasus; the one who drew
His reins too strait, curbing his floundring horse;
The Other, too weakly aiding, she did force
To follow him, and headlong both do rush:
Next with a spear, farre-off, she fierce does push
At Hippodates son, Amaster strong:
Tereus and Harpalycus ere long,
Stout Demoph'on and Chromis, all she slew.
And look how many shafts this lady threw,
So many Trojans died. Ornitus stout,
In arms most strange, did fly the fields about,
On an Apulian beast, in hunters pride,
Whose shoulders broad an oxes hyde did hide,
And for an helm on's head a fierce wolfs head,
With grinning jaws, white teeth discovered:
He in his hand a clownish club did weld,
In thickest troops 'bove all the rest beheld.
Him she assailed (nor was this brave fact
Effected when the troops retired back)
Assaulting, slew: and wrathfully thus said;
Proud Tuscane, did thou (false) thy self persuade,
That thou wast hunting wilde-beasts in a wood?
This day shall teach thee thou have understood
Erroniously, and that, by female force:
Yet tell thy fathers ghost, it is no mean course,
No common death, thus by Camilla's lance
To die. This said, forthwith she did advance
Both at Orsilachus and Butes bold,
Two Trojans huge of body to behold:
But fiercely she at B^tes her spear struck,
Which 'twixt his helm and corslet way did make,
Glistring about his neck: his target strong
By his left side hung danglingly along:
Orsilochus she subt'ly seems to fly
On th'inner-side, circling, with policy,
Her foolified foe; who thus again
Her close pursues, that chases him amain.
Then raising up her self, with battle-ax great
Together armor, flesh, and all she beat:
And on him praying, prating, double blows
Nimbly redoubles, till at head and nose
Warm brains gush out, and all-besmeare his face.
Then unawares arrived in this place,
And at first sudden sight somewhat afraid,
The warlike son of Aunus, who long made
Abode in Apenine* none of the worst
Of Ligures lying race, whiles fates (from first)
Permitted him to cheat: who when he saw,
He by no slight nor flight could now withdraw
From a sharp fight, nor turn th'affronting dame;
He thought how he by craft some trick might frame;
And thus begins; What so renowned a fact
Is it, if thou, a woman, having backed
So brave a beast, do boast and trust him so?
Leave thy swift horse, alight to me below,
And hand to hand let us bicker on the ground,
And fight on foot; then shall it soon be found,
How fond thy flash of praise is, who will best merit.
He ceased. But she with hot enraged spirit,
Enflamed with deep disdain, her horse forsakes,
Commits him to her mate, her self betakes
To equal arms on ground, her sword in hand
And nimble shield, thus stoutly she does stand.
But now the lying lad, thinking his cheat
Succeeded right, flies thence in frightfull heat;
He makes no stay, but turns his reins with speed,
Sets spurs to's nimble nagge, hopes (thus) he is freed.
Whereat says she, Vain Ligur, it is in vain,
That thou thy pride of heart would thus maintain:
In vain's (I say) thy country cousenage base;
Nor shall thy fraud thee shufle in safe case,
To thy fallacious father Annus vile.
Thus spoke the lady, who in this meanwhile
With light-heel'd flashy haste the horse o'retook,
Lays hold on's bridle, at him fiercely struck:
And thus in's blood revenged his knavish wrong.
Much like great Mars his bird, the faulcon strong,
Flown from a lofty rock, having in chase
A swift aire-piercing dove in quivering case:
Which caught, he keeps, and does with his tallons tear,
Forcing both blood and feathers fly i'th'aire.
But Jove, great founder both of Gods and men,
With watchful eye looks from olympus then;
And Tuscane Tarchon to this fight invites,
And with sharp spurs of rage him soon incites.
Then into th'midst of the fight and failing bands
Tarchon does rush, and stout on horseback stands,
With various votes encouraging his wings,
And every one by name about he brings,
Re-cheering those that fled to th'fight to fall.
And thus he says; What fear surrounds you all,
O still dull Tyrrhons, never to be lamented?
What so great sloth has you so circumvented?
What, shall a woman force you to pale face?
Shall she you up and down so hunt and chase?
Why bear ye blades? why wear ye weapons vain?
Ye stand not thus, fond cour^esie to strain:
Nor dreaming thus at Venus wanton sport,
At nightly wars: or when with thick resort
Bacchus his bag-pipe calls in companies:
Or when with beer and cheer ye g^rmandize!
O here is your love, here your delight most lies,
Whiles in high groves your priest glad tidings sings,
And to your sacrifice fat offerings brings.
This said, his horse into the midst he spurs,
Himself much vexed in heart, fate first him stirs
To set on Venulus most furiously:
Whom from his horse he pulls down instantly,
And with main force squeezed him on his own breast.
Then mighty clamours were to heaven expressed,
And on him all the Latins cast their eyes:
Thus lightning flashing Tarchon forward flies,
Bearing down men and arms: and as he past,
The iron of his spear brake off at last.
Yet still death-wounds to give all parts he pries:
And fighting, he himself does shield likewise
From bloody blades, and force by force defies:
And as the lusty eagle lofty flies,
And in his claws a snatched up dragon holds,
Which fast in's feet he with sharp tallons folds;
But yet the pinching serpent wrigling wreathes,
His folding limbs and scales with hideous breathes,
And poisonous hissings, struggling sturdilie:
Yet never the less, the eagle eagerly
Him pulls and pinches with his beak most strong,
And through the air forcibly flies along:
Even so great Tarchon from Tyburtum bands
Triumphantly bears the prey in his hands.
The Lydians likewise gladly imitate
Their brave commanders pattern and good fate.
Then Aruns, full of craft and subtlety,
Subject himself to fatal destiny,
Rides round about Camilla with his lance,
His fortunes fitliest laboring to advance.
And wheresoever in thickest troops she stood,
Thither does Aruns slily prying scud:
Where she from foes retreats a conqueresse stout,
Thither by stealth quick runs he, wreathes about:
And this way, that way, every way does trance,
And round he runs, and shakes his death-sure lance.
By chance Choreus, once a priest divine,
In Phrygian arms 'bove all the rest did shine,
Prancing his foaming horse, adorned fair
With rich caparisons, brass scales most rare,
Garnisht with gold, himself most richly clad
In fine outlandish scarlet, purple sad.
His Cretian shafts he shot in Lycian bow,
His bow all gilt, his shoulders hung below.
A priests gilt helm, rich yellow coat he wore,
Whose dangling flaps gold buttons ty'de before,
A rare embroidered jacket, robe to's thighs.
The lady him no sooner thus espies,
But (either that she might her temple grace,
And Trojan armor hang in special place;
Or cloth her self in captive clothes of gold)
This hot-spurr'd huntresse greedily blindfold
Through all the fight follows him eagerly;
And fired with feminine aviditie
And longing lust of that rich spoil and prey
Aruns, who long in watchful ambush lay,
At last lays hold of fit time offered,
And casts his dart, and these votes uttered;
Great Jove, and thou Soracte's grave Apollo,
Whom chiefly we with sacrifices follow,
To whom a pile of oily pines still flame,
And we, assisted by thy sacred name,
Through midst of flames can walk and pass most free,
Yea even barefooted, yet unhurt are we:
O grant, great Jove, my weapon may wipe out
Our foul disgrace, too long thus born about.
No trophies from the damsel I desire,
No prey nor spoils in conquest I require,
By other facts I will advance my fame:
So I may but subdue this pest'lent shame,
I pass not, though I pass ingloriously
Unto my home, and honourlesse there die.
Apollo partly his request respects,
Partly as airie stuff he it rejects:
He grants Camilla by dire death shall die,
But his return safe home he does deny:
And these his words like winds he made to fly.
Wherefore as soon as e're the whisling lance
Flung from his hand, did through the air advance,
The eyes and thoughts of all the host throughout,
Toward the Volscian queen were cast about.
But she, nor air, nor sound, nor singing dart,
Heard or regarded, till it pierced her heart:
Until the spear on her seared breast fast lights,
And drunk with damsells blood her heart it smites.
Her maiden-mates made all about her straight,
To stay their falling queen, in dying state.
But Aruns chiefly makes away with speed,
In whom much fear mixed with much joy does breed:
Nor longer durst he linger, more to try
The damsells dart and spear, but fast does fly.
And like a wolf, who ere the adverse darts
Do him assault, fearfully flies and starts,
And hides himself in uncouth mountains high,
(Some shepherd by him slain most ravenously,
^r some brave bullock) conscious of the deed,
Does with the tail between his legs proceed,
And haste into the woods with fear and fright:
So Aruns full of fear gets out of sight,
Well pleased with flight, him in the army hides.
The dying queen the spear, which in her 'bides,
Strives to pluck out; but in her bones and breast
The steely weapon fast did stick and rest;
She wanting blood, sinks down, her dying eyes
Shut down their lids: her red, which beautifies
Late cherry cheeks, is lost. With dying voice
To Acca, one of her chief maids of choice,
(Whom before the rest for her fidelity
Camilla used in deep anxiety,
With her her sorrows to communicate)
Thus she her mind does dying demonstrate;
Hitherto, sister Acca, I was able;
But now my mortal wound does me disable.
All things (me thinks) 'bout me seem dark and dim*
Haste hence to Turnus, and relate to him
My last advise; wish him in any case
To come to the fight, Trojans from's town to chase:
And now farewell. And with those words her rein
Fell from her hand, and with her wounds great pain
She fiercely falls to ground; then by degrees,
Her corpse all natural heat does softly leese,
And so grows cold, and then her limber neck
Lets loose her helpless head, to bow and beck:
And from her hands her weapons letting fall,
With a great groan, her struggling soul withal
Flies to the seat of souls. Then instantly
A wondrous clamor clambers up to the sky.
Camilla thus cast down, more bloody grows
The furious fight, and thick the confluence flows,
Of Trojan and of Tuscane captains stout,
And of Euanders brave Arcadian rout.
Meanwhile, fair Ops, Diana's maid, sat high,
Mounted upon a mount, undauntedly,
To view the fight. As she among the sparks,
Furiously fighting sees far off and marks
Camilla most unworthily thus slain,
A hearty sigh these words pump out amain;
Too dear (alas fair lady!) ah, too dear
Thou now have paid, by cruel death laid here,
By war thus laboring Trojans to provoke.
In vain thou wor'st in woods Diana's yoke,
In vain thou did our shafts and quiver wear;
Yet no disgrace (fair queen) there shall appear
In this thy death; nor shall it without praise
Pass through the world: Fame thee revenged shall blaze:
For whosoever thy corpse thus violated,
Shall surely be by death retaliated.
Under a steepie hill there was the grave
Of king Dercennus raised aloft most brave,
With heaps of earth from ancient Laurent taken,
Covered with oaken boughs and branches main:
Here the fair nymph first swiftly did alight,
And from this hill on Aruns cast her sight.
Whom spying richly armed puffed up with pride,
Why fly'st thou hence (says she) and turn'st aside?
Make this thy way, come hither to thy bane,
Take thy just guerdion for Camilla slain.
Shall not thou by Diana's dart now die?
And at these words, like Thracian huntresse high,
From her gilt quiver she a sharp shaft takes,
And fiercely bends her bow, and fitly makes
The nock stand to the string: so strong she drew,
That both the horn-ends meet; out swiftly flew
The shaft from both her hands. Aruns at last
Hears the darts din, as through the air it past:
The steel stuck in his breast, he gasping lay,
His mates unmindefull of him, gone away,
Left him expiring in an unknown ground:
Ops for Olympus with her wings is bound.
Lady Camilla slain, her left wing first
Flies fast away, their fair array quite burst:
The routed Rutuls run, Atinas flies,
Their ensigns lost by captains cow^rdize,
Seeking for shelter, horsemen haste to the town,
The Trojans fierce by death do all beat down.
None them withstands, none can their darts resist,
Foes unbent bows fall from their fainting fist:
Flying horse-hoofs shake the bemired fields,
The way to the town rais'd-clouds of thick dust yields*
Wives from the walls behold it, beat their breast,
Womanish cries to the skies their woes expressed.
And those which first by flight got open the gate,
Promiscuous might of foes does perturbate.
Nor escape they bitter death, even at the door,
And at their house and homes they gasp in gore.
Some shut the gates, shut out their mates for fear,
And though they pray, to open are forced forbear.
A mighty slaughter here defendance found,
And fierce assailants find their fatal wound,
And some shut out, before weeping parents eye,
Constrained, run headlong into the ditch and die.
Some fury-blinded, set spurs to their horse,
And headlong butt the bars and gates by force.
The women on the walls made so fierce fight,
When dead Camilla came into their sight,
(Such to their country was their zeal and love)
That fearful fast they fling darts from above,
And steely staves of oak, ^peares burnt at the end,
Fearlesse to die, their country to defend.
Meanwhile a message sad as bad flies out,
Which in the woods fills Turnus heart with doub^*
By flying Acca to this young prince brought;
How their affairs were with confusion fraught:
How Volscians vanquished were, Camilla slain:
How furious foes upon them pressed amain:
How they in all with prosperous war proceed:
How fear within, without the town did breed.
He fury-fill'd (for so Jove's fierce decree
Ordained had) the immured mounts does free,
Leaves the sharp thickets, scarce was out of sight,
Hardly had pitched his camp in Martial rite;
When brave Aeneas entered had the wood,
And on the late forsaken mountain stood,
And got out of the grove: when both in haste
With all their troops unto the city pas'd,
From one another not far distant lying.
Aeneas also vigilantly eying
The dusty fields and fair Laurentine bands:
And Turnus saw where stout Aeneas stands,
His footmens fierce approach, his neighing horses:
Immediately they had conjoined their forces,
And fough^ ^he field, had not Sols roseall face
With tired ^^eeds been veiled in the end of's race,
In Western waves, and days decay brought night;
Before the town they therefore plant their might.
An end of the eleventh book of Virgils Aeneis.
THE ARGUMENT of the twelfth book.
King Turnus, now the Latins tired
With adverse arms, once more desired
By single combat fates to try.
Latinus laboring urgently
A peace to make, the peace is had.
Juturna, Turnus sister sad,
Disturbs the same, Camertes feignes,
Both the adverse bands to fight constrains.
Aeneas wounded with a dart,
His mother Venus cures the smart.
The town is taken: queen Amata
Then hangs herself. Turnus straightway
The combat with Aeneas tries,
Is slain: Aeneas wins the prize.
WHen Turnus saw his Latins tired quite,
And much perplexed with this unfriendly fight,
His promise now required, himself the but
On whom the eyes of all themselves did glut.
With self-incensed rage he burns and blazes,
Fury implacably his spirit raises:
Much like the Libyan lion hunted sore,
Who with a mortal wound molested more,
Prepares to fight, insultingly does shake
His curled locks, hoping revenge to take
On the sly-hunter, snaps the spear in's paws,
And furious, fearelesse, roares with bloody jaws:
So wrath vindicative fierce Turnus swells.
Thus then to the king his troubled thoughts he tells;
In Turnus (sure) there can be no delays,
Why turn-coat Trojans should use stops and stays,
Eating their words, refuse their promise past.
I Will meet him: then (grave sir) about you cast,
Secure conditions for your peace to make,
For with this hand I Will either undertake
That Asian fugitive to send to hell,
(Let Latins sit and see, and note it well)
And with my sword-salve heal this public ill:
Or he shall conquer us, and with good will
My fair Lavinia in due marriage have.
The king with settled thoughts and countenance grave,
Makes this reply; O most accomplished prince,
By how much thou all others do evince
In virtue, valor; the more seriously
Must I consult with circumspective eye,
And cast all courses how to free our fear.
Thou have fair realms held from thy father dear,
Fair warre-won towns: Lati^us still inherits
Plenty of gold, but most and best, brave spirits:
And Latium and Laurentum does pos^esse
More virtuous virgins, full of nobleness.
Then give me leave to speak the truth, though tart,
Plain without flash, and fix my words in heart:
To no old suitor I my daughter may
In wedlock join: this fates and all men say:
Yet won with love of thee, won by thy race,
And floods of tears on my sad spouses face,
I brake all bands, infringed my promise plighted
Unto my son in law, vile war invited.
Meanwhile thou see (brave Turnus) what befalls
Both thee and me; what broiles even to our walls,
How many tyring troubles, chiefly thee
Have overtaken: whereby we now see
Our selves in two set-battells vanquished,
And we within our town scarce free from dread,
The strength and hope of famous Italy:
And to this day our blood does tepefie
Swift Tybers torrent, still our fields look white
With mighty heaps of bones. O why so light
Turn I so often? what phrenzie moves my mind?
If ( Turnus slain) I make these foes friends kind,
Why rather do I not, while he is alive,
An end of these fierce fights with speed contrive?
What will our kinsmen the Rutulians say,
Yea and all Italy, if I betray
(Fates falsify my words) his life to grave,
Whiles he our daughter his choice spouse does crave?
Wars various events respect, I pray;
With pity thy old parents grief allay,
Whom, full of grief, Ardea's land separates.
This speech no whit stout Turnus rage abates,
Whose salve does more and more the sore infest*
Who soon as he could speak, it thus expressed;
Your care of me (grave sire) pray put aside,
And let me death for dignity abide.
We yet cast darts, draw swords with Martial hands,
And every wound we give, life-bloud commands.
His Goddess mother will be absent far,
Who in a cloud that fugitive from war
With feminine affection used to hide,
In pain shall he in cloudy vails abide.
But now the queen with this new-purpos'd fight
Sorely perplexed, showers tears in piteous plight,
Her fiery son in law, ready to die,
Embracing in her arms, with plaints does plie;
Dear Turnus, by these tears I thee entreat,
(By that, if any love of the honor great
Of Amata, warms thy late loving heart:
For of our old age thou the sole staff art,
Our sorrows solace, Latins lovely crown,
That prop, which fa^ling, all our state falls down)
This one thing I thee pray, Cease wars with Troy;
For whatsoever chance does thee annoy,
The very same (my Turnus) me'le destroy:
And life I Will leave, ere captived I will see
Aeneas base, my son in law to be.
Her mothers tongue, with tears, Lavinia knew,
Straight crystal drops her blushing cheeks bedew,
Whose corrall color seemed her face to flame,
And with much heat to overspread the same.
Much like white ivorie with vermilion stained,
Or lilies fair with much red-roses drained;
Such was the damsels dainty colored face.
Love straight turns Turnus to more amourous case:
Whose eyes fast fixed on her countenance fair,
More eagerly for arms he does prepare.
Thus therefore briefly to queen Amata
He makes reply; Forbear, forbear, I pray,
Dear mother, with your tears me to molest,
To urge me from a lot which I love best,
And for which I will bloudiest battles try:
Nor is it in Turnus, life or death to fly.
Go therefore Idmon, tell that Phrygian king,
Show the unsavory message thou do bring;
That early the next morn, so soon as e're
Ruddy Aurora with a count'^^nce clear
In purple chariot ushers in day ^ight,
His Trojans should not Rutule^ (...) fight,
But both might rest, and both desist from arms,
And their two's blood determine these alarms.
This message sent, to's home he fiercely flies,
Calls for her horses* which, before his eyes
Champing with foaming mouths, him much delight:
Even those which of a fair and prancing sprite
Fair Orithyia to Pilumnus gave,
For snowie color and swift course most brave.
The horse-keepers about them busy stand,
Slicking their breasts, clapping them with their hand,
To cheer them up, and comb their mains rough hair.
Himself puts on his corslet, shining fair
With glistring gold and streaks of tin most bright:
His sword and shield and helmet, fits to th'fight.
His sword (I say) which ignean Vulcane gave
Unto his father Daunus, dipped most brave
In The Stygian stream, to make it strong and bright
Then from a pillar standing bolt-upright,
In The midst of the room a mighty lance he takes,
And in his hand it furiously he shakes,
Actor Aruncus spoil: thus then he said;
O thou my spear, which never deny'dst me aid
When I desired, the time is now at hand:
Once mighty Actor used thee to command,
But Turnus now thee in his hand does hold:
O grant, with thee I may his carcass cold
Lay low on ground, and by thee, my brave spear,
With my strong hand, the pulled off corslet tear
Of that hen^hearted Phrygian, and most just,
Smeare his perfumed smelling locks i'th'dust,
Curled and crisp'd with heated irons neat.
Thus up and down with rage and fury great
He breathes outbraves, and makes wrath-sparkles ^lie,
And flames of indignation flash in's eye.
As when a bull a furious fight intends,
Aire-frighting bellows forth he forthwith sends,
And with madhead his horns whets on the ground,
Buts truncks of trees, to fight with winds turns round,
Plays with the dust, plowes up the earth in spite:
Aeneas also fits him for the fight,
Armed in his mothers arms, Mars invocates,
And him to th'combate, wrath exasperates,
Rejoicing that by this thus offered truce,
There was good hope to peace war to reduce.
Then sad Iulus fears, and all his mates
He comforts by discovering all his fates:
And bids the messengers show to their king
The rules for peace, and truth of every thing.
Next morn, when day with light scarce sprinkled had
The mountain tops, so soon as Sol most glad
Gave reins to's coursers, with a full careere
Mounting from sea, snorting out day most clear
From their light-breathing nostrills: when with speed
Trojans, Rutulians, busily proceed
To bound the limits of their field to fight,
Under the citie-walls, i'th'cities sight:
And 'twixt them both, they fire and water brought,
And to their Gods they grassie altars fraught,
In linen clothed, with sacred vervine crowned.
Thus first come forth the Latin bands renowned:
The Trojans then and Tuscanes follow fast,
And troops with various weapons, with them past.
As comptly, promptly armed with blades most bright,
As if they all were instantly to fight.
And in the midst of these their thousands bold,
Their captains praunce in scarlet and in gold.
And Trojans brave, Mnestheus, Asyla's forces,
And stout Messapus rider rare of horses,
Great Neptunes offspring. All then, at the sign
Now given, to their set-stations do incline.
Their spears i'th'ground they pitch, their shields let fall.
Then with desire to see, the women all
Flock forth, and young and old, and weak and strong
Climb turrets high, and up and down they throng:
Some over house ridges stride, some on high gates:
To all high standings each one properates.
But Iun^ from a mountain steep and tall,
Which now adays, Albanus men do call,
(But then was namelesse, famelesse, quite neglected)
Survayes the Martial field, being much affected,
Views both the Laurent and the Trojan bands,
And in what state the Latins city stands.
Then to Iuturna, Turnus sister, she
Thus said, Fair nymph, to whom is granted free
Authority over roaring rivers swift,
(For from above great Jove gave her this gift,
When she was stripped of her virginity)
Rare nymph, of floods the lustrous braverie,
To us most near and dear; thou well do know
Of all the Latin ladies which do go
To mighty Jupiters ungrateful bed,
That thee alone I kindly suffered,
And lovingly in heaven gave thee a place:
Learn then of me thy present piteous case,
And do not me, Iuturna, henceforth blame:
For I, as far as fates would grant the same,
And destinies decreed, have still protected
Latiums affairs, Turnus and's towns affected:
But now I see the young prince overmatcht,
And by fates frowning day decreed, quite caught
In snares ofhastning death: nor can mine eyes
Endure this fight, and cursed confederacies.
If therefore now thou any good can do,
Then for thy brother, it with speed ensue,
As it is most fit: perhaps fates may afford
Better success. Scarce had she said that word,
When from her eyes Iuturna showered out tears,
And twice or thrice her breast she beat with fears.
Cease (straight says Juno) now is no time to weep,
Make haste, thy brother (if thou can) to keep
From speedy death; and or with Martial broile
Inflame them; or, their peace begun go spoil.
Be bold, I Will bear thee out. With these persuasions
She leaves her cumbred with most fierce invasions
Of wounding thoughts. Meanwhile the kings proceed;
( Latinus in a chariot with swift speed
Drawn by four horses gallantly bedeckt
With twelve-fold golden wreathes, whose rare aspect
Shone like his gransires glorious sunbeam bright;
Turnus goes next, drawn with two horses white,
Grasping in's hand two steelie-lances strong:
Then grave Ae^eas bravely goes along,
The basis of Romes regal progeny,
With His starrie shield glistring refulgently,
And heaven-given arms; with whom Ascanius came,
The second hope, Romes empire fast to frame)
Thus on (I say) they to the camp proceed:
Their priest aray'd in pure and spotless weed,
Draws forth a brislie sowes young porker fair,
And unshorn sheep, to th'burning altars rare
Bringing the beasts. They then their faces bent
To the ascending sun, on the beasts spent
Their salt and bran, and with their sizers keen
They clip the hair, and wool their brows between,
And on their altars pour out bowls of wine.
Then with drawn sword Aeneas grave, divine,
Thus vents his votes; Bright Sol, my witness be,
And thou O Latium, who both hear and see
Me praying, and for whom I undergo
These mighty toiles: and thou great Jove also,
Yea and Saturnian Juno, whom I pray
A kinder Goddess be, wrath laid away:
And thou renowned Mars, who at thy will
All wars do regulate and order still:
And springs and rivers all I invocate,
And whatsoever heavens power do venerate,
And all that in the azure floods do go.
If on Italian Turnus chance bestow
The victory, we vanquished, will depart
Unto Euanders town with ready heart.
Iulus also shall your land quite clear,
Nor shall our Trojans arms against you bear,
Or ever after give you least distaste,
Or with their swords your territories waste.
But if to us Mars grant the victory,
(Which I much rather hope by destiny,
And pray the Gods would rather ratify)
I neither will Latins subjection crave
Unto us Trojans, nor your kingdoms have:
But that both Trojans and Italians be
Linked by one law in endless amity:
I Will guide you to the Gods and sacred rites.
Have power (great father in law) in Martial fights.
Have and enjoy (grave sire) thy soveraigntie:
My Trojans only shall me edify
A settled town, and call it by the name
Of thy Lavinia, to her datelesse fame.
Thus first Aeneas, then Latinus grave,
His hands and eyes lift up, this answer gave;
The self same things I (great Aeneas) swear,
Let sea and land and stars true witness bear,
And both Latona's broods, and Ianus old
With his two brows, and hells force uncontrold,
And dues divine of plaguie Plutoes seat:
And let great Jove hear thus, whose thunders great
Do truces tie; fright the fedifragous:
And hereupon our shrines I handle thus,
And midst of the flames I touch, and Gods I call,
Of what I speak and vow, to witness all.
No day shall Latins make this peace t'impeach,
Nor of these coards of concord to make breach.
Nor (whatsoever chance betide) will I
By any force fall backward wilfully:
No, though the seas hide earth with inundation,
Or heaven with hell should force fierce desolation.
And as this mace (for in his hand by hap
A mace he bare) quite void of native sap,
Shall never sprout or spring with branches tender,
Nor ever any cooling shadows render,
Cut out of the wood, and from the stock quite rent,
VVanting its root, and boughs and bark all spent.
And cut away with tools, but once a tree,
Though now with gold it garnished you see,
By cunning artists skill, and thus made fit
For Latin kings to hold, in thrones that sit.
With such like words their peace they did conclude
Amidst the princely peers and multitude:
And then, as custom was, their beasts they slay,
And on the fire their sprawling inwards lay.
But all this while, this match seems much amiss
To all the Rutuls, muttering much at this,
With various votes and thoughts, and so much rather,
By how much their unequal strength they gather.
And Turnus his slow walks and paces sad,
And low dejected looks much fear do add,
As he was humbly sacrificing there,
With hollow cheeks and childish total fear.
Which muttering whiles Iuturna notes right well,
And how the peoples hearts both rose and fell;
Camertes countenance counterfeiting, she,
(Famous for grandsires ancient pedigree,
And fathers fortitude, which far was blown,
And he himself valiant in arms was known)
She mixed her self amidst the thickest wings,
And craftily acquainted with all things,
Spread rambling rumors amongst them all, and said,
O Rutuls, are ye not with shame o'relaid?
Thus one man's life for many's to expose
To danger great? Equal me not our foes
In number and in magnanimity?
See here the Trojans and Arcadians lie,
And fatal troop Etrurians, Turnus foes;
And if in fight we bravely them oppose,
They scarce have man for man. He shall indeed
To the Gods (whose altars he adores) proceed,
And live by fame in all men's mouths, though dead:
But we (our country lost) live in dire dread,
Be slav'd to supercilious lords, whiles we
Lie lazing and permit it thus to be.
With these like words the youths hot thoughts she fires,
And more and more the murmr might acquires
Through all the army. Now the Laurents stout,
And all the Latins wheel their thoughts about,
And they which lately looked for rest from fight,
And safely from their sorrows, now downright
Addicted are to arms, wish the peace marred,
And with great grief, Turnus hard hap regard.
And to all this Iuturna jugles more,
And from the heavens sends a sign them before,
Which more effectually than ought else yet,
Did mould the Italians minds for her most fit,
To foolifie them with a prodigy.
For as Jove's bird, the eagle, in clear sky
Soaring along, drives little birds about,
And frights the chattering flock and wingie rout,
When with a sudden swoop and serious watch
H^ gliding down, a gallant swan does catch,
And tears in'stallons; (hereat instantly
The Italians courage take) then cherpingly,
All the birds back do fly (a most strange sight)
And with their wings do dim the skies clear light,
And with a clustring cloud over all the air,
Their foe so much infest an over-beare,
That forced at last by force and ponderous weight,
He lets his prey fall into the water straight,
And swiftly flutters from them into the sky.
The Rutuls their auspicuous augurie
With clamours loud adore, to fight prepare:
Tolumnius specially, a southsayer rare,
Stands forth and cries; This, this is it indeed,
Which I long looking for, wish might succeed.
The Gods great power I know, and glad embrace.
Brave Rutuls, come, come follow me apace,
Even me your captain, let your swords take place:
Even you, whom this base stragler by fierce broiles,
Would as those weak birds fright from native soiles,
And all your shores with fire and sword invade;
But he shall fly, and with base retrograde
Hoise sails from hence, and haste into the main:
You then with one consent your troops maintain,
Double your files, and with your Martial arm
Defend your forlorn king from fatal harm.
This said, he running forth at's enemies
Casts a strong dart, which whisling fiercely flies
Clean through the air, piercing all opposites:
And this and more a doubled din incites,
And all the armies startles and provokes,
And heats their hearts to fierce tumultuous strokes.
And as the spear flew on with furious chance,
Against nine brethrens bodies it did glance:
All whom one modest Tuscane mother bred
^o her Gylippus in chaste marriage bed.
One of which nine standing in the midst, it hits
Just on the place whereon his brave belt fits,
And where a button clasps his clothes aside,
A lovely lad, and full of Martial pride:
And through his ribs it quickly perforated,
And on the sands his life soon terminated.
Hereat the other brethrens valiant band
Enflamed with grief, take some their swords in hand,
Some deadly darts, and furiously fly on:
Whom to oppose and fiercely set upon,
Laurentum troops fly out: hence instantly
The Trojans, like an inundation high,
Break out, and Agyllines, Arcadians bold,
In gallant arms embroidered rich with gold.
Thus all had one hot heart to fight it out:
Their shrines snatched up, fierce tempests fly about
Through all the air, and storms of deadly darts,
And showers of slicing swords to wound their hearts.
Their sacrificing censers thence they bear,
And flaming fires. Latinus in great fear
Makes haste away, unto the Gods complaining
Of their dishonor and the peace profaning.
Some from the chariots take their horses out,
And nimbly backing them, do range about,
With naked swords in hand approach the fight.
Martial Messapus full of warlike spite,
This late compacted peace now to confound
Against Aulestes king, and kingly crowned:
Over the Tuscanes ran with full careere,
And to the ground him straight did over-beare.
And headlong him on head and shoulders cast
Flat on his back, upon an altar fast:
Whereat Messapus fiercely to him flies
With spear in's hand; and as for life he cries
And much entreats, he with his beamie lance,
On horseback strongly against him does advance,
And with a mortal blow, thus to him spoke;
So, so, it is well, thou wilt a good offering make.
The Italians close him, mangle him all-o're,
Whereat stout Chorineus vexed full sore,
Snatched up an altar firebrand, bravely met
Ebusus coming in a furious fret,
And smiting at him; whom he swift does chase,
And thrusts the flaming firebrand in his face:
Which cing'd his hair and broad beard all about,
And sent a mighty stench and savor out.
Then this his trembling foe does with him close,
Lugs him by's locks, and gives him more full blows,
Forcing him on his knees, fells him to the ground,
And through his side his sword his heart does wound.
Then Podalirius with a slicing blade,
Alsus a famous shepherd did invade,
Pressing on forward in the vantguard brave:
Whom Alsus such a knock with his battle-ax gave,
As cleft his head to the chin, sprinkling all-o're,
With his deep broached and out-gushing gore.
Rough rest and steel-given sleep do shut his sight,
And close his eyes up in eternal night.
But great Aeneas stretched his unarmed hand,
As he bare-headed without helm did stand,
And calls aloud to's mates; O whither flock y^?
Why with this creeping jarre our peace thus mock ye?
O pacify your rage; conditions fair,
And good conclusions for us fixed are:
It Is I alone must now the battle try.
O then give way to me, all false fears fly:
For with this hand I will corroborate
This peace, and Turnus troubles terminate.
As he thus spoke, ere he had ended all,
Behold a whisling dart did fiercely fall
And light upon the prince, uncertain whence,
From whose strong hand, what stormy violence,
What fate, what fortune should the Rutuls raise
To such high honor, unexpected praise.
The glory of the fact lies raked up, yet
Not one dares brag that he Aeneas hit.
When Turnus saw Aeneas leave the field,
And all his troubled troops much ground to yield,
With hasty hope his heart begins to flame,
He calls for horses, longs to fight for fame:
And proudly prauncing in his chariot high,
To his loose reins gives ample liberty.
And many a valiant soldier fiercely flying,
He sends to Styx, and many leaves half dying:
And either tears them with his chariot-wheel,
Or bores their flying backs with darts of steel.
Like as when bloody Mars with his strong shield
Does check cold Hebers floods, and makes them yield;
And waging war, his furious steeds sends out,
Who swifte^ then West-windes flies all about
The Martial field, and with their trampling strong
Do shake large Thraces confines all along,
Frighted about with shapes of damping dread,
Wrath, rage and plots, the God accompanied:
Thus agile Turnus, 'midst of all the fight,
His sweatie smoking steeds drives on, a sight
Woeful to see, how he insulting goes,
And gluts his sword with his thick slaughtered foes:
Dying their horrid hoofs with dews of blood,
Mixing both sand and gore like morter-mud.
And now he slew Sthenelus, Thamyris,
And Polus fierce to death he does dismiss:
Meeting now this, now that resisting foe
Fighting farre-off; farre-off he meets also
Imbrasus sons, Lades, and Glaucus strong,
Whom Imbrasus himself had nursed up long
In Lycia, and alike with arms them fraught,
And horse or foot-fight expertly them taught.
Upon another part Eumedes stout
Amidst the thickest ranks flies all about,
Famous in war, by kindred of great fame,
Stout Dolons son, right of his grandsires name
In strength and courage parents parallel,
Who once in valor did so far excel,
That he a scout to the Grecian camp would go,
If they would on him Achilles coach bestow.
But Diomedes did his boldness pay,
And with another price sent him away,
Of great Achilles chariot frustrate quite:
Whom Turnus spying a farre-off in fight,
Ere he went far, pursued him at the heel,
And stopped his passage with his nimble steel.
Whereat he stays his steeds, from's coach descends,
And to his half-dead falne-down foe he bends:
Sets his foot on his neck, draws out his blade,
Died it in's throat; and this moreover said;
See, Trojan, see the land so long time sought,
See Italy, which thou with blood have bought,
Now lie and meat it out. Here Is all their gain,
Which me to war thus boldly dare constrain,
Thus to themselves a city they erect.
A dart he then did furiously direct
Against his mate Asbustes, Chlores next,
Sybaris and Daretes he perplexed;
Thersilochus, with him Thymoetes strong,
Whose starting jade on ground laid him along.
As when Aedonian Northern blasts do blow,
Aegean roaring surges do overflow,
VVave following wave, thick rolling to the shore,
As puffes do push them, and in the skies all-o're
Clouds sleet about* so Turnus turbulent
Makes armies fly, which way soever he went,
And turns troops headlong back; force makes him stout,
And blasts his fluttering plumes do puff about.
But Phegeus fierce no longer could abide
His sturdie stomach and insulting pride,
But to the coach he comes with courage bold,
And with his hand upon the reins lays hold,
To stay the foamie horses furious pace,
And to divert them to some other place.
As thus he is drawn, and on his horse-main hangs,
A mighty spear upon his armor clangs;
And pierced his double plated corslet brave,
And on the top of's skin a wound him gave.
He hereupon safe covered with his shield,
Makes at his foe, pursues him in the field
With his drawn-sword, for surerer safety;
Who with the chariot wheels velocitie
And swift driven axle-tree, was headlong cast
Down to the ground, whom Turnus follows fast,
A lights, and 'twixt his helm and gorgets brim
With his sharp sword straight way beheaded him,
Leaving his headless carcass on the sand.
As thus i'th'field Turnus does victour stand,
Mnestheus, Achates kind, Ascanius fair,
Bleeding Aeneas bring with grief and care
Into his tent, who walking with weak strides,
And resting on a strong staff which him guides,
He Is sorely vexed, strives with all urgencie
The spear and head to pluck forth totally.
Which since he could not, he desires their aid
To take the nearest way, cure might be made,
And with a blade the flesh to lance more wide,
Which did the arrows head so deeply hide,
And thus to get it out, and him again
To send to th'field, the combat to maintain*
And now Iapix came, old Iasus son,
Who with Apollo from all others won
The praise and prize, in his most deep affection,
Once taken with his love, by kind aspection;
And thereupon upon him did bestow,
Accurate arts and sciences to know,
Hid auguries, rare music, archers praise;
But he his bed-red-fathers wasting days
Long to prolong, himself did most apply
To study physic, and plants secrecy,
And such like silent and less honored art.
Aeneas still extremely vexed at heart,
Leans on a mighty lance, with many a youth,
And young Iulus full of fear and ruth,
All shedding tears: but he unmoved stood.
Then old Iapix, like a surgeon good,
Tying a linen apron him before,
Of salves and physic herbs he brings forth store,
Whose power Apollo had unto him taught,
These faintly he appli'de; but none well wrought,
All proved in vain, in vain he trialls made,
With hand, with pinching pinsers to give aid,
And get the iron out. No chance finds way,
And Phoebus physic serves him for no stay:
But more and more increase fierce clamours high
About the field, and mis^hef draws more nigh.
They see dust fly in the air, horsemen make speed,
And numerous darts amongst them cast, exceed:
And clamourous noise and cries of soldiers fighting,
And of fierce Mars, dead bodies headlong smiting.
Then Venus vexed at her sons piteous pain,
To cure the wound and make him well again,
From Cretian I Would straight gathers dittanie,
Whose stalk has little leaves, and to the eye
Bears purple blossoms. To this well-known plant
VVilde beasts repair, when cure of wounds they want,
When in their flesh fierce digging darts do stick.
This Venus, hidden in a cloud most thick,
Brought quickly thither with all secrecy,
Steeps it in pans of water standing by,
Compounds it with Ambrosian juice most rare,
And odoriferous P^nax plants most fair.
Iapis old not knowing what was done,
The wound to supple now again begun
With this compounded water; instantly
All wonted pain and smart from's wound did fly,
All putred blood into the wound collected,
And out oth' sore was carefully ejected:
And then the steel without least molestation
Smoothly came forth; and to their admiration,
He instantly new strength and vigor feels,
And old Iapis now his courage steels,
And cries out, Come, come bring the prince his arms:
Why stand ye, stay ye him from fierce alarms?
Know (brave Aeneas) 'twas not humane will,
Nor arts best parts that freed thee from this ill:
Nor power or practice of mine own right hand,
Some greater God did thus propitious stand
By thee, and thee reserve to greater deeds.
Aeneas (for his zeal to th'fight exceeds)
Plucks on his buskins overspread with gold,
Cuts off delays, his glistring lance does hold,
His shield and corslet on, armed capa-pee,
His young Ascanius in his bosom, he
Hugging within his arms, with kisses sweet,
His beaver raised, thus he his son does greet;
Fair son, from me thy father virtue learn,
And of true industry the gain discern;
And fortunes power by others und^rstand.
As yet I Will thee safeguard with my strong hand,
And thee exalt unto great dignity:
But when thou art grown to full maturitie,
And strength of years, then use thou famous facts,
And then remember me and my great acts:
Recogitate and ruminate with spirit
Thy fathers and thine uncle Hectors merit,
And let their patterns stir and spur thee on.
This said, in haste he through the gates is gone,
Brandishing in his hand his mighty lance:
And with huge troops, along with him advance
Anteus, Mnestheus, and even all the rest,
Which in their camps were for the fight addressed.
Black clouds of dust over all the field o'respread,
And trampling thick the ground even harrowed.
The adverse army Turnus marching saw,
And all the Italians* how they nearer draw:
Cold fearful quakings on them straight do fall,
Chiefly Iuturna, amongst the Latins all,
Observes and knows their noise, and frighted flies,
And he with wingie ^peed to th'battell hies,
Rushing on with his dust-hid armies strong.
As when a blustering storm is for^'d along,
Dissolving furious drops from sea to land,
(Which the poor swains, alas! pre-understand,
And tremblingly foresee; fore^eeing, fly,
As knowing what rough ruin by and by
'Twill make amongst the trees and fields of corn:
And all before it will be overborn,
Before its blustering blasts fly to the shores
With mighty huffring, puf^ing, rumbling roares,
Even so Rhoeteius, Trojan captain stout,
Against his foes most fiercely flies about:
In doubled files they all conglomerated,
Thymbraeus stout Osiris trucidated,
Mnestheus Archetius slew, Achates brave
To Epulo a most deep death-wound gave;
Stout Gyas Vfens slayes; Tolum^ius, he
The southsayer which first made them disagree,
By throwing first his dart against his foes,
Even he was slain A mighty clamor rose,
And Rutuls now were put to dustie flight
But brave Aeneas will not dain to fight
With all he meets, nor horse or foot will slay,
No nor on armed foe his hands will lay.
But in the thickest throngs seeks seriously
For Turnus; he alone his strength must try.
Jollie Iuturna a Virago stout,
In fear of this perplexed with great doubt,
Stepped to Metiscus, Turnus wagoner,
And 'twixt the horses reins o'returns him there,
And leaves him fal'ne far from the beam of the wain,
And takes his place, and checks the loos'ned rein;
And rightly she resembles every way
Metiscus, both in shape, words, weapons gay.
Like swallows black which princes courts frequent,
And fluttering 'bout the yards seek aliment
For their young chattering birds left in the nest,
Spiders, gnats, flies, as they can catch them best;
Sometimes in galleries large, or standing lakes:
So diverse ways through foes Iuturna takes,
And drives the coach through every part and place,
And fiercely flies, and here and there does trace,
And bring her bragging brother to and fro,
But will by no means let him fight with his foe;
And far enough flies from him out o'th'way.
No less, Aeneas does bypath assay
To find his foe, and through the straggling bands
Calls him with words and becknings of his hands;
And still as he on's foe his sight does cast,
And thinks with his wing'd-heel'd steeds to meet at last;
So often Iuturna turns the coach a wry.
Alas! what should he do? what must he try?
In vain with various rage his heart does burn,
And diverse doubts his thoughts distractive turn.
Messapus meets him, in his hand two spears
Well tipped with steel, which he by fortune bears,
Both light of flight, one of which darts most swift
Griping, he flings with straight and sturdie drift.
Aeneas stands, to him his target takes,
Shrinks down, but yet the spear impression makes
Upon his helm, and tears the top of's crest
Hereat Aeneas much fierce rage expressed,
And much incensed by this vile treachery,
Seeing the horse fly back, coach turned awry,
Great Jove, and the altars he to witness brings
Of their peace broke, and many wrongful things.
And now at last invades foes thickest bands,
And with successful war and conquering hands
Makes all without all difference fall and die,
And unto rage give reins implacably.
My Muse cannot, O then, what supreme might
Can help me here to set down and indite
The many bitt^r bickerings, slaughters fierc^,
And captains slain to sing in solemn verse?
Which now by turns (as 'twere) stout Turnus slayes,
And now Troyes prince, wounded, confounded lays.
Great Jove, was this thy will that with such rage
Those men should meet, which in ensuing age
Should in eternal peace spend all their days?
Aeneas now endures no long delays,
But strikes Rutulian Sucro through the side
(And that first blow made flying Trojans 'bide
And bid fresh battles) and through's vital part
Under his short-ribs wounds him to the heart.
Turnus o'returns Amycus from his horse,
And meets on foot Diores with great force;
Two Trojan brethren brave, one with a lance,
The other with a sword by fatal chance
He slaughtered straight, cut both their heads off quite,
And hung them on his chariot in full sight.
The chariot sprinkled with thick drops of blood,
Then slew he Talo and Tanais good,
And stout Cethegus; all three met at once,
And brave Onytes venting gasping groans,
A Thebane peer, sprung from Peridia
His mother dear. Here does he also slay
Two brothers sent from Lacia and the plains
Of great Apollo, and here dead remains
Arcadian young Menoetes, who in vain
To go to war did fear and much refrain:
Whose special skill and will was fish to catch
By Lerna's fishie banks, in house of thatch
He poorly lived, his coin could never swarm.
His father also hired a plow-farm.
And as huge burnings made in diverse ways,
Amongst dry trees and squib-like crackling bays:
Or like fierce frothie streams which down do shrill
With rapid roaring-race, from some high hill,
And scud to sea, and find or force their way:
With no less force both these their parts do play.
Aeneas brave and Turnus with great might
Most furiously do rush about and fight:
And now, just now, their imbred rage enflames them,
Least thought of being foiled, with envy shames them.
Therefore with utmost force they fight and fell.
Murrhanus here Aeneas sends to hell,
Proud of his parentage and grandsires great,
And regal race of Latin kings complete;
He dashed him headlong down with rockie stone,
By which fierce stony storm he is overthrown,
And with his coach-wheels crushed and trampled hard,
By's horse, who naught their master do regard.
Turnus assails stout Hilus, rushing fast
With courage bold at's gilt-arm'd temples, cast
A digging dart, which furiously straight ran
Clean through his helm, and stuck in his brain-pan.
Nor could thine arm, Creteus, Greeks brave knight,
From Turnus thee protect, in furious fight:
Nor could thy Gods, Cupentus, ease thy case,
When against thee great Aeneas came in place*
When at his breast his steely spear he sent,
Which (spite of's brazen shield) through's body went.
And thee, great Aeolus, Laurentines spide
Slain in the field, on's back the ground to hide.
There thou lay'st slain, whom Grecians could not slay,
Nor great Achilles, Priams crowns decay.
This was thy fate-given date, near Ida born
Of great Lyrnessus line, now laid forlorn
In La^rents field, a sepulcher to find,
And ^ow the total troops together wind,
All L^tines bands, and all Troyes valiant rout:
Renowned Mnestheus and Serestus stout,
Messapus, rare horse-rider, and his mate
Asylas strong, against whom do properate
All Tuscane troops and brave Arcadian wings,
And every one his best assistance brings.
No rest they take, no stay they make from fight.
And here Aeneas mother, Venus bright,
Promps her sons thoughts, that to the citie-wall
He should make haste, and all his forces call,
And vex the Latins with a sudden fight:
Who whiles for Turnus he does cast his sight
On every troop, still prying here and there,
Seeks up and down, but could him find no where.
He spies the city, sitting still, at rest,
Untouched, unstirr'd, no war did it molest.
Straight hotter brands of broiles in's breast flame out.
Mnestheus, Sergestus, and Serestus stout,
His captains brave, he to him quick does call,
And takes a hill; to which the Trojans all,
And valiant troops thickly and quickly they
Assemble close, cast not their shields away,
Nor nimble spears; then mounted on a hill,
Standing in the midst he thus declares his will;
Let no delay (fair mates) clog my designs,
Jove's friendly face I see now on us shines.
Though I be sudden, yet let none be slow,
The imperial city, cause of all this woe,
King Latins throne, this day I Will ruinate,
And houses tops to the ground aequiparate,
Unless they take our yoke, and to us yield*
Shall I (forsooth) stand waiting in the field,
Till Turnus please to meet me? and again
Attend him, when he vanquished does remain?
Here is the head (brave sirs) the seat and seed,
Which all these toiles and bloody broiles did breed.
Quickly bring brands, with flames your peace demand.
This said, they readily do his command,
And make a warre-like wedge, and wondrous quick
They to the city flock in clusters thick.
The scaling ladders suddenly they rais^,
And sudden fires to mighty flames do blaze;
Some get to the gate, and kill the first they meet;
Some dart their shafts, which fly so thick and fleet,
As dims the air. Aeneas first of all
Holds up his hand, standing hard by the wall,
And with loud voice Latinus he does blame,
And calls the Gods to testify the same;
That he unwillingly was forced to fight,
And that the Italians twice used hostile might,
And twice had covenant broke. Then amongst their foe*
And fearful citizens great discord rose.
Some bad them open the gates, let Trojans in,
And some the king himself to the walls do win:
Some bring their arms their city to defend.
Much like a swarm of bees in dark rock pend,
And by a shepherd found, who joyfully
Fills it with choking smoke all inwardly:
The bees afraid, fly 'bout their waxen ^ell,
And with huge humming wax most fierce and fell:
Black fumie stench flies out from forth the hive,
The stones within make crackling noise, and drive
Smoke into the empty air. Besides all this,
A woeful chance fell out in the town amiss,
Amongst the tired Latins, which procured
Most loud laments, woeful to be endured,
Through all the city: for so soon as e're
The queen beheld the enemy draw near,
The town-walls scaled, the houses all on flame,
No Rutuls bands, no Turnus near to tame
Their insolence; she thought (poor wretch) again
Her young prince Turnus in the fight was slain.
Her heart overwhelmed with sudden fear and grief,
She straight cries out, that she is the cause and chief,
The head and heart of all these miseries.
Thus in much sad and mad perplexities
Exclaiming, with her nails she rends and tears
Her royal robes, ready to die with fears:
And to a beam, a cord made fast on high,
She hanged herself with foul indignity.
Whereof when woeful Latins ladies heard,
Chiefly Lavinia, mighty schreeks she reared,
And with her nails all tears her yellow locks,
Scratcheth her face, the folk in mighty flocks
Rage up and down, their houses fills with cries:
Hence through the town the fame thereof soon flies.
Men's courage sinks, Latinus rent and torn,
In's regal robes goes up and down fo^lorn,
Mightily frighted at his qu^ens foul fate,
And at his cities ruinated state,
With dirt and soil his grave gray hairs he smeares,
Blames himself much, drencht deep in thousand fears*
In that at first he Dardans prince rejected,
And as his son in law had not affected.
Now all this while stout Turnus in the fields
Follows a few, whose face small conquest yields,
Poor and pale scattered straglers, and besides
He sees, how more and more, more slow he rides,
His horses waxing tired. Again a noise
He hears in the troubled air, which him annoyes.
Whereat he stands and listens to the same,
And from the city various clamours came,
And most distasteful stirs: hereat he cries,
Alas, alas! what woeful miseries
Are to this city come, thus to molest it?
And that strange turmoiles variously infest i^?
This said* enraged, his horse rein'd-in, he stays.
Whereat his sister who her old pranks plays,
Seeming Metiscus, still in the coach remains,
Guiding his coach and horse, ruling the reins,
Says thus to him; Brave brother, this way haste,
This way the Trojans first and best thou may
Fully subdue, here conquest gate stands open,
The town has troops enough with them to cope.
Aeneas close on our Italians lies,
And fiercely fights with all his companies.
Let us then also, with our fury fell,
Go send those Trojans souls in post to hell:
So shall thou part in equal parity,
No less in number, nor in dignity.
Turnus reply'de; O sister, now I know,
That thou by craft at first did overthrow,
Our treated truce, these wars did work again.
But now, fair Goddess, all thy craft's in vain:
But pray thee tell me, who from heaven thee sent
To undergo these troubles turbulent!
Was it to see thy woeful brothers bane?
For, what do I? what help can hap me gain?
I saw before mine eyes, Murrhanus kind,
Than whom to me more dear earth none can find.
I heard him call me, one of mighty merit,
Who, though now dead, yet died with dauntlesse spirit.
Unhappie Vfens also slain does lie,
That he might not survive our infamy:
And Trojans now his corpse and arms enjoy.
And shall I suffer ('it is the last annoy
Which only yet remains) our buildings flame,
And not resist dire Drances foretold shame?
And shall I fly? and shall this nation see,
Turnus a turn-coat fugitive to be?
And should it now be shame in me to die?
O ye the ghastly ghosts, which low do lie,
Be ye propitious, for the heavens do frown,
To you my sacred soul shall now go down,
Untainted and unspotted of this blame.
And still m ost worthy that my linag^ came
From ancestors of such renowned fame
Scarce had he said, when Sages foamy horse,
Hurrying him through his foes with windy force,
His face all bloody with an arrows wound,
And rushing on, at last he Turnus found:
And calling him by name, Turnus (says he)
Our last and best help now consists in thee;
Pity our plight, for Troyes Aeneas thunders,
In bloody broiles unto our woes and wonders,
And threatens ruin to our Latian towers,
And dire destruction, by his conquering powers.
And now, even now flames 'bout our houses fly,
In thee the Latins hope of help does lie;
On thee Italians all do cast their sight,
The king himself mutters in much despite,
Whom he his son in law might now ordain,
And whom in love and league to entertain.
The queen beside, they e're most faithful friend,
With her own hands her woeful life did end,
In fright has fled the light: now at the gate
Only Messapus and Atinas wait,
And animate the army yet remaining:
But round about them are thick foes, maintaining
A furious fight, like standing-corn in fields,
Which to steel sickles helplessely straight yields.
And yet do there alone in this left plain,
Tracing thy coach about, here still remain?
Turnus astonished at the tottering state
Of these affairs, like one inanimate
Stands mute, his eyes fast fixed on the ground,
And inward shame his boiling heart did wound;
And what with sadness, madness, raging love,
Conscious of adverse power, which he must prove,
The mistie vails of his dull thoughts put by,
And sunshine of discretion shining high,
His angry eyes to the citie-walls he cast,
And views the city as in's coach he past.
And now behold, with flames the rafters fly,
And boards between burn up unto the sky,
Which caught hold of the tower, that tower, I say,
Which Turnus self erected rich and gay,
With brave crosse-beams and wheels and bridges high.
Now, now, dear sister (says he) readily
My fates attend me, use no further stay;
For where my fate and fortune point the way,
Thither I Will go, my resolution stands
To try the strength of proud Aeneas hands,
To 'bide worst bitterness of deaths dire smart.
Nor shall thou henceforth see me play the part
Of an ignoble coward. This, I pray,
Good sister suffer me, that now I may
Be mad, e're I be mad: which having said,
Leap^ng from's coach, most swift away he made
Into the field, through thickest of his foes,
And leaves his sister full of fears and woes:
And with swift flight breaks into thickest bands.
And as a rockie mount which headlong stands,
And tumbles from the top, broke down by wind;
Or by strong sowcing showers quite undermined,
Or rotted with long years antiquity,
And so slips down with huge velocity,
In broken fragments mounting on the ground,
And woods and herds and people does confound,
And roll and wrap with it: Turnus even thus
Through his dispersed troops most furious
Runs to the citie-walls* where all with blood
The ground like pools and ponds bedrenched stood,
And whirling arrows clattered to the air;
With hand and voice his mind he does declare
Unto them thus; Forbear Rutulians all,
And Latins now your swords and shields recall;
What ever fortune falls, it is mine own due,
It Is fitter far for me alone, then you,
To pay the price of this thus broken peace,
And with my sword this quarrel quite to cease.
All straight gave back, for him in the midst made way:
But brave Aeneas without all delay,
Hearing but Turnus named, leaves towers and town,
Breaks off all business, and comes nimbly down:
Leaping for joy, thundering in arms most strong,
Like Athos mount, or Eryx ste^p and long.
Or like old Apennius raised on high
Into the air, kissing the starrie sky,
Rattling with leaves on trees, glistring in sight,
Proud of his tops, clothed with snow most bright.
And now Rutulians and the Trojans stout,
Seriously bend their eyes and look about:
Italians, and all those that kept the town,
And those which would with rams the walls butt down.
All arms they lay aside, king Latin stands
Amazed to see two men so strong of hands,
Of diverse nations, now to meet and fight.
The champions both beholding in their sight
The lists made void, and space to encounter in
With rapid race, the combat straight begin;
And now far off darts at each other cast,
And to their swords and shields they come as fast:
With dashing clashing bangs the ground even groans,
And doubled trebled blows they give at once,
With their bright blades: virtue and valor brave
Seem mixed in one, in one their seat to have.
And as two angry bulls in furious fight,
With butting horns encountering with deep spite,
On mighty Syla's mount, Taburnus high,
Their fearful keepers keep close, covertly,
The other cattle, cows and calves, stand mute,
And with soft muttering hold a still dispute,
Who shall their leader be, whom they shall tend.
The bulls meanwhile each other wounds do lend,
And gore each others sides, whose blood spurts out,
And head and shoulders all be bathes about:
Whose bloody blows the echoing woods resound:
No otherwise is this fierce duel found,
'Twixt Troyes Aeneas and great Daunus prince,
Laboring each other strongly to evince,
With swords and shields the air with clanging filling.
Then Jove himself, to poise their fortune willing
In equal balance, for some distance stays,
And to them both their several fortune lays:
Which should with toiles triumph, which, fighting, die.
Turnus himself roused up, his sword raised high,
Hoping (untoucht) to do what he did aim:
With all his might he smote, the blow home came*
Whereat the Trojans cry, the Latins tremble,
And both the bands in much amaze assemble
To eye the issue: But the bastard blade
In pieces brake, the blow thus frustrate made.
Who, had he not straight fled, had dead there lain.
As swift as wind he therefore flies amain,
Finding in's hand a hilt, to him unknown,
His hand now weaponlesse. Fame thus has blown,
That when he first to fight his coach ascended,
And furiously him to the battle bended,
'Twixt fear and fury, left his fathers blade,
And snatched Metiscus sword for it* and made
Indifferent shift therewith, wh^les frightfully
The scattered Trojans did before him fly.
But when he minds Vulcanes strong tempered blade,
And that this si^lie sword by mortals made,
Brake straight, as brittle glass the shivers small,
Glistring upon the ground as down they fall:
Then like a mad man Turnus flies about
Through all the field, here, there winds in and out:
For all the Trojan bands had hedged him round,
And citie-walls and mighty moorish ground.
Aeneas also (though his late wounds pain,
Pinching his knees, did swift pursuit restrain)
Follows, and foot to foot, keeps to him nigh.
Much like a huntsman, who with course and cry
Of eager hounds, a dear has close in the 'flouds;
Or girt with fear o'th'bloudie dart, he scuds:
But frighted at the toiles and banks most high,
A thousand ways does turn and wind and fly;
But yet the noble nimble Vmbrian hound,
With breathing chaps, keeps close, does loose noground.
And now, even now, snaps him, yet lets him slip,
Who from his cheated chaps does quickly skip:
Loud cries are raised, the brooks and banks about
Re-echo, thunder from the skies breaks out.
Turnus thus flying blam^s his Rutul^s all
For his tried sword, by name does each one call.
On the other side Aeneas ruin threats,
And present death, if any at his treats
Dares him approach, whose fear does them afright:
Menacing much to raze their city quite;
And thus (though wounded) he his foe draws nigh,
And five round circling courses, eagerly,
They finished had, leaping back here and there:
And for no petty prize thus earnest were,
Even for no less then Turnus life and blood.
By chance, a sowre-leav'd olive tree there stood,
Devoted to God Faunus, venerable,
To mariners once, when it stood, most stable,
When they did shipwreck escape; whereon they placed
The gift wherewith they L^^rents Gods had graced,
And gar^ents to the God were consecrated:
This tree the Trojans had eradicated,
Regardlesse of its use, that so they might
Prepare a full and fair field for the fight,
Here stuck Aeneas spear, by force there cast,
And in the tender root was settled fast:
Aeneas stays* ^ssayes with his strong hand
To pluck it out, with his spear to make him stand:
Whom he in running could not overt^^e.
Turnus in rage and fear this prayer did make;
Favor me, Faunus, and this goodly ground,
Keep fast the spear, since always ye have found
My sacred worship to your deity,
Which Trojans wrong most sacrilegiously.
This said, thus prayed, his prayers were not in vai;
For why? Aeneas laboring with long pain*
And struggling at the stock, yet by no might
Could make the stump let go his fastened bite.
As thus he stirs and struggles all in vain,
The Daunian Goddess did assume again
Metiscus shape, the wagoner before,
And to her brother does his sword restore.
Venus being vexed, to see this nymph so bold,
Hastes to the spear, and plucks it from its hold.
Thus both these warriors armed with sword and spea^
Themselves most bloudily, bravely, now they bear:
This proud of's blade, that joyful for his lance,
With breathless blows to th'fight they readvance.
Meanwhile great Jove, olympus sovereign high,
From's yellow cloud casting his all-seeing eye
Upon the combatants, to Juno spoke;
Fair spouse, when meanest thou an end to make?
What yet remains? thou know and do confess
Aeneas for to be a God, no less,
That he belongs to heaven, stars must him hold.
What do thou build? what hope in clouds thus cold
Makes thee stay here? think thou it fit to be,
A sacred God with mortal wounds to see*
Or that his sword (for but by only thee,
Iuturna naught could do) should gotten be,
And brought to Turnus, vanquished hearts to cheer^,
O now at length, fair Juno, cease, forbear
To press me with thy prayers, thy self to fret
With tart intestine grief, me to beset
With carking cares, to give thee sweet content;
It Is now come to the period of event.
Thou know I let thee both by sea and land
Infest the Trojans, and, at thy command,
To wage fierce wars, his house quite to deface,
And marriages to make in mournful case.
Farther I now forbid to enterprise.
Jupiter ceast. Juno in submisse wise
On the other side reply'de; All-sacred pheere,
Since first I knew thy mighty mind most clear,
My Turnus and the world unwillingly
I have relinquisht; nor so sorrily
Should thou me see on this cold cloud to sit,
Suffering so many things fit and unfit;
But clothed in flames, standing my troops about,
And fiercely firing all the Trojans out.
And as for poor Iuturna, I confess,
I bad her help her brother in distress,
And for his life bad her all hazards try:
But bow to bend or weapons to supply,
This I never bad, and to this truth I swear
By Styxes muddie peacelesse spring, the fear,
And only sacred oath the Gods do take.
And now I cease, and all these fights forsake.
Yet this one thing (which fates do not gainsay)
For Italy, grant me I humbly pray,
And for the grace and honor of thine own;
That when they to a peaceful pass are grown
By marriage made (well, be it so) and when
All rites and rules of peace are fixed by men,
That thou wilt not change ancient Italians name,
Nor Troy or Trojans to wear out the same;
Let then their language and their weeds retain,
Let Italy and Albane peers remain:
Let Romes rare offspring spread by Latian might:
Troy now is dead, O let Troyes name die quite.
Jupiter smiling on her, said, most mild,
Thou art Jove's sister and Saturnus child:
Yet can thy breast enchest such anger still?
Well, go to then; yet now subject thy will,
Cease thy vane rage begun: I grant thy motion,
Willingly won herein to thy devotion.
Italians shall old kinds and customs keep,
And, as it is now, their name in fame as deep
Still stand and grow; Trojans shall only be
A mixed body amongst them* thou shall see,
That I religious rites will teach them all,
And every land shall them Italians call.
The offspring which from Latian blood shall rise,
All men on earth, yea and the Gods i'th'skies,
Shall pass in piety; and than this nation,
None shall bring thee so copious adoration.
This tickled Juno passing-well at heart,
And from her cloud to heaven she did depart.
This thus performed, great Jove does now contrive
How he Iuturna might from Turnus drive.
Two hellish hags there are called Furies fell,
Whom dreadful night begat in horrid hell
Both at a birth, upon Megaera black,
Both with like serpents stings and wreathed back,
And wings like winds. These at Jove's footstool lay
Under his throne, their angry king to obey:
These fears and frights, kindle in ^ale-contents,
When direful death or vexing punishments
Jupiter pleases on the bad t'impart,
Or towns will terrify with wars desert.
One of these furies fierce Jove from him send^,
Who to Iuturna, Turnus death portends.
She flies away to earth, whirlewindes fast
Much like a shaft from Parthian quiver cast
All dipped in poison curable by none,
And by some Parthian, or stout Cydon thrown;
The dart unseen whisling through shadows, flies:
Thus this night-imp hastes on, to earth now hies.
Who having spi'de Troyes troops and Tur^us hands,
In The figure of a little bird she stands*
As screech-owles, who are wont on graves to sit
And dark-night walks, to screech and hollow it,
And in this owlie shape, this fury fierce,
In Turnus sight does up and down traverse,
Making much noise, fluttring her wings about
His shield, which lets in fear, sets courage out.
Trembling, his hair does stare, speechless he stood.
But when far off, Iuturna understood
The furies fluttering wings and screeching stir,
Poor sister, ah, how it bemadded her!
Her face she scratches with her bloody nails,
With fists she beat her breasts, and thus she wails;
Alas poor Turnus! pray thee speak, which way?
What means remains whereby thy sister may
Shield or assist thee? or ^hy life prolong?
Ah! how can I resist this omen strong?
Now, now foul fowls I from these armies fly.
Cease then me trembling more to terrify;
I know your plaguing plumes and deadly din,
I know Jove's proud prescripts; do I this win
And naught but this, for lost virginity?
Why gave he me life's immortality?
Why am I freed thus from a dying state,
Whereby I might these great griefs terminate,
And in hels depth with thee poor brother range?
Am I immortal? ah, I would it change!
For without thee, dear brother, naught can please me,
Oh, if some earth could swallow me 't would ease me!
Sending a Goddess down to Limbo's lake,
These words with many tears and sighs she spoke;
And straight her head waterie gray weeds hid,
And deep into the river down she slid.
Meanwhile, Aeneas strongly does oppose,
His tree-like lance brandishing as he goes,
And angrily thus cries; Now Turnus stout,
What stays, delays, make thee still time it out?
Why draw'st thou back? we must not fight by flight,
But hand to hand with furious blows downright.
Transform thy self to shapes most variously,
Collect thy self with magnanimity.
To fight or by arts slight to soar i'th'aire,
Or hid i'th'ground to cover all thy care.
Turnus in rage shaking his head, replies,
Thy tongue, proud Trojan, nothing terrifies
My troubled breast, but the angry fatal Gods
And Jupiter himself, with me at ods.
And with these words he spide a mighty stone,
A huge old stone, by which lands bounds were shown
All difference to decide, left long i'th'field:
Which twelve men scarce upon their necks could weld:
Such proper men (I mean) as now adays
Times do produce. This he with ease does raise,
And with his trembling hand cast at his foe:
And yet this noble prince does scarcely know
That he himself raised high, did swiftly run,
Took up the stone, or what else he had done:
His knees began to faint, his blood grew chill;
Then on i'th'emptie a^re, the stone went still,
But went not its full way, nor hit its mark.
Like as, when in our dreams, at midnight dark,
When lazy sleep tired eyelids down does force,
We seem sometimes to run an eager course:
And in the midst of many a seeming act,
We faintly fail, and vainly cease the fact;
We talk sometimes in sleep, but faultringly
Our forces fail, nor words, nor works comply:
Thus 'twas with Turnus, where his power was bent,
Fierce fates made all his facts in vain be spent:
Then diverse doubtful thoughts in's heart arise.
Upon his Rutuls casting now his eyes,
Now on the town, fright stays him, and deep fear
(Even every moment) of his foes strong spear:
Nor finds he means to fly, nor means to fight,
Nor sees his coach, nor sister-coachmans sight.
Aeneas having in his nimble eyes
Fair fortune offered, does not sluggardize,
But brandishing his dart at's doubting foe,
Far distant, at him does it fiercely throw
With all his might: never flew stones so fast
To batter walls from warlike engine cast
With battering din, nor thunder makes more roar*
Like a black storm, hurrying destruction sore,
So flies the spear, and through his corslet strong,
And sevenfold lined shields brim glanced along
With clanging noise, sticking fast in his thigh,
Which struck down mighty Turnus instantly,
Doubling his knees to the ground. The Rutuls straight
Raise a huge cry, which hills reverberate,
With mighty echoes, round about the plain,
And all abroad the woods beat back again.
He meek and lowly raising hands and eyes,
O now (says he) I bear my most just prize.
I ask no favor, use thy happy fate,
Only I pray thee to commiserate
My aged father Daunus (if in thee
Least piety to parents harbored be,
And thy Anchises once was such an one)
And me (if so much favor may be shown,
If die I must) restore my corpse to mine.
The victory to thee I now resign:
Our Latins see my conquered hands extended,
La^inia is thy wife, thus fates intended,
Let farther fury cease. Aeneas stands
Fierce in his arms, yet still he holds his hands,
Gazing with his eyes, and now even now began
His speech to work compassion in the man,
Till that unhappie belt he did epsy
Upon his shoulders hanging broad and high:
Whose buckles known, and glistring rarely clear,
To be young Pallases did plain appear,
Whom Turnus with a conquering wound-had slain*
And 'bout him did that fatal prize retain.
But when his eye did seriously survey
That badge of griping grief, that piteous prey,
Enflamed with fury, all with rage possessed,
Ah! dos^ thou hope to escape my hands thus dressed
With my dear Pallas spoils? for Pallas sake
This wound shall thee his due oblation make.
And with that word, he sheathed his sword in's heart.
Whereat death seazing on his vital part,
His members bursen, loathed life out flies,
And with a deep-fetcht groan to Charon hies.
An end of the twelfth book of Virgils Aeneids.
Trin-uni Deo soli sit omnis gloria.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
COurteous Reader, The large distance of place, and inevitable duties of my
calling hindering my presence from the* Printers-presse* diverse faults have
escaped, which I heartily desire may with thy patience and pen be corrected, as
here is directed.

IN the life of Virgil, page: 3. lin. 12. for shallow, read sallow* Aeneids. p.
5. l. 22. for Orentes, read Orontes. p. 28. l. 8. for I, read By. p. 29. l. 13.
for sheep-shelter, read ship shelter. p. 35. l. 11* for wraths, read wreaths.
p. 39. l. 21. for hiddie, read hideous. p. 40. l. 2. for wag, read way. p. 45.
l. 3. for Automedon* read Antomedon. p. 46. l. 26. for they, read for ^he. p.
53. l. 24 for Frame. read From's. p. 61. l. 27. for save, read leave* p. 66. l.
8. for could, read cold. p. 68. l. 18. for grew, read drew. p. 72. l. 1. for
siecie, read feirce. p. 73. l. 25. for to the Sea by Gods, read by Sea to the
Gods. p. 77. l. 14. for Achilles, read Anchises. p. 79. l. 10. for a station,
read our station p. 81. l. 22. for sigh's, read fights. p. 8^. l. 17. for on,
read on's. p. 83. l. 24. for au-all, read ouall. p. 93. l. 30. for long, read
longs. p. 95. l. 2. for fiction, read fictious. l. 6. for The, read That. l.
10. for these men's, read these in men's. l 28. for right, read rich. p. 111. l.
14. for cutting, read crossing. p. 113. l. 20. for thousands, read thousand. p.
115. l. 20. for That same, read, That the same. p. 118. l. 20. for a more, read
no more. p. 121. l. 16. for Phaethons, read Phactons. p. 124. l. 12. for
or'eth' board, read o're-board. l. 32. for power, read pour. p. 132. l. 21.
for land, read laud. p. 134. l. 16. for begirt, read begirts. p 139. l. 6. for
partly, read party. p. 140. ^. 2. for Laborynthicke, read Labyrinthicke. l. 25.
for fleets, read fleet. p. 141. l. 15. for from, read for. p. 164. l. 29. for
Now, read Nor. p. 175. l. 6. for he heaven, read he did heaven. p. 177. l. 4.
for these, read those. page 185. lin. 4. for Statutes, read Statues. page 194.
lin. 25. for turret, read turrets. page 197. lin. 6. for O that, read O what.
l. 24. for flight, read fight. page 200. l. 3. for An, read Ah. p. 204. l 7.
for waves, read wives. p. 205. l. 21. for bid, read bad. p. 210. l. 21. for
godly, read goodly. p. 214. l. 3. for Put-on, read Puts-on. p. 217. l. 18. for
grunt, read groan. p. 220. l. 23. for Numacks* read Numicks. p. 224. l. 29.
for Ane, read And. l. 31. for So, read To. p. 227. l. 10. for sire, read Sir.
p. 237. l. 6. for protest, read protests. p. 238. l. 11. for for-mens, read
foemens. p. ^57. l. 12. for flying, read fling. p. 259. l. 9. for afraid, read
afear'd. p. 262. l. 28. for land, read laud. p. 265. l. 30. for Italy, read
Italia. p. 277. l. 20. for touch, read tough. p. 298. l. 10. for Asius, read
Iasius. p. 323. l. 17. for Joining, read Ioying. p. 346. l. 5 for Adulterous,
read Adultrous. p. 352. l. 14. for coasts, read costs. p. 353. l. 2. for forth'
alarm, read, fore the alarm. p. 361. l. 23 for There, read They. p. 372. l.
12. for her, read his. p. 373. l. 3. for defendance, read defendants. l. 9. for
made fight so feirce, read make furious fight. p. 379. l. 8. for And their,
read Let our. p. 384 l. 21. for thus, read this. p. 386. l. 1. for me, read we.
p. 392. l. 13. for sleet, read fleet. p. 398. l. 16. for give, read gives. p.
399. l. 2^. for shrill, read thrill. p. 403. l. 11. for fills, read fill. l.
32. for that, read what. p. 405. l. 26. for they, read thy. p. 406. l. 2. for
there, read thou. p. 411. l. 17. for bloudily, read bouldly. p. 413. l. 4. for
then, read them. p. 418. l. 8. for bursen. read loosen.


