A MANIFESTATION OR REMONSTRANCE.

OF THE MOST HONORABLE the Duke of Buckingham; General of the Army of the
most Gracious King of great Britain, containing a Declaration of his Majesty's
intention for this present Arming.

Translated out of the Original French Copy.

Published with Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Eagle and Child in Britains Bursse. 1627.

A MANIFESTATION, OR REMONSTRANCE OF THE most Honorable, Lord Duke of
Buckingham, General of the Army of the most Gracious King of great Britain,
containing a Declaration of his Majesty's intention for this present Arming.
WHat part the Kings of great Britain, have always taken in the affairs of
the reformed Churches of this Kingdom, and with what care and zeal they have
labored for the good of them, is manifest to all; and the examples of it are
also as ordinary as the occasions have been. The now King my most honored
Lord and Master, comes nothing short of his Predecessors (...) of those
Churches into (...) and splendor. And what (...) be less hoped for by so
strickt an alliance, and from so many reiterated promises by the mouth of a
great Prince, but effects truly Royal, and sorting to his Greatness? But so
far fails it therein, that his Majesty in so many promises and so strait
obligation of friendship, has found means to obtain liberty and surety for
the Churches, and to restore peace to France by the reconciliation of those,
whose breath vtters nothing else but all manner of obedience to their King,
under the liberty of the Edicts: That contrariwise they have prevailed by the
interest which he had in those of the Religion to deceive them, and by this
means not only to vnty him from them, but also to make him (if not odious
unto them) at the least suspected in perverting the means which he had
ordained for good to a quite contrary end. Witness the English Ships not
designed for the extirpation of those of the Religion, (but to the contrary,
express promise was made, that they should not be used against them) which
notwithstanding were brought before Rochel, and were employed against them in
the last Sea fight. What then may be expected from so puissant a King as the
King my Master so openly eluded, but a thorough feeling equal and proportioned
to the injuries received, but his patience has gone beyond patience, and as
long as he had hope that he could benefit the Churches by any other means,
he had had no recourse by way of Arms: so far that having been made an
instrument and worker of the last peace, upon conditions, disaduantagious
enough, and which would never have been accepted without his Majesty's
interuention; who interposed his credit and interest to the Churches to
receive them (even with threatenings) to the end to shelter the Honor of the
most Christian King, under assurance of his part, not only for the
accomplishment, but also for the bettering of the said conditions, for which
he stands caution to the Churches.

But what has been the issue of all this, but only an abuse of his goodness,
and that which his Majesty thought a sovereign remedy for all their sores:
has it not brought almost the last blow to the ruin of the Churches? It
wanted but a little by the continuing of the Fort before Rochel, (the
demolishing whereof was promised) by the violences of the Soldiers and
Garrisons of the said Fort and Isles, as well upon the Inhabitants of the said
Town, as upon Strangers, in lieu whereas they should wholly have retired, have
daily been augmented, and other Forts built, and by the stay of the
Commissioners in the said Town, beyond the term agreed on, to the end to make
broils, and by the means of the division which they made to slide among the
Inhabitants, to open the gates to the neighboring Troops, and by other
withstandings and infractions of Peace, little I say failed it, that the said
Town, and in it all the Churches had not drawn their last breath. And in the
mean while his Majesty has yet continued, and not opposed so many injuries,
so many faith-breakings, but by plaints and treatings: until he had received
certain advice (confirmed by intercepted Letters) of the great preparation
that the most Christian King made to shower upon Rochel. And then what could
his Majesty do less but to vindicate his Honor by a quick Arming against
those who had made him a party in their deceit; and to give testimony of his
integrity and zeal, which he has always had for the re-establishing of the
Churches, an establishing which shall be dear and precious to him above any
other thing. And that is the sole end of this Arming, and not any particular
interest; whosoever would yet call this in doubt, let him consider the
circumstance of the times, and disposition of affairs. For who will believe
that the King, my Master, has any Design upon France, or to have proiected
Conquests here in a time so disaduantagious, having for an Enemy one of the
most puissant Princes of the world: and if he had such a Design, that of so
many troops that he has on foot (which he entertaines at the same cost he
should do here) and that they were ready to pass the Sea if the Churches have
need of them, he should but send a handful in regard of what should be
behouefull for the execution of so high an enterprise, considering the great
succors that he sends into Germany. Who will not rather judge as the truth is,
that these Troops here are but auxiliaries, and that the intent of these Arms
is no other but only for the good of the Churches, which for so many important
reasons and considerations he finds himself obliged before God and men to
protect and succor. But put the case it be alleged that the King my Master
has bin moved to take Arms for other considerations, as the detention and
seasure of all the Ships and Goods of his Subjects at Bourdeaux, and other
places of this Kingdom, to the breaking and manifest contrauention of the
Treaties between the Crowns, which in this point are expressly to the
irreperable prejudice, yea to the total ruin of commerce (in the rupture of
which the poor people of this Realm, being not able to vent their
Marchandises, groans, not only under the burden of so many taxes and
impositions, but of the necessities for life it self. That the apprehension of
the King my Master for the powerful increasing of the most Christian King by
Sea, has forced him to take Arms, to hinder the growth of it, and in the end
that he has been constrained to put himself in Arms, because he can no
more hope of any accommodating of business. The answer to all that is, that
whosoever will search the Arrests, Seasings and Prises which have been made of
the one side and the other, he shall find that the King my Master and his
Subjects have hitherto profited most by this breach, and that it turned to
their vtility.

In the second place it is so far off, that he is jealous of the increase of
this pretended power by Sea, and that he would hinder it: that there needs
nothing (when the King my Master shall see time) but letters of Mark to his
Subjects to dissipate all these vain and feeble forces, without employing a
Royal power for it. And finally, that there has bin a necessity for thus
Arming, because there is no hope of an acco^modating, the contrary is most
manifest to whosoever will consider the researches which have bin made at
several times, as well by their own Ministers, as by the Ministers of stranger
Princes to the King my Master, to treat an accommodating at their instigation.
All aboue-said witnesses for the King my Master, that he has not been
constrained to take Arms for any particular interest, but for the defense of
the Churches only, for the surety and liberty whereof he stood answerable. And
in the mean while there be some persons that dare insinuate into minds, that
his Majesty has a particular design in it, and that he uses Religion for a
pretext to make a party; by the means and adjoining of which, with his own
Forces, he pretends to thrust forward his disignes to the end that he has
proiected. No, no, our Religion teaches us otherwise, and the piety of the
King my Master, in which he gives place to no man living, will never permit
him. His Designs is the establishing of the Churches, his interest is their
good, and his aim their contentment. That being done, these Drums beating,
these displayed Ensigns shall be shut up again, and all this noise of War
shall remain in night and silence, because they appear for no other cause but
theirs, nor advanced but for their occasion.

Given aboard our Ship Admiral this Wednesday the 21. of July. 1627. So signed
BVCKINGHAM.

MANIFEST DE MONSEIGNEVR le Duc de Buckingham, General de l'Armee du
Serenissime Roy de la grande Bretagne, contenaut vne Declaration des intentions
de sa Majesty en ce present armement.
QVELLE part les Rois de la grande Bretagne ont tousiours pris e's affairs des
Eglises Reformees de ce Royaume, and auec combien de zele and de soin ils ont
trauaille a leur bien, il est notoire a tous, and les exemples en sont aussi
ordinaires, qu'en ont este les occasions. Le Roy d'a present mon tres honor
Seigneur and Maistre, ne doit rien en cela a ses Predecesseurs, si ses bons and
louables desseins pour leur bien n'cussent este peruertis a leur ruin par ceux
qui auoient le plus d'interest en leur vray accomplissement. Quels advantages a
il refusez, quels partis n'a il pour suiuis, pour par son alliance auec la
France pouuoir operer plus vtilement and plus puissament a la restitutio^ des
Eglises en leur ancienne liberte and splendeur? Et que pouuoit on moins esperer
d'vne alliance si estroite, and de tant de promesses reiterees par la bouche
d'vngrand Prince, que des effect's vrayen e^t Royaux and sortables a la
grandeur? Mais tant s'en faut que se Majesty en tant de promesses and de si
estroittes obligations d'amitie ayt trouue moyen d'obtenir liberte and seurete
pour les Eglises, and redonner la paix a la France par la reconciliation de
ceux qui ne respirent autre chose que toute sort d obeissance a leur Roy, sous
la liberte des Edicts; Qu'au contraire on s'est preualu de l'interest qu'il
auoit en ceux de la Religion pour les tromper, pour par ce moyen non seulement
le destacher d'auec eux, mais aussi le leur render, sinon odieux, a tout le
moms suspect en peruertissant les moyens qu'il auoit ordonnez pour leur bien a
vne fin toute contraire. Tefmoin les vaisseaux Anglois designez non pour
l'extirpation de ceux de la Religion (au contraire promise express donnee de
ne s'en seruir contr'eux) qui cependant furent menez deuant la Rochelle, and
employez au dernier combat naual contr'eux. Que pouuoit on alors esperet d'vn
si puissant Roy que le Roy mon Maistre elude si ouuertement, qu'vn ressentiment
esgal and proportionne aux iniures receus, mais il a patiente an dela de la
patience, and tandis qu'il a c^eu pouuoir profiter aux Eglises par autre moyen,
il n'a point eu recours a celuy des arms: iusques la que d'auoir este rendu
instrument and moyenneur de la derniere Paix, sur des conditions assez
desaduantageurses, and qui n'enssent iamais este acceptees sans l'interuention
de sa Majesty; qui interposa son credit and interest enuers les Eglises pour
les receuoir (mesmes auec menaces, a fin de mettre l'honheur du Roy Tres
Christien a convert, sous asseurance de sa part, non seulement de
l'accomylishement, mais iussi de l'amelioration desdictes conditions, don't il
demeura caution enuers les Eglises. Mais quel a este l'issue de tout c^cy sinon
un a bus de sa bonte, and ce que sa Majesty auoir creu un remede souuerain a
tous leurs maux, n'a-il pas apporte presque le dernier coup a la ruin des
Eglises: Peu s'en est falu par la continuation du Fort deuaunt la Rochelle,
don't la demolition estoit promise, par les violences des Soldats and garnisons
audit Fort and Isles, tant sur les habitans de ladicte ville que sur les
estrangers, qui au lieu d'estre entierement retirees, ont este iournellement
augmentees, and d'autres Forts construits, and par la demeure des Commissaires
en ladicte ville au dela du term accord pour y fair des caballes, and par le
moyen de la division qu'ils faisoyent glisser parmi les habitans, ouurir les
ports aux troops voisines, and par autres contrauentions and infractions de
paix, peu, di^ie, s'en est-il falu que ladicte ville, and en elle toutes les
Eglises n'aye^t tire leur dernier souspir. Et cependant sa Majesty s'est
encores contenue, and n'a oppose a tant d'iniures, tant de violements de foy,
que des plaintes and des entremises. Iusques a ce qu'elle ayt eu aduis certain
(confirm par lettres interceptes) des grands preparatifs que le Roy
Tres-Chrestien faisoit pour venir fondre sur la Rochelle. Et alors qu'est-ce
que sa Majesty a peu fair moins que de vindiquer son honneur par un promt
armement contre ceux qui l'auoyent rendu complice de leur tromperie* and render
tesmoignage de son integrite, and du zele qu'elle a tousiou^s ou au
restablissement des Eglises, restablissement qui lui sera tousiours cher and
precieux par dessus toute autre chose. Et que ce soit la le seul but de ses
arms, and non aucun interest particulier, quiconque voudra encore reuoquer en
doubt, qu'il considere la circonstance du temps and la disposition des
affairs. Car qui croira que le Roy mon Maistre aye aucun dessein sur la
France, ou y ayt proiette des conquestes en un temps si desaduantageux, auquel
il a en test and pour ennemy un des plus puissans Princes du monde, and que
s'il auoit un tell dessein que de tant de troops qu'il a sur pied (qu'il
entrerient aux mesmes frais qu il feroit icy) and qu'il est tout pressed de fair
passer la mer si les Eglises en ont besoin, il ^ust seulement enuoye comme vne
poignee de gens, au prix de ceux qu'il faudroit pour l'execution d'vne si haute
entreprise, and des grands secours qu'il enuoye ^n mesme temps en Allemagne.
Qui ne ingura plu stost comme la verite est que ces troops icy ne sont
qu'auxiliaires, and que le bur de ses arms n'est autre que le seul bien des
Eglises, lesquelles pour tent de raisons and des considerations si in portantes
il se sent oblige deuant Dieu, and deuant les hommes de proteger and secourir.
Que si on veut alleguer que le Roy mon Maistre aye este ^eu a prendre les arms
pour d'autres considerations, comme la detention and saisie de tous les
na^ires, biens and effects de ses suiets a Bordeaux and autres places de ce
Royaume, a l'infraction and contrauention manifest des traittez enter les
Cou'ounes, qui sont exp^es en ce poinct; and au prejudice irreparable voire a
la ruin totale du commerce (en la rupture duquelle pour peuple de ce Royaume
ne pouuant debiter ses derre^s, gemit non seulement sous le fardeau de tant de
taxes and impositions mais aussi des necessitez de la vie mesme. Que
l'apprehension du Roy mon Maistre, (^e l'aggrandissement de la puissance du Roy
Tres Christien par mer l'a pousse a cest armement, pour en empescher
l'accroissement, and en fin qu'il a este contraint de se mettre en arms pour
ne pouuoir plus esperer aucun accommodement des^effaires. La responce a tout
cela est que quiconque vondi a lecercher les arrests saisies and prises qui ont
este faictes de part and d'autre, il trouuera que le Roy mon Maistre and ses
subjects ont iusques icy le plus profit de ceste rupture and qu'elle leur a
este plustost a vtilite. En second lieu, que tant s'en faut qu'il soit ialoux
de l'accroissement de ceste pretendue puissance par mer and y vueille apporter
de l'empeschement, qu'il ne faudra (quand le Roy mon Maistre en verra le temps)
que des lettres de marque a ses subjects pour dissiper tous ces vains and
foibles efforts, sans pour cela y employer vne puissance Royalle. Et finalement
qu'on ayt este necessite a cest armement pour ne pouuoir plus esperer un
accommodement, le contraire eft tout manifest a qui voudra considerer les
recerches qui ont este faictes a diuerses fois, tant per leurs propres
Ministres, que par les Ministres des Princes estrangers verse le Roy mon
Maistre, a leur instigation pour traitter un accommodement, Tout ce que dessus
rend foy pour le Roy mon Maistre qu'il n'a este contraint de prendre les arms
pour aucun interest particulier, mais pour la deffence des Eglises tant
seulement, de la seurete and liberte desquelles il demeuroit responsable. Et
cependant se trounera-il des persons qui osent bien insinuer dans les esprits
que sa Majesty y a un dessein particulier, and qu'il se sert du pretexte de la
Religion pour former un party au moyen and par l'adionction duquel auec ses
propres forces, il pretend pousset ses desseings a la sin qu'il a proiette. Non
non, nostre Religion nous apprend toute autre chose, and la piete du Roy mon
Maistre en la quelle il ne cede a homme viuant, ne lui permettra iamais. Son
dessein est l'establissement des Eglises* son interest c'est leur bien, son but
leur contentement. Cela estant ces tambours battans, ces enseignes desployees
seront referrees and tout ce bruict de guerre demeurera enseuely dedans la
nuict and dans le silence pour n'auoir paru que pour leur subject, and n'auoir
este advance qu'a leur occasion.

Done au board de nostre vaisseau Admiral ce Mercredy vingt, and vtriesme
Iuillet 1627. Ainsi sign BVCKINGHAM.


