A True Relation of the Late Battle fought in New England, between the
English, and the Salvages:

With the present state of things there.

LONDON, Printed by M. P. for Nathanael Butter, and John Bellamie. 1637.

Ad Lectorem Authoris carmen (...) de Victoria hac Nov'-Anglica, 1637.
DVcit in Americam varios gens Angla Colonos:
et been convenient sydera, terra, solum.
Ast ferus hoc prohibet, solis vagabundus in arvis,
insolitoque aliquos, incola, Mart necat.
Quod simul invitas crimen pervenit ad aures
Angligenum, ira o murmr cuncta fremunt.
Tunc laesi justa arma movent, hostemque sequuntur,
struxerat, haud vanis, qui munimenta locis.
Invadunt vallum, palis sudibusque munitum:
(pax erit: hoc uno solvitur ira modo.)
Vndique concidunt omnes, pars una crematur:
post, caesi, aut capti caetera turba luit.
Vtraque laetatur Pequetanis Anglia victis,
et novus aeternum, hic, figimur hospes ait.
Virginia exultat, vicina Novoniae gaudet,
Signaque securae certa quietis habent.
Plaudite qui colitis Mavortia saecra nepotes,
et serat incultos tutus arator agros.
Qua novus orbis erat, spiranti numine, (Lector)
Anglia nascetur, quae novus orbis erit.
P. Vincentius.
A true Relation of the late Battle fought in New England, between the English
and Salvages, with the present state of things there.
NEw England, a name now every day more famous, is so called, because the
English were the first Discoverers, and are now the Planters thereof. It is the
Eastern Coast of the North part of America, upon the Southwest adjoining to
Virginia, and part of that Continent, large and capable of innumerable people.
It is in the same height with the North of Spain, and South part of France,
and the temper not much unlike, as pleasant, as temperate and as fertile as
either, if managed by industrious hands.

This is the Stage. Let us in a word see the Actors. The year 1620, a Company
of English part out of the Low Countries, and some out of London and other
parts, were sent for Virginia. But being cut short by want of wind, and
hardness of the Winter, they landed themselves in this Country, enduring,
with great hope and patience, all the misery that Desert could put upon them,
and employed their wits to make their best use of that then Snow-covered land
for their necessities. After two years experience of the nature of the soil,
commodities, and natives, they returned such intelligence to their Masters,
that others took notice of their endeavors, and the place. Then some Western
Merchants collected a stock, and employed it that way. But they discouraged
through losses, and want of present gain, some Londoners, and others (men of
worth) undertook it, with more resolution, building upon the old foundation.
Hence a second plantation adjoined to the other, but supported with better
pillars, and greater means. All beginnings are ever difficult. The half,
says the Proverb, is more then the whole. Some errors were committed, and
many miseries were endured. No man is wise enough to shun all evils that may
happen; but patience and painfulness overcame all. The success proved
answerable even to ambitious expectations, notwithstanding the impediments
inevitable to such undertakings.

There is scarce any part of the world but habitable, though more commodiously
by humane culture. This part (though in it is Naturals) nourished many natives,
distinguished into diverse petty nations and factions. It were needless
curiosity to dispute their original, or how they came hither. Their outsides
say they are men, their actions say they are reasonable. As the thing is, so it
operateth. Their correspondency of disposition with us, argues all to be of
the same constitution, and the sons of Adam, and that we had the same Maker,
the same matter, the same mould. Only Art and Grace have given us that
perfection, which yet they want, but may perhaps be as capable thereof as we.
They are of person straight and tall, of limbs big and strong, seldom seen
violent, or extreme in any passion. Naked they go except a skin about their
waste, and sometimes a Mantle about their shoulders. Armed they are with Bows
and Arrows, Clubs, Iavelins, etc. But as soil, air, diet; and custom make
ofttimes a memorable difference in men's natures, so is it among these Nations,
whose countries there are like so many Shires here, of which every one has
their Sagamore, or King, who as occasion urges, commands them in War, and
rules them in Peace. Those where the English pitched, have showed themselves
very loving and friendly, and done courtesies beyond expectation for these
new-come Inmates. So that much has been written of their civilitie and
peaceful conversation, until this year.

But Nature, heavens daughter, and the immediate character of that divine
power, as by her light she has taught us wisdom, for our own defense, so by
her fire she has made us fierce, injurious, revengefull, and ingenious in the
device of means for the offense of those we take to be our enemies. This is
seen in creatures void of reason, much more in mankind. We have in us a
mixture of all the Elements, and fire is predominant when the humors are
exagitated. All motion causes heat. All provocation mooveth choler, and
choler inflamed, becomes a frenzy, a fury, especially in barbarous and
cruel natures. These things are conspicuous in the Inhabitants of New England.
In whose Southermost part are the Pequets, or Pequants, a stately warlike
people, which have been terrible to their neighbors, and troublesome to the
English.

In February last they killed some English at Sea-brooke, a Southerly
Plantation beyond Cape Cod, at the mouth of the River of Connectacutt. Since
that the Lieutenant of the Fort there, with ten men armed, went out to fire
the Meddowes, and to fit them for mowing. Arriving there he started three
Indians, which he pursued a little way, thinking to cut them off. But presently
they perceived themselves encompassed with hundreds of them, who let fly their
arrows furiously, and came desperately upon the musles of their Muskets,
though the English discharged upon them, with all the speed they could. Three
English men were were slain, others wounded. The eight that remained, made
their way through the Salvages with their swords, and so got under the command
of the Canon of the Fort, (otherwise they had been all slain, or taken
prisoners) one of the wounded falling down dead at the Forts Gate The Indians
thus fleshed and encouraged, besieged the Fort as near as they durst approach.
The besieged presently dispatched a messenger to the Governor at the Bay, to
acquaint him with these sad tidings, who with all speed lent unto their aid,
Captain Underhill, with twenty soldiers. Not long after these Salvages went
to Water-Towne, now called Wetherfield, and there fell upon some that were
sawing, and slew nine more, whereof one was a woman, the other a child, and
took two young Maids prisoners, killing some of their cattle, and driving some
away. Man's nature insulteth in victory and prosperity, and by good success is
animated even in the worst of wicked actions. These Barbarians triumphed and
proceeded, drawing into their Confederacy other Indians, as the Nyantecets, and
part of the Mohigens; of whom about fifty chose rather to join with the
English, and sat down at New-Towne, at Connectacut (now called Hereford, as
the other Town that went from Dorchester thither is called Windsore.) Fame
increases by flying. The former sad news was augmented by the report of
sixty men slain at Master Pinch^^s Plantation, etc. which proved false. The
N^^^^gansets neighbors to the Pequets, sent word to the English that the
Pequets had solicited them to join their forces with them. Hereupon the
Council ordered that none should go to work, nor travel, no not so much as
to Church, without Arms. A Corpse of Guard of 14. or 15 soldiers was appointed
to watch every night, and Sentinels were set in convenient places about the
Plantations, the. Drum beating when they went to the Watch, and every man
commanded to be in readiness upon an Alarm, upon pain of five pound. A day
of fast and prayers was also kept. Forty more were sent to strengthen the
former twenty that went to the Fort, and 50 under the command of Captain Mason,
which being conjoined, were about100. Two hundred more were to be sent after
them with all expedition.

The 50 Mohigins that joined with the English, scouring about, espied 7
Pequets, killed five of them outright, wounded the sixth mortally, took^ the
seventh prisoner, and brought him to the Fort. He braved the English, as though
they durst not kill a Pequet. Some will have their courage to be thought
invincible, when all is desperate. But it availed this Salvage nothing; they
tied one of his legs to a post, and 20 men with a rope tied to the other,
pulled him in pieces, Captain Underhill shooting a pistol through him, to
dispatch him. The two Maids which were taken prisoners were redeemed by the
Dutch.

Those 50 sent from the three plantations of Connectacut with Captain Mason,
being joined with Captain Underhill and his 20 men, (for the other 40 were not
yet arrived with them) immediately went upon an expedition against the Pequets,
after they had searched for them. The manner was this. The English with some
Mohigens went to the Naragonsets, who were discontented that they came no
sooner, saying they could arm and set forth two or three hundred at six hours
warning, (which they did accordingly, for the assistance of the English) only
they desired the advice of the Sagamore, Mydutonno, what way they should go to
work, and how they should fall on the Pequets; whose judgment, in all things,
agreed with the English, as though they had consulted together. Then went they
to the Nyanticke, and he set forth 200 more, but before they went, he swore
them after his manner upon their knees. As they marched they deliberated which
Fort of the Pequets they should assault, resolving upon the great Fort, and to
be there that night. Being on the way, and having a mile to march through woods
and Swamps, the Nyanticke hearts failed, for fear of the Pequets, and so they
ran away, as also did some of the Narragansets. Of five or 600 Indians, not
above half were left: and they had followed the rest had not Capttaine
Underhill upbraided them with cowardice, and promised them they should not
fight or come within shot of the Fort, but only surround it afar off. At
break of day the 70 English gave the Fort a Volly of shot, whereat the
Salvages within made an hideous and pitiful cry, the shot without all
question flying through the Pallisadoes (Which stood not very close) and
killing or wounding some of them. Pity had hindered further hostile
proceedings, had not the remembrance of the bloodshed, the captive Maid, and
cruel insolency of those Pequets, hardened the hearts of the English, and
stopped their ears unto their cries. Mercy marres all sometimes, severe Justice
must now and then take place.

The long forbearance, and too much lenity of the English toward the Virginian
Salvages, had like to have been the destruction of the whole Plantation. These
Barbarians (ever treacherous) abuse the goodness of those that condescend to
their rudeness and imperfections. The English went, resolutely up to the door
of the Fort. What shall we enter said Captain Vnder-hill? What come we for
else? answered one Hedge, a young Northamptonshire gentleman: who advancing
before the rest, plucked away some bushes and entered. A stout Pequet encounters
him, shootes his arrow (drawn to the head) into his right arm, where it
stuck. He slasht the Salvage betwixt the arm and shoulder, who pressing
toward the door, was killed by the English. Immediately Master Hedge incountred
another, who perceiving him upon him before he could deliver his arrow, gave
back: but he struck up his heels and run him through; after him he killed two
or three more. Then about half the English entered, fell on with courage, and
slew many. But being straightened for room because of the Wigwams (which are the
Salvage huts or cabins) they called for fire to burn them. An English man
stepped into a Wigwam and stooping for a firebrand, an Indian was ready to knock
out his brains. But he whipped out his sword and run him into the belly, that
his bowels followed. Then were the Wigwams set on fire, which so raged, that
what therewith, what with the sword, in little more than an hour, betwixt
three and four hundred of them were killed, and of the English only two, one
of them by our own Muskets, as is thought. For the Narragansets beset the Fort
so close, that not one escaped. The whole work ended, ere the Sun was an hour
high, the Conquerors retraited down toward the Pinnace, but in their march
were infested by the rest of the Pequets: Who scouting up and down, from the
swamps and thickets let fly their arrows amain, which were answered by
English bullets. The Indians that then assisted the English, waiting the fall
of the Pequets,(as the dog watches the shot of the fouler to fetch the prey)
still fetched them their heads, as any were slain. At last the Narragansets
perceiving powder and shot to fail, and fearing to fall into the hands of
their enemies, betook themselves to flight upon the sudden, and were as
suddenly encompassed by the Pequets: Fear defeateth great armies. If an
apprehension of eminent danger once possess them, it is in vain to stay the
run awaies. No oratory can recall them, no command can order them again. The
only sure way, is by all means that may be, promises, threats, persuasions,
etc. to maintain and keep up courage, where yet it is. But these fearful
companions had one Anchor, whose cable was not broken. They sent speedily to
the English, who came to their reskew: and after five Muskets discharged the
Pequets fled. Thus freed from that fear, they vowed henceforth to cleave
closer to the English, and never to forsake them in time of need. The reason
why the Englsh wanted ammunition was, because they had left that which they had
for store with their drum at the place of their consultation: But found it in
their return. They now all went a shipboard and sailed to Seabrooke-Fort,
where the English feasted the Narragansets three days, and then sent them home
in a pinnace.

Let me now describe this military fortress which natural reason and
experience has taught them to erect, without mathematical skill, or use of
iron tool. They choose a piece of ground dry and of best advantage, forty or
fifty foot square. (But this was at least 2 acres of ground.) here they pitch
close together, as they can young trees and half trees, as thick as a man's
thigh, or the calfe of his leg. Ten or twelve foot high they are above the
ground, and within rammed three foot deep, with undermining, the earth being
cast up for their better shelter against the enemies dischargements. Betwixt
these pallisadoes are diverse loope-holes, through which they let fly their
winged messengers. The door for the most part is entered side-waies, which they
stop with boughs or bushes as need requires. The space within is full of
Wigwams, wherein their wives and children live with them. These huts or little
houses are framed like our garden arbours, something more round, very strong
and handsome, covered with close wrought mats, made by their women of flagges,
rushes, and hempen threads, so defensive, that neither rain, though never so
sad and long, nor yet the wind, though never so strong can enter. The top
through a square hole gives passage to the smoke, which in rainy weather, is
covered with a pluver. This Fort was so crowded with these numerous dwellings,
that the English wanted foote-roome to graple with their adversaries, and
therefore set fire on all.

The Mohigens which sided with the English in this action behaved themselves
stoutly. Which the other Pequets understanding, cut off all the Mohigens that
remain with them, (lest they should turn to the English) except seven: who
flying to our Contrymen related this news, and that about an hundred
Pequets were slain or hurt, in the fight with the English at their return
from the Fort. Moreover that they had resolved to have sent an hundred choice
men out of their Fort as a party against the English, the very day after they
were beaten out by them. But being now vanquished Sasacus the Pequetan
Captain, with the remainder of this massacre was fled the Country.

It is not good to give breathing to a beaten enemy, lest he return armed if
not with greater puissance, yet with greater despite and revenge. Too much
security or neglect in this kind has often times ruined the Conquerours. The
200 English therefore, resolved on before, were now sent forth to chase the
Barbarians and utterly root them out. Whereupon Cap. Underhill with his 20 men
returned and gave this account of those exploits of the New-Englanders, which
here we have communicated to the old English world. This last party invaded
the Pequetan Country, killed twenty three, saved the lives of two Sagamores
for their use hereafter, as occasion shall serve, who have promised to do
great matters for the advancing of the English affairs. They pursued the
remnant threescore miles beyond the Country (till within 36. miles of the Dutch
plantations on Hudsons river) where they fought with them, killed forty or
fifty besides those that they cut off in their retrait, and took prisoners
180, that came out of a Swampe and yielded themselves upon promise of good
quarter. Some other small parties of them were since destroyed, and Captain
Patrick with 16. or 18. brought 80 Captives to the Bay of Boston. The news of
the flight of Sassacus their Sagamore, is also confirmed. He went with forty
men to the Mowhacks, which are cruel bloody Caniballs, and the most terrible
to their neighbors of all these nations: but will scarce dare ever to carry
arms against the English, of whom they are sore afraid, not daring to
encounter white men with their hot-mouth'd weapons, which spit nothing else but
bullets and fire.

The terror of victory changes even the affection of the allies of the
vanquished, and the securing of our own estates makes us neglect, yea forsake,
or turn against our confederates, and side with their enemies and ours, when
we despair of better remedy. These cruel, but wily Mowhacks, in
contemplation of the English, and to procure their friendship, entertain the
fugitive Pequets and their Captain, by cutting off all their heads and hands,
which they sent to the English, as a testimony of their love and service.

A day of thanksgiving was solemnly celebrated for this happy success, the
Pequetans now seeming nothing but a name, for not less than 700. are slain or
taken prisoners. Of the English are not slain in all above 16. One occurrent I
may not forget. The endeavors of private men are ever memorable in these
beginnings: the meanest of the vulgar is not incapable of virtue, and
consequently neither of honor. Some actions of Plebeians have elsewhere been
taken for great achievements. A pretty sturdy youth of new Ipswich, going
forth, somewhat rashly, to pursue the Salvages, shot off his Musket after them
till all his powder and shot were spent; which they perceiving, re-assaulted
him, thinking with their hatchets to have knocked him in the head. But he so
bestirred himself with the stock of his piece, and after with the barrel,
when that was broken, that he brought two of their heads to the army. His
own desert and the encouragement of others will not suffer him to be
namelesse. He is called Francis Waine-wright, and came over servant with one
Alexander Knight that kept an Inn in Chelmsford.

I have done with this tragic scene, whose catastrophe ended in a triumph. And
now give me leave to speak something of the present state of things there.
The transcribing of all Colonies is chargeable, fittest for Princes or states
to undertake. Their first beginnings are full of casuality and danger, and
obnoxious to many miseries. They must be well grounded, well followed, and
managed with great stocks of money, by men of resolution, that will not be
daunted by ordinary accidents. The Bermuda's and Virginia are come to
perfection from mean, or rather base beginnings, and almost by as weak
means, beyond all expectation, and reason. But a few private men by uniting
their stocks and desires have now raised New England to that height, that never
any plantation of Spaniards, Dutch, or any other arrived at in so small a time.
Gain is the lodestone of adventures: Fish and Furs, with Beaver wool, were
specious baits. But whiles men are all for their private profit, the public
good is neglected and languisheth. Woeful experience had too evidently
instructed New Englands Colones in the precedents of Guiana, the Charibe
Islands, Virginia, and Novonia, or New Foundland, (now again to be planted by
Sir David Kirk, though part of the old planters there yet remain.) We are
never wiser, than when we are thus taught. The new Englanders therefore
advanced the weal public all they could, and so the private is taken care
for.

Corn and Cattle are wonderfully increased with them, and thereof they have
enough, yea sometime to spare to new comers, besides spare rooms, or good
houses to entertain them in. Where they may make Christmas fires all winter,
if they please for nothing. I speak not of the naturals of the Country, fish,
foul, etc. which are more than plentiful. They that arrived there this year
out of diverse parts of Old England say that they never saw such a field of 400
acres of all sorts of English grain as they saw at Winter-towne there. Yet
that ground is not comparable to other parts of New England, as Salem, Ipswich,
Newberry, etc. In a word, they have built fair Towns of the lands own
materials, and fair Ships too, some where of are here to be seen on the
Thames. They have overcome cold and hunger, are dispearsed securely in their
Plantations sixty miles along the coast, and within the Land also along some
small Creekes and Rivers, and are assured of their peace by killing the
Barbarians, better than our English Virginians were by being killed by them.
For having once terrified them, by severe execution of just revenge, they shall
never hear of more harm from them, except (perhaps) the killing of a man or
two at his work, upon advantage, which their Sentinels, and Corpse du guards
may easily prevent. Nay, they shall have those bruites their servants, their
slaves, either willingly or of necessity, and docible enough, if not
obsequious. The numbers of the English amount to above thirty thousand, which
(though none did augment them out of England) shall every day be, doubtless,
increased, by a faculty that God has given the British Ilanders to beget and
bring forth more children, than any other nation of the world: I could justify
what I say from the mouths of the Hollanders and adjoining Provinces, where
they confess (though good breeders of themselves) that never woman bore two
children, nor yet had so many by one man, till the English and Scotch
frequented their wars and married with them. I could give a good reason
hereof from nature, as a Philosopher (with modesty be it spoken) but there is
no need. The air of new England, and the Diet equal, if not excelling that
of old England: besides their honor of marriage, and careful preventing and
punishing of furtive congression gives them and us no small hope of their
future puissance, and multitude of subjects. Herein, says the Wiseman,
consists the strength of a King, and likewise of a nation, or Kingdom.

But the desire of more gain, the slavery of mankind, was not the only cause
of our English endeavors for a plantation there. The propagation of Religion
was that precious jewel, for which these Merchant venturers compassed both Sea
and Land, and went into a far Country to search and seat themselves. This, I
am sure, they pretended, and I hope intended. Only this blessing from my heart
I sincerely wish them, and shall ever beseech the Almighty to bestow upon
them, devout Piety toward God, faithful loyalty toward their Sovereign,
fervent charity among themselves, and discretion and sobriety in themselves,
according to the saying of that blessed Apostle, (...) Rom 12. 3. Not to be
wise (in spiritual things) above what we ought to be wise; but to be wise
unto wise sobriety.

Doubtless there was no other way better to chastise the insolency of these
insulting homicides, than a sharp war pursued with dexterity and speed.
Virginia our mother plantation, and for her precedent a rule, has taught us
what to do in these difficulties; forewarned, forearmed. They were endangered
by their friendship and peace, secured by their enmity and war with the
natives. From these experiments, shall the now inhabitants of those two Sister
Lands, beat out unto themselves an Armor of proof, and lay a sure foundation
to their future happiness.

FINIS.
Nihil obstare videtur quominus haec
Relatio typis mandetur.
November. ix. M.DC.xxxvii. G. R. WECKHERLIN.


