August 30

A Continued IOVRNALL OF ALL THE PROCEEDINGS of the Duke of BVCKINGHAM his
Grace, in the Isle of Ree, since the last of July.

With the names of those Noblemen as were drowned and taken in going to
relieve the Fort.

As also the portaiture of the Knife with which his Excellence should have
been Murdered: which very Knife was brought over by Captain Buckestone, and
delivered unto the Duchess of Buckinghame her Grace on Monday night last.

Published by Authority.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Eagle
and Child in Britaines-Bursse. 1627.

THis is the true Portraiture of the poisoned Knife both in length and breadth,
having four edges, with which a Iesuited Villain was sent out of the Fort by
Monsieur de Thorax, the Governor of that Jland, with an intent to have killed
his Excellence, but by Gods Providence was delivered. His Grace has used the
French so nobly in all respects, that he rather deserved their love, then any
ways to have his life thus trachearously sought after, under the pretense that
it was a meritorious act. Which Knife was brought over into England, by
Captain Buckstone, and by him delivered unto the Duchess of Buckinghame her
Gacce on Monday night last.



THE IOVRNALL CONTINVED TO THIS DAY.
Received the 27. of August.
Here I have sent you all the remarkable News that I have upon the last of
July. There was taken by a Perdue of ours, in the night (a Frenchman) that was
sent by Monsieur de Thorax, the Governor of the Citadell, with a full intent
to kill my Lord Duke; and for the speedy effecting of the same, he had prepared
a strange and dangerous Poynado, which although it was taken about him, he
confidently denied that he came not with any intent to kill the Duke, until
he came to the Tortures, which being presented before him, he promised to
discover all to my Lord if he would promise him life, the which he did, and
does so perform with him, like a noble and merciful General.

The same man that was apprehended did affirm, that he was enjoined to act
this same treachery, within 15. days, or a month at the farthest: So by that
we conjecture and hope that they are victualled for no longer time.

The like Treachery we hear from England was plotted there by the Agent of
the King of France, but God be thanked he is yet well; and so I hope shall be
to the terror of his Enemies.

Upon the 5. of August being Sunday in the night, we made approach into their
Trenches, and beat them out most shamefully to their great loss: The Reason
why we gave them this Allarume, was to the intent we might get to a
principal Well they have in their custody, that we might poison it, the which
we effected to our very little hurt, and their much prejudice, by reason they
have so little water, the best of them is stinted to a Pint a day, the common
Soldiers have less, and have but a Biskett a day to eat with a pound of
Butter between eight of them.

The greatest part of their Horses they were feign to kill for want of water,
and to cast them into the Sea: So they have not above 40 Horses left in all;
the which were encountered by ours the night following as they were going for
relief to another little Fort they have, in which are some two hundred men, or
there about: There they have good water enough, but very little Victuals; our
Horse men beat them in again with some loss to them, and they took a
Prisoner, whilst we were entering their Trenches, our Sea watch had taken two
Barks, the one laden with Provisions, and the other had 27. Barons and great
Commanders which were coming to the Fort to assist the Governor Monsieur
Thorax; after them were to follow, if they safely arrived, seven thousand men,
and 3000. horses, who were fearful to go before their Commanders, and as I
think now, will scarce ever follow; for that they were all drowned, only
three were saved: the one of them is the Governor of Breast his Son; the
other, Governor of the Kings Fort by Rechell; the third, Lieutenant Colonel
of the three Thousand Horse, a brave Commander.

The principal that were drowned of note that these men will discover to us,
was the base brother of the King of France, a great Prince: the other was
Colonel of the Horses; the rest they will not name unto us, their loss is so
great that they are ashamed to speak of.

The Rochellers are fearful that the King will lay siedge to the Town, since
he cannot send them to us: So as those French that came to assist us, being in
number two hundred and fifty, they are now gone back to Rochell for their own
defense.

The King has made Proclamation in Languedocke, that those Protestants that
will not go to Mass by the sixteenth day of August, they shall prepare for the
Sword; upon which cause the Duke de Rohan, for their defense, and his own has
fifteen thousand men in Arms, and the Protestants flock daily to him, and to
Rochell for their Defense.

The Duke of Sauoy for that the King has not performed with him concerning the
marriage of his Sister, is joined with the Count de So sons, a great man of
France, who for some private discontent was of the late Conspiracy against the
King, who fledd some to one part, and some to another.

One of them is in England which was used to come so much to my Lords.

All of them now that are able to raise any force are coming with these two,
against the King with a very great force and power.

The Prince of Conde has all his Forces ready to defend himself against the
King, but as yet he stirs not, so that if please GOD we had this Fort, we
should have hope of further good success to follow this Enterprise, to the
French Kings great trouble, considering how much he has to do, and with whom.

Captain Pennington has taken two Ships of the French which were bound for
Spain.

Our men has also taken a Galley from under the Fort which was for the
Governors safety, when he could hold out no longer; there was no men in her,
by reason it lay near the Shore, they ran away other Boats and Barques in
abundance.

We have taken those that venture to pass by us, and many we have suncke
with men in them, some we have fired under the Fort, so that now our Sea men
have nothing to do, because the French dare not venture to come thither.

The ninth of August 7. Soldiers ran from them to us, and do protest that
they have killed many of their Horses for food, so that now there is not above
twelve in all, which are stolen out into the little Fort, who were afterward
encountered by Sir William Connigham Captain of the Horse, with as many on
foot, who were going out for forage for their Horses, but as they coming
home, Sir William met with them, and slew and drowned thirteen of them, and
five he took Prisoners, the rest escaped very hardly.

Such is the Cowardice of these that are left, that they have suffered
themselves to be round Entrenched, and not once to make any Sally upon us.

The reason is, because (I think) my Lord will keep no quarter with them,
because of their treacherous plott against his Person, and they being fearful,
will rather starve then fight, now the best of them is gone, the French
Nobility have had such ill success this many years.

They are forced to set up Sheets in many places of the Fort to catch Rain
water to drink, we have had much rain which has been a great help to them.

The ninth of August here was a man hanged against the Fort, who had attempted
with many others (women and children) to carry Victuals to their husbands, and
fathers, and friends into the Port, contrary to a Proclamation there to tending.

For which attempt on the cleuenth day following, all the Wives, Children, and
Families of those men which were in the Fort, were turned out of the Town into
the Fort, to help to eat that little Provision that they have left; but had
you heard the cry that was made amongst them it would have greened the hardest
heart living: for their Husbands were forced to shoot against their Wives, and
Fathers against their Children, and not to suffer them to come in: but the
night being very wett, at last they took them in with an ill will.

The same Proclamation likewise shall be put in execution through the whole
Isle, the sooner it is done, the sooner we shall have done with them.

We are sending twenty S^yle for more Victuals, lest we want, it must keep
the Soldiers all this Winter.

We have expected ever since we came five thousand men out of Ireland, and
three out of England, but we hear no news of them at all.

We have not (God be thanked) any of our men sick, nor ill, for all that they
never stir out of their Trenches, and the weather very wett.

God be thanked, we have good plenty of all Provision, for we have a Market
kept every day, and the Country people bring in store of Butter, Cheese, and
Fish.

We found good store of white Wine, which our Enemies left us, they having no
leisure to carry it with them, so that we have plenty of of good Wine.

We find the Island very rich, notwithstanding this late spoil, there will
be made this year, as it is thought, forty thousand Tons of Wine.

Those that ran out of the Fort look so lean and starued that they are
pitied.

We have none dead of any note since the Battle but Sir George Blundel who
lived fourteen days after, and was buried in Rochell.

Sir Edward Hawley is reasonably well recovered of his wounds.

GEntle Reader, there is a true and perfict Map of the Islands of Ree and
Oleron, with the Scale of Leagues, wherein you may see the true Situation of
those Islands, which Map is Printed for THOMAS WALKLEY.

April 4. The proceeding of the Parliament, being this day related to the
King, by the Counselors of the Commons House of Parliament.
HIS Majesty upon the report made, expressed great contentment that it gave
him; not valewing the Money given, comparable to the hearts showed in the way
of the Gift: For although his great occasions of State did require more Money
then at this time was given; yet now he made account he could not lack since
he had their loves; and that this day, he thought that he had gained more
Reputation in Christendom, then if he had won many Battles; Saying
further, (according to his Speech the first day of the Parliament,) That they
might easily make him in love with Parliaments, (now he professed he was so:)
And that we should find the fruits of it by calling us often together, and to
secure further fears, and create future confidence, he assured us that we
should enjoy as great imunitie and freedom in his time, as ever we possessed or
had under the Reign of any the best Kings of this Realm.


