November 2.

A Continued IOVRNALL OF ALL THE PROCEEDINGS of the Duke of BVCKINGHAM his
Grace in the I Will of Ree, containing these particulars.

The strong Siedge of the French King before the Town of Rochell. The state of
the Town of Rochell, with the demolishing of the new Fort, which the Kings
Brother was building upon the point Blanchine, by the Rochellers. The state of
the English Army under the Conduct of the Duke of Buckingham. The surprising of
nine Boats of the Enemies, which would have relieved the Fort. The French in
the Fort driven unto a Parley. The new Supplies of the Fort. The now state of
the Fort with the surpizing of the outworkes of the same. The supplies the
Rochellers have sent unto the Duke. The Funeral of Sir John Borrowes.
With many other occurrences of note.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed by A. M. for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Eagle and Child in Britains Bursse. 1627.

THE IOVRNALL CONTINVED TO THIS DAY.
Continued to the 2. of November.
IN my last Iournall of advertisement concerning the proceedings of the Duke of
BVCKINGHAMS Excellency, in the I Will Ree, which said Iournall was dated on the
second of October last. I related unto you the estate of our Leaguer as it then
stood, with diverse particulars, concerning the Fort of Saint Martins, and the
besiedging of Rochell by the French Army. Since which time there are two
several Messengers arrived in England, whose relation concerning the French
affairs, both in the Maine, and in the Island, is as follows.

The French King is now personally come before the Town of Rochell, being
willing to honor the Siedge with his presence. Before his coming his brother
the Monsieur had used all possible means to annoy the Town, being furnished
with all Materials and Engines fit for such a purpose.

He lies strongly entrenched, and has a powerful and numerous Army, as being
above thirty Thousand thought by the List.

He plies the Town with his Canon day and night, and has burned some houses,
with Wild fire Balls, Grenades, and other fiery Missiues, which the
Besiedgers shoot into the Town, for the most part, in the night time, out of
their Bombards and mortar Pieces.

The Rochellers notwithstanding this, make a brave and resolute resistance, and
have made diverse courageous Sallies, in which they have taken and slain many
of the brauest French Caualiers. And that they might make the Besiedgers know,
how little they do esteem that great Army, they have by way of open defiance
unto the French, hung up the King of Englands Colors upon the walls.

They have so plied the the new Fort (which the French King is building upon
the point before Rochell) with their Cannon, that they have quite slighted and
ruined the Fortifications of it, and have slain sundry persons of quallity and
command in the French Kings Army.

The English Forces which besiedge the Fort of Saint Martins, in the I Will of
Ree, under the conduct of his Illustrious Excellency, the Duke of Buckingham,
have delivered unto the World brave testimonies of their valor and patience,
being as well couraged in suffering, as active in doing, thinking no labor too
difficult, nor danger to perrillous, where the honor of their Country, and
their proper duty is engaged.

They have brought their approaches close to the Enemies Counterskarfe, though
not without sweat, and blood, there having been made diverse brave Skirmsshes
by them, and diverse brave attempts by us.

And as it is reported by a Duchman, who came lately to the Court, our men have
beaten the Enemies out of all their outworkes, so that both the Counterskarfes
and the Skonse without the Fort being lost, there remains nothing unconquered,
but the Cittadell it self.

These Out-workes, as this Messenger relates, are possessed by Colonel Gray,
a man that knows how to keep his footing, as well as any Soldier in
Christendom.

This report is likely to be true, as being delivered upon peril of his
credit, yet another Gentleman that came thence four days before this
Dutchman, and arrived at the Court, the same night that the other did (having
been hindered in his journey by means of a wrack) cannot, and will not assure
as much.

His Excellency before the arrival of Sir William Beacher with new Supplies of
Men, Munition, and Victuals, suffered much, both in his own particular, and
in the generality, and was feign to give the common Soldiers out of his own
store, to keep them from mutining, and for continuing them in their duties.

The English Soldiers do much duty, as watching by turns every second or
third night in the Trenches, which bringes some of them into fluxes, fevers
and other diseases.

Besides, they were so much distressed for want of Victuals before the coming
of the last supplies, in so much that eight Men were put to four Men's
allowance.

Yet this want was in part relieved by the surprising of nine French Vessels
or Shallops laden with Victuals, which intended (if they could) to relieve the
Fort.

Besides, there arrived happily a Ship of Bristow, which being laden with
Victuals, did for a time relieve our Army.

To second which good fortune, Sir William Beecher arrived happily and safely,
with all requisite and necessary Provisions, which did much refresh our Men,
and relieve our necessities.

Neither were the besiedged without their share of wantes, but were troubled
with them more feelingly and pressingly, so that they sent to his Excellency
to parlie, and were resolved to surrender up the Fort.

But as they were treating upon Conditions, there happened a storm that night,
it being then a Springtide, by the benefit whereof, they did put into the Fort
some small proportion of Victuals.

But yet this was but a drop thrown into the Ocean of their wants, and like a
Squibbe tied unto a Bulls tail, it increased their appetite and our anger.

For although this desperate adventure furnished them with some proportion for
the present: yet there penury is grown as pressing as before, and as the
Dutchman reports, those of the Fort are again much distressed, so that want
makes some sick, and many Fugitives.

Through whose defect there are not above five hundred of the besiedged left in
the Fort, and many of them are so weak, that they cannot stand under Pike or
Musket.

The Duke of Rohan (Monsieur Subeza his Brother) has ready 7000. Foot, and
500. Horse, well provided and brave Soldiers in a readiness, for the aid of the
Protestants.

The Pope does endeavor all he can to make this quarrel belong to the
Emperor, the K. of Spain, and the House of Austria, persuading them it is for
Religion.

The Rochelers have fully declared themselves for the King of England, to which
agreement, there are diverse Articles concluded on by his Excellence.

His Excellence has sent word to his Majesty, that if it will please him to
send him Bread he will deserve it, but if he will add unto it something more
he will drink his Health.

Our men have mounted their Cannon so aduantagiously, that they command the
Enemies Ornance, and have dismounted them our of their Carriages, so that they
have not one Piece left to play upon the Approaches, either from their
Batteries, or Casemates.

The French knowing how much the honor of their Nation, and the safety of the
neighboring Provinces on the firm Land depends upon the keeping of the Fort,
have sought again to relieve it with sixteen Boats, but being discovered by
our men, they were pursued by our Long Boatse, Shallops, and those flatt
bottomd Boats, with which the Rochellers have furnished us, being Vessels very
serviceable both for chase and fight.

We suncke four of these Barques, the rest got into the Maine and by the
benefit of their Sealegges escaped our hands.

The enemies never attempt to relieve the Fort but in a stormy night, and
Springtide, and then our Ships were of little use in respect of the darkness
of the night.

We have no other means of hinderance, or prevention, but by the Boats and
Shallops aforesaid.

There runs away daily many Soldiers out of the Fort unto our Leaguer,
notwithstanding all the care and persuasions of the Governor.

These are not sent into the Maine, but kept in the Island under safe custody,
because they shall not carry any message, nor deliver any particulars
conceruing our Affairs.

These Fugitives inform us, by a general consent of report, that the
Besiedged are compelled to sustain nature with things unnatural, and unusual
to the Palate: their greatest daineties being but bread and water, and they
are allowed that but in a small proportion. So that they hold it for certain,
that upon the arrival of our next Supplies, the French will forthwith
surrender the Fort.

I pray God they may come thither safely and opportunely, and then in humane
reason, we have no reason to doubt of good success; for if the Besiedgers do
not give up the Fort by that time upon composition, his Excellency, by Gods
assistance, will adventure to make a forcible entry, He knowing right well in
the clearenesse of his judgment, that the Defendants are so few and weak,
that they cannot endure a general Assault.

In the mean time, our men entrench themselves to prevent the excursions and
sallies of the Enemies.

The French do earnestly mediate for quarter at Sea, but his Excellence well
knowing that no relief can come to the Fort but by water, will not grant them
any quarter at all.

But to deter the Enemies from bringing relief, and to hinder their
desperate attempts, all those which fall into our Sea-mens hands, are either
put to the Sword, hanged up to the maine Yeard, or thrown ouerboard.

The Rochellers having no other Victuals but what is transported unto them
from other places, and being doubtful to be necessitated themselves, have
affoorded us as yet no great relief, only they have exchanged some meal for
bread corn, and have taken One Thousand of our sickemen into the Town, and
instead of them have sent over to us five Hundred of their own Soldiers to
fill up our numbers, until the coming of the next Supply.

His Excelencie in the continuation of this Siedge has taken more then
ordinary pains and care, sparing his person from no labor nor peril, in
furthering the present service: And although he has hitherto been doubtfully
supplied out of England, by reason of the contrary winds, and the delays which
happen commonly in such great preparations, yet he has subdued these
difficulties with incredible patience, and has won an honorable reputation
amongst all the Soldiers of our Nation.

For knowing that the virtue of the English is cherished by nothing more then
by the love and presence of their Commanders, he is wanting neither in the one
or the other, but with his presence comforts them in their night duties, and by
visiting and relieuing the sick and wounded, obliedgeth the hearts of his
Soldiers unto him.

I speak not this out of any fawning or partiality, (truth being nearer to me
then the Duke of Buckingham,) but only to make those know (who out of private
respects have been maleuolent against him) how much they have wronged his merit
and reputation.

And although diverse men who are either affected to the French, or disaffected
to his Excellency, have held the taking of the Fort of Saint Martines a thing
more then difficult, as being altogether impossible; and have made the Siedge
the subject of their jests and table talk: Yet if in serene and more
impartial judgments, we shall consider the causes for which this enterprise
was undertaken, and the means which do facilitate and assure the taking of
the Fort, we cannot choose but allow the design (although diverse of these
prepossessed Spirits have censured the contrary) for honorabl^, profitable and
feasible, being grounded upon ^he necessities of Policy and Religion.

I know that it has been reported, and has passed the vulgar swallow (I mean
those ^ho are of vulgar apprehensions,) that his Excelencie before Beechers
arrival, dispaired of success, and had raised his Siedge, if he had not
received speedy supplies of victuals.

This report may be true, without any blemish to his Excellency, since no
warlike enterprise can have his due proceeding, without Men, Money, Munition
and Victuals, which are the means of an active motion.

But since that time, the Siedge has been continued with a powerful hand, new
supplies are arrived out of England; and the succors under the conduct of the
Earls of Holland and Mo^^on, are upon their passage toward the Island: Whose
ariuall (I hope) will crown his Excellencies head with the wreath of Success,
and the laurel of Victory.

A Relation of the Funeral solemnity of that Honorable Knight, Sir John
Burrowes, who was interred at Westmister, on Tewesday the 23. of October. 1627.
ON tewesday, being the 23. of October, the Body of that Honorable Knight Sir
John Burrowes (who being Colonel General of the English Infanterie in the
Isle of Ree, was slain with a Musket shot from the Fort) was brought from
Durham House to Westminster Abbey, where near unto the Tomb of Sir Francis
Veare (whose Pupil he had been in the art of War) it was interred, with
great funeral pomp, and with such Rites as were due to his deserts.

To solemnize his Obsequies, five Companies of of the City of London were
drawn into Arms, being about twelve hundred in number, who martched before
the Corpse with their Colors, Pikes and Muskets trailed.

The Pike which he recovered with his Sword and Target from the Frenchman upon
our first landing (who charged him with it at the push, and razed the skin
with the point of it thorough his breeches) was carried advanced before, with
his own Ensign trayled, and his Horse for Service clad in mourning black.

Next to the Horse, there went six and fifty old Soldiers, with black
Cassockes, Swords and Staves, being as many in number as he was years old.

His Scutcheon, Sword, Gauntlets and Spurs, were carried by the Heralds. His
Brother was Chiefe-mourner, being accompanied with twoother principal Mourners.

Next unto these, went the Earls of Dorset, Warwick, Carlisle, Barkeshire, and
Molgraue; The Vicounts Grandison Conway, and Wimbleton, with diverse other
Knights and Gentlemen of quality.

In the midst of the Abbey Church, a little above the Quite, there was a
stately Hearse erected, which is yet standing, covered over with black Velvet,
where his Corpse was placed during the time of the Sermon, which was preached
by Mr. Adams, a learned and renerent Divine.

Upon his Hearse his Scutchions were fixed, with this Motto, Nec insisto
paruis. which in English is thus I do not dwell upon low things.

The Sermon being ended, and Offerings being made, his Body was interred, and
as it was put into the earth, the Muskatiers of those fine Companies honored
his Interment with three vollies of shot, their Coullers displaied, and their
Drumbes beating, his own Ensign was broken and buried with him.

The end of the Journall.

