A Continued September 1^ IOVRNALL OF ALL THE PROCEEDING^ of the Duke of
BVCKINGHAM his Grace, in the Isle of Ree, since the last of August.

TEMPORE PATET OCCVLTA VERITAS

LONDON Printed by A. M. for Thomas Walkley, and are to (...) sold at his Shop
at the Eagle and Child in Britaines-Bursse. 1627.

THE IOVRNALL CONTINVED TO THIS DAY. Received the 18. of September.
FOrasmuch as report, that is seldom constant, is very different concerning a
Subject which in time and place is so nere, I mean the Siedge of Saint Martins
Cittadell, under the conduct of his Illustrious Excellency, the Duke of
BVCKINGHAN. I thought it would be an acceptable relation, to discover, by way
of a demonstratiue discourse, the state both of the Leaguer and Fort, according
to that Intelligence which I have received from a Gentleman of worth and
quality.

You must therefore understand, that the English Army now lying before the
Cittadell, having entrenched themselves strongly, labor continually to draw
their approaches and batteries nearer, and although the earth is ill to work
in (as being altogether Rocky or Sandy) yet our men being encouraged with the
presence of their General, have at length (though not without sweet and
danger) raised a new Reintrenchment and Battery.

Besides, our Soldiers who supply the place of Pioners, have suncke a Mine of
the Enemies, nere the Foundation of the utmost Counterscarffe, by the blowing
up whereof, they hope to open a breach but they do not spring this Mine as
yet, expecting those Reinforcements, which are to come from England, upon whose
arrival, we doubt not, but that the Enemy (who is already much distressed for
want of necessary accomodations) will surrender up the Fort without any further
inforcement.

Our approaches are brought so near unto the Enemies, that we are able to
throw a Coite from our works to theirs, and the like may they do, from theirs
to ours. But if all other courses of Conquests should fail, we are assured by
all probable aduertisements, and conjectures, that the besiedged cannot hold
out long, they being so much necessitated for want of victuals, as having
received no relief from the Continent, never since the beginning of the Siedge.

Our men have them so continual in the eye, that they dare not look over
their works for fear of our Canon, and Musket shot.

Our Soldiers deliver brave testimonies of resolution and valor, so that by
the very confession of the Enemy, they are reputed as daring men as any are in
the World.

To which actions of Honor, they are not so much encouraged by the precept of
Discipline, as by the Example of their General, who cheerisheth the valient,
incourageth the wavering, and punishes (though mildely) the slothful and
inactive Soldier; and besides his personal night-watches, and walking of the
first round, he does personally present himself in the Face of all necessary
dangers.

Which motives of president do so strongly confirm the virtue of our English,
that like men lavish of their lives, they adventure themselves to all perrills,
and hazards.

So that if they were not restrained by the curb of Military obedience, they
could hardly be kept back from assaulting the Fort without command.

Yet there are some maleuolent spirits who are lukewarm in affection, either
to the Duke, or to the cause, have maintained with an opinionatiue obstinacy,
that the taking of the Fort is not seazable, yet our men who are there engaged,
(amongst whom there are diverse solid judgments) do as confidently believe, as
if they had displayed their Ensigns upon the walls thereof already, that they
shall be masters of it upon the first arrival of the next supplies from
England.

The Fort (notwithstanding rumor has blazed the contrary) is very ill
provided of Victuals and other necessaries, for besides the want of water and
fuel, (the want whereof is the interdiction of Mankind) they are very much
distressed for want of Bread, Flesh and other necessaries; since the cutting
off their Conducts, and poisoning of their Well, they have no other fresh
water, but what they make shift to receive upon Sheets hung up in the air for
that purpose of receiving that uncertain influence of the Heavens, which was a
great refreshment unto the Enemy.

Their Bread is allotted and allowed unto the Soldiers that are in the
Cittadell by small proportions, for each one of them has less then half a
pound a day for his nourishment.

Also the like is done to their Water, for which they may thank God that this
Autumnall wett weather fell out so luckily.

All their Horses (which being of the choicest breed of France, were ordained
for the Saddle, and not for the Palate) are either killed for want of water, or
eaten for the satisfying of the hungry Soldiers: so that they have not so much
as one Horse left alive, nor any fresh Victuals to relieve themselves withal.

They are only cherished with windy hopes of succor from the continent,
which those of Angolisme and Poictowe promise, but this is like to be mere
wind without success, without effect: for his Excellency knowing that
prevention is the spirit of policy and the life of offense and defense, has
used such prouisionall courses of interception, that in humane reason it is not
to be succou^ed.

The French King has been most desperately sick at Villeroy and as we here he
is not yet perfectly recovered.

The Count of Soissons (who fled the last year into Sauoy, being discontented
with the government of France) is making new leuies against the King, and as
it is reported, diverse other Princes stand upon their guards and proper
defense.

The Rochellers receive our sick men willingly, and entertain our Soldiers
who come to the Town, with all respects of love and courtesy.

Notwithstanding the care of his Excellency: some of our men (but those not
many) have fallen into fluxes and other diseases, by eating of Grapes and
drinking of Wine, which agrees not with English bodies as well as beer, that
drink being most agreeing with nature, which is first used from our Infancy,
Those that are sick and wounded are carefully looked unto by Physicians
Chirurgions, and if they want fresh meat his Excellencies care is such, that
he causes present provision to be made for them, so that very few of them
dye, by means of these necessary and careful helps.

His Excellence has given a strict and special charge to all the Physicians
and Chyrurgians to see their store well provided of all necessary medicinalls
for a winter Leaguer.

Likewise his Excellence has caused a Proclamation to be published of late,
that no man should stir out of his quarters upon pain of a severe penalty,
for fear that the Enemy should make any desperate attempt or sally which as
yet they never attempted.

The French King has sent diverse companies of Foot, and troops of Horse
into the Island of Oleron, but by GODS assistance and the complying of our
industry, we shall keep them from succouring the beseeged.

The end of the Journall.

