PETRVS VIRETVS.
oval portrait of Pierre (or Peter) Viret in a decorated rectangular frame

THE Christian disputations, BY MASTER PETER VIRET.

Divided into three parts, Dialogue wise: Set out with such grace, that it
cannot be, but that a man shall take great pleasure in the reading thereoff.

Translated out of French into English, by John Brook of Ash.

Math. vij. d. 21. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the kingdom of Heaven: but he that does my fathers will which is in
heaven.

MIEVLX VAVLT MOVRIR E^ VERTV QVE VIVRE EN HONCTE printer's device of Thomas
East, of a black horse standing on a wreath (McKerrow 206)

Imprinted at London by Thomas East. 1579.

To the most Reverent Father in God EDMUND by the permission of God Archbishop
of Caunterbury, Primate and Metrapolitan of England: John Brook wishes in
this life prosperity, and eternal felicity in Christ our Savior.
REading for mine own private exercise and studies, the worthy work of
Master Peter Viret, entitled, The Christian disputations (right Reverent
Father) the sweet entry into the same, with such pleasant allurementes of
comfortable matter, so drew and tolled me forwade, as uneaths I could cease,
until I had clean discoursed and gone through the whole work. Which having
once accomplished, and due consideration therevppon had, according to my
slender capacity, I thought I could not bestow my time in any thing more
worthy grateful acceptaunce, then in publyshing and setting forth the same,
that others might be made pertakers of my comfortable delights, and
delightful comforts taken in reading hereoff. Not meaning like a chorle, alone
to devour such a rich banquet, furnished with so great a number of Iunkets and
delicate dishes, but to inuit thereunto (according to the intent of mine
Author, a company worthy such a feast, which being first prepared and dressed
very cunningly after the French fashion, I have, for the great good will and
zeal ^owe unto my native Country, and for their better taste, translated and
set forth the same, after the English manner: wherein my small unlearned skill
desirous of sure supportacion and good defense, craves your grace as chief to
give me credit and countenance, against the biting sting of Zoilous persons
and heretical Papists, whose stomachs may in no wise digest or abide the good
and wholesome diet in this feast prepared, whose unsavory tastes, as I seek
not to content, so I fear not to offend. Trusting your grace will accept this
my bold enterprise as proceeding of hearty good will toward you, and earnest
love borne unto my country, preferring my zealous intent, and the Godliness
of the matter unto the unworthiness and slender skill showed in the
translation. As I shall daily pray unto Almighty God, to govern and direct
your grace, in all your affairs, by his holy spirit, remaining ever.

Your graces bounden during life: John Brook.

John Caluyn unto the Readers.
THE love of God our Father, and the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be given
to you, and multiplied from day to day, through the communion of the holy
Ghost. There is an ancient Poet which says, that he which delyteth and
profits altogether in his writings, has gained the price and favor toward
all men. The same is spoken because of the diversity of natures. It is very
true, that the only doctrine, wherein we know it to be good and profitable,
ought to suffice us, for to incitate and provoke us to read willingly a book,
to give and bestow thereon all our study, to love and set by it, and finally
to take pleasure in it. But there are a great many, and well near the most
part, which will be a great deal better pleased, that one should teach the^
after a gentle and pleasant fashion, then otherwise: In such sort, that as in
recreating themselves, they may profit and receive instruction, liuen then as
those which occupy themselves to make books of pastime, vain and frivolous,
and which cause the world to read them, are to be vituperated and despised
although they have no corruption in them: So on the other side, those which
have the grace, so to teach that they do both delight and profit the Readers
through their pleasant style, are double to be praised. And in very deed that
is a virtue and a gift which is not in all men. Yea, often times the wisest
cannot atteine unto it. And which is more do make themselves to be laughed at
in desning that which is not given unto them. For a man which desires to use
merry conceits and jests, ought to beware of two vices. The one is, that he do
nothing of compulsion, or laugh over much, as there are a great many which have
cold laughters, the which do seem as though they were pulled out of their
throat by force. The other is, not to use baudy and silthy talk, the which is
called in Latin scurrilitas, in our language pleasant iestes.

But to keep the mean, that is to know how to speak effectually and with a
good grace, so for to recreate that there be nothing spoken foolishly, at all
adventures, or uncomely, which is no common virtue. I do speak this by reason
of these present Dialogues, out of which a man may so gather good instruction,
and yet notwithstanding he shall have occasion to laugh. For the matter of it
self is very pleasant: And is set out with such grace, that it cannot be but
that a man shall take great pleasure in the reading thereoff. Our brother and
companion in the work of the Lord Jesus, Peter Viret, who is the Author, has
by nature the virtue which I said to be requisite in that man which will meddle
himself therein. It is virtue true that as in all other works he gives
himself, unto a better study and of greater weight: So in these Dialogues his
principal intent is not to delight the ears. And in very deed, that should
be but a small labor, and a pain evil be stowed of a man of such wit and
knowledge. Furthermore, besides the gifts that he has of God, he is called
unto a more higher calling. But forasmuch as the matter that he has taken in
hand to entreat off, shows that he teaches by order of pastime and merry
iestes, he pretends notwithstanding the right doctrine, as the true mark to
shoot at, mingling with the same, some merry conceits as a companion
therewith all. Yea in such sort that this book is a suffient witness, that be
has a singular dextentie to do it, yea even as much as he will himself: that
is to say, as much as is needful or convenient. I do know that it is a
dangerous thing and that no man ought at the first sight to allow a book.

But I fear not to have any rebuke of good men, and of such as are of sound
Judgment, to have commended the reading of that book, as a book in which the
time shall be well bestowed. I need not to bring witness, nor to speak among
those which know the man, This only knowledge will suffice for to as^ure them
that they cannot say^e to stay themselves upon it. But because that it may be
that some for want of advertisement, will make none account, to prove what it
is: I have partly testified what it is, for to give encouragement unto those
which will believe me, and to stir them forward to see them, until such time
as they may Judge of themselves. Not that I do presume so much as to attribute
unto my self the Judgment above the works of others, for to pronounce them
as for authority: or to bring all the Readers unto mine opinion or advise. Yet
nevertheless because that I think and am altogether persuaded, that many will
not refuse to stay and content themselves to that, that I affirm unto them: I
am constrained for the profit of them to speak my mind. Although it is not
now needeful to set forth at large all the profit that may be gathered, and
the pleasure that may be taken therein. This only I can certify, that all
those which shall have the patience to continewe the reading over it, will not
repent themselves to be so well occupied.

There is one only point, which I know, which might diminish the grace of the
book toward some men: That is, that it should seem good that the matters of
the Christia^tie ought to be entreated off with a gravity correspondent to
their dignity and worthiness.

And therefore it is not meet to mingle them with matters of mirth,
considering that there is danger, that in so doing we should turn them into
laughing. Chiefly at this present time, in which impyetie ouerfloweth more
then ever sithence the beginning of the Christian Church: Or at the least wise,
it is more openly uncovered. To the end that none for being prevented with
that reason, be not out of taste with the reading. It is to be noted, that one
may dispute of the matters of the Christianity two ways: First in rebuking
the foolish supersticions, which are risen among the Christians under color of
Religion, the which notwithstanding are not but corruptions of the same, for to
destroy and overthrow it. Secondly, in declaring the simple and pure verity
according as it is revealed unto us of GOD by his holy word. As touching the
second kind, it is most certain that as soon as we have opened our mouths
for to speak of GOD, no merry conceit or jest ought to enter in our matter:
But we ought in all that we say and speak, declare what reverence we do
bear unto his Majesty, not pronouncing one word but in fear and humilytie.
But in disiphering and disclosing the superstitions and follyes with which the
poor world has been blinded in before time, he could not chose in speaking
of matters so ridiculous but to laugh with open mouth. It is most true that
there is also good occasion to weep and lament: Forasmuch as it is not a sport
or jest that the glory of GOD, and his eternal verity, having been so
darkened, the which ought to be had in us in a singular recommendation, has
been so abolished through infinite lies: that so many poor souls have been
led of Satan into ruin and dampnation.

But the one must not let the other, that (...) and taking such sorrow as we
ought to have, to bring us again in remembrance, how God has been so
blasphemed: having also pity and compassion of the calamity wherein the
world has been so long time, and is yet at this present. Yet nevertheless in
rehersing of such foolish dreams and fond bables, we use such mocketies as
they do merit and deserve. When we do so, it shall be after the example of the
Prophets: who interpreting of the pure verity of God, do speak with a
majesty, which ought to make all the world to tremble: But in blaming the
dreams of the Idolaters do make it no doubt to use scoffings and laughings, for
to declare how ridiculous they are. Although the Prophets are one and we an
other. For as much as we speak not in the name of God as they, to the end that
all that which we pronounce should be received as a revelation come from
Heaven: It is lawefull for us to use a baser style. But I have alleged this
comparison only for to declare, that it is not to give any occasion unto the
Luci anists and Epicures and other contemners of God, to speak evil of the
Christian religion, or to have it in disdain, when they shall mock of the
corruptions of the same.

Thomas Singleton to the Reader.
OUR Author (gentle Reader) here,
of frank and free good heart:
A Chest of treasures has unlocked,
whereoff thou may take part.
With travail great he has it brought,
from far and foreign soil:
Which thou, and many may enjoy,
at home with easy toil.
Stand back, hard hearted Heriticke,
here is for thee no ware:
Eake stubborn Papist, go thou by,
thou have herein no share.
Whom blind erroneous fancies lead,
the truth that thou despise:
Whom wilful and gross ignorance,
has closed up thine eyes.
These rich and precious Ornaments,
and Jewels high of price:
For Godly, Zealous, Virtuous, been,
that hate both sin and vice.
A mild and gentle friendly Brook,
has brought the same to shore,
Then (Reader) take it thankefully,
he craves of thee no more.
FINIS.
The Preface.
IT is said in a common proverb: he which has suffered nothing, knows not
what evil A proverb.
is. And therefore it is very hard, that he which never has suffered any
evil, can have such pity and compassion of the captives and miserable, as he
which has tried and proved great miseries and need, and which has been
exercised in them, and has abidden many adversities and troubles. For he that
knows not what poverty is, does not much think upon the necessities of
the poor, nor he cannot so well know in what languer and misery they do live.
When the rich man has his feet well shodde, and that he is well cladded and
pompeously apparelled, he sits at the table, he has of delicate meat great
abundance, amongst which he banketeth and makes great cheer, he thincketh
not much upon Lazarus, who lies at his gate full of botches and sores, naked,
Luc. 16. l. 20.
and having no nourishment. He does not greatly pass whether he be shodde or
vnshodde, naked or cladde, whether he be cold or warm, whether he have meat
and drink or not. Since that he is at his ease, all others are so, and he
cares not for them. Wherefore I doubt not but that the Lord will s^nde many
adversities and afflictions unto his servant in this world, and that he will
try them The cause of y^ temptation to the elect.
so many ways, that every day we shall feel and prove them, to that end,
that they having proved in themselves the poorness and miseryes that others
may suffer, they do learn the better how to bear it, and to have more
greater pity and compassion, and to be the readyer to aid and succor them.
And without seeking to far the examples of the Patriarchs and Prophets: As
Abraham Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, David, and other like, which have been
tried with so many tribulations. Let us only consider how the Lord Jesus
Christ would make his two Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Paul to humble
themselves before that he did commit his Church unto them, and after that,
they had the charge given them. He Heb. 4. d. 15.
which was in all points tempted, like as we are: but yet without sin, to
the end that we should not doubt, but that he knows our infirmities, and
that he can have compassion of them, has suffered Peter to fall, that The
fall of Peter. Mat. 26. g. 25. Luc 22. l. 60
by his fall, he may learn to know himself, and the nature of all other
poor sinners environed with man's infirmity, for to comfort and confirm
them, after that he shall arise again. Also he suffered Saul to err a long
The error of Saul. Act. 7. 8. 9
time, before he called him to the light of the Gospel, and to bring him in
yt right way, to the end that after yt he should depart from the dark
clouds of ignorance, should have more greater pity and compassion of the
poor blind and ignorant, and that he should not despair incontinent of
the health and salvation of the rebels and persecutors. Also we cannot deny,
that there is any man living upon the earth, but that he has been plunged
over The darkness of the world. Exo. 10. l. 22.
the head in the darkness of error and ignorance, the which were more
thicker upon all the land, then ever they were in Egypt. And would to GOD,
that those which are yet covered in Egypt, may at the least wise feel and
perceive as the Egyptians did theirs, and that they would desire with such
affection to be delivered. But this is the mischief that the Egyptians which
are at this present time cannot acknowledge what they are, The Egyptians at
this present time.
but would be taken and accounted for the true Israelites. And notwithstanding
that they have the darkness palpable among them, yet they glory and brag
themselves of the light, and do promise it unto others, by y^ which they shall
have need to he illuminated themselves. Wherefore so much the more ought we to
have yt greater compassion on them, as they have the less knowledge of the
evil and danger wherein they are. Those then unto whom the Lord has opened
their eyes, and that he has brought them from the ^enebrous Egypt, all true
Israelites which are in the land of Gosan, beeinge separated from those
horrible darkness, ought to travail with Moses that good servant of God,
not only to draw the Israelites out of the land of Egypt, but also if it be
possible to convert the Egyptians into Israelits, praying the LORD to drive
away all darkness, by the light of his word, and the cleerenesse of his
coming. For if we will not lie against our own conscience, who can deny but
that all the world is a very Egypt, and all the Christianity a very Babylon,
full of all confusion? For he that will well ponder and Egypt and Babylon.
mark the language that the Christians do speak, and the diversities of
opinions which are among them, but that he shall be constrained to say, that
Babylon is not Babylon, in comparison of this. The one says white, the other
bcack. That which the one calls day, one other calls it night. That which
is the light unto the one, is darkness to the other. That which the one
finds sweet, the other iudgeeth it sour. That which is Jesus Christ, truth,
and Paradise to the one, is Antechrist, lyinge and hell to the other. What is
then to be done in this great variety and contrariety of opinions? What ought
the poor ignorant people thinck of it? In what trouble and perplexity ought
their poor consciences to be in, when they see the one to deny that which an
other affirms? What opinion ought they rather follow? and of what side can
their poor consciences find most rest? It is most certain, that there is but
one verity, and that in such variety and contrariety of opinions and One
only verity.
sentences, there cannot be but one true, and it may well he that they are all
false, if man follow any other guide, then Gods only verity. What then is he
that is of so sure a judgment, which can surely judge what is the best, the
most certayntest and infallible verity? There is none which can better judge
of the Art, then the woorkeman: of a matter, then he which has some knowledge
and experience. If we will then find any rest in our consciences, and obtain
and get a good judgment, for to discern in that diversity of doctrine, what
is the best and most certeintest, and what is the truth that declares all the
other The means for to find out the truth.
to be lyinges, we must give our selves to the means by which we may atteine
thereunto. But it is hard to find, for it must be searched for out of all
creatures, and yet nevertheless by the creatures. And therefore forasmuch as
the thing seems to be hard, and that I see many poor consciences very much
troubled and almost in despair, not knowing on which side to turn
themselves, so much is the thing more worthy of pity and compassion. And for
because that I my self have been long enough sick in that same bed, and
have experimented and proved how dangerous that euilt is, and what dolor and
torment it brings unto the man that fears God, and which is afraid to
offend him, for that cause am I the more moved to aid and succor those which
are yet holden fast in the same, and which cannot in the end find remedy. Not
that I dare of (...) self to promise any great thing, since that I am nothinge^
but forasmuch as the common proverb gives unto Proverb. The fool
counsaileth the wise
me boldness, which says: The fool co^^sayleth the wise. To promise remedy
unto a disease so hard and incurable, I dare not of my self, and I will not
do as the Sape etiam est holitor valde opportuna locutus.
venturous and hardy Emperickes do, which promise help unto all diseases,
how incurable so ever they he: and those which are most ignorant, do most
assure it. But I dare promise to declare, that the disease is not so hard to
be cured as it is dangerous, if one provide not remedy in time, and without
delaying the means whilst it is possible: And that the difficultnesse that is
in it do not proceed but of us, which have the remedy in our hands, if we
know how to use it. And although that I nor no man that is in the world,
cannot, of himself remedy it, yet nevertheless I trust through the help and
aid of him which has it in his power, and which does comfort those whom it
pleases him, that I will declare and show unto those which have need, some
redress to atteyne unto it. For although that I know not very much, and have
not seen much, yet nevertheless I can not deny but that the Lord, who through
his grace and mercy has drawn me from those troubles and anguishes, and from
darkness, unto the knowledge of the truth, has also made me prone many
things, of which I may help my poor brethren, whom I can not despise
without dooinge unto them iniurye and wrong, and to show that I have
forgotten the estate in which I have been, and that I am unthankful toward
Gods liberality and goodness, who immediatlye from my youth, being yet at
the schools, has drawn me from that labarinth of error, before that I was
to much plunged in that Babilonical Antechrist, and received the mark of the
beast. Nevertheless notwithstanding that it has pleased God, that that
carecter and mark was not printed in my forehead (to the which yet
nevertheless A. prepared my self, thincking yt it was the right way of
salvation, if the Lord had not had pity and compassion, on me, who called
me unto a better vocation) yet I cannot therefore deny, but that I have been
sufficiently plunged and very deep in that whore of Babylon, as well as others.
Although I have not been none of the governors and chiefest Eurgesses and
Citizens of the same, yet I have been of the meaner sort and prepared for to
bring forth the fruits of confusion, as the others did, and so much the more
that by Nature I was more given unto religion, the which yet nevertheless I
knew not, following in steed thereoff all superstition. Wherefore, since
that the Lord has taken me out, I can not yet forget those that are detayned
and kept therein. And in remembering and considering the train of the new
Babylon, it makes me so remember a law and custom that The law of the
Babilonians for the diseased, Herodo, It. 1.
the ancient Babilonians had, the which is not altogether to be despised nor
unworthy to be remembered. Before that Physic was yet brought into any perfect
Aite, and that there was not cunninge Physicians for to practice it, they did
set down a law, by which they ordained, that those which did begin to be
sick and diseased, ought to go unto those, which sometime have been sick with
the same disease, for to have their advice and counsel, and for to learn by
them the remedy which they used, if they had proved any good, and which were
well to be found. And to the end that that law should be the better kept, they
used to bring those that were sick and diseased unto the streets and open
places: and those which sometime had been sick, were bound by the law to
visit them, and to teach unto every one of them the remedy by the which they
were healed. If then the Babilonians were so careful of the sick and
diseased: let us think what reproach we shall have of God, if after that he
has made us feel his grace, and has given unto us the remedy, not only
against all the diseases both of body and soul, but also against the corporal
and spiritual death, we have no pity and compassion on our brethren which
are yet in the bed of death, and if we do not show unto them the remedy
that we have learned of GOD, and that we do not bring them unto the high and
sovereign Physician JESUS CHRIST? His law and commandment ought more to urge
us then that of the Babilonians. If he willed and commanded that he that shall
find the Ore or the Ass of his neighbor going astray, yea of his enemy, to
bring them to him again: or Bxo. 23. (...)
if he be fallen into a dyke, or sink under his burden to help him out and
up again, do we think that he has not yet more care of man then of a beast?
of the soul more then of the body. Does he not give us sufficiently to
understand by that commandment, in what recommendacion we ought to have our
neighbors, and what care we ought to take of their souls and health, since
that he binds us by his commandment to take the care and charge of his
Ass? I then considering the great darkness, abuses, and errors, which have
occupied and filled all the Christianity, seeing so many scrupulous, doubtful
and troubled consciences, and so many diseases, of which every street, place
and all the world is full, would not despise them, without teaching them some
remedy, for to comfort them, at the least a little, if I cannot do much,
chiefly for that I have been required of many good men which do fear God.

It is very true, that one shall find men enough, which will promise remedies
for such diseases, but he shall not find many which have well proved and tried
that which they teach unto others. For many men sometime will meddle or take
upon them to heal others, which have more need of a medicine, then those
unto whom they would give it, and there are more Phisicions then diseases. And
although I will not glory nor boaste my self to be very able and cunning in
that matter, yet nevertheless I will not hyde that little talent which the
LORD has given unto me. I am not ignorant, but that the Lord has raised up
in these our days, learned men which have already very well declared and
opened those obscure and dark places, of which so many poor consciences are
troubled, after whom I am not worthy to carry their books, but do esteem it
a great benefit of GOD to have been their disciple and scholar, and by their
means to have understood GODS truth, although that many books have been
already made and set forth in our country by diverse learned, for to discover
the abuses, and for to put again the word of GOD in his honor, according as
our Savior JESUS CHRIST instituted it. Nevertheless, I have yet thought that
my little labor shall not be altogether vain and unprofitable toward a great
many of my brethren and countrymen, especially toward some, for many causes.
First, because that the most part of those which have written of divinity,
have heterto written in the Latin tougue, the which is not to be understood
Latin books.
of all men, and especially of the poor ignorant people, which have more
need of plain doctr^e and consolation. Wherefore it is good that such matters
which do touch and conserne our health and salvation be manifested and set
forth in all languages, to the end that those which do not understand the
one, may be instructed by the other. For it is all one what language one
speaks unto us, so that we understand him, and that we may be well instructed
in the will of God, and in all things All languages good to God.
necessary unto our salvation. For God regards not the languages, but only
the thing to which all languages ought to serve. Then even as those who do
write in a language which is most common to every Nation, and by which they may
instruct and teach, not only those of their country, but also of strange
countries, are worthy of great praise: So I do judge them worthy to be blamed,
and not worthy to be accounted for christian men, to occupy themselves so much
to teach the most wisest and best learned, and those which are so far
separated from us, and that the poor ignorant, and those of the house should
he despised, and should feel nor receive any fruit. One might rightly rebuke
and check us: Physician heal thy self: And that we do not follow the
example of Jesus Christ and his Prophets and Apostles, who have Luc. 4. d. 23.
always taught those with whom they had to do, in a language that they
could best understand. For that cause was given unto the Apostles the gift
of tongues, for to preach unto all people and Nations, knowing The gift of
tongues. Act 2. 2. 1.
that the language ought to serve to the matter, and not the matter to the
language. Wherefore considering that some men do write in Hebrewe, some in
Greek, some in Latin, others in Almayne and in Flemish, others in Italian and
Spanish, I have also written in a language, with which I am best acquainted and
have most familiarity, French books
according to my birth and nativity: Although that the matters that I entreat
off, should have a greater grace in the Latin tongue then in the French
tongue, and should be unto me more advantage. For oftentimes, I have the
matter ready, that I need not but to write them out of good Authors, where I
need not to travail to translate the things in French the which is very
hard and impossible, especially unto me to set them out with such grace,
and to interpret them so natiuely as they sound in their natural language,
Hebrewe, Greek, or Latin. For although I be a poor Orator in Latin, I am
not much better in French. Wherefore although I do not speak the language of
Attica, nor well beautified and like a Retricion, but that it happens
oftentimes that I do fall into my rude speech: Or if I wander astraye in
France, and that I come again into the country, I do think that the
favorable Reader will well bear with such faults, and especially in the
rymes and French verses, which sometime I mingle in these Dialogues, following
the example of the good Authors, which have willingly kept this custom, to
translate into verse, after their own language, that which they allege of
the Poets, which have written it in an other language: The which I have done
sometime, because that I put in the margentes those Authors, by the which I
help my self, for to discover and vnhide better the abuses and superstitions,
to the end that some men should not think that I speak of the speakers of
the Dialogues for the nonce, and without just occasion. If there be in my verses
but little rhyme, it suffices me so yt it have some reason. For I do not make
profession of Poetry: and it suffices me to turn them grossly or plainly:
Besides that, that I am an evil Orator, yet I am a worse Poet. Yet
nevertheless I am fully certified that so many good minds and wits as
France brings up very able and expert, both in Poetry and French prose,
shall have none occasion to envy me, nor to rebuke or find fault with my
Poetry. For they may very well judge that I pretend not by my verses to have
the crown of Baye, and that I will not take from them their Science and name.
Also I hope that those unto whom GOD has given more gifts and grace to
speak, will consider to bear with my rude style, as the Athenians, who were
the cummingest in all Greece, both in doctrine and in language, have not
despised the doctrine and language of the Philosopher, Anacharsis, Anacharsis.
notwithstanding that he was a Sythian and of a barbarous Nation. They must
also consider which know the greatness of the country wherein I am, I have
sometimes used expressly some words which shall not be received of those
which sludye in the finenesse of the French tongue, but I do the same, for to
condescend to the rudeness and capacity of the most ignorant which better
understand those words taken from their language, then others that are more
fine and eloquent. Furthermore, although that there are many good men which
have already written of the matters of Religion in the French tongue with more
hautye style and more el^quent then I can, and of a more deeper and profounde
knowledge. Yet nevertheless I do not think, that those which know that
Christian simplicity and modesty is, will neither despise my language nor my
doctrine, but that they will take it all Amos. 7. d. 13.
in good part, consideringe that if Amos which was a shepeheard, and many
other Prophets of base condition, have not used so high a style, nor have
spoken so profoundly and learnedly as that kingly Prophet David, or David. Esaias.
that great Orator Esaias, of the royal lineage and brought up in the court,
they have not therefore leaft off to be Prophets and to speak through Gods
spirit, and to profit very much in his Church, whose style they have used.
And although that the Euangelisles and The Apostolical eloquence and human
^loqu^ence.
Apostles have not written in such pomp of words, nor have not so much
trauayled after the language of Demosthenes and Cicero, yet we cannot deny
but that they have more profited to all mankind, by their ^ude style, then the
others, by all their pomp of humayne eloquence without any comparison. But if
we consider Gods works, we shall know that the holy Ghost, although that
he do not reject the eloquence, which is one of his gifts, yet nevertheless
he delights himself more in the simplicity of language, for to declare
better his virtue and efficacy, to the end that we do not attribute unto
humayne eloquence that which apperteineth unto him.

I speak this because of some delicate mo^thes, and curious of language, which
regard not but the style and Curious men of speeches.
the manner and phrase of speaking, without considering the sentence, and that
that one speaks, as though men do write for the tongue, and for to learn
only, for to iangle and prattle as the Pyes and Iayes, not rather for to
instruct the spirit, soul and the conscience. They regard but the flowers,
and care not for the fruit: And which is worse, one shall find them of such
corrupt judgments, that they prefer the painted flowers, before those that
grow naturally, thinckeing to beautify their language, and to enrich the
French tongue. GOD knows what a cuttinge and manglinge they make, and how
they mangle the Latin, so that they do Manglers of Latin.
speak neither Latin nor French. But desiring to avoid and not to use all
that which they think to be common, to the end they might be esteemed the
greater Orators, do forge and invent a new language, and do despise the
good French words, for to steal away those from strange tongues. That
curiosity and affection of language, is the cause that many delight rather to
read books, full of scoffinges, fables, lies, and of blasphemies, then those
of divinity, or of some good divines and holy men. And this vice is not only
in the French tongue, but also in yt Latin. For there are some which have so
great fear to defile their golden tongue, and to embrew These which do
avoid the reading of dinine books.
their goodly style with the simplicity and baseness of the Prophetical and
Apostolical language, that they had rather to defile their souls,
understandings and spirits, in foolish curious books, or in the writings
of the Panims and Idolaters, then to read in the holy Scriptures the which
they dare not touch: Or if they desire some Proverb. Velut Canis? Nilo.
time to drink of it, that is as the dog does at the flood Nilus. They do
but suck in the water hastily, as though they were afraid to touch it, and
that there were in it Crocodiles. They will touch it as a Cat does hot
coals. I do not condemn the reading of good Authors and of Poets, Orators
and Philosophers the which may serve us to the glory of God, if first of all
we be well instructed in the Christian religion. But I can not allow, but
greatly condemn those which altogether give themselves unto such Authors,
or to others a great deal worse, and make none account of the holy Bible and
divine books to which all other Sciences and disciplines ought to serve, and
to which they ought to be preferred. Shall we not judge him a fool and All
Arts and disciplines the handmaides of holy books.
out of his wit, which will always stay in his Grammar, and in the principles
and rules of the same, and despise the study of other liberal Arts, and of
Philosophy, and will in no wise meddle with them, nor exercise himself in
speakinge nor yet in writing, fearinge to forget and lose those rules and
grounds of Grammar? Who will not judge such a man to be mad, since that the
Grammar, yea, the Rethoricke, (whatsoever praise that Cicero gives unto it.)
And the Logic also, are not but as handmaydens and servants unto other
disciplines, the which men do learn for to serve unto them? We do now
mock the barberous schole masters which we have had, which could read unto
us Doctrinall of Alexander.
but doctrinall of Alexander, and do hold us therein all our life time,
without letting us at any time taste any good Author, insomuch that one shall
never have done, but the thing is always to begin again. Those some unto me
not to differ much from them. For notwithstanding that they do read better
Authors, and that they do exercise themselves to speak and write better. Yet
Nevertheless I esteem not all that which they do, no more then the Grammar
of Alexander, or as Grecismus and Roiolis, and the Logic of Tartaret, and of
other Sophisters, except they make all their skill and knowledge to the honor
and glory of GOD, and if they mind it unto any other mark or end. For
otherwise whereto shall all their Eloquence without the fear of God.
science and eloquence serve, but to the Panims and people without God? the
which is more hurtful and dangerous, then profitable to the common wealth, in
him which has not the fear of God, and which is not well instructed in the
Christian doctrine. And when they have studied all their life time to beautify
and (...) forth their language, I think yet nevertheless that a man shall
not find many among them, which can come unto such perfection, by the which
they may approach so near unto Gicero, as that seditious Catiline, who was very
eloquent. Cleero and Gariline.
But when they do surmount Demosthenes, may not we rightly ^ay that of them
which Eschines has said of him, comparing him unto a flute, which has but the
beak of bil, Eschines and Demostlienes.
the which is unprofitable, after that the neck is cut off? What is there also
in these here, but the tongue? The which oftentimes hurts many, and
profits few. Is not a poor labourer which knows his God, and Jesus Christ
his Savior, and which confesses him in his rude The true science and
eloquence.
language, and which honors him through his good life and conversation, to
be preferred before all these great Poets, Orators, and Philosophers, who are
altogether ignorant, and which do serve but the flesh, the world, and Satan
Prince of the same? Are not they great Asses and beasts in comparison of him,
and yet worse? For the Ox knows his Lord, and an Ass his Masters stall, as
says the Prophet, the which those here, which will be Esa. (...). (...). 3.
counted for true Israelits, Gods people, and Christians, will not acknowledge
nor serve him, doing unto him so much honor, as the Ox and the Ass do unto
their Masters. How dare they esteem themselves wise, being ignorant of the
knowledge of God, the which only is the true knowledge, for to bring us unto
everlasting blessedness, in comparison of which all other which are called
sciences, are but men's opinions, errors, and lyinges, except they John. 17.
23
have this for a guide. It is very hard to find for such men mediciues proper
to heal them, and meat for to make them have an appetite, since that they are
so far out of taste with the bread of life, and the heavenly Manna, Out of
east of ye bread of life.
to the which they prefer the garlic, onyons, the flesh and fishes of
Egypt. For he that shall give them such meat as they desire, shall but
increase their grief the greater. And if the meat be not as they would have
it, they will not taste of it. Wherefore I leave such to be handeled of those
which have more cunninge then I, and which can better help their disease.
There are others which differ but a little from these here, and which care not
so much of the language, but they have yet a great vice common with the
first: that is, that they delight not in reading any good matter, grave, and
which touches Gods word, and the health of their souls, but Curious
readers of foolish books.
unto worldly things delectable to the flesh, pernicious and hurtful to the
spirit and conscience. And therefore, although that many good men have written
in French very learnedly and in a good language, touching the matters of our
Religion, yet nevertheless that sort of people cannot apply themselves to
read those good books, and can take no taste of them, because that their
mouth is not fit for such meat, and that they are to precious for them. For
the ^doriseraunt and sweet flowers The svveet smellings unto hogs.
smell not so sweet in the hogs noses, as the mire and durte. For that cause
such carnal men take more pleasure and delight in the books that speak their
language. But the thing is more detestable to women which delight to read
^ookes of bawdry and whoredom. Vile and filthy books.
For they understand them the better because they are of the earth: and do
speak of earthlye matters, and cannot comprehend the celestial language,
because it is not natural unto them. Now such books as they desire are not
wanting unto them. For there are enough of fools bables throughout the worl^e,
which Fools bables.
do serve but for seoffing and testing, and which have no other care, and
apply their study but to please men, and to nourishe their vain curiosity,
louinge better to speak pleasant things, then salutary, and to delight the
flesh and the ears, more then to edify the conscience. Yet this was one of
the causes which moved me to write and proceed after an other manner, then
those which have written before me. For I consider that many do leave off to
read them, not only Good books despised and forbidden.
because it is forbidden in many Countries, kingedomes, and Segmories, to read
good books which speak of GOD, suffering yet nevertheless the others, which
do induce but to dishonor and blasphemye. But also because, that although
that it be permitted unto many to read them, yet nevertheless they do make
none account of them, because that either they seem unto them very obscure and
so wayghtye that they cannot well understand them: or the time to long, and
take no pleasure to read books which have not some merrye conceytes and
delites, for to make them pastyme. For they are yet to carnal, and find no
pastime in those books which speak but of GOD, and of the health of the
Soul, if there be nothing for the flesh, the which they would only keep.
There is no doubt, but that malady or disease is very perilous, and that
such vicious and corrupt Natures, do very much displease GOD, since that they
have so little reverence of him, and his word, and that they prefer the
poison before the good meat.

Nevertheless because that amongst such one may yet find some which are
not altogether perverse and malicyous, but that they have yet some seed of
the fear of the LORD in them, me thinckes that we must not altogether
dyspayre and abanoon them, as sick folk that are incurable, but that we must
yet prove to win them if it be possible, and to transfigure and change them
into al forms and shapes, for to induce them to read the holy Scriptures, and
to give unto them some taste. For if we can convert into good uses the means,
by the which the Devil gives himself to draw away man from the word of God,
and to rob him altogether, and hold him in the vanities of this world, and
may use them as a bait on a hook for to draw them from such vanities, and to
incitate and provoke them to the study of the truth, me thincketh that we do
nothing unworthy of the office of a Christian man. For even as the holy Apostle
has been made all unto all men, and does apply and give himself unto every
one, in all The Christian all to all men. 1. Cot. 9. c. 20.
that which was possible for him, without being against the will of God,
making himself a Jew unto the Jews and a Gentile unto the Gentiles. So me
thinks y^ by good right, I may do the like, so that I do not altogether
forget the Christian modesty and the honor and reverence that the Christian
owes unto the word of GOD. For if the bawdes of Satan endeavor themselves
through fair and goodly delites and merry conceits to destroy the poor and
silly soults, the espowses of Jesus, and to draw them away from him, for to
make them serve him and to forsake their master: shall it not be lawful for us
to use an other practice and cunning for to let theirs, for to discover and
vnhide their filthiness, for to make them appear to be abomination to all
the world, and to retire and draw back the souls from his stews, for to
join them again with Jesus Christ their Savior?

If a paysoner do cover and hide his poison with some delicate meat, for to
poison and murder men, shall it not be by more just reason peruntted to a
Phisi^ion to mingle sugar and honey among the wormewoode and the bitter Aleos:
for to sweeten a little the bitterness of these drinckes? Which
notwithstanding that they are bitter in the mouth, are yet nevertheless
healthful to the boot. For if such holy deceits are worthy of praise to the
Physicians Holy deceyts.
of the body, wherefore shall it be despised to the Physicians of the souls? I
would to GOD that he had given unto us the grace to deceive so all the world
for his profit and health. For the diseased is happy, which is deceived by
the Physician to his health and healing: which is the end to the which both
the one and the other do pretend, both the Physician and the diseased. I know
Book discovering the abuses
very well that there be already many books written, which do much discover
abuses, and which do sufficiently mock the vain ceremonies, idolatries, and
superstitions, which are among the Christians, but that suffices not, except
one do teach what is the verity, and what is a firm and sound doctrine. The
which many have already done, but because they seem and appear too severe and
grave unto those with whom we have chiefly to do, they read them not, and
do profit nothing. There are others, which have followed a manner to write
altogether contrary unto those. For even as those have regard to none other
thing, but to entreat of the word of God with all gravity, modesty, and
reverence, adressinge their writings unto people of good judgments and of
temperate senses, and full of the fear of GOD: These here unto the contrary,
have not taken their sight but to the white and mark of man's vanity and
curiosity, and have purposed to absteme themselves from all weighty, honest
and holy matters, and to write only of follyes, merry conceits, iestes,
plays, and pastimes, as of fools, morishdauncers, scoffers and iesters. And
if they would hold themselves within those limits, they were the more
tolerable: But many are not content to play the fools The office of fools
and scoffers.
amongst men (although that that office is scant meet unto an honest man) do
yet worse. For they give themselves but to scurrilitie, and do think that
they cannot sufficiently enough delight men except their device be altogether
full of ruffenly talk and bawdry, of vilanies Vile and (...) be (...).
and blasphemies, not only intollorable to the Christians, but which should
be judged worthy of grievous punishments amongst the Jews, Turks, Panims,
and Infidels. For if the Gentiles and Panims have not taken and accounted for
honest men, and worthy to be advanced into any honorable office in a common
wealth, the Morishdauncers, Maskers, Iuglers, Players, Mummers, and Iesters,
what honor is that unto Princes and unto Christian people to take delight, not
only in such men with their books, but in others a great deal more
detestable, and more ruder in all filthy and vile words, as the ruffians of
the stews, and denyers of GOD. Do we think that Jesus Christ has said An
idle word. Mat. 12. c. 35.
without a cause, that for every idle word that men shall speak, they must
render account at the day of judgment? Since that the truth, which lies not
tells us the same so clearly, and does meanace and threaten that we must
render an account for every idle word: that is to say, which is vain and
unprofitable, which serves nothing at all to the glory of GOD, nor to any
edifyinge of our neighbor: Do we think that our ribalde and bawdye talk,
backebitings, evil speakings, unadvised, slanderous and infamous words
which do serve to none other end but to peruerte the understandings of men,
to add or heap evil upon evil, to cast oil into the fire, and to bring towe
the better to inflame man's conscience unto all wickedness and abomination,
and unto the which it is already too much inclined: Do we think that
such languages shall not come to an account, and that they shall not be a
reproach unto us and brought before our eyes at the judgment of GOD? Were it
not better for us to follow the admonition which the holy Apostle taught us
saying: Let your speech be always well sauoured Coll. 4. a 6 The language of
the Christians. Ephe. 4. f. 29.
and powdered with salt, that ye may knew how to answer every man. Let
no filthy communication proceed out of your mouths: but that which is good to
edify wythall, when need is: that it may have favor with the hearers.

And grieve not the holy spirit of GOD, by whom ye are sealed unto the day
of redemption. Let not Ephe. 5. 2 3
fornication and all uncleanness or covetousness be once named among you
as it becomneth Saints: neither filthiness, neither foolish talkinge,
neither iestinge which are not comely: but rather giuinge of thanckes. Behold
the lesson which the Doctor of the Gentiles gives unto the Christians, for
to learn them how they ought to speak: the which many have very evil
studied and kept. For by their words and writings, they profit to none
other end, but to infect and poison the souls, and to hinder a great many of
good spirits to read better books, and more profitable for their health and
salvation. For man cannot be idle, and except that he did find foolish and
wicked books for to apply therein his study, he should be constrained to
seek better and to occupy therein altogether his mind, without any
detraction unto unprofitable things. I know very well that one may upon
this replye, that such men in playinge and iestinge do discover the abuses of
the world: But it is better not to remove and discover them, then to discover
and blow them abroad after such a sort. For by that manner of doing, they
may rather make of a To show forth lying without the truth.
superstitious and an hipocrite, a man without GOD and without Religion, then a
good religyous and holy man.

For notwythstandinge that they do show forth the follye of men, and that
which ought not to be, yet nevertheless they show not that which ought to
be, and what is the true wisdom and the remedy for to redress such diseases.
It is very easy to mock and scoff at lyings, and to show that which is not,
but it suffices not, ercept one do show the truth, and what it is. It
suffices not to know Antechriste, except we know Jesus Christ.

That is to teach after the manner as Cicero desputed of the Nature of the
Gods, the which is more proper, Disentations of (...).
for to show that which is not God, then who is God. Such manner of doing
brings no resolution to the conscience, but leaves it always in doubt and
error. And although those shall do no worse, yet that shall be some thing, and
they shall not altogether lose their time, for that they have incitated and
pricked men forward, and put a desire in them, to inquire of the truth, for to
know it. For that is no little profit nor no little advantage, that they have
already brought it to that point. But these here of whom I do speak, do
not follow the style, I say not, of some good divine, nor only of some good
Panim Philosopher, but do seem that they are altogether given to the
immitation of Lusian, a man without God and Lusian and Lustanistes.
without Religion, a mocker and despiser of God and men. If it be a matter to
pastime, to laugh, play, and jest at the superstitions and idolatries, of to
devout men, caphardes and hipocrites, and of all the estates of the world, we
need not search for none other Author, and we have no need of these new
Lusianistes, which are but as his little Disciples, for to carry his book
after him. For if we must make comparison of the language, they approach
nothing near to his eloquence. If we must compare the spirit and the
knowledge, there is as much difference as is between the apprentice and the
Master. Wherefore if the writings of Lusian and the matters that be entreated
off, were very profitable and necessary unto those which could not read them
in the Greek tongue, or beeinge translated into the Latin tongue. I would
counsel rather his Disciples to travail and employ their eloquence to
translate them in the French tongue, then to forge and invent for us new
Lusians, which do but steal from him his inventions and arguments, for to
attribute them unto themselves, as if they had been the first Authors and
inu^utours. For how wicked so ever he has been, and enemy to GOD and all
Religion, yet we cannot deem but that he was a wise man, a great Oratoure and
a Philosopher, and that he has written many good things, and a great deal
better then those do here, of which the faithful man may well profit, so that he
read them after an other spirit and intention then he has written them, and
that he do know to try the gold from the midst of the dross, and to separate
the poison, from the good meat, but those whom I rebuke, do teach nothing
which can serve to the honor and glory of God, nor unto good manners, nor to
the edification of the congregation, nor to civility, nor to the knowledge of
natural, human, nor divine things, but to play the fool, and to jest with
all the world, and to moeke and despise as well the true Christian religion, as
the superstitions and abominations of Antechrist. For if they would speak one
honest word, it must be accompanied with fifty dishonest words. If they do
set forth the truth, it must be that it be always environed with a thousand
infamies and slanders, as of Damoisels and body keepers, for to hide, defend,
and countergarde that it be not taken uncovered. How much can that manner of
writing and speaking profit? For the prayer of the truth is simple, and would
The nature of the truth.
not have such couertures and cloaks, but would walk open and uncovered* And
if we have compassion of the ciuyle and imperial laws, because that they
beeinge goodly in themselves, are dishonored by the hemme of those gloses and
filthes of Bartolus, and barbarous writers. What may we The ^ems and gloses of
the laws and of the truth.
say of the truth, so noble a daughter of the eternal king, accompanied with
Damoisels so stinking, vile, and dissormed with so many filthiness which do
mar and take from her, her beauty? And to reply that it is not sure and
without danger to speak truth in any other manner, I do answer to the
same, that he were ^etter to hold his peace altogether, then to preach it
after such sort, and that it should be better not to give meat unto a man,
then to give him poison for to kill him. Wherefore all things compted and
reckenned, I know not how one can conclude any other thing of such doctrine
but that the Authors thereoff do give occasion unto those which have any
fear God, to account them for Lucianistes. And unto those which have nothing,
or a very little, to pull them away altogether, and to make them recule and go
back from the truth more then they were: As daily we see it by experience in
young children, merchants, gentlemen, damoisels, and courtiers, who after that
they have tasted of such books, are clean out of taste, and cannot away with
all other, which are not like unto them. Wherefore I would gladly counsel such
men of so good a mind and spirit, which give themselves to make such books,
and I desire and pray them in the name of Jesus Christ, and so much as they
love his honor and theirs, to apply that goodly wit and understanding which
GOD has given unto them, and that rhetoric and gift of eloquence, wherewith
they are endued, into some better study, and matter more profitable, to the
end they be not rebuked and blamed to have abused the gift of God against his
honor and glory. For that cause I have purposed to write after a sort, which
peradventure will seem very euilly to agree with a Theologian, to wit, unto
one which will speak of divine letters: But I think that when men shall
understand my reasons, they will take my advice and deliberation in good part,
and I will leave unto none any just occasion to accuse and rebuke me in that
I rebuke others, except that men love rather to serve to their affections and
to use slanders, then to judge of things according to truth and equity. I
have already touched some reasons which have induced me to do that, besides
yet I will add too many others. The first is, that I would assay to make those
learn by my example which have a better wit then I, to do that which I my
self cannot: the which thing ought not to seem to strange. For a whetstone
and a wheel do sharpen well the Iron, and makes it to cut, and yet
nevertheless it is not sharp nor cutteth of it self: And at the least wise I
endeavor my self to show unto those good wits and spirits, which delyght
themselves in pleasant things, and which occupy themselves to such vanities,
and matters in the which they may exercise their understanding and cloquence,
more to their honor before GOD and good people, and to more greater profit
then they do, if they will not apply themselves unto matters to high and
weighty, as many have done, as well among the old as the new. And if I my
self cannot do that which I would teach unto others, at the least wise I
will serve them in steed of a pattern, wherein they may find some thing for
to follow: Or at the least wise, the fault y^ they shall find in my manner of
proceeding, will admonish them of the vices that they ought to avoid in their
writings, the which if they find in my style, or in my invention, or
disposition, I am sure that they shall not find in the sentence and substance
of the matters, any thing unworthy for a Christian man. For whatsoever thing
that it be, I believe that one shall find nothing which may induce to
heresy, except those who of themselves do pretend thereunto, and who as the
Spiders do draw the venym from all places, and heresies out of the holy
Scriptures, which are given unto us to keep us from all heresy. Although that
I do The manner to mock to Gods glory.
mock and jest at the abuses, errors, heresies, superstitions and Idolatryes
of the Church of Antechriste. Yet nevertheless whosoever shall well mark and
consider the matter, and shall have patience to read all the tenoure of the
sentence and of the Argument unto the end, except he be of a perverse
judgment, shall be constrained and compelled to acknowledge and confess that
I do not mock or scorn of things which are worthy, not only of mockery,
but also of hatred and abomination of all mankind: And that I do not only
uncover the abuses without showing by and by the true use of y^ things: nor I
do not condemn the errors and the lyinges, without shewinge the truth that
we must follow, and wherein the faithful ought to stay themselves: And I
do not manifest Antechrist for to avoid and to flee from him, without showing
Jesus Christ for to follow him. Wherefore me thinckes, that those which have
their ears so delicate and cannot only abide one little word Delicate ears.
against the Idolatry, superstition, and the great abuses which lead all the
world into ruin, are not rightful Judges, but of a corrupt and perverse
judgment. For what judgment is this, to hear and see the name of God, the
death and passion of Jesus Christ to be blasphemed daily so horribly, and not
to speak a word? And to be such an unjust and sharp rebuker, and severe
Judge, against those who only in scoffing and jesting will admonish and rebuke
such blasphemers? They do willingly suffer that such men do mock God
openly, that they do blaspheme him without any shame: That they do turn
vpside down The lovers of man's honor, are traitors of Gods honor.
all Religion and the truth of Jesus Christ: That they make frustrate and of
none effect the virtue and efficacy of his death and passion: That they do
eat up and devour his poor sheep before their eyes: That they do lead the
poor souls unto perdition and eternal dampnation, and do hold all the
world in error and Idolatry for to destroy them altogether: And cannot we
suffer that unto such mockers and blasphemers of God and of men, one should
only give a little holy water of the court, and that one should sprinckle them
with the least thing of y^ world, only with some little word or saying, or
with some pleasant word, the which can hurt no man, and which is no dishonor
unto God, but serves to discover the abuses, and to bring the mouths of y^
faithful out of fast, with the idolatry and superstition: and to manifest unto
them the seducers, for the health of their souls. I do greatly marvel of
those great lovers of the honor of Hipocrites, Sedusers, false Prophets,
rauishers, and deuourers of the poor widows, and fatherless, mockers,
contemners, and blasphemers of the word of God, and have so little The honor
of Jesus trodden down.
regard or care of the honor of God, and of Jesus Christ our Lord, whom they
see daily to be crucified before their eyes, and to be spurned and trodden
underfoot the blood of his testament, and covenant, and yet dare not speak a
word: But which is worse, they will not yet suffer that others, unto whom God
has given the means, and boldneess, should speak, and rebuke such abuses and
sacrileges importable to all good Christian hearts. Me thinks that such
people have no just occasion to condemn us in that behalf. For if they are
too wise, and do think that such things Cuer wise.
agree not with the gravity of their persons, then let them leave them to be
spoken of the fools, since that as men do The privilege of Fools.
say they have the privilege to speak all things. For as for my part, I would
be very well contented, that God would give me the grace, that I might say unto
them, as the Apostles said unto the Corinthians: Ye are wise and 1. Cor. 4. c.
10.
we are fools for the love of Christ. If they would preach Jesus Christ covert
and hid, let them not be angry if we To preach Jesus Christ covertly and hid.
preach him all naked and openly, and him crucified. And if we cannot glory but
in the foolishness of his cross, as the Apostle says, the which yet
nevertheless is the true wisdom 1. Cor. 1. c. 9.
of GOD, although that the world reputeth it foolishness. For we do well
perceive what profit there comes of their so hidden preachings, of which
none can almost receive any fruit, except he understand the matter that they
entreat off, almost as well as they themselves. For what utility and profit
can there come unto the poor (...)rant people, for whom the sermons ought to
be chiefest made? do they not always continue in their errors? and are they
not confirmed the more by their dark questions, and hyd words? the which the
hearers do draw and take for their advantage, and interpret them after their
own sense and meaning, and not after the meaning of the speaker, except he do
expound if plainly, or at the least in manner that one understand not one
thing for an other. For the poor people cannot understand that Sophistry, nor
comprehend their dark questions and problemes, who have yet much ado ^o
understand that which one declares unto them as unto little children. For if
a learned man knows very well hew to draw out of their sermons the
consequences the which they will entreat off, how many shall one find of
others, which will, do clean contrary. And although there were but their
stlence, by the which they do dissimule the abuses and the Idolatry, do they
not approve sufficiently the false relygion? I do fear very much, that one
shall not find many, amongst these so wise and discreet, which are so prompt
and ready to judge and condemn all those which follow not their counsel and
carnal wisdom, of such an advise and opinion as Demades was, who did mock
the Athenians, The counsel of Demades. Vale. Max. lib. 7 c. 2.
because they did put themselves in danger, to fall into the indignation and
displeasure of Alexander the great, and to loose their lands, towns, and
countries, because they refused to give unto the said Alexander the divine The
ambition of Alexander.
honors, and to worship him as a God: unto whom Demades said. Take ye good
heed, least in keeping the Heaven you do lose the earth: willing thereby to give
ye Athenians to understand, that they were great fools, to put themselves in
such danger, for to keep the honor of the Gods: And that it were better for
them to be Idolaters of men, and to honor Alexander as a GOD, then to loose
both body and goods, whose counsel they followed. Wherefore Diogenes in
mocking and jesting of their vanity Diogenes.
and flattery, said unto them. Since that you have made Alexander a God, and
do honor him for Bacchus, Bacchus, S^rap^s. August. de ciuita Dei. lib. 18.
c. 5.
make me also Serapis, and honor me as him. For even as Bacchus was honored
among the Satyrs, so was Serapis honored and worshipped in Egypt in the
likeness of an O^e, and taken for the great God: of whom the law was made,
that whosoever did call him a man, and did not account and take him for God,
should loose his life. Wherefore almost in all the temples and churches Matrob.
li. 3. c. 9 Varro de lingu^ ^at lib. 3. Augerona, Hars pocrates. Silence. Outd.
Meta. 9. Sanctaque B^^a ^is, var^sq^^ ^o loribus Apis.
in which Serapis was honored and Isis in like manner, they used to hold an
Image, like unto that which the Romans called. Augerona, the which some do
call Harpocrates, who did hold his finger against his mouth, admonishing every
one to keep silence, least they should speak any thing against those goodly
Gods, which might bring hurt unto the speakers. O would to God that we had
Qulqus premit vo^^^ dig^toque silentia suadet. pers digiro compose^ labellum.
not so many Alexanders, Serapis, and Isis, who being^nortall men, would yet
nevertheless be taken and accounted as Gods among men, and that their Idolles,
laws, ceremonies, traditions, statutes and ordinances should be preferred
defore God and his word: nor so many Harpocrates, which do not only make a
sign with the finger, that those unto whom God has given the heart to
confess the truth should hold their peace, and be not dumine Images, but
should know very well to rebuke those which have a better affection then they,
and which do speak that which they dare not take in hand. For they will not
loose the land or earth, for to keep the Heaven: and do account and take
those for fools, rash and mad, which do make themselves to be persecuted, for
to uphold and maintain the word of the Lord.

But it is greatly to be feared, that in thinking to keep the earth the which
they prefer before the Heaven, they loose both Heaven and earth, as it
happens unto many, who loved rather to follow the counsel of Demades, then
that of Jesus Christ, and the example of him and of his Apostles. And how do
those edify, who in their secret preaching, do put always a ripe between
two rotten, or rather a rotten between two ripe, disguising as much as they can
Gods truth, after that they have preached for the little fear that they shall
have, will deny all that which they have well preached before, and will deny
Jesus Christ openly to the great slander of all the poor faithful people,
whom they never have confessed but particularly, secretly and privily? I do
not speak this for to rebuke any man of his infirmity, inconstancy, or
carnal fear, by the which he which thinks to be very hardy and constant,
does find himself overcome: But I speak only unto a company of vain and
glorious fools, which do these things and worse, and yet nevertheless
would feign cover and hyde their faults and condemyne the poor faithful
people, who hazard their life for to advance and amplyfie the kingdom of
GOD, and which boldelye and constatlye rebulie Idolatry and the abuses. Me
thinks that they do The office of a Prophet. Iere. 1. b.
evil understand the office of the Prophet, to whom it is not only commanded
of the Lord to plant and buyld up: but also to root out, break, off and to
destroy, for to plant and buyld afterward, and to cry as loud as he can, like
Esa. 58. a. 1 10.
tho voice of a trumpet, for to show unto the people their offenses, and to the
house of Jacob their sins. If they will say, that we which are out of danger,
have goodly scoffing, let them then suffer us to do that which they would not,
dare not, or cannot do. If they think that it is a matter too vile for them,
and that they will not occupy themselves but about grave and weighty matters
and of great importance; let them suffer us to play the children with the
children, and to abase our selves with the little ones, and to use our plain
speech with the rusticall, and to edify the poor ignorant, as they do edify
the wise, and to uncover the errors unto those which know the^ not. If they be
great Divines and severe Philosophers, let them account us for young
Grammarians, who do but a little open and bruise the matters, and to chewe unto
the simple people the meat a little more smaller, for to prepare them to their
school, and unto a more higher Philosophy. If they think that, we must
entreat of such matters with more greater gravity and modesty, I deny not
that we can entreat of the word of God with to great honor, and reverence:
But I would that they had as well the consideration, that the word of God is not
so severe, but y^ it has his merry conceits, sports, honest games, merry
jests, and words couenable and most agreeing The manner to speak merely in the
holy Scrip.
to his grace and Majesty. And he y^ will try and prove it, let him consider
how. GOD himself, and Jesus Christ that great celestial Orator, does speak
sometime, either in rebuking his Disciples or the Hipocrites and reprobate: and
among those which the Lord did speak, without heaping together, a great many
of examples, that they would only, mark and behold what answer Ioas the
father of Gedeon did Judges. 6. f. 31.
make unto the Burgesses and Citizens of the town who Judges. 6. f. 31
complained to him of his son, which had pulled down and destroyed the Idol
of Baal and his Altar: And the words that Ely had with the Prophets of Baal:
What 3. Reg 18. e. 15. Esa. 44. b. 13.
mocked did he give them? And Fsay in like manner against the Babilonians and
their Idolles? Who yet nevertheless were both of them grave and very severe
Prophets. And in the book of wisdom, and in Baruch and in the Sapien. 13.
14. 15. 36.
Epistle attributed unto Jeremy. I will leave off to allege the examples of so
many good ancient Doctors, who in their books, and by their writings have so
much iested and mocked at the superstitions and Idolatries of the Pan^ns, which
had more greater reason and appearaunce then those against whom we do at this
time fight. He that will not believe me let him read their works, chiefly of
Tertulian, Eusebius, Lactantius, Augustine, Hierome, and other like, upon all
those that they have written against the Pan^ns and Heretics. Wherefore then
shall not that be permitted us in Dialogues, which we rebuke not in those
great men, when they have spoken it in their own person, the which requires
more gravity, then if they did bring in other men speaking and disputing
together, as I do in my Dialogues and disputacions. For there is none of a good
License and liberty of Dialogues.
judgment, but that he understands very well that in the phrase of writing
there is no greater liberty and license in Poetry, then Dialogues and talks.
For they must bring in the persons speaking according to him whom they
represent: who oftentimes do speak more after their sense and of the persons
whom they do jest at, then according or after the same of the author.
Although that the author has willingly used to choose some one by whom he
gives to understand what is his opinion, and the best sentence. Therefore I
have brought in four men of diverse qualitis The persons of the Dialogues.
and opinions, and do make them to speak according to the matters which are
talked off at this day among men, and according to the nature and affection of
every one of them. I have brought in one as a man very devout and searing God,
which nevertheless is yet altogether wrapped in supersticion and error, and
maynteineth man's traditions, but not wilfully. I have brought in an other,
which is not yet fully assured and set down neither on the one side nor on the
other, but is troubled in his conscience, and knows not very well whom to
believe, but runs on the one side and ^n the other, and yet nevertheless
desires to know the truth, and he enquireth and knows already many abuses:
wherefore he speaks a little more joyfully, and cares not so much for man's
traditions, and is not so affectioned after them, nor so severe as the first,
who is yet altogether rooted in these old superstitions. Afterward comes
one, who represents the person of a grave and honest man, and skillful in y^
heavenly and human letters. which speaks daily with great honor and
reverence of the word of God and absolueth the questions and matters alleged of
the one side and of the other, according to the sentences of the holy
Scriptures, and ancient Ecclesiastical Doctors. And for the fourth there is
one which is a little more talkatiue then this, and a little more given to
speak freely against the abuses, but he does it with more greater modesty and
honesty, then the Caphards do speak against the ministers, and lovers of the
truth. I do said this man to have more skill or knowledge in humayne letters
then the others, and which speaks willyngly and joyfully, but in such sort,
that he plays in earnest, and says nothing but to the dishonor of
Antechrist, for to magnify Jesus Christ, and that he is content to be
corrected by his companion, if any thing be to be blamed.

Wherefore if any man would saeme to cavil, because it seems unto him some
time that this man plays the part Human letters m^ngled with the divine.
of a mocker, and that he mingleth the humayne letters, Histories and Poetryes
with the divine, let him consider the person whom he representet^ and that he
does not speak any thing so absurd nor so strange, but that it serves to
the present matter, and let him not vere himself any more.

Furthermore if Saint Paul by occasion has sometime Act. 17. f. 28. 1. (...).
15. b. 12. Titus. 1. d. 12.
alleged the witness of the Panuns, yea of Poets, for to serve to his matter,
and if the ancient Doctors of the Church of whom I have already spoken off,
have yet done more and their book have served them so well for to confound
them themselves, and to vanquish them of their errors and to show unto them
more clearly the truth and virtue of our relygion: Insomuch that Julian the
Apostate in The forbidding of Julian the Apostate. Histo. trip. lib. 9. cap. 17.
spite of his beard was constrained to forbid the Christians to read them: he
ought not to think it strange, if I do follow their example in like things,
chiefly when I will show plainly and openly before all men's eyes, how the
superstitions and Idolatryes of the Christians were taken from the Panims and
Idolaters, and altogether like or worse. I do not allege them for that Gods
truth is not sufficient of it self, to allow and maynteyne it self, but for
to make all things to serve him, and for to make the light the better to be
known from darkness, the truth from lyinge, and the better to vanquish and
overcome the shameless seducers, who would yet hide and cover their heresies
and abominations, if one do not show them forth with the finger, and except
one do take them as the thief upon his theft and robbery, and the shameless
whore with her whoredom. And if there be any yet which will not be contented
with those resons, I will show unto him such an excuse and defense as Mantuan
did make for himself, in a matter almost like, saying: Think not that I am to
be rebuked because that 1. Lib. de patie^. c. 23
I have recourse to the authority of an heathen man. For Saint Augustine which
is one of our Doctors, says: If the Philosophers have said any thing
confirmable unto our faith, we must not avoid them nor fear them, but rather
we ought to convert and turn them to our use and profit, as things recovered
and taken away from unjust possessours, for to make them serve to their true
possessours.

If they do then admit the just and reasonable excuse of Mantuan, and do
attribute any authority unto Saint Augustine, they ought not to do unto me
worse then to other. And if it seem unto any of our sages and A buses are not
yet enough uncovered and made known.
wise men, that the same is but lost time, and that we need not now any more
to discover the abuses, because that they are already sufficiently discovered
and opened, I am of the contrary opinion, and do know clean contrary by
experience. I know not whether the sages have seen the abuses so uncovered,
and whether they (which dare not speak of Jesus Christ but with half a mouth,
and dare not preach but secretly) have found people among them of so sharp
and earnest a spirit, that they do know all things and are ignorant of
nothing. But as for us which are here, we have experience clean contrary. For
since that the Gospel has been preached already ten or twelve years in
some places, and freely (the which men dare not in all places) and the abuses
have been manifested so clearly and plainly as the same is clear at hye noone,
we are yet all abashed, that we do find dreamings, errors and great
superstitions in some, yea in those in whom a man would not think, and yet we
do think that we have already much profited in the knowledge of God. But
that is marvel that of the mark and carecter of the Devil, which is so
hard to deface, and of an old custom which is so hard to tear out, and so
much the harder the worse it is. Wherefore I shall be much abashed, that there
where one dares not speak of Jesus Christ, nor to open his mouth against
Antechrist, that the errors and abuses were all so clear and manifest, that
there was no more need to speak of them, inasmuch as here and there where the
truth is cl^rly and freely preached, one cannot tell which way one can pluck
and tear them from the hearts of men, and that it is not requisite to say or
speak any more against them. Or it must be that God has there more amply shed
out his grace, or else that there are heer^ very dull spirits and wits in
comparison of others. But I fear rather that those which glory in themselves
to know them so much, know not themselves the moite, and understand very
evil, that which they think to know. For if they had intelligence and
understanding such as they think to have, and that they did know the
abomination such as it is, and how it displeases God, and is noisome and
hurtful unto his church, they would retire and draw themselves further from
it then they do, and it should be impossible that they could see and suffer
it, but would flee rather away from thence, or they would suffer themselves
rather to be burned, then to dissemble and consent unto it: But would say as
the faithful of whom the Prophet has written, which do consider the grace
which God has done unto them, and comparing them with their first condition,
say, to the great abomination Esa. 30. c. 22.
of al Idolatry. Fie, get you hence. And therefore, one cannot to much manifest
the abuses. For truth cannot be The profit to uncover abuses.
known without discovering them and pulling them down. And in doing that,
one does manifest them unto those who knows the^ not yet, which shall be
always more in number the^ we would, the which we must draw away. Afterward
the thing may serve them which already have the knowledge, many ways. First
for to refreshe and quicken the memory from the darknesses in which they have
been, to the end, that they may know the better the blindness and infirmity
of man's understanding, and what he may do of himself, when he will be guided
by his own head, and forsake God and his word, for to follow men and their
traditions. Afterward, that shall serve them for a remembrance and sign of
the triumph of Jesus Christ, and of his truth, to the confusion of Satan,
Antechriste, lyinge, and man's wisdom, who will exalt himself above the
knowledge of GOD, to the end that he have more occasion to humble himself,
to acknowledge the mercy that GOD has done for him, and to render thanckes
unto him: And that he be more prudent and better aduysed hereafter, and
pray unto the LORD more earnestly that he do keep him that he do never
fall again into such or like errors and inconveniences. Furthermore that
shall serve him as a prick, the better to prick him forward to indignation
against Antechriste, and to have compassion upon the poor ignorant people
and his wandering and erringe brethren, and to take with more greater courage
the cause of the truth in hand, considering the unworthiness of the thing.
And he that shall be yet weak, should fortefie and strengthen himself, and
he that shall be already firm and strong, should confirm himself more.
For all these causes and reasons, GOD would that the errors and sins of the
people should be registered, and has so many times commanded that they
should be remembered. And the Prophet Esaias did not admonish so many times
without cause the people, after that he had well mocked them for Esa. 46. c. 8
Idolatry, that they should remember those things to the end they may the
better know the judgment of God which is upon the Infidels, which are as
brute beasts, and what treasure it is to have the truth of God and his
word. And if any man will yet say, that notwythstanding that it is not
evil, but very profitable and necessary to show forth and declare the
abuses, yet nevertheless we must not proceed in such sort, which should
seem peradventure unto some men more proper and fit for to be offended,
then for to be edified by it: I do answer unto the same, that I know not
what those shall be that shall read those books, nor what occasion they may
have to be offended. I do think that they shall not be so much esteemed
that many people would read them: Beside that many peradventure would,
which cannot. But howsoever it be, if those that do read them are good and
virtuous people and fearing GOD, they shall know that I study not but to
manifest the verity, and to glorify Jesus Christ, and that those whom I
rebuke are not only worthy to be mocked, but unworthy that the earth bears
them, except they will acknowledge their faults, and give glory unto GOD. If
they were ^picures and contemners of GOD, they can be no worse Ep^^^es
then they are, and therefore know in what reputation they ought to be unto
all good people, and that they are unworthy to be taken and accounted not only
for Christians, but for men being a great deal more worse then brute
beasts. If they be Pharisees and obstinate Hipocrites, Hypocrytes Man. 15 a.
1. The offense of the Pharisees.
and that they do seek the occasion of offense, they do find it in Jesus
Christ. Wherefore we must not much care or take thought for it. For they do
take the offense without any man gyuing it them, and are an offense unto
themselves, and cannot hear the truth without being offended. Wherefore we
must hold unto that which Jesus Christ said unto them: Let them alone, for
they are the blind leaders of the blind. They Mat. 15. b. 14.
must understand that an evil knotte and hard piece of Malo nodo Malus
tuntus.
wood to cleave, has need of an hard wedge and a strong mall to cleave it.
If they are so shameless, that they have no shame at all, and have their heart
so obstinate and hardened, that they have no remorse of censcience, in mockinge
of GOD and blaspheminge him so horriblye as they do daily, and do test so
at men to their great loss and hurt, shall we be more ashamed to tell them
their iniquity? to rebuke their abuses and abominations which they do? If
they would not that one should speak of them, let them leave off and cease
to do them.

For I believe that there is not a man of a good heart, which takes any great
pleasure to remove that filthiness except they be constrained to do it
through their importunity, impudency and shameless face. For what good
Christian heart can suffer, that daily men should hyde those abominations,
and that one should cover such villanyes, making us to believe, that their
filthmesse and stincke is as sweet as balm: their poison to be the bread of
life: lyinge to be the truth: Hell to be Paradise: cursinge to be blessinge:
darkness to be light: and death life? As for me I cannot color, flatter nor
hyde the things, and I cannot but name them by their names. For such is the
language and style of the spyrite of God, which will not speak after men's
fantasies The style of the holy Ghost.
and for to please them, as the Oratou^s, which can give unto vices the names
of virtues, and such color as it pleases them, but to speak truth, as the
thing is, calling Idolatry, that which the Hipocrites and Idolaters do call
divine service, and their Idolles, Devils, the which they call Gods. Wherefore
although The forehed of hypocrytes and prophets
such Hipocrites have their forheades of stone and Iron so hard and immutable,
that one cannot make them blushe, but do keep their countenaunces as thieves
and murderers, and shameless as harlots, yet let them understand on the other
side that GOD has given to his servant, as he said unto Ezechiel, aforehead
of Brass, and of Ezech. 3 b. 9
a Diamond which is yet more harder, and which does less shame to speak the
truth and to give praises unto God, then they to maintain lyings, and to blame
it. And therefore the Lord commanded Ezechiel, saying: go speak unto Ezech. 3
b. 7
them, and say unto them that which I have commanded thee. I know
nevertheless that they will do nothing, but I will y^ thou do tell them. I
know not what excuse such men can have. For they have been already taught al
manner of ways. If they do complain that one has learned and taught them to
sharply, and with to great severity and rigor, I would learn and teach the^ a
little more joyfully, and more iestingly, then bitterly. If they do yet find
my manner of doing too sharp, there are as many others, which have written as
modestly as is possible, and yet they find no goodness in it, and leave not
off to persevere always worse and worse, in their errors and heresies.
Wherefore I know not what song one may sing unto them, but to rebuke them of
that which Jesus Christ rebuked the Iewishe people, and that which the little
children, which played in the streets, rebuked their companions off: when Mat
11. b. 16
we did singe unto you sorrowful things, you have not wept, when we did
singe unto you joyful things you have not daunsed. John Baptist came in great
severity ^austeritie, and have found him very sharp, and they say he has the
Devil within him. Jesus Christ came with all humility and gentleness, and
they said that he was a drunkard and a glutton, and a friend unto publicans and
sinners. If one do speak unto them sharply, as their iniquity requires, they
say that one is furious and mad. If one do speak unto them pleasantly, they
will call him fool or scoffer. To couclude, they will always find some thing
to say, as we see it by experience in our time. Many men at the beginning have
taken upon them to touch a little some abuses, yet of the most grosest and
most apparent. These Hipocrites could not bear them, but they have persecuted
them by sea and land. They cannot only suffer that one should touch a little
with his finger their Idolatry and superstition, and that one should open his
mouth for to speak one word for to reform their estate, but which is more,
have declared themselves to be enemies unto all learned and wise men, which
have travailed to abolish all barberousnesse and sophistry for to set up
again all good letters and other disciplines, and have accounted and condemned
them for heritickes, and have put them in great danger of their lives. Since
then that they cannot suffer those here, that they should go so pleasantly,
not only of little dialogues, and familiar talk for little children, which
do unto them yet more greater honor then they deserve and do flatter them
more then is need, God has raised up others, who have in such sort removed
their filthiness, the which others have not done but a little tickled up, that
they have in such sort made the filthiness and stink so to avoid, that all
the world does perceive and fool it, in such sort that one can no longer abide
and suffer it. When these sharp surgeons are come, which have thrust their
instrument so deep within the Apostume, that they have perced them even unto
the heart, and bones, they have begun to reject y^ first which did but a little
touch the wounds and sores without, and through their gentleness make them to
fester and wax worse and worse, making of it but a certain pallatiue cure or
healing. When they have experimented and tried the second, they have cried out
Alarome against them, and have been constrained to praise the first whom they
condemned in comparison of those here.

Afterward, came consequently others who have a little better uncovered their
disceite, and which have better manifested the villainy and the fornications of
the great whore of Babylon, insomuch that those whom men accounted to be so
earnest and such heretics, have begun by them to be esteemed gentle and good
men, in comparison of the latter. And so they have had of all sorts, and yet
they will understand nothing. Wherefore me thincks they can no more pretend
ignorance nor infirmity, or any just excuse, but that it is time to answer
to a fool according to his foolishness, to the end he think not always
Pro. 19.
to be wise. We must then let them to understand that men do account them
for such as they are, and they must not any more spare them, since that they
would wax worse and empaire if one should keep them, and the more that one
does think to make them meek and gentle in flattering them, they become the
more savage, wild, and mad. And therefore I think that those that are of a
good judgment, and which do consider the things according to the truth,
shall be constrained to confess that I flatter to much. Although that I doubt
not but that one shall find some which may say of me that which is said
commonly of the Ass, which would The fable of y^ Dog and of the Ass. Apes
required in the court of Babylon.
play with his master, as he did see the dog do, strikinge him and leaping
upon him with his feet. I am very sure that such plays and games do not
please the king of Babylon and his court, and that they will not have such
Apes, except they be otherwise apparelled, then that poor Ass was. For they
have not accustomed that those little Ladies dogs, which make them sport and
wagge the tail, and which are learned and taught to Ladies Dogs.
run and leap on the Ladies and Gentlewomen, and those pleasant Apes and
Marmesettes for to make them pastime. But the LORD will have none other Apes in
his Church, then such dullardes as the world judges them, which do play and
jest earnestly, and do go as they do intend, in all simplicity, without
dissemblinge that which ought not to be dissembled. He will not have such
little pleasant dogs, for to be a delight and pleasure unto Ladies, but
would have good Mastyes and great greyhoundes which are not to be carried in
the Bsa. 56. c. 10 The mastyes and grayhounds of Jesus Christ. Horat. Hae
n^^gae seria ducunt, ridentem diccr^ Verum. Quid vetant.
sleeue, but for to bark and drive away the Wolf from the fold. Wherefore
if there be men which in laughinge do bite, they do give us to understand
that they take no great pleasure, by such plays and pastimes, but that they
would have other pastime and occasion to speak of better matters. Yet
nevertheless they do show unto those which do love the pastyme, and which
take Democritus.
pleasure in them as Democritus has laughed and scoffed at the follies and
dreams of men, that it is not now need that they do seek any other matter.
The court To laugh at the popes cost.
of Antechrist gives them enough, and most worthyest to laugh at, and in the
which one may better jest without offending GOD, if one do it with such
affection and such modesty as is in these Dialogues. Those also which shall
be totter and severe, and which as Heraclitus Heraclitus.
do judge the follies and miseries of men more worthy of weepinges and
lamentations, then of laughings and iestinges, they shall have here matter
enough to weep, seeing the judgment of GOD which has been, and is yet upon
the Christian people because of our sins, and despisinge of his word.
Insomuch, that me thinckes that I have not written any thing which may bring
hurt unto the Christian religion.

And though I do not profit very much, yet nevertheless there wanted in me
no will. Wherefore I do trust that the good men will take all in the best
part: whom only I fear to offend. If the wicked are angrye without a
cause, I will leave them for such as they are: yet I speak nevertheless the
verity, although they will not take it. If the wise and learned cannot much
profit, it is sufficient for me that the poor ignorant people should receive
some fruit: Although that such a one do think himself very wise and
learned, that he may yet find some thing for to learn. It is very true that
that matter requires better to be entreated off in Latin then in French. For
it contains things which would have been plainer and which would have been
entreated off more briefly, the which peradventure I may be rebuked for
overmuch prolixitie and tediousnes. But there are many reasons which are the
cause. The first, is for that I am one of those Orators which know not to
enter in talk, or begin any matter, nor which know not how to leave off. The
second, because that I do write most of all for the ignorant and rude people,
for whom we had need to chew their meats a little, and to declare the matters
more grossly y^ which they cannot understand in one word, as those that are wise
and learned, which will comprehend it very easily, as those which have read the
Authors out of whom I have taken the matter. Therefore there is yet an other
reason: that is, that I must use great circumlocutions and narrations for to
express and declare that which in Latin or in Greek might be spoken in one
word. For the things are more hard unto those which have not read the Greek
and Latin authors. But I have told already the causes which have moved me
to write rather in this language then in an other. And if the matter be worthy
to be put in the Latin tongue, if it please the Lord, it may be done at
leisure: or it may move the heart of some which will do it better. Be it as it
is, it is to me sufficient, so that I do serve a little the good. If I do
offend the Hipocrites, I would be contented that they be offended with me,
so that they do find better taste in all the other which have spoken and
written of the relygion a great deal better then I, and so that they have them
in such honor and reverence as they ought to have. Histories of our time.
Also I think that none shall find unfit for the matter many of the
histories of our time, the which I have set in and mingled among these matters.
For if it be lawful to allege the ancient historyes written by others,
wherefore should we not speak of that which is done in our time when occasion
serves? Since that so many things do come dailye more worthy of remembrance
then many of those which the ancients have written? Wherefore I have not
esteemed and thought that to be a thing inconvenient nor unworthy of
remembrance, which we our selves and our fathers are witnesses. Also I have
put the quotations of the authors in the margents, out of whom I have taken
that which I have alleged, to the end it should not appear that I have
invented them of mine own head, as well of the Philosophers, Poets,
Historiographers, as Doctors, Questionaries, Sophisters, as of the ancient
Doctors of the Church and holy Scriptures.

FINIS.
THE ARGUMENT AND SVMME of the first Dialogue.
IN this first part and first Dialogue I do amply entreat of the matters which
concern those that be deceased, declaring the errors, abuses, and
superstitions, which are committed about them, and the false and diverse
opinions which have been and yet are among men, as well touching the estate of
the bodies as of the souls. And of hell, Limbus patrum and of Purgatory. And
how that which the supersticious Christians do about the dead, is nothing at
all like unto the word of God, but is altogether taken of the Infidells and
Panims. And for to enter into the matter, I bring in the persons who take their
theme and matter upon a fermon which they heard of an holy father, entreating
of such matters. And although the matter might seem wholly to be feigned, yet it
has the foundation upon a true history. For mine intent is partly in this
first disputacion, to rebuke the sottish and vain curiosity of foolish
Preachers and Doctors, who have forsaken the principal points of the holy
Scripture to occupy themselves upon unprofitable questions and vain
contemplations, and to enquire, of things that they cannot know and which we
have not to do withal. And which serve to none other end but to hinder and
let the poor Christian people to seek out the will of God, to induce and lead
them to false religion, supersticion, Idolatay and all Paganism. Also I
declare the Arguments of the Popes Purgatory with the Purgatory of the
Panims, and the ceremonies and supersticions which they use about the dead, and
out of what spring they issued, and what have been the purgations of the Panims
which the Idolatrous Christians do yet keep: and how the Papisticall Purgatory
has served the insatiable avarice of those which do live to destroy and
devour all the poor world. Also how the priests Purgatory is burned, how
fire has taken the same and what punishment is prepared for those which go
unto strange fire to be purged from their sins any other then the fire of
lesus Christ: and how the priests do disagree both from the word of God, and
from their own doctrine, decrees and canno^s. After those things we shall enter
into the second part which shall entreat of the appearing of the spirits of
those that be dead. All these things shall be yet more plainly understood and
better confirmed by the Dialogues following, of the which the last shall be of
the immortality of the souls and the resurrection of the flesh. Afterward
we will come unto the living, and in the other parts we shall enter into
matters yet more grave, more necessary and of greater importance, for the
present time, to show what is the estate of the world and of relygion, and by
what means that man which fears God, and the poor troubled and doubtful
consciences, may be assured and know what is the true Church and the truth, and
whereunto they may surely stay themselves, and how they may be certain what
doctrine is of God. I have entitled this first Dialogue the Alchymee of
Purgatory, chiefly for two causes. The first because I declare how the
ancient Panims and our priests after their example do travail to extract the
fifte essence of the souls which they melt in their furnaces of Purgatory. The
other is, because from those furnaces our priests do draw out the
Philosophical stone.

For to enter then into the matter, Hillary begins, asking his companions of
the Sermon which they heard.
THE FIRST DIALOGVE which is called the Alchymee of Purgatory.
The Speakers.
Hilarious. Eusebius. Theophilus. Thomas.
Hilarious. If mine eyes have not deceived me, I think I saw you all three to
day at the Sermon: wherefore I desire to know your opinions how the same
pleased you, and what you think of the Preacher.


Eusebius. As far as I can judge, I think that he is very skillful and
cloquent: for he has spoken very learnedly and deeply of matters so obscure
and profounde.


Hilarious. He could not speak more profoundly: For he has pierced even unto
y^ very center of the earth: therefore I am the more abashed that he spoke so
clearly of matters so obscure, and of these dark places no man ever saw ought.
For the Sun never shines there.


Theophilus. As far as I could perceive by him, I think that either he has
not been in those places of which he spoke, or else if he were, it is long ago.
If the opinion of Isydore be true, we shall have very small occasion to give
credit to this ghostly father and to his preachinge.


Eusebius. Has Isydore ben of an other opinion, then the rest of the Christian
Doctors, touching this matter?


Theophilus. There is none among the Christians which doubts that there is an
hell, seeing that the holy Scripture rendereth so sure and vndoubtefull a
testimony with the which we ought to content our selves, not willing to know
any Hell and hell fire Mat 5 c. 25. Mat. 18. 18 Ma^c^^ 41. ^s^ ^6 g ^4. ^ob.
10. d. 12
further, then it has revealed it unto us. It ought to suffice us which Jesus
Christ witnesses unto us, that there is an hell of eternal and unquenchable
fire, where the worm dies not, but where there is everlasting horror, weeping
and gua hing of teeth: we need not to enquire of the place: for I think there
is none which desires to go thither. And therefore we have need to pray unto
GOD, that it would please him to give us his grace to know his will, and to be
able to accomplish it through his son Jesus Christ, to the end we may avoid
that hell fire and extreme darkness. We need not much to stay to know in
what place hell is, The bounds of hell The opinions of the Theologians Thom.
in. 4. did 42 art. 2. D. 1. Richard. 4. did. 42. Plato in Phaedone. The
opinion of Isydore. Io. maio. 4. Sent did. 44. quest. 1.
whether it is in the center of y^ earth, according to the common opinion of
the Doctors and of Plato, which says, y^ it is in the depth of the earth: or
whether it is under the earth in the country of the Antipodes, according to the
opinion of Isydore, who says that after the day of judgment, the Sun and
the Moon shall keep themselves so steadfast in heaven that they shall no more
turn round about the earth, but give their light and brightness, only in
that part of the world in y^ which we dwell, and that the damned shall be all
sent away under the earth, into those horrible darkness, and into those
places, in the which at this day, some men do think, that the Antipodes do
dwell.


Hilarious. If it were so that the Sun and the Moon does now shine there,
we may think, that some one of the country of the Antipodes is come from
thence, who has declared and described to our Preacher the scituacion of hell,
of Lymbo patrum, and of Purgatory, with all their confines in such sort and
manner as he has expounded them unto us.


Thomas. You may say what you will, and I will believe what pleases me, but
I cannot think that he was ever there, or that he has ever heard any one
speak that came from thence, and has so well visited all the places theroff.
For never in my life I heard it better devised. There is neither hall, chamber
nor closet, cole-panne, kitchen, nor seller, chimney nor pot-hangers, great
caudron nor little caudron, chains nor flesh-hookes and other insernall
vtensills, but that he has described and set them forth so lively, as me
thinks I see the things before mine eyes in such sort, that yet I am afraid
when I think on them. The Cyrographers and Notaryes are very dilygent and
curious for to express and declare in their instruments and writings the
situacion and lymtis of houses and possessions of which they make writings off:
But I have not found any so skillful and of such ability who can bound and
lymitte so perfectly the lands, as our preacher to day has lymitted and
bounded out hell, Limbus patrum and Purgatory. As far as I can perceive he
knows in what clymate they are: how many degrees, miles The description of
hell
and places the one is from the other: of what side they are all situated and
placed, whether they be on the Cast, West, North or South.


Hilarious. You take not the matter am^^se. But you must not be abashed, if he
and such as he is, do take so great pains to bound and lymitte so perfectly
those places, and chiefly Purgatory: For they Purgatory and lus revenues
have no better possession then this, which yields unto them more profit and
gain, nor of which they receive and gather up more rents and revenues. There
is no realm, Lordship, land nor heritage which brings more profit to their
Lords and owners, then Purgatory does bring unto them. Wherefore it is no
maruayle if they do fear so much to loose it and that their bounds and lymits
should be transported or changed any other where. Ptolomus and many other wise
and excellent Geographers are esteemed to be very well learned, as well among
the Greeks as the Latins. But I think that among all those, there is not
one, which in his Geography has at any time so well painted and described the
earth with all the parts thereoff, countries and regions as this our Doctor
has described and drawn out before our eyes, these low parts and inseruall
regions.


Thomas. By that we may know, or at the least presume, that he speaks not
only by hear say, but that he has been there in proper person, or ^ls has
had some expert teacher in that Geography. For I do see that the best
Geographers and the most cumming Cosmographers do fail oftentimes in the
description of the earth, and of many countries and regions which are most
familier to us, and of which they may have greatest and most certain
experience.


Hilarious. Without seeking any further, we may try it in the French Cards or
Maps. There is not almost a country better known then France, nevertheless
we see oftentimes great errors in those Cards in the which it is described.
Wherefore we may well think that it may so chance in other tables, mappes,
and cards conteminge the description of heaven and earth and of the regions
and countries unknown.


Thomas. I doubt not at all, but that this Monk has the The inferuall mappes
spirit for to compose and make a table and Map of these low countries,
better then the paynters have painted them out in the temples, or the Printers
in the Shepherds Cale^ders. And therefore I desire very much to speak with him.
For I have taken in hand a journey in the which he may help me. For I hope
that either he will show me some good way, or else satisfy me in such sort
that peradventure I shall save the journey and charges.


Hilarious. What voyage is that which you have taken upon you? will you go
into Sicily?


Thomas. What to do in Sicily?


Hilarious. To descend into hell: For I cannot understand The descending into
hell in Sicily.
any other thing by your talk, forasmuch as you enquire after that Monk to
accomplish and end your voyage. I think you will have him for your guide, to
conduct you in that dangerous voyage, even as Circe ^uyded Ulysses Homer
iodss. 1. and. 11. Virg. Aeneld. 6. Ovid Meta. li. 14.
to bring him to the speech of Elpenor: and Sybilla Aeneas to conduct and bring
him unto the speech of his father Anchises.


Thomas. I think you are either a Prophet or a Divine: you have hitte the
na^^e on the hea^e, you have not erred a whit from the matter. ^ut to what
purpose speak you unto me of Sicily? Is there any haven, or any entrye,
place, or den, to descend into those infernal and obscure, horrible and
most darkesome countries.


Hilarious. What mean you to make all this circumsta^ce and questionings? you
make it so strange as though you had never heard it spoken off before. There is
nothing more The Poetical divinity.
common in the Poetical Theology.


Thomas. You allege unto me a goodly divinity. I have nothing to do with
the Poets, nor with their fables and faynings. Is it not well known, that they
be invented of pleasure, and there is no truth in them, but that they are most
evident lies.


Hilarious. If you so little esteem the testimonye of the Poets, I think you
will not despise altogether the The common witness.
vulgar and common opinion which has continued and endured so long time, and
moreover does confirm it.


Thomas. You bring me into a fair land, and allege unto me a testimony
worthy of credit, for confirmation of the other, to set me over unto the
common people: there is nothing more unconstant, more foolish, more mutable,
nor more ready to believe all lies, fables and follyes?


Hilarious. I think y^ yet at the least wise you will not reject the testimony
of that holy man Odillo, Abbot of the Monks Odilus Abbot of Cluny.
of Cluny, and of many orher Monks very devout, which have followed him.


Thomas. It may be that when I shall hear his opinion, either I will allow it
or disallow it. What says he?


Hilarious. Peter of Amiens has written that in the time of Pope John the
viij. About a thousand Durant. ie Rat. dan o^fi. lib. 7. Rub. de offi. ^or.
Polid. Virg. de invent. reli. lib. 6. c. 9. Aetna called Gibello mount in
^icily.
years after the death and passion of Jesus Christ, Odillo was in Sicily, and
because that he heard oftentimes the noise, cries and bewaylings which were
made continually, about that burning hill Aetna, called of the Italians at this
day Gibello monte, did think it came from the Devils lamenting that the
souls of the faithful deceased were delivered from torments through the
masses, vigiles, prayers, sacrifices and offerings of the Christians. And
therefore he incontinent declared the same to his Monks, and they all decreed
together, that after they had offered their offerings the first day of
November, and celebrated the feast The feast of the dead. Supple. Chron. lib.
2. Feralia Satra
of Saints in the honor of all Saints, they would in like manner the next day
being holyday make prayers and ^risons for the souls of all the faithful
deceased. Afterward in succession of time others received and allowed that
manner of doing, as good and holy.


Thomas. What Parentali^.
reason had they to imagine that those cries and mourninges came of the
lamentations that the Devils made?


Hilarious. I cannot understand that it has had any other reason or foundation
then the Poets, and the common people, to think that there was a place there
to descend into Hell in Sicile.
hell, and the place in which the souls of the wicked were tormented for their
sins, because that in that same mountain there is a perpetual fire which
always burns, and Plini. li. 3. c. 2
has done so of long time. Wherefore they have thought that y^ damned were
kept in those great burning goulfes. By this same reason was Odillo and his
Monks moved, and were the Authors, that the Christians gave Anniuersaries.
themselves to celebrate feasts, and make sacrifiees for the dead in the month
of November, even as the heathen Romans did commonly use it in the month of
February, by y^ Quid. Fast. li. 2 Liui. li. 1. dec. 1.
institution and appointment of Numa Pompilius y^ second king of the Romans.
All the reason that moved Odillo proceeded but of ignorance, for y^ he
understood not the cause whereof those gronings, noise and fearful cries which
he heard in Sicily about that mountain did arise. But imagined that it was
the Devils which haled and fore themselves by the hair, sorrowing with great
despite that they saw thesoules go out of pains and torments. But his
imagination has brought no hurt to his covent, nor to all the other Monks and
Priests. For that sanie day, is the best fair that they have all the year,
and a time in which they make harvest and vintage altogether, with not taking
overmuch pains. If the souls of the deceased have as much gain as they,
they, may be very joyful of the feast.


Thomas. But I would gladly know, from whence those cries and mourninges did
proceed, whether they came Lu^r. li. 1. Hic Aetnea minantur. Murmura flam^
marum rursum se colligere iras.
from the Devils, or from the souls of the dampened, or from those which are
kept in Purgatory, or of some other natural cause.


Hilarious. The cause is easy to be known of him who will understand what
is the situation and nature of the place. For of the one side is the (...)
^u^ibus crap^es terum vt vis cuomatignes. Ad caelum qu^ ferant flamai sulgur^
rursum Clau. de rapt. proserpi. li. 1. Sil. li. 14. Diodo. li. 6. and. 16
Polib. li. 1 ^elli puni^^ S^rabo. li. 6
roaringe of the Sea, which makes an horrible noise, on the other side the
great goulfes of fire that arise and come out of the mounteyne. Wherefore when
the vehement*windes do blow, and enter violently into the holes and caves
that are*there, and mingle themselves with those veins of brimstone kindled
with that impetous fire, we must not marvel when all those things mixed and
confused together, do meet, if there are fearful cryinges, and such which
the Poet has described, saying. Lo^ here the hill that Aetna hight, most
horrible to behold Ovid Meta. li. 15 The description of the hill Aetna.

Thundering out and making cries, most terrible to be told.
Which many times does cast from it, of clouds that are full dark,
And also vvhirle winds that are great, with smoke that is full black.
And burning sparks of fire did fly, and flames that are most great
Which from the fire rose sodeinly, and touched the heavenly seat.
Which oftentimes does vomit out, the hovvels and the guts
Of rocks and stones that are full hard, which in that hill there lu^kes.



Thomas. I do then much doubt, if it be even so as you say, but that the
good Odillo was deceived, and that he, and all his Monks have greatly
dreamed. The poetical fable of Enceladus and of the other Gyrantes. Vir. an^d.
li 3 Fama est E^^^ladi s^mustum flumine corpus Vigeri mole ha^, ingentemque
insuper Aetnam impositam r^ptis flammam ex^ pirare camini^. Et sessum quoti. ^s
mutat l^^us intremere omne^. Murmr Trinacriam, and (...) (...)



Hilarious. They have at the least so much dreamed and those which have
believed their dreams, as they who stayinge themselves upon the fables of
Poets, have thought that Enseladus, Briarnis and the other Gyauntes, were
buried under that great and burning hill of Aetna, after that Jupiter destroyed
them with lightning and ouerthrewe them upon the mounteines that they had made
for to ascend into heaven, when they warred against him. For even as they
imagined that those fearful and terrible Gyauntes were enclosed under that
mounteyne, who remouinge themselves from the one side to the other, did cast
and throw forth those great and dangerous ^^^tes, flaminge fyers,
whoorlewindes and smoked: Those here do put the Dyuels in slee^e of the
Giants: And do attribute unto them that which the mounteyne does naturallye.
So as other dreamers and fo^^es have done of the mounteine of Islande and
Norwaye: of The mountains of Island and Norvvay.
which they that have written of those Regyons and Countries, do witness that
they are almost like unto that hill Aetna, and specially about the borders of
Norwaye. For they say that there is there a mounteyne commonly called
Hechelbergo environed with the Sea, the most horrible Hechelbergo.
and fearful that is in the world. And for to make the tale better and the
thing more meruaylous, they say also, that there are heard the cryinges,
weepinges and lamentations of the souls which go into Hell, insomuche as
those horrible cries and noise are spread and heard The crying of the damned.
a mile round about. They add moreover that there are very great and
meruaylous black Ravens and Crows Ravens and hell crovves.
which fly round about it making also horrible cries, in such sort that they
terrefie every man that none bareth to approach nighe unto that mounteine.
Afterward; Fountains of excessive coldenesse and heat.
there arises out of the same two fountains, whereof the one is of such
vehement and excessive coldenesse, and the other of such heat, that both of
them are intolerable, and there is no Element how cold or hot soever it
be, but that they surmounte it, both in heat and coldenesse. And which is
more in that same Country, toward the South parts, as men say, there is a
place called Nadhegrin, in which the Dyuels of that Nadhegrin. visible d^uels.
place do appear unto men, whom they see before their eyes having bodies of
the air.


Thomas. Odillo might have had better occasion to have situated Hell and
Purgatory there, then in the hill Aetna.


Hilarious. It would have had better, appearaunce, if those things were true.
But if we should stay our selves upon such dreams and lies, we might also
forge an other Hell and Purgatory in Scotland, in which The do^eful hill in
Scotland.
men say that there is a hill full of sorrow and very fearful, by reason of
the cries of those that do weep and lament there. And in Thuringia there is a
hill in which there are heard Thuringia.
most horrible noise and cries: And y^ has not only the name to be freque^ted
with Faunes and Satyrs which are a kind of Devils, which many ways have
seduced y^ Panims. But also some do affirm y^ they have seen the same by
experience. And some writers and Authors accounted for men worthy of credit,
have written it.


Thomas. There should be then many Helles and Purgatories by that account. But
because I fear very much, that there are great follies and lies in those
histories, I think that it should be most sure and expedient for me, to
take that way which I first purposed, then to take the way either in Sicily or
in any of those places that you have named unto me. For the way is not much
frequented nor known as that is which I have taken upon me, except you have
touched the one of the countries, whether I would go.


Hilarious. Whether have you then enterprised to go?


Thomas. I do make mine account, to go straight into Scotland or into Ireland.


Hilarious. Is there any way to descend into these infernal Regions and
countries?


Thomas. Have you ever heard spoken of the voyage and Caves of Saint Patricke?
do you not remember the books that we had at The voyage of saint Patrickes
purgatory.
school when we were little children?


Hilarious. You make me now remember the saying of my Graundfather. Were we not
happy in those days, that we had such books in our hands, in steed of some
good Author, and of the Bible and holy Scriptures? If we consider well the
unhappiness and misery of that time and barberousnesse and ignorance both of
God and all good discipline which then possessed all the world, and compare it
with the mercy which GOD at this present does unto us, we have good occasion
to render unto him thanckes. Do you think that that book, wherein is
described the voyage of Saint Patricke and such other like, full of fables,
most sottishe and brutish, were meet to give any good doctrine unto children,
and that the new testament had not been a better for them to have in their
hands? Truly we are in a good way, forasmuch as we be already come unto
Saint Patricke.


Thomas. You know that this cave is in Ireland.


Hillatius. Some place it in Ireland, and others in Scotland: It is all one to
me wheresoever it be, for I will make no voyage thither.


Thomas. It is all one also to me. For those countries are not far Scotland
and Ireland. Erasmu^^^n ^hiliad. va(...) in Commentae. super pomp. mel.
distant the one from the other: It is enough for me, so that I may find it.
For that cause I have determined to go thither out of hand. But since I heard
our Ghostly Father, I will not go before I have first spoken with him: and
after I will rule my self according to the counsel that he will give me.


Hilarious. You do either mock or dream?


Thomas. That is no country, whereof we should mock, forasmuch as all those
that have been there have lost their laughing and all rejoicing.


Hilarious. It is then like unto the den of Throphonius, which is in the
country of Lebadia, of which the ancient To loose the laughter.
writers have written almost all after the same sort, as our dreamers have
done, of Saint Patrickes hole or cave: and doubt not, but y^ the one fable
has engendered y^ other. Nevertheless Throphonius den. Lebadia philos^r.
^^as. chil. 1. ce^t. 7.
I do not yet think that you speak in earnest.


Thomas. You think that I am such a mocker as you are.


Hilarious. If you be not a mocker, you are then a dreamer.


Thomas. I sleep not whereby I should dream.


Hilarious. No more also did our ghostly Preacher sleep to day: I never in all
my life heard such an old dreamer dream and take on in such sort. I believe
no other thing but that he has studied in the school of some old doting
witch full of lyings, from which he brought this divinity.


Eusebius. Are you not ashamed so to mock and speak against such a virtuous
and learned man as he is.


Hilarious. I know not what knowledge and learning he may have: But this I may
surely say, that I never heard any thing of him, whereby I might know that
there is either knowledge or wisdom in him. If he had studied in humaino
letters, I should have thought that he had read that he preached either in the
Poetries or verses of Homere or Virgil, or of Homer. odissi. (...). Virg.
anaed. 6. plutar in comment. de dam. Socra.
some other Poets, as well Greek as Latin: or in Plutarke. For I am sure y^ in
those Theologies a man shall find that matter altogether entreated off almost
after that sort as he has declared unto us, and chiefly in Plutarke who
declares Timarchus.
most marvelous things, that Timarchus has seen in the den of Trophonius,
which differ but a little from those which we have heard of our Ghostly father.
But I greatly fear that he never profited so much in Greek neither in Latin,
that he could ever have read those authors, nor that he could have
dnderstoode them, if he should have read them. But for to speak as I
think, I rather The Shepherds Callender. Dantes.
believe that he has read it either in the Sepheardes Callender, or in Dantes.
What age is he off?


Thomas. Wherefore do you demand his age?


Hilarious. Because that if he had lived in the time of Alcestis and
Protesilaus, either in the time of Hercules and Theseus, or in the time of
Ulysses and Aeneas, whom the Poets do witness and affirm to have been in
hell, and that they have visited all those countries and chambers, as well the
Limbus patrum as Purgatory, and also those goodly and pleasant fields
Eliseas, we might presume and think that he has spoken unto them, and has
learned of them that Theology. But he must be then at the least more then a
thousand and nine hundredth years old, and that he must John. 12. b. 9 A
sained fable upon the history of Lazarus after the imitation of the poets.
be twice so old as Mathusala.


Thomas. Have we not Lazarus whom Jesus Christ raised to life who has been
long time after all those, who could tell what there is? For thou can not
say that the same is a fable as the others are?


Hilarious. Yet the Ghostly Father could not have spoken unto him, except he
were at the least more then fiftene hundredth years old. I do not deny his
resurrection, but I do deny all those lyings which are added unto the history
of the Gospel.


Thomas. Could he not very well have heard it of those who through long
succession have learned and understood it of those who have heard it of
Lazarus.


Hilarious. Here are a great many of heeresaies, I would gladly know who was
the first, unto whom Lazarus declared it, and whether Lazarus has spoken more
amply then Jesus Christ and all his Prophets and Apostles. Do we not plainly
see how we do ieste with God, tourning his works and miracles into fables,
and Poets inventions? Could the enemies of our Religion do more? Do not these
old dreamers who have dreamed and invented out such fables, make of Lazarus an
other Alcestis, Theseus, Ulysses or Aeneas who are come from hell, for to
declare what is done there? To what other end do all th^s^ inventions and
fabulous narrations of old fools serve. But for to call into doubt Gods
truth, and for to give occasion unto the mockers and contemners of God and of
his word, to laugh and make a scoff of the Christian Religion, and the
Doctrine of the Gospel. As Pithagoras, Lucrecia, Lucian and many others have
scoffed at the Ovid Me^. 15
fables and inventions of the Poets, touching their Hell, and of the vain
credulity and great foolishness of the ignorant people, who gave credit unto
them. As we have done to the dreams of those Caphards and ^oltes, who would
make so many parts of the infernal Regions, as the Cosmographers have made of
the earth. For as they have divided The division of the insernal Cosmographie.
it into Asia, Africa and Europa: Even so have those divided the infernal
habitations into the Limbus patrum, Purgatory, and the hell of the dampened. And
have made all those countries inhabited, and so full of people that there is
not one little corner nor angle, but that all is full, chiefly in purgatory, if
we will believe our Priests and Monks. For the souls go thither daily by
thousands.


Theophilus. Our Lord Jesus Christ raised not Lazarus, nor the others, whom he
has called from death to life, for to hold and keep men by such mockeryes,
and for to make the word of GOD like unto the work of Poets. For his
simplicity, gravity, nor yet his majesty, can bear and suffer it. It
suffices him to teach I^ suffices to know of Hell.
us that there is a Hell, and we ought to content our selves therewith,
without enquiringe where it is, nor what it is. For those who through the just
judgment of God shall be there condemned, shall know it by proving and
feeling it to soon, and more then they would. The elect and blessed who
through Jesus Christ are delivered, study not to know any further, then God
has revealed unto them, that they have felt it in their consciences, when they
have offended, and that they have been grieved and pressed down with the
feeling of their sins.


Hilarious. What will you say if this Ghostly father be one Transmigration of
pythagora^.
of Pithagoras Disciples, and of that same opinion? and that, the soul of
every one of them, whom of late the Poets do witness to be descended into
hell, were entered into his body, insomuch that he was one of the very same?


Theophilus. We might very well have thought no less, in hearing these
dreams and lies: But that we knew for certain that the opinion of Pithagoras
is false (although that many among the Jews are yet dronken therewith) and
that the same which the Poets and Monks have invented are nothing else but
dreams and lyings. But yet although our Monk were some Theseus, Ulysses or
Pithagoras, yet he might very well be deceived. For sithence that those The
^yre begun in purgatory.
were in those regions and countries, the fire has begun there to kindle,
which has burned all the walls of those diverse habitations and infernal
chambers, forged, made and builded first by the Poets, and after wards by the
Monks and Priests, insomuch that there remained neither Limbus patrum, or yet
Purgatory, but Hell only, where that inextinguible fire is.


Thomas. Y^u do speak of the Limbus patrum and of Purgatory, as though there
were none, and that the same that has been preached unto us, was invented of
pleasure, and that they were but fables. But does not the Scripture make
mention of it? do you think that so many good prechers which have been in times
past would have taught such things, if they had not be^ true?


Theophilus. I have heard many preach y^ the children y^ are borne dead, The
children borne dead.
and all those which do die before they be baptized, go straight way unto the
Lymbus patrum wherein they have their chambers aparte, separated from hell and
Purgatory, and that they shall never enter into Paradise, but that they shall
be deprived for ever from y^ joys theroff. Afterward there was nothing that I
heard so much commended in the sermons, as the souls of Purgatory, unto whom
also they give chambers apart, and do keep them as prisoners, in those
dungeons and prisons, until such time as they have The prisoners of P^rgatory.
paid their ransom.


Eusebius. Do you not steadfastly believe that the same is true, that there is a
Lymbe and a Purgatory?


Theophilus. I would believe it without any doubt or contradiction, if I had
read it as well in the old Plato in gorgia and phaedone pl^t^r. in comde dam.
and new testament, as in the books of Plato and of Plutarch and such other
which were of the same opinion.


Hilarious. You ought yet to have added among y^ Greek Poets Orpheus, and
Homere and Virgile among the Latin Poets: who have so well described the
Lymbe, hell, Purgatory, and the Popes paradise, that I think it is not
possible to paynt and set them out better. And I cannot believe but that he was
inspired with the same spirit by The spirit, the Author of pgatory.
which they have spoken who have forged and invented unto us those Lymbes and
Purgatoryes, and with which those were inspired, who did sit in the Counsels
in which such doctrine was allowed and confirmed: peradventure he may find
some thing in the description of Virgile which may seem a little to differ
from the Popes Theology: But notwithstanding if the matters are well examined
and tried, one cannot find so great errors, that for thein he may be judged
an heretic in the Popes church, nor yet repugnance which is not more easy to
agree, then to make Scotus and Thomas Aquinas to agree together: the Reals The
Limb vvher the children are
and No^^alls, the Sophistes and Doctors questionaries that be among them.

But for to prove it, give ear what the Poet speaks ^n such sort as I may
speak in our propre tongue: And for to begin in order I will recite vnt^ thee
first the ^escription of the ^^mbe^ ^here the children are, saying. Anon were
voices heard, and piteous cries, and vvaylings sh^^ll Virg. A^^t. 6
Of souls of tender babes, and infants weeping void of skill. That pleasure
svveet of life did never taste, but from their breast Untimely death them took,
and Fortune grim has down oppressed.

He gives unto the little children their chamber apart, and appoynteth their
dwelling at the entering in of hell, the which he describes more horrible and
fearful, saying. Yet syts a worse v^ithin, Than hell it self that
sinke-hole s^eepe,
Two times as broad desce^ds, two times as headlo^g down right deep Hell.
A^^c. li 6

As heaven upright is hye, if men thereto from thence might peep.


Over and besides these two places, he adds yet two others, to weete,
Purgatory, and the fields E^seas, of which we will speak off hereafter when
his turn comes. Now al these which are lodged in those diverse chambers, are
handled every one of them according to their merits, and punished after diverse
sorts. For the torments and pains are given unto them either more grieu^ns and
cruel, or else more tolerable and gentle, according to ^uery ones mirites and
deserts. He puts and places a large prison, deep, and dark, horrible and
fearful, in the most lowest part of hell, from which those shall never depart
which once have been thrown therein. That prison is the very hell it self,
wherein the great and most grievous sins and offenses are punished, and that
they are ^^sanable and can by no means be purged, as these: sacrilege,
murder, tyranny, vyolences, erecrable whoredom, and such other crimes, and
chiefly those of the Tyrants, Kings, Princes and Lords, whom Plato of which In
Gorgia. the sins of y^ princ^s and tyrants.
proceeded this Philosoph^e, lodged all in hell, if in sleede to be good
Princes and Pastors, they have been tyrants, and the deuourers of the people.


Thomas. I do already here perceive a great agreeing with our Priests and
Monks. As concerning the Lymbes of the little children, there is no more
difference, but that Virgile puts them all there, and our priests do not
lodge and put but those which are dead without being baptized.


Hilarious. He is not so rude and ungentle unto them. For he depriueth them not
of all joy and consolation, as these our priests do the poor little children
of the Christians.


Thomas. As touching hell I do not much mistyke the opinion of Plato. First
because it approaches nigh to the verity of the holy Scriptures, and that he
declares the just judgment of God upon the tyrants. For it is good reason,
since that there is none who may chastise and correct them in this world, and y^
they will not be in subjection neither to God nor man, but do what they list,
they should have double punishment in the other world: And that they should
vomitte and spew up again their great cruelties, vyolences, and great
enormities that they have committed, because they feared neither justice nor
punishment.


Theophilus. Although that the witness of the holy Scriptures is sufficient
for us, yet this ought further to move us, and to confound the Infidlls when
The ver^^e of. the tru^^.
we do see the virtue of the truth to be so puissaunt and of such force that
it constrayneth Philosophers, Poets and others, who have been ignorant of the
knowledge of God, to confess it and to bear witness thereoff.


Thomas. But me thinks that our Priests and Monks do much differ from Plato
and Virgile in y^ they do lodge y^ richest people and the great Princes and
Lords sooner in Purgatory then in Hell.


Hilarious. Do you not know the cause? The riches of Purgatory.
There came no profit unto Plato nor Virgile of the Purgatory, as comes unto
those, and believe that although they had any profit, they were of a better
conscience, and that for their own particular gain they would not have so
seduced the poor ignorant people. For they do show forth by their writings,
that they had a certain fear and knowledge of God, more then we may
acknowledge in these our priests. For they watch after the dead bodies, as
Plato and Virgle.
the Ravens do upon carrion. And if they can meet with any dead man that
has his purse well stuffed with money, wherewith he is able to pay his
ransom, they will be sure to make him tell who has eaten the fat, they will
put him in such a place, from whence he cannot come out before they have taken
some fat from him. For they are the tyrants of tyrants and the pillars of the
great The tyrants of tyrants, and the pillars of the vsarers.
pillars and Usurers, whom they will not suffer to be broiled and tormented of
the Devils, but they will be their hangmen themselves, take away that office
from them to whom God has given it.


Thomas. They shall be the^ much tormented by this account. For they shall be
cruelly handled in this world, and also in the other after their death, as they
have vexed b tormented y^ world whilst they were alive. And suffer them not
notwithstanding to fall into y^ hands of the Devils. But I would gladly know
what pain the other have that have committed smaller sins.


Hilarious. Plato and Virgile do lodge these in Purgatory, The Purgatory of
Plato. In Gorgia. plutar. desera. muni. vind. The sins of the simple people.
The sins of princes.
especially the simple people and which have not been of great credit and
authority. Wherefore they could not have so great license to do evil as the
others. And if they had committed any fault, they had not the power so much to
hurt the people as the others had. For the sins of the Princes do not hurt
only themselves: But as well by them as by their evil example they do hurt
and destroy all the world, where the simple people do hurt but themselves.
And therefore they did think that their sins were sanable, and that they might
be purged. For that cause, they condemned them not unto eternal dampuation:
For The differences of sins and the diversity of the estates of those that
be dead
they thought y^ they had not committed evils enough for to be damned, and that
there was some remedy to be healed. Also they lodged them not at y^ first dash
in y^ fields of bliseas, as the other great and virtuous men, who through their
virtue have merited to be incontinently received into blessedness and toye, or
in the number of Gods.


Thomas. Those then which were good people, and which had not the power to do
so evil as the other, do go into Purgatory against their wills. Nevertheless I
am sure that God will not held them excused therefore. For ^e regards the
heart, will and the affections, and not only the works as the Philosophers
do. Our priests differ not much from that opinion. For they Cannonise and
lodge among the Saints Cnnonizacion of the Saints. Extra. de. cele. miss. 13.
q. 2. Tempus.
those whom they do judge to have been most virtuous and holiest and the
souls perfectly good, the which do fly straight into heaven, and have no
need of our good deeds.


Hilarious. That is to weete the most greatest Hypocrites, superstitious and
Idolaters, and those which have done most for them, and that have best
nourished and fed their fat bellyes.


Thomas. They do lodge in Purgatory those who have not accomplished here
their penance, which nevertheless dyed confessed and repentaunt, or which do
not carry deadly sin with them, but only venial sins, the which may be
purged by the fire. For there is some remedy for those.


Hilarious. Such is their doctrine: But notwithstanding when it comes to
trial, they neither have regard to mortal nor yet venial sins, but sooner
to the riches or to the poverty. It is all one with them whether the sins be
mortal or venial, sanable or insanable, so that the dead has wherewith to
pay their drougs and medicines, and money for his ransom, and letters of
grace that they make for them by their bulls and pardons. And as touching the
poor, of whom they have no profit, it is to them all one whether they go, be
it into Paradise, Hell, or Purgatory. For they have no care of the souls, but
only of their purses.


Thomas. I have yet one thing to demand of thee. Do they say that there is
fire in y^ Poets Purgatory as there is in y^ of the priests?


Hilarious. It seems to me that y^ Poets are a little more reasonable and
more merciful then the priests and Monks. For they make not such broyling and
rosting of the poor souls.


Thomas. How then?


Hilarious. Because that they have assigned the pain a little easier and
lyghter, according to every ones misdeedes. For they condemn not all
generally to y^ fire. But they do make three differences, The differences of
sins and the diuerlitie of the pains.
according to the greatness and smalnesse of sins. Those that have sinned
most grievously, and which are most full and stuffe^ with sins, and which are
most earthly and most hardest to be purged, being so hard glewed and tied to
the soul, that it cannot be plucked away, nor made clean by no means but
through the fire, are put and cast into the hot furnace. For they must be melted
all new again. The other that are not altogether so filthy and vile and that
have not their sins so glewed in the soul that one cannot pull them away, are
holden for a certain time within the great goulfes of water, for to be there
washed and made clean. There are yet others y^ are less faulty and guyltie,
and which have committed but certain small sins, that has no need of such
strong purgation. And therefore they are hanged but a little in the air for to
wind them. For they need but to have a little wind for to blow away the dust
that The diversity of purgations
cleaves fast to the soul, because of the conjunction that it has with his
body and his flesh.


Thomas. As far as I perceive they do with the souls in that Purgatory as
we do with our apparayle, sheets, vessel and metal. For when we have any
clothes, or sheets that are dustie, or whereof we doubt the Moths and Worms:
we stretch them abroad and hang them upon a perch in the air for to wind
and clean them. And if there be any spot or stain that will not easily come
out, we wash them with water. And if that suffices not, we soap them, or put
them in the bucke and bucke them, or else deliver them to the scourers for to
take out the steyne. Also if we have metal that is rusty and canckred and
which has need to be made clean, we cast it in the fire, which makes it
very clean and consumes the dross and rust and other false metal, and
seperateth it from the pure and fine metal.


Hilarious. Thereby you may know that the Poets have had more wit and
reason and better color so to do then the Priests. For they have considered
the nature of the sins, and of the sinners together, as a good Physician The
Phisicions of the soul.
does behold the completion of those that are sick, for to give unto every one
a convenient and sit remedy for his disease.

For they have regard that man's body was made of the four Elements, and that
the completion and the affections of man do follow the temperatnesse of the
body, and the nature of the elements, of which they were made. Forasmuch then
as the body is the house and habitacion of the soul, and that the soul has
been holden within that earthly body as in a prison, and dark dungeon, it is
impossible, but that it is corrupted and defiled with the filthiness of that
infectious body, as he which shall depart out of an infectious and stinking
prison. And therefore Plato and the other Philosophers and Poets, which
followed his opinion, have thought, that the souls had need of some
purgation, after that they were separated from the body, because that after
their departing, it was impossible but that they should carry with them and
keep some filthiness of that corrupt flesh, because of the conjunction,
conversation and familiarity, that they had together. Nevertheless because
that the bodies are not all of one complexion, but according to the disposition
and temperatenesse of the elements, of which they are made, some are more
earthely and other some more heavenly, and according to the doctrine that they
have received, and the exercise that they have had in virtue, some more vicious
or virtuous then the others: Even so have they esteemed and thought that the
souls did differ, according to the difference of the bodies from which they
came out. They have then considered that there are some sins that are more
thin, easy and lighter then others, holding more of the nature of the air,
and of the wind, then of the earth. And therefore they must purge them by the
element, which approaches nearest to their nature, and which seems for them
the best remedy.

The others that are more heavy and wayghtie, as the water is more heauyer and
wayghtyer then the air and wind, are washed in the water: For they do hold
most of the nature of the water. And therefore they put them in the bucke,
wherein they drive, beat and wash them very clean.

Besides those there are other more wayghtyer and heauyer and altogether
earthlye, whom neither the wynd^ nor the water can make clean. And therefore
y^ Souls that have been so defiled with y^ filthiness of their vile and wicked
body, and so much given unto y^ pleasures of y^ body, that they are almost
degenerated and become earthly, are purged by the fire. For they have need of
a hotter and stronger eleme^t for to purify them, and for to consume all
filthe and dross, that there remain nothing but the pure metal of the
celestial nature. For contraries are healed by contraries. But least you
should think that I am the author and inuentour of that Philosophy, and that
I speak these things of mine own head and for my profit, behold how the
Poet speaks, in whose verses you shall find comprised in few words a great
part of that Platonicall and Plutarchall Theology, where he writes of the
souls separated from the body after this manner.

Moreover, when their end of life, and light does them forsake. Virg. Aene. 6.
Purgatory.

Yet can they not their sins, nor sorrows all poor souls of shake.
Nor all contagions fleshly, from them voydes, but must of need
Much things coge^dred long, by wondrous means at last out spread.
Therefore they plagued been, and for their former faults and sins
Their sundry pains they bide, some hye in air does hang on pins.
Some fleeting been in floods, and deep in gulfs themselves they tire
Till sins away be washed, or cleansed clear with purging fire.
Each one of us our penance here abydes, then sent we be
To Paradise at last, we fevv fields of joy do see. The fields ^liseas.

Till compass long of time, by perfect course has purged quite,
Our former cloddred spots, and pure has left our ghostly spirit
And senses pure of soul, and simple sparks of heavenly light.

Thomas. I do think that the Alcumistes have taken their foundation upon
that Philosophie^. For that is the true manner for to extract the fifte
essence. But I think that those Phisiciens of the souls had need to see
their urine for to make them better know their complexion, and to give unto
them the medicine and purgation meet for the same.


Hill^^ins. It should be then needful that the Souls that are in Hell and in
Purgatory should as well have, Esculapius or Cosme and Daiman for their
Phisitious, as the Gods and Saints have in heaven, and by a The physicians and
paticaries of hell.
better reason. For the Gods and the Saints have no more need neither of
medicine nor of purgation as the poor souls have that are kept in Purgatory.
I know not how the ancient Poets and Painims have given unto Mercury the
office of Physic, for to practice his medicines in Mercury.
Hell, with which he guides the souls, for to make them to pass over the
floudes by Charon the ferry man: For he had been very meet and proper for the
souls.


Thomas. But when they shall have a Physician, who shall be their Poticary,
for to make their drouges?


Hilarious. The Priests, which have their shops full, The purging drougs of
the panims.
and are better furnished with them then ever the Panims were, which had
chiefly three sorts of drougs, for the purgacions as well of the quick as the
dead, the which Ovid has comprehended in three words, saying: Three times
the old man vvashed was, with Water fair and clear Ovid.

And with hot fire and Sulphur strong, he purged does appear.


Besides these purgations of the water, fire, and brimstone, Cuperent lustrari
si qua darentur Sulphura cum t^ di^, a u^ si sores humida laurus.
they had also their holy winnowinges or faminges, which they used chiefly at
the feasts and sacrifices of God Baccus, the which they made with a fan
consecrated for that purpose.


Theophilus. Behold the dreamings wherein men do fall, yea the most wisest,
when they give themselves The holy fannings of Baccus
to play the Philosopher with heavenly things after their own fantasy and
mind without the spirit of God, and that they do seek the purgation of
their sins in their purgatories, besides Jesus Christ.


Thomas. Me thinckes that we do yet retain almost all those customs. For
we do light and offer torches, tapers and candels of Wax, as well for the
dead, as for those that are alive. And the first thing that we must have, when
one dies, are the torches to lead him to hye grave. And all the year after
we must have Candels lighted upon his Sepulcher, and after to offer them unto
The torches and lights at the burials.
the Priests.


Hilarious. It is because they see not.


Thomas. Whom do you mean? the Priests or those that be dead?


Hilarious. Both the one and the other. We cannot deny but that the dead bodies
have lost their sight, and that they are in darkness, as touching their body.
But nevertheless the shining and brightness of the torches Virg. Cassum
lumine lugent.
serves them to no purpose. I think also that the soul has no need of
them. For if it go into Paradise, it has the Angels to carry it thither, as
the soul of Lazarus was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. For that
Luc. 16. 2. (...)
has light enough and the Angels also with the brightness of God. Wherefore
they have not to do with our light, that cannot serve for the soul, but for
the body only. If the soul go into hell, there are guides enough for to
bring it thither, and it is not now necessary that we do give light to it. It
has the Angels of Satan altogether contrary to the other Angels to carry it
thither.


Thomas. But if it go into Purgatory, for that it is so deep, has it no need
of light for to conduct them through those dark places?


Hilarious. If that which they say be true, there is fire enough, without
putting any more unto it. And if that fire be not sufficient for them, I
think that the light of our torches cannot give light there. For if the Sun
beams and his brightness cannot enter and pearce through, what may we hope
of our fire? You may then understand by these reasons that all these lights
serve nothing at all for the dead, nor profit them, neither for the body nor
yet the soul. It must be then that they do profit the Priests, or else it is
a lost labor. But wherein can they serve for them? For if they be blind, and
that the Sun light helps them not, no more shall they see by the
illumination of the torches and candels. If they do see clear enough, they
have no need: for the cleerenesse of the Sun ought to suffice them: except
they buried them in the night, as the Panims did bury the poor that had not
money to pay for their funeral pomp.


Thomas. It must then be that they are either mad The burying of the poor
in the night.
and out of their wit, or else that they would show by the same, that those that
do such things are fools and deprived of all understanding.


Hilarious. I think that they would do In Apotheg. Diogenes.
as Diogenes did, who at noone days lighted a candle, and did seek for men in
the middle of the Market with a lantern.


Thomas. To what purpose did he the same?


Hilarious. For to make men to understand, that they were beasts without
reason and understanding, and that he had much a do to find men, that is to
say, wise men, both of wit and judgment, although he sought them with a
lanterns. Should he not have more occasion to do the same now at this
present time? For to what end do all those lights serve, but for to declare
that we are the successors The imitacion of the Panims.
of the Panims who after the same sort used torches, and candels at the burials
and funerals of their dead? For we have not read in all the holy Scriptures
that ever the true servants of God have lighted candels for the dead. Nor
that they were ever in such superstition. Also we need not to doubt but that
the holy Water wherewith we The holy water.
sprinkle the graves of the dead, is also taken of the immitation of the Panims.


Theophilus. I doubt it not. It is very true, that the ancient The baptismes.
and vvashinges of the ^hvish people Leuit. 16. c. Nomb. 19. a. 4 Heb. 9. d. 13.
people of God had certain washings and certain baptismes, for their
purifications: not that they did thinck that the filthiness and uncleanness
of the soul and conscience, could be washed and made clean, by the water and
corruptible Elements. For since that the soul is a spirit, it must have a
spiritual purgation, agreeing to his nature, and not corporal.


Thomas. What profit then do they receive of such ceremonies?


Theophilus. They did the same for to testify and witness that they were
sinners, polluted and unclean, and that they had need of a purgation, the
which they could not find in themselves, but must seek it of others.
Forasmuch then as they acknowledge themselves sinners, and in making open
confession by those exterior and outward washings, and do witness that the
blood of Jesus Christ was necessary for them for the washinge away of their
sins, they pleased by that obedience and confession, God, and by the faith that
they had in Jesus Christ, ^figured by those ceremonies and sacraments, whom
they did look for to be their Savior. They did truly communicate the blood
of Jesus, which for them ought to have been shed, as we do by the baptism,
saving but that we had all things more excellent then they. But we do not
find that they ever baptized the dead, nor sprinkled their Sepulchers with
coniured Water.


Hilarious. We read that the heathen Priests used in their purgations, the
water of the sea, with which they sprinkled that which they would purge:
Proclus de sacrif. and mag. Salt water. The property of Salt.
Of which Proclus that noble Philosopher the Platonist yeldeth the reason,
saying that such water has the property to purge, because it is salt, and
that the salt has in it some portion of the fire, and holds somewhat of his
Nature. That same makes me to think that our Priests for that same cause
did put salt in their holy Water. For before they did conjure the Water, they
did first conjure the salt, and after did put it into the Water.


Thomas. They did it after the example of Eliseus.


Theophilus. But Eliseus did not cast the salt into the The exemple of Eliseus.
4. Reg. 2. d. 21 De consecr. dast. 3. cap. Aquam.
water, for to conjure the Devils there with, but has done it for to purge and
make it clean, because that it was infected and poisoned, so much y^ none
could drink of it. And notwithstanding that Eliseus did put salt in it, yet
nevertheless the salt of his nature had not the property to correct and amend
the corruption of the Water, if the virtue of God had not wrought and done it
nuraculously: As it is declared by the applications of the things, which Jesus
The spittle of Jesus Christ. Mar. 7. d. 3^
Christ used, as in putting the spittle upon the tongues of those that were
dumme, for to make them speak: or upon the eyes of the blind, for to make
them see: or within John. 9. a, 6
the ears of those that were deaf for to make them hear: not because that
he could not do that without such applications, as he has very well
declared in a The applicatio^s of Jesus Christ.
great many other of his works: For how oftentimes has he healed them in
touching them only, either by ^at. 6. a 3 Mat. 9(...) Mar. 5. c. 29
the hand, as the leapers, or by y^ gown, as y^ woman which was diseased with
the issue of blood, and others, without either seeing or touching them, as the
son of y^ Centurion: Mat. 8. a. 5
But even as thereby he would declare that al proceeded from his virtue and
power, and not of the creatures. Also sometime he used them for to let us to
understand, that when he would they should serve, he gave them such virtue
and property as it pleases him, and for to learn us that we ought not to
despise the means that he has The means of God.
given unto us, how vile soever our reason judges them to be. For whatsoever
they may be, so that he has ordained them, and that we have his promise,
we must not doubt but by them he does that which he has promised.
Therefore he has taken things, which had not of their own nature the virtue
to bring to pass those effects, to which they have been applied, that all
men might know, that from him only proceeded the virtue, and not of any
ordinary or natural cause. But these miraculous works, are nothing at all
like unto those which our Priests do: and their ceremonies, have not such
promises. If by that they could remedy she corrupt waters, as Eliseus did, we
will acknowledge the gift to work miracles to be in them which was in
Eliseus. But to what end serves the salt in the water?


Hilarious. To what end serves it to be put into the Infants salted. The
salt in the Baptism.
mouths of the little children, when they baptize them?


Theophilus. As much as their spittle profited the infants being put into
their mouths, upon the tongue and upon the ears.


Hilarious. Me thinckes that I do see Apes, which would counterfeit al y^
works of Jesus Christ: Apes that cou^terfet Jesus Christ.
At the least wise all their doings are as those of the Apes, which does but
little and yet evil. If they could by their spittle make the little children
and those that are dumme The spittle of the Priests.
speak: or make the blind see, and the deaf hear, I would counsel them to
use it often: But if I had a little child, I would not have that such swinish
and pockie Merchaunts as are among them should breath over his face, nor put
their spittle in his mouth. They do call their salt, y^ salt of wisdom: And
in steed to season us and to make us wise through the salt of the word of God:
They salt us in the throat at The salt of vvisdome. Accipe sal sapientiae. The
salt of gods word. The salt of the priests.
the baptism. I think that they feared y^ the wine would not abide
drincking, and that we should not be good bibbers. Wherefore they would season
us in good time. I believe that they greatly feared least we should become
Turks, and least we should cast up the wine, if they salted not well the
throat, as men do unto their sheep. If they could with their salt make the
fools to become wise, I would The seasoning of fools.
thinck it good to salt all the foolish people as men do salt the fat larde,
throughout all the body not only in the throat.


Thomas. I would not give y^ counsel. For then the salt would ware very
dear, if Saloman has said true, writing, Eccle. 1.
that the number of the fools are infinite. Hlilarius. Thy reason is good. For
y^ inconvenience which thou speak off would follow, and an other more
greater: To weet, that S. Maturyn who healed the fools, should loose his
occupation: Besios that I believe that the salt, although there Saint Ma^^in.
be great quantity and store of it, will not much profit y^ souls when the
Priests do mingle them with the Water. For the disease is very incurable. But
for to return to our Priests, I do believe that of that salt and Water, they
would make such potage for the souls, as my Mother did potage for the souls.
once make for her self and for me and my little brother which were not much
above twelve or xiij. years of age, without putting into it eitheir Oil or
Butter, because that she would have us to fast with her with bread and water:
For if there had been any fatness in the broth or potage, it had not been a
perfect fast. If it be so, our Priests on this side the sea, which dwell far
from it, should have better color and cause to salt and season the water,
then those y^ dwell hard by it. For if they would make potage for the souls,
they shall find enough of such sodden Water in the sea, and they shall not
need to seek after the example of Eliseus for to make him their Author: For
he was never such a Cook: But Alexander. 1 the first inuentour of holy water.
they must give the honor of that inue^tion unto Pope Alexander the first of
that name. For if they will purge the dead through water, I would give them
counsel rather platine in vit. Alex. 1. de consecra. did. 3 cap. aquam. The
bathes of the dead.
to wash them altogether with hot Water, as the Panims did theirs, and call
that washing the last bath or washing, even as our Priests do call their last
an cling or unction, the latter Sacrament: In which they do herein differ
from the Panims, that they anointed men a little before they dye, and the
Panims anointed them afterward. Wherefore their unction was a little more
latter. But least you should think that I speak without authority, as many
Divines and Preachers do, when they do preach their own fables and dreams,
I will bring out first for mine Authors that ancient Poet Ennius, saying.
Ennius.
When death with dreadful dart, bereft, king Tarquin of his life
His body vvasht and nointed was, by hands of his own wife.


And Virgile speakinge of the burninge of Misenus, says: Some brought the
Water vvarme, in Caudro^s hot they set in flower Virg. Aene. 6

The body cold they vvash, a precious ointment on they power.


If the water could any thing profit the dead, it were better to make for
them a great bath, and to plunge all their body, in a great tub of Water, and
to wash them well for a good space, then to sprinckle them so little. For me
seems that that manner of doing is more proper for to kindle the fire of
Purgatory, if the Water does descend thither, then for to quench it. And the
same I will prove by authority and by examdle. I will first prove it by the
authority of many good Physicians, which say that when a man is very dry for
want of drink, it is better for him to drink a good draught at once then to
sippe often: For that same does not quench the heat that is in the body, but
kindles it the more. And to the end that The examples of the Smithes.
it do not seem that they speak that without reason, they do also allege
the example of the Smythes, the which I will bring forth for my second
argument, which is infallible, inasmuch as it is always confirmed by
experience. For we see that when they would have their To what end serves
y^ washing of the dead bodies.
coals burn well, and to give great heat they sprinckle the^ with water,
which they have always ready, with a little sprinckle or besome, as the
Priests have them in their holy water stock. There is yet an other reason,
for which I do find the manner of the Panims better and more lowable, because
that at the leastwise that shall serve for the dead, for to prove whether they
be dead or not: For it Those that are alive reputed to be dead.
chances oftentimes through some disease, that the spirit is so locked and
enclosed in the body, that man loses altogether his breath, in such sort that
one can by no means perceive it, but judges him to be dead, and so he is
deceived. By that means sometimes some have been buried quick: The which
thing ought very much to be feared in all suffocations and chokings, and
chiefly of the matrice Suffocations.
of women, and also in the time of the pestilence or plague: wherein many times
it has been found that they The time of pestilence.
have brought to be buried those who were found alive. Wherefore it is not
meet to bury any dead body to sodeine, especially when he dies sodeinly. For
y^ may very well sometime happen unto man, which we have proved in some
beasts, namely in the Dormouse, which have been The Dormouse.
found so fast of sleep in the Winter, that it is not possible to awake them:
As it has been many times proved in some of them, who although they were cut a
sunder in the middle did not wag nor stur until such time as they are put into
hot sething water. And to that end and purpose many Plini. Not hist. li. 7.
cap. 52. Val. Max. li. 1. cap. 8 A. Auiola L. Lam^a.
Historiographers and namely Pliny makes mention of one Attilius Auiola, and
Lucius Lamia, that after that their bodies were cast upon the wood for to be
burned after the custom of the ancient Romans, did stand right up when they
felt the heat of the fire, and there tarried still. For none could succor and
help them because y^ fire was kindled about them, but were burned all alive.


Thomas. Those have no need to go into purgatory. For they have been purged
enough already.


Hilarious. For y^ cause y^ panims did not burn the bodies of those that dyed
incontinently, but kept them seven days, and washed them in hot water, and
bewailed and lamented them with a loud voice many times, as we Singing after
the dead.
do unto those that do sound or faint, when any faintness of heart has
taken them. And after when they have bewailed them the last time, they do
burn them the eight day, and the nynthe day they bury their ashes. For that
cause do they also celebrate the nine days feast for the soul of the dead.


Thomas. If that which you speak off be true, we do but a little differ from
them. For our priests do cry after them with so loud a voice, that if they be
not deaf or altogether dead, they would awake.


Hilarious. There is no difference, but that we are more foolish and more mad
then the Panims. For the Panims do not cry after the dead, but until they are
burned and their ashes buried: But our Priests do cry after them over their
Tombs and Sepulchers, twenty, thirty, forty, yea a hundredth years after
their death, and although they are altogether consumed to duste. But I find
them a great deal wiser and better advised in that matter, for that they do
sprinkle their Sepulchers with water only, and not with wine, as the Panims
that did shed out great abundance of wine, and milk upon the Sepulchers,
and To offer wine for the dead.
more lyberally then those do the holy water.


Thomas. They were very fools, do they think that that wine descends into
Purgatory, for to give drink to the souls of the dead, or the bodies that
were in the Sepulchers?


Hilarious. We are as much fools if we do think that the holy water,
wherewith we sprinkle the Sepulchers and Churchyards, does descend into
Purgatory for to quench and put out the fire. For when the priest makes his
Asperges in the Mass, and in casting the holy water upon the people, if he
do see any that puts not off his cappe or bonet for to receive that holy
coniured and charmed water, he cries out upon him and calls him Lutherian
and Heretic. Nevertheless if their holy water had such strength to penetrate
and go through into Purgatory, it is marvel if it cannot as well pearce and
go through a cappe or bonet, without putting it of the head.


Thomas. From whence think you that that manner to To sprinkle the sepulchers
with water.
sprinkle the Scpulchers with water did first come?


Hilarious. Truly I know not: except it be done in steed that as the Panims
after the burninge did sprinkle with water all those that were there present,
for to purify them The purifications at the funerals.
from the pollution and filth that they might receive, in approaching nigh the
dead: with which they did think themselves defiled. And in steed that the
Panims did purify those that be alive, our Priests will purify those that
be dead, and when they are upon the earth and under the earth: Or
peradventure that custom first came or took his beginning, for that the
Panims did deck and To beutifie the sepulchers with flovvers.
beautify their Sepulchers with goodly flowers. Afterward they sprinkeled
them with water, to make them continue the longer fresh and sweet. The which
is used at The custom of the Bigordains. Bag^teres. Ratio diui off. de offi.
mor. li. 7. Reiserspeeg. Sermo dominie. 20 post Trinita.
this day in the country of Bigore, in the City of Bagnieres hard by the hills
Pyrenes: And among some other Christians, as well in Almaigne as in other
countries, who do put hats or garlands of flowers, either of Baye or of Iuye
within the beer under the body of the dead, because they should keep a long
time their verdure and sweetness. But because peradventure you may desire the
witness of all these things, which I have now declared unto you of the Panims,
I would y^ you should hear the^ speak themselves, as already before we have
done it, translating word for word their Latin verse into English rhyme, to
the end that they may keep the better their style.

Mark well then the Prince and chief of the Poets, touching the cries and
lamentations that they make after the dead, speaking after this manner of the
burying of Polidorus.

And holy blood in basins brought, we pour and last of all Virg. Aen. 3.

We shright, and on his soul our last with great cries out we call.


And as touching the effusion of the wine, the sprincklyng of the water and of
flowers, the which he has comprised altogether, mark what he says at the
funerals of Misenus.

^Hen fallen his sinders were, and longer blase did not endure Aene. 6.

His relics and remain of dust, with wines they washed pure.
Then Choryney his bones, in brazen coffin bright did close
And sprinklyng water pure, about his mates three times he goes.
And drops of sacred dew, with Olyue palms on them did shake,
And compass blessed them all, and sentence last he sadly spoke. Requieseant in
pace.

To fields of joy thy soul, and endelesse rest we do betake.


And in an other place speaking of the Anniuersary that Aeneas did for his
father Anchises says. ^E from the counsel came with thousa^ds thick in mighty
thro^g Virg. Aene. 9

Unto his fathers tom be, in mids of all his Princes strong.
Two bowls of blessed wine, in solemn guise he cast on ground,
And milk in basins tvvayne, about the tomb he poured round.
And tvvayne of sacred blood, then all the grave he spread and laid,
With flovvres of purple hevves, and thus at last full lovvd he prayed.


Thou have heard the words of the Poet, or at the least the sense of them,
which have given me occasion to think that which I have told unto thee.
Nevertheless it may be that our priests have invented that manner to sprinkle
the Sepulchers with water, for to spare the wine, the which they had rather
drink then to shed it, and they will not be so prodigal in spending the
wine so much as they do the water.


Thomas. We do not spare it therefore. For we are compelled to give drink to
the souls all the year.


Hilarious. We are the more fools: But our Priests are wiser then the Panims.
For they have no regard to give the souls drink, nor to pour it upon the
earth, for to sprinkle the Sepulchers: but do pour it into their bellyes,
and sprinkle their consciences, and will keep the law of Numa ky^e of the
Romans, saying: Do The ^^vv of Numa.
not pour out the wine upon the ashes and Sepulchers of Vino rogum ne
respergito.
the dead.


Thomas. They are then the Lieuetenaunts of the souls, but I would have no
such Lieuetenants at my table. I had rather to give them charge to fast for
me, then to eat, and had rather have them heerem my Lieuetenants. But let us
also speak of the wynnowings that you have set forth for the third manner of
Purgatory, y^ which the ancients had and used. I know not whether we use them
toward the dead: But I have seen them used toward those that be alive. I
have seen them used toward those that be alive. I have seen the priests to
wind the women and little children with the platine, messell and corporal
cloth in the Mass. But I know not to what end the Demostb. in Aes^ chi. Virg.
Georg. 1. Et mistica vannus Ia^^bi.
wind can serve for y^ souls in Purgatory, but for to blow their fire.


Hilarious. I would counsel them to have a Fan, as the Panims had, which
was made holy for to make their holy winnowings. When I have throughlye
considered it, I do think that our Priests and Monks cannot give so good
reason of y^ that they do, as y^ Panims. And for to tell the truth, me
thinks that they are like unto those Emperiques, that have but one receyte
for all Emperiques.
diseases and complexions, for all ages, times and countries, who do kill more
then they do heal: or for to make y^ comparison Melters.
more proper, they make me to remember those Surgions which do grease those
that have the gout and the pocks, whom they cause al to pass through their
furnace, for to melt them all anew.


Theophilus. Since that they despise and contemn the The Purgatory of those
that have the pox.
Gospel, and that by the same they will not be made new creatures, forsaking
their old Adam, and the concupiscence of their flesh, it is good reason, that
they have such Smithes and melters for to make them new again. And since that
men do make no punishment. God through his just judgment will make them to
feel that fire, for to quench the fire of concupiscence which burns in their
heart and veins, if they can consider it, which is for their profit, and to
draw them from their whoredom.


Thomas. Men have The diet.
now found out, that they can heal through the diet without melting them.


Hilarious. I do greatly fear, that if our Priests and Monks learn none
other occupation and science, and that they find out none other drougs for to
purge sins, that they shall not find hereafter any great trade, but shall be
constrained to make the diet themselves, and the Alcumy with their teeth, the
which they do fear greatly. For men will give them so little to eat, that I
greatly doubt that they need not to learn to fast and to live in more
greater sobriety and abstinence, for to cool them a little. For since that the
fire has begun to kindle with in their furnace, as Theophilus has said, and
that all is consumed and burned except hell, it is much to be feared that the
register and rentall of their revenues with all their rentes The rentall of
Purgatory.
that come unto them yearly of Purgatory be not altogether consumed and
melted. I do think that there is no The Art for to teach y^ priests to be
sober.
better remedy for to correct their whoredom, and to learn them sobriety and
to keep a good diet, then to take from them their Purgatory. Wherefore y^
Soldiers were not altogether The salutacion of the Soldiers unto the holy
fathers
evil advised, nor did not evil understand that matter, who answered to
those holy fathers, in steed of a great curse when they saluted them, with
their Pax vobis and pax sit huic Domini: Dominus auferat vobis Purgatorium. O
holy father (say they.) They do pray that the Soldiers may have peace, and
the Soldiers to the contrary do pray for them that God would take from them
their Purgatory. And do show the reason. For we live say they by the war,
as you do of Purgatory, and you would take it from us, and give unto us
peace. Wherefore we pray unto God that he would also take from you the
Purgatory, and you shall be as much estonished as we, and do think that you
shall have no more to eat their we have.


Thomas. You are of his opinion whom I demanded not long since the exposition
of a place that is in the Gospel, Mat. 17 d^at To drive ou^ Devils through
fasting and prayer.
in which Jesus Christ speaking of him y^ was possessed with a Devil, whom his
Disciples could not heal, says: This kind of Devils cannot be driven out
but by fasting and prayer.


Hilarious. What exposition does he give unto thee upon the same?


Thomas. That the Priests and Monks were of that kind of devils, that they
cannot be driven away but by prayer and fasting, and therefore says he, give
them nothing to eat, but let them fast as long as they have made you fast, and
pray unto God for them.


Hilarious. Behold a very good receite, the which will not cost very much at
the Apothicaries.


Theophilus. But we must not so jest and scoff with Gods word.


Thomas. Notwithstanding he that answered unto me so and unto many other that
were present, was one of your people and one of your goodly gospellers.


Theophilus. I deny not but that we have many such, which are good Carnal
Gospellers
gospellers in not giving any thing unto the Priests, nor yet in offering any
thing unto them. But that is not sufficient: Since that they account the
Priests and Moukes for Devils, I would gladly that they should practice with
themselves that doctrine of Jesus Christ, and that they would not be only
gospellers in eating of flesh all days a like, and in not offering no more
unto the Priests, nor unto their images: But that they would give themselves
to pray unto God, to deliver his Church from false prophets and sheperdes, and
for to provide true Priests that do confess and preach his gospel. And to
the The fastings and prayers of the Christinas
end that their prayers should be the more fervent and done with greater
faith, I do also desire that they would live more soberly then they have done,
and that they would fast after the manner of the true servants of God, for to
be more attentive and fervent in their prayers, and that they would give
alms unto the poor, of the goods of Jesus Christ that men have stolen from
his members, for to give them to the Priests.


Thomas. I am of thine opinion. For as touching the riside we, I see that
almost every one will be come a gospeller in that point, that is in giving
little unto y^ Priests. But after all these matters, I would gladly that you
would declare unto me, when and how the fire has first begun in Purgatory,
and sithence what time it is burned?


Theophilus. Sithence that the Gospel of Jesus Christ has been preached by
the Apostles.


Thomas. Me thinks that you speak against Hillarie, How Purgatory is burned
and all the catholic Church. For if it had been burned so long time agon,
what Purgatory should the Priests have had sithence?


Theophilus. You must understand, that sithence the ruins and decayed places
thereof have been repaired and amended by them, as an old house that men do
reedifie and amend, after that it is decayed. But sithence these thirty or
twenty years, the fire has begun to kindle again, and has consumed and
wasted it altogether. Therefore I do say, that either the holy father the
preacher was never there, or else it is long time sithence: Wherefore he could
not be advertised of the household that they keep there.


Thomas. Then I pray you, wherefore is not Hell as well burned which is more
dangerous, Hell
and in which there is greater fire, then either in y^ Limb, or in Purgatory?


Theophilus. If you had well understood that which has been already told
you, I needed not now to satisfy again your demand. The Limb and
Purgatory are burned because they were builded and set up with men's hands, who
can make no work to continue any long time, but that it will be rotten in long
continuance, or else destroyed with the fire which consumes all 2. Pet 3. d
Hell and the pains of hell are eternal
things. But hell is an other thing: there are very strong walls, which will
continue for ever. For even as God, which is eternal has builded with his
own hand those goodly celestial palaces, and has planted that pleasant and
delectable paradise, for to receive his children and servants into the fruition
and pleasure of the eternal life and felicity: So has he constituted and
appointed for to give unto the wicked according to their iniquity, and to
punish them as a righteous judge for their execrable crimes and offenses, the
fire of Hell in which y^ worm dies not nor y^ fire is never Mar. 9. g. 4 4
Esa, 66. g. 24 Esa. 30 g. 30.
quenched. For as witnesses y^ prophet Esaias: The Lord does breath forth,
through y^ wind of his wrath and indignation, and does cause the floods of
Brimstone to flow out for ever, through his wrath and vengeance, insomuch that
there is never fire there lacking.


Thomas. But how has the fire begun in Purgatory rather sitheus the time that
you have spoken, then it did before?


Theophilus. I do marvel that in this so long time it has not been done, and
how it could so long continue, considering the tyranny that was there
exercised. For since that it was reedyfied and builded again, there went no
more any into Paradise nor yet into Hell, but all tarried in Purgatory. There was
neither poor nor rich but that all were put in there: and they could not be
suffered to depart although that they had paid their ransom two or three
times, especially when there is whereof to take. For there are such, that after
they have been kept there already one or two hundredth years, yet they have
been constrained to disburse yearly, daily and hourly new money, for to have
bulls and pardons, for to have Masses, Vigiles, Requiems, Libera me, and for to
celebrate Yereminds, Anniuersaryes, for to pay obites, and a great many other
sorts of gatherings, tributes and rents, that it is impossible to number them.


Hilarious. I think that there should be goodly and rich mines of gold and
silver. I know not whether that fire has melted and consumed it al together.
For there was in times past great store, that almost all the gold and silver of
the world, and all the riches and treasures of the Christians are all gone
thither. The Panims held Pluto for the God of hell and of riches, because they
thought him to dwell in Pluto.
those low countries, to which the souls did go: and because that all the
treasures and riches do come from the earth, and that one shall find th^r the
mines of gold and of silver. But the more I do think on the folly of the
Panims, so much the more do I find ours to be out of reason, saving that we
have in deed that which they had but in figure and imagining. For we have the
Pope which is the very Pluto. For he has both Hell and Paradise to sell. He
is king of Hell, Lymbe and of Purgatory. He is Eacus, Minos, and Radamantus.
For he judges the ^oore souls, as it pleases him, and condemns them to the
Limb, Purgatory or in hell when it pleases him, and as often as he sees
good. And God knows what mines of gold and silver, what treasures and goods
he draws unto him: in such sort that we may very well call him Pluto, Mammon,
God of the earth and under the earth, king of Hell and of all his territories.
The more I consider the thing, so much y^ more it makes me astonished. For I
have read many histories which make mention of many Tyrants and great thieves,
which have been covetous and raueners without all measure: But I know not,
whether a man shall find many, or To demand tribute of the dead.
one only that has caused tribute to be paid by the dead, as be does daily
among the Christians. If one shall find any, I believe at the least that he
has not so long compelled the dead to pay tribute. We may very well say that
among the Christians is accomplished the proverb of the auncientes, who speak
of those that with wrong and violence Aristo. li. 2 R^eto.
go about to have and catch, they demand tribute of the dead and the meal
and flower of Images: willing also by that kind of speaking, to rebuke those
that will enrich themselves by dishonest and unlawful means, and which do
seek profit of those small and vile things, as the Emperor Vespasian, who
caused tribute to be paid of the vryne: and of vile things, as of bawdry, even
as the Pope did that received tribute of whoores and of brothell houses that
are at Rome. One may also speak it of those that get money of all men, without
any difference either of friends, poor or Sueto in ve^^as. Tribute of v^^ne
and of the stevves.
of the beggars, and in the end, of those that are dead. But that Proverb
could never be better applied, then to our Priests and Monks. Vespasian
although he was otherwise a good Emperor, has been taxed of covetousness
for that tribute that he received of the vryne. And when his son Titus who
was ashamed, Vespasian and Titus S^^ to in Vespas.
admonished him, he caused him to smell at his nose the money he received,
afterward asked him, whether he did smell the vryne? When Titus had answered
him, that no, he said unto him then? All savor is good so that money do
come. The savor of the gain is good which way soever it do come and of what
thing soever it ^ix^i bonus odor exre qu^^ libet. B^^ry savor is good so that
money come.
be. Our Priests have kept well that proverb and know very well to
practice it. For notwithstanding that the dead carrens of whom they take money,
do stincke, it suffices them so that the money does not stincke. The Roman
Princes have been in the old time much despised, The avarice of the Romans
Necrocorinth^a.
for that they have dug up the monuments of the Corinthians, and have
carried away their Images and pictures of brass. But what shall men say of
these here? They are not content with the dismes, prebendes, benefices, rentes
and revenues that they have continually, but The Christians contributaries
before they be borne and after they be dead.
we must give them new money daily, after that we be conceived in our
Mothers belly, until an hundredth years after we be dead and more. If our
Mother that bears us do take any hurt because of her child, she shall make
incontinently a vow unto some Saint, and shall cause Masses to be said, and
shall bring money unto the Priest, and shall bind her son to keep the vow
and to do the like when he comes to age. Are we not already appointed to
pay a ransom in our Mothers belly? Do we not begin to pay tribute, before
we be borne? Afterward if the child be borne? he shall not be baptized,
nor can be a Christian, except you do Baptism.
pay money. Behold the happy hour that we have immedeatly at the enteringe
into the Church. Must the child be anealed and confirmed? he must pay,
for they will not lay only their hands upon him, nor he Confirmation
shall not have the holy Oil and Cream, except that he have Confession Singing
of Masses.
ready money. Will he be confessed? he must pay. Will he have Masses and
prayers said for him? he must pay. Will he receive the Lords supper? he must
buy Jesus The Supper.
Christ with ready money.


Theophilus. Yet their money were but a small tryfle and a thing of nothing, if
that that they did, were according to Gods ordinance: But it is altogether
contrary.


Hilarious. Will he marry? he cannot be wedded Marriage.
but that he must pay. Will he be a Priest? GOD To take orders.
knows howo often he must put his hand into his pourse before y^ he has
passed through all their orders. But after he will make the poor people pay
for it. Does he fall sick and will he be anealed? and have his last
Sacrament? Extrem vnctio^.
he must pay. I do not know how, but that we may be all good
Arithmeticians, although we have never seen Arithmaticke nor yet castinge of
accomptes. For we do practice all our life time no other Arithmeticians. and
the schole of Arithmaticke.
science with them. We need not to send our children unto Schoolemaisters
for to learn them to account, cifre and number. For they may learn very
well with them. They will neither consecrate nor conjure not so much as a
stone, chalice, candle, or a drop of water, they will not so much as lift up
their hand for to make a cross and bless but with two fingers without
putting out all their hand, without some hope of gain. They will not so much
as to bless a root, a grain of The blessings of the Missell, the Portus and
of the Manuel of the Priests. Benedictio ^ladi, salis, and ouorum Benedictio
rasurni. Benedictio pera and baculi. Benedictio anuli and lecti. Benedictio
panis, et seminum. Benedictio domus nou^. Benedictio easula. Benedictio ad
omnia.
salt, or of wheat, an egg or a morsel of chief, or a root when one
would sees it, or the scrippe or hooked staff of a Pilgrim, when he would
go on his voyage, or the ringe or the bed of one that is wedded, but that they
must have some thing.


Thomas. They do meddle with a great many of things if they do all that.


Hilarious. Their Missels, Portesses and Manuels may bear witness, if you
will not believe me. But you may well perceive and know that they have not
innented all those manner of dooinges, but thereby the better to get money
every where, the which they get very easily and without any great travail,
but only in making of crosses, and mumblinge some words after the manner of
inchaunters. But into what danger I do cast my self? I had rather to draw
out all the water of the sea, then to declare all the manner of the pillings
that they do unto us. The Historiographers do account as detestable crimes
the tributes, and unhonest gaynes, the rapines and extorcions that the
Tyrants and Roman The rapines and extortions of (...) the Emperor Caligula.
Sueto. Tra^q. in Calig. The pride of Caligula.
Emperors have exercised, chiefly Caligula and Nero: But these here will
justify them and account them for good men in respect of them, if that time
should continue a little longer. It is written of Caligula (who was so bold
that he would be worshipped as God, and has builded a temple in his honor
during his life) that he spared neither Joseph. Anti. li. 18. ca. 15.
man nor any thing whatsoever it be, to the which he has Tribute of
vittailes and of process.
not laid some tribute. He received certain tribute of all manner of
vittaile that are sold in the City. There was neither plaint, process, cause
nor judgment, of which he took not the forty part of the sum for which the
controversy was, insomuch that if the plaint had been forty thousand crowns,
he would take a thousand for his part. He receives Tribute of get p^nce and of
harlots.
the eight part of the gain that the poor get pence, iangellers, log
carriers, and other like did daily get. Also the common harlots and whoores
must not only pay unto him when and as often as they did commit whoredom, but
did also compel those y^ before time used that occupation, and which had been
whooremongers and bawdes: and not content with Tribute of marriages.
that, did receive tribute of those that are married. The plaiers also of
cards and dice were not exempted. But which Tribute of plaiing at cards and
dice.
is more, he caused to be builded and set up houses for whoores for to make his
revenues the greater.


Thomas. Behold most vile, excecrable and most unworthy things, I say not of
an Emperor, but of the most wickedst man in the whole world. That is much
worse then to recover tribute of urine and piss.


Hilarious. If you think that to be unworthy for a heathen Emperor, what
may you judge of the Pope and his officers, if they do the like, yea, or
rather worse? You have already heard how that there is neither poor man nor
rich, of whom they have not gotten money every way and daily. And if you will
know what tribute they receive of the victualles they sell, you must ask the
Itali^ns, The papisticall tribute of the vi^^a^les.
who can tell by experience. I do believe that Caligula never used such
cruelty as Pope Clement used, altogether contrary to his name, who in the time
of dearth The cruelty of Pope Clement
and famine, seeing that the poor people had not any other thing to eat then
herbs, of which they made sallets for to nourish and feed them, the better
to show forth his clemency, pity and compassion that he had of the poor
people of Italy being much oppressed with hunger, caused to make their salt
deerer, and set a talent upon it, to the end that they could not eat a sallet
but that they must pay tribute. But Dispensations for to eat flesh and milk
do we not daily see the money that they get unto them, for to dispense with
those that would eat flesh and al such meats as are made of milk, against
their decrees? These are meruaylous sellers of vittailes and Bouchers, that
receive money of flesh, eggs, milk, butter and cheese, and do never dystribute
any thing. And of their plaintes and process, does there come unto them small
gain? And at Rome, Boulong^e and other Cities subject unto the Pope, has he
not officers Phil. Beroal. in Sueto Caig. Tribute of whores Prafecti Bulle
tarum.
and other Cities subject unto the Pope, has he not officers and magistrates
that receive monthly tribute of whoores and of those women that are forsaken?
which are commonly called the Popes pardoners.


Theophilus. The Lord by Moses has forbidden that one shall not offer the hire
of an whore nor the price of a Dog. But those are not disdainful. At the
least wise they Deuteronomy. 23. c. 18 Alexander Seuerus emperor lampi id in Alexand.
did as the Emperor Alexander, who did forbid that such tributes should not be
put into the treasure of the temple, nor of the common wealth.


Hilarious. I do also think that those do not put in much, and that the
Bishops do not enrich very much the treasures of the Church, with the tributes
y^ they have received of their whooremaister Priests for suff^ring them to have
their concubines, whom they love a great deal better, then if they were
honester men. For they should not have so much gain. But I think that the
Pope who is the great prince and captain of the bawdes ought also to compel
the Bishops who are the The Bishops Bavvdes to the priests.
bawdes, unto their Priests, to pay unto him tribute, of the tribute that they
have gotten. But the thing might yet be more tolerable if they had but only
rendered the tribute of y^ whoores, to that they had exempted those that are
married, of which they do receive no less money, as well of the process which
their decrees and canons have ingendered, as of the dispensations, as well for
the espouses as of the degrees of consanguinitie and other like things. It is
also written of Nero, that he never gave any office to any person, but that
he added and said. Thou know that I must have. Letting us to understand,
that they must The selling of Offices. Nero. Sueto. Tran. in Nero. Scis quid
mibi opus sit: and hoc aga^^s ne quis qui^qu^n habeat Alexander Emperor.
pay. For he has need of money: And after that sort he was the seller of
offices and of Magistrates, which is a very unworthy thing for a good Prince.
But the avarice and rapacite of Nero, nor the selling of offices were nothing
in comparison of that which is in the Popish Church, in all offices and
benefices.


Theophilus. Alexander Seuerus a Roman Emperor how great a Panim soever
he were, shall have good occasion at the day of judgment to rise against
that generation. For he would never suffer that any should sell either
honors or offices, speaking these words worthy to be remembered. It is
necessary that he y^ byeth do sell. Wherefore I will not suffer Merchaunts of
estates and offices.


Hilarious. Behold the words of a worthy Prince: Necesse est vt qui emit
venda^. Ego non patior mareatores potestatum.
But would to GOD that the Pope and his Popelinges did no worse then those
Tyrants, and that they would suffer us at the least to be at peace and rest
after that we be dead, and that we might dye without paying any thing,
since that our lyse has cost us so much. But then that tyranny does begin a
fresh. Are we dead? we must first pay for the burial before we can be
buried. The panims had at y^ least common churchyards for to bury in, for y^
poor mean people which did cost them nothing. The buryall sold.
But among the Christians, in many places it is not only lawful that the
poor dead carkas should be covered with earth, except he do first buy the
place and length and breadth of the ground in which he would be buried. And
according to the sum thou gyuest, the place shall be accordingly Grego. in Reg.
Iann. (...). 1. ^a^.
either little or great. If thou will pay a great deal it shall be lawful for
thee to rotte by the high Altar. If thou do (...). 2. Qu^sta. Ib. d. ^^^ro in
Gene^^ 4. post. qua^. and (...). Tu^^a. In eccle si ^^^o, and ca. precipiendum.
give but a little, thou shall lie in the rain with the common people. And
although men do offer unto them wyllingly money for the buryall, yet they
shall run into infainy and shame for taking it, and also their canons and
d^cretalls as it appearethe by the ancient Doctors, doc forbio it expressly.
But they d^e a great deal worse. For they say that it is their duty and
right, and compel them to pay it.


Theophilus. Ephron that heathen and barberous man, offered willingly unto
Abraham, being a stranger and not Ephron and ^braham. Gene. 23. b. 10.
known, his field freely, for to bury his wis^ Sar^ in, and it was much ado
ever he would be persuaded to rece^ue the money that Abraham offered him. But
the Christian priests do sell the buryall in other men's ground and which
belongs not to them: yea, and moreover they h^e out for money, as their own,
that which is common to all. I would gladly that they were at the least so
honest men, as the Scribes Math 27. a. (...) Act. 1. c. 18
and Pharisees; Bishops and Priests of Jerusalem, who bought with the money,
that Judas gave, them again, a field and possession for to bury the poor
strangers, in blood wheroff our Priests do sell the ground to their next
neighbors.


Hilarious. I assure you without lying in any one word, that there was in the
city of O^be a poor Tailor, named A true history of our time.
Gaspard. I think you know him. Who was so poor that he had much ado to
live and who had so many pieces and patches in his cloak as there be days in
the year. It was so peeced and patched with so many pieces one upon an other
that it was rather like unto a brigantine, then a coat. His wife brought him
forth a child that was Our lady of Lausanna and her miracles.
borne dead: he carried it unto our Lady of Lausanna, who did many goodly
m^racles: who raised to life those little children that were borne dead, and
after they must incontinently bury them. For after that she has raised them to
life, they cost their parents no more to nouryshe. That was a resurrection
altogether differinge from False miracles
that of Jesus Christ, and of those whom he has raised, who did speak,
walk, eat and drink after their resurrection, John. 11. e. 43. and 12 a. 2
Mar. 5. d. 42 Luc. 7. c 15 Act. 9. g 40 Act. 20. b. 9
as it appeared in Lazarus the brother of Martha, and of Mary: Also in the
daughter of Iarus, also in the son of the widdowe of Naim, also of Doreas
raised by S. Peter. And Eutieus by Saint Paul. When the child had been a
little time before the Idol, he stood up as the others did, and the miracle
was done when it pleased the old woman that kept it. For there were also
means to haste the The old women that do keep the children that be borne
dead.
miracles. For when any did give a large drincking penny to the old woman she
might the cleerer or better know when the child changed color or when he
breathed or wagged. And that is soon found out as well there, as at our Lady
of grace of Geneua, of those old women who durst say unto some y^ have brought
of those children, when they will not give them to drink as they would, nor
give them that they demand: The Devil of miracle that you shall have three
days. Those are yet living who heard it, who can witness the truth.
Wherefore I do conclude, that the old woman does the miracles and not our
Lady.


Thomas. And has that poor man Gaspard quenched their thirst?


Hilarious. I kmow not what he did. I think that when she saw him so
beggarly, that she had some pity. But herein stood the question that when
the child that was raised must be buried, then had he somewhat to do. For he
must pay four or five grotes for the buryall: and I believe that he had not
four farthinges for to pay his charge and expense. Nevertheless he could
never agree with the Priests, but was constrained to carry his child to Orb,
or otherwise he must bury him in the raw earth. For he could never have one
foot of sodden earth.


Thomas. What do you call sodden earth and raw earth?


Hilarious. Are you of that country and know not the Raw earth.
language? Do you not know y^ our priests do call commonly raw earth that
which is out of the churchyard, and which has not ben blessed and consecrated,
y^ is to weet charmed by them, as the same of their Church. If it be raw I
conclude by contraries that the other is sodden.


Thomas. And when he was at Orb, did he find the Priests more pitiful then
at Lausannia?


Hilarious. God knows how that poor man was sifted and tried. They did
think to eat him alive with his child, and compelled him to carry him to
Lausannia, or at the least would not suffer him to bury him in the Churchyard:
nevertheless he buried him. But I know not whether it were in the raw
ground or sodden.


Thomas. Behold a great rigor and cruelty showed unto a little infant.


Hilarious. I do think that Apuli. li. 6. Asini aur.
if that time had continued any long space we should have been constrained not
to dye, for want of burying. It is a marvelous case that that poor little
Infant had so much Et si sort p^ae manu non fuerit n^mo expirate pauperem
patiotur.
a do to find one little corner or angle in the earth, for to be buried in,
and that the earth was not great enough for him. We may very well say that of
our Priests which Phocion. said of the Athemans a little before his death.
Phocion Plut. in Phocion.
When they had condemned him to dye (because he was too honest a man for them,
nor they were not worthy to have him among them) he must drink of the
hemlocke. For The poison of the Athenians.
the Athenians had that custom to make those that were found faulty to
drink that poison, and to put them to death after that sort. After that all
the other that were in the prison with him, had dronken, and that there was
none but he alone left, because that all the other had consumed the poison that
did drink first, the hangman said that he will not give it him unless one
would give him twelve Death bought.
drachines of silver. For because that an ownce of the poison was sold for so
much. Phocion then pleading with the hangman that his death might not be
prolonged, and that the same should not let or hinder him to die, called unto
him a certain friend of his, and said unto him: Since that it is not lawful
to dye at Athens freely but that it will cost money, and that I must bye death,
I pray thee deliver money to this hangman, and give him the price he
demands, least that for want of money I should tarry any longer before I
dye. We may say as much of the Christians, and that y^ Christianity is so much
contributary, that one cannot only have the death and the burial freely, but
that we must pay a reward. There was also among the Panims The custom of the
dead and the s^^ry money of Charon.
a certain custom that the dead must pay. And therefore when any man dyed they
did put into his mouth an half penny for to pay for his passage and custom
unto Charon the Ferryman of Hell for to serry the souls over the rivers that
were there to pass over.


Thomas. That Naulum O^^alus
was very good cheap: But I do think that there passed many together at once.
For the souls are not very hea^y.


Hilarious. According to the bodies from which they came out.


Thomas. And if they had not wherewith to pay, should they be constrained to
return to live again, and to continue and abide here for want of money?


Hilarious. They had that opinion that they should continue in great torment,
if they could not pass.

For they could not be purged of their sins, nor enter into the fields
Eliseas with the blessed, but that they must first pass the river: As men
have made us to believe of the souls who have not ended their penance. They
do also believe that if their bodies be not honestly buried according to their
estate and degree, they cannot pass in an hundredth years, but must be
wandering here and there, until such time as their bodies be buried, or until
the term of an hundredth years, which was assigned unto them for their pain
and punishment, be expired: the which things the Poet has comprised altogether
in one self place by his verses of which I will recite unto you one part of
those that agree best to our matter.

He speaks in that place of the things that A^neas has seen, being
descended into Hell with Sibilla, the which afterward he expounds and
shows plainly wh^t they signify. He first describes that which they have
seen there practiced, saying.

Here now the way does lead to Lymbo lake and filthy stoud, Ver. A^ne. 6.

Whose cha^nell choked is, with troublous grounds of miry mud.
And belching boyles a sand, which to the bakes it throws from deeps,
A dreadful ferriman that streme, with visage lothsom keeps.
In tartred vvretched weed, and Charon he by name does hight
His hoary bush and bearde, both ouergrovvue and foul vndight.,
With skowling steming eyes, and from his shoulders down his loins,
His filthy mantell hangs, whom sluttish knot uncomely ioyns.
Himself with pyked poale his boat does guide, and bears a charge,
Transporting still the souls, in rusty dusty canckred barge.
Well aged now, but sappy strength he keeps of greener years,
To this place all the rout does dravv themselves with louring cheeres,
By nombers great, both men and women dead, nor long delayde,
With Princes preased boys and girls, that wedlock never said.
And slouring youth, that in their parents time were laid in ground,
And all that life had borne, about that bank they clustered round,
As thick as leaves of trees among the vvoods in vvynter vvinde.
When first to ground they fall, or like as fowls of water kind.
Assembling flock themselves, when year of frost has first begun,
And over S^^s they seek in vvarmer lands to take the Sun.
They stood, and craving cride, that first transport they might before,
And stretching held their hands desiring much the further shore.
The churlish ferruman, now these now those by course receives,
And some down thrusting throvves, and from the sand restraining
Aeneas then for of this great tumult he merua^lde sore,) vveiues.
O virgin tell ((...) he) what means this busy great uproar?
What seek they thus? why to this water bank rome they so fast?
Wherefore be these reject? and yonder those their course has past?
And some with ores I see are s^veeping yet this channeell blevve,
Than shortly thus to him dame Sibly spoke that Prophet true.
O great Anchises son, undoubted child of Gods in bliss,
Now Lymbo lake thou ^eest, infernal poole this water is.
Cocitus called it is, and Stygies more the name does bear,
By which the Gods themselves, so sore afraid been for to swear.
This prease that here thou see, ben people dead not laid in grave,
A piteous rabble poor, that no release nor comfort have.
This boateman Charon is, and those whom now this water bears,
Are bodies put in ground, with worship due of vveping tears.
Nor from these fearful banks nor ^^ers hoaree they passage get,
Till under earth in graves their bodies bones at rest are set.
A hundredth years they walk, and round about these shores they houe
And then at last full glad, to further pooles they do remove.
There are yet at this day some who do not much differ from that opinion.


Thomas. I know not what they do in The prayer of those that are deprived
from ^^^riall. Rer^c. sperg. Ser^o dominic. 24 post Trinita. (...) all Ap^li.
li. 6. Asin a^r. ^rgo inter mortuos anaritia V^i^: ne^ C^aron ilie ditis, and
pater tantus Deus quiequam gratuito facit? and pauper mortens debat viaticum
quarere. The Milanois.
other places, but in our city when any is dead, and that they do bring him
to be buried, he must bring with him his trentall. For as soon as the dead
corpse is come into the Church, they do lay ten lyardes upon his breast,
which is thirty deneeres in valewe, the which the Curate or vycar goes
incontinently to take up.


Hilarious. That is n y^ honor of the thirty pence as I think which Judas
sold Jesus Christ.


Thomas. I know not whether they had a regard to that, but you have made me to
think that the same was to pay the feriage. Wherefore I would at the least
wise that if the Priests will not suffer us to pass freely, that our custom
might be as cheap as was that of the Panims.


Hilarious. The Milanois have yet at this day that custom, that they do put a
piece of Silver in the hand of him that is dead, but he carries it with him,
and does not give it unto the Priests. Upon which I have heard recited an
excellent history which is written in the cronicles of Milanois, very proper,
for to show unto our Priests that they ought to suffer the dead to rest,
without demanding any thing more of them. For they are no more in their own
ground nor country: wherefore they ought no more to be tributaries. And may
very well think that they ought not to have any great store of money with
them in these base and low territories, for as much as already long time
agone they have taken all that that they could: and which is more, they did
well know that they have taken away nothing with them. For even as they Ioh 1.
d. 21 ^^c. (...). 5 c 14 (...) o. b. 7 Valor. Max. li. 2 ^a. 1. de just aut.
came all naked into the world, so shall they return again all naked: Except
peradventure our Priests be of the opinion of the ancient Galls and
Frenchmen who do think that in the other world men do handle money as they
do in this: and therefore they do lend the one to the other money unto
usury, to pay it below after their death. But I greatly fear that our
Priests do not so much believe of the unmortalitie of the souls, as those
there, and that they had rather borrow upon that compte, then to lend. But
let us come unto our history. In the time that Goths Adventurers To spoil the
dead, and to pil the naked A true history
the Barbarians and Goths did inhabit Italy, and Lumbardy, and did use great
extorcions unto the poor people, (as adventurers and Soldiers have accustomed
to do: who after that they have gotten all the spoil, yet they will pill the
naked and spoil the dead. And when they have taken all, insomuch that there is
nothing left, yet they would that men should give them more, and do torment
the poor people, for to compel them to tell where they have hid up their
money, although they have none.) Among the rest there was an honest widdowe and
of a rich house, Blondu^
who knew not what to do, her house and all her goods were already sacked
and pilled, that there was no more to take, and yet nevertheless the Soldiers
did grieve and threaten her that she had more money. Whilst that she was in
that perplexity, one of her children came unto her and said: You do remember
mother that when my father dyed, one did put a ducat in his hand? let us go
fetch it and give it to the Soldiers, to the end that they would let us have
a little peace and rest. The poor woman believed the counsel of her son,
and for to have peace with those thieves was constrained to open the Tomb
wherein her husband was laid with other dead bodies and took away that ducat
from him for to give it unto them. The same being come unto the Captains
ear: for the Soldiers were present, who saw every thing and declared it unto
him. And therefore incontinently as he understood theroff, he said unto his
people: Let us depart hence, and let us not torment them any more: For there is
no more money, since that they have been constrained to seek it with y^ dead.


Thomas. Truly that might be very well called to take tribute of the dead.


Hilarious. I would gladly that our priests and Monks had such a judgment,
and that they had as much pity on the poor people, and not to compel them any
longer to pay trybute for the dead, when they see that they have work vnough
to find money to buy bread for to give meat unto those that be alive. Me
thinks that they ought to content themselves for that they have pilled the
world so long time, when they see y^ it is eaten even to the bones. For how
many poor people are there, that shall be constrained to go and dig the dead
out of their graves, if they did know any that had money, for to deliver
themselves from the hands of such adventurers? But which is worse, in steed to
content themselves in so pillyng the poor people until this present time, if
there be any that speaks one only word against their pillyngs and
extorcions, and which refuses to pay tribute for the quick and the dead,
they will condemn them immediately to the fire, as Heritickes. We do call
the Scythians barbarous people, and esteem them very cruel, especially the
Essedonians and Massagetes, who do eat their fathers and mothers and their
parents and friends, in steed to burye them. The Essedonians have a custom
(as the Historiographers do witness) to singe after their parents, and after
that their kinsfolk and neighbors are assembled together, they do eat the
flesh of the dead bodies, mingled with the flesh of beasts. The like have
they written of the Massagetes who were also Scythians. I have thought that
manner of doing to be meruaylous strange, and would not believe it that there
were people upon the earth so inhumaine, who had not great horror and fear to
eat the flesh of men. But when I consider and way the doings of our Priests,
I find the Scythians to be very human in comparison of them. For they are
not content to eat the dead only, but they eat both the quick and the dead:
and not being content with y^ do also eat with them their wives, children,
parents and friends with all their cheuances and substance: and yet they cannot
be suffised and satisfied. They make The Priests are the graves of men and of
Jesus Christ. Stella clericorum O saccrdos cor^ pu^ tut^m efficitur quotidic
sepulchru^ Christi.
of their bodies y^ sepulchers of the poor people whom they do englut and
devour, for to bury them more preciously in their bowels. But you must not be
abashed if they make of their bodies the sepulchers of the poor people, as the
Scythians did of their parents and friends, since that they say that they are
made daily the sepulcher of Jesus Christ, because they do eat him daily, and
bury him in their bodies and entrayles. The poor people have then no just
occasion to complain of their cruelty. For they do unto them no worse then
unto their God, if their doctrine be true, but do bury them as preciously and
honestly. And he that will not believe me, let him read their book which is
entitled Stella Clericorum: and he shall see whether I lie or no: Stella
clericorum Mundi precium proiieitur in sterquilinium id est in o^ immundi
sacerdotis.
but he shall there find rather worse. For it is there written, since that the
Priest is the sepulcher of Jesus Christ, that if he do presume to take the
body of Jesus with his polluted mouth, he does worse then if he threw it in
the durte or mire: But which is more, he casts it into a privy. Judge
therefore Eusebius, whether that good God whom they have forged, be honestly
lodged, and whether he have not a tomb and sepulcher very precious and
according to his dignity.


Eusebius. If there are some wicked Priests who did irreverently handle Jesus
Christ, and who did dishonor their office, must ye therefore despise the
estate, which is so worthy and excellent, and blaspheame Jesus Christ in such
sort?


Hilarious. When did you ever hear us blaspheme Jesus Christ, and speak
irreverently of god? do you think there is no difference between Jesus christ
the true savior of y^ world. As for me I find as much difference, as is
between y^ true God of Israel and the gods of the The true God and that of the
Priests.
Babilonians and other Idolaters. Wherefore if you will accuse me of blasphemy,
when I will not receive those new gods, and that I speak in such sort, you
shall be also compelled to accuse the Prophets of the same crime, when they do
so often mock at the strange gods. But wherefore are you not rather offended
with them, then with me, who have not inverted any thing but do speak only
after them? To what purpose do they call the Priests the Sepulcher The
Sepulcher of Jesus Christ Act. 1. a. 2 Rom 6. b. 9
of Jesus Christ? Is not Jesus Christ risen again and ascended into heaven?
does not the Apostle say. Christ once raised from death dies no more. For as
much then as Jesus Christ lives eternally at y^ right hand of god his father
what needs he of a sep^lohre, especially of such as these are? When he dyed
for our sins he had his sepulcher in Jerusalem, in which Joseph of Aramathia
and Nicodemus Mat. 2^. g. ^7 Mar. 15. d. 42 Luc. 23. g 50 John. 19 g. 35
did bury him in. They did not as the Scithians, eat him flesh and bones and
bury him in their bellyes and entrayles. But in a goodly new sepulcher, hewn
in stone. The priests then camib^ say that they are that sepulcher in which
Jesus Christ was put, and out of which he rose again. Wherefore if they be the
sepulchers of Jesus Christ, it must be that he is dead sithence, and that he
was buried in their bellyes. For I cannot understand how he could be buried,
if they have not eaten him, as the Scithians did eat their parents and
friends. And if you do think that I tell you a thing that is strange,
consider and mark well the words that the Apostle has written to the
Hebrews. The sacrifice of Jesus Christ Heb. 7. d. 27. and 9. c. 12
He witnesses that Jesus Christ was once offered, and he shall be no more
Afterward tells the cause. For if he must be often offered he must dye often,
since that there is no sacrifice without effusion of blood. Yet the priests say
that they do offer and sacrifice really every day Jesus Christ; it follows
necessarily, y^ either they do put him to death, and that he dies again, or
else y^ the holy Apostle is an evil Logicioner, and that he concludes euilly,
and knows not the rules and laws of his Silogismes and consequences. If it
be so the Priests may well be called the Sepulchers of Jesus Christ, but not
of the true Jesus Christ whom Saint Stephen Marc. 16. d. 19 Luc. 24. g. 51 Act.
1. b. 9
did see at the right hand of God, who as the Apostle witnesses, dies no
more: unto whom I give more credit, then unto all the Priests and Monks
which ever were or shall be. And therefore either it must be that they have
forged a new Jesus Christ, that dies and rises again every day and as often
as they list, and that they are all liars: or else that the Apostle has written
against the truth, the which is impossible. Wherefore it follows, that the
first part of my proposition is true.


Eusebius. Do you not believe that the Priests have power to consecrate the
body and blood of Jesus, and that they eat it flesh and bones, as gross and
as big as he was To eat Jesus Christ.
on the cross?


Hilarious. I do ask you an other question, when they have eaten the flesh
and the bones, what do thy with the skin? And how they could dine upon
Christmas day, after that they have eaten him three times. For me thincketh
they should have their bellies too full and strouted. Also wherefore De consecra
distic. 2. in glos. cap. nee Moses. Lib. de sacram. Joan chanois. Vtrum
Christus. comederit seips^o in die coenae. Respondet quod sic. Vt communiter
tenent Docto. res. Vnde versus. Re^ sedet in ^oene turba ^inetus duodena. Se
tenet in manibus, se cibat ipse cibus.
do you not demand of me this question which is also very common among your
deuines? To weet whether Jesus Christ did eat himself?


Thomas. What resolution do they give?


Hilarious. That he did, you may thereby know what reason there is in their
doctrine. Will you have a more greater absurdite? We do eat his flesh
spiritually for to have life: But he who is the life, what need has he to eat
himself? And if Jesus Christ did eat himself, it must be that he has two
bodies: the one which eats, and the other which was eaten. O Lord God, what
dreams are these? But if your Priests do eat the flesh and the bones, they are
worse then the Scithians. For they were content with y^ flesh of man, without
eating the bones. Nevertheless to the end that you do not think that I will
gainsay the word of Jesus Christ, and that I am some Caparnaite, who is
offended with the preachinge that he made, of eating his flesh and Caparnaites
John. 6. f. 55 To eat Jesus Christ three ways.
drincking his blood, or as the hearers who did forsake it. I answer that
there is three ways to eat the flesh and drink the blood of Jesus Christ.
The true manner the which he would teach us by his word, and that he would
represent and frequent in the holy supper is spiritual The spiritual
^nanducation John. 6. g. 63
and not carnal, as he himself witnesses, saying. It is the spirit that
quickens, the flesh profits nothing. The words that I have said are
spirit and life.


Theophilus. That is not meant that the flesh of Jesus Christ does not profit
any thing the faithful, since y^ he himself calls it the bread which came
down from heaven, without which we cannot have life, nourishment, nor
salvation. But the carnal sense and understanding of his words, and such
intelligence as the Cape^naites, and hearers that were offended had, is the
flesh eaten in such sort as they understand it. For when we shall have the
very flesh of Jesus Christ in our mouth, and that we do crashe it with our
teeth, and digest it in our stomach, it profits us no more then to Judas to
have kissed him, and to the hangmen to have touched him, yea, to be sprinkled
in his blood, and to have had his garments. For Jesus Christ does profit
nothing being known after the flesh, except he be known through faith, by
the which he fills and satisfies us also with his flesh and blood.
Therefore it is not needful that he discende from heaven, nor y^ he remove
from place to place, for to feed us in that manner with his flesh and blood,
The presence of Jesus christ
and for to be present with us and in the midst of us. For he dwells in
our hearts by faith, and lives in us, and quickens us by his holy spirit.
Wherefore he calls Ephe. 3. c. 17 Romans 8. b. 1^ The Temple of God. 1. Cor. 6.
d. 19 2. Cor. 6. d. 16.
not the faithful, his sepulcher, but the temple of the living God. For he is
not dead in the hearts of the faithful, but lives there and the faithful
by him. Even as then the sun is present with us, although it descend not
from heaven into the earth, and makes us to feel his virtue and power, it
illuminateth us, and through his heat and brightness nourishes and
quickens both man and beasts, better then if it were here in earth with us:
even so Jesus Christ, that great son of righteousness through his divine
power and virtue of his holy spirit, does give unto our souls and bodies his
flesh and his blood, and does nourishe and fill us and makes us to feel the
virtue and efficacy of his death and passion, and of his body and blood, that
he has given for us, better then if we did eat his flesh with our teeth and
there did devour and swallow it in with his blood in our stomach: insomuch
that there is not a body which is so well nourished and fed with bread and
wine, that he eatcth and drincketh, as the faithful who with a true and
lively faith comes unto him., and receives his word and communicates the
Sacraments that he has ordained, is filled and satisfied with his flesh and
his blood. For he John. 6. d. 31.
has said: he that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that believes on
me shall never thurst. If he that comes and believes in him shall no more
hunger nor thurst, it follows then that in believing and communicating his
Sacraments, he has eaten and dronken and is satisfied.


Hilarious. That suffices which you have now spoken off (friend Theophilus)
for to prove my meaning. For we have not at this present neither better time
nor fitter occasion for to pursue more fully that matter. But I will not grant
unto thee Eusebius, that the Priests do eat the flesh and drink the
blood of Jesus Christ after that sort. For since that they seek his carnal
presence, they deprive themselves of his spiritual presence, according to the
witness of the Apostle which says: We have an Altar Heb. 13. c. 10
whereoff they may not eat which serve in the Tabernacle. If those who do
serve in the Tabernacle of Moses, and put yet all their affiaunce in the
leuitical Ceremonies and sacrifices, are shut out and deprived from the true
sacrifice of Jesus Christ, what communion can those have with him, who have
altogether overthrown his Sacraments and Ordinances, and have found out and
invented new sacrifices, more intolerable then ever the Jews used? There is
an other manner to eat the flesh and drink the blood of Jesus Christ, the
which The carnal manducatio^ Capernaites
I cannot grant unto them, y^ is, the carnal eating, as the Caparnaites did
understand it, even as one eats the flesh of the butchery. Jesus Christ
which is at the right hand of God cannot be eaten after that sort.

For he is the bread of Angels and of the true children of God, and of his
sheep and not of Dogs, Wolves, Hogs, Lions and wild beasts. But I will
grant unto them the third manner to eat Jesus Christ, and The papistical
manducation.
do confess with thee that they do eat it truly, reallye, and
essentiallye, not only in flesh and bones, but which is more (least you
should account me for an heretic) besides the flesh and bones, they do
eat the skin, and break the bones for to suck out the marrowe that is
therein, because they have found such good taste in the meat.


Thomas. If they do so, they do worse then the Jews. For they brake not a
bone of Jesus Christ.


Theophilus. That was because that it was necessary that in him should be
fulfilled which was figured and represented The hones of Jesus Christ are
whole John. 19. f. 33 The pascall Lamb. Bxo. 12. 2. 5
by the pascall Lamb, of which they must leave his bones whole. For we cannot
have Jesus Christ, but that we must have him whole, and his virtue and power
cannot be broken by death it self.


Thomas. I have not yet very well understood you.


Hilarious. I will declare it unto thee by a clear demonstration, and by
evident arguments. Did thou not first confess unto me, that all the true
faithful are the true members of Jesus Christ?


Thomas. I confess it.


Hilarious. If they be members of Jesus Christ, they are then his body, of
which he is y^ head, as the Apostle does witness in many places.


Thomas. I do agree unto you Induction Members of Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 12. b.
12 Romans 12. b. 5
in that.


Hilarious. Forasmuch then as the faithful are the body of Jesus Christ, you
will also grant me, that those which eat the faithful and poor widows and
orphants, do eat Jesus Christ. And if you will deny it, I will prove it To
persecute Jesus Christ. Act 9. (...). 4
by that that Jesus Christ said unto Saul, saying: Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? In the same manner then as Jesus Christ does complain himself to be
persecuted when his members are: So may I say, without digressinge from the
Scripture, that those eat Jesus Christ that do eat his members.


Thomas. But you have not yet proved, that the Priests do eat the members of
Jesus Christ.


Hilarious. It has been already proved by the things that were spoken before.
For have I not already told thee, how they do eat both the quick and dead?
But least thou should think that I speak without the Scripture, behold
his witness. What do you understand by that rebuke and check that God did
unto the tyrants and enemies of his people, when he complained that they
denoured Jacob, To eat Jacob.
and his people, as a morsel of bread. Psa. 79. b. 7 Psa. 53. a. 5 Psa. 14. a.
4



Thomas. The places do declare enough of themselves. For he complains that
his enemies are come into his enheritage, and have destroyed his people, which
is signified by Jacob, of whom did proceed and come the twelve tribes of
Israel. That is a manner of speaking common in all tongues. Even so do we say
that a man is burned when his house is burned, also we do call the great
thieves, covetous persons, Metonimia. Virg. Aene. 2 Vealegon ardet. Deuourers.
tyrants, rauishers and usurers the consumers and deuourers of the poor
people, widows and Fatherless children, not that they ease and devour man's
flesh, but because they destroy and devour their substance, and many times
cause them to dye for very poverty and lack.


Hilarious. You have already concluded y^ which I would have concluded. We
cannot deny, but that the Priests and Moonkes do devour all the substance of
the poor Christian Gods heritage. 1. Pet. 5. a. 3
people, which is the true heritage of God, and the true Jacob whom they have
consumed, wasted, and devoured more cruelly then the Babilonians did unto the
Israelites. For to make you better to understand the effect and sumine of our
disputation, I will comprehend it in a little sillogysme Sillogismus in darii.
and plain conclusion. Whosoever eats the poor, eats the body of Christ.
The Priests do eat the poor: wherefore it follows infallibly that they
eat the body of Jesus Christ. The sillogisme is good, for it is in his inode
and dialecticall and logical figure. It needs no more for to prove the
premises and the Antecedent. For you have already granted it unto me by your
aunsweres. You do then see now friend Eusebius, that I am not an heretic,
noither after God nor after the Pope. For I do confess y^ true and spiritual
manducation of the body of Jesus Christ, and the very papisticall manducation,
which is more truer then it is in the books of your Doctors. I do then thinck
that you ought to content your selves with us, and that the Pope ought not to
pursue us to the fire, and to such cruel death, for that Article. For I
believe y^ there is none of all those who^ you do condemn for heretics, who
are not ready to confess as much as I. And if you will compel them further,
me thinckes you do them wrong. For what can they confess any more, without
speakinge against the truth? Now it rests that I do prove how they do To
eat the skin and the bones.
eat the skin and break the bones for to have the marrowe. Wherefore I will
take for my warrant and advocate in this cause chiefly Michea among the
Prophets, who speakinge both of them and of their like, accuses them after
this manner, saying. Ye hate the good and love Mich. 3. 2. 2.
the evil: ye pluck off men's skins and flesh from their bones: ye eat the
flesh of my people, and flaye off their skin: ye break their bones, ye
choppe them in pieces as it were into a Cauldron, and as flesh into a Pot. And
as concerning the Prophets that deceive my people, thus the Lord says
against them: When they have any thing to bite upon, then they preach that
all shall be well: But if a man put not some thing into their A sop in the
throat.
mouths, they preach of war against him. I do never read those words of
Micheah, consideringe the avarice and rapacite of our false teachers and
shepherds, Shepherds feeding themselves.
who do feed themselves, not the Lords flock, but that me thinckes I see
before mine eyes that great Bze. 34. 2. 2. Serberus the porter of hell.
and hidious Cerberus the dog and porter of Hell, with his three heads,
which he has for to devour, eat, and swallowe up all that comes unto
him, if one do not cast a sop into his mouth, even as Aeneas and Sibyle did,
according to Virgiles description, who has set out his rage and insatiable
madness, speakinge after this sort.

There Cerberus, infernal hound, with throats vvide open three, Vir Aene. 6.

Does havvle with barking noise, at Lymbo mouth full huge to see.
Whose neck when Sibly savve with startling snakes to swelling fixed,
A sop of bread with sleepy seeds and Honny sweet commixt.
Against his throat she threw, he gaping wide his threefolde jaws,
All hungry caught that gub, and couching strait with stretched paws.
He bowed his boistrous back, and on the ground himself he spread,
Encombring all the cave, and groueling lay with slombry head.
We have a great number of such dogs, who although Du^me dogs and cryers.
they are mute for to preach the word of God, for to cry against the abuses,
vices and offenses, for to chase and drive away the Wolves from the fold and
to defend the sheep, nevertheless are not mute, but great cryers against the
true servant of God who cease not to bark, bite and devour, except for to
have them quiet, one do cast them some bone or sop in their mouth. Now think
if that infernal monster and mad dog, who has but three heads and one belly,
be so hungry and insatiable, what ought we to esteem of so many Cerberus, and
of so many gluttons who have so many heads and bellies, which are as the great
goulfes of the sea. It is not then without cause that y^ prophets comparing such
shepherds to those great masties and dumme dogs, shameless idle knaves Esa.
56. c. 11
and insatiable, and unto Lions and ravening Wolves who have eaten nothing
until Evening, who do flay the skin, eat the flesh, afterward do break the
hones and cast them into the pot for to eat and devour them, and yet cannot
be satisfied and filled. Wherefore I cannot believe but that Solomon by the
spirit of GOD has foreseen and spoke of that generation, and that he minded
to paynte Prouer. 30. b. 14.
it out unto us, when he said: There are a people whose teeth are swoordes,
and with their chafe bones they consume and devour the simple of the earth,
and the poor from among men. The Horseleech has two daughters, the The
daughters of the horselech. Horat in art. Poet.
one is called fetch hither, and the other bring hither.


Theophilus. He says not without cause that she Non missura cute^ nisi
plena cruoris hirudo. The insatiable things. Pro. 30. b. 16
has two daughters. For she has two throats, and draws the blood from
one side to the other. But I am not abashed, but of that that when he nombreth
the things that are not satisfied he has also added those which are the most
insatiable of all. He says, that there be three things that are never
satisfied, and the fourth says never hoe. That is to say, hell, a woman's
womb, and the earth has never water inoughe, as for fire it says never hoe.
One may very well add to these for the fifth.


Hilarious. It is no need. For among these four, they are already contained in
two for fault of one. Has not Solomon The fire insatiable.
spoken of the fire, who never says hoe. For one cannot find so much as it
consumes. There was never fire, that molted and consumed so much goods, as the
fire of their Purgatory and of their kitchen which is of y^ same nature.
Again, is not y^ hell comprised among those insatiable things? Hell or y^
grave insatiable.
May we not well speak that of them which David has written of his enemies?
saying: their throat is an open sepulcher. Psa. 5. c. 10
And that which Esaias speaks off, saying: hell gapeth and opens her mouth
marvelous wide. For of all Esa. 5. 6. 14.
that they can once lay hand on, nothing ever retourneth again, no more then
from the mouth of hell and grave. But which is worse the grave consumes and
deuoureth but the dead bodies: but these do devour both the quick and the dead:
And we may very well say y^ these are the Harpyes of whom Harpyes. Vir. Aene. 9
Virginei volucru^ v^ltus, fodissima ventri^ Proluuies, vnca que manus, and
pallida semper. Ora fame. Painted Sepalchres. Mat. 29 b. 14 Mar. 12. d. 39 Luc.
20. g. 47 The ornaments of the painted Sepulc^res.
Virgile makes mention off. But because they are fair and goodly sepulchers,
as the Scribes and Pharisees who do never cease to cry: Corban, Corban, give,
give, offer, offer: and as the daughter of the Horseleech. Bring, bring to
the candles of the good Saint. Because they are so beautiful and pollished
without, y^ poor world cannot know the^, although they do see them devour and
eat up widows houses before their eyes, under color of long prayers. For
they have those goodly habites of religion, goodly Ornaments, Ceremonies,
goodly names and titles, and that goodly appearaunce of holiness, which do
cover and beautify those sepulchers and tombs, in such sort that men cannot
perceive the filthiness and infection that is there hidden and kept close
within, but pass over it without any aduisement, as men do by the Sepulchers.


Theophilus. They are more open and dyscouered then need required. For GOD
has now raised up a people whom they would not have, who have in such
sort removed all that filthe and infectyon that it stincketh throughoute the
whole world. And we must not be abashed if they call them the Sepulchers
Sepulchers of Jesus Christ.
of Jesus Christ, and though they do meruaylously stincke, since that Jesus
Christ is altogether dead in them, and to them, and that they have nothing at
all. For if Christ live not in us, what other thing can we be, but dead
carryons, stinking and infectious, who do not only rotte and consume
themselves, but do rotte and consume with them all other things?


Eusebius. All of you do cry out against the Priests. Have you now all said?
It was not enough for Hillarie to speak evil and backebite, but that you must
aid and help him Theophilus, and meddle also as well as he.


Theophilus. You never saw a man that delyteth less The difference betvveene
to speak (...) evil and to speak truth.
to speak evil and backebite, and to hear evil speakinge and tales: But
truth constrayneth me, and you ought to understand, that to speak truth for
the health of ones neighbor, is not to speak evil, backebite, and slander
any man. Would to God I could speak as much good of them, as of the Apostles.
For I do love better to praise their virtue, charity and mercy, then to
despise their vices, cruelty, avarice, and rapacitie. But what will you that I
speak? If I do see a poor man, who is wandering alone in a forest, or wood
full of thieves, am not I bound to give him warning of the danger he is like
to fall in?

If I say nothing unto him, am not I guyltie of his death since that I knew the
danger: And if I encourage him to enter, and tell him that there is no
danger, am not I then more culpable and worthy to be taken for a murderer of
my poor brother? But if I do admonish him of the dangers and of the thieves.
Do I wrong unto the theenes in calling them by their name? Should I do
better and according to Gods commaundemet to call them good people for to save
their honor, and that I should put my brother into their hands to have them
to cut his throat?

What goodness can I find in those, who from the greatest All Papisticall
Priests excommunicated,
to y^ least are al excommunicated and judged Simoniacks and Heretics,
unworthy of all Ecclesiastical honor and office? not only by the authority
of the holy Scriptures, To take money for y^ sacraments and ec^lcsiastical
offices Gela. Papa. l. quae (...) Baptiz ^^dis Item Ca^^st (...) Grego.
Nazia^ze c 1. 3 Q^i stude: Ambr. de my^te ca. cum ordina^^ntur Item can
Q^busdam and pueri
but also by their own counsels, decrees, and Canons.

For how many Counsels, Decrees and Canons be there that do forbid to
demand and take, gifts, rewards, presents, hire or silver, nor any thing
whatsoever it be, for cream, baptism, orders, laying on of hands: for y^
earth, nor Sepulture, neither for Sacraments nor whatsoever office is in the
Church, under pain of excommunication, and to be holden and reputed
Simoniackes, Heretics, and Sacriledgers, and deprived and deposed from their
offices and honors? and not only they that receive the money, but also those
who do give it for such things.


Thomas. There shall be then by that compte no Christian, who shall not be
excommunicated. For among the priests Papists excommunicated
there is not one but has received money for such things, nor among the
people but has disbursed somewhat.


Theophilus. Therefore you may consider what communion may be in y^ Popish
Church. For Saint Peter did Act 8. d. 20
not only curse, in the authority of God Simon the Sorcerer, of whom Simony
and Simoniackes have taken their Simony and Simontack.
name, but also the money that he offered for to buy the gift of God withal.
Now if Simon for offering y^ money has received such malediction, what ought
it to be upon them that do clean contrary to Saint Peter, who do not only
receive but also do compel the poor people to give it them? I do not
hereby mean that the true Euangelycall Priests, and true Pastors of the
Church, are not worthy of their nourishment and reward: But I speak against
Merchaunts in the Church 1. Pet. 2. 2 3
those Merchaunts which are in the Church of God, whom Saint Peter has
forespoken, who have both GOD and the Diuill to sell, Paradise and Hell, holy
things and profane things, and which do exercise merchandises of all things,
and are polluted and d^fil^d with all Simonie Plati in v^ta Leon^ pont. 2.
Conc^liu^. Elbertinum. Ex cnoci. Telet 11. Ca.
and Sacriledges, that they themselves have been constrained to condemone them.
And he that will not believe me, let him read Platine in the lives of the
Popes, and the decrees of the Council of Elybertine holden in Spain, in the
time of Constantine: and that of Tholet, holden in the Quiequid. ^x ^yno. ca.
6. Nuil^s. ^x conc. Calc. 1. q. 1. cap. Si quis. Ex conc. Carth. 4. cap
Placuit. Emendan. Dictum. Conc^. Tiburiensis. The selling of the burial. Psalm.
24. a. 1. Math. 10. a 8.
year. 713: and that of Calcedone: And the 4. of Carthage: And the Council of
Tiburien and Varensian, who do condemn namely those that take money for the
buryalls, saying after this manner: Wherefore do thou sell the earth?
Remember that thou art earth, and into the earth shall return again. For the
earth is not man's, but as (the Psalmist David witnesses) the earth is the
Lords, and all that therein is: If thou do sell the earth, thou shall be
holden guyltie of larcenie, as he that attributes unto himself the thing of
an other man's. Thou have received it of God freely, give it freely. And because
it is altogether forbidden to all Christians, to sell the earth unto the dead,
and to deny unto them the grave and burial which is due unto them.

Item, we must command according to the authority Ex con. Vatensi. cap.
Praecipiendum. Grego. in Registro. Ianuarius bishop. Nereida. 13. q. 2. cap.
Questa est. Ephron. Gene. 23. b. 10
of the Canons, that one should not demand or receive any thing for men's
burialls, nor for their graves. And he that would see the opinion of Gregory,
let him read the Epistle, wherein he rebuked Ianuarius Bishop of Sardinia,
for that he asked money of Ne^eida, a noble woman, for the sepulture and
burying of her daughter. And for to make him more ashamed, he propounded unto
him the example of the Panim Ephron, and the honesty that he used toward
Abraham touching his field for the buryall of his wife. What shall we say
friend Eusebius of those poor blind men, blinded through their avarice, who
so openly speak against the word of God, and all Counsels and Canons? May
not we rebuke and check them with that, that Tertulian Tertulian Apolog.
aduer. Gent. ca. 13. Tributary gods and to be sold.
rebuked the Gentiles and Panims, saying: The Gods that are most tributaryes
and the greatest gyuers, are to you the most holiest, but for to speak better,
those that are the holiest, are the greatest gyuers and trybutaryes. Their
majesty is put to sale and valued and is esteemed after the gain that it
brings. Your begging Relygion, goes about in Tauerns, Shops and Markets,
Begging Religion.
for to beg. Ye demand money for the pauement and bourding of the Temple,
for the entering into the Temple and holy places. It is not lawful for to know
your Gods without money Tertul. in Apo^duer. Gent a. 42 Begging Gods Unto
whom we must give.
or reward, for they are to be sold. We cannot suffice or have inoughe both
for men and for your begging gods, and let us not think that we are bound
to give unto any other, then unto those that ask it. If Jupiter then will have
it, let him put forth his hand. For our mercy does bestow more goods
throughout all the street, then your relygion throughout all your Temples. He
The charity of the ancient Christians.
declares by those words that the ancient Christians bestowed not their
goods in buylding of Temples, setting up of Idols, and in offering to them
sacrifices, and in feeding of those Caphards and false Prophets, and in the
mean season to suffer the poor to perish with hunger, about in the streets:
but do bestow them in nourishing and feeding of those that were among them.
Therefore he complayneth in the name of all the Christians, that since that they
have bestowed already so much goods for to nourishe and feed the poor, they
cannot provide sufficient to give so much unto the Idols and Gods of the
Panims, who do never cease to ask and beg. He thinks in his judgment
that the Christians have enough to do to keep and provide for the poor that
are among them, without bestowing so much cost and charge to keep and provide
for the Gods of the Panims, who are more costlye then the poor. What will he
then now say if he did see the Priests The tributaries of the Priests.
who are called Christians and Lieuetenants of Saint Peter, to gather and
receive tribute of the Gods, of Images, of the quick and the dead, and to make
Gods, and men, the quick and the dead tributaries, and to compel the poor
Christians to maynetayne and keep so rychly their false Gods and Prophets,
the bones and the carcases of the dead, and to be at such great charge and
expenses upon the dead, and in the mean time do suffer the poor members of
Jesus Christ and the lively Images of God to perish with hunger. May he not
rightly say, that all the Christian Relygion is no other thing now, but a very
beggary? And the Gods that are there of the beggars, do never any other thing
but beg, and that the dead d^e spend more then those that be alive.


Hilarious. These are dangerous beggars. For they Dangerous beggars.
are like unto those lusty and stout beggars, who will chide and beat people,
when they will not give them that they would have: and sometimes they do cut
Merchaunts throats. At the beginning they do seem but as though they did
beg. And therefore they have found out so many abuses, for to make their
begging the better worth, and for to still their scrippe the better.
Afterward in the end they make men to give by force. But among all their
inventions, they never had any that brought them more gain, then the God Pluto
and his furnaces of Purgatory. God P^uto. The furnaces of Purgatory Alcumistes
For there they do make the Philosophical stone, and by those do impouerish
all the whole world, as the Alcumistes deceive those who do muse after their
furnaces. But these are more craftye and subtle. For they do enrich themselves
with other men's poverty, and the Philosophical The Philosophical stone.
stone is always good for them. And if God would not have had that the fire
should have begun in those furnaces, as Theophilus has said, all the whole
world would have gone to ruin, and there would nothing have been left.


Thomas. I have desired of long time to understand, how that fire has
begun there, by what means, and by whom. But you have not yet declared it
unto me.


Hilarious. I am content to tell unto you. First, that The mouers of sedition
of Purgatory.
that I do understand and know, and who have been the mouers of sedition,
which were the causes of that great offense, and afterward Theophilus shall
tell you his advice, which I doubt not but that it is better then mine.
Since that Paradise and Hell were so shut up, and that there arrived daily
such a great number of souls in Purgatory, and have been kept there so
long time, there is no doubt, but that it must needs be that the fire was
very great, for to keep such a rosting and for to warm and make hot the
kitchen and for to seethe the pot of so many Priests and Moonkes, who are
dispersed and scattered abreade throughout all Christendom to so great a
number, there is no Arithmetician, how cunning soever he be in his A^te, which
can cast or number them. And yet nevertheless all the fire that was in their
kitchen begun of Purgatory. For they, neither their family (which is not
little) do eat no meat but that which is boiled and sodden in that fire. For
you ought to understand, that forasmuch as the number of y^ souls do become
very many, and that Purgatory was the better furnished, so much the more
greater did the fire kindle in their kitchen. For the reuenew was very great.
Wherefore it must needs be also y^ the train did increase and augment, and
that after Requiem, one should sing Gaudeamus. And y^ more they did The
gaudeamus of the pres^es
see y^ fire to burn y^ more they did blow it. To be short al went by y^
disshes. They did cast the house out of the windows. There was no more question
but to blow the coal, to rejoice and tryumphe, insomuch that they themselves
did make the fire.


Thomas. I do not yet very well understand your meaning, except you do
speak more plainly.


Hilarious. I mean that they are fed and nourished so fat and big about
that kitchen, and have invented so many fables and lies, for to maintain and
augment that fire, that they have uncovered and bewrayed themselves: and also
have done such wicked and most execrable things that whether men would or no,
they have been constrained to open their eyes, and to know that they were but
deceivers and seducers of the people, and that all their doctrine was nothing
but fables and lies, and especially by their Croysarde, which has brought
forth Luther in place, who The croyaards
was the first that discovered their disceyte.


Theophilus. It is very true, that that which you say has served for some
thing. For where Jesus Christ has Mat. 5. b. 16
commanded his Disciples that their light should so shine before men, that
they seeing their good works might be induced to glorify God: Those here
have so lyghted and kindeled the fire of their Purgatory, that every one
begins to see the dark places wherein they have put us. But that were but a
small thing, if God thereby had not sent from Heaven another fire, more
vehement and burning, which The celestial and euangelical fire Gene. 19. e.
24. Psa. 103. b. 8 Nomb. 14. d. 18. Exo. 34. a. 7.
has burned and consumed it altogether.


Thomas. Did the lyghtening fall upon it, or the fire and brimstone that
consumed Sodoma and Gomorra?


Theophilus. Not yet. For God who is full of compassion and mercy, and long
suffering, will not suddenly use such rigor and vengeance. And therefore the
fire that he has sent is more for to illuminate and make hot, then for to
burn and cousume. But it is of such a nature and force that it draws after
it the fire of the wrath and indignation of God, upon those which by the same
will not be illuminated. That is it of which Jesus Christ speaks off, saying:
I am come to put Luc. 12. g. 49.
fire on the earth: and what is my desire, but that it be kindeled. And for to
declare better what is the virtue of that fire, and what fire he means, he
has sent his holy Ghost unto his Apostles and Disciples, like a tongue of
fire, Act. 2. a. 3 Mat. 3. c. 11 Act. 1. a 5 The true fire of purgatory.
witnessing thereby, that it is he, of whom John Baptist has spoken, saying:
who shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire. That is a fire that
has an other virtue, then to purge the purses of the poor sinners. For it
purges in deed the souls, the which none other fire can do. And therefore
he has sent his Apostles for to carry Mat. 28. d. 19. Mar. 16. c. 15 Luc. 24.
c. 36 John. 20. a. 22 Esa. 2. c. 25
that fire, and to set on fire all the world, that through the same all
sins, filthiness, and iniquities should be purged in his Church as in a
furnace, and that all that which was false metal, should be so tried and
melted that nothing should remain but pure gold: and that all the relics of
2. Cor. 5. d. 17. Heb. 1. a. 3 1. Cor. 5. b. 7 Act. 15. b. 9 The purgatotory of
Jesus Christ and that of the Pope.
the old Adam should be burned and consumed, in such sort that all the true
children of God should be made new creatures through the power and virtue of
Jesus Christ, who alone has made the purgation of our sins, puryfying our
hearts through faith, washing and making them clean with his precious blood.


Hilarious. Behold a Purgatory much differing from the other. For in the other
they do nothing without money, but in this here we must not have any.


Theophilus. But he that will give and offer unto it is accursed of God, and
sent to hell fire, as it appears by the reprehension that Saint Peter did so
rigorously unto Simon the Sorcerer, cursing both him and his money that Act s.
d 10
he offered.


Hillarus. I am not abashed, although he were a beggar. For he was very
rigorous and cruel unto those that did bring him money. Those that say they
are his successors have not done the like: But clean contrary, that is, that
he that will be best welcome unto them, Exo. 13. b. 15 Deuteronomy. 10. d. 16
must not come empty handed. For it is wrttten: Thou shall not appear before
the Lord empty. They have well advised on those places that speak of
bringing, for to make them serve for their gain and profit: although that
they do understand nothing of them. And therefore they say unto those that
do bring any thing unto them: Intra in gaudium Domini tui: Enter into the joy
of thy Lord. Centuplum accipies, and vitam aeternam possidebis. Thou shall
receive an hundredth times as much, and possess eternal life.


Theophilus. Saint Peter studied in an other school, and remembered the
commandment that the master gave unto him saying: Freely ye have received,
freely give. Mat. 10. 28.
And for that cause has he himself preached in his name, saying: ye were not
redeenied with corruptible things, as 1. Pet. 1. d. 18
silver and gold, from your bayne conversation, which ye received by the
traditions of the fathers: but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
undefiled, and without spot. Forasmuch then as it is so, are not those men The
panishme^? upon those which re^ect y^ gospel, and do go to a strange fire
worthy to be cast into everlasting fire, if they do reiecte such grace, when
it is presented and offered unto them? and if they refuse to be purged with
that celestial fire, which was not sent unto them for to consume them, but for
to save them?


Hilarious. We must not doubt of it.


Theophilus. All other fire then besides that is a strange fire, the which ye
Lord has forbidden, willing and commanding Leuit. 10. a. r. Nomb. 16 g. 46.
Nomb. 26. g. 26. Esai. 6. c. 6.
that we should use only the same of his temple and altar, of which the
Seraphin took and brought the cole in his hand, wherewith he purged the lips
and mouth of Esaias. Also they ought to way and consider the example of Dathan
and Dathan and Abiron. Nomb. 16. e. 31.
Abiron and what profit they received in offering of strange fire, other then
that which was commanded of God. They offered it, but it was to their own
hurt and destruction. For God kindled fire against them and they were burned
and consumed, as the Babilonians were with the fire of their furnace. Danl. 3.
c. 22. Nadab and Abihu. Leuit. 10. a. 1.
And if God did not pardon Nadab and Abihu the proper sons of Aaron, but
caused them to be burned and consumed openly in the sight of all the people,
only because that through negligence they did take other fire then of the
Temple, do they think that he will support and bear rather with those who
dyspise the fire of Jesus Christ his son, and of his holy Ghost: Therefore
he said not without a cause, when he did send his Dysciples for to bring
that fire, saying: When you shall enter into any Citte or house, if they will
not ^^^^ue you, Mat. 10. b. 14.
shake off the dust of your feet in a witness against them. For truly I say
it shall be easier for the land of Sodoma and Gomorra in the day of
judgment, then for those of that generation. Wherefore I said but even now ye
that celestial fire draws with it the fire and brimstone, which consumed
Sodoma and Gomorra. For he that shall not be purged by that fire in this world,
it is necessary that he be consumed in that hell fire. And therefore it is
better for us that we do hold our selves unto that Purgatory, since that it
has pleased God to bring us thither again, then to seek an other, which in
steed to purge us, does burn us in hell fire.


Thomas. If it be so, it is a great deal better. But I would gladly know how
that fire has been quenched out so long time, and now kindled again.


Theophilus. You may well understand that when men would kindle an other, they
must quench out this here, and also wh^ men would build an other Purgatory,
they must ruinate and destroy that of Jesus Christ. For they cannot agree
together: and it is impossible that the one can endure and continue with the
other, since that the one purges without The cause wherefore the purgatory of
Jesus Christ has hene unknown.
money; through the only grace of God, and the other is an insatiable goulfe,
which melts and consumes all the gold and silver of the world, neither
purges it the sins, but makes all those guilty of hell fire that seek in
it their purgation.


Hilarious. I do compte him to be foolish and mad that had rather consume and
wast all his substance for to buy hell, then to receive Paradise freely, which
shall cost him nothing.


Thomas. In hearing you speak, I am greatly estonied to see how men have
changed their nature. For they do all willingly run to the best chepe, and
there is none but bad rather receive good merchaundise, if it cost nothing,
then to buy the bad very dear: or poison for to kill in steed of bread which
ought to nourish, and which shall be presented and offered unto him without
money.


Theophilus. And yet nevertheless we do see the same put in practice every
day: wherein we may well know how God has taken away the senses and
understanding of men, who do take such great pleasure to destroy themselves,
and to lose both their bodies, souls and goods: For they are mad to run
after ye priests for to buy death, and refuse life, which is presented unto
the^ freely and thanckfully by Jesus Christ.


Hilarious. I believe it well, and behold the cause wherefore al these collyars
and kitchen men, who do live upon that fire, have endcuoured themselves as
much as lies in them, to quench out altogether the fire of the gospel of Jesus
Christ, which quenches and puts out theirs, because that it is more
vehement and more violent, and consumes it into Ashes.


Thomas. Is it then true that it is quenched even as you say, and that there
remains nothing whole?


Theophilus. There remains yet some chamber or cabine, which are not yet all
burned. But sithence that once the fire of Jesus Christ has begun there to
kindle, it will not cease until such time as it has consumed it all into
Ashes, for that is a fire which none can quench.


Hilarious. I do much marvel that they do not all run for water to cast
upon it. Whereto serves their holy water? wherefore do they not no we make it
to show his virtues, as well as against the lightninges and tempests when they
conjure them?


Theophilus. They do clean contrary. For every one runs to the fire, to the
fagots, to the brimstone, to the lights and to the bellows for to make it the
more to burn. And they are so hot after it that there is neither, To put out
fire by fire.
King, Prince, Lord Bourgis, Merchaunt, or Labourer, whom they do not provoke
to blow their fire and to cast on fagots, in such sort that it is become so
great, that men do see in many places that it is like to consume those that
be alive.


Thomas. Can they quench it by that means?


Theophilus. You are not deceived, has the fire of men used to quench the fire
of God? No, but they do kindle it daily more and more.


Hilarious. I know the cause wherefore they do it. They do greatly fear least
those Lutherians and heretics should not be dampened, and that they should not
go into hell, since that they deny the Purgatory, and that they will not enter,
therefore they would make them to feel it in this world, and to purge them
from their sins, and to put them in Paradise against their wills. They do
well declare thereby, that they differ from the Persians, The Persians. Cice.
Tus. q. li. 1 Strab. li. 15. Volater. Herod. li. 1. 2. 4. Reg. 16. a. 3. and.
17. e. 17. 2. Cor. 28. a. 3. Psalm. 106. f. 37 Lact. de sal. rel. li. 1. ca. 21
Eus. de prep. eu. li. 4. Plini. li. 7. Dtoni. Hali. Diod in. 2. biblioth. The
Pope makes princes his haugmen.
who will not burn the dead bodies, as the Greeks and Latins do, because
they hold the fire as a God; and they thinck that it seems that it was much
unseemly for his majesty to defile himself with dead bodies, and to nourish
him with flesh. But these here do give him none other meat, but do sacrifice
to him men, as the Idolatres did God Moloch, Pluto, Saturnus, and did nourishe
them with man's flesh. But one may replye unto me, and say, that they did
unto him that honor to nourishe him with live flesh.


Theophilus. I am not so much amazed to see them do that, as I am to see how
they make the princes and lords their hangmen, putting into their hands those
whom they would have to be executed.


Hilarious. They show themselves to be the successors of those, who said
unto Pylate, speaking of Jesus Christ: we have a law and by our law he ought
to dye. But it John. 19. 2. 7.
is not lawful for us to put any man to death. And therefore they pray aid
of the seculer power, the which men dare not refuse. I do think that many
Princes and Lords do fear least it happen unto them as it happened unto
Nicanor the preuost of Alexander, against the Bactrianians. Nicanor.
The Hircanians and Bactrianians did usually give unto the dogs those that
were very old, and did think it to be the Bactrianians Hircantans.
best burying. For that cause the common people nourished up common dogs for
that purpose, and the rich men tame and demesticall dogs for to serve them
for that purpose: Cicero. si. 1. Tus. qua. Sixth. Emper. Hiero. aduer. louin.
lib. 2. Canes sepulchrales. The dogs for burying. Call. Rhod. Lect. aut li.
17. ca. 19. Aduer. louini. li. 2. P. Rosset a princely poet. Chanons of Mont
faucon.
And therefore they called them in their language the dogs of Sepulchers or
grave dogs. Then when Nicanor was come unto the Bactrianians, he endeavored
himself to reform and correct that vile custom and execrable crime. But he
could never take order to reform it, but to the contrary as witnesses saint
Hierome, they did rise against him, in such sort that he had almost lost his
kingdom. Now if we will consider the things and way them well, what are in
these days our Priests and Moonkes who do live upon carrion, as the dogs of
the Sepulchers do. For that cause I think, that Rosset the Poet of Sauoy,
called the dogs, the Chanons of mount Faucon, as I have heard him oftentimes
say in his lessons. Since the^ they have used to eat man's flesh, it is no
marvel though men do fear them, and that they feed them deintely, as they
do in Hircania. For there is not almost any great house but has his
domestical dogs, besides those that are kept and fed commonly in every town
and village.


Theophilus. I do much doubt that the same that they are afraid off will
happen unto them, since ye they will set no good order, according to ye power
that God has given unto them. I do greatly fear, that in ye end those dogs
will dououre the^ altogether. For they have already well begun.


Hilarious. Me Cicer. de not. Deo. lib. 2.
thincks that they take ye Pope for Moloch, Pluto or Saturn, who^ men cannot
appaise without sacrificing unto them men. The Pope would be called our holy
father, but that is such a father as Saturn was, who did eat his own children
Saturn and Rea.
(if the Poets have not lied) but yet Rea his wife hid them from him, and kept
them ye he should not eat them. But the court of Rome, and the papisticall
Church, who would be called our holy mother Church, does eat them as well as
our holy father: and in steed to hide them from him, she seeks every where
for to devour the^ with him. Wherefore we may very well give credit to the
Poets, and account them as Prophets herein. For me thincks that they have
truly Old. Fast 4.
prophesied and figured (...) those Gods which we have. I Sueto. in Ang.
would that the Princes would better advise themselves in their doings, and
that they do not unto the Pope, as Augustus Caesar did unto Julius, unto whom
he sacrificed three hundredth men before his Alter the ninth of March of those
that yielded themselves.


Thomas. I know not what to say of your matters, and am much abashed that
Eusebius holds his peace all this while without speaking any word, that he
takes not the quarrel in hand and the matter in earnest for to defend the
holy mother ye church to which he bears so great zeal. How much does
purgatory cost thee every year Eusebius?


Eusebius. I will not make thee account, nor I will not have the trumpet blown
when I do any good deed.


Thomas. I will tell thee the cause it that be true that they say, you and I
have lost much money, and our matter fares very evil. Wherefore me thinckes
you should answer something, and allege some reason against that ye they
say, or otherwise me thinckes you will be vanquished, and that you do prove all
that which you have heard of them.


Eusebius. What reason will you that I allege unto people without reason? It
makes me to tremble to hear their blasphemies, and I do marvel how God can
suffer them, insomuch that in hearing them me thinckes that the earth should
open her mouth and swallowe them up. A little thing would have made me to have
gene away, and I am amazed how I could hear it so long.


Theophilus. Have you found our matters so out of reason.


Eusebius. But what reason is there to mock so with God and with our holy
mother the Church? I do greatly fear that God will not give you grace to go
from hence into purgatory: But that he will send you into hell, and that you
shall be of the number of those unto whom Jesus Christ will say: Go ye cursed
into everlasting fire. For I well know by your Mat. 25. d. 41
own words that you do smell of the brimstone and fagots, and that you are
rank heretics. I doubt not, but ye there has been a great many burned that
have been honester men then you are.


Hilarious. Nor I also doubt it. she cannot deny but that the tyrants have
burned many holy Martyrs, for the Gospel of Martyrs.
Jesus Christ, and do yet still unto this day a great many honester men then
we. For if they had not been good and honest men, they would not have by their
blood sealed the witness of the truth.


Thomas. I do well perceive that Eusebius will leap by and by upon the Ass, and
will be in a rage, if men do vere him much.


Eusebius. Who would not be in a rage, bearing such matters? It were enough to
make all men alive in a rage, that have any zeal unto the holy catholic
Church.


Thomas. Forasmuch as thou thinckest that we are so far past reason, I pray
thee, to answer unto that which I will ask thee. And if thou have any good
reason, show it forth, for to draw me from error and heresy, if thou
think ye I am fallen into any.


Eusebius. I will not dispute nor plead with you, but I had rather follow the
counsel of saint Paul, who commands me to reject him that is an Tit. 3.
c. 10
heretic. For it is forbidden to dispute with them. And I To dispute with
Heretics.
do well know, that I shall profit nothing, but to be perverted, if I were not
very strong in my faith. For as far as I can perceive, you are already to
obstinate and hardened in your heresies: and as saint Paul says: Evil words
corrupt 1. Cor. 15. c. 33
good manners.


Theophilus. You have spoken your mind. But before that you do condemn us for
heretics, we must be vanquished of heresy. And if it should be so that we
should fall into any error and heresy, yet thou can not call us heretics,
except it be known unto thee that we were the authors and The signification
and definition of an heretic August. 1. li. de vtilita. credend. Et. 24.
quae. 3. ca. Haereticus.
inuenters of sects, or that we were obstinate and hardened in error, and that
through praise, arogancie, presumption or covetousness, and for some worldly
gain or profit, we would speak against the truth. For according to S.
Augustines diffinition, such men ought to be taken for heretics. But I
beseech God we be not led with such affection. And when you shall know
perfectly that we are heretics, yet saint Paul Titus. 3. ca. 10.
does not command us to reject an heretic at the first dash, but after once
or twice admonition, when he shows himself incorrigible. And as yet you have
not admonished nor corrected us, wherefore you cannot lawfully accuse us,
neither of obstination, nor yet of heresy. And to the end that we should
give the less occasion, I am content to hear patiently all yt which you will
say, and believe that I shall receive reason for payment, upon this condition
also that you will hear me, and talk with me quietly, as though you did
count me for your Christian brother, until such time as you have vanquished me
by your reasons, and that you did fully know my obstination.


Thomas. I would gladly see Eusebius skirmish with you: But in the mean time I
would also as gladly hear that some would speak of dinner, and to let that
skirmish alone till afterward. For I do see ye the sun is already very hye,
and think that we have forgotten to dine: For I have a stomach that barketh
as the hungry hound, which keeps me ye I cannot forget it.


Hilarious. Thereunto I am thy compalgnion. Therefore I find thy counsel good.
I know not how it is with you, but with me I have a good appetite to drinck.


Eusebius. God knows that you are yet fasting at this mass. For you have
accustomed to fast.


Hilarious. Although I have broken my fast twice, yet you ought not to be
abashed although that I am much altered. For we have been all ye day about that
fire of Purgatory, which has so altered me that I think that all the holy
water of the Priests cannot quench the fire and the thirst which is in my
throat.


Eusebius. I do believe very well that you love the wine better then he
water, and that ye same is the holy water that you require.


Hilarious, I do also believe that you are not much contrary from mine opinion,
and I do not thinck, how good a catholic soever you be, that you would change
with a priest a pint or quarte of wine, for a quarte of his holy water. At ye
leastwise I would not: for I do find the one better and more profitable then
the other. I know not how ye souls of Purgatory do like of the water, but I do
like better of the wine: And if I must needs drink water, I had rather to
mingle it with a little wine, then with salt, as the Priests do in their holy
water.


Eusebius. They do it not for to drink.


Hilarious. I believe it well: for they are not so deintie: and they love the
wine as well as I. But wherefore do they it?


Thomas. For to deface and purge the sins by the sprinckling thereoff.


Hilarious. I am ashamed of their folly. One may Apothegma of Diogenes for the
holy water Ovid, Fast. 1. Ah nimium saciles, qui tristia crimina cadii. Exigua
tolli posio putalls aqua.
very well say unto them as Diogenes said unto a certain Panim, who sprinkled
himself with water for to purge his sins, after their ancient manner. O
miserable man (says he) if thou have s^^led in thy Grammar and committed a
fault and incongruite, thou can not be absolved wc sprinckling of the water:
how do thou then thinck with the sprinckling of the water to be absolved and
washed from thy sins?


Thomas. It seems unto me that if you have such great thirst as you say, you
will not begin to enter into a new matter, for to make us fast any longer.


Theophilus. Admit it were so yt we had a day of fasting. For it is now Lent,
and although it were not yet I do believe yt Eusebius would have fasted and
peradventure Thomas also. And when we shall be all under the Popes religion, we
must the^ fast the Lent al out, or else at the leastwise a great part thereoff.


Hilarious. It is true, and it is better for us to fast at liberty, then
through compulsion. But since that ye be all of that mind, let us go then to
dinner.


Finis primi Dialog.
THE SVMME OF THE second book.
Since that we have already declared in the first Dialogue the agreeing of the
Platonicall, Poetical, and Papisticall Purgatory, and the diverse manners of
purgations, that have been, as well among the Panims as the Christian Idolaters,
and how all those things were invented by the Priests for to serve their
avarice, and rapacitie, the which was more greater in them, then it was ever in
others: Now we will bring in, declare and set forth perticulerly their other
practices, and the office which they do for the dead, and how at the funerals,
burialls and mortuaries they follow more the errors and abuses of the Panims,
then the examples of the true servant of God as well in their singings and
lamentacions that they make for the dead, as in torches, lyghtes, belles,
ryngings, and sepultures. Therefore I have entitled this Dialogue: The office
of the dead: In which also we will declare, what is the honor that is due
unto the dead: what ought to be the burialls, funerals, and the sorrowing of
the Christians: what has been the beginning, in making, co^memoration and
prayers for the dead. Also we will declare the principal points of the Mass
of Requiem, that they do sing for the dead, and we will prove by their own
words, that they do pray rather for the Saints and Saints, and for those that
are in Paradise in joy and celestial rest, then for those which are in
pains, be it in Purgatory, or in any other place, according to their own
doctrine: and how by their own prayers they sufficiently testify and witness
that in their doctrine there is nothing that is certain, and that they hold
not those whom they do judge to be in Purgatory, as assured of their
salvation.

It shall be also declared what is the true Purgatory of Jesus Christ, and the
true satisfaction of the Christians toward God, for their sins: and how the
Papisticall Purgatory and satisfactions do disagree altogether from the
promises of god, and the remission of sins by Jesus Christ, It shall be
declared in like manner for what cause God does chastise and punish the
faithful in this world, and not in the other: what are the good works, and
wherefore God will judge men by them: and how we must watch and do penance,
and travail whilst we are in this life, without trusting upon the good deeds
that other will do for us after our death. Item, what are the good deeds that
we ought to do for the dead, and wherein we may succor and help them, and
the great injury and wrong that the Popes and the Priests do unto Jesus
Christ, and to all the Christian people, holding them in the sincke and dungeon
of their perverse doctrine and traditions: What fishermen they are, and what
their floods and ryuers are wherein they fish and catch the gold and silver
and not the men: what are their relics and holy bodies: and how they do abuse
the dead bodies to the great dishonor of God and of his Saints as the
Coniurers and Sorcerers do. And whereto serves all that which is done at the
burialls, and chiefly to those which are buried in the habit or cool of
Saint Fraunces. And in the end we declare how Jesus Christ contains in
himself all that which is needful for us, both in life and death.

For to enter then into the matter, Theophilus brings the other in order.

THE SECOND DIALOGVE which is called the office of the dead.
THeophilus. You did erewhile complain because that in speaking of Purgatory
we were so affectioned after it, that it have almost made us to forgette our
dinner: But now I do fear very much the contrary, that the dinner does make
us forget purgatory, and the residue which yet remained to be thought on.

Hilarious. You know very well that the Priests have accustomed to break
their fast, and to eat the soppe in the wine in the midst of their Mass.
Wherefore it were good reason that we did pause a little in the mids of our
Mass, for to breathe our selves. For we have said and sunge enough for the
dead for to drink once: And yet we are more beneficial unto them then the
Priests. For we have not dronken upon their costs and expenses.


Thomas. Therefore you are so much the soberer. For me thinks that you have
not druncke very much according to that that you say you were a thirst.


Hilarious. I took that which sufficed me and no more, and was content. For it
does to me more good, then all that which the Priests and Moonkes have eaten
and dronken in the name of the dead; does profit the dead. It is already long
since that I would have brought in for you that, but I do always wait when
that Eusebius would begin. But I know very well that the dinner has a little
abated his choler, and that the advice and counsel of Seneca is good, who
Seneca.
counsayleth those that are subject to ire and choler not to fast nor to take
in hand any wayghty matter, if they do find fasting hurtful to those which
are subject to wrath.
themselves by experience to be more enclyned to wrath before they have eaten
then after, because that hunger increases it the more.


Eusebius. Therefore do you break your fast so willyngly in the morning, and
are so much afraid to fast. You must not impute my choler unto fasting, but
to your importunate and wicked tongue: For he must have great patience which
would not be moved to wrath through your words.


Theophilus. I would gladly know thy reasons wherefore. Admit that all that
which this holy father has preached this day be true, and all that which he at
other times has made us to believe of Purgatory: First I demand of thee,
whether the Priests and Moonkes can deliver the souls which are kept in that
fire, through their Prayers, Suffrages, good deeds, Uigiles, Masses and
Pardons?


Eusebius. Who will say the contrary but the Heretics?


Theophilus. If it be so, wherefore are they so cruel that they do not
deliver them incontinent from the fire, since that they have the power to do
it? Do they delight to see them frye, roste, and burn with a little fire, as
they do The crueltye of the prestes toward the souls.
those whom they condemn for Heretics, for to make them suffer more
greater torment? If you see an house on fire, and that there were a little
child, or a poor man with in the house, crying for help and succor, would
you not run by and by and fetch them out, if you might possible?


Thomas. Although it were but a Degrees, yet one should have pyttie to hear him
cry and howl.


Theophilus. That same is most true. Wherefore you Miseremini mei, miseremini
mei, saltem vos amici mei, quia manus Domini tetigit me. Lugentibus in
purgatorio. Qui torrentur ardore nimio, Et torquentur sine remedy, Subuentat
tua compassio, O Maria.
may judge Eusebius, what people those are, whom you have in such estimacion,
and accomptest for the holy Church. They do sing in their Uigills, in the name
of the souls: Have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, you at the least
that are my friends. And in their Mass and in their Lugentibus in Purgatorio:
They do cry unto the Uirgin Mary that she have pity and compassion of these
poor souls which do lament themselves in Purgatory, and which are roasted
with a very great fire and torments without remedy. Wherefore do not they
themselves have compassion on them and give them help.


Eusebius. What do they then? Do you not see how by those very words, they
do pray unto the Uirgin Mary for them, and how they show that they are their
aduocaters and intercessors toward her.


Theophilus. But do they that for the compassion that they have of them?


Hilarious. They declare it sufficiently enough. For if one give them no money,
they will let them roast and burn perpetually, although they have power to
deliver them, as they brag and boast themselves they can.


Theophilus. Thereoff I am much abashed, The rule of the divine service for the
dead. Durant. Ratio diui. off. li. 7. Rub. de off. mort.
and yet more, because it is written and ordained in their rules of their
divine office, that if it chance that the years mind of those that be dead
fall upon a Sunday, or upon any solemn feast, it ought not to be delayed nor
put off until the next day, as it is used in the office and feasts of Saints,
if they fall upon such days: But must rather advance the office and prayers
for the dead in the days before, for to comfort them the better, and to
prevent and mittigate the pains that they to suffer in Purgatory. Of which
they do give such reasons, saying: that the dead and the Vnde versus Non peccat
cantans, qui iustam praeuenit horam: Sed peccat cantans qui iustam prae terit
horam. lo. Maio. 4. sent did. 45. q. 1. Long and short Masses.
souls of ye dead have need of our aid, but not ye Saints. Wherefore the
Saints which be in Paradise have more greater leisure to tarry, then the poor
souls that are holden in the fire of Purgatory. Whereunto agrees very well the
question which Maioris made: To wit, what Mass is most profitable for the
dead, either that which is said quickly and hastily, as the custom is in
France to singe them: or else that which is said leasurely, and in which they
bestow a great time, as they do in Scotland and in Spain.


Hilarious. What is the solution of the question?


Theophilus. That the same that is soonest dispatched is the best: For the
souls do not feel the comfort that they ought to receive of the Masses
which are sunge in their name, until such time as the Mass is done.


Hilarious. And therefore they say as I think. Ite Missa est. Go your way the
Mass is done, and do believe that then the souls have leave for to depart
out of purgatory. But by that account the Masses of Hunters should be the The
hunters Mass. The requiems of the poores and of the rich.
best. And the poor should have more greater advantage then the rich. For
they do dispatch their Masses quickly with a little Requiem, yet the Priests
do eat the one half for the great have that they have. It seems playnelye
To go into Paradise in post, and upon a ^^rslytter or vvagon.
that they would send them into Paradise in post. But the rich they do
carrye vppen Horselytters or Wagons with great Requiems, which continues
every one of them more then ten miles, and are more then ten else long.
But I thinck that they have regard unto that, that the most part of those
arrant thieves were goutie, and they are yet afraid to do them hurt and to
trouble their goutes.


Thomas. I had rather to have the gout and to be carried into Paradise upon
the most trotting horse that can be found, then to burn in that so terrible a
fire. But I maruayle, if it be so, wherefore it is forbidden that the Priests
shall say but one Mass in a day, since that they are One Mass in a day.
so profitable for the dead. Me thinks that the Priests should never cease
singing of Masses at all times and that they ought to forsake their meat and
food to do that. For if they were in a fire, they would gladly that one
should leave all things for to help the^ out. Furthermore, how much the more
a thing is the betre^, so much the more the frequentacion of the same ought to
be the better.


Hilarious. I am also estonyed that the Papists do not all the good deeds
that they determine to do for the dead all in one day without tarying for the
yeremindes, and causing the poor souls to languish so long in that fire, and
to suffer them so long time to roste: and that those that ordain Masses in
their Testaments, do not cause them to be dispatched in an hour, without
lymiting so long time.


Theophilus. Also Maioris did very well say, that the same 4. Cent did. 45. 41.
should be the better, although that afterward, he added that a Mass which is
said more treatably, does recompense through the deuosion of him which says
it, the quickenesse and brevity of that which is said in have.


Hilarious. I believe very well that they had rather have all their money
together that they look for, then to cause them to languish in tarying for it,
as the poor souls, fearing least any thing should escape them. Therefore they
say, that the candle that goes before, is better then that The candle that
goes before.
which comes after.


Thomas. I assure thee that I had an Aunt, whom they had put that into her
head that the To bury one before he is dead. An history.
must be buried before she be dead.


Hilarious. How could she do that?


Thomas. She has done during her life all her good deeds, as she would have
that one should do for her after her death, carryinge candells, and sprinklyng
holy water upon the grave in which she would be buried, and causinge the
Priests to sing, as they should have done if she had been dead. But the same
happened well for them. For afterward she was converted to your law, and the
most part of all her parents and kinsfolk. Wherefore the Priests should have
lost all that.


Hilarious. And therefore it is not without cause yt they make such have of
offerings, but without the same they make no have.


Theophilus. It should seem to those yt hear the^ read upon their books, ye
they have great pity and compassion of those captive souls, since that they
had rather delay ye honor yt they would do unto ye saints, and their office,
then ye same of the dead, and the solace and comfort that they would give unto
them. But ye practice of their doctrine and experience declares unto us the
contrary. For he that will not give them ready money in their hands without
all question, those poor souls should never have any help of them, or at the
least it shall be but little, and they shall tarry their leisure. And so by that
means the poor shall be always miserable, and cannot enter into Paradise for
want of money, if there be such avarice in Paradise as is among them.


Hilarious. Some men say they have heard their lamentations, and that you do
wrong unto them, and that The lamentations of the prests for the dead.
they are not so pitiless as you make them. For in singing for the dead, they
lament so piteously, that men would say that they did weep and mourn, as if
they had buried their father and mother. But it is easy to be seen, that
they are not so sorrowful as they seem they are: But that those are the
tears of the Crocodile, who Crocodili la. chrymae. The vveping of the Crocodil
weepeth when he would eat and devour men. Wherefore the more I behold them,
so much the truer do I find the answer of him, of whom one asked what kind
of people do live now a days most joyfully and freely upon What men are most
free and privileged.
the earth? and who have the greatest franchises and privileges?


Thomas. What answered he?


Hilarious. That they were the Priests and the Phistcians. For the Priests are
always joyful and merry as you hear them sing at the burialls, when all the
other do weep and lament. The Phisicians also have great lyberties The
privilege of the wicked Phisicions and hangmen. Plin. li. 29. c. 1. Medico
tatum hommem occidisse impunitas summa est.
and franchises. For it is lawful for them to kill men, not only without
receiving punishment for it, but which is more, they have and receive money for
their labor?


Thomas. The hangmen are as much privileged.


Hilarious. You say true, I am abashed that Pliny has not joined them
together, when he did speak of the privilege of the Phisicians. But it
seems unto me, that they ought yet to have wages of the Priests. For they do
not neglect and fore slow their business, but do bring goodly hydes into The
tanne fat of the prestes.
their tanne fat.


Theophilus. Yea the barbarous and ignorant Emperiques and Arabians, which
ought to agree with them, and the Theologians Sophistes. But they cannot get
much with the cunning Phisicians and which are of a good conscience.


Hillarias. And therefore me thinks that those cannot well agree with the
Priests, For the Priests desire none other thing but death: And the good
Phisicians The good Phisicians.
do not travail but to drive death away, and to give health, and to keep and
maintain the life of men.


Thomas. There is nothing truer then that thou say. For I my self have
heard them how they do rejoice of their poor parishieners, and say the one
to the other, in going to the tavern: Let us go drink upon the first skin
that will come.


Theophilus. What mean they by that? A new proverb of the priests. To
drink upon the skin to come.



Hilarious. I do understand their proverb. But I am not much abashed, although
you do not understand it, for it is not in the Chiliades of Erasmus. They
compare the poor people to the beasts, of whom they are the boutchers and
flears, as they themselves confess by their proverb. And nevertheless The
butchery of the priests.
Eusebius is angry when we do name them by the names that they themselves have
given them.

For what other thing does their proverb signify, but as the boutchers and
flears have the profit and gain of the skin and hyde of the beasts whom
they flea: Even so also have they the profit of the dead bodies of which they
flea. I have heard them my self, how they rejoice, when they hear that there
is any rich man sick and in danger of death, and how they say let us make
good cheer: For we shall have by and by here a good skin for shoes and for
the tanne fat. There is neither Tanner nor Cordwaytter Hydes for shoes
Tanners and Shomakers of men's skins.
so wealthy as those are. For all the other know not to make their profit but
of ye skins and hides of beasts: But these here do occupy the skins of
men. And although that they be unprofitable for any work, nevertheless they
do make of them more gain, then of any other, insomuche that all the gain
that: ye Tanners do with their marroquino and vntanned hides, and the
Cordwamers with their shoes, is nothing in comparison of that which these do
get with their trade. The reproach of the cuntry man against ye priests



Thomas. I assure thee that I do know a man at Couppet which is besides
Geneun, who has made this reproach unto the Priests of the same place, and
said unto them. Ye have dronken upon my skin, but you shall pay y^ shot if ye
will for mo: For I will not disburse any penny or farthing.


Hilarious. Wherefore said he that?


Thomas. Because that The dead does mock ye priests.
he was sick of long time, and during his sickness the Priests hoping that he
would have dyed in short time, went to ye Tavern to drinck upon his skin:
But he deceived them, and did not to them ye pleasure they looked for: For he
died not, but is yet alive to this day.


Hilarious. The dead has then deceived and mocked them as well as the old men
who do spend all their goods under hope that they shall dye in short time, and
afterward, as men say, were constrained to go beg at the gates and doors,
desiring to give some almose unto those poor people whom death has begiled.
These Priests have as The complaynt of the Curate.
great occasion to complain of him, as ye Curate had, who (as men say)
complained of his Parishoners, saying: what would you have me do my
Parishioners? you will neither offer nor yet dye. Whereof do ye think that I
can live? have you determined ye I should dye with hunger? do you not think
Eusebius, ye one may say the same of them that Seneca has written of Aruncius
and Aterius, and of other Seneca si. 6. de benef. Auruncius Aterius. Captatores
testamentorum. Hunters and watchers after heritages and testaments. Libitina
Libitinarij. Vespillones. Marrons are those vhich do bury in ye time of the
plague.
like, who do make it an occupacio^ and science to purchase after heritages and
to watch after testaments, saying that they have the same desire which the
Marrons had, and those who make it an occupacion to bury the dead bodies, and
to furnish and prepare that which is necessary for the burials and funerals.
For the greater that the number of the dead bodies are, so much is the game the
greater both of the one and the other. And therefore says he: Those ye do make
it an occupatio^ to bury the dead know not of whom they ought to desire death:
But these hunters and watchers after testaments and heritages, do desire yt
their friends and kinsmen should die. If the Priests of ye Panims had been like
unto our Priests, I doubt not but yt they would have joined unto those here.
For they desire as much the death of men, and more then those, since that they
make and do the occupation both of the one and the other. Wherefore when I hear
them sing their songs so pitiously and lamentable, about the dead, and their
graves, me thincks that I Proverb. Flere adnouercae tumulum. The means to
comfort the I Priests. Minius. Haredis status sub persona lisus est.
see children cry, as the proverb says, at the burying of their stepmother.
And yt they are like unto the little children, who do weep and laugh all with
one wind, and by and by are appeased, so ye when one gives them a piece of
bread, or an apple, and that which they ask for: Even so we must appease those
and give the^ money to comfort them. Afterward as soon as they have received
it, behold them mapings and lamentations are ended, their sorrow is turned
into joy, and Requiem into Gaudeanius.


Theophilus, This that you speak seems to be sour and sharp unto Eusebius:
But I am certain that if he did read a little ye which S. Cyprian has written
against Cyprian. tract. 1. cont. Demet. Nec infirmes exhibetur misericordia and
defunctis auaritia inhiat acrapina, and appetuntur spolia mortuorum. The
minstrells at the burialls Siticines, Tibicines.
the avarice and greediness of the Priests and Prelates, and of their rapine
and theft toward the dead, in his book against Demetrian, he shall find the
thing a little more sweeter and pleasant.


Hilarious. I do think ye they determine none other thing but to abolish all
ye institution of the true Church of Jesus Christ, for to reduce and bring it
to Iewishnesse and Panimry. The ancient Panims have accustomed to hire for
ready money some minstrel or many minstrels after the estate of him that dies,
who shall singe with their instruments many lamentable and pitiful songs, of
the calamities and miseries of the old time, for to comfort the parents and
friends of the dead, hearing of other men's misfortunes, and letting them to
understand thereby yt they were not alone. For as men do commonly say: The
consolation and comfort Alexadr. Appro in proble.
of the miserable is to have compaignions. They do it also, to the end that
through the harmony of ye instruments they should be drawn away and feel less
dolor and grief. The minstrels then do accompany the pomp and funeral
procession, and play their notes before the dead body, sounding their Trumpets,
Flutes and Drum for to move the hearers Plato de leg. li. 12.
to sorrow and lamentation. Sometime they do sing of the praise of the dead,
and according to the note that ye minstrel does sound, and the affections that
he gives to his songs and instruments, the parents and friends of the dead do
strike their breasts and begin to weep and lament, and not content with
Lamenters
that, but do hire some to lament and weep, for to help them to sorrow and
weep and to singe the complaints, and Threnodes. Tremnistriae. Praesicae.
Biernoys Naeuius Alexandrians.
chieflye women, because that they are by nature more pitiful and myleh hearted
to weep, as the Biernoys besides Gascoyne and in Alexandria do yet use unto
this day, and do so their office, that one would say that the matter
touches them. They have also accustomed in many places to shave their beard in
token of sorrow and mourning.


Thomas. Whereto serves all that for the dead? Haec quidem me hercle praefica
si mortuum laudat. Coel. Rho. lec anti. 17. c. 22. Herod. Tranq. The honor
dew unto the dead. Gene. 3. d. 19. Vir. Aene. 11 Interea socios, in humalaque
corpora terra. Mandamus qui solus honos. Acheronte sub imo est. 1. Thessa. 4.
c. 13 The burial of the Barbarians Herod. Ierom. in loui. lib. 2. Tertul. in
Marcio. Friar Genure. Lib. consor. fol. 63.



Hilarious. Whereto serves for the^ now all ye that ye Priests do? What
greater honor can we do unto them, then to bury them honestly in the earth,
followinge the sentence of God, which has said: Earth thou art and into earth
thou shall return again.


Theophilus. The true servant of God, Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles,
have not much used any other Ceremonies, and we know not to follow a better
rule and example then theirs, and the admonition which the Apostle does give
unto us. He forbids us expressly ye we should not sorrow for those ye are
fallen a sleep, as the Panims and Gentiles do who have no hope. The holy
Apostle would not bring us to such barberousnesse as has been sometime used
among the Panims, who did eat the dead bodies, or else did give them to be
devoured and torn in pieces with dogs, birds and fishes, without burying
them: As many authors as well Panims as Christians do witness it of the
Scithians, Indians, Bactrianians, Hircanians, Pontickes, and other such like
barberous people.


Hilarious. I think the Friar Geneure who is so much praised in the book of
the conformities of saint Fraunces, came from some of those Nations. For among
all the other marvelous virtues which are reported of him, this is one, that
he caused ye Devils to flee away seven miles without ever retourning again. It
is written in the same book, that he said: I would to God that when I shall
dye there do proceed and come out from my body such a stincke, ye none dare to
come near it, and finally that men would cast me out without burying of me,
and that I might dye all alone, abhominably and that they would suffer me to
be devoured of the dogs.


Theophilus. Some have accused the Lutherians for that they make none account
of the dead bodies, because they condemn the superstitions of the Papists:
But I do not think that ever any of them would speak so unhonestly,
neither of his own body, nor yet of any others. Yet Diogenes. Cic. Tus q. 1.
Diogenes had more honesty, how dogish soever ye he was. For although ye he
did not much take care for his burying, yet he commanded not that one should
give his body to the dogs. It is true ye he did say, that he had no great care
how he should be buried: For those that shall have the house will not suffer
him to rot within it. And if they do cast it out, at the least let them cast a
staff after it for to defend and keep it from the dogs. I know not in
what Theology this Friar Geneure has learned that honesty. For the Apostle
speaks not after that sort. Also I would not that we should be so
superstitious in the burying as were the Grecians, Romans, and other like
people, who esteemed Grecians and Latynes.
themselves more human and honest, and that we should so lament and sorrow
for the death of our parents and friends; as they did: as though we had no
more hope and trust of the resurrection then they, and as though we did
think them altogether dead and lost. And although that there was more greater
moderation in this among the Jewish people, then among all the other, and that
they did keep an ^^der more agreeing to nature, yet nevertheless the Apostle
would that we should be bold and constaunt, forasmuch as we have more
certain and sure witness of the resurrection of the dead, and more greater
and excellenter revelation of the Gospel, then this ancient people had: at
the leastwise that we do not worse then they, but that we may witness through
our constancy and countenance the The sorrovving for the dead
faith that we have in Jesus Christ, and our hope in his resurrection. The
Apostle says not simply: Sorrow not for those that are fallen a sleep, and
be not sad. For that should be Stoique like, and of men he would make
stones and blocks of wood, without any affection: But the doctrine of the
Gospel imports not the same. For although What affections the Gospel does
permit.
that the Gospel of Jesus Christ does correct and mortefie the wicked
affections of the flesh, yet nevertheless it depriueth nor spoileth man from
all human affection, but amendeth only that which is vicious, through the
natural corruption, proceeding from the sin of man. It is impossible that we
can be wout dolor and sorrow, although we would, when we do see the
afflictions and miseries of our brethren, being of our flesh and blood, The
holy Scripture has not condemned the sorrow and heaviness that Abraham
conceived Genes. 23. c. and Genes. 50. a. 1 Mat. 14. b. 11 Act. 8. 2. 21 Act,
11. 2. ^
for the death of Sara his wife, and Isaac of his mother, Joseph of his father
Jacob: The Disciples of S. John, and of Jesus Christ, and of s. Steven, and of
s. James, of ye tears ye they have shed and of ye sorrow that they made: For
man cannot be man, without being moved to pity and compassion, seeinge the
calamities of others, and feeling the damage that he himself receives.
Therefore S. Paul speaks very sharply, when 1 Thessalonians. 4. c. 13
he said, that the faithful should not be sorrowful as the Panims and
Infidels, who have no hope of the resurrection. Since then that he condemns
the dooinges of the Panims, we ought not to keep them, except we would be
rather counted Panims then Christians. It ought then to suffice us to bury
honestly the bodies of the dead, and to put them in the earth as in their bed,
tarrying and lookinge for the coming of Jesus Christ, and the general
resurrection of all flesh. Therefore the Christians do call the place that is
appointed for their burial Cimiterium, because that it is as the bed, couch
and dortoire of the faithful that be The Churchyard and dortoyr
dead. And therefore it is good to have some certain honest and comely place,
as a common repository of the Christians, Those do dishonor god which do not
bury honestly the dead. 1. Cor. 6. 1. 10
and public witness of the resurrection of the flesh. For we should do great
wrong unto our bodies which are the temple of God, in whom God dwells, and
which have been consecrated and made holy through the blood of Jesus Christ
unto his honor and glory, and dedicated unto the immortal inheritage of his
kingdom, if we do cast them to dogs, fowls and wild beasts, as she
carryon of wild and brute beasts, as though they should live no more after
they were dead, and be no pertaker of the immortality, no more then beasts.
Their bodies ought to be more dear unto us, and more joined and knit unto us
then their apparel, as Basile witnesses. For that cause the Patriarchs and
true servants of God Bas. serui. 2. Mana. ca. 13 Genes. 23. d. 19 Genes. 25.
2. 7 Genes. 17. g. 19 Tho. 1. 2. 3
were praised, and namely Thoby, not for that they caused singing, prayers, and
offering for the dead, and in spending their substance without necessity upon
the dead: But because they have delivered them again to the earth their mother
Job. 1. d. 22
from whom they came out: and that they have so honored them by their burying,
without sparing that which was necessary for the bodies of the servant of
God, for whom he was glorified. And the Panims themselves were greatly afraid
to suffer those to lie unburied who have lived Those that do kill themselves
are deprived of their burial. Sopho. in Aiace fla. 24. d. 5. Si non lice. etc.
Cum homo. and de poe. did. 3. c Judas.
honestly, and did not deprive but those who through despair did kill
themselves, as yet unto this day it is ordained by the Canons. But the Panims
oftentimes, do but cut off the hand that committed the fact, iudgeing it
unworthy to be buried with the body, to whom it has done violence. Also in
some places they do punish with such insamy those that commit sacrilege, and
that kill their fathers and mothers, and others that have committed such
execrable crimes: notwithstanding that the Hebrews after that they had
satisfied to Justice, buried them, and would not suffer that the Iosep. aut.
li. 4. ca. 6. Esa. 14. c. 19 Iere. 22. c. 19 The buryall of an Ass.
burial should be denied not to the enemies, as Josephus witnesses: And the
Lord by his Prophet declares unto ye tyrant of Babylon, that he shall have no
place to be buried in: And threateneth Ioachim that he shall be buried among
the Asses, because of his infidelity and tyranny.


Hilarious. The Panims had some appearaunce to do that, and used not such
cruelty as our Priests, who for default of money do refuse ye burial, not
only unto the old folk, but also to ye little Infa^ts. And how many times
does it happen, yt they have excommunicated some poor labourer or busba^dma^,
Excommunication for money.
for twenty or thirty soubs, yea, for three, and if he do die being so
excommunicated by the^, having not wherewith to pay, they have denied him ye
place to be buried with ye other christians: In c. ex part de sepult. Extra.
de torn. ca. De peni did. 6. c. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 4. a. 5
or else he must buy it deerly? And yet nevertheless there Canons deny not that
Churchyard, but to those who are no Christians, or who do kill themselves: or
to those ye have been killed in doing some wicked act, as adultry, larceny,
murder, and Jewish plays. I am greatly abashed where they and we have had ye
understanding. S. Paul and Moses do forbid us expressly, to be co^firmable to ye
imitatio^s of the Panims and Idolatrers, it that in dispite of them we have
not taken any other myrrour, nor have studied in any other thing. For what
difference is there between our funerals and buryals and theirs? The ringing
of Belles.
Have not we the Bells in steed of the Minstrels that the Panims had? And even
as they had the Minstrelles that were best allowed, according to the estate and
condition of the persons, so have we the Bells, Priests and Monks. When The
burying of the rich.
there dies any Prince or noble man or rich man, that has well wherewith to
pay, they will bury him with the trumpet, with many torches, with great pomp
and procession, and with a great company of Minstrels, and of men and women,
for to singe, weep and lament about him, as it does well appear by the
description that Virgile made of the burying and funerals of Pallas the son
of king Euander, saying, that after that he was known to be dead in the
City, and that the Citizens did understand that men did bring the body, and
that it was already at hand, did as follows.

Th'archadians most sodeinly, unto the gates then came, The burial of Pallas.
Vir. Aene. 11

Holding the torches funerals, already for the same.
According to their old fashion, their guise and eke custom,
And every one his torch did light, that served in that rome.
Marching so well before the hearse, by order on a row,
That there was none among them all, out of order did show.
Giving such great a shining light, the way the which they went,
With the dead corpse and pomp so great, which to his grave him sent.
That all a far and round about, the fields that are full fair,
Did give such light and seruent heat, which flamed in the air.
And in an other place speaking of the weepings and lamentations done over the
dead, says:

Even to the heavens assended is, of men the doleful cry, Vir. Aene. 11

And eke the sound of the trumpets, lamenting pitiously:
And hesids all these things, the rich men were carried to the earth upon a
goodly Beer, with great magnificence and pomp, the which the Satirical Poet
has comprised in a few verses, speaking of those which through their excess,
and for that they follow not the counsel of the Physician, and keep not good
diet do kill themselves saying.

With such like train they march before, with tro^pe and torches bright
Persius. Sa. 3.

To guide the rich man to his grave, a goodly gorgeous sight.
Who on a curious coffin lies, and mourners bear his beer,
And all his friends bewail his death, with sad and mourning cheer.
On the contrary part, if there do dye any poor man, The burial of the poor.
or any young child, or man of small calling, they do bring him simply
with a little procession, and a small company, and the most times in the night,
for the causes which already before have been touched, and they had but one
little Flute. Of which among others the Poet Statius does witness it writing
of Archanorus, after this manner.

But when poor men or children dye, their burial is not brave.
A little Flute does serve their turn, to bring them to their grave. Statius.

Since that we are fallen into the talk of the Flute, I Pli. si. 19. c. 43 The
burial of a Raven.
do remember an history that Pliny makes mention off, of a Raven that was at
Rome, who had learned to speak, insomuch that every morning he went into the
open streets and saluted the Caesar's, to wit Tiberius, Germanicus, and
Drusius, by their proper names, and also the people of Rome: For which cause he
was so well beloved, that when he was dead, the people of Rome put him to death
that had killed him, and made such great sorrow and lamentations, that they
celebrated funerals and pompes for him, so that he was carried to the grave
upon a goodly beer, very trimly decked and adorned, the which two Aethiopians
or black Moors did bear upon their shoulders, with a great number of garla^ds
and crowns of flowers, and a Fluter which played upon the Flute before until
they came to his grave.


Thomas. Is it possible that the Romans, who have been so greatly esteemed
through out the whole world, to have been so foolish?


Hilarious. They witness it themselves by their own historyes: and you must
understand, because that the dead body was black, it was carried by two
Aethiopians or black Moors, as he was. But if they Black monks.
had had of lacopins, Augustines, or Moonkes of the order of Saint Bennet they
had been a great deal fitter for that office: and so ye Ravens should have
carried ye Raven to the grave, and should have put him in the Paradise of the
Ravens. And doubt not, that if the Ravens, Dogs, and Asses had wherewith to
bury them, and that the Priests might get so much money from them as they do
from the rich men, that they would spare them no more then they do the rich,
and would have no more pity and compassion of their souls, then of the
souls of men. I do marvel of nothing but of this that the Romans used
rather the Flute in those funerals of the Raven, then the Trompette The burial
of the poor. Vnde versus. Dum moritur dives, concurrunt vndique ciuet. Dum
pauper moritur, vix vnus adesse videtur.
since that in all the rest he was buried as solemly as the rich men be. And
what do our Priests? If any great Usurer be dead, they run by and by to the
great bell. There is not a Church nor parish but that all the belles are
walking, insomuch that they make a greater noise then the Cyclopes do with
their Hammers and Mallets. I would counsel them to do as the women of the
Lacedaemonians did when their king was dead, who did run about the country
sounding and tinging of fire pannes, pots and basins (as men do after Bees
when they swarm) for to declare the death of their king. After that the belles
are Herod.
once set in order a ringing, behold from all quarters do come, Moonks,
Priests, white, gray and black, smokid of al colors as Owls and Shrichowles,
Ravens, Eagles, Wolves, and Dogs do after carren, and they have no need to
shave themselves, as the Panims do, for to lament and be sorrowful. For they
are already shaven of themselves as the Priests of the Babilonians,
Egyptians, and the Priests of Isis are: and are clothed with lynnen and white
Barue. 6. d. 30. Ier. in Eze. 24 Herod. in Enterp. Plin.
shirts as they are. They do serve for all: In steed of Minstrells, singers,
weepers and lamenters. And even as those Panim Minstrells did sing pitiful
and lamentable songs, and the evil fortunes of men, for to comfort the
parents, even so have these our Priests and Moonkes turned the book of Job
into such lamentacions and complaynts. The book of Job dedicated to the dead.
Ex conc. Thol. 3. 23. q. 2. c Qui diuina.



Theophilus. Nevertheless it is concluded in the counsel of Tholet, that
those which are called of the Lord from this world, ought to be carried to
their grave, only with singing of Psalms, the rather to witness and declare
that they do not so mourn and lament as the Panims do, then for any other
thing, and also to declare the hope of the resurrection.


Hilarious. There was more appearaunce, in that which the Idolaters did, for
they did sing in a language understood of all men, and if the songs did not
serve any thing to the dead, yet at the least they served somewhat to those
that were alive: But the roaring and bellowing of our Priests and Moonkes do
serve neither for the one nor the other, but only to accroche and get to
them money, and to cause it to come as the Birds to the call: except
peradventure they would allege the reason of Macrobius which says, ye men
do accompany the dead to the grave with Macrob. in some. Scipi. li. 2. ca. 3.
singing, because ye panims believe after ye ye souls are separated from y^
bodies, they do follow that sweet harmony, and with the same go up to Heaven.
For monye were of the opinion of Herophilus, Dicearchus, and Aristoxenus,
Herophilus, Dicoarchus. Aristoxenus. Cic. Tusc. li. 1.
of whom Cicero makes mention, who said that the soul was not altogether
nothing, or only a harmony, the which takes pleasure with that pleasant
singinge and melody: and goes with it: And God grant that these here do
believe the souls to be immortal, and that they may have a better opinion
then those had. And also as touching the torches that the Panims carried, there
was some honest cause wherefore. For they carried them partly for to kindle
Torches at the funerals. The ancient custom.
wood that was prepared for to burn the dead bodies withal, because that
when they were come to the place appointed and ordained for the same, ye
nearest of kin did take one of those torches, and kindeled the fire, as Virgile
has sufficiently declared it, speaking of the burying of Misenus, after this
manner:

In mourning sort, some heave on shoulders hye the mighty beer. Vir. Aene. 6.

(A doleful service sad) as children do their fathers dear.
Behind them holding bronds, the^ flame vprising broad does spread,
And oils and dayntyes cast, and Frankensens the fire does seed,
Also in some places they have need of them, because that they do bury them
in the night, after the law of Demetrius The law of of Demetrius Phalareus.
Cael. Rho. le. an. li. 17. ca. 20.
Phalereus, who has so ordained it for to correct the superstuous pomp and
pride of those exequies and funerals: which were too excessive, insomuch that
many did bestow great cost about them, and afterward they themselves wanted:
as it happens daily to many, who bestow great treasure upon the dead, and do
dye with hunger in their houses: nor leave wherewith to pay their own debtes,
nor those of the dead, and do keep back that which is due unto the good
people, for to give it to the Priests. Because of those torches the Latenists
do call at this day the burialls Funus, because that they were made Funus
Funeralia. The burialls of the Turks.
with cords, the which they call Funes, as they do call them yet now. But the
Turks have a better order and of more appearaunce in that, then we. It is very
true that they have some things like to our superstlcions. For in the burying
of the rich men and men of honor, their Priests whom they call in their
language Thalassanians, do follow them a great number, according to the
richness and estate of the dead, singing often times this Song and Lctany: God
is God, and ye true God, and Magman the Bessenger of God. But they have this
goodness, that they do cause the Binges and Princes to build for some of them
Iemples, Foundations for the poor.
for others Bospitalls. for Sepulchers and graucs, the which they enrich with
great revenues and rentes: not for to nurrish the idle priests, but for to
sucecur the necessity and no d^ of the poor and needy.


Eusebius. All your matters are nothing but:sul of mocking and slaunderinges.
Does not all pain and travail require a reward? Is it not good reason that
the parents and friends, which have the goods of the dead, and become their
heirs, should recompense the Pricstes somewhat: Has not Jesus Christ said
that the Laborer is worthy of Lue. 10 b. 7.
his reward? If the Priests would do that without taking any thing, the
heirs and friends should make great cheer with the goods of the dead, and
in the mean while the poor Priests, which do travail for them should die
of hunger: And so by that means one should find none that would do. that
office nor which would be a Priest.


Hilarious. That should be a great incenuenience and very evil for the
Christianity, chiefly for the poor souls of Purgatory, who should have no
more advocates nor intercessors between God and the Uirgin Mary, for to
deliver them from those pains.


Theophilus. I confess that we must not moossell the Those that are the true
Ministers are worthy of nurrishment. Deuteronomy. 25. a. 4. 1. Cor. 9. b 9. 1.
Timoth. 5. c. 18
mouth, of the Ox that treads out the corn, and it is also good reason that
he that serves the Gospel, should live of the Gospel: But what travail do
those here take: what services do they, either to the quick or to the dead?


Hilarious. To eat up and devour their goods and substance.


Theophilus. That which you have alleged is against your self. For when
Jesus Christ says that the workman Mat. 10. b. 10.
is worthy to have his meat, he speaks of the Ministers of the Gospel, and
not of Minstrells. He has not commanded the Christians to feed and give
meat to Minstrells for to have them sound in their ears: but Ministers for
to preach ye gospel to them. He lets us to understand that we must work
and travail in the Ministry of the Gospel, by that that he says the
workman, not the idle and slougthfull. Afterward he declares that he would
not have the Ministers of his Church covetous, 1. Timoth. 3. a. 3 l itus. l. b.
7. 1. Pet. 5. a. 2.
nor given to filthy lucre nor insatiable, when he declares that the meat is
due to the Pastors of the Gospel, but ought to content them selves, as the
holy Apostle to be cloto c^, nourished and kept according to their estate and
condition: whithout super fluity, which may cause them to for get God, and
without to great need, which may hinder them to exercise their office: But
these here do never cease to a^^e and to catch, and yet they do no works that
serve for ye health of men It wine a great deal better ye they would The
ligrification of heales Durant in Ra dui. off li 1. Rub. de camp.
show forth ineffect ye which they say their belles do signify, then to have
beiles for to represent it. They do interpret that the sound of their belles
does signify the sound of the word of God, the which they ought to preach unto
the people and that the belles do signify the prophets and ministers of the
gospel, who ought to sound in the Church of God: But they do leave all the
charge unto the belles, and will not uiedle with it. Have they not well
provided for the christian people, good preachers?


Hillarias, You do not understand their practice. They are wyser then you
think. Me thinckes that men The bellsand Images the Priests Vicars
cannot complain of them, as touching the office of preaching; for they have
so well provided, that one cannot rebuke them. It is very true, that they do
not preach: But they have so many the more vicars to supply their office.
Have: they not the Churches full of Images? For you Grego. ad Sere. Epise.
Massil. par. 10. Epist. 4.
know that their Images are lay men's and sooles books, as they tell us. But I
know not what books they are, nor on which side they must take them to open
and read in them, or whether we must begin at the beginning, as y^ Oreekes,
Latined, Frenchmen, and others like: or at the end, and so go backward, and
clean contrary to others, as the Hebrews and Caldes do. We have assayed
them, and have taken very sharp Batchettes and Ares, for to open the leaves,
which are so saste stirched and glewed together, that it is impossible to open
and separate them a sunder, except we do hew and cut them in pieces. We have
looked before and behind: toward the head and the feet, the belly and the
back, but we could never so any letter, neither to know whether they were
written in Greek, Hebrew or Latin, nor yet in what language. To conclude, we
find nothing there, but Mice, Pytch, Spiders, and such filthyuesse. But if they
be the lay men's books, whereto serves then for them preachers, have they not
found them ready at hand and the most fytte as is possible to find? First of
all they could not have found them more fitter for them. For they do neither
eat nor drinck, nor their meat and fire costeth them any thing. But which is
more, they nurrishe and keep them about them, and do well declare, that they
are not vicars without cause. For the offerings that they receive, they make a
good account, and do pay a great reuenewe to their Curate and Bishop. Du the
other side, should not the people have great wrong to complain? For they are
gracyous preaches. They never rebuke any man, but let every one do as he
lisse. If the prophets, Apostles and ministers of the Gospel were such
pleasant preachers, they should not be so much hated, nor evil entreated of
men, but men would offer unto them candels, and hysse their f^^t, ^s they do
those But thore is a great fault in them, for the which we must provide. For
not withstangding that they have, goodly Os habent and non loguentur:
oculoshabent et non videbu^s: manut halent and non palpebunt, pedes habent and
non ambulabunt, et non clamabunt in guttere suo. 1. Cor. 14. b. 9. Act. 2. b. 7
mouths, yet nevertheless they speak not, because they have no voice.
Wherefore they have the belles for are compence, which have the voyes for to
speak in stende of them although that they have lso mouths: But the Images
have the countenaucos and do furnish the mouth and the belles the voice, for to
fulfill that which is written: except ye speak words that have signification,
how shall it be understood what is spoken? For you shall but speak in the
air, and as a tinckling simball, and there is yet another secret, which every
one understands not. All those that did hear the Apostles in Jerusalem upon
the day of Pentecost, were cssonyed, because that not withstanding they were
Galieans, yet nevertheless all of what language soever they were of, did
understand them speak as if it had been their own and native tongue and common
to all the he arers. Now ^^asmuch as ye ^els are the Popes and ^ Priests
Apostls, all of them because that they have not that gift of God, would
counterfayte that miracle by their belles. For they do The belles do speak
all languages.
speak all languages, and such as it pleases the hearers. And what sound
soever they have, they speak that which the hearer has in his fantasy, as
every one may know by experience, and I my self can witness the same. For
when I was a young child, and that I did hear the bells towle as I went to
school, I did think that they said sometimes that which some had put in my
head: Lost labor, thou shall be beat: and I was always afraid that they had
said true. Even so it happened unto a widow who The widow asked counsel of
the belles.
desired much to marry, but she was ashamed to tell it, therefore he sent her to
the belles whom she asked counsel, knowing well her affection, and that she
would do but that which was in her fantasy, whatsoever counsel one gave
unto her. When it was appointed that she should hear the counsel that the
bells gave unto her, she thought that they said unto her: Marry thee:
afterward when she was married, and that her husband which was very jealous
had well beaten her for going or gaddinge abroad many times, and had well
drused her bones, seeing that that feast should always last, she rebuked him
that did give her that counsel: and said unto him: My friend you have not
well understood the bells: Go presently and give good ear; and you shall
see if they say not the contrary: the which so happened. For because that her
fantasy was past she did think that the belles said: Marry not. Wherefore I
conclude that I have sufficiently proved mine intention, and that the Priests
have very well provided for us Preachers, and such as appertain unto us: of
whom we ought to content our selves. For fools would always that one should
counsel them after their own fantasy. And because that we are fools, we
desire such Preachers which speak after our own fantasy. But we cannot
better find them but at the belles.


Theophilus. It was commanded in the law, that when the high Bishop entered
into the Sanctuary, that he was clothed with a gown of Iacinte, which had Bells
and Pomgranards hanging at ye The Pomegranards and belles that did hang upon
the vestme^t of the high Priest. Exo. 28. e. 34.
hems. By which things I cannot understand, but ye by the Pomgranardes which
are of a sweet savor, the Lord would figure Jesus Christ, who has been to
him a sacrifice of a sweet savor: And admonishes all the true pastors of his
Church, to be by their holy life and conversation, a sweet savor of the Gospel
unto the poor and simple people, as S. Paul says, that he has been. By the
Belles, that the high Priest ought to be heard when he enters into ye
sanctuary, nor I doubt not but that also he has figured the preaching of the
Gospel, by the which Jesus Christ and his Apostles have awakened all the
world: and after their Ori. in Exo. 28 e. 34.
example all the good shepherds of the Church and flock of Christ ought to
do, as Origin does expound it, saying: That the high priest should also
have round Bells about his bestment, ye he entering into the Sanctuary, should be
heard, and that he should not enter with silence. And those Bells which ought
always to sound, are put in the hemme of the bestment, and that is to that
ends that thou should never hold thy peace until the end of the world,
but that always thou be heard thereby, that thou do dispute, and speak, as
he which says: Remember the end or the latter things, and thou shall not
sin. Behold the exposition of Origin, the which I would gladlye they would
follow, and that they would consider that since that the time of ceremonies is
past, we have no more need of their Belles, for to figure unto us that which
has been figured of the high Priest: But ye in steed of the figure and
shadow, they would give unto us the verity of the things figured, after the
example of Jesus Christ, and of his Apostles: or if they will yet keep and
hold us in shadows and figures, it is better for the^ to follow those of
Moses, then to invent and make for us new, as they do. For they cannot find
better, nor more proper: If they do ring or towle their Belles, for to call
the people together to the Church, for to preach unto them the word of God:
or when any man is dead, for to admonish every one of man's infirmity and
weakness, and to preach onto them the judgment of God. and to teach every one
how he ought to prepare himself to dye, and to confirm and strengthen them in
the hope of the resurrection, declaring unto them that the blood of Jesus
Christ is the true Purgatory of the souls, and that there is none other, their
ringing and singing would have a little more appearance, and should be more
conformable to the ancient Church: But they do it altogether for none other
end but to induce and lead the people to superstition, and for to strengthen
them in their opinion of purgatory, making the^ Durant in Radiui. off. li. 1.
Rub. de camp. and 4. li Rub. de ac. pont. ad alt. The, bells to drive away
devils. The banner and the cross.
to pray for the dead, without any word of God. But do they not yet allege an
other goodly reason, saying: that they do ring their Bells in their
processions, funerals, and at other times, to that end to make the devils
afraid, and to compel them to flee: For they say that those are the trumpets
of the Church militant, of which the Dyuell has as great fear, as a tyrant
has when he hears that one gives him the Larame, and as the sound of the
Trumpets and Drums of a puissaunt King or Prince, which is his enemy, and
come for to discomfort him: For that cause say they, do they carry the banner
and the cross, and that they cause the Bells to be ronge and towled for the
tempests, and also for to admonish the people to pray unto God: But it were a
great deal better that they would make such admonitions Ephe. 6. c. 10
by the preaching of the Gospel, and that they would arm the people with the
buckler of faith, and weapon them with the sword of the spirit, which is the
word of God, for to defend them against the Devil, and to drive him away. For
these are the true weapons, which the Devil fears, and which S. Paul gives
to the Christian knight.


Hilarious. If that little children, or any old dreamers and fools had held
ye opinion, one could not but laugh: But is it not great shame that such men
who would be esteemed and counted the pyllers of the faith, would forge and
invent such a Theology? But have they not good leisure to baptize the Belles?
Is The baptising of bells.
not that to mooke and scoff with Jesus Christ and his baptism, to baptize
Brass and insensible mettalles? The adventurers or vagabondes which baptized
a Calfe, and called him a pyke for to eat him in Lent in steed of a fish,
had not they more cause to do for I do, judge that they think that one
can drive away the Dyuelles as they do the birds from the vanes. If the
Dyuelles were like unto the Bees, they would stay them rather: And I do
fear that it happens so well unto them. For as far as we can perceive by
their works, there is not a people that has so many Dyuelles about them.
But you have let Durant. in diui. off. si. 1. Rub de camp.
out the best, that is, they say that at the solemn feasts we must ringe
much, and a long time for to awaken the drunckardes, and those that sleep.
But will you have me tell you the true interpretation of The true
signification of the belles.
their Bells? Consider the form and fashion of a Bell. It has a little head,
but it has the greater belly. Wherefore I cannot understand, according to the
Morrall, Allegorical or Anagogicall sense, but that they do signify that
they are no other thing but fat and slothful bellyes, and that they
Slothful bellyes.
pass not on the head, but only on the belly. And even as they are but
bellies, they do also very well know that other men do love more the belly
then the head, and notwithstanding that all have a goodly belly, and love it
well, there are but a few which care much for the head, the brain, wit and
understanding, nor which take any thought to have it. Wherefore I believe that
they have determined so much to ringe their Belles, that they may break
altogether the head of those which have yet a very little, to that end,
that neither wit nor understanding might abide in them. In such sort that
we may well make it a Proverb, as well as the auncientes have made it of the
Basinnes, Caudrons and Belles of Dodonaeus. Behold the truest exposition
friend Dodonaeum asdodonaes lebetes Zenodot. ex Aristoph.
Eusebius that I can at this time give unto thee: And think not that thou
can give unto me a better nor more proper: except peradventure thou will
say, that they do the same after the immitation of the Gallots, Curets, and
Corybants, Priests of the Goddess The Priests cl Cyble.
Cyble the mother of Gods, whom they do carrye upon their shoulders in their
processions, sounding of Cymballes, Herodot. Diodor.
Drums, Belles, and other such instruments, which do make a great noise,
with the cry and sound of their Letanyes, which they go singinge after: as
many Apule. de Asini li. 11. Lactan. lib. ca. 21. The feast and procession of
Cible.
ancient Authors do witness, as well Panims as Christians, namely
Lactantius which alleges some verses of Ovid, who among others, in a few
words speaking of her feast, comprehends all these things, saying:

Then forthwith shall be heard the home, Ovid Fast. 4.

of Berecynthia blow,
Of Cyble graundame of the Gods,
thapproching feast to show.
And Eunuchs playing upon Drums,
whose noise the air does fill,
And ringing out the braying blast,
of Trumpet sounding shrill.
She on their shoulders sitting soft,
is borne about the Town,
By Priests and servant of her own,
with noise and shriching sown.
Epiphanius that good and learned Bishop and of great estimation among the
ancients, did write a book, that he Epiphanius.
made of heresies, saying, that there were in his time, some women of Siria who
did begin to carry in that sort the Image of the Virgin Mary and offered unto
it oblations: But he Idolatry of the image of our Lady.
says that the same superstition and Idolatry was repressed and beaten down
through the diligence of good Bishops and pastors, knowing that the same was
none other thing, but an imitation of the furor and madness of the Panims.

Wherefore Epiphanius, numbreth that error in the Roll of the heresies that
he has made. And yet nevertheless our Priests have not ceased therefore to
put it forth, and more greater Idolatry then ever was among the Priests of
Cyble and Isis, after whose example they do carrye their Idols, Relics,
Hearses and Shrines, and for to declare that they are their successors, they
have their heads shaven, and their surples: and many other ornaments of lynnen
and white cloth, as those had, as the Poet says:

Attending on the goddess then, the crew both great and small, Ovid.

Are clad in lynnen garments white, to honor her vvithall.
And again he says.

These shaven Priests in white arayd, ensued the Goddess grace,
And making noise with sound of Droms, did follow her a pace.
Forasmuch then as it is thought that they make Devils afraid, and drive them
away by the sound of the belles, those there then ought to make them tremble
and quake. Wherefore I think that forasmuch as our Priests do say that their
belles are the Trompettes of the great King, and that their streamers that they
carry in their Processions, are his Enseigns and Banners, they ought also to
carry and sound Drommes and Trumpets, for to make it better appear unto the
Devil, that they will join a strong battle with him, and that they come not
with false Enseignes, and that their quarrel is not the sport and play of
little children, and that they will not suffer Iuuena. Ft inge^s
semiturobscoeno sacies reuerenda minori. Mollia qui capta secuit genitalia
testa. Did. 36. ca. 1l. literatos Did. 55. ca. si. quis To ring for the time.
the ancient custom of their old ancestors and predecessors to be
abolyshed whom we have of late named, from whom they do not much differ as
touching their Ceremonies: But the most great difference that I can find,
is, that these here are not so chaste as the others are, because they are not
gelded as they are. For that should be against their orders and Canons, and
many women would be barren, if we had not such Saints for to make them bear
children. And as touching that that they do ring their belles against the time
of thunderinges, lyghtenings and tempests, and that they do conjure them, they
cannot deny but in the same they do follow the Panims, who had their
exorcismes, coniuratione, ringinges and other manner of doings against them,
which did not much differ from those of these here. It is very true that the
Arisioph. in Vesp. Quod si fulguraro popissant.
Panims had not such belles, because they were not then used as they are now:
But in stead of them they clapped their hands the one against an other for to
make an noise, and made a noise with their mouths, for to appease Piin. li.
28. c. 2. Fulgura popisi nis adorare co^sensus gentium est. Holy wood.
Remedies against ye lyghtning. The Baye tree. The sea Calves The Eagle. Plin.
li, 2. c. 55
and quallyfie the thundrings and lyghtenings, after the manner as men do clap
their horses and make much of them, thinking that the same would serve in
stead of a remedy, that the lyghtening should not strike them. Some did carry
of the Baye tree, in steed whereof we did carry wood, leaves and boughs and
branches of trees that had been hallowed upon Palm Sunday, and of Easter
flowers, or the skins of Sea Calves, because that among all the Sea beasts,
men say that lyghteninge will not touch the sea Calfe, nor the Eagle among the
souls.


Thomas. And for what served the Baye tree?


Hilarious. They had this opinion, that lyghtning would never fall upon it,
nor could strike it, as almost all those ye have written of his property and
nature do witness it. They had also the art and manner to conjure the
tempests, To conjure the time Jupiter. Elicius. Ovid. Fast. 3. Numa Pompilius.
and to make the God Jupiter come from heaven, for to adjure them and drive
them away: the which they had learned and received of Numa Pompilius the second
king of the Romans.


Theophilus. I do not find in the Scripture that the people of God ever used
such sorceries and coniurings, nor ye they ever had any recourse to candels,
holy water, holy wood, ye bay tree, to the bells nor to ye coniurations, for to
drive away ye lyghtnings and tempest. For yt Tibullus. Hane ego ducentem de
coelo sydera vidi: Fluminis haec rapidi carmine vertutur. Quum libet haec
trists do^el lit nubila culo.
appertains better unto the Magicians, Sorcerers, and Enchau^tors, who do
attribute unto themselves the power to move ye heaven and earth, to move and
stir up ye lyghtnings and tempests, and to appease them, and to pluck ye Moon
and the Stars from heaven. But the true servant of God, in all dangers and
perils, or if ye heaven has been shut up, so yt it gives no rain: or if it
sends hayles, thu^ders and tempests: or it famine, plague, or drought have
been on the earth: Quum libet aestiuo prouocat orb niuer
if the corn have been destroyed, or the Locusts and Caterpillars have
destroyed the goods of the earth: or if they have been afflicted with any
other kind of plague or malady, they use none other remedy but to turn
themselves to God only with prayers, with true repentance of the sins and
amendment of life. And ye Lord has always heard them, according to the
request ye Solomon made unto 3. Reg. 8. a. 1 2. Cro. 5. a. 1
him, when he dedicated to him his Temple.


Hilarious. They make me to remember those mockers and dispisers of God, which
were among the Panims, who did clappe their feet together against ye thunders
and tempests, and for to Oppedere contra tonitiua. Salmoneut. Virg. Aeneid. 6
Vidi and crudelem dantem. Salmonia penas Dum slammas louis and souitus imitutur
Olympi. The minstrels ^airus. Mat. 9 c 18. Mar. 5. c. 12 Luc. 8. f 41
show themselves more wicked, did open their bellyes against them, in mocking
and scoffing it: Of which these proverbs do yet continue. Even so it seems ye
those would mock God, and counterfeit these thunders as Salmoneus did.


Eusebius You can declare and set forth unto me nothing but the Panims. But
wherefore do you not allege unto me as well ye minstrells, and the singings,
which y^ Israelites, that were ye people of God, used in their burialls? As it
appeared by those which were in y^ house of Iairus the chief ruler of ye
Sinagoue when his daughter was dead, whom Jesus raised to life again, and yet
he rebuked not the ministrells: the which he would not have omitted if he had
judged the same to be evil. Wherefore may we not have as well bells and Priests
for to sing, as those had The Priests Minstrels.
minstrels, for to incite and provoke them to lamentacions and compassion upon
the dead, and to pray to God for them with a better courage?


Theophilus. You come to the end of my matter, and by that count the Priests
do serve us in steed of minstrels. But it is to be feared that Jesus will
drive them out of his Church, as he avoided out those of Iairus out of the
chamber and house. For he will not have Priests for the dead, nor he sent his
Apostles and Disciples, but for those that be alive. For ye true Euangelical
Priests and Ministers of the Church, ought to be like unto the Physicians, who
are always assistaunt unto men as much as they can, and A comparisoa of tue
true Priests and Phin^ous.
help and succor them as much as is possible during their life for to keep
them in health, or to heal them when they are sick, but after that they be
dead, they have no more to do. For they cannot aid nor help them any more,
therefore they do to them no more afterward. But our Priests are Physicians,
who suffer their Patients to dye, without helping them, after they will bring
unto them medicines when they are dead: But Jesus Christ would have no such: as
he has given us to understand by the answer that he made to one of his
disciples, which asked him leave to go and bury his father, saying: Suffer the
Mat. 6. c. 12. It was forbidden the Priests to be assistaunt at the burial
of the dead. Leuit. 21. 2. 1.
dead to bury their dead. But what appearaunce is there, that Jesus Christ
would occupy ye Ministers of his church, and the true Cuangelycall Priests
about the dead, since that God would not only suffer that the high Priest of
the law, and the other Priests should go to the burials nor that they should
come nigh any dead bodies, except they were their fathers or mothers, or any of
their nigh kinsmenne? The which thing he pernutted not to the high Priest. The
chance should be much changed, and the Gospel should have made us Priests
very contrary and differing much from those of the people of God. For we do
not read that ever they meddled with the dead, nor that they prayed nor offered
sacrifices for the^, notwithstanding ye they were under the shadows and figures
of the law, and in the time of the sacrifices, which now through Jesus Christ
are abolyshed. And our Priests do serne us always for none other thing, but
to boe let about the dead.


Hilarious. It were a great deal better to hire the minstrells and lamenters
as the ancients did, then to nurrish and feed so many fat bellyes, with so
great dayntyes, and costs. For we should pay them no money but when we do set
them to work, and they will serve us as much as those our Priests, whom we
must keep all the year long, with great costs, charges and expeuces. I
doubt not but that Moses did well foresee that. Therefore has he through the
spirit of God forbidden, that the Priests should not be present at the
burials. I had rather that they would do as the Egyptians did, who did put
the body of their Diodorus The custom of the Egyptians.
king, when he was dead, before the entering in of the grave or sepulcher,
afterward did read a lystle book containing his acts, and that which the
king had done during his life. And he that would might disprayse them. The
Priests were there present, who did examine an judge of all the points. The
people also were there present, and did clap their hands and rejoice at the
praises of the king, and did vituperate and disprayse the vices. The same gave
a certain fear unto the kings and Princes that they should not abuse their
office, and did admonish them to be virtuous if they would have praise of men.
for it did chance some times, that the king lived so wickedly and detestable,
that they did judge him unworthy to be buried. The like did they of other men.
In like manner the Greeks and Latins had a custom to praise the bertuous The
Greeks and Latins Panegyres Orationer fune bres. A custom to praise the dead
men after their death, and to make Drations in their praise, as well for the
consolation and comfort of their parents, as for to incitate and move others
unto virtue, by their examples. For that cause they do rehearse their
prowesses, their virtues and valiantness. And to make an honest mention at
sometime for to encourage others to be virtuous. Thucidides witnesses, that
ye custom to praise the dead did begin among the Greeks by Pericles, who
Pericles.
was the first that openly made an oration in the praise of those which were
dead in the war of Peloponense. Also among the Romans, Valerius Publicola
was the first, Valerius Public^la.
which after that manner praised his companion Brutus, as witnesses Titus
Liuius. Afterward that custom has continued among the Gentiles and
Idolaters, If our Priests would serve us in that stead, the thing would be more
tolerable: although ye we have the word of God sufficient enough for to merte
and move us unto virtue and honesty: But they serve us to none other end but
to ease, and the greatest thoeues and usurers, are those unto whom they do the
greatest honors, and give the greatest praises, and do bury them with
greatest magnificence. But if any poor man do bye, that has not ready
money, scant and with much a do shall he have one Priest sor to bear him
company, nor one scant to ringe the little bell.


Theophilus. There is no doubt but ye the ancient Christians, because ye some
were come of the Jews, and some of y^ panims, have yet hept many of the
manners and customs that they used in their countries, the which yet
nevertheless they have changed into a better use. For the Jews and Panims
had many things, which of themselves might be tolerable, and to serve to some
kind of honesty and cluilitie, if the supersticion and the foolish opinions
had been taken away. In the ancient Church Commemoratio^ of the dead.
when that any faithful man was dead being constant in the faith of Jesus
Christ, and that he made a goodly confession in his death, they used to make a
commemoration to the congregation, for to incite and stir up others to such
faith and constantnesse, and chiefly when he has been killed by the Tyrants,
and that he has been the true Commemoratio^ of y^ Martirs
martyr of Jesus Christ, and in the mids of his torments has constantlye
confessed the truth, and has witnessed it by his death, and sealed it by his
blood. For that cause the Notaries and pronotaries. Plati. in vit. Clem Ant
he. lul. and Fabi.
Notaryes and Protonotaryes were constituted and appointed, who were charged to
write truly and after the truth the Ecclesiasticull historyes, the lives and
doings of the holy Martirs, and true servant of God, for the edification of
the Church and congregation: for at certain times they made commemoration unto
the Congregation of the faith and constantnesse of the Martirs, for to comfort
and for tesie the poor faithful in the mids of the persecutions that they
suffered for Jesus Christ, to the end that after the example of the Martirs,
they should prepare themselves rather to dye valyantly for the witness of the
truth, then to renounce and forsake it. And the Dration and Sermon that Saint
Ambrose made for Ambrose and Theodosius.
the Emperor Theodosius after that he was dead, tended to none other end. And
when the good ancient bishops praised after that sort the good servants of
God, that had faithfully travailed in his work and vyneyard, they did go about
no other thing by that means, but to edify the congregation with good
examples, even as the holy prophets and Apostles have described unto us ye holy
scriptures, the lives and acts of holy men, which have been called of God, for
to instruct and teach us by their example. This manner of doing was not
altogether to be despised, and it might be practiced to ediflcation, if satan
the enemy unto all goodness had not altogether converted and turned it into
superstition, Idolatry, and blasphemy, as we see and prove it daily. For
from those beginninges the Prothonotaries are descended, whom we have yet at
this present time, who keep only the name Prot honotaries of name.
without exercising the office. For to what end do they serve us?


Hillatius. To hunt after and so lay wait for benefyces. What would you they
should do, would you have them to write and register the lives of our
Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests and Moonkes? They will leave the charge of
that The legend of the Papists.
unto the Lutheriaus, which are their protonotaries, for to describe and paint
out the legend of such saints and Martyrs of Venus, rather then of Jesus
Christ. For their life and conversation is so holy, that they had rather that
men would never speak of it, and that the remembrance thereoff should be
altogether defaced and forgotten. Yet I think that they rendered no great
thanckes unto Platine who has written so much, although that he turned the
say side outwardes as Platins
nigh as he could.


Theophilus. This is yet the least fault of the Prothonotaries: But from that
same fountain is risen and sprung up the error of invocation of Saints, The
error touching the honor and invocation of saints
of feasts, wanderings, blessings, relycks, pilgrimages, and all other Idolatry
and supersticions, which men do commit daily about the Saints. For whereas in
the ancient Church men did but only make mention of the life, faith and
constantnesse of the Martirs and Saints when the people assembled themselves in
the Ecclesiastical assemblyes, without inuocating or praying to the Saints,
but only unto God: Afterward in process of time, the supersticious and
Idolatrous Christians, have made of the Saints Gods, and have dedicated to
them, Feasts, Temples, Aultars and Chappells. And have begone to sing
Canenization Herodia.
Himnes and supersticious songs in their honor and praise, after the same
manner as the Panims and Idolaters did to their Binges and Emperors, when they
Ca^onized them. And are not content to preach their lives and Legende, as the
ancients did: but have added unto it fables and lies. and have made to them
Masses, in such sort, that Masses of saints
for one supper of Jesus Christ, we have more then three hundredth nullyons of
Masses, all contrary and differinge the one from the other. By that means the
Prophecy, the preaching of the word of God, the Supper of Jesus Christ,
Prayers, and Ecclesiastical assemblyes, and the true commemoration of the
Saints, are altogether abolyshed, in such sort that there is nothing, but that
it is altogether perverted and turned into more greater superstition and
Idolatry, then ever it was among the Panims. As much happened about ye other
faithful that dye, which are not counted for Canomsed Saints. For as on the one
The original and beginning of ye prayers lot the dead.
side they are given to inuocat and pray to the Saints, whom they believe to
be in Heaven: Even so on the other side, they give themselves to pray for the
dead, whom they think to have yet need of their prayers and good deeds, for
to help them, and to prepare the way to Heaven, ^^ steed of the simple
commemoration y^ they did in y^ ancient Chruch, without using prayers for the
health of their souls. but only exhortatio^n, adm^nitions and consclatio^s,
for the health and salvation of those that be alive. After that manner ought we
to understand that which the ancient Ecclesiastical doctors have written of
the faithful that dye, and of the care that we ought to have of them. And if
peradventure it be so that Saint Ambrose, Crisostome, Cyprian, Hierome,
Augustine, or any other the like, do seem to have written otherwise, yet
nevertheless they will not allow such superstition as is at this day among
the Christians: And although they should have done it, yet we are not bound to
bel^eue them, without the authority of the Scripture. We are most certain of
our side, that there is no place in all the holy scripture, by which one can
prove that manner of doing, except one will mar and pervert the sense
thereof. And for to declare the same more plainly, I demand of thee, what the
Priests do in the name of the dead, do they it for those which are in hell?


Eusebius. Thou may well perceive they do it not. For they themselves do
sing, that in hell there is no redemption, Quia in inferno nulla est redemptio.
Luc. 16. g. 26.
as it is plainly declared unto us by the answer that Abraham made unto the
wicked rich man, saying that there is a great space between those which are
in the places of blessedness, and those which are in hell fire, unto whom the
rich cannot have so much only as one drop of water for to put upon his
toungue for to cool it.


Theophilus. Have those who are already in Paradise with the blessed any
profit, of their suffrages and prayers.


Eusebius. They have no more need of them. The Priests do not pray but for
those which are in Paradise.



Theophilus. And yet nevertheless they pray not but for those that be there,
and I will take none other witness then themselves to prove it. I pray thee
consider and examine well the Epistle taken out of the Reuclation of S. John,
which they sing in their Mass for the dead and mark viligently how it
agrees with their Lugentibus in Purgatorio: And how is it possible that the
faithful that dye should be roasted and tormented in Purgatory, and that they
should be at rest, as they sing both the one and the other, speaking against
themselves. They sing: Blessed are Apoc. 14. c. 13 Beati mortui qui in Dommo
moriuntur. A modo iam di^it spiritus, us reautesant a laboribus suis. Opera
en^m lilorum sequuntur illos. The estate of the faithful that do dye
those which hereafter dye in our Lord, even so says the spirit, that they
do rest from their labors, But their works shall follow them. First they
say: Blessed are they which dye in the Lord. And who be those that dye in the
Lord, but the good, faithful and the Christians? If they then are blessed, all
the other which do not dye: in the faith of our Lord, are cursed.


Eusebius. I deny it not.


Theophilus. Wherein consists that blessedness and felicity? does not
Saint John give the reason, alleging not his authority, but the authority of
he spirit of God, that he himself has heard? saying: hereafter they rest
from their labors. Thou do well perceive that they are called blessed,
because that by death they go and depart from the trauayles and wickedness of
this world, and after the same do go into eternal rest and joy, Sith then
that it is so, what need they any longer to sing: Requiem eternam dona eis
domine: O Lord give them eternal rest, sith that they have it already? For
they do not pray but for those which are dead in our Lord.


Eusebius. Thou interpretest the scripture for thine advantage and as it
pleases thee.


Hilarious. Eusebius is always a good Gregorianist. But I do greatly fear y^
he Gregorianists.
shall not escape Purgatory in the end.


Eusebius. You shall not yet pluck it out of my hands for all that. For
Saint John speaks there properly, of the faithful, which have suffered, and
which have been killed for the witness of the truth. For those have suffered
sufficiently in this world, and have had their Purgatory. and accomplisned
their penance. He speaks not generally of all the Christians, but only of
the Martirs, whom the great beast has persecuted.


Theophilus. I agree unto thee that the holy spirit speaks that, chiefly for
the consolation of the poor that be afflicted, which suffer persecution for
the name of Jesus, promising unto them rest, after the trauayles and
wickedness of this mortal life, for to fortefie and strengthen them in the
cross, to that end they may be more patient in tribulation, and that they
should persevere and continue boldlye and steadfastly unto the end. But you can
not deny, but y^ the sentence is general, and that it comprehends all the
faithful. For they cannot be faithful without bearing rightly the cross of
Jesus Christ, and without having great pain and travail, after which they
look for rest. And least thou should think that I have alleged that place
evil to the purpose, I will tell thee yet farther, that it makes not only
Purgatory to fall down, but also the invocation of Saints. For since that
roast from The inuoca^tion of saints
their labors is promised unto the Saints, and that the prayers which the
holy men make for their neighbors, whilst they are in this life, are
comprised and contained amongst the labors of the saints, we may conclude,
that after that they have ended the course of this mortal life, and finished
their combat, that they rest them that labor as well as the other. For they
have no more need but to praise God, and to give him thanks, and ought no
more to be occupied for to serve men, since that they are out of all necessity,
and that they have ended the ministry that they had among men. At the
leastwise, although that it be, we have not in all the holy scripture.
example nor yet authority, for to endure and lead us to inu^cate them: But we
have not now to debate upon that point, I have only desired to touch the
same by the way. As to the other matter, touch (...) Purgatory, for to take
front thee that fantasy which thou have against^ my interpretation. I will
confyrme it unto thee by the very interpretatyou of the Priests, taken from
the chiefest of the Canon of their Mass. Mark well the Memento that they say
when they sing Mass for the dead.


Hilarious. Peradventure hoe will not hear thee because he is altayd to be
excommunicatod. And also hel^ da^e you recyte it^ For you know very well that
it is forbidden The Canon of the Mass and the Ale^ron are forbidden to be read.
under pain of excommunication to all those that be not Priests, to read
the Canon, and to recyte it.


Theophilus. As Well is the Alcoran of Mahomet, under pain of death: But I will
not be a frayd to read it for all that if I had it. For I build my self upon
S. Paul, which says: Cramine all things and keep that which 1. Thess^. 5. ^.
21.
is good.


Thomas. But it is otherwise of the Canon of the Mass for it is to be feared,
that if the lay people should hear the sacramental words pronounced, they
would do as the Priest, and that thereby would come great hurt. As
Clythoueus does declare and witness most evidently in his Clith. Eluci. li. 3.
de. Cano.
Clucidatory by the example of certain Shepehardes, who because they have
heard and kept in mind the sacramental words, did put bread upon a stone,
afterward they pronounced the words. That bread (as they say) was converted
and changed into flesh, after the pronunciation of and words. But fire and
lightning fell sodeinly down from heaven upon them and killed them all.


Hilarious, The witness is well worthy of the Doctor, from whom it proceeded.
But he is not the first that has invented that fable. For Durant and others,
that have written of that matter does almost all of them allege it.


Theophilus. Wherefore then has Jesus Christ commanded Rat. diui. off. li. 4.
Nico. de plone. in tract. sacerd The Gospel published to all men Mat. 26. b.
26. Mar. 14. h. 13 Luc 22. h 19 1. Cor. 11. c. 24.
that his Gospel should be preached unto all creatures, without excepting
either the lay people or the ignorant, unto whom yet nevertheless the supper
is recited all at length? Wherefore has not he warned his Apostles to keep
those words secret? And wherefore have they published and written it all at
length in their Gospel books, which ought to be in the hands of all
Christians? Is the Canon of the Mass more worthy and more holy then the holy
Gospel of Jesus Christ?


Eusebius. ye ought not to jest or mock: For you do not yet know that God
does behold you. What say thou of the Canon and Memento of the dead? Art
thou so foolish and bold that thou will find fault with it?


Theophilus. First make what it contains, and after The Memento of the dead.
Nemento elia^ Domine famili orum and familiarumque tuaru^ N. qui nos
processerunt cum signo fidei and dormiunt in so^no pacis ipsis domine and
omnibus in Christo quie see^tibtes locum refrigerij lucis and pacis vt
indulgeas de precamur. per eundem dominum Iesum Christum. Amen. A true history.
thou shall understand what I will say?


Eusebius. I am very well content. For I am very sure that you shall find
nothing to reprove me.


Theophilus. I will recite it unto she word for word, that thou should
not think that I have either added or diminished any thing for mine own
pleasure: Remember O Lord thy men servants and thy women servant, who have
gone before us with the sign of faith and do rest in the sleep of peace, We
bes^ech thee O Lord, that it would please thee to grant unto them and unto
all those that rest in Christ, place of comfort, light and peace, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, Amen. First, after that the Priest has said: R^member O
Lord thy men servants, women servant, and handmaydes, there is an N^in a red Letter, which signifies in that behalf that ye must expressly name
those, for whom the Mass in song, and in whose name the money is paid for,
faying it.


Hilarious. I do know a man that sometime had been a Priest, and now lives
honestly, after the reformation of the Gospel who did confess unto me, that
all the while that he was a Priest, that he kept very good countenance in
singinge Mass, until he came unto that place: But when he was come to the
commemoration of those women and handmaydens, they entered so much into his
head, that afterward he could not have his spirit in quiet.


Eusebius. Because that he was an whooremonger, he Marriage of priests
could not live chastlye, but gave himself to be one of your societye, for
to break his volue and to mary.


Hilarious. Has he not done better, the^ to burn through concupisence and
transgress the commandment of God 1. Cor 7. b. 9 Mat. 15. a. 3. Mat. 14. a.
^ The vow of Herod. Whoredom.
for to keep his vow, as Herod who caused John Baptist to be beheaded, for to
keep his oath? Has not he done better then those fat whooremo^gers, who had
rather to persevere in their whoredom, and to abide still in their filthiness,
then to use the holy marriage which God has given to be 1. Cor. 7. 3. 2
a remedy unto all those y^ have not the gift of continency: of which they do
well know how far they are ^ro^ it. God knows what goodly redemers and
aduocats y^ souls have of them, between God and them. Now much do you think
y^ they have, who do think more upon their handmaides when they say their
Memento, then on the souls of Purgatory, for whom they do singe the Mass?
And although that their doctrine were true, they make you often Idolaters. For
although that they affirm that the body of Jesus Christ and God be realy in
the host, yet nevertheless their book, which they call Rationale diuinorum
Rationale diui norum officioru^
officiorum, witnesses that if y^ Priest has not the intent to consecrate
when he pronounces the sacramental The intent to consecrate.
words, he does not consecrate. And so by that means it is not God, but the
bread abides still bread. And consequently all those which do worship it are
Idolaters. For they do worship the bread, and not God. Wherefore I refer it
to thine own self to think, when those maidseruauntes do enter into their
mind, and such other fantasies, which are as good stuff, what intent they
have, when they think thereon, and what God they can forge.


Thomas. By that reckening the Priest which was A true history in the year
1538. of a Priest that was a forcerer and of his. vvhoore burned at Roll in
the time of Lent.
burned of late at Roll, which is between Lausanna and Geneua, for that he
was a Sorcerer ought to have made the people Idolaters. For he confessed that
he was xxiiij. years a Sorcerer. And which is more, he had also his whore
which was a Sorceresse, who was burned as well as he, who did make her a
Sorceresse. Forasmuch then as he denied God, Cream and Baptism, as all
Sorcerers do confess in their process (if it be so) what faith can he have to
the Mass, and what consecration ought he to make?


Hilarious. The Papists do think that the same is well provided for by the
counsel which the book above alleged gives them. For to avoid such an
inconucnience, he counsayleth the Christian that he do worship the host with
such condition, saying in his heart: Lord god if thou art there, I do worship
thee: if thou art not there, I do not worship thee. And that counsel is taken
from Tho. in li. 3. sen. did. 9. 10. Ludo. viual. de monte regali. in aur.
oope. de. ver. t. co^^ The buylding of the faith of transubstantiacion
Thomas Aquinus, who resolved that question after y^ sort. For by that
condition all adoration, if there be but bread, he auoydeth to be an Idolater.
But I pray thee consider a little, whether y^ our faith be well builded, seeing
that it is builded upon the intent of a Priest, and how that it can be faith,
seeing always that it is in doubt.


Eusebius. Thou art a slaunderer. For all y^ Doctors say not so?


Hilarious. I do well know that they are not all of one agreement and that
Nicholas de Ploue, says, that the intent is necessarily requisite, and not the
attent, and that it suffices Nicolaur de ploue intentio non attentio. in
tract. sacerd.
that y^ Priest have a general intent to consecrate, although that he be not
always attentive, and think not still on that that he says and does,
wherein nevertheless he sins greatly. All do travail as much as they can
to find reason out of reason. But it suffices me so that the same which I
speak be written in the book which gives the reason of your divine service
and ceremonies.


Theophilus. Thou have no good manner, in always interrupting us in our talk.


Hilarious. What will thou have me to do? When I remember the great follies
that they have spoken and done, I am constrained to make some parenthesis, and
some little digressio^. But leave not off to return unto thy matter and to go
forward with it. I believe y^ thou have not forgotten it. That follows
afterward which thou have said of y^ menseruaunts and maidseruaunts: which
have gone before us with the sign of faith, and do rest in the sleep of peace.


Theophilus. Thou see already Eusebius, for The priests do pray but for those
which are already in Paradise
who^ they pray, to wit for those, of who^ S. John speaks off in ye
Apocalips, which are dead in our Lord, and rest from their labors. For to dye
in our Lord, and to go with y^ sign of faith, to rest from their labors, and
to rest in the sleep of peace, is all one. And Clithoue himself is
constrained In Eluci. 3. can. expo.
to expound those words by the same of Saint John. Wherefore thou may
know, that they do pray but for those which are already in Paradise. For
there are none other which do rest in the sleep of peace but those. It
follows then that they do also pray for y^ virgin. To pray for the Virgin
Mary and the Saints
Mary and for all the Saints of Paradise. Now let us hear what thing they
require for them. We beseech thee that it would please thoe to grant unto
them and unto all those that rest in Christ, place of comfort, light and
peace: If they rest in Jesus Christ, are they not already in place of comfort,
light and peace? Otherwise I know not what it is to rest in Jesus Christ,
seeinge that it is written. That although that the righteous be overtaken Sapl.
4. 7.
with death, yet shall he be in rest. If they be in a fire, as the wicked rich
man, of whom thou have spoken, and that they do burn as they make us believe,
what difference is there between them and the dampened? Thou know very well
that Lazarus who was in Abraham's Luc. 16. 22
bosom, and who rested in the sleep of peace, because that he was departed
from this world, with the sign of faith that he had in the promises made unto
Abraham, and of the seed of blessedness, was in a place far differing from
the other, in which he rested in joy, pleasures and delights. For if after that
the faithful be called f^o^ this world, he wero kept in the fire, in what rest
should he be from his labors? Should he not be in worse estate then he was
before?


Hilarious. After that I have labored all the day, and have much sweated, it I
must go into a furnase when I should go to bed, for to rest my self in y^ same
al night, I would never go to bed.


Theophilus. But where should be the promise of Jesus Christ who has said so
oftentimes: He y^ believes in me has everlasting life and shall not come The
promises of God contrary unto the papisticall purgatory. John. 5. 24
into condempnation, but has passed from death unto life? And that which S.
Paul said, now then there is no condempnation to the that are in Christ Jesus,
which walk not after y^ flesh, but after the spirit.


Eusebius. That is not repugnant: For those which are in purgatory are already
Romans 8. 1.
assured that they shall not be dampened. But they shall have eternal life; after
y^ they have satisfie^ for their sins. Theophilus. Since that there is such
punishment, it must needs be that it has judgment and condemnation: For God
punishes not without iudgeing: And I know not how we can make y^ opinion
agree with so many goodly promises which God has made unto us by his
Prophets, and by all the holy Scriptures: nor yet with that which the Priests
themselves do singe in the prose of the dead, The prose or prayer of the
dead. Dies irae, dies ^lla.
which begins: Dies irae, dies illa soluet seculum, etc. They do say in a
little verse.

O king of reverent majesty,
which sauest all souls freely,
From evil Lord deliver me,
thou fountain of all clemency.
They ceerely and plainly confess that we are saved through grace, and do
use this aduerbe, Gratis, which signifies froely and franckly. Wherein they
do very well agree to that which Saint Paul witnesses, saying: You are
justified freely by his grace. That is not then by our Romans 3. d. 24: Romans 21.
a. 6 Gal. 2. d. 16 Ephe. 2. b. ^
works, and satisfactions: For then were grace no more grace. I do much
marvel how that good word escaped them.


Hilarious. I think that the same chaunsed because of the rhyme, for to make
all rhyme in Atis. For in the first verse there is:

Rex tremende maiestatis.
And for to make all to be in Atis, they have said:
Qui saluandos saluas gratis,
Salua me sons pietatis.

Theophilus. Now do those satisfactions agree with that that the Lord
promised, saying: if the ungodly will Eze. IS. c. 21
turn away from all his sins that he has done, they shall not be thought
upon any more: Also though our sins shall be as red as scarlet, purple, or y^
worm that comes Esa. 1. e. 18
out of the earth, he will make them as white as woll and the snow, and will
cast all our sins behind his back, and Esa. 38. 17
will put them as far (as David witnesses) as the East is from the West,
and will cast them in the bottom Psa. 105. 12 Mich. 7. 19.
of the sea.


Eusebius. David, after that the fault was pardoned 2. Reg. 12. 15. 16. 1^.
and 18 The punishment of David
him, insomuch that he was driven from his kingdom by his own son Absalom?
Wherefore punished and chastised he him, after that the Prophet Nathan had
declared unto him the remission of his sin?


Theophilus. For what cause God chastises us in this world
When God chastised David, and when he chastises us every day, because of our
sins, he does it not so much, for the sin which has been committed, as for
to aouertise and admonish us, that we do not sin hereafter. And the pain
that we bear is not for to satisfy God. For there is none other Satisfaction
sor the sins
satisfaction then the death and passion of Jesus Christ, that he can allow to
be sufficient. For if we must satisfy for our selves, we must bear and carry
all the importable burden of the wrath and judgment of God. Now if we must
bear them, there is none of us but should have his shoulders broken, and
should be plunged and drowned in the goulfe and bottom of hell with the
Devils. For if the Angels could 2. Pet. 2. 4
not bear it, which of us shall be sufficient, which are but worms of the
earth? And wherefore did God our good father send us Jesus Christ to help us,
but to that end that he would bear it and satisfy for us, and that through his
satisfaction John 3. 16 Romans 3. 24
we should be reconciled unto God, and delivered from his judgment? Seeing then
that God our father has the satis^action of Jesus Christ his son, which is
more then sufficient for us all, he requires for us none other satisfaction.
And if he require good works of us, he requires What works God requires
of vsand 10: what end
them not for satisfaction, for they are too insufficient: But for praises and
giving of thanckes, and witnesses of our faith, and of the remembrance that
we have of the benefits that hoe has given unto us in his son Jesus
Christ, and for to incite our brethren for to praise and magniste him.
Therefore said Jesus Christ unto his Dysciples. Let your light so shine
before men, that Mat. 5. 16
they may see your good works and glorify your Father which is in heaven.
He said not to the end that by them, you should satisfy for your sins:
or that you should merit the kingdom of heaven, and be iustyfied. For the
faithful man has obtained already all that by the faith of Jesus Christ,
which is Romans 3. 22. Gala. 2. 16 1. Cor. 1. 30
our wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, through whose merit Paradise is
given unto us. For that cause the holy Apostle calls the eternal life, the
gift of GOD. Wherefore we may understand that we merit it not through our
good deeds, but it is given Romans 6. 23. Merit and grace
us froelye, through Gods lyberalytie: Even as the Fathers enheritaunce is
given unto the son: not for that he has deserved it, but because that he
pleased him so, for that he loved him, and that he is his child, and will
give him his goods froely. Otherwise grace Romans 6. 6.
should be no more grace, but debte. On the contrary, when Saynct Paul did
speako of the eternal death, he Romans 6. 23.
calls it the wages of sin: declaringe thereby that man has well deserved
it, and that he can deserve none other thing, but that that wages is due unto
John. 15
him, for a recompense of the service that he has done unto the Devil, the
Prince of this world, even as the wages which is paid unto a souldyer, for
bearing of weapons under his Captain. We (...) then see that The works of
the Angels and of the elect.
the works done by the children of God, and the service that the Angels
doo^ unto him, do tend all unto one end, to wit, to glorify GOD and to
sanctyfie his name. Even as then the Angels serve not GOD for to merit
Paradyse, of which they are already in possession, neither for satisfaction
of their sins, of whithe they are not entangled: But only for the love
that they have in GOD, and the desire of his glory, so Gods elect do regard
none other thing, for they are already washed and purged 1. Cor. 6. 11 Apo.
1. 8. Act. 15. 9. John. 13. 14
from their sins by the bloud^ of Jesus Christ, and their heart puryfied
by the faith in him, and through the word that they have heard of him: And
are already possessors of ye kingdom of heaven in hope: the which is no less
sure and certain, then if the thing were present, and that the Angels are
assured of that that they have. Therefore the holy Apostle says, that we Romans
8. e. 44. Ephe. 1. ^1. ^0
are saved through hope, and that Jesus Christ does make us sit in the
heavenly places. And therefore when God does chastise and cortect us in this
world, that is, as the Apostle also writes unto the Corinthians, for to
correct and chastise us, that we should not be damned with the world and the
Infidels: because that we are yet in the way, and 1. Cor. 11. g. 31
capable of chastisment and ainendement, But there is an other reason after
this life here, when we are out of the way; and need, and that we cannot
any more empayre nor amend: And therefore the Lord does chasten us here, as
the good Father who beats not his son for to have The chastisen^t of a
father toward his clulde.
any recompense thereby for the fault that he has committed: For the pain
of the child brings no profit unto the Father. Also he does not beat him
through rigor nor through malice that he has to take vengeance of him: For
he loves him as his child, and the fatherly affection makes him soon
forget the faults and injuries that he has done unto him: As it is clearly
showed unto us in the Father of the prodigal child. Luc. 15. ^. 22.



Eusebius. What has ye father then to do to chastise him?


Theophilus. If he knew that he would never do any more fault he would
soon pardon him, without any punishment: But fearing least through his great
patience ^ gentleness should fall again, he is constrained to beat and
chastise him, although that he do, it not willingly, but it to that end to
make him more prudent and wise, and to better advise himself in time to come,
and that he take diligent heed not to sall again in y^ fault or in any other
greater. The which is no more to be feared in those whom, GOD has called from
this world. Wherefore they cannot any more rectius punishment which should
be to c^n^en them as is y^ same of the father toward his child, for to amend
him. But if there he a punishment, The punishment of the malefactors.
it is rather, to declare the judgment and the severity of God toward the
wicked and reprobates, and to manifest his goodness and mercy toward his
elect: As the Judge does condemn the traitor, murderer and other malefactors,
that have deserved death, not for to have any recompense, nor those unto whom
they have done wrong and injury. For what recompense can they have by their
deaths? neither do they it for to cause them to walk in time to come more
uprightly, since that they take from them their life: But for to satisfy
righteousness, and to mayntaine it, to that end that other may take example, and
that they may know how auayleable it is to have followed virtue and eschewed
vice.


Eusebius. To what purpose then does Saint John Apo. 14. c. 13 Obie cten O
pera. N. illorum sequuntur illos. What ^orkes follovv y^ dead.
in his revelation say: Their works do follow them? what works do follow them,
but the good deeds that men do for them after their death? For those that
they have done whilst they lived went before, not after. Wherefore it
follows that there are some other which do profit them.


Theophilus. Saint John speaks it because that their works do bear witness
that they are the children of God. He says not other men's works, but their
own works. For as man lives of his own soul, and not of the soul of an
other man's, even so does the righteous man of his faith. And as the righteous
man lives of his faith, and not of the faith of an other, even so shall every
one be judged according to his works, and not after Abac. 2. a. 4. Romans 1. b.
17 Romans 2. a. 6
those that other men shall do. For it is written: Every one shall bear his
own burden. And therefore Jesus Christ says: by thy word and thou shall be
justified: and by thy words thou shall be condemned: That is so say thy Gala.
6. b. 5 Mat. 12. d. 37. Wherefore the Judgment shall be according to the
works
words and thy works shall bear witness, of thy heart, and by them thou shall,
be iuslified, that is to say, absolved, declared and pronounced just and
righteous: O^ by them thou shall be condem^ned, known and judged worthy of
death and condemnation. Not that God needs any witness of our works, for to
know whether we are worthy of absolution or comdemnation. For he knows y^
hearts, and needs none other witness but his own. Psa. 159. a. 2 (...). 9
(...). 30 (...). 4
But y^ scripture uses such manner of speaking for to apply it to our
capacity, for to manifest and declare unto us better ye Just Judgment of god,
which will show forth y^ h^pecri^e of man heart. For man how wicked soever his
heart be, he would always hide it: and if one put it to his own co^^c^ece
although y^ he do condemn it, he will not for y^ leave off to aduasice and brag
he y^ le an honest man, until such time as he he take with his wicked deed, as
y^ thief with his stea^ing. For he is so peruers and wicked although y^ be be
taken with the deed, he will excuse himself: And as y^ shameless whore, is not a
shamed to deny y^ which we see with our eyes, and hanole with our hands: As we have
an example in Came. Although Gene. 4. b. 9.
that he killed his brother, and y^ his hands were yet all blouddy and wette
with the blood that he ^ad shed, it seems to hear him speak, that God did
unto him great miury and wrong, in asking him where he is. And therefore God
would vanquishe the malice and peruersitie of man's heart, and condemn it by
the works that are manifest, for to declare unto him, and to make him confess
by the fruit, that he is the root and the tree, to the end that he may not
glorify himself to be the Fig and the O life Mat. 7. c. 16
tree, when one does emdently show unto him the thorns and thistles that it
has born. And even so every creature is constrained to acknowledge and
conf^sse, that the judgment of God is just, and that it consists in all
truth and equity. Now the works y^ men do for us, after that we The works
dene for us after our death.
be dead, are not ours. Wherefore we cannot say, that they follow us. For it
is another matter to be in the way and journey, and to have already ended his
journey and to be arrived at the port, whylest that we are in the course of
this present life, he takes us as a sree which yet grows, the which one may
dress and proyne, for to To be in the way
make him bear fruit. But when he is once cut down, there is no more hope, he
lies where lie falls, he must travail no more afterward. In like manner may
we judge of man. Whilst y^ he is in ye way, and that he is in his course and
Luc. 13. b. 6
sight, one may aid him by admonitio^s, entreatings and other morkes of
charity, which we owe y^ one to y^ other, whilst y^ we are herein ye work of
god, for us to help the one the other to obtain and win the victory. But
after that he has called us from the work in the which he has set us, we
must attend and look no more but for the reward and Crown of righteousenes,
the which the righteous Judge shall give unto us, as Saint Paul hoped for
himself, as 2. Timo. 4. b. ^
we have fought for him the good fight, and have fulfilled our course and have
kept the faith unto the end: On the contrary, we must look for fear,
confusion, and eternal death, as the slougthfull servant, unfaithful and
vngrations, we have hid away and stolen the Talent away Mat. 25. c. 26
from our Master, without bringing unto him any profit. Mat. 3. b. 8.
Therefore Saint John says: Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance: that
is to say, through which you show forth that truly you repent you of your
sins, and that you have amended your evil life. For the are is put unto the
root of the tree, so that every tree which brings not forth good fuite, is
hewn down and cast in to the fire. Upon that ma^ter Saint Augustine did
writ Mat. 3. c. 10.
unto Macedonius after this manner: There is no other place for to correct and
amend manners, then in this life. Augu. Epist. 54
For after this life every one shall have that that he has gotten here. And
in another place he says: In this world the Sermo 66. de tempore
mercy of god helps those y^ rep^t: But in y^ world to come repentance
profits not, but we must ri^der account of our works. Liberty of repentance
is only given unto us in this life, after y^ we be dead there is no more
licr^ce of correction. Now is y^ time of mercy, after wards shall be ye time of
judgment. And in expou^ding those words of Jesus Christ: He In 10. tract. 12.
Marc. 16. d. 16
which believes not is already judged, says after this manner. The iug^ei^e^t
appears not yet, but y^ judgment is already done. For y^ Lord knows who are
his. He knows 2. Tim. 2. d. 1^
those which abide looking and farryng for the crown, and those which abide
looking for the fire. Moreover Saint John Chusostome speaks more plainly,
confirming that Chrisosleme de L. 12. t. con. 2.
which I have said, in such words: Prepare and make reaby thy works for the
end, and prepare thy self to the way, and if thou haste taken any thing by
violence from any man, restore it again: and make restitution, and say with
Luc. 19. b. 8
Zachens: if I have taken from any man by forged cauilatio^, I restore him
four fould. If thou art angry with any man, agree with him, before that thou
do come unto judgment: dispatche here al things, that without let thou may
see that Iudictall seat. All the while that we are here in this world we have
goodly hopes, but as soon as we shall be gone from thence, it lies no more in
our power to do penance, nor to deface and put out our sins. For after ye
Hom. 22 and popu. In Mat. 11 Hom. 37. In Heb. c. 1. and 2. Hom. 4.
end of our life, there is no more occasion of merits, no more then there is
unto those ye play at prises and games, to obtain crowns and rewards after
that the combat, play and prises are finished and ended. For he which in this
present life has not washed away his sins, afterward he shall find no
consolation. For in hell (as it is written) who shall confess thee? That is to
say, who shall praise Psa. 6. b. 6
thee in the grave? And by good reason. For this is the time of the Theators,
of Combals, Plays, and Prises: But ye shall be the time of the Crowns, rewards
and salaryes. Also let us not think when we shall be come thither, that we
shall have mercy, which do nothing at all, wherefore we ought to have pardon:
No though Abraham, Noe, Job, and Daniell did pray for us. Whilst then we have
time, let us prepare for our selves great trust and assurance toward God. And
Saint Hierome says no less, confessing that Hierome. 12. q. 2. Inpresenti.
Ambrosius. lib. de bon. mor. ca. 2.
in the other world. And Saint Ambrose, is of the same opinion, saying, David
required that his sins might be pardoned him before that he departed out of
this life. For he that shall not here in this life receive forgiveness of his
sins, shall not have it in the other: he shall not have it because he shall
not have the power to come and attain to the eternal life. For ye forgiveness
of sins, is the eternal life. Therefore says he: pardon me O Lord, that I
may be comforted before that I goo and shall be no more. And therefore I
greatly meruatle of that papisticall doctrine, which is so repugnant both to
the holy scriptures, and to the witness of the ancient Doctors of the Cyprian
Church. Saint Cyprian has written, in the Sermon that he made of the
immortality, that the faithful that do dye, have taken white robes and
garments, By which he The office sorthe dead Domine Jesus Chreste rex glory
libera ammas omnium sidelium desire torum and de penis inferni de profundo lacu
Lsbera, eas de ore leonis, ne ab sor beat eas tar tarus, ne cadu^t in obscuro
sed signifer sanctus Michael rpresentet eas in lucem sanctam quam olim Abrahe
promisisls and seminie ius Quia in inserno nulla est redemptio. Mantua. 3.
calami Sed neque rex Ereli quemque tranare paludi Nee super is ite ru^ reddt
sinit The signification of hell.
means, that they are come to the beatitude and felicity, and feacheth, that
we must weep no more for the dead. Since that they are already in the estate
of felicity. But me thinks that the Priests do not take them to be assured
of the eternal life whom they lodge in their Purgatory, but that from
Purgatory, they may yet fall into hell: Or if they understand it not so,
wherefore do they sing in the offertory of the Mass for the dead? Domine Jesus
Christi etc. That is to say, O Lord Jesus Christ king of glory deliver the
souls of all the faithful that dye from the pains of hell, and from the
deep lake. Deliver the^ from ye Lions mouth, least ye in hell he devour the^,
lest ye they fall not in ye obscure and dark places, but ye S. Michel ye
standard bearer do represent the^ into the holy light, which of late thou
did promise unto Abraham and to his seed.


Thomas. Me thinks that this is repugnant unto that which Eusebius has
spoken before, and to that which the Priests do sing, saying: that in hell
there is no ransom nor delyuerance. And yet nenerthelesse, they pray here in
that o^fertory, unto Jesus Christ, that he will deliver them from the pains of
hell. It must then needs follow, that either their prayer is vaiue, and that
they demand a thing of God which they do very well knew to be impossible and
contrary unto his will, or that there is as well deliverance in hell as in
Purgatory, and that they speak against themselves, or else that hell and
Purgatory be al one thing.


Eusebius. Thy disiunetiue is not good. For not, withstanding ye commonly men
take hell for the hell fire and the place of the dampened, yet nevertheless it
may be understood more amply for yt low places and cositries, and the estate
and condition of the dead: after this manner, his signification shall
comprehend and contrine also the Purgatory, as it does in this place here.


Hilarious. We must then expound it of the pains of hell, that is to say, of
the pains of Purgatory.


Eusebius. It cannot be understood otherwise.


Thomas. And what shall we understand by the deep lake?


Eusebius. The very same.


Thomas, There is then also a lake in Purgatory?


Hilarious. You do well Thomas to be affrayd, Did you never here before, how ye
priests did pay ye seriage for to have ye dead pass over? It is then
necessary ye they have their fery man Charon, for to let pass and repasse ye
souls, as well Charon the fery man.
as ye Panims and Poets had. Now if there be a Charon and a fery man, he cannot
carry over souls without ye there is seas lakes, or ryuers, for to caryhis
boats, scyfes, ships, barks and galleys.


Thomas. But I am greatly abashed wherefore we do call those that dye, in the
french tongue trespasses. Think that it was because that they were already
passed wherefore we do call the dead bodies in french trespailes.
from this life in the other. But as far as I can perceive it is rather
because that they have passed over those infernal lakes and reuers.


Hilarious. I do believe that the Christians and true faithful people have
called their dead trespasses: signifiyng by yt same that the death of the
faithful is no death, but only a passage for to enter into life, and those
which are dead John. 5. a. 24
in ye faith of Jesus Christ, according to his promises, are passed from death
to life. And therefore they are rightly called trespasses because ye they are
already passed over, and are come unto the port of health, in which they rest
in joy and consolation wc Jesus Christ their Lord, having escaped all the
dangers, and the great gculfes of ye sea of this world, The Pope Pinto, Eacus,
Minos, Rhadamantus and Neoptolemus.
of sin, death and hell. But sithence ye the pope has begun to reign in
steed of Jesus Christ, and ye he has take the office of Pluto ye god of hell,
and of Eacus, Minos, Rhadamantus, and Neoptolemus ye infernal judges, as a new
king, he would change ye laws, estates, habitations and ma^ners of huing of
his subjects ye be dead, as well as of those y^ be alive, The decrees and Canous
of Lesus Christ.
and endeuoreth himself wc all his power and strength to abolish and put out
ye laws, ordinances, institutions, holy Canons and inuiolated decrees, which
Jesus Christ has given as well to ye living as to ye dead by his prophets and
apostles, passed, confirmed, ratefied and sealed by the arrest of the
celestial and beauenly court and by the great counsel and wisdom of god, of
the holy trinity of ye father, the son and the holy ghost, of all the angels
and archangels, Saints and Saints, patriarchs, apostles, Evangelists,
Martirs, Confessors and Mirgins, to the end y^ the faithful wcout any other,
should have place in heaven, in earth and in hell.


Theophilus. He would The Emperors and Pope do abolish the statutes of their
predecessors.
do unto Jesus Christ, as the Roman Emperors, and the Popes have done many
times the one against the other, making frustrate, and boyd ye which their
predecessors have made and ordained. For in as much as they have made Jesus
Christ the first pope, and S. Peter ye second, I think, ye it seems good
unto the^, ye as well they may abrogate and make boide their ordinances, as
they have done those of other Popes their predecessors, changing most ofce^
times ye that the first have ordained, and making frustrate their counsels and
decrees, especially sithence ye time of pope Stephen, who made boide al ye
which Formosus his predecessor had don. Jesus Christ the eternal Plipe, Plat.
in vita Stepha. 6. and Formosus. 1. Stephan. 6. For mosus 1. Antibopes and
Schismatickes
But they do in that great wrong unto Jesus Christ that sithe^ce he is risen
again there are so many popes risen up in his place. For they will not suffer
that one should choose another whilst they are alive: or if that be done, they
call him antipope ye is chosen in spite of their bearde, and hold for
scisinaticks as well him as those that have chosen him and which are Joined wc
him. They call him antipope who sets himself against him when they esteem
to be ye Christ and Antechrist. Romans 6. a. 4 1. Cor. 15. b. 12 Ephe. 1. d. 28
and 2. b. 6 Coloss. t. c. 18. Mat. 28. d. 20
true pope, eve as we set antichrist against Christ. Since the^ ye Jesus Christ
is rise from death he is immortal, and shall dye no more, but shall abiee and
dwell eternally with his church, of which he is ye only head, according to y^
promise y^ he has made to his disciples, saying: beld I am with you until
the end of the world: For as much also as that great hea^^nly father, of whom
proceeds all fatherly love y^ is called Ephe. 3. c. 15 Daniel. 7. 1 22
y^ old aged, of whom Daniel speaks off, he has given unto him al judgment,
power and seigniory both in heaven and in earth, and has made him to be called
by his prophet, the father of the world to come, Prince of peace, willing y^ in
y^ name of Jesus should every knee how, both of Esa. 9 b 6 Phll. 2. b. 10 Apo.
^. d. 13
things in heaven and things in earth and things under the earth, I am greatly
abashed from whence this over boldness and rashness should proceed to create and
those other popes then he, since y^ he is always alive, and y^ he is the Lord
of y^ quick and of the dead, and his kingdom has nene end.


Hilarious. They cannot deny but that they are al Antipopes. That is to say
contrary and enemies to the true Hope, and so consequently heritickes and
schismatickes. For since y^ Jesus Christ is the true Christ, and true Pope, that
is All Popes Antipopes and Anticurists
to say, the father of y^ Christian Church, it follows that they are
Antichrists and Antipapes of the church of Jesus Christ, and true and lawful
Popes of y^ of Antichrist. y^ which has not only of trepasse but also passed,
repassed and trepassed, which never shall find rest. For they must first
pass into Purgatory, and after repasse, for to put them out, and again to
pass all over for to put them in the Popes The Papisticall ^irges
paradise. But as slowly as they can, when they can get no more money.
Wherefore it must needs be y^ there are lakes and ryuers, at the least,
insomuch as y^ Poets do declare The lakes and internal finds.
it, since that we must so much pass and repasse.


Thomas. But how can y^ fire and water agree together if Fire. and water.
there are so many rivers and deep waters, it seems to me y^ it is great
folly, to cast y^ holy water upon y^ graves, and upon y^ dead, since that they
have such slore below with them. If Holy water un profitable.
I were below in Durgatory within that fire. which is so hot and burning, I
would find the means, if it were possible, to get me near unto those rivers,
and would plunge my self therein, as a Ducke and a Coote.


Hilarious. I would not that the Priests should sing and pray for me, that I
might be delivered from y^ deep lake, for I had rather to be a fish, and to
dwell therein always.


Thomas. Thou cause be no better at thine ease. For thou shall be always in
the fresh water, and may drinck when thon wilt.


Hilarious. That should be a goodly pastime for y^ drunckardes, if those slouds
were of wine, and for those that dwell upon the mountains, if it were of
milk, as in the time of Saturn, and in the time of the golden Age, if the
Fluds of wine and of milk. Ovid. Meta. 1 Flumina Iam lactis, Iam flumina
nectaris ibant. The infernal fluddes their names and interpretations. Lethe,
Achero^, Styx, Cocytus, Phlogeton.
witness of the Poets be true. But I rather fear that those are not always
that, as the Poets have said, and that one cannot always attribute unto them
their ancient names: Although that the Pope reigns there in steed of Pluto.
For the one is called, Lethe, y^ is to say, oblivion: An other Acheron, that is
to say, without Joy: An other Stix, that is to say, sadness: An other Cocytus,
that is to say, mourning and lamentation: An other Phlegeton, that is to say,
heat. Now what other thing can there be in the Popes Purgatory, if it be such
as they have described unto us. I find it in nothing to differ from the
Poetical hels. Wherefore they do no great wrong, if they do sing: Deliver them
from the deep lake, and from the Lions mouth. Sith that that roaring Lion is
there, it must of force be that it is hell. But they fail in this that they
have not directed their prayer unto the Pope, and his, which have cast the
souls therein and hold them there, and not unto Jesus Christ, who handeleth
not so cruelly those of his faithful servants. But truly those which will
not drink of the fountain of life of our Savior Ies^s, and of his goodlye
Psa. 12. a. 3 and 55. ^. 1. Iere. 2. c. 13.
sweet rivers, which are more sweeter then either wine or milk, are well
worthy to drink of those bile and stinking papisticall Cesterns, and to be
plunged and drowned in those pits and infernal lakes, and to live in the iron
Age.


Eusebius. Thou blamest the Sophisters, but I never The significatios the deep
lake.
saw a greater Sophister nor greater slaunderer. When the Priests do pray
that Jesus Christ would deliver the souls from the deep lake, is it not
easy to be understood, that they speak not of a lake full of water, but
that word is taken by translation and comparison, for to declare and show
forth y^ depth of y^ miseries in which sin leads the poor sinners?


Theophilus. But has not Jesus Christ through y^ blood of his testament,
delivered all the true Christians from those broken pits that will hold The
lake without water. Zach. 9. c. 11
no water, even as he has brought the children of Israel from the bottom of
their captivity and misery, according to the prophecy of Zachary? do thou
think that Zachary has lied?


Hilarious. Thou do call me sophister and slaunderer, but if thou find that
that I do say so strange, I would gladly know of thee out of what flood came
the soul, which the fishermen of the Bishop Tibaud did take in a net in steed
of a fish?


Thomas. Truly I now perceive A soul taken in a net
that thou do mock men too plainly.


Hilarious. If I mock, thou must then impute the fault to that great Doctor
Barleta, of the order of the preaching Friars, who has written that goodly
example, in his Sermon Barleta feri. 4 hebd. 4. quadr. de pe. purg.
that he made of the pains of Purgatory, and said moreover that the fisher
men did bring that net unto the Bishop, unto whom the soul cried: Pray for me
in thy masses, to whom the Bishop demanded, what art thou? The Bishop Tibaud.
the soul answered: I am a soul that have accomplished here my penance.
And as soon as he had caused a trentall of Masses to be song for it, it was
delivered from her pains. Now what do thou think, how was that soul
brought thither? I can conjecture none otherwise but that it did swim bpon the
top of the water, as the Troutes, Salmons and Eles, and many other fishes do,
which go against the sweet water, and do depart from the sea and lakes, for to
enter into the rivers. For I doubt not, but that there is stinckinge mudde,
mire and durte in those papisticall lakes, and that the water is very much
corrupted, salt and bitter, The papisticall lakes and ^ondes. The ^luds of
Paradise Esa. 11. a. 3 Gene^. 2. b. 10
wherefore I am not much estonished, if that the souls have such great desire
to depart out of those stinking Cesterns, for to refresh themselves and to
draw of the water, in the sountaines of our savior Jesus Christ, and in those
plesaunt rivers and floods of that delicious and pleasant garden, wherein the
golden age continues for ever, and of that goodly Paradyse, the which God
has planted, The tree of life
and in the myddest of which he has set the tree of life, for to make us
pertakers of his immortality. And as for me, whatsoever Sophister thou call
me, yet I could not give better solucion to my question: nor I know not
whether in Sorbonne, one might find a more fitter. But least thou should
not think that I do speak without authority, I will allege unto thee the
witness Cic^ro. Tuse. q. li. 1
of the Poets, and the same of Cicero, who alleges that he favors greatly
the history of Barleta, and the exposition that I have made upon the same.
Mark then the A soul drawn from hell.
horrible and sharp verses, that those souls which departed from hell did
speak, as some man has translated it into our tongue.

From the infernal lake I came, and grisly goulfe of hell, Where souls in
fire and brimstone plungd, in endless trome^ts dwell. Thus having passed
Acheron that foul and stinking sloud, And eke escaped Gerberus the dog that
is so wood, Upon the sharp rocks creep I must, and do by penance so,
(Till time I have sulfilde the same) in pangs of pain and vvo.

Thou do hear the language that the same soul did speak, although that
Cicero did mock of those fictions and of such a heap of fools, who demanded
a form and shape of the souls, and did think that they did return. Upon
which he says: From thence by his account the lake of Auernus Aueruus
is not far off, from whence some do say that the souls do come in a
black shadow, after that the gate of Acheron is opened: and that from thence
came forth the Images and figures of the dead men, with false blood.
Notwythstandinge the same they would that those Images and visions should
speak: the which they cannot do, without a tongue, mouth and throat, or
without strength and figure of liver and ribs. And although they see nothing by
apprehension of understanding they would y^ those figures of the dead, should
be represented before their eyes. Although y^ Cicero rebuked y^ opinion of
those, yet nevertheless they do not accord very evil with y^ theology of your
Doctors. Wherefore thou ought to coutent thy self with my solution: or if
thou will have a better, propound the question in Sorbonne, and if the Doctors
cannot absolve it, let them condemn the books of Barleta, and of other like
dreamers, The forbidding of books.
and forbid the Moonkes to read their Sermons full of blasphemy, rather then
the holy Scriptures, and the books that they judge to be full of heresies,
only because that they do contain truth, and which condemn their abuse.


Theophilus. They will not do so. For the other do cause The fluds of
paradise. Pyson. Genes. 2. b 10
the water to come better to their mil. Moses witnesses that Pyson, the one of
the four floods of the terrestryall Paradise, brings gold with his waves:
But those will have nothing to do with the floods of Paradise, nor of the
gold that they bring, which is a great deal more precious then Fluds
brings gold.
that which they draw from their internal floods, ye which they prefer
before those, because of the great riches and treasures that they draw there
out.


Hilarious. There is no Prince upon the earth, which gets or draws so
much out of the floods nor mines, as Tagus. Pactolus. Ganges. Hebrus. Padus and
Eridanus Orcus.
they have. That is none of the gold which Tagus the flood of Portingale
brings with his sands: Or Pactolus of Lydia: Or Ganges of India: Or Hebrus
of Thracia: Or Padus of Italy: Or Orcus, which is in the country of Taurine in
Piedmont. All the gold that those floods have is nothing in comparion of that
that they catch in their internal floudes: which cause the wheels of their
Mill to turn about very well. In very deed they have an Orcus which is more
fertile in gold then that of Piedmont. And ye name Eurotos and Peneus. 4. ca.
8 Plin. li. 4 ca. 8 P^neus accipii amnem Euroto^ nec recipit, sed olei mod^
super natatem breui spaicio portatu^
agrees with it very well. For Orcus signifies hell, from whence those floods
arise, which cannot join themselves with those floods of the terrestryall
Paradise, no more then Eurotos with Peneus, that goodly floude of Thessaly,
which cannot abide nor suffer that the execrable waters of that stinking
flood, engendered with pains and torments, should be mingled with his silver
floods: But they must swim above him, as Oil, and after ye he has carried
him a little, he drives him far from him.


Theophilus. Those here would as well mingle the waters abdicat penales aquas,
dirisque genitas argenteis suis miscere recusans.
of their stinking Cesterns, with the water of life: But it agrees not
together. For Jesus Christ cannot abide nor suffer that, but casts it far
from him. Wherefore I doubt very much, that as he has already kindled his
fire, which has burned Purgatory, that he will also repulse those rivers and
lakes, and that he will cause them that they shall The floude of Christ
not swell over as a flud does his waters, for to quench and put out that
little fire which shall be there left.


Hilarious. they ought a great deal more to fear that flud, then the drowning
and ouerflowing of Tiber, which The ouerflowing of Tyber.
was like to have drowned Rome. For when it runs over, it will carry away
both the castle of Saint Ange, the Pope and his Popedom and all the Romish
Babylon. Wherefore it is no marvel though they fear those evangelical The
flood Nylus and the fertility of Aegipt Strab. Geor. li. vlti. Solin. ca. 45.
Seneca li. 4. natu. quae. Luc. Phar. 10 Plin. in panegy ad Traia. Plin. natu.
hist li. 5. ca. 9 Nilometres. Diodo. sicu. li. 1 Tibul. li. 1. ad Nilum. Te
propter null los tellus tua postulat imbres Arida nec pluuio supplicat herba
loui. Claudia. in con su. Theo. Lene sluit. Nilus, sed cu^ctis amnsbus extat
vtilior.
waters, and endeavor themselves to keep their filthy internal puddles, and
infectious and stinking wells. For that is all the force and riches of their
kingdom. The flud Nilus which ouerfloweth the land of Egypt, and which makes
their fields fruitful and fat, and brings unto them great abundance and
increase of wheat and other corn by the mudde, filth, fat ground, dunge and
fatness that it brings with it, is not so fertile nor profitable unto ye
Egyptians, which inhabit in the land of Egypt, as unto us new Egyptians.
Wherefore if the Egyptians take such pain about their flud Nilus, and have
their Nilometres, that is to say, the mesurers of ye flud Nilus, which have ye
charge to measure it, for to know whether it increase much or little, we must
not be estonished, if those here do so travail after theirs.


Thomas. Wherefore do they that?


Hilarious. Because that if that Nilus do not increase but twelve cubytes, then
they have the famine in Egypt: because that if all their grounds are not
watered and moysted through the ouerflowinge of the same, those which are not
covered are as the sand, and will bring forth no fruit. For it rayneth not
in Summer, and all their felicity and riches, depends upon Nilus. As Moses
declared Deutat. bae
unto the Israelites, comparinge Egypt unto the land of Canaan. If the flood
Nilus arise up xiif. cubits, yet there shall be tamishment in Egypt. If it
increase xiiif. cubits, it brings joy: if xv. it brings assuredness: if
it increase xvf. cubits, it brings delights and pleasures. For they have
such store and abundance of corue and other goods, that all is plentiful.
On the contrary, if it Palaemon ex Diony. Non alius tantum fluutorum ditat
arenas. Atque trahens limum complec titur vbere ca^pos.
increase above measure, they cannot sow, because that the water tarryeth so
long that the earth will not be dry to be tylled: But when it increases by
measure, they make great cheer, taking care for nothing, and therefore they
have those Nilometres which measure the hight and depth of those waters, and
if they know that it aryseth not high enough, for to water all the earth,
they make it to be known through out all the Towns and Cities, afterward
every one makes dykes and The flood Nilus of the Pope.
trenches for to make it the easier to run all abroad. If they know to the
contrary, that it will swell and rise up to hye, and that through his great
abundance of his waters it will let and hinder to sow and till the earth,
they make great rampers and walls round about it for to keep it in, and to
cause it to run more slowelye. Now therefore doubt not, but that our
Egyptians are as wise in their generations, and that they know as well that
practice, for to provide and foresee to their Niles and flouddes, which cause
the water to come to their Milles, from which all their fertilities and riches
do proceed, and with which they fish and catch the goulde, of which yet
nevertheless they can never be satisfied. For Charibdis.
they are as a goulfe of the sea, in which these ryuers do empty themselves,
and yet they can never fill the sea. These The dykes of ye fortresses of the
Papists.
are the dikes of their castles and Lordships wherein does consist all their
fortress, of which none can approach nigh unto the^, without being fore
afraid and in great danger of killing and drowning. For those ye will approach
as enemies, for to assalt them, shall find those floods altogether ^ull of
sulfure and fire, and more whotter and burning then ye internal flood
Phlegeto^. Those which do pass over the^, for to yield themselves unto the^,
shall find themselves more miserable and unhappy. For first of al they must
pass ye flood Lethe, which signifies To pass the floude Lethe. To forget God.
oblivion: because that it is necessary, that those which give themselves unto
them for to drinike of the stinking water of their doctrine and traditions,
forget God and his word, and Esa 29. d. 13. Mat. 15. a. 8
serve him in vayn. Wherefore from thece they must come unto Acheron, which
causes all those that pass over it to lose all their joy and mirth. For since
that the kingdom of God is A cl. cron
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, what peace The kingdom of
God. Romans 14 c. 17.
and joy can those have who have forgotten and forsaken God, the fountain of
the water of life, and the sea of all goodness, for to come and drink of
those muddye and stinking Iere. 2. c. 13.
wells that will hold no water? Since that then in that Acheron, one shall lose
all joy and mirth, they must of necessity come unto the other flouddes, to
wit, Stix, which signifteth Styx Cocytus Phlegeton Ihon. 14. d. 16 The holy
ghost is called ye comforter. Claudiut. Foelix qui phaitas prescindit vomere
terras. Nubila non spe rat tenebris co^dentia coelum Nec grauiter slantes
pluuiali frigore Coros. Inuocat, aut arcum varlota luce rubentem Aegyptus sieve
aube ferax inbresque serenos. Sola tenet so cu ra poli, non indiga venti.
sorrowfulness, and to Cocytus which signifies mourning: and unto Phlegeton
which signifies heat and burning. For since that the holy Ghost is called the
comforter: joy nor consolation cannot be but there where he is, and where he
has shed abroad the waters and drops of his grace. And therefore who can
have his conscience which is deprived from that comforter. but sorrowful and
full of perpetual mourning? What greater heat and burning can there be in hell,
then is in the consciences of those which have aba^doned Christ, for to serve
Antechrist, and for to follow his doctrine and traditions? For that is a very
hell unto the conscience: and it is not possible that those which are addicted
and given unto his service, can ever be refeshed and filled. For that Egypt is
not watered nor sprinkled with ye dewes and floods of heaven, no more then ye
other Egypt wc the water from heaven in summer: and has nothing in it but
these filthiness and puddels, ye which it does esteem more then ye goodly
fair and clear water: it prefers it self unto the land of Canaan, the
which yet nevertheless Moses esteemed more then that of Egypt: saying unto
the Israelites: The land whether thou go to possess it, is not as the
Gaudet aquis quas ipsae vehit Niloque redundat.
land of Egypt whence thou came out, where thou sowedst thy seed: And
wateredst it with thy feet as a garden of herbs: But the land whether ye
go over to possess, it is a land of hyls and valleys, and drincketh water of
the rain of heaven. They had rather with great travail torment themselves
after and about those marysses and low grounds, then to attend and receive
the blessing from heaven. And therefore they can never find rest nor
consolation in their consciences, but abide always in doubt, perpleritie,
trouble and anguish.


Theophilus. That is the very same that they desire. For Antechriste has his
fishers, altogether differinge and contrary unto those of Jesus Christ, who
desire not but troubled waters, because that then their fishing is a great
deal Deu. 11. b. 10 To fish in the troubled water The fishers of Jesus Christ
and of Antechrist. Mat. 4. d. 19. Luc. 5. c. 10.
better. Jesus Christ said unto his Apostles, and Disciples: I will make you
fishers of men: Because that he would send them, for to draw men, by the
nets and cords of the preaching of the Gospel, out and from the sea of this
world, and from the goulfes of sin, death and hell, for to lead them unto
the port of health and safety, and unto Jesus Christ their Savior. The other
fisher men take fishes for to kill and eat them. But these are sent for to
retire and pluck back men from death unto life, and from the perils and
dangers of the sea and goulfes of hell, for to lead, present and bring them
all alive unto Jesus Christ. On the contrary, Antechrist Fishers of gold and
silver. Sub anulo pisca torto.
has his Apostles and fishers, not of men, but of gold and of silver: or if
they do catch men, that is after the manner and sort as the fishers catch the
fishes for to kill, eat and sell them.


Hilarious. If they be not fishers of men, they are fishers of souls. Wherefore
I would counsel them, since Fishers of souls.
that they know to take them in their nets as fishes, that in sleede of their
masses, vigilles and suffrages, they would buy fish lepes, nets and hooks
for to catch and fish for souls.


Theophilus. They have no need of thy counsel. For they have been provided
of such instruments long agone, that if it be possible there shall not one
soul escape, but that it shall be intrapped and caught in their nets, which
they have laid forth on every side. What other thing are all The nets of the
Priests.
their prayers for the dead, their Idols and ceremonies, but bytings, Hooks,
Nets and engyns, for to catch and take men, as the Fisshers take the
Fisshes? or the Spiders the little Flies with their copwebbes?


Hilarious. Therefore it is very necessary for them to have a great many of
Nilomitres and servants, for to take good heed to their rivers, since ye there
are so many Fishers, and which have so many nets and engyns. For it is to be
feared greatly, ye if their Nile and their bloody waters of Egypt should
ouerflowe, arise The waters of Egypt.
and swell to much, that it would quench and put out the fire, that they
keep yet in their Purgatory, as well as the over great fire that they made
there, has burned the walls and chambers that were there, and least the same
should hinder and let their sowings and reapings in harvest. On the contrary,
if those fluddes decrease and dry up, it is greatly to be feared, but that they
will bring dearth and famine, for many causes and reasons. For merchants nor
merchandise cannot come no more unto them. Afterward it is to be feared,
least the Israelites whom they To go out of Egypt Exo. 14. c. 21 The taking
of Babylon. Cirus and Darius
hold in captivity in Egypt, shall escape them, if God dries up the red Sea,
for to give issue and passage unto his people: or least their Babylon should be
taken, as Cirus and Darius took ye of the Chaldeans, after that they had
found the means to turn the river Euphrates, which entered into Euphrates.
Pli. li. 3 ca. 14. Solin. ca. 50. Xenoph. in Cir. hist. li. 1. in cho
the same, for to give free passage unto their soldiers and host of men: the
which they placed within Babylon, there where the course of the water was, and
did take it in the night, whilst that the king Balthazer with his Princes,
curtisans and concubines did banquet and make good chere, Daniel. 5. s. 23
and celebrated the feast of his gods.


Theophilus. They may well repair their dykes, and Joseph. lib. 10 ca. 13
fortea^e themselves as much as they can: But yet nevertheless they shall take
them never the sooner. For it is necessary yt the prophecy which Esaias
prophesied against the Egyptians be accomplyshed upon them, and upon all The
Prophecy against the Egyptians.
their Fishers, and upon those which live about their rivers, and which make
ye instruments of Idolatry and supersticion.


Hilarious. What is that Prophecy?


Theophilus. Give ear, and you shall see whether it agrees not well to our
matter. The water of the Sea (says he) shall be drawn out, Nilus shall
sink away, and be dronken up.

The rivers also shall be drawn out, and the wells shall decreace Esa. 19 2. 5.
and dry away. Reed and Rush shall fail, the grass by the waters side or
upon the rivers bank, yea, The fisshers for saken.
and whatsoever is sown by the waters, shall be wythered, destroyed and
brought to naught. The fisshers shall mourn, all such as cast angels in the
water shall complayn and they that spread their nets in the water shall be faint
hearted. Such as labor upon Flare and Silk, shall come to poverty, and they
also that weaue fine works. And all those which do make pondes and stews for
the living souls shall be sorrowful for their nets.


Hilarious. It is not possible, to find out a prophecy which better agrees
with them. For this here makes mention of waters, of Fisshers of Flare
workers, of makers of nets, of makers of pondes and stews, in which they do
keep and hold fast the living souls, as the fisshers do keep their fishes
in their stews and fish pents. It makes also mention of their instruments and
of the workmen that make them, ye they fear nothing less least that the
preaching of the Gospel should dry up those rivers, as Demetrius and those of
his sect greatly feared, ye through Demetrius. Act. 19 s. 14 Diana the goddess
of the Ephesians.
the preaching of Paul, the honor of Diana the great goddess of the Ephesians
should be diminished, and their gain with her. Therefore they are not to be
blamed although they look to it so diligently. It in more then time that the
virtue of God does show forth it self, for to deliver his poor people, from
the hands of so many fishers which plunge and drown so many poor souls
through their lakes and puddles. Those are terimen and marrincrs which do
drown all those Dangerous Mart^ers
which enter into their boats and ships. For they have not Jesus Christ with
them, which causes the winds and tempests Mat. 8. c. 2 ^ Mar. 14. d. 32 John.
3. b. 19
to be calm and to cease, and which causes always a safe landing and port.


Theophilus. And therefore it should be more reasonable that we should cry
after him as ye Apostles Prayer for the living.
did, saying: Lord save us: and that we should make our prayer unto God, that
he would deliver us from that deep take, and al those that be alive, then to
sing for the dead. For if David and the other servants of God did complain
themselves to have been drowned in the lakes of tribulation and mysery, The
water of tribulation. Psa 2^. c. 21 Psa^. 6. e. 23 Esa. 8. h 8 Sennacharib.
and that the waters have environed and covered them over the head, we have no
less occasson to complain. Esaias desiring to signify the misery and
tribulation which should come unto Jerusalem and to all the land of Judah by
the army of Sennacherib, says that she shall be environed with waters up to
the throat: And uses such comparison for to let them to understand that the
same army shall destroy and cover all the land, even as Euphrates did cover and
destroy Euphrates. Strab. li. 16 Proc. li. 1. Pers. bell. Esa. 36. cap. 4. Reg.
18. and 19. cap.
that land of Assyria, when it ouerflowed: making comparison by the soldiers
and host unto ye river, because that both the one and the other do pass
through one land. But Jerusalem was never so afflicted nor oppressed by the
vyolent waves of the army of the Assyrians, as the poor Church is trodden
down and oppressed by that great Romish Sennacherib and his army, which is
innumerable The Romish Sennacherib.
throughout all the whole world, as the sand of the sea. But we have spoken
enough of the Lake: It rests now to absolve the doubt which I have already
begun. Forasmuch (friend Eusebius) as you say, that that hell and deep lake,
of which mention is made of it in ye affertory for the dead, is taken for
purgatory, what does y^ signify which is spoken off afterward: Deliver the^
from ye lions mouth, least that hell do not devour them: I believe ye they
understand by ye Lion none other but the Dyuel, who as S. Peter The devouring
Lion. 1. Pet. 5. b. e
witnesses is our enemy, and walks about seeking whom he may devour. But
since ye the soul is separated from ye body, how can it be delivered from ye
mouth of y^ roaring and denouring lion, if ye soul be of a reprobate, which
dies out of y^ says of Christ, who shall deliver it from his throat, when God
has given it him? And if it be of a faithful man, Jesus Christ who is the
strong and invincible Lion, of the tribe of Judah The Lion of ye tribe of Judah,
Apoc. 5. b. 5
who has had the victory over that Lion which is adversary and enemy unto God,
has he not already delivered it? has not he killed and prohibited the mouth
of that Sampson and David. Judge. 14. a. 5. 1. Sam. 17 c. 35
hungry Lion, as a true Sampson and David, in such sort that he has no more
teeth nor fanges, for to devour the childen of God whom the Lord Jesus
holds, as the Lion his pray, to whom none dares to come nigh, as Esaias Esa.
31. b. 4
has written, that the Lord keeps Jerusalem and his elect people. Also I
think it not much unmeet if we make such prayer for those that be a live, the
which Jesus Christ has taught us to pray and say: And lead us not into
temptation, Mat. 6. b. 13 Luc. 11. a. 2
but deliver us from evil. And he him self has made the prayer unto God his
Father, for his discyples, as John. 17 b. 9
witnesses Saint John. He says not, I pray thee that thou would deliver
them from evil after this life: nor says, I pray not, that thou would take
them out of ye world? 1. Pet. 5. b. 8
but that thou would keep them from all evil. Also S. Peter does not
exhort us to abstain from meats, to be sober, watch and pray, and to arm
us with faith against that roaring Lion, for those that be dead, but for our
selves Repugnaunce of doctrine
whilst that we be a live, to the end we may avoid his mouth, for to come
unto that holy light which he has promised unto Abraham and unto his seed.
For according to your doctrine, since that the soul is separated from the body,
if man has not had here remission of his sins before his death, he cannot
have it after. And if he have it in this life, he goes either into Paradise or
into Purgatory. If he be in Paradise, it is no more to be feared that hell can
swallow him up. If he be in Purgatory, although that according to your
opinion, he be in pains, yet nevertheless you confess that he is past the
danger of damnation, and that he is sure of his salvation. Wherefore I
understand not, how that prayer can agree with the word of God, and the
doctrine of the ancient doctors, and your own For you speak against your
self. If that prayer does profit The Papisticall doctrine is uncertain.
the souls of the dead in the other life, it must then be, that there is yet
great hope, either to merit or not to merit, and a place to do good or evil,
as in this mortal life, and to be damned or saved.


Eusebius. There is great difference. For in this life man may merit or not
merit of him self: But after he is dead he can do no more for him self, but
others may do it for him? And the merits of those that be alive do serve him
to salvation.


Theophilus. And so by that means, Jesus Christ shall be a Savior neither of
the living nor of the dead: and the merit of his death and passion, shall save
neither the one nor the other, but the living shall save themselves, during
their life? and after their death, others that shall be the^ alive, shall save
them especially the Priests and Moonks, By that means, we have many saviors,
and men should never be certain nor sure of their salvation, neither before
their death nor afterward, which is a thing altogether contrary to the
doctrine of the scriptures.


Eusebius. And if I would maintain, that those which are in hell, can be
somewhat delivered from the pains theroff, either by the prayers and good
deeds of the living, or Deleyueraunce from hell
because of the good deeds that they themselves have done during their life,
that should be a strange thing unto thee. What would thou answer to that?
Have we not the witness of a great many histories and good doctors, worthy to
be believed, which certefie us, how that Saint Gregory delivered Traianus the
Emperor from the pains Traianus delivered from hell
of hell, who notwithstanding did put to death many of the Christians, and
namely Saint Ignacius the discyple of S. John Saint Ignatius lo. Maio. 4. sent
did. 45. quae. Saint Machayr Saint Brandun. Alrus. in fine sui 4. Judas out of
hell.
the Evangelist. It is in like manner written in the life of the fathers, that
Saint Machaire delivered a priest being a Panim, who affirmed unto him that he
was damned. And in the life of saint Brandon we read that he did see Judas,
which walked by the meadows, of whom he asked the cause, wherefore he was not
in hell: who answered him because of the good deeds that he did in his life
time, he had therefore some solace and comfort.


Theophilus If Thou can no better confirm my sentence, nor better prove that
your doctrine is altogether uncertain, variable, inconstant and gamesayinge it
self. For have thou not already confessed unto me, that the priests do not
pray for the dampened, because that there is no deliverance from hell, and from
the fire of hell? Consider I pray thee, how that agrees with those goodly
fables, and with that which thou meanest now to speak off. Diverse opinions of
the deliverance of Traianus Tho. in 4. did. 1. 3. Argu. 2 10. Maio. 4. sent
did. 45. qua. 1. Barl. ser. 3. Hab. 4. sermo de pen. inser.



Eusebius. If you had read diligently the books of the good ancient doctors,
and especially of Saint Thomas, you might easily make all these places agree.
For they do allege four opinions and reasons for to satisfy such doubts.
The first is, that Traianus was raised through the prayers of Saint Gregory,
and that he dath done penance in this life, through the which he meryted grace
and pardon of his sins. Wherefore he is dead in the grace of God, and has
been saved, and this is the best allowed opinion of ye doctors. The second is,
that the soul of Traianus was not simplye delivered from the pain and fault
thereof, but that his pain was suspended and delayed, until the day of
judgment, and afterward shall be saved. The third opinion is that Gregory
delivered him, not from the place of hell, but from the pain. The fourth,
which is also best allowed among all the other, that the soul of Traianus was
delivered from the pains of hell, and has obtained mercy through the prayers
of Saint Gregory: the which thing was done, not after the common law, but
after the disposition and dispensation of the wisdom and providence of God,
who did foresee that Saint Gregory should pray for him. Wherefore it has not
dampened it by or through diffinitiue sentence, but by a sentence suspenciue:
The which thing has been a particular privilege. For Saint Hierome says,
that the privileges are but for a Privileges.
few people, and not for all. For the privileges of a few are not laws
common to all: And the things which go out of square from the common law,
ought not to be drawn into a consequence.


Hilarious. I think that that is the privilege which Extra derog. sur. li. 6
is written in the Aeneados of Virgill, the which Cyble recited, speaking to
Aeneas after this manner.

Then prophet Cyble said, O borne of blood of heavenly kind,
Thou Troyan Duke, the way that leads to hell is light to find. Virg. Aenci. 6.

Both nights and days, the door of Limbo black does open gape,
But backward up to climb, and free to Skies est soones to escape.
Their works, their labor is few men whom equal love did love,
Our virtue pearcing all, did to the stars advance above.
Behold the privilege of that good doctor, which peradventure Jupiter, in
whom Traianus did believe, granted unto him.


Theophilus. I do greatly marvel, both of Thomas of Aquin, and of other
questionarie doctors, which have taken such great pains for to color and
set forth a fable. It must be that they have had very much leisure, and that
they were not much occupied about other better affairs. They would sooner
have given a more true and certain solution, if they had by and by answered,
that they received not such fables: as some of their own sect have done,
namely our master John Maioris the Scotte, the which I have heretofore heard
read in the College of Our master John Maioris 4. sent. did. 45 q. 1.
Mountaigu. He rejects without making any doubt, both the history of Saint
Machaire, and also that of S. Brandon. As touching that same of Traians,
although that he allege the common solutions of other doctors: yet
nevertheless he first does answer, that he knows not from whence that
history had his first beginning: the which has no certain author: not
withstanding that some do attribute it unto John Damascenus. But how should
he have The Author of the history of Traianus Damascenus. Supple. chro.
Bergons. li. 9.
written it, since that according to their own witnesses and chronicles, he
reigned long time before that saint Gregory lived, and was dead before that
Saint Gregory was borne. For their chronicles do witness, that Damascenus
flourished in the years of our Lord 440. And that he was very familier with the
Emperor Theodosius. The which yet nevertheless I believe not: For by that
account, he had lived in the time of Saint Ambrose, and nevertheless there is
great difference between his books and these of Saint Ambrose. For these of
Saint Ambrose are a great deal ^latin in vit. Celest 1 The time of Gregory.
Bergo. li. 10
purer, and keep a great deal better the purity of yt ancient church. But
peradventure they mean the young Theodoseus, which rayned after Honorius.
Although that it be so, by their own Chronicles, he was before the time of
Gregory, about 152. years. For they do write that Gregory reigned in the
year. 592.


Hilarious. It must needs be then, that either the Chronicles are false, or ye
witness of those ye do make Damascenus the author of that fable: Except
peradventure they will say that through the spirit of prophecy, he has
foreshewed that deliverance, which Gregory ought to do, touching the soul of
Traianus.


Theophilus. I know not what their prophecies are, but I never in all my life
did see nor hear a thing wherein was less reason, assurance and incerteinly,
then in that papisticall doctrine. For it consists but in mane opinions. But
how do those fables agree with that that they themselves Maio. 4. sent. did.
45. q. 1. Berl. sermo. de pen. inse
allege of Saint Augustine, who by their own witnesses should say: If I did
know that my Father were in hell, I would pray no more for him then for the
devil. Wherefore then have S. Gregory and S. Machair prayed for the dampened?
And when the Priests do pray unto Ne absorbeat. eas Tartarus: ne cadant in
obsura.
Jesus Christ that he deliver the souls, least that hell should devour them
and that they should not fall into the dark and obscure places, in what place
do they understand that the souls, for whom they make that request, ought
The place of ye Papisticall souls. The fall of the souls.
to be? Since that they make request that hell do not devour them, they do then
understand and mean, that they are not in hell. But when they admoreouer, that
they fall not into the dark and tenebrous places, they declare thereby, that
they ought to be in a place, from which they may not fall. Now, what is that
place? Is it Paradise?


Eusebius. No Paradise.
verily. For those that are there, are already all assured, that they shall
never fall.


Theophilus. No, except you are of that opinion that the souls may yet sin
in Paradise, as the Angels and Adam, in the terrestrial Paradise, The fall
of Angels and of man. Genes. 3. d. 24. 2. Pet. 2. a. 4.
and that God did throw them headlonge into hell, as the wicked Angels: or
that he did drive them out of Paradise, as Adam. But I believe thou art not of
that opinion, friend Eusebius, for thou should speak against all the good
ancient Doctors, and the doctrine of the catholic Church, who do prefer
the work of man's redemption, to the same of his creation, in that that man
has been so created of God, that he could sin: But he has after such sort
redeemed it, that his elect can never perish nor sin after they be in
Paradise.


Eusebius. It is very true.


Theophilus. In what place then are those souls? Thou wylt not say that they
are The Limb.
in the Limb? For according to your own doctrine that same of the fathers is
empty, and as touching the other there goes none thither but the little
children that be borne dead, for whom you do no more pray, then for the
dampened? For you hope no more that they can come out from thence, (...) more
the^ tho dampened can come from hell. Wherefore there rests no more but
Purgatory. Now Purgatory
if those souls are in Purgatory, it must be that they have some solace,
and some light, as in Paradise: or otherwise, wherefore do they pray, that
those souls do not fall into the obscure and dark places, if they be there
already? We will yet come again unto my first matter: and thou shall be
compelled to confess that Paradise and Purgatory is all one thing: Or that you
do pray for the Saints and Saints of Paradise, and for those which are at
rest: or at the leastwise, that the souls which are already tormented in
Purgatory, may yet fall more deeper into hell and y^ dark places. And so by
that reason, they are yet in danger of dampnation, which is contrary to your
own doctrine.


Hilarious. I am greatly estonished, friend Theophilus, what reason you can
find out of all reason: and what certeintie you search, besides the word of
God, which is only certain? What foundation shall you find in dreams? For
all that that they say and do touching the dead, and all their doctrine, what
other thing is it but dreams and lyinges? which have neither spirit nor
judgment. Is not that a Theology altogether come of the Panims? for of all
those things have they learned any one syllable of Jesus Christ? Wherefore, I
would, since that they will not follow but their own fantasy, the opinions of
men, and of the Idolaters, and that they have no regard of the holy
Scriptures, that they would not at the leastwise only follow the evil, but
also the Three kinds of righteousness after Plato.
good, that they have taught. Plato that great and worthy Philosopher, has set
forth three kinds of righteousness: The one toward God: an other toward
men, and the third toward the dead. But these here do neither regard God
nor men ye be alive, but have converted all their care upon the dead: not for
the love of them, but for the love of themselves. Wherefore you must not
think, that they have done this, for any zeal of righteousness for to
render unto them their duty.


Theophilus. I desire gladlye, that they and all the Christians, would acquit
them in such sort that one may say that which the Scripture witnesses of
Ruth Ruth and Booz Ruth. 2. d. 20
and of Booz, and to give unto them such praise. For it witnesses, that they
have showed mercy on the dead. Works of mercy toward the dead.


But how? was it in bestowing their goods to bury them pompeously and making a
great many of Ceremonies about their buryall? They have not learned to do so
by August. de ciui dei li. 1. ca. 12. 13. que. 2. c any ma. 4. sent. did. 45
c. de pompit. The profit of the burial.
the word of God. For as Saint Augustine says, also it is written in the
decrees themselves, and in the Master of the sentences. That all these things,
to wit, the travail and labor that they bestow upon the funerals, the
beautifying of their buryall, the pomp of the exequics and buryals, are more
to comfort those that be alive, then for to aid the dead. If the precious and
costly buryall profits Virgil. Facilis iactura sepulera.
any thing the wicked, the vile and contemptible buryall shall hurt the good,
or if he do remain unburied. That rich man of whom Jesus Christ speaks off,
had Comparison of the rich and of Lazarus. Luc. 16. c. 19
a great number of servants, and courtisans clothed in purple, and sumptuous
apparaile, who made for him most excellent funerals, and buried him very
costly to al men's sight: But the Ministering of the Angels made a great Luca.
li. 9. phras. aternus anima^ colligit in orbs. Non illue auro positi nec thure
sepults perueniunt.
deal more noble before the face of the Lord that of the poor beggar, whom
they carried not to be buried: But carried it into Abraham's bosom. Behold
the words of S. Augustine, who declares unto us that we must not despise the
dead bodies, and deny unto them their buryall, for to testify and witness
the hope that we have of the resurrection, and that we should esteem them no
less then a ring or a badge which they have left unto us, the which we would
gladly hide and keep for the love of them. Also we ought not to think, that
the faithful can be in nothing of less strength, and to receive any hurt
before God, when they abide unburied, as it oftentimes chauused, as it is
written: The dead bodies of thy servant Psa. 79. a. 2 Luca. li. 6 phars.
Nihil agis hac tra, tales ne cadauera saluat. An rogus haud resert. Placido
natura receptat. Cuncta suni and post capit omnia tellus. (...) Quae genuit
coelo igitur qui non habet vina^
have they given unto ye souls of the Air to be devoured: and the flesh of
thy Saints unto the beasts of the land. Their blood have they shed like
water on every side of Jerusalem, and there was no man to bury them. But yet
nevertheless although that those things seem to be hard and cruel yet
notwithstanding before the face of the Lord, the death of his Saints are
precious The Panims themselves that have had any understanding were not much
careful of the buryall: although that many superstitious Idolaters have
thought that it brings great hurt, unto those that have not been buried. Now
even as the cost which is done about the dead bodies for their buryalles
profits less unto them, then to any other: As much may we think and judge
of all the suffrages and cost that is done for them after their death and
burial, as Saint Augustine does playnelye declare, upon this place of the
Plalmes. They call their lands after their own August in psalm 94. cone. 1.
The benquettee for the dead.
names. What is that? They bring (says he,) breads and wine unto the graves
and call it there the name of the dead. How much or how often do thou
think, that the name of that rich man has been called upon afterward,
when men were dronken in remembringe him, and one drop of cold water did not
discende to quench his hot tongue? Men do serve their bellye, and not the
souls of their parents and friends. There comes nothing unto the souls of
their dead, but that which they have done with them being alive. But if
beeinge To do good during our life.
alive, they have done nothing with them, there comes nothing unto the dead.
What reproach had the men which understood not what they should do with their
riches, when they lived, and which did think that they should be blessed, if
they had a memorial in a Tomb of marble stone, as an eternal house: or if
their parents and friends, unto whom they shall leave their goods, do call
their lands after their names: But on the contrary, they ought to prepare for
themselves an everlasting house, in good works. They ought to prepare for
themselves the immortal life, Preparation for the departure out of this life.
to send ye cost and charges before them, to follow their works to have good
regard of their needy co^paignion, to give unto him with whom they do walk,
not to despise Jesus Christ, to wit, his poor members, lying full of botches
and sores before the gate, who has said: Inasmuch as you have done Mat. 25. d.
40.
it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it to me. Does not
here Saint Augustine clearly say, that man must do his good deeds and
almose, not unto ye sat Moonks and Priests, but to the poor members of Jesus,
whilst ye he is here in the way? For after ye he shall be out of this world,
the good deds and almose ye their parents and friends do bestow of their
riches, profits them nothing at all. Whereto also Hierome in Esa of
Forgiveness in this world
agrees ye which S. Hierome speaks off, saying: he which shall not obtein
pardon of his sins, whilst ye he lives in this body, and shall so depart this
life, he perishes to god and leaves to be: Although ye be do make himself
subject to pains. By those dronken bankets of whch Saint Augustine speaks
off, we may sufficiently understand what was the custom of the Panims, which
for an affection that they did bear unto their parents and friends, and for a
desire that they had, and also for a pomp and glory, have dedicated some
Days dedicated to the dead. Neeysia. Lunata. Euagismata. Ceterismata.
Terchismata. Triacas. Parentationes. Nouendialia Demealia. Ratio diui off. de
off. pro mort Rub. 7.
of them, the third, the seventh, ninth or tenth day, others the thirty or
forty day, for to make remembrance for the dead, and to offer for them and
make feasts and bankets. And have not ordained those days without putting
superstition to the number of them. And yet nevertheless, we do see that the
Christians altogether and wholly have followed that manner of dooinge, as it
appears both by their practice, and also by the book of Durand: Although
that Saint Ambrose and others after him have made Sermons and decrees, against
that custom, the which notwithstanding could not be so clean taken away and
abolished, but that that superstito^ continues almost every where. For men do
The seventh days and the year minds.
celebrate the seventh day, tenth day, anwersaries or year minds with great
bankets and pleasures, as it appears by the canons and decrees, in which it
is written after this sort. No Priest shall in any wise presume to be
droncken Did. 44. ex co^cilio Nauente^si. Nullus. A lesson for the Priests.
Quaffing for bidden.
when he comes to the year mind, or to the trentenarie, or to the seventh
day, or ternary of any office for the dead, or to any contraire or
brotherhoode: And that he drink nor quaffe when he shall he desired for
the love and in the name of the Saints, or for the love of the soul of him
that is dead, nor that he do not also compel others to drinike: and that he
do not play the Gluttony.
glutton and fill himself to much with good cheer at the request of an
other: And that he presume not to rehearse and recyte iestes and unlawful
scoffinges, plays and vain fables: nor by any means to singe: And Maskes
and Morrishes.
that he suffer not that one should make before him vile games and toys, and
that he consent not that one should bring before him false visages and
maskes of Dyuelles. For that is dyabolicall, and forbiden of the holy Canons.
We may well understand by that decree of the counsel, what honesty the
Priests and Christians have kept in such bankets, since that they must make
laws by the counsels, and wherein they differed from the Panims. Wherefore
if the good ancient fathers have made any memory of the dead, it was after
that sort and manner, as we have already spoken off, and for to abolysh by
that means the superstitious fashions of the Panims, and to change them to
better manners, since that they cannot pluck them away altogether. For if such
religion was pleasinge unto God, it was marvel, that God did not as well
ordain, God has not instituted feasts nor sacrafices for the dead.
certain feasts, sacrifices and ceremonies, for the dead, as he has done in
all other things, and many, which seem not to be so necessary, as those here
do esteem the offering for the dead, whom they do grieve more, then any
commandment that God has ever given. If that were comprised in the love that
we owe unto our neighbor, how could the spirit of God hold his peace, Jesus
Christ and saint Paul his Apostle, who have so much strove against it, and
commanded love toward our neighbor, and have not once spoken any word to
make prayers, almost nor sacrifices for the dead? If that same had been
necessary, and according to the will of God, why would they have more hidden it
from us then any other thing? how can that which Jesus Christ and also his
Apostles have said be true, that they have declared and manifested unto us all
the will of God? Do we not then unto them great injury, to make that a
commandment of love and charity of which they have never spoken off? But I
am not abashed sith that almost in all other things the Priests do follow
the Panims, and the Jews the Mosoycall Ceremonies, abolyshed by Jesus Christ,
how they have not followed them in this matter, and that they do not absteyne
to come near the dead, and to assist them at their buryalles, as the ancient
Priests of the law, unto whom GOD has forbidden it. For if they would be
Jews, and follow them in older thinaes, they ought also to follow them in
this, or to yield a reason, wherefore they follow them in one thing, and not
in an other. Wherein the Priests do follow y^ Jews and Panims



Hilarious. they had rather to follow the Gentyles and Panims in this behalf:
For their Ceremonies and superstytions do bring unto them more profit, the
which they follow, notwithstanding they are nothing worth, as I have
already said. Wherefore I think that they would have made to others, a law
gathered out of all that which was evil and wicked.


Theophilus. It is then easelye to be understood by all those things that
the praise that Neomi did Ruth. 1. b. 8 Ruth. 2. d. 20
give unto Ruth, saying: The Lord deal as kindlye with you, as ye have
dealte with the dead: And unto Booz in like manner, praysinge him for that he
has kept for the dead that same grace and lyberalytie, as he did unto the
living, regarding not the Masses, prayers, songs and sacrifices which they
have done for them: But the love and charity that they have showed toward
the parents and friends of the dead that be living. Wherefore the holy
Scripture declares what mercy we ought to have of the dead, and what good
deeds God requires of us for them. The prayers, offerings and good deeds,
that What good deeds God requires for the dead.
Ruth, that good wydowe, did make for her husband that was dead: was, that she
kept company, faith and loyalty with Noemi her Mother in law, her husbands
mother. A poor widow both of husband and children as she hirselfe Ruth and
Noemi
was, she comforted her in her afflictions and adversities: And nourished,
cherished and loved her, and was attendaunt upon her in her old age, as though
she had been her own The good deeds done unto the dead by Booz.
mother. In like manner the grace and love that Booz has also kept and done
unto the sons of Noemi as well to those that were dead as to those ye be
living, that is, that even as during their life, he has exercised love and
charity toward them in cherising and comfortinge them, the like affection
has he kept toward them after they were dead. And when he could no more
aid and succor them, and that they had no more need of him, he has
declared his love that he did bear unto them, toward the wydowes, mothers
and wives, of whom he has had pity and compassion, and has hulpen them
both in body and goods, procuring with all his power the honor and profit
both of the one Ruth. 4. c. 10
and of the other, until he did take to wise that poor widow Ruth the
Moabite, which was y^ graundmother of David, Mat. 1. 3. 3
and her remembrance is celebrated with the same of Booz her husband, in the
gonealogy of Jesus Christ. Wherefore we may know, how much the work both
of the one and of the other has pleased God, and what remembrance we ought to
have of the dead.


Thomas. I do find that to be the best way, to bestow and give the almose
unto the poor widows and fatherless children (for that is the true Religion)
then for to take their goods and bestow them upon the dead, or to waste and
consume them upon bawdes and harlots, and upon their children in like manner.


Hilarious. I warrant you they will not follow any good example, nor the
certain commandment of God, but what do they follow in this matter? When I
have well read over and over again all the holy Scripture, I do not find one
word. And the most auncientest that I can find which did first bring in
those manner of doings among the The Authors and institutors of ye fun^ralls
Pluto. Diedo Aeneal Virg. Aene. 5 Ovid. Fast. 2. 5 Romulus. Plutar. in Romulo.
Panims, was Pluto: of whom we will speak off hereafter, whom the Docts and
the Panims have made the God of the souls: and the king of the dead, and of
hell. After him came Aeneas, who did bring that custom into Italy. After
Aeneas, Romulus and Numa the Kings of the Romans: afterward our Popes, who
have continued, augmented and confirmed still more and more those errors and
abuses. Although that the Panyms had yet a certain better opynion in the
same, then our superstitious Papystes had. For they did not make the
sacryfices for the dead, for the estymation that they had, that that should
serve them for to deliver them from pains, but for to appease them, to the
end that their spirits should not hurt them and do them evil, if they had
displesed them when they were alive. For Plato himself who has been the one
of the chiefest forgers and Plato de repub li. 12. After death the parents and
friends can do uothuig.
inuenters of Purgatory, witnesses plainly, that the parents and friends
cannot profit y^ dead. And therefore (says he) ye parents, friends and
kinsslolkes ought to admomshe their friends that they do live well and
honestly, and to do presently unto them that good. For there (to wit) after
this life, they cannot give it the^. And before the judgment seat there shall
not be any great company of parents and friends which shall maintain and
defend and entreat y^ Judge, and which can obtain of him, that he will
pardon thee.


Theophilus. I would to God that all our divines bad no more evil and wicked
opinions then that panim, touching the doings of the dead, and that they had
said noe sentence less to be credited then this.


Thomas. If ye panims did not mean y^ their sacrifices and commemoration
should profit the dead, wherefore did they it then.


Hilarious. It might be that they did think, that there might retourr^ unto
them some little profit: But yet nevertheless their chief intent and purpose
was to appease the souls of the dead and to reconcile them unto them by that
means, to the end they should not hurt them, either in their bodies or goods:
even as they have accustomed to celebrate scasts and to do sacrifices unto the
souls of holy men, whom they did think to be in heaven with the gods, for to
have aid and solace, as Aeneas did unto his Father Diverse sacrili^ces for ye
dead, for diverse causes
Anchises. And all that error proceeded, from the false opinion that they had
of the souls, and for want of knowing their nature and estate, therefore they
judged after their own sense and understanding, and not after the word of God.
As they do also of the bodies, thinking (at the least the most supersticyous,
as it has been already touched) that the soul does walk a certain time, if
their bodies has not bad y^ honor of ye burial, such as apertameth and was
Virg. Aene. 5
meet for them: And that the bodies were in danger of Enchantors and
sorcerers, which would abuse them through their Nycromancic and coniuration. And
the Hebrewe The opinion of the Rabius and Doctors of ^ae levvs touching the
body The dwell A^izel. Ge^. of. 3. d 14 Esa. ^5. d. 24
Rabins, and doctors of the Jews, and in no less dreaming. For they say, that
the dead body is left in the power of the devil, who calls him self Zazell,
and do wrest and turn those places of the scripture, for to confirm their
error, unto whom it is said unto the Serpent: Thou shall eat of the earth
all the days of thy life. And in another place. The earth shall be the Serpents
meat. They would conclude by those words, that the body of man, and all that
which is in the flesh, and the vices therein, is given for meat to the
Serpent, whom they do call Azazell, lord of the flesh and the blood, and
Prince of that world, saying that he is also called in Leuiticus the Prince of
ye deserts. Since then that our body is created and made of the slime Genes. 2.
a.
and dust of the earth, and that the earth is given for meat unto the serpent,
they conclude thereby, that our bodies are subject unto him, and in his power,
until such time as they be sanctified, and that the earthly flesh be
transformed and changed into a spiritual nature. And therefore say The
foundation of the prayers for the dead
they that that body has need both in his burial, and whilst that he is in
this earth, to be purified and sanctified through prayers sacrifices,
encensements, exorcismes, coniurations, and other ceremonies fit for the same.


Theophilus. Durand in that book, wherein he yeldeth Daran Radiui. off. li. 7.
Rub. de off. promort. Reisersperg. Sermo do^inic 23. post trinit. and 24. and
feri. 7.. sest prasent. B. Mar. and don 1. ^duent. and fers. 4 fest. S. Andr
The use of holy water at the burials
the reason of all the popish ceremonies, speaking of the office and burying of
the dead, allegeth the same reasons, and almost nothing differs from the
Jews and Cabalistes. Wherein we may well know that the supersticious
christians follow more the Jewish and Cabalisticall doctrine, then the
Christian and Apostolical doctrine. For Durand himself is compelled to
confess, that the bodies of the dead are encensed and sprinkled with holy
water, not to that end that they are purged and delivered from their sins,
which could not then by such things, be defaced and put out: But to the end
that the wicked spirits, and their presence should be driven away. And
therefore says he that in some places, they do put of the the holy water into
the tomb or grave, with the fire and encense, and that the holy water is put
there, to the e^de that the devil should not come near, for he does fear it
very much.


Hilarious. It has been well declared and proved by Friar Gyles that holy
Cordelier, unto whom the devil appeared A fable of a Cordelier, li. co^form^.
so terrible, that he could not speak for fear. And as the devil came upon
him and grieved him much, Friar Giles could not arise, but did creep as well
as he could unto a vessel wherein was holy water, wherewith he sprinkled
himself: and was incontinently delivered from that fear that the devil did
unto him.


Theophilus. Behold a good proof: the holy water has then more virtue and
power then Jesus Christ, and the faith in him: or else that Friar Gyles had no
faith, which is The faith. Ephe. 6. c. 16
the buckler and shield, wherewith the Apostle teaches us to resist the
devil. I do much marvel where God has commanded to drive away the devil
by water, and when To drive away the devil, by water
the true servants of God have used such weapons aginste the devil.


Hilarious. At the leastwise they must provide for him a boat if they would
drive him away by water,


Theophilus. When the witness of the scripture fails it must needs be, that
those masters of ceremonies have then recourse unto fables. But for to return
again unto the reasons of Durand, he adds moreover, that in what soever
place the christians shall be buried out of the churchyard, they ought to set
always a cross at his head. For the devil does fear very much that sign,
and dares not to The some of the Cross.
come nigh the place, where he sees the cross.


Hilarious. That is because that the earth which is out of the church yard, is
not coniured. Whereby it has not so much virtue. And therefore in recompense,
they do ad y^ cross, for to drive away ye devil.


Theophilus. For y^ same cause do they also conjure y^ earth of y^ churchyard.
For as they The hattayle of the D^^ll against the dead bodies.
do witness and affirm, ye devils have used to get the^ unto the dead bodies,
and to exercise their cruelty and vengeance against them, and enforce
themselves to do unto them, at the least wise after that they are dead that
which they could not do whilst they were alive. Furthermore, they
Reisersperg. Sermi de mor. ^^t dominie. piniqua. Mat. 22. h. 21.
say that at the day of judgment, our Lord Jesus Christ will say unto them
that present themselves unto him, that which be answered unto the disciples
of the Herodians, and Pharisees when they asked of him the question of the
tribute, and that they had showed unto him the money and Image of Caesar. Even
so will he say unto those: whose is this Image? what money is this? Then those
which shall be marked with the cross, shall be known to be good christian money:
And Jesus Christ will say: that which is Cesars, that is to say, unto the
devil, give it him and that which is unto God, give it to God.


Hilarious. I am abashed if the devil dares carrye away those which have made
upon them the sign of the material cross, especially the priests and
moonks, which are all hyd and covered with them? Are not these goodly reasons,
and most worthy of such divines?


Eusebius. Yea, those are Godly reasons, what will you say to the contrary? do
ye think that so many wise men which have been in the church have not well
considered the causes, wherefore they ought to do that? And that it has not
ben ordained without good and just reason?


Theophilus Thou have heard them, and thou have also the Jews, Cabalists and
Panyms, for to be the first authors of them. But those dreams are yet more
tolerable, and worhty of pardon then those here, because that having the
brain full of false opinions, and inchauntments, they fear least the
enchauntors, Magitians, and especially the coniurers, and the devil with them,
should abuse their bodies, through their enchau^tments necromances and
witchcraft. But what excuse or color can the christians have, who ought to be
assured of their salvation in Jesus Christ, as well for the body as for the
soul, using such ceremonies, which I may truly call charms inchauntements,
and magical supersticions and purifications, and not euangelical. For although
that the earth has been given for meat to the serpent and that our bodies are
taken of the earth, how will God permit and suffer, that that old serpent,
shall defile 1. Cor. 6. 1. 19
those bodies which have been the Temple and habit ation of his holy ghost?
And which have been consecrated unto him, through the blood of his son Jesus
Christ, and sanctified through his spirit? have the water and the earth which
are bewitched and charmed, after the manner as the enchaunters and charmers do
their exorcisms and coniurations and a corruptible and a material cross, more
virtue then the consecration of our bodies and souls, which Jesus
Consecration of Jesus Christ.
Christ the great and sovereign Bishop and eternal Priest, has done by his
blood and the lively water of his holy spirit, and the baptism that we have
received in his name? And if we as good christians have borne the cross with
him, that is to say, the troubles and adversities of this world, in all
patience, and have put all our hope and trust in the merit of his death and
passion, rejoicing our selves only in his cross, as the holy apostle says we
ought not to doubt but that that faith, has imprinted such a cross and
such a sign and mark in our hearts and bodies, ye the devil dares not to
approach nor come nigh them. And if that same is not sufficient, there is none
other after To hear the cross of Christ. Mat. 16. d. 24. Luc. 14. ^. 27
our death, which can serve us. Furthermore since that God has given unto us
his Angels, for to serve, keep and defend us, let us not fear, that as they
have ca^ted the soul of Lazarus, into Abraham's bosom, and have kept and
defended the body of Moses from the power of the devil, and Gal. ^. d. 14
did strive and fight for it against them, but that they will be Stigmatos. The
Angels ye ministers of the faithful. Psa. 91. c. 11 Lue. 16. e. 22. Heb. 1.
d. 14. Epist Jude. b. 9. The body and burial of Moses Deuteronomy. 34. b. 6
also assisting unto all true faithful people, for to keep their bodies and
souls, according to the charge and commission that they have of God and that
God himself would bury them rather, as he has buried Moses, then to suffer
that Satan should have domination or rule over them. Wherefore I do greatly
fear, that the bodies and relics which the idolatrous christians do
worship, and honor under the name and title of the saints, and saints, are
not The holy body and relics.
the true bodies and relics of the Saints and true servants of God, but
rather those of some malefactory or wicked man and abominable before God. For
it ever any bodies were left under the power of the old Serpent, and of the
Devil, those be they, of whom men have made Idols, and which have been set up
for relics for to be adored and worshipped, and which have been the occasion
among the Christian people of the greatest Idolatry ye ever was in ye world.
Wherefore it is most lykest to be true, that the devil makes himself to be
worshipped and honored by the bodies in which he dwelled, and of which he was
served during their life, then in those which have been the Temple of the
living God, and which have served to his honor and glory, forsaking altogether
the devil and his service. The Jews and Cabalysts have esteemed those
purifications and ceremonies about the dead, of which we have spoken, to be
necessary to their bodies because that the Magicians and coniurers have used to
steal them Coniurers
away, or to take certain members from them for to serve for their
witchcraftes and to make them instruments of the devil: as it appears by the
witness of many ancient writings and historyes. Lucanus Phars. li. 6.
Erichtho the Sorcerer The custom of Theslaly. Apul. in asini. aur. li. 2.



Hilarious. Lucan declares it very plainly, describing the Witchcraftes and
Sorceryes of Erichtho. For that same cause the custom was in Thessalia the
which has always had the name to be full of Enchaunters, Witches and
Coniurers, that when any man was dead, a certain Seriaunt or common Heralde
cried with a loud voice in the open street, that if there were any man which
would keep a dead body let him come forth and bargain and agree for the
price?


Thomas. Wherefore did they so? have the dead bodies in Thessaly used to run
away? or whether they were more dangerous then in other countries. Mortui non
mordent. Percius. in pertam rig. dos calces eaten dit.



Hilarious. Thou may well know, that the dead bodies can no more byte any
man, and that they are in an evil case, for to run away since ye they must be
carried to be buried, their seete stretched out right before.

But I think that thou have not forgotten that which we have spoken of the
Panyms, how that they do not bury their dead by and by, and the causes
wherefore And therefore the Thessalians, used to keep their dead all the night,
until the day that they burned their bodies, and buried Apul. in Asini. li. 2.
Sagae mulieres, ora mortuorum passim demorsicant: ea quae sunt illis artis
Magicae supplementa Imo vero etia^ muscas indunt.
their ashes, because they had that opinion, that the sorcerers did come in the
night and did byte their faces, and dismember them, for to serve them for their
enchauntements and witchcraftes: and for to do the same, they transform and
change them selves into the form and likeness of what beast they list:
sometime into ye likeness of birds, some time like dogs, or myce: yea into the
likeness of very flies: and afterward do fly and come into the houses and
enter so subtly and secretly that none cane perceive it. And when they are
entered within, they through their enchauntements do make those that keep them
fall into a sleep, afterward they do unto the dead bodies what it pleases
them. For that cause the parents and frinds of the dead, did hire keepers, for
a piece of money, for to watch all the night by the dead body, without
sleeping any thing at all, not so much as to wink, or to turn their face here
and there, but to have their eyes always fixed upon the dead body. After that
they have found out keepers, which will take upon them that charge, they
deliver the body unto them in charge, having witnesses how they have delivered
it all whole and sound afterward they shut them into a chamber, with the dead
body, and a lamp full of Oil, for to give them light until the morning, and
water within vessels. And if he that Quicquid inde decaptum dimi nutumque
juerit id omne de facie sua desectu^, sarcire compellitur.
keeps it do not take good heed of the body the next day whatsoever is
wanting or diminished of ye dead body that he has evil and negligently kept,
he is bound to restore and recompense it of his own proper face.


Thomas. These people were very fools to believe such follyes. Who has
written the same.


Hilarious. A good doctor called Apuleus, which says that he has done that
office himself.


Thomas. Truly thou have very well found it. Peradventure he has seen the
same, whilst that he was changed into an Ass. To vvate^h the dead.



Hilarious. I do confess, that the same is a great dreaming: But do not the
christians almost the like? do not they also watch the dead bodies with a
candle and holy water? Are they afraid that they would run away, or least the
Cattes or Mice should come and gnawe the feet and the face of the dead? or
whether they are afraid of witches and coniurers? or that the devil should
carry them away, as one has written of some, whose bodies are not yet town?
if God has given power unto the devils over the dead bodies: the water,
candles, fire nor incense, shall not make them afraid, nor yet the
witchecraftes and coniurations, except they will say, that they do use charm
against charm, and that theirs is more stronger then those of the enchauntors.


Theophilus. It is not now need, that they take such pains, for to drive
away the devils or the socerers from them. For their was never forcerer,
coniurer nor enchauntor, that abused more vile and shamefully the bodies of
men, nor to the greater dishonor of God and hurt of all the Christianity,
then the Priests and Moonks, who in stead of the coniuring, that is to say,
divination by ye dead that the Panyms and Infidels have exercised and used,
they have set up and erected a necrolatrie, that is to say, an Coniuring.
adoration and worshipping of the dead, and the most greatest Idolatry that
ever was upon the earth: And have made the bodies of men to serve ye devil,
and have made him to be worshipped, under the name and title of them, even as
Saul worshipped him under the name of Samuel, by the Necrolatrie
means of his old witch. Is not that a great blasphemy and sacrilege, to
offer and consecrate unto the devil the bodies of men, whom Jesus Christ has
dedicated and consecrated Saul. 1. Reg. 18. a. 7. A vvitch
to God through his blood, for to be the Temple of the holy Ghost, not for to
be Idols, that men should worship them, instead of God? we may very well say,
that these bodies of which Satan is served under the title The bodies of dead
men in the steed of the Idols of the Panims
of the relyckes of saints, after the manner as he was ierued before of the
Images and Idols of the panims, have not been well coniured by the charms,
witchings, cross, candells, encense and holy water for to drive the Devil
from them: or else ye all those things were nothing worth since that Satan has
had such power upon them, that he has let them to return unto the place
which God has assigned them, to wit, into the earth out of which Genes. 3 d,
19 Epist. Jude. b. 9.
they came, and that he has done that that he pretended to do about the body
of Moses, the which he desired to set up for an Idol among the people of
Israel, knowing that Exo. 20. a, 4 Deuteronomy. 5, a. 6
God has forbidden Images and Idols. And there is no doubt, but that he had
brought it to pass, if God by the ministering of his Angels, had not let
him, and showed The burial of the Saints
his virtue and power, not through material crosses, holy water, candells and
torches, encense and lyghts, and other like supersticions, the which Moses had
not at his buryall nor all the Patriarchs, Pruphetes, and Apostles, nor yet of
Prayers, Suffrages, nor Sacrifices, after their death, and yet they were
nevertheless delivered from the power of the serpent.


Hilarious. You forgette the principal, you speak not of the habit of Saint
Fraunces which has yet more virtue The virtue of S, Frau^ces habit
then all that which you have declared and spoken off, if we will believe and
give any credit unto the Cordeliers and Nonnes. For it does not only drive
away the devils which are about the body, but also it quenches the fire of
Purgatory, and mitigateth the pains, especially if that he which has clad
himself with it do dye upon Saint Fraunces day. But which is more, it
delyuereth The feast of Saint Fraunces.
from eternal death, as the Cordeliers do witness of the king of Castilia,
which was delivered, because yt being The king of Castilia Most horrible
blasphemy. The selicitie of the lyce and their boldness
ready to dye he did put on him yt holy garment, and dyed in the same: and
as well of other Kings and Queens, of whom mention is made of them in ye book
of ye conformities. Whrfore I esteem ye lice the most happiest creatures of
all others, according to the Theology of the Cordeliers. For there dies a
great number of them within that holy habit. Wherefore Friar Jews did no
wrong, in calling them the pearls of the poor. But I do much marvel of one
thing, yt the Lyce are more bolder then the Devils, since that the Devils do
so much fear that holy habit that they dare not approach and come nighe, and
the Lyce lodge there at their ease. I should well believe that if the Devils
were as fearful as the young children, that they should be greatly afraid
of that habit and mask at the beginning, when they did see men so wildely
disguysed. And I think, that if Ortis the kings Ortis a Moore
Moore, had been the first that had dyed in that habit, that they would have
had great fear. For he was as black as a Devil, and disguysed as a
Cordelier, wherefore they would have found the same very strange.


Thomas. But I am wonderfully abashed, wherefore they put rather a cross in the
hands of those which dye in the habit of Saint Fraunces, then in the hands of
poor simple people, who are buried only in a sheet.


Hilarious I can give unto thee none other reason, but that I think that the
same is done by the permission and providence of God, which will that men
should do unto them honor, as they customally do unto the evil and wicked
men, when they are executed through Justice, unto which in many places and
countries, they make him to bear a cross in his hands, chiefly the
Sorcerers and Heretics. Wherefore men do not very great wrong unto those
Idolaters which do put their affiaunce and What does the cross signify
vhich is beciven ye hands of those which do dye in the habit of Saint Fraunces
trust in an old rotten garment, to compare them unto the Sorcerers and
Heretics, rather then to the poor simple people, since that they have
declared themselves more Infidells then the other, and that they have less
faith and hope in the merit of the death and passion of Jesus Christ.


Eusebius. Wherefore do thou speak so outragiously, since that the most
honest and wise men and which are most esteemed in this world, have desired
to dye in that habit?


Theophilus. So much the more ought we to fear most, seeing that the
efficacy and strength of Satan The efficacy of Satan.
has been so great, that the most wysest men of the world, and those which
are accounted for good and virtuous men, have been deceived through such
opinions, and are fallen into such blasphemies, the which yet those wicked
Moonkes are not ashamed to uphold and maynteyne. For what blasphemy was ever
greater The blasphemy of the cordelier
upon the earth, as to to attribute unto such a Mask, the health and
salvation of souls, and to make an Idol and new Christ, not only of Saint
Fraunces, but also of his hoode and habit? Whereas in deed I do not think,
that he was ever disguysed in such sort, and that he has been the author of
those blasphemies, of which under his name and title all the world has been
filled and poisoned, through the means and practice of those false brethren
the Cordeliers, which have been the Trompette and Bagpipe of satan The bagpipe
of Satan.
throughout all Christendom, together with their other companions. But to
what end does that habit profit the dead? It may serve for those that be
living for a gown, hose, bonet and hoode, for to cover and keep them from the
cold.


Hilarious. You do yet forgette the chiefest. For it serves also unto the
Moonkes, for to show that they The vtlliue of the habit
are effeminated, and worthy to be taken for women, although that by their
works, they sufficiently declare themselves not to be women, and that men do
not call them father, without good cause. Yet nevertheless me thinks they
are repugnaunt to the Scripture which forbids men to put on woemens
raiment, nor the The disguising of men like women. Deuteronomy 22. a. 5
woeman that which pertayneth unto the man. And yet nevertheless, he which
shall consider and mark well their apparayle, they are lyker woemens apparayle
then men's, as well those which they commonly wear, as the vestements which they
do use in their Masses.


Theophilus. I grant unto thee all that: but to what end serves it to the
dead? First of all what profit can it bring unto the soul? For it cannot
touch it, cloathe, nor cover it, nor yet descend into Purgatory with it.

The body also goes neither into purgatory nor into hell, but is buried in the
earth, until the day of the resurrection. For then the habit shall be clean
rotten, and I do not believe that it shall arise with the body, and that those
which are dead in the same, shall arise again clothed in a Cordelier. For it
shall not be then time to make maskes and dance the morish. There is neither
the habit of Fraunces, Dominicke, nor of any Moonke whatsoever he be, nor any
thing that man can muent and dream, which can serve us any thing before the
face of that great Judge The judgment of God. The leanes of ye Fig tree of
Ada^. Genes. 3. ^. 7
of the quick and of the dead, no more then the Fig leanes served Adam for to
cover him before him, but that he will see all our filthiness and
abominations, if they he not covered and hid with the righteousness and
innocence of Jesus Christ. Wherefore if we will appear clothed and not naked
before his majesty, it must be that he himself do cut out and make the
apparayle and habit, wherewith we must be clothed, as he did make unto Adam
Adams apparel
and and Eve. And therefore we must follow the counsel of the Apostle, who
exhorts us to put off the old man, and to put on, not y^ habit of Fraunces
or Dominicke, but our Lur Lord Jesus Christ. For that is an habit which The
habit of Christ and of the relygious Christians Ephe. 4. ^. 22 Collo, 3, b. 10.
serves both to the body and to the soul, and which delyuereth from ye
judgment of god. That is the holy water, the lights, bells, sencings and
candells, which delyuereth our bodies and souls from the power of the serpent,
whose head he has broken. That is the water of life, Genes. 3. c 15 John. 4.
b. 14
which rayseth us unto eternal life: which washes and makes clean our
consciences. That is the true fire of Purgatory, and furnayce in which the
old Adam is melted and made new, and the new man purged from all his
filthynesse and simes. Wherefore I do give counsel unto you all, that you
take good heed that such treasure be not stolen from you, and that you trust
not to the good deeds which those that be alive shall do for you after that
you are dead: But that you do put your trust in Jesus Christ, and declare
and show forth the virtue and efficacy of your faith, through charity and
good works, which do serve to the glory of God, to the edyfiyng of his
Church, and the vtilytie of our neighbor, and that you follow the example of
the true servant of God, and the doctrine which the holy Ghost by them has
given unto us, not the Gentiles and Panims, and the false pyophets and
seducers, which have altogether turned vpside down the Christian Religion, and
have converted it, not only into Iewishnes, but also into panimrie, witchcraft,
and sorcertee.


Eusebius. You have spoken as it pleases you: but I must needs auniswere you.
For if you dispute and plead all alone, you may easily win the victory.


Hilarious. We desire none other thing then to hear thy reasons but we have
forgotten one of the princiyall points. For we have not yet demanded of Thomas
the cause wherefore he would go to saint Patricke: the which I desire glady to
know.


Thomas. I have determined with my self many times to tell you: but I desire,
to hear first what Eusebius can say against you. Wherefore I do think it
best that forasmuch as all these days, there is none of us which is so greatly
occupied but that we may give him the next day for his revenge, to answer:
And after that I have heard all you, I will declare unto you y^ meruaylous
fantastes which I have in my head.


Hilarious. I believe, that there is none of us, but that he is of that opinion.


Theophilus. In steed where others do pass away the time in playing and
other vain occupations, whereoff comes no profit, I find it better, that
we use such recreations, which bring no hurt unto any man, but may much serve
and profit us. For in so doing we learn the one the other: and do examine
the things together, the better to know how to render a reason of our Law and
Religion: besides that we learn some honest recreation together, the which is
better agreeing with our estate, then to remain idle without doing any thing,
or in losing the time in beholding foolysh plays and maskes: or in banketting
and in bestowing great expenses, yet to the hurt and domame of our bodies and
souls: or unto sleeping, and as beasts to give our selves only unto
pleasures, as many do. And although that all we may be occupied in other
men's affairs, either public or domestical, which would better serve for
the pursse and for the particular gain and profit: yet nevertheless one cannot
be always atte^tife in great affairs, without having some intermission and
relaxation of the spirit: And we must not be so covetous after the gain and
the particular profit, that at no time we should have leisure to speak and
falke of the things of God, and that through honest pleasures and recreations,
we may not refresh our wits and spirits, and prepare them again to the great
affairs to which God has called us all, according to the grace that we have
received of him.


Thomas. There is nothing more certain then that which thou say, and I would
not for a great thing, but that I had been with you and to have heard, that
which I have heard. Hilarious. We shall know in the end what taste thou have
had therein. Yet nevertheless I do more fear least that Eusebius be more
offended then thou. But I trust notwithstanding, that the hope that he has of
the victory, will give him courage and boldness to come again the more
willyngly.


A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL matters of the first part of the Dialogues.
A.
ABuses are not yet enough uncovered and made known. fol. 16 Accipe sal
sapientae. 35. Adventurers. 47. Adams apparel. 114. Affectators of languages.
what affections the Gospel does permit. 67. Alexander the first inuentiour of
holy water. 35. Alexandrines. 66. Alexander Seuerus Emperor. 43. Ambrose and
Theodosius. 78. Ambition of Alexander. 13. Anacharsis. 5. Angels ye ministers
of the faithful. 103. Anniuer saries. 25. Antipopes and Schisutaticks. 88. Apes
requisite in ye court of Babylon. 19. Apes of Jesus Christ. 35. Apothegme of
Diogenes. 60. Applications of Jesus Christ. 34 Arithiuettcians and school of
Arithineticke. 42. Aristoxenus. 70. The art to learn priests to be sober. 39.
All arts and disciplines the handmaidens of holy letters or books. 6. Avarice
of the Romans. 41. Auernus. 90. The authors and instituters of funerals.
100.
B.
Bables of fools. 8. Bay tree. 75. Bactrianians and Hireanians. 58. Bacchus.
33. 13 Babylon taken 93. Bagpipe of Sathau. 106. Banner and the cross. 73.
Baptisine. 41. Baptisines and wasshings of the Jewish people. 34. Baptising of
bells. 73. Bathes. 45. Bathing place of the dead. 36. Battle of the devil
against dead bodies. 102. Belles and Images the Priests vicars 71. Bells do
speak all languages. 72. Bells to drive away the dwells. 73. Bellyes that are
shoughtfull. 74. Benedictio bladi, salis and ouerum. 42. Benedictio resurni.
42. Benedictio pera; and baculi. 42. Benedictio annuh and lecti. 42. Benedictio
domus nouae. 42. Benedictio casulae. 42. Benedictio ad omnia. 42. Benedictio
panis and seminum. 42. Bewtifie ye sepulchers with flowers. 45. Brernoyes. 66.
Blasphemy most horrible. 105. Blasphemy of the Cordelier. 106. The blessings of
the Missell and the Manuell of the Priests. 42. Blondus. 47. Body and burnall
of Moses. 103. Bodies of dead men in steed of the Idols of the Panims. 105.
The bones of Christ whole. 50. The book of Job dedicated to ye dead. 70. Uile
books 7. Good books despised and forbidden. 8. Books disceuering abuses. 9.
Joyful Books. Books and talks that are filthy. 9. Latin Books. 4. French
books. 4. Saint Brandon. 95 Burying of the poor in the night. 33. Bury one
before he is dead. 64. Burying of the rich. 68. Burying of Pallas. 68 Burying
of the poor. 69. Burying of the Turks. 70 Buryals of Daynts. 105. Buryall
sold. 43. Those dishonor God which do not honestly bury the dead. 67. Burying
of the Barbarians. 66. Burying of an Ass. 68. Burying of a Raven. 69. Butchery
of the Priests. 65 Bishop Tibaud. 89 Bishops the Priests bawdes. 43
C.
Calender of the Shepherds. fol. 27 The Candell that goes before. 64. Canes
sepulehrale^. 58 Sea Calves. 75. Canon of the Mass and the Alcoran forbidden
to be read. 80. Canonization 78. Canonization of Saints. 31. Capernaites. 49.
50. Carnal Gospellers. 39. The cause wherefore God does chastise us in this
world. 83. The cause wherefore the Purgatory of Jesus Christ has been unknown.
57 Cerberus the Porter of hell. 51. Chanong of Mount Faulcon. 58. Char^bdis.
91. Charon the feryman. 87. The charity of the ancient Christians. 54. The
chasticement of the father tourards the child. 84. Christ and Antechrist. 88.
The christian all in all 8. The Christian tributarye before he isborne and
after he is dead. 41. Churchyard. 67. Cicero and Catilina. 7. Cocytus. 92.
Commemoration of the dead. 77. Commemoration of Mortirs 77. Complaynt of a
Curate. 65. Comparison of the rich man and of Lazarus. 98. Comparison of the
true Priests and Physicians. 76 Coniurers. 10^. Coniuring. 104. Conjure the
time. 75. Confession. 41. Confirmation. 41. The confines of hell. 23. Consilium
Elibertinum. 53. Consecration of Jesus Christ. 103. Counsel of Demas. 13.
Counsel to worship the host. ^1. To bear y^ cross of Jesus Christ. 103 The
croyzatde. 54. Cryings of the dampened. 26. The cruelty of Pope Clement. 43 The
cruelty of the Priests toward the souls. 62. Custom of the Bigordians 45.
Custom of Thessalia. 103 Custom of the Egyptians. 77. Custom to praise the
dead. 77. Ancient custom. 70 The custom of the dead, and the serye money
of Charon. 45.
D.
Days dedicated unto the dead. 99 Dama^cenus. 96. Dangerous beggars. 55.
Darkness of the world. 1 Dathan and Abiron. 57. Daughters of the horfeleach.
52 The dead why are they called trespasses. 87 Death does mock the Priests.
65. Death bought for money. 45. Holy deceiving. 9. Decrees and Canons. 88
Delyueraunce from hell. 95 Demand tribute of the dead. 4^ Demetrians. 91.
Democritus. 20. Depart out of Egypt. 93. Diana the goddess of the Ephesians.
93. Dicearchus. 70. The Deity. 38. Difference of smnes, and the diversity of
the estates of the dead. 30. Difference between to speak evil and to speak
the truth. 53. The dykes of the fortresses of the Papists. 91. Diodorus. 77.
Diogenes. 34. 20. Disguysing of men like woeemen. 106. Discending into hell in
Sycile. 24. The description of the hill Aetna. 25. Dispensation for to eat
flesh and white meat. 43. Disputations of Ciccero. 10. To dispute with
heretics. 59. Devils visible. 26. The devil Zazel or Azazel. 101 Division of
ye infernal Cosmography. 28 Diversity of purgations 31 Diverse opinions of the
delyueraunce of Traianus. 95. The doctrinall of Alexander. 6. Doctine
Papisticall. 95 Doctrine of man mingled with the heavenly doctrine. 15.
Dodonaeum aes, dodonae lebe^es. 74 The Dormouse. 36. Drink upon the hyde to
came. 6^. To drive away the dutell by water. 102. To drive away ye dwell through
fastings and prayers. 39. The purging drogues of the Panims. 33. Dumme Dogs
and cryers. 5^.
E.
Ears delyeate and pleasant. fol. 12. To eat Jesus Christ. 49. To eat
Jacob. 50. To eat the skin and the bones 51. Egyptians at this present
time. 1 Egypt and Babylon. 2. Eloquence Apostolycall and humayn. 5. Eloquence
without the fear of god. 7. Emperors and Popes abolishing the statutes of
their predecessors. 88 Epiphanius. 74 Epicurians. 17. Eridanus. 90. Reichtho
the Sorcerer. 103. Errors of Saul. 1. Error touching the honoring and
invocation of Saints. 78 Eschines and Demosthenes. 7. The estate of the dend.
79. Aethna the hill Gibello. 24. Eurotos and Peneus. 90. Example of Eliseus. 34
Example of the Smithes. 36 Extreme unction. 42. Excommunication for money. 68
Extractors of the fifth essence. 22.
F.
Fable of the Dog and the Ass. 19 Feigned fable upon the bittory of Lazarus.
27 Fable of a Cordelier. 102. The Poetical fable of Enceladus and of the
Gyaunts. 25. Faith. 10. Fall of Angels and of men. 97. Fall of Peter. 1. Faunes
and Satyrs. 26 Fall of the Souls. 101 Fastings and prayers of the christians.
39. Feast and procession of Cyble. 74. Fasting hurtful unto those that are
subject to anger. 62. Feast of Saint Fradnces. 105 Feasto ot the dead. 24.
F^^ldes Eliseas. 32. The felicity of Lyce and their boldness. 105. The fire
insatiable. 52. Fire and water. 88. The fire begone in Purgatory. 82. The
celestial and euangely call fire. 56. The true fire of Purgatory. 56. The true
fire of Purgatory. 56. To Ash in troubled water. 92. Fishers of Christ and
Antechrist. 92. Fishers of gold and silver. 92 Fishers forsaken. 93. Fishers
of souls. 92. Flears and manglers of Latin. 5. Fleread nouercae tumulum. 6.
The flood of Christ. 91. Floudes of hell, their names and interpretaciens. 89.
Floudes of wine and milk. 89. Floudes of Paradise. 89 90. The forbidding of
Iultan ye Apostate. 16 The forbiding of books. 90. Formosus. 88. The forchead
of the Hypocrites and of the Prophets. 18. To forget God. 91. Foundation for
the poor. 70. Foundation of the faith of transubstantiation. 82 Foundations of
ye prayers for ye dead. 101 The fool counsel the wise. 2. Fountaynes of
excessive cooldenesse and heat. 26. Funus ^uneralia. 70. The furnayce of
Purgatory. 55.
G.
Ganges. fol 90. Gaudeamus of the Priests. 55 Unto whom we must give. 54. The
Geography of hell. 23. The gift of tongues and languages. 4. Gluttony. 99. God
Pluto. 55. God has not instituted sacrafices nor feasts for the dead. 99. The
true God, and that of the priests. 48 Tributary Gods and to be sold. 54. To
do good whilst we are alive. 98. Gospel publyshed unto all men. 80. Griffins
and hell Ravens. 26. Gregorianists. 79. Greeks and Latins. 77.
H.
The habit and apparel of Christ, and of the relygious Christians. 106
Harpyes. 52. Hebrus. 90. Hechelberge. 26. Hell and hell fire. 22 Hell and hell
fire are eternal. 40 Hell. 22. 29. 40. Hell in Sicily. 25 Heraclitus. 20.
Heredis sleius sub persona risus est. 65 Heritage of God. 51. Herodia. 72.
Herophiles. 70. Hydes for shoes. 65. The hills Islande and Norway. 26. The
dolorous hill in Scotland. 26. Hipocrites. 18. Hi1tory. 64. Historyes of our
time. 10. A true history of our time. 44 A true history. 81. A true history in
the year of our Lord 1538. of a Priest that was a Sorcerer, and of his
whore. 81. Holy Ghost the comforter. 92. The honor of Jesus Christ traden
under 12. The honor due unto the dead. 66. Hunters after testaments and
heritages 65.
I.
Idolatry of the Image of our Lady. fol. 74. Jesus Christ the eternal Pope.
88. Wherein the Jews do follow the Panims. Saint Ignatius. 95 Induction. 50
Infants that are borne dead. 28 Infants salted. 35. Intention to consecrate.
81. Innocation of Saints. 80. Imitation of the Panims. 34. Infatible things. 52
Judas out of hell. 95. Judgment of the Lord. 106. Jupiter Elyeins. 75.
Wherefore shall the Judgment be according to the works. 85.
K.
Those that do kill themselves. 68. King of Castille. 105 Kingdom of God. 92.
L.
Our Lady of Lausanne and her miracles. 44. The lakes and pondes of the
Papists. 89. Lady Dogs. 19. Lake without water. 89. The lakes and infernal
floudes. 88. The Pascall Lamb. 50. Lamenting or surr^wing for the dead. 67
Lamentacions of y^ prieses for y^ dead. 64 Lamenters. 66. language of the
Christians. 9 All languages good unto God. 4. Law of the Babilonians for those
that be sick. 3. Law of Numa. 38. Law of Demetrius. 70. To laugh at the Popes
cost. 20. A lesson to the Priests. 99. The leaves of ye Fig tree of Adam. 106
The Legendes of the Papists. 78 Libitina Libitinari^. 65 The Limb. 97. The
Limb of the Infants. 29. License and liberty of Dialogues. 13. The devouring
Lion. 94. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah. 94. To show lyingswithout truty. 10.
To loose ones langhing. 27. The lovers of man's honor and traitors of the
Divine. 12. Lucian and Lucianists. 10. Lucri bonus odor ex^re qualibet. 41.
M.
Saint Machalre. 95. Malo nodo, malus cuneus. 18. Manducation spiritual. 49.
Manducation charuall. 50. Manducation Papisticall. 50. The manner to mock to
the glory of God. 12. The manner to speak joyfully in the holy Scriptures. 14.
The infernal Mappes. 24. Merchants in the Church. 53. Marriage. 41. Marriage of
Priests. 81. Marrons which do burye in the plague tuke. 65. Dangerous
Marrianers. 93. Maskes and morish daunces. 99. Masses long and short. 63.
Masses of hunters. 63. The Masties and Haryers of Jesus Christ. 20. The means
to find out truth. 2. The means of God. 35. The means to comfort the ye
priests. 65 Members of Jesus Christ. 50 The Memento of the dead. 81 Men more
joyful and more privileged. 64 Mercury. 33. Merit and grace. 84. Metonimia.
51. The Milanois. 46. Mimus. 65. The true ministers worthy of food. 71.
Minstrells at the burials. 66 Minstrells of lairus. 67 False miracles. 44.
Black Moonkes. 69 To take money for the Sacraments and Ecclesiastical
offices. 53. Mortui non mordent. 103.
N.
Nadhegrin. 26. The nature of of the truth. 11 Naulum. 45. Necrocorinthia. 41.
Nerolatrie. 104. Natts and engines of the Priests. 93. Nero. 43 Micanor. 58.
Nilometers. 91. The flood Nilus and the fertility of Egypt. 91. Notaryes and
Prothonotaryes. 77 Numa Pompilius. 75.
O.
Objection. 83. Obolus. 45 The odoures and smell of a hog. 7. Odilo Abbot.
24. Offer wine for the dead. 37 Office of a fool and babbler. 9. Office of a
Prophet. 14. Office for the dead. 87 One only verity 2. One Mass a day. 63.
Opinion of the divines. 23 Opinion of Isidore. 23. Opinion of the Robins and
Jewish Doctors touching the body. 101 Oppedere contra tonittus. 67 Orcus. 90 To
take orders. 42 Orationes funebres. 77. The original and beginning of prayers
for the dead. 78 The ornaments of white sepulchers. 52. Ouerflowing of Tiber.
91. Out of taste of the bread of life. 7.
P.
Panegyres. fol. 77. The pain of those that are deprived from their burial.
46. Papists excommunicated. 53. Al pipistical pricsts excommunicated. 53. To go
into Paradise in post. 63. Paradise. 97. Parentalia. 25. The parents and
friends can do nothing after one to dead. 101 Pastors and Shepherds feeding
them selves. 51. Pericles. 77. To persecute Jesus Christ. 50. Persians. 58.
Personages of Dialogues. 15 Peter Rosset a Poet royal 58. Good Phisicians. 64.
Phisicians of Souls. 31 Physicians and Poticaries of hell. 33 Pillars and
deuourers. 51. The place of the souls of ye papists. 06. Plato and Virgile.
30. Pluto. 40. The poison of the Athenians. 4^. All Popes Antipopes and
Antechrists 88 The Pope makes the Princes his hanguien. 58. Poinegranards and
Bells hanging upon the bestement of the high Priest of the law. 73. Potage
for the souls. 53. To pray for the Virgin Mary and the Saints. 82. Prayers
for the living. 94. To preach Jesus Christ mask wise or covertly. 13. Praeseth
bulletarum. 43 Preparation for the departure out this life. 98 Presence of
Jesus Christ. 49. It is forbidden the Priests to be at the burying of the dead.
67. The Priests of Cyble. 74. Priests Minstrells. 67 The Priests do not pray
but for those that be in Paradise. 82 Priests the churchyard and sepulchers
both of men and Jesus Christ. 47. Priests following the Jews. 100 The pride of
Caligula. 42. Privilege of evil Phisicians and hangmen. 64 Prisoners of
Purgatory. 29. Privileges. 95. Privation of the burial 68. Profit of the
burial. 97. Profit in discovering abuses. 17. Property of salt. ^4. Prouises
of God contrary unto Papisticall Purgatory. 82. Prophecy against the
Egyptians. 93. The prose of the dead. 83. A new Proverb of the Priests. 65 A
Proverb. 65. A Proverb. velut canise Nylo. 6. Protonatory of name. 78
Purgatory. 32. 97 Purgatory of Jesus Christ and that or the Pope. 56. Purgatory
Platonieall. 30 Purgatory and his revenues. 23. Purgatory of the pockie. 38
The mouers of sedition of purgatory. 55 How Purgatory is buried. 40.
Purifications at the funerals. 37 The punishment of those that reject the
Gospel and do go unto a strange fire. 56 Punishment of malefactors. 85.
Punishment of David. 83.
Q.
To quench fire with fire. 58. The quick reputed for dead. 36 Nuasting
forbidden. 99.
R.
Repines and extorcions of Caligula. 42. Rationale diuinorum osticiorum. 81 Raw
earth. 44 Those which do fly from the reading of holy books. 6. Curious
readers of foolish books. 7 Refounders or melters. 38. Religion of beggars, or
begging Religion. 54 Remedy against the thunder and lyghtning. 75. Renullion
and forgiveness in this world 98 The Rentall of Purgatory. 39 To repose or
remain Christ. 82. Reproach of the Paysant to ye priests. 65 Repugnauncio of
doctrine. 94 Requiems of the poor and rich. 63. Requirescant in pace. 38. Thr
riches of Purgatory. 30 Three kinds of righteousness after Plato. 97 Ringing
of belles. 68 To ring for the time. 75 Rule of ye divine service for the dead.
63 Ruth and Booz. 97 Ruth and Noe^^. 100.
S.
Diverse sacrafices ye dead for diverse causes. 10^. Sacrafice of Jesus Christ 48
Salt in the baptisute. 35. Salt of wisdom. ^5. Salt of the word of God. 35.
Salt of the Priests. 35. Salting and seasoning of fools. 35 The salutation of
the soldier unto the holy fathers. 39 Sampson and David. 94. The efficacy and
strength of Satan. 106 Satiffacion for sins. 8^ Saturn and Rea. 59. All
sauors are good, so that money do come. 41. The sclpunder of the Pharisees. 18.
Shepherds feeding themselves. ^1 Scotland and Irelande. 27. Sellyng of
offices. 43. Sellying of the burial. 54. Senna therib. 94. Sennacherib
Roman. 94. Sepulcher of Jesus Christ. 53. Sepulchers infatiable. 52. White or
painted sepulchers. 52. To sing after the dead. 87. Singing of Masses. 41.
Signification and definition of an heritiche. 60. Signification of belles. 71.
74. Signification of hell. 17. Signification of the deep lake. 89. Sign of
the cross. 102 Sillogismus in Darif. 51 Simonse and Simoniackes. 53. Sins of
Princes. 30. Sins of the simple people. 30. Sins of Princes and Cyronts.
29. Siticines. 66. Soppe in the throat. 51. A soul drawenfrom hell. 90 A
soul taken in a net. 89. To what serves the washings of souls 36. The
spertell of the priests. 35. The spertell of Jesus Christ. 34. To sprinkle the
sepulchers with water. 37. The spirit the author of purgatory 29. Stella
Clericorum. 48. Stephen the sixth. 88. Stlgmates. 103. Style of the holy Ghost.
18 Stix. 9^ The Philosophical stone. 55. Stiffocations. 36 Supper. 42.
T.
Tanners of men's skins. 65. Tannefat of the Priests. 64. Temple of God. 49.
The cause of ye temptacions of y^ elect. 1. Tempus. 31 The Poetical Theology.
24 Thuringie. 26. Three differences of sins and the diversity of the payues.
31 Tibicines. 66 Time of Gregory. 96 Time of pestilence. 36 The tyrant of
tyrants and the pillars of the usurers. 30 Torches and candells at ye burialls.
33. Torches at the funerals. 70. Troianus delivered from hell. 9^. Tree of
life. 90. The true science and cloquence. 7. Tribute of the brine and of y^
stews. 41 Tribute of victuals and of process. 42 Tribute of get pence and
whores. 42. Tribute of Moriages. 42. Tribute of players. 42 The papistical
tribute of victuals. 42 Tribute of whoores. 43 Tributaries of Priests. 54.
Trophonius den. 27.
V.
Vealegon arder. 51. Valut Canis e Nylo Prouerve. 6 The virtue of the truth.
30. The virtue of the habit of S. Fraunces. 105. Vespiliones. 65 Voyatge of
Saint Patrickes wells. 26. Vino rogum ne respargito. 38. Use holy water at
burialls. 101 Vow of Herod. 81
W.
To be in the way. 35. Waters of Egypt. 95. Water of tribulation. 94. Holy
water. 34. Holy water unprofitable. 88. To watch the dead. 104. The old women
that do keep the children that be borne dead. 44 Weeping of the Crocodile.
64. Whoredom. 81. Widow askng counsel of ye bells. 72. Canon witness. 24.
Too wise or over wise. 13. Holy wood. 75. Idle word. 9. What good works God
requires for the dead. 100 Good works don to ye dead by Booz. 100 Works of
mercy toward the dead. 97. What works do follow the dead. 85. What works
God requires of us and to what end. 83 Works of Angels and the elect. 84.
Works done for us after we be dead. 85
Z.
Zazel or Azazel a Devil. 101.
FINIS TABVLAE.
THE SECOND PART of the Christian disputations.

By Master Peter Viret.

Translated out of French into English by John Brook of Asshe next Sandwich.

MATTHEW. XV. A. IX. In vain they worship me teaching doctrines which are
nothing but men's precepts.

MIEVLX VAVLT MOVRIR E^ VERTV QVE VIVRE EN HONCTE printer's device of Thomas
East, of a black horse standing on a wreath (McKerrow 206)

Imprinted at London by Thomas East.

THE SVMME OF THE third Dialogue.
IN this third Dialogue by reason that Eusebius mainteineth and vpholdeth that
the Prayers and Sussrages for the dead, are of Gods ordinance, and of the
institution of the auneient Church, it is entreated off very amply by
Theophilus and Hilarious, and showed out point by point of what original and
beginning that did first begin, and by whom it was begun, and has been
augmented, as well among the Panims, as the Jews and Christians: And what
has been the customs and ceremonies of the one and the other, as well in
their mourning and sorrowing for the dead, as in their Anniuersaries, Feasts
and Obsequies for the dead. And because that there is great conformity
between the feasts dedicated unto the dead, as well among the Panims as the
papisticall Christians, we will declare evidently by conferring the one with
the other, not only the agreeing that these feasts have togother, but also
that which is amongst many other ceremonies joined with them, and depending
upon them: The which have been borrowed of the Panims by the papisticall
Christians, or at the least wife the imitation is so clear and evident, that
there is none but that he may easily judge, that they proceeded all from one
spirit. For to manifest and declare then this same the better, and for to make
it the playnelyer to be seen, we will declare point by point the
conformityes which are between the one and the other, touching the diverse
feasts and days dedicated unto the dead, and touching the forbiddinge of
marriage at certain times. Afterward the conformity of some feasts and
Idols of the Panims and Papists, and the feast of the candels and diverse
purisications observed of the one part and of the other: And the consecrations
of Torches, Wax, Waxcandles, Salt, holy Water, Fire, Ashes and many other
such diverse matters, by the which euory one may easily judge, who has been the
author of the popish Ceremonies: and what difference there is between the
ancient Panim Rome, and the Romish Church, such as it is at this present. We
do call this Dialogue, Anniuersaries, or years minds, because that it makes
mention of many Ceremonies, which yearelye have been observed among the
superstitious and Idolaters about the dead, as of the strange Gods.

Now for to enter in the matter, Theophilus begins after this manner.

THE THIRD DIALOGVE which is called Anniuersaries or years minds.
THeophilus, I am very glad because that you are all come in so good time, and
chiefly of Eusebius. For I greatly feared that he was offended with our talk
and dysputations that we had yesterday. But as far as I can perceive, not
with standing that he be very much rooted in his old opinions and
superstitions, yet never thelsse I know that he differs much from a heap of
obstinate and wilful fools, which have no reason at all to defend their
cause, nor know how to take any other weapons then opinions and obstinations,
for to fight against the truth, neither know how to find any other mean to
vanquish it and to revenge themselves thereoff, then to hurt and wrong those
which do propound it unto them, when all other reason sayleth, and to shut
their ears against the same, to the end they understand it not.


Eusebius, I came the more willingly, because I thought my self better armed
then I was yesterday, and that I can fight better to day, and to be revenged
and have more advantage upon you. For I was yesterdaye sodeinely taken and
assailed, being unprovided, neither did I think that we should descend
into such a field to fight: or otherwise I would have come more armed, and
better in order, for to defend my self and to fight against you.


Hilarious. We did think no more of it then you, neither were we prepared
nor armed for the same.


Eusebius. I believe you well. Wherefore I do know now by experience that
the same which is said of all you is true. For it seems that you have all
the holy Scripture upon your fingers ends, and that you have never studied
in any other thing, of which I meruayled greatly, in hearing you speak,
chyeslye Hillary, which is none of the greatest studyentes in the world, at
the leastwise in the holy Scriptures. For he has always loved better to
carry a Virgile or an Ovid in his sleeue, then a Bible. And yet nevertheless
he is now a Doctor, as if he had passed Doctor in Sorbonne. As for
Theophilus, I am not so much abashed: For all his life time he has been very
devout, and has always loved to read in the Bible. I am sorry for nothing,
but for this: that he is become a Lutherian, and that he is now so contrary
unto our Mother the holy Church: For I would never have thought that he would
have so fought against the good faith, and the ancient law: But I trust, if
God vouchsafe, that howsoever armed you be, you shall not find me to day so
feeble as before, nor you shall not fight with me so much at your ease,
although that you be two against one, yea, almost all three. For Thomas is so
variable, that I know not of which side he will stick too.


Thomas. Yet I am not nevertheless a Lutherian, but think my self to be as
good a Christian as thou art. Defend thy self valiauntly, and thou shall see
if I be contrary unto thee, so that thou do speak with reason. It is very
true, that I cannot very much help and succor thee. For thou do well know
that I am an ignorant man, and that I have not much studied neither in divine
nor yet human books, but I always followed the good faith as others did:
saving that I had sometime some doubt in my conscience, and yet more now then
ever I had, seeing the differences which are in the Christianity.


Hilarious. But after that we have heard Eusebius, we will give thee place
to expound it, as thou thy self have required. And therefore friend Eusebius
enter now and begin to fight, for as far as I can perceive, thou come not
with false enseignes, nor without having thy harneyes bright. But what book
is that thou hold in thy hand?


Eusebius. It is Eccius.


Hilarious. Eccius.
When theu did name unto me that great Captain and master Gunner of the
papisticall army, thou would make me to tremble and quake, if that I were
fearful: But I comfort my self again in one thing, that although that it
be provided with great Canons and Artillarye, Artillery of ye Papists
yet nevertheless it is evil provided and furnished with powder and shot, and
there be no pellets for to make any great breach, but account it as the
Harquebuts, which are only charged with paper, without having either lead or
stone within it, which give great strokes for to make women and little
children afraid. But they hurt no man, neither do they make the men of war
afraid, nor it cannot pearce through their harneis.


Eusebius. I will compel thee by and by to speak otherwise, and I will make
thee to feel it better then thou winnest.


Hilarious. I stay upon nothing, but that thou do put to the fire, for to
burn up and consume that fire of Purgatory, which will be altogether put
out and quenched, if thou do not let it. In the mean time I will make my
bulwark and fortress of Theophilus, for to receive the first blows, and I
will not depart from the skirmish, but when I shall see mine advantage.
Nevertheless, I will yet serve thee in steed of a Trumpet, for to make thoe
to enter into battle, and to give the Allarume unto thine adversary. Begin
then to strike.


Eusebius. she has not taken the custom to pray for the dead of her own
fantasy, without beeinge well assured that God has commanded it by his
word, and that Purgatory was well allowed by the same.


Theophilus. If you had well considered and kept in mind, that which we have
already spoken off, that is, of the custom which has been amongst the
Panims in their funeral Drations and praysinges, and how the ancient Church
has changed that manner of dooinge into a better use. You should easily
know what has The beginning of prayers and suffrages for the dead.
been the beginning of the commemoration of the prayers and suffrages for the
dead, and that the custom of the ancient Fathers has differed very much,
yea, and altogether contrary unto that which is now in the Popish Church: But
because that the same has been already entreated off amongst us amply
inoughe, I will not reintreate nor rehearse it again. But for to satisfy thy
question which thou have now propounded, I will only advertise thee that
those errors and abuses, and that superstitious remembrance and full of
blasphemies, such which we do now see to be practiced about ye dead, did take
great force and were greatly multiplied by Pope Pelagius, Pope Pelagius.
who made an ordinance, much dyffering and contrary unto the custom of his
predecessors, and of the ancient Church: After whom succeeded Gregory the
great, Gregory 1.
who has not amended and corrected the abuses and errors, but has still
nourished, augmented and increased them, and has been the cause of many
Idolatries and superstitions, which have brought great hurt and damage unto
Gods Church. And least that you should think that I speak without reason and
authority, judge a little of that which Nauclerus witnesses, that Gregory the
third has written unto Boniface being Legate and Ambassador into Nauclerus
Gregory. 3 Boniface.
Almayne, to wit whether that Christians may offer for their dead, which
were truly Christians: And has commanded that the Priests ought to make
commemoration of them. Dne may very well presume by that advertisement and
commandment that which Gregory made unto Boniface, touching this matter, that
it is not Mass for the dead.
long ago that the Mass has begone to be a sacrifice for the dead, and
that the institution is not so ancient as some men do think it to be: at the
leastwise that Jesus Christ and his Apostles have not been the author
thereoff. For Boniface would not have kept it secret in that time. Wherefore I
give more credit, unto those which have written that Pope Pelagius has been
the author, inuentor and promoter of those suffrages and prayers, the which we
see daily yet in use among the Christians, and we call them the good deeds
for the dead, then to any of those which have followed the Apostles.


Eusebius. If you had read over and ruminated the ancient doctors of the
Church, you shall not find that doctrine so new, but you would speak
otherwise and should know that the Church has followed it of long time before
that Pelagius or Saint Gregory were borne. Amd, de obitu Theodos.
Wherefore then did Saint Ambrose make mention, writing of the death of the
Emperor Theodosius, of the first, seventh, thirty and forty day that the
Church did celebrate, making remembrance of the dead, and for what cause they
did the same? of whom the words are written in the decrees after this manner.
Because that Days dedicated to the dead. 13. quest. 2. cap Quta.
some have used to observe the third caye, other some the seventh, and others
the thirty in the office of the dead. Let us consider what thing yt lesson in
the scripture teaches us. It says: After that Jacob was dead, Joseph
commanded Genes. 58. a. 3
his servants that they should bury him: And the The burial and mourning for
lacob.
children of Israel buried him and the forty days being accomplished, for so
were the days of the burial compted and they lamented seven days. We ought to
follow that solemnity, the wh^che the holy scripture describes unto us It is
also written after this manner in Deuteronomium. Deuteronomy. 34. c. 8 Mourning for
Moses.
that the children of Israel lamented Moses, and did weep thirty days, and
then the mourning was ended, heth those two observations have then authority,
by the which the necessary office of piety and humanity is accomplished. Do
you not see here plainly by the words of Saint Ambrose, that already in his
time the Church did the office and commemoration of the dead, and did
celebrate in their memory certain days, and yet the ancients have not
instituted them after the inutation and example of the Panyms and Idolaters, as
you say and affirm, but after yt imitation of the ancient Patriarchs and
Prophets and of the people of God?


Theophilus. I am abashed, I know not whether I A^svver to the objection.
shall speak it of the ignorance and malice of your doctors. For if they
understand that Saint Ambrose has allowed that which they at this day do
uphold and maintain, they do greatly err, and show themselves to be very
ignorant. Also if they understand his intention and meaning they are very
malicious and wicked, to peruerte and mar the sense of the same, for to
maintain their abuses, and always the more to keep the poor people in
error. First, they well perceive and see that Saint Ambrose makes no
mention, neither of Purgatory, Lamenting and sorrovving for, the dead.
nor of Mass for the dead, and that that place cannot serve but for the sorrow
that men take for the dead. For yet in that time, the Church approached nearer
unto the purity of the primative Church, and was not so much corrupted, as
she has been afterward, sithence the time of Pope Pelagius and of Gregory the
great. This then that he makes mention of the first, seventh, thirty, and
forty day, in his book and sermon that he made of the death and burial of
Theodosius, is not set forth by him, for to nourishe and hold the pepole in
the supersticions of the Panyms, as you do, but rather to draw them back from
it, and for to induce and leave the Christians unto more greater honesty and
modestye, to the sorrow that they ought to have for the dead. For that cause
did he propound and set forth the example of the Israelites, not that he
would thereby make a law unto the Christian people, that they should mourn,
seven, thyrty, nor forty days, because that the Israelites have mourned so
many days for lacob, Moses, Aaron and Marie their sister, and yet less for to
cause Masses to be said, and to banquet and make the priests broken, as they do
Numeri. 10. a. 1.
daily, at the Portuaries and Anniuersaries. For then he should teach the
Christian people to play the Jews, The Christian liberty.
and sin against the Christian liberty, if he would of all the examples of
the Scripture, and of the things done by the Israelites, draw out and take
laws and statutes, for to command them unto the Christian people as
necessary and ordained of God. For first of all God never has defined, nor
determined by his law, certain days, nor yet to lament and mourn for the
dead, nor for to make any commemoration of them, as it appears very well, by
the examples asore alleged. For the Israelites themselves have not kept a
certain number of days at the mourninge of Jacob, Moses, Aaron and of Marie.
For they did keep Jacob in Genes. 50. a. 3
Egypt forty days, after that he was enbaumed: and the Egyptians bewept
him Ixx, days. He was carried into Hebron: afterward his sons bewept him
seven days in Atad. But Moses, Aaron and Marie their Deuteronomy 34. c. ^ Numerl. 20.
2, 1.
sister were beewept every one of them thirty days. Thou do see already
here, that they are not very superstitious in the days, and that some time
they have used The ordinary time for y^ mourning of the Israelites. Eccle. 22.
b. 13
either more or less. It should seem that their ordiuary was but for seven
days. For it is written: Seven days do men mourn for him that is dead, but
the lamentation over the unwise should endure all the days of their life. But
when it is for some noble person, as for a Prince or a Prophet, or any man
of great estimation, and renome, they would of custom prolonge their
mournynges until thyrtie days. But they would not wyliyngly pass beeyond it
as we see here in these three examples of Moses. Aaron and Marie who were
bewept and lamented of the The translation of (...) in the (...) Canaa^.
people of Israel, as much and more then any other ever were. The mourning of
Jacob was a little more longer, because he was carried to be buried a great
way, and that they carried him from the land of Egypt into the land The
holiness of the land.
of Canaan: not that they esteemed the land of Canaan more holy then that of
Egypt, as touching his nature, or that The witness of ye faith of the
Patriarchs
it had any more virtue, for the health of the body or soul of him that was
buried there, as the superstitious Christians and poor ignorant do judge of
the earth in ye churchyard, because that it was blessed and hallowed by their
Bishops and Priests. But they did that, for to witness in Act. ^. 3 ^ Heb. 11.
b. 8
the article of the dead, the hope that they had in the promise made unto
Abraham of that land, and for to confirm their successors in the same, to the
end they should The bying of the field of Ephron. Genes. 23. d. ^S.
be certain and assured that they should possess it, although that they never
receauid one foot during their life, except that possession which Abraham
bought for to make a burial place for him, his wife and all his family. This he
did, that it should be a witness unto all his successors, that they should be
heirs of that land of which he has The translation of the bones of Jacob.
Genes. 50. d. 25
already taken possession. For that same cause also, Jacob commanded and
ordained in his testament, that his body should not be buried in Egypt, but yt
it should be carried into the land of Canaan, in the sepulcher of his fathers.
And Joseph his son following that example has also commanded the children
of Israel, to heepe his bones, until they enter into that land? not for to
made reliches of them, and to enclose them in gold or silver for to worship
them, all the while that they shall be in Egypt, The holiness of the land of
Canaan.
or in the land of Canaan, after that they shall be aryued in the same, but for
to bury them there: not for the opinion that he had of the worthynesse of his
sepulture, or of the holiness of the land. For then it was inhabited of ye
Panyms and Insidels, o^ the Canaas, Amorrians, and others like which were so
abbominable, because of their erecrable crimes, that God could, not suffer
them. but has exterminated, driven away and destroyed them by his just Denl.
S. a ^
judgment, for to give that land as an heritage unto his people. But Joseph,
although that he dyed in Egypt would first witness, that he believed
perfectly in the promise of God. And for more greater probation of his faith,
has left unto them that witness of the same, for to assure them that they
should enter there once, since that he would not be buried, until such
time as they were come thither, for to inherit the promised land. That was
almost such a witness, as that of Jeremy, in bying the field Iere. 31. 8. 44
The bying of I cremy
of his cousin, which was in the land of Judah: willing thereby to declare and
show forth, that the people then were in captivity, and almost all of them
did despair never to return into their land (notwithstanding that the Lord
had promised unto them the contrary) which was unto him certain and sure of
the promise of ye Lord. Wherefore he would give unto them a good hope of their
returning, promised chiefly by Esaias long time before the captivity, and by
Jeremy and Ezechiell prophesying at the time that the captivity approached, and
during the same: therefore did he buy that field and that possession, for to
testify by that buying, that he had a good hope of his return, and that he
was assured by the word of God, what soever infidelity was in the people: or
otherwise he had been a fool and not well advised, to put his money in
hazard to be lost, and himself to be mocked, and accomted for a liar and a
false prophet. Paking then that buying to ye intent, it was unto him as a
sacrament, even as the burial of Joseph deferred until the entering unto the
land of Canaan, the which he would not defer for any thing what soever it
be, for to be deprived from the burial so long time, and from the honor
which is due unto the body, according to the ordinance of God, the which he
would by no means resist. Genes. 33. d. 19



Thomas. You speak of many things, but how do I know whether the same ought
to be understood after that sort as you expound it.


Theophilus. If thou doubt of my exposition, read the xi. Chapter of Saint
Paul's Cpistles unto ye Hebrews, Hebrt. 11. a 1.
and thou shall see whether the Apostle does not set thee in ye way for to come
unto ye intelligence and interpretation.


Eusebius. But you show not ye cause, wherefore they observed certain days
for to finish their funerals and mournings.


Theophilus. I have already answered thee, that they The cause of ye days
appointed for moarning.
did not the same for any superstition that they had to the number as ye
Panyms. For the Patriarchs and Prephets were not so much of the sect of
Pithagoras, nor such great obseruers of the numbers, as the Papisticall
doctors, and Durand. in ratio. diui. off. lib. 7. Rub. de off. mor
namely Durand, who yelding the reason wherefore the Christians keep certain
days dedicated to the commemoration of the dead, declares the mysteries
contained in the number of them, and has written after this manner. Note that
some celebrate the memory of the dead Ternarij. Septena ly Numerl. 19b. 11.
the third day, for to represent the burial and resurrection of Iosus
Christ, or in the honor of the Trinity. Others cause Masses to be song the
seventh day, or seven days continually. Afterward they prove that the same
is taken of that place which is written in ye book of Nombers: that he which
shall touch the body of a dead man, shall be defiled and unclean seven days.
Is not the The philosophy of Pithagoras The cause of ye moarning of the
Israelises.
same very fit for to prove the seven days feast of the Priests? I do
omit a thousand other dreams, which are more mad, that one cannot believe
them. He practices a Philosophy and a Theology likewise upon the ninth,
third and fourth and the day of the years mind, to which he makes those
numbers better to agree, then of ware, and better then ever Pithegoras did. For
his Philosophy had more reason and doctrine. But that which the Israelites did,
I think that the same was none otherwise, but for an honesty and cluditie
which ought to be among the people of God. For they had no express law, nor
commandment proper for the same, and ye should make them to be subject unto
the^ And although they had a commandment, as they have of their other
ceremonialand civil laws, we should not be yet nevertheless therefore Liberty
of the Gospel.
bound, no more then we he to them, but should abide in the liberty in the
which Jesus Christ has called us. Now if we be delivered from ye subjection
of ceremonies and laws which God himself has expessely commanded, by a more
stronger reason ought we to be exe^pted, and to abide and continue in our
liberty, in ye that has been lest in liberty unto ye people, which was yet
under ye servitude and bondage of ye law. Wherefore I think ye the Israelites
did keep yt custom among the^, for the self same cause yt Joseph al, ledged
speaking of Moses: De has also provided in the funeralles Ieseph against
Appion. li. 2 The law for the ludaieall funerals.
of the dead, to that end that men do not celebrate sumpteous obsequies and
burtals, and that men do not bestow great and costly buildings of sepuleres,
but has commanded, ye the household servants of him which should be dead,
should administer ye necessary things, for to carry the dead to ye grave. He
has also ordained, as a lawful thing that all those ye be a live should
assemble themselves together, when ye any person should be dead, and should
mourn and lament over him. He has also commanded, ye the domestical and
those of his house should be purified after yt burying. Although yt we read not
all these words of Joseph, so expressed and placed in ye books of Moses, yet
nevertheless Joseph, which was himself a Jew, and a man of great knowledge.
and well seen in the customs and Iudaical things, was not ignorant of the
manner of their burials and funerals, and the causes wherefore they did all
those things. He makes The water of separation consecrated with the ashes
of a young Heifer, Numeri. 19. c. 11
no mention, no more then Moses, ye one should not make sacrifice nor offering
for the health and salvation of the dead, nor that one should sprinkle it with
holy water, and with the consecrated water that they did heepe mingled with the
ashes of a young Heyfer, for the purificatio^ of yt living, not of ye dead,
but witnesses only, yt the domestical or those of yt house which were assisting
and helping at yt funerals and burials, or touched ye body sh^^ld be purified,
by the ceremonies ordained of God, principally by yt consecrated water, with yt
ashes of an Heyfer the Purification af,+ter the funerals. Hebr 9. d. 13
which was a figure as witnesses the Apostle, of the blood of Jesus Christ, by
which we are purified: who has done that which the water and the ashes of
the Heyfer, could not do. Wherefore we have no more need of such ceremonies,
since that they are accomplished and fulfilled by Jesus Christ: And yet much
less of other new, invented by man's presumption. That then which the
Israelites used certain ceremonies and mournings about the dead, had two
respects. The first was, to the end that the people of God should not be
like unto the barbarous and heathen people, as those of whom we have already
spoken off, which did make less account of the bodies of yt dead men, yea of
their own parents and friends, then of the carcases of brute beasts. Agame,
even as the Lord would that his people should be far from such inhumanity and
The means that we must keep in mourning and at the funerals, and the v.ces
of the Panims.
barbarousnes, so would he provide on the other side, for another great vice,
which reigned amongst the Panims, who did to much exceed in sorowing and
mourning, in ceremonies, superstitions, Idolatries, and with to great expenses
about their dead and funerals. Besides all this Barue 6. c 30. Leult. 1. and
21. Heodo. in Enterpe. 3. Reg 18. e. 28
they did many things not seemly to men. For some of them did round and poll
their heads, beards and hears, the mourning, as Herodotus witnesses of yt
Egyptians. There were also which did hurt and prick themselves with lancets,
and made the blood to come forth of Theod. in Leui ticum, 19. Apul. asinl. aur
lt. 1 1. Cice Tusc. q. 3. Leuit. 21. a. 3.
their bodies, in the honor of the dead, and for to witness their dolor,
after the same sort as the Pricsts of Baal did in praying to their God Baal.
And the Priests of Cyble in like manner, who in that point followed them.
They did also make marks in their flesh, with great superstition the which
things the Lord did forbid his people, namely in Leuiticus. And therefore
those good patriarchs and prophets, who were prudent and wise, and guyded
through the spirit of God, have found a good means to let and stop those
vices and excess which they did commit as well on the one side as on the other,
amongst the Panyms. For if the Panims themselves have regarded that, and have
need laws and statutes, for to correct the indecent things that was there
committed: And the pomp and foolysti cost, that men bestowed about such
banities, we must not be abashed, if the people of God, who ought to be the
rule and moderation of all others have so well provided for the same, for to
keep a mean in all things. For it is not possible that man, how spiritual
soever he be, can rob or take from man, all humayne aflection, but that there
abides always a meruaylous desire in his heart, of the person absent whom he
loved, especially when through death it is separated from him. Since then that
one cannot The lymitte of humain affection.
pluck away altogether that affection from man's heart, he must at the
lcastwise set some lymitte; to the end that he excede not measure, as the
Panims did. For so long as the affection is too great, insomuch that it draws
us from God, and makes us to stay more unto the creatures then is needful,
it cannot please God. And therefore even as the Lord leaves us to be man, and
suffers our humayne affections, which have some agreeing with his nature, and
are the seed and pricks of virtues, so will he not suffer them to flow over,
or arise above the lymittes of reason and honesty, as we have already touched
in another place. The same then that the The time prescribed for the mourning
Heorewes and Israelites had some certain number of days, for to mourn and
lament their parents and friends that were dead, was not for to restrain every
one generally and perticularly to lament and mourn one so many days, without
adding or dimimshing any, as if the number of the days were necessary; or that
it contains any relygion and holiness in it: but to the end that those
which should mourn and lamont, if one could not keep them from it
altogether, without doing great biolence to their affections, at the
leastwise, they should not pass that lymit and time, which was bsed and
prescribed, and which was long enough and sufficient, for to satisfy their
heart and to mitigate their sorrow and heaviness.

Wherefore I doubt not but that Saint Ambrose had The infention and meaning
of S. Ambrose.
regard unto that honostie and modesty, not for to induce the christian people
unto Iewishnes, but to follow rather the erample of the holy Patriarchs and
Prophets, then of the Panims. As we may manifestly judge by his own words,
without seekinge the gloss and interprctation any further. For first of al he
erhorted not yt people to play unto god for the soul of Theodosius, but
witnesses euidetly, ye he acco^pteth and holds him to be saved, and
affirms many times ye his soul is at rest, in light and felicity with Jesus
Christ his Lord. Also he teaches not ye people to in uocate and pray unto him,
not withstanding ye he holds him as a saint in ye kingdom of god: but
admontsheth to pay unto the children, ye which they do owe unto ye father,
saying: they owe him more after he is dead, then when he was living, After
wards declares unto the^ ye means how they ought to acquit and order
themselves toward their good Prince, after his death: that is, in commending
his young children whom he has left to be heirs of the Cmpire, and that they
declare toward them the fidelytie, faith, loyalty, and love that they had
toward their father. It is sufficiently declared ye there is no mean more
proper, nor any good deeds more agreeable nor more profitable for the dead,
then to have in commendacion and praise their successors, children and
friends. On the other side, he comfort the children, and chiefly goes
about to niltigate the doloure and sorrow of Honorius, because that it was not
lawful for him to accompanye the relyckes, that is to say, the other part of
the body of his father, which was carried to be buried unto Constantinople, as
they accustomed to do with the bodies of great Princes. Wherein it appears
whereunto Sayncte Ambrose pretended. For lest us not think that he has been
of an other mind and opinion then the other Doctors, which have written both
in his time and before him. And to this end that you should the better know
that I speak not so without reason, give ear and marlie what other Doctors
says, which is contained in the Decrees themselves, and adjoined immediately
after that which yon declared of Saint Ambrose, the which will serve us for the
declaration of the same, and consormation of nsy worbes. First you have Saint
Gyprian, who Cyprian. 13. ^. 2. Quam preposte rum. Mourning indecent for
Christians.
declares unto the Christians that they ought not to be sorrowful and
sad, neither for their death nor yet for that of others, saying: Is it not a
strainge and a perverse thing, to require that Gods will be done, and that we
do not obey the same, when he calls us out of this world, but do repugne
and resist it, and as peruerso and rebellyous servant we are brought before
our Lord with sorrow and mourning, and being colistrayned through the bond of
necessity, not willyngly and with a good heart. And we would be honored
with heavenly rewards by him, unto whom we do come maugre our selves. And
how many times is it revealed unto me, and commanded of GOD, that I do
protest daily and preath openly, that we ought not to lament and mourn for our
brethren which are called and delivered from this world by the Lord, since
that we know that they are not lost, but are only sent before, going for to
over go us, even as those do, who do walk and swim.

Unto this also agrees Saint John Chrysostom, who Chriso ad pepu Hom. 69. and
70 Item in John c. 11. ad Hebr ca. 2. Hom. 4
in many places has rebuked and coereted the immoderate mourninge of the
Christians, saying among other things, I do not forbid that we should not
mourn for those which are departed out of this world, Let us lament and
bewail them, but not undecently and unhonestly: not in tearing our hairs,
uncouering of our arms, cutting our eyes, not in wearyng black gowns, but
only in our heart, sheading forth inwardely bitter tears. Also lice does
cleerelye show, that to lament Chrisosto. in Erst. ad Hebr. 13 q. 2. vbichnq3
Psa. 24. a. 1
and mourn for the dead, proceeded but of wealtenesse and for want of faith,
saying: In whatsoever place we be buried in, the earth is the Lords and all
things that therem is. That that he ought to do does: But to lament, mourn
and weep for those which are departed out of this life, comes of weakness
and for want of heart and courage. And it must not be understood that it
proceeds from any other thing, then of a despair of the resurrection to
come. Therefore the Apostle spade not simply, we would not 1. Thessa. 4. c. 1^.
have you ignorant, concerning them that are fallen a sleep that ye sorrow
not, but he adds moreover, as other do which have no hope. It is not then
forbidden us to mourn and bewail the dead, through a compassion and
affection of piety and a regard of humanity, as we do read, that some
Saints and holy men, have bewailed (after Gods law). the funerals of others.
Therefore Anastacius in the same place has said. Those which know Anasta. 13.
^. 2 habent.
not nor look for any other life, and have no trust ye from this world there
is a place for to go unto a better estate, have peradventure just excuse of
their long grief and sorrow: But we which do believe and teach the same,
ought not to be sorry for those which dye, to the end, that the same which
toward other has appearaunce of piety and compassion be in the greater
fault. For that is a kind of distrust, against that that every one does
preach. And immediately after is alleged the example of Jesus Christ, the
example of Christ. John. 11. c. 13.
who bewailed not the death of Lazarus, but bewailed him when he would raise
him again, for to return unto the miseryes of this world.


Hilarious, Certeynly if we did well consider the evils which are in this
miserable world, and the fragilytic and misery of man's nature, and if we had
true says to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and true hope of our resurrection,
and of the eternal life, we should have more occasion to follow the custom
of the Thracians, then of other Danims, and for a more just occasion, The
custom of the Thracias herodet in Paler. Max. li. 2. ca. 1
For if they, which had not a certain hope, nor assurance that there is an
other life then this here, did bury their friends yt were dead with joy and
gladness, saying that they were bery glad yt they were delivered from ye evils
and wickedness of of this life: And on the contrary, did weep and lament at
the birth of their children, lamenting them because of ye evils to the which
they did: n^^ coming into this world: Have not we more (...) cause to
rejoice, when that the Lord calls us our friends, and draws them from that
dark prison, for to lodge them in his celestial Places? And to desire with
the holy philip. l. d. 25.
Apostle to be dissouled so? to be with Christ? If we will not follow the
doctrine and examples of the holy Scriptures, at the leastwise let us not do
worse then the Panims. And if we will follow them, let us follow the most
reasonable, and not the most maddest. those of Mirsellea, in the time that they
were yet Panims, we a great deal more modest and sober, and less
supersticious and Idolaters in their burialls, and about their dead, then those
are now at this present time which do follow the papisticall doctrine. For the
ancient massilians did bury their dead The ancient custom of the Massilians.
Val. Max. li. 2 cap. 1.
without great sorrow and lamentation. The sorrow and mourning of their
furenalls continued but one day, without adding too any other ceremony, but a
domestical sacrifice, and in making a banquet, not for the Priests, but for
their parents and friends. But now I warrant you that the Priests will not
acquit them for the price. Behold what they have gained with the papistical
doctrine: which has less reason, then the costomes of their ancient
predecessors, although that they were Idolaters. Wherefore it should seem unto
them yet more honest, and a great deal more profitable, to bring again in use
their ancient fashions and manners, then to follow the papistical manners. But
amongst others they can not find better, nor more necessary to all Christians,
then that which they had of late, to shut the gates of their town against all
Hipocrites, Cagots Stongeth full he lies under co. 1 lour of religion
Caphards, and Seducers, who under the shadow and title of holy Religion would
live idelly, and cate and devour other men's substance without doing any
thing. Their gate was not opened to such gluttons and belly gods, and they
would not admit any Religion and new supersticion. If the Christians had done
so, the world not have been so spoiled and devoured by the Priests, Poonkes and
caphards. But for to return unto mourning: In the manner also Seneca has
written, that the ancient Romans The custom of the Romans. Senec. epist.
75.
have not pressed, nor determined any certain time unto for to weep and
lament, because it has no honesty. for as the himself witnesses, a wise man
does not afflict The office of a wise man.
nor lament himself too much, when he loses his children or his friends, but
bears their death with such a stomach and heart, as he would do his own.
For that cause amongst others was Anaxagoras praised, who without any Cice.
Tusc. 9. li. 1.
trouble to himself, answered unto him which brought hun tidings of the death
of his sons: Thou tellest me of no new thing, nor a thing but that I ahue
long looked for it: For I knew very well that he whom I engendered was mortal.


Thomas. When I do hear spoken of the constancy and modesty, that the
Panims have showed in the death both of them and of their friends, I am
greatly ashamed of us christians, who have so great fear, and do make such
noise, and torment our selves after the dead.


Hillairus. Thereby we declare, that we are very The custom of: the 1. yeians.
Val. Max. li. 2. ca. 1.
ignorant and effeminated. And therefore the Lycians did apparayle them with
womwnes apparel, when they did mourn and lament, to the end that they should
be moved through that deformity of apparel, and thereby constrained to cast
down all that foolish sorrow. Declaring by the same, that they accounted it
folly to lament Plut. in Lycur. The custom of ye Lacedemetis.
and weep. For that cause Lycurgus did not permit to the Lacedaemonians, but
eleven days to mourn and lament in: and after at the twelfe day, they must
cast it down, after that they had made a sacrifice unto Ceres. Upon that
matter ahth Plutarch written, that all things not accustomed nor used were
applied unto those that did lament and mourn. And therefore the men went
forth openly, The manner and fashion (...). 1. C ^^. 11 a 5.
having their heads covered. the women uncovered and shorn, or altogether
polde, against the order of nature, that being ashamed of such desormitie, they
should be constrained she rather to moderate themselves, and the better to
banqutsh and overcome their affections. And whereas the Romans prescribed a
year full out The law of the Romans of ye mourning of the vvidovvees
unto the women for to mourn, was not for to compel them to lament and
mourn so long time, but to moderate and correct them, to the end they
exceeded not measure. And therefore the widows did carry the signs of
sorrowfulness, being apparayled with black, and wearing white kerchiefes
upon their heads, as the Papists do at this Pluta. in quest
day. The which things ovid has comprised in a few bearses, speaking of the
year ordained by Romulus, after this manner.

When funerals were once fulfilde ovid. Fast. 1

the wise with ruthful cheer,
His husbands death did wayle the want,
the space of one whole year.
And the Poet Statius says also.

The women wear in their attire, Statius.

the have of black and white:
To represent the difference,
betwixt the day and night.
And it was not lawful for them to marry, before that those ten months were
expired, except the had a dispensation of the Senate and Counsel, as we have
used to take of the people. For Numa Pompilius of the same made The lavvw of
Numa for the marriage of Widow. plut. in Vita Numa Anto. Fan. in Fast. 1
a law, the which did condemn the widow, which married before that the term
and lawful time was accomplished, to sacrifice a Cow with calfe. Not that he
esteemed that it was a sin worthy of great punishment, in marrying her before
that term, but had regard to the honestye, for two causes. The first was,
because that it was not honest for the woeman but very much contrary unto the
shamefastness and natural modestye, which ought to be in her, to marye
again so soon, and before that the feet of her first husband, (as the common
Proverb is) be thoroughly cold. The other cause is for to conserve and keep
the lynage and generations, without minglyng them and destroying the seeds.
For it may so chance, that the woman shall be with chilce by her first husband
and she shall not know it so soon. Nevertheless Disponsation of marriage.
Antbony Octauian.
when there is any person of great calling the Senate and Counsel would
dispense with him, as it appears at the maryages of Anthony and Octauia, who
by the authority of the same were allowed, notwithstanding that Octauia did
mourn for C. Marcellus.


Theophilus. It is most certain, that it lies not in man's C. Marcellus
power to make a law which is repugnaunt and against that which the Lord has
said by his Apostle. He that what y^ laws ought to be of marriage. 1. Cor.
7. b. 9
cannot abstain let him mary, to the end that none do put any snare about the
neck of any man, and put his soul in danger. Therefore says he, it is
better to mary then to burn. For that cause let us not make a law, for to
bind any man, and to take from him his liberty in such things, but let us
leave y^ unto every ones discression, following ye customs most allowable. Yet
nevertheless it is requisite, whatsoever infirmity of the flesh that one can
allege, that one have always reason of honesty and Christian modesty. For
that cause friend Eusebius have we propounded unto thee so many examples and
sentences, both of the holy scriptures and of ancient Doctors, and also of the
Panims, to that end that thou may the more clearly know what has been the
custom of the ancient Israelites and of the Panims, and of the first
Christians also: what has been their mourning, what days they have dedicated
for the same, and for the dead: and for what cause, and how the ancient
Doctors have written, and to what intent: and how much the Christian religion
has degenerated from his ancient purity, insomuch yt it is not worthy to
compare them in such things, I say not unto ye ancient Jews, but unto ye
Panims themselves which have had some judgment and honesty. And yet
nevertheless S. Hierome does desire yt the christians should be yet more sober
S. Hierome. Tomb. 6. The mourning of the ancient Isr. Ielytes.
in such things then y^ ancient Israelites, whose manner of doing he praised
not greatly, which they have used toward the dead: But he excuses them
because that they had not yet received so amply the light and knowledge, nor
the accomplything of the promises of God so amply and so excellently as we.
Wherefore he would that we should be a great deal more moderate, and that we
should declare more lively the hope that we have of the resurrection.

But if we can do no better nor be more perfect then they, let us not be at
the least more imperfect, and let us not do worse, after the manner of the
Papists who are mroe to be rebuked in those things, then any people that ever
was upon the earth. Wherefore it were better (friend Eusebius,) that we
should reduce our selves to the imitacion of the Apostolical Church, then to
continue always in our folly and madness, under the color of a word or two
that we find either in Ambrose, or in some other ancient doctor for want of
well understanding them.

And it shall be a great deal more convenient and meeter Example of David. 2.
Reg. 12. d. 15.
for us to follow the example of David, who mourned and lamented for his child
all the while that he was sick, and whilst that he was yet alive, and not
after yt he was dead. For which all those of his house were much abashed. For
whilst that the child was yet sick, and that he had some hope of life, he
watched, fasted and prayed, making request unto God for the child, and did lie
flat on the earth, and during the space of seven days all those of his house,
no not his ancients and counselors could not make him to lie on a bed, nor to
arise up from the earth, nor to eat nor drink with them, until such time he
understood that the child was dead, the which thing none of his servant
durst tell him off, thinking that he would have been mernaylously sad and
pensise, after that he should be advertised of his death, since that all the
time of his sickness whilst that there was yet some hope of life, he always
wept and lamented. But it happened clean contrary. For as soon as he knew
for a certeynetie that the child was dead, he arose from the earth, and washed
and anointed himself, and changed his apparel, and went into the house of
the Lord, and prayed, and after came to his own house, and bad that they should
set meat before him and he did eat: And made greater cheer then before,
whereoff his servant were much abashed, and asked him what is this that thou
have done? unto whom he answered: while the child was a live, I fasted and
wept. For I thus thought: who can tell whether God will have mercy on me, that
the child may live? But now seeing it is dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I
bring him again any more? I shall go to him, but he shall not come again to
me. David teaches Mourning for the living and sick.
us a good lesson, and learneth us to pray the one for the other, while we
be in this life, and to make prayers unto God, and to lament and mourn for
our brethren and neighbors, whilst they are alive, whether they be in health
or sick, prosperity or adversity, and not after they be dead. For whilst
that they be sick, we ought to pray for them, that it would please God to
pardon their sins, and ours: to give unto them health, and to suffer them a
while to be with us, and comfort us, and to serve moreover unto his church, if
he know yt the same is most expedient for the glory of his name, and our
profit. For whilst that man is sick, we know not certeynly, what God means
to boe with him. We know very well that his will cannot be but good, and that he
will dispose all things to the best: But we cannot know perticulerly, without a
singular revelation, whether that it be better that ye sick person do live or
dye, both for him and for us. Wherefore we ought to pray and weep for him
whilst that we can aid and help him, and that he is yet alive with us, in
the which we have place to repent. and to obteyn pardon for our sins: and we
ought chiesly to bewail the poor (...)
sinners, whom we see to go to perdition, as Samuel bewept Saul seeing him
forsaken of God: And Saint Paul the Corinthians, whom he law to be deteyned
and kept in 1. Reg. 15. s. 26 2. Cor. 12. g. 21 Hie^in comment in Mat. 5. c. 11.
sins, if it would please God to have mercy upon them. But since that God has
once declared unto us his will, we must hold our selves unto the same, and to
take no more care for those whom God has called unto himself from among us,
but we ought only to advise and sludie how we should dispose and order our
selves for to follow them, after the example of David. Whereunto agrees very
well the doctrine of Daynct James, who admonusheth the faithful The visitacion
of the sick Iam. 5. c. 14.
if any of them be diseased to call unto them the true Priests of the Gospel
and Elders of the congregation, for to comfort them with the word of God, and
for to pray for them, that they may have ye forgiveness of their sins, and to
comfort and procure all that they can for the health of their bodies and
souls, and for their health, and through prayers and ointments and other like
things, which God has given unto the primitive Church, the which has received
The gilte do miracles in the primitive church. A noynting with oil. Marc. 6.
b. 13
the gift to do miracles, and in the which the Apostles did miraculously
heal the diseased. Anointing them with oil, not after the manner as the
Papisticall Priests do, which do anoint the diseased, not through the hope
that they have to heal them. For if they did think that they should heal
them, they would not anoint them.


Hilarious. They would not do so. For they should loose much nor they should
have so many fat hydes.


Theophilus. For that same cause they call that unction extreme, and the last
sacrament: And they give it not for Extreme vncsion
the health of the body nor for to heal the diseased, as the Apostles did, nor
to that intent as Saint James has written, but did give it for the health of
the soul, as though their holy oil could penetrate in the same, and that the
haly Ghost and forgiveness of sins wertied unto ye oil. I know not whereto
ye unction can serve for ye poor diseased, such as the do use, since yt they
have no promises of god. and that ye gift of miracles is not given unto the^ as
unto ye Apostles, and to yt primitive church: and they do none other thing but
read ye Psalter and babble it in a strange language unto ye sick person, of
which he receives no instruction, nor any The saying of the Psalter. The use
of extreme unction. The Apes of ye Apost^ 3.
consolation at all.


Hilarious. If thou know not whereto that unction serves, I will tell thee.
First, that is a witness for to prove that in yt same they are the Apes of the
Apostles, for to counterfeit their works and miracles, as they counterfetted
those of Jesus Christ in the Baptisine of young children. Afterward it serves
unto the diseased, for to make them hope to be healed, as the coming of the
hangman unto the thieves, when they do see him.

For they know right well that he is the messenger of death So when the poor
patients seeing the Priests coming with their Cream bores, Dyle and Drogues,
they may well think that men account them for dead, and their time is come.
For such Physicians have not accustomed to come, nor to bring their Triacle,
but at the very hour that the sick person is abandoned and forsaken of other
Physicians. They may judge that their hangman is come, who cares nor for the
soul, but requires only the body and the spoylyng thereoff.


Theophilus. There is nothing truer. Wherefore they cannot allege Saint James
for their defense, nor also the ancient doctors whom they would take for
bucklers for all their matters. They make a great account of Denis, who has
written the celestial The author of the celestial ^^. d ecclesiastical
Hieratch12 Act. 17. eccle hist. li. ^. ca. 4. li. 4. ca. 21. 22. 23 Eccle bier.
^ 7 Denis. Areopagite.
and ecclesiastical Hierarchies, saying that that is Saynct Denis of Athens,
who was converted by the preaching of Saint Paul, which is not like to be true.
For the style of those books, sinelleth not like unto that of the Apostles,
nor of their time. Furthermore Eusebius in his ecclesiastical history makes
mention so dilygently of the books of Denis Bishop of Corinth, and never
makes any mention of those of Denis Areopagite. Wherefore it is most lykest to
be true, that he has written nothing: or else Eusebius would not have held his
peace more then of the others. But although he should have written those
books, yet he did sufficiently declare by them that at the time as those were
written, there was not such extreme unction as there is at this present. He
makes mention that the Christians used of custom to anoynte the faithful in
the baptism, in witness that they did arm themselves for to fight, and the
dead in like manner, when one buryeth them, in sign and taken, that they have
valyauntly fought, and that they have gotten and obtained the victory, and are
gone to rest. But he speaks not a word of the anointing of the sick and
diseased, the which with much ado he would have omitted, without touching
and expressing it, as well as he has done the cream of the baptism. And
although it should be so, that that which the Priests do, should have some
certain foundation in the doctrine of Saint James, yet they cannot deny, but
that that place bath great color, for to condemn that which they do about
the dead. For they have not much read in all the holy Sacripture, which has
more appearaunce at the first sight, for to color their ceremonies, and new
sacraments, which they have invented without the ordinance of Jesus Christ,
then that place bath, for to give light unto their extreme unction, and those
muttering and mumblyng of the Psalter which they do make about the sick
persons, And yet nevertheless there is not one only syllable upon which they
can stay or take hold for to ground and allow the least of the ceremonies and
supersticions which they commit about the dead.


Hilarious. It is nevertheless much to be meruayled at, that if there had been
in their case any imitacion of the traditions of the Apostles, and of the
Primative Church, but that Saint James would have touched some word, since
that he has already taken in hand the matter of the sick and diseased, and
that occasion also did suffer to speak of the dead, and to teach how the
Christians and the Ministers of the Church ought to behave themsolues, if such
things were necessary, which since the time of the Apostles have been
brought into the Church of God.


Theophilus. Thy reason is not evil. Wherefore me thinks (friend Eusebius
that thou may now understand that that place of Saint Ambrose, and the other
reasons which thou have put forth for to prove thy intentien, and to confirm
thy matter, conserve serve thee nothing at al, for to allow that which now in
such a case is dene in your Churches: But rather to condemn and reprove them.
For you your self follow not the example of the Israelites propounded by
Saint Ambrose, and your Decrees and Canons, nor you are not contented with the
dayed which are there specified, nor with the manner described in them, for to
celebrate the commemoration of the dead, but do add to it many other things
of which you cannot allege any example to be on your side, neither in the
old nor new Testament, nor of the ancient people of Israel, nor also of the
first Christians, but of the Panims and Idolaters, whom you do follow,
keepinge almost the very same days that they for the same have chosen, and
with the like supersticion as they. Wherefore I am abashed of Durand, who
expounding the misteryes and secrets contained in the number of those days,
Rat. diui. off. l^. 7. Rub. de off. mort Nensuain^^
has written among other things that some Christians have also chosen the
nynth day, for to make the Dbsequies and commemoratien of the dead: or have
used of custom to offer nine days together for them, that their souls
should be delivered from pains, and joined and kiut together unto the nine
order of the Angels. But he adds that the same was not allowed of some,
fearing least it should seem that the Christians were unitators and followers
of the Panims and Gentiles, who had yt same day dedicated unto ye obsequies and
co^memoratio^ of their dead, as already has been touched.


Hilarious. Duer and besides the witness of all the Poets and chiefly of
Virg. Aene. 5. Hota. in Epod. ^ice ad Quint Pra. li. 3. Liui ^. ab. v^be Et. ^.
bell. ^um.
Virgile, who described yt Anniuersarie that Aeneas made for his father
Anchises, and the sacrifices and plays that they celebrated in the nynth day
of the same, we have all the histories which are o^ credit, namely Titus
Liuius, who in many places, makes mention of those Nensnaines and nine days,
which they do call Nouendium and Nouendiale.


Theophilus. But wherefore was the customs of yt Christians more to be
rebuked, which do celebrate the nynth day and the Nensuaines in ye honor of yt
dead, then either which do celebrate yt seventh day, thirty, forty, a hundredth,
or other like days? For if the thing be good in one day, how can it be evil
in the other? does the number add or give any more greater holiness to one of
the days more then to an other. And if the thing be nothing worth to one of
the days, what privilege have the other for to make it better?


Eusebius. Wherefore do you demand the cause, since that it has been already
alleged by thine own self, reciting the words of Durand? Do you think that
that cause ought to suffice, least it should not seem yt the Christians do
follow yt Panims, and allow their manner or doings?


Hilla. Truly you look well to your business, and have well provided for your
affairs. Me thinks yt that devil, who has been yt author of your
supersticio^s and idolatries, in very deed has been a great Louldaue, and of a
slougthful spirit, if he had any judgment in me^ with whom he had to do, and if
god by his just judgment had not taken from the^ their sense and
understanding. For what mask has he taken for to disguyse himself withal to
change one day into an other? what difference is there, if you do yt same
things. which were used among the Panims, saving that you do change the
day? Which is best, either to blaspheme God the third, seventh, thirty and
forty day, or the fourth, nynth, tenth, or fiftle? Can one dishonor and
blaspheme him more honestly in the one of those days then in the other. What
do I care what day you take, if you commit the same faults? As touching the
days, you have Imitation of ye jews and panims.
chosen those same of the Jews. As touching the supersticion, you do follow
the same of the Panims: and desiring to show yt you are neither Jew nor Panim,
you declare, that you are less christians: but yt you have a sect and a new
law like unto that of Mahomet, who have not followed altogether The Imitacion
of Mahonus.
neither that of the Jews, and Panims, nor yet yt of the Christians: But made
one, taking out of all those together that it pleased him, and has made a
potage, mingled with all sauces, and corrupted with all poisons, which do in
such sort waste all that that may be good, that there remains nothing, but
the vile venyme of all errors and heresies. I know not unto what I may compare
more preperly your traditions, then unto those of that false prophet: nor I do
not well know, what difference may be the greater between those, except
peradventure I should say that in yours there is more of the imitation of the
Panims, and that your Rome and her laws, is always the ancient Rome, and the
laws that she had before the revelation The old and new Rome.
of the Gospel. The which thing I will show unto thee at the first sight, by a
goodly discourse, the better to vanquish and overcome thee, since that thou will
not be contented with that which already has been sufficiently proved unto
thee: not that I have determined to rehearse all your ceremonies and
traditions. For I had rather to number and tell all the sand of the Sea and to
draw out all the water from the same: But I will content my self at this
tune, with the conference of Mortuaryes, and with that which belongs unto
them, which have been among the panims, the which you have kept, and the things
which have some affinity with them.

Then I demand of thee first of all, if Durand did find anything to say unto
the Christians, which did celebrate the Nensuaines, because of the affinity
that they seemed to have with the Panims: Wherefore then do you allow
Anniuersaries.
those which do celebrate the Anniuersaryes of the dead? For the same never
had other for his first authors then the Panims, as I will prove unto thee by
and by, by their Theologians. Thou art not contented with that which
Theophilus has answered thee in, that sithence the time of Pope Pelagius and
Gregory, those manner The beginning of the feasts and Anniuersaries for the
dead. Pluto. Call. lecsant. li. 17. ca. 2
doings have taken great force, and have been much augmented among the
Christians, and thou do no wrong: For they are a great deal more auneyent,
yea, and invented long before the time of the Apostles, if we will believe
Diodorus, who affirms Pluto, to have been the author and inuentour of them,
and of the funeral ceremonies, as I have already told thee before.

After whom came Aeneas, who in the honor of his Aeneas. Anchises.
Father Anchises, ordained and made Anniuersaries and yearly feasts, and
sacrifices for the dead, as the ancient histories do witness, whom the
Poets have followed, who do describe those things very amply, and chieslye
Virgile, who brings in Aeneas speakinge unto his compaignions in this manner.

You mighty Troyans, from the blood of great Gods that descend, Virg. Aene. 5

This time is come about, a perfect year is now at end,
Since when my father Anchisos blessed bones were put in ground
And mourning alters for his holy relikes we did found.
And now the day (if I do not mistake) approaches near,
That unto me, shall ever doleful be, and ever dear.
Since Gods has pleased so: If I this day were cast a land,
Among the savage Moors, or on the shotes of Syrtes sand.
Or eaught on Greekish seas, or in Mycena town a^slaue,
Yet pay my yearly vows I would, with pomp of duties brave,
And gifts in feastfull guise, on alters large I would advance,
Now here in haven we be, among our friends, not by no chance,
But by the Gods (I trust) of purpose wrought, and for the nones,
To worship here my fathers blessed dust, and precious bones.
Come on therefore, let every man set forth these honors pure,
With mirth on every side, that of good vvindes we may be sure,
And as I yearly now these offering days to him do make,
So when my City builded is, in Temples he shall take.
Now following the vow that Aeneas made here, Ovid Ovid, Fast. 2
also witnesses how that manner of doing, by him was carryd into Italy,
saying.

Aeneas, the first deviser was,
of all true godliness,
Which order brought to Italian land
as stories do express:
That yearly gifts for fathers souls,
to Temple should be brought.
From him the people learned had,
new customs never taught.
After Aeneas came Romulus, who did follow his example, Romul. Remus. Lemuria.
Plut. in Romans The feasts of the dead in May.
and has also ordained a feast, called Lemuria, or Remuria, and an
Anniuersarie in the month of May, for his brother Remus and others that be
dead, as many historiographers do witness, and Ovid vescribeth after in this
sort, saying:

The order was of sacrifice, Ovid. Fast. 5.

on days Remuria hight,
For silly souls that were in pain
to sing a Ditge at night.
The year then was not full so long
for Februa feasts were none,
Nor Ianus guider of the months
With double shape was known:
Yet after by and by they brought
offerings for souls to have,
And Nephews sacrifyces made
for graunsires laid in grave.
And by and by afterward says:

Romulus that day Remuria hight
that sacrifice for sin,
For graundsires souls from body past
was offered first by him.
Now Numa the successor of Romulus, not being contented with that which has
been already instituted by Numa.
his predecessors, amongst other ceremonies that he gave unto the ^emishe
people, be has yet added unto the Feasts for ye dead in February Lupercaies
Plat. in Romans Ovid. Fast. 2 The signth^ati.
first an other feast for the dead in the month of February which he
celebrated yearelye, and continued eleune days, that which Romulus, in
institutinge the feast of Lupercales has already somewhat begun. For that on
of February Consorius Plutarch Sex. Pomp.
cause was that month called, February, the which Num^ has added with
January, to the year of Romulus which was not but ten months, and keeps
yet the name. For February sigmfieth as much in Latin, as purgation or
Purgatory. And therefore ye name was given unto that second month, because of
the feasts and sacrifices which were celebrated, as well for the purgation of
the souls, as for, the purification of the City and all the country: to the
which thing all that month was dedicated: the which Ovid has all comprised
in these verses, saying:

The Roman fathers Februa hight, a sacrifice for sin, Fast. 2.

And to the word does crodue give, as does consist therein:
And whatsoever is prepared, by any means they may,
Is for to purge our bodies so, that sin rest not nor stay. February.

In time therefore of Fathers old, vvhieh sheared not their hair
That month then took his name thereoff, as it shall hear appear.
At what time that the Lupersales, with sin be rent and torn
Did purne the earth from filthy sin that then was al forlorn.
Or else because those times be pure, that dead appeased be
When offering days be gone and past, as that time they did see.

Theophilus. Friend Eusebius, if you are not contented with the authority of
Ovid, yet I think at the leastwise you will not relect that same of Saint
Augustine, who in his books of the City of God, speakinge August. de ciui
Des. li. 7. c. 7
of that same matter confirms that which Ovid has written, alledginge
his^owne verses, and says among other things. In that month was made the
holy Purgatory, Sacrum Purgatorium quod vocant February
which they call Februm. He understands by the same that the Panims did make
in that time, their holy and sacred sacrifices of purgation, as we would
say no we at this day the Purgatory, or purgatine Mass.


Hilarious. Besides those general feasts and which were common to all the dead,
according to the viuersitie of the countries and nations, and as ye case
requires and the person which dyed, they had other feasts and Annirersaries
more particular either for one, or for many, as the Greeks had a custom The
obseqnies of the Greeks in September.
to celebrate the xbj: day of the month of September, the Dbsequies and
Anniuersaries of those which dyed in the war, fighting against the Persinns, as
witnesses Plutarch: Plat. in Aristide Anniuersaries in Nonember. Plut. in
Marce lo. forum boar^um. Cice. pro Flaccs and li. 2. de legs Liui 4. bell puns
Casa. li. 7. bell. gal.
Also he witnesses ye at Rome they did the like in the month of November, for
the Gaulois, Frechmen and Greeks, which have been buried in the place which
was called the Bullock market. And Gicero and Titus Liuius do offe^times make
inention of such feast days of the Panims and good deeds.


Theophilus. He has learned by those things, even as we do see daily the lilte
practice in our Popes and prelates of the Church, who have always added
ceremonies upon ceremonies: superstition upon superstition, and Idolatry upon
Idolatry, and have daily augmented them, since that they are once begun,
insomuch that it is not possible that they can proceed any further. For we do
surmount and exceed already long since, all the ancient Idolaters in Idolatry.
Wherefore we have better occasion to complain, then S. Augustine had in his
time, which differed much from ours: And The complaynt of S. Augustine Epist.
ad lannu artus. 119
yet nevertheless he did greatly complain of the multitude of ceremonies and
superstitions with which already the Church was then ouercharged and
corrupted. Therefore said he, our Lord Jesus Christ willing to give unto his
church a great liberty: would not make it to be, subject unto many ceremonies,
but only unto a little certain number of sacraments: And yet nevertheless it
is now so much charged, The charge of ceremonies.
that the condition of the Jews who were under the shadows and figures, and
the servitude and bondage of ye law, is more tolerable then ours, and chiesly
in that that the ceremonies which they had, were given unto them of God, but
those which have been brought into the Cstristtan Church, are nothing else but
man's presumptions and inventions of presumptious and ouerbolde men.


Hilarious. Truly he should have now other occasion to write the same, if he
did see the train that the Papists do hold: as well toward the quick as
toward the dead: we may assuredly affirm that Pluto was no less the
author of the Dbsequies, Funerals, Dbites, Legates, Anniuersaries The Pluto of
the christians.
and other like things, which are at this day used among the Christians, as
among the Panims. For Pluto is the God of riches. And what has been the first
cause, and first foundation of all these things, and of Purgaforye, and of
those dependaunces, and the occasion of so much augmenting and increasing of
them, but the insatiable avarice and covetousness of the great Romish Pluto,
and of his Mercuries, and other like Gods, which are joined with The office of
Mercury,
him? For if we by just occasion, do call him Pluto, we have no less occasion
to compare both him and his unto Mercury, Call. Rho. lect. Ant. li. 18. ^. 6
whose office is among the Gods, to lead and bring the souls in those
Plutonical and infernal regions and kingdoms, after that they be separated
from the body, He has to do now in heaven, now in the earth, and by and by
in hell. The which thing was one of the causes, wherefore the Panims did paint
his picture and Image, having three heads. In steed whereoff our Pluto, has
his three crowns, for to declare Mercury has three heads Tyrephalos. The
three Popish crovvries Hecate triuia and trifortmis.
that he has power in heaven, earth and hell, and that he holds the place of
Hecate, unto whom the Idolaters do attribute three forms, and such a power:
the which the Pope does attribute unto himself altogether. For he is mounted
and ascended into such arrogancy and pride, that he dare take upon him to
command the Angels and the The Popes power. Virg. Aene. 6. Orpheus and
Euridice. Castor and Pollux. Theseus and Pirothus Hercules. The harp of
Orpheus and that of and Pope
Dyuels, and to stretch forth his hand even to the hells, for to pull from
thence the souls, and those which are thither descended, but it is after that
sort as Orpheus went to seek his wife Eurydice, Pollux his brother Castor: The^
seus and Pyrothus who ravished Proserpina: Dr as Hercules descended thither,
for to bring away Cerberus. For I doubt not, but that these poetical fables do
contain as much truth, as yt which yt Pope would make us to believe. And I
believe yt his Musitions and Singers have no more tertue, then the Harp of
Orpheus for to draw the souls from Purgatory: But he has a Harp upon which
he plays better, then ever Orpheus did, For by ye means of the same, he
eateheth every thing, and nothing escapes him, but y^ he brings al things
under his wing, Wherefore we may rightly attribute unto him three heads, as unto
Mercury Geryo^
and Cerberus, and three bodies, as unto Geryon, since that he has such credit
with ye celestial and infernal gods, that he commands yt. Angels of heaven,
that they bring unto the joys of paradise, the soul of him who for his
pardons goes to Rome, and that he be delivered from Purgatory. And he says
yet moreover, we will not, that the pain of hell be any thing at al enjoined
unto such a person. And it is not sufficient for him to vsurps such authority
and seigniory upon hyn, but he does also give that power unto those which do
receive his Cromade, ^o deliver from Purgatory three or four souls, yea, such
as they will themselves. The bull of Glement.



Thomas. Is it possible yt he is so shameless and ouerbold?


Hilarious: The Bull of Pope Clement may bear witness of it, ye which is kept
yet at this day well sealed with seals of lead at Vienna, Limoges, Poictiers,
and in the coffers of yt privileges. It is very true yt the Sorbo^nists of
Paris would not allow it, but condemned it. But yet nevertheless it must
needs be that it must pass by their hands. He has also a great many other
proverties in him, for the which one may compare both him and his unto
Mercury, who was in Other offices of Mercury Rhod. lectant. li. 16. ca. 19 The
Image of Mercury
like manner holden and accounted of the Panims, for the God of gain, of
merchants, deceivers, hers and thieves. And therefore they painted him with a
serip, did set his Image in the middle of the market, and before the gates of
the houses, for to keep them, and for to drive away ye other thieves: because
that he was the greatest, and Prince of others. For did the earth bring forth
ever such deceivers, abusers, and liers, such merchaunts, and more covetous of
filthy gain? They may well carry the scri^. For that is the cabin from The
scrippe of Mercury
which do come forth all these laws, canons and decrees, for to yet the money
both of the living and also of the dead. And he caryeth not the key without a
cause, for to open and shut the gates, and to empty the coffers and scrippes,
and to take away the pray from other thieves, of whom he is the Captain.
At the leastwise, none can denfe, but that the doctrine of the Panims, as much
as concerns the dead; is more reasonable then that of the Papists. For
although that the Theologians of the A little cost about the dead.
Pamins, do allow the Ceremonies, Feasts, and Anniuersaries of the dead, yet
nevertheless they do also teach, that it is not now needful to bestow
any great cost about them, but that they content themselves with a little
thing, even as Ovid the master of ceremonies, witnesses Ovid. Fast. 2,
in his Calender, in these words.

It is an honor dew to souls
and bodies that be dead
To bring such gifts to yerksome grave,
as satisfye their mead.
The souls do much delight therein
and much the same does crave,
By means whereoff themselves they think,
from Plutos force: to save.
With flowers green and garlands gay,
their heads they do adorn:
And wine and salt is put thereto
with other fruits and corn.
Nor things of more weight I reprove
For souls therein delight,
On grave say thou thy prayers then,
that ghostes may have their right.
Whereunto agrees also the Dracle of Apollo, speaking The Oracle of Apollo.
of the sacrifices of the infernal Gods, and of the souls, in these words.

The Gods which with their bodies black, about the world do fly, Which also
daily sacrifice, require incessauntly, Iucense of Meal and salted fruits, and
also pleasant Cakes, See that you make together mixed, as dainty delicates.

For that cause they used in, that time there, to set The banquet and supper
of the dead.
such meats upon a. stpue^to the cude that the good scules and shadows should
come and banquet there, and they called that banquet and supper, that they made
for them Silicernium, Silyeernium.
because that the shadows and the souls behold it in stlence. They do also
call it Feralis Coena, as we Feralis e^na
may say the supper of the dead: of which speaks luuenal, confirminge the
things above spoken, after this manner.

In platters small, the suppers they do put. (...). Saly. 5
^o^ bodies dead, in loathsome grave laid up.

And in like manner Persius, speaking of him which consumed Pers. Saty. 6
his goods foolishly:

The heir with wrathful ire does pine
to see thy goods so spent,
Nor funeral feasts esteem will he
not made to his intent.
I do think that Baruch did understand by such suppers, Baruch. 6. e. 30.
that which is written in his book, of the Priests of the Babilonians and
Idolaters, saying: The Priests sit in their temples, having open clothes,
whose beads and beardes are shaven, and have nothing upon their beads:
roaring and crying upon their Gods, as men do at the feast, when one is dead.
He shows in sewe words, the manner that the Idolaters had, both in their
divine service for the Gods, and the office of the dead.


Hilarious. And what had they that we have not? do not our Priests roar
and cry both after their Gods and after the dead? may we not rightlye call
their Masses of Requiem, the supper of the dead? For they have all that which
Baruch has comprehended, without faylinge one hair of ones head. It may have
peradventure some differ^ce in that yt the Mass is song in the morning.
Wherefore it should soeme more fitter, to call it, the draft of wine, or the
breakfast or dinner of the dead?


Thomas. That which thou have spoken to cover the able to the d^^^, is used yet
at this day of some, who at the fense that is made when one is dead, do leave
all night the Table covered and set full The table covered for the souls.
of meats, being of that opinion that the souls do come thither to banquet.


Theophilus. Master John Belet witnesses nevertheless M. John Belet. Rat.
dius. off. 1^. 7. Rub. de cath. 5. Pet. The feast of S. Peter's chair.
in his book that he made of the Legend of Saints, and feasts of all the
year, that the ancients have ordained the feast of Saint Peter's chair in
February, upon such a day as the Panyms accustomed to offer yearly, Wine,
and other meats upon the Sepulchers of the dead, and to banquet them, thinking
that the souls and shadows which passed by the Sepulchers, would come and
eat. Wherefore to abolishe that superstitious and witked custom, they have
constituted that that feast should be celebrated, the which for that cause was
called at the beginning, the feast of Saint Peter of meats and bankets.


Hilarious. And what have they gained by changing it? The poor Christian
people have no profit by it, and there is no gain but for the Priests, which
in ste ede thereof, have at this day their stones and aulters, upon which they
do lay their table clothes, and afterward when the table is spread and
covered, we must take care for the meats, and pay the banquet, and yet
nevertheless we cate nothing at all, but are as the Panims, which bring the
supper to the dead, afterward they only look on them, not daring to touch
it, which was also the one of the causes, wherefore that banquet was called
Silicernium, as witnesses Donatus. For they did think, that whosoever did
taste, eat or drink of that which was offered unto the Donat in Adelph Terent.
dead, was polluted and defiled. But our priests fear not that For they
themselves do eat with they? domestical he Nymphs A the Priests and of the
panims
Nymphs, which beuoure and consume with them, the relief which remained for
yt souls. For such Nymphs, do take no less pleasure in sweet and deheate
meats, then those of the Panims, who would that one should offer unto them wine
and ^ony, as witnessoth the Oracle of Apollorsaying:

The Nymphs are glad and make good fare The Oracle of Apollo.
with honey and wine, which pleasant are.

In steed of them we have those paliards and whorehunters unto whom we must
offer under the title and name of the Souls, who endeavor themselves so well,
that nothing of the offerings remains, although that yt shadows and souls
diminish them nothing at al. For they baue not very great bellies: except
peradventure there be dronkerds, like unto those of the bawd, unto when
Propeise gives the Requiescant in pace, saying. Properse. Requise ^^ in pace
of the havvde.


Thou slinking bavvde and filthy whore, and strumpet al forlornt,
Thy loathsome Tomb is over groan with sharp and pricking thorn
Thy ghost' is dry, and fore a thirst, and so will still remain
Against thy will it must be so, why should I to thee saine.

Thomas, Yet nevertheless a man shall find shadows which do eat very well,
and which have good teeth and great bellies.


Hilarious. If thou do take the shadows for those Shalovves having teeth and
bellyes.
which come unto the bankets, not being bid with those which are the gestes, I
grant unto thee, that such shadows have not the taste in the teeth, nor live
not of the dew, as the Grasshoppers: or of the wind as the Camelion. But the
shadows of which I speak, are of another nature. The ancients called those
whom thou speak Cigales. Chameleon. (...) 1 cent. 1.
off, shadows, because that they follow and accompany those that are bidden,
as the shatowe solloweth and accompanies the body, and under color of them,
all though that they be not called by him that makes the banquet, do keep
nevertheless company with the gestes, and sit at the table with them. After
that sort did Plutarch The shadows of the dead. Ving. Aene. 6. Phn. li. 7
ca. 55
expound it, and Horace among the Latius has often used it. For when such
shadows are at the table, they do effectually show yt they are not vain and
empty shadows, but of bodies altogether fat and massy. But when the ancients
do speak of the shadows of those that be dead, they understand not properly
their souls, but their visio^s and fantafficall figures, which do watch about
the Sepulchers, Trang. in talig Cice. Tuse. ^. li. ^
and do show themselves as shadows, in the form and likeness of bodies, which
yet nevertheless were not, and vanished away when (...) did come nigh them,
and when one did think to tonche them, as a shadow and smoke.


Thomas. I do verily believe that those do not much diminish the meats.


Eusebius. Also one may well know, that there is now none so foolish that does
think that the souls do eat the offerings: But we do carry them at their
feast days, for to nourish the servants of God, through whose prayers, and by
reason of the Masses and good deeds that they do upon such days for them,
they have deliverance and rest.


Hilarious, That is the cause wherefore their Bing pluto, and Neoptolemus,
Eacus, Minos and Radamantus, yt criminal Judges of the Infernal court, and
of those Plutonicall Regions, do open unto them the charters and prysons of
Purgatory, and do give unto them field plays and pastimes and leave to play a
little, as the School masters The plays and pastimes for the souls.
do give unto their scollers, for to take some recreation and pastime, even as
Mantuan witnesses saying.

As often as men their Sacrafice Mantua. li. 3. Alphonsi.

By alms or seasts do make:
Or else by prayers they do think.
the needies thirst to slake,
To bellies rage and pamperd flesh
a brydell they do set,
And to the gods they do pour out
their prayers from heart yfet.
By means whereoff, the furious rage
of windy force is laid
For gods thereto agreed has
which makes them well apayd.
By use whereoff and gods good grace
they have both mirth and joy.
And save them from the hellish rage
that does their souls anoye.
It were good reason that they should have at the least The days of Aristotle.
once or twice in the year, some good Aristotolicall days for to delight and
refresh themselves and for to bring them out of these hot and burning furnaces.
I pray thee think what joy they do make, when that they feel and perceive
their feast to draw nigh, in which they look to have some liberty and to
find some little grace and favor of their king Pluto, by whom I mean him of
whom the French Poet has written after this manner, in his hell.

It is the holy name of Pope, that hellish hounds embrace,
And with his stole can cull them in, and win them to his grace,
But fear thou not, that monster great, that does affirm and say,
That hell to open and also shut, he both them can and may,
Yea he it is, by scorching heat, that martyr can the souls
And thousand thousands ryd he can from heat of parching coals.
I think that then he holds his keys in the right hand The merry conceits
and iestes of a holy father
for to let loose a little these poor souls, that they should laugh and be
merry, if that be true which a holy father preached at Bordeaux, saying and
affirming, that when one offers for the dead, and that the souls do hear
the sound of the money which falls ting, ting, in the basin, or the bore
prepared to receive the offering, they receive so great joy, and do begin
so much to laugh, that they do make a noise, ha, ha, ha, hi, hi, hi. What will thou more? should one spoil and rob them of their laughing? The laughing of
the souls



Thomas. And did that holy father laugh, so in the pulpit?


Hilarious, Thou do well know that the play had been nothing worth otherwise
and it behooves that a good player of jests and games, do reprcsente and make
all the lestures and parts of the parsonnes whose part he plays. And will thou know whether he spoke it in carnest or not? I believe that he did swear
yt it was so, by his breast, by the faith of his Pricsthoode: and by the Mass
he song this day, and the God that he had eaten. But for to return unto the
bankettes of the souls: how much do thou think that they have spente? I
think that they do less burte unto those meats, then the flies, and that
they do but lych a little upon it. Wherefore one cannot perceive the cost,
for to reckon to them their shot: Nevertheless although that accoroing to the
Theology of Ovid, they are contented with a little, yet they are
notwithstanding meruailously sorrowful and angry, and do rage out of measure
when The puni^hmet for the dtspising of the souls Fast. 2.
one forgets them without making any account, and doing his duty toward
them, and do avenge themselves rigorouslye as the Theologyan before alleged
witnesses, speaking of that matter, and of their feast, saying:

When doubtful chaunco of victory, with foes in field was tried,
Then sunerals for parents souls, was laid clean aside,
And though that flames for corses dead, did heat the walls of Rome
Yet seapt they not unpunished, by just and rightful dome,
He means by the same that they were stricken with so terrible diseases, and
so great mortality, that every day men ceased not to make great fires in the
suburbs of the City, for to burn the bodies of those which daily dyed to a
great number.


Thomas. But how have the Romans imagined, that their evil proceeded
thereby? For they had a certain excuse, because of the great affairs that they
had.


Hilarious. Dur Doctor before alleged, expounds also the manner how the
same came unto their knowledge, saying. Fast. 2. Souls and man. dring shadovvs


The graundfathers reported are,
by night from Tomb to come
And in those times do much bewail,
the wrongs unto them done.
For sacrifice not for them made
their souls by streets do glide.
And through fields and deserts great,
in woeful dole do slide.
They learned to their cost, not to despise and forget any more the souls,
and they did set such good order, yt they never afterwaids tt,eir realt and
solemuitie was forgotten and onlitted, without being ducly celebrated, as it
ought to be according to the ancient manner.


Thomas. And did that profit them any thing al all?


Hilarious. Mark the answer and witness of the same Doctor, saying.

But after sacrifices done
that did surcease of yore
These monstrous shapes and mortal plagues
afflicted them no more.
Who will deuy but that Ovid was a true Prophet of the Popes? who has
prefigured and described in his feasts and Calender, the feasts and popish
Religion. so well in every point, yt there is no more to be spoken of it? for
what other thing is the popish Religion, then the Fast. 2. Ovid the popes
Propact.
contmucation and maintenance of the ancient Rome? the which this man here
has succeeded, observed and kept all in all.


Theophilus. He has hit the nail on the head. Wherefore The Calender of Ovid
The Romish to lygion old and new
you do no wrong friend Eusebius, in saying yt you would live as your
predecessors: For those old Idolatrous Romans are your true predecessors,
since that you will follow them, and not yt Prophets and Apostles of Jesus
Christ: And even as those fictions, appearing of spirits and Predecessors of
the Papilt.
shadows; served among the Panyins but for to nourish, keep and confirm the
Idolatry? even so is it at this V Vherevnto yt appearing of sdirits protend.
day among the Papists. In steed that yt Romans ought to acknowledge and
confelse that God punished the^, because of their abominable Idolatry,
msatlable avarice, stelthes violences, murders and sheading of man's blood,
which was shed by them through out the universal world, they have rather
presumed and thought, yt those evils. happened unto the^e, because yt they had
not wei done their duty toward yt souls of yt dead, yt is to save, because
yt they had not well served and honored yt devil as he would be: unto who^
they did make those sacrifices, not unto God, since yt of him they had not
received commandment, nor such laws and ordinances.


Hilarious At yt least, friend Eusebius you can not deny, but yt your religion
has great confirnutie, with yt which you have already heard: But I will yet
declare and show unto thee more, without swaruing from the feast of yt dead.
For there were other laws, statutes and customs The co^sormitie betvveene the
Popish relygio^ and the panims. Marriage forbid deli certain times among the
Panans. February
yt you keep at this day, saving yt there is a little difference in yt
months and days. But else all is one. They had certain months in the year,
in which it was not lawefull to mary nor to celebrate marriage: not yt it was
forbioden al yt month through out, but only certain days in every one of
the^: of which february had elcuen, which we dedicated unto yt dead, as Ovid
withnesseth, saying:

Now all that time of sacrifice Fast. 2.

no wedding might they see,
Nor bride to bridegroume, might be known
by vow to lynked be.
Nor virgins fair in Mothers sight
that marygeable were,
By tricking might set out and dress,
their yellow bush of hair.
The marriage mocions now were gonne
and love was laid a side
And duties due to bodies dead Hymeneus the God of marriage

in place began creep and glide.
This feast endured and abode
so many days they say:
As is the month above eleven The month of March. The procession of Mats
Fast. 3. The comhat of Mars and Miner ua. Porpbyrion in Horat.

this do they not denay.
That forbidding also took place in yt month of March, but it continued but
three days, during yt which they made the feast and procession of Mars the
God of battle: whom the Goddess Minerua banquished in the combat and battle
that they had together of marriage. ^f whom Minerua obtaining her Uirginitye,
was called Neruie, in the honor of whom the maidens and suoemen did abstain
from marriage, these three days together. There remains yet almost as many
days for Vay, because May. Pluta in Romu Porphy. in Horal. ^ pist. vlts.
Past. 5.
of the feast of the dead, instituted in such time by Romulus as already has
been declared, and Ovid also witnesses it saying.

Nor were those days, for marriage apt.
for wydow nor for maid
And they that married in those times,
with loss of life were paid.
And for that cause, as proverb old Common Proverb.

does both affirm and say
That for to wed has been forbid
even in the monthe of May.
I know not whether there be any other time, in which marriage was prohtbited,
except one part of the first days of June, until such time as the filthiness
which men took from the temple of Vesta, after that it was purged and made
clean, were cast into the kyuer: as it appears by the verses of the poet
before allcvged, who brings in Sanctus Fidius speaking of his daughter in
these words.

A time of marriage then I sought Fast. 6.

that so by law might bear
That join I might, him whom I lyckt
her whom I held full dear.
Then found I that the Ides of lune
to my desire did gree,
That daughter to a son in law
might mstly linked be.
And that the first part of the month,
thereto does not agree,
As Sacrificers wise of late
full often has said to me.
But till that quiet Tiber does
the silth from Vesta rear
By trickling flowing water move
and so to sea them bear.
I think it lawful not for me
my rugged hair to comb,
Nor yet for me to pare my nails,
until dew time does come.
Now I pray thee consider friend Eusebius, whether in your religion that order
be much changed, and whether you The conformity betvveene ye God Mars and S.
George
have kept those ceremonies. I could here declare unto thee the conformity
the which your feast of Saint George has with that of Mars. For you have S.
George for the God of battle and patron of the soldiers, in steed as the
Panims had Mars. As touching his feast, there is difference of the time, saving
that the one is kept in the moncth of April, and that of Mars in the month of
March, in whose honor it The Image of Saint George cast into Seine. John Maio.
4 sent. did. 49 9. 5.
keeps his name. Although that Saint George showed not himself to be any
valiant knight, when he suffered his Image to be cast into the river of Seine,
of those of the new city of S. George, nigh unto Paris, because that the vines
were frosen upon his feast day. I might also bring in the conformity which you
make between the virgin Mary and Minerua: For you have consecrated for them
feasts all in one month, but I will not now so much dilate and enlarge the
matter. Yet nevertheless because of the affinity and conjunction that the one
of the superstitions has with the other, in declaringe the feasts of the
dead, I will myngle in the deduction of the matter, some other Ceremonies,
because of the kyndred and neyghbourhoode. I demand then of thee first of
all The conformity of ye feasts of the dead. February and November
friend Eusebius, whether there be any great dyfference between the feast
of the dead, which is celebrated at Rome in the month of February, and yours
of November, the which you do celebrate the day after all Saindes?


Eusebius. As thou have accustomed to do thou will find always by thy
slanders, such agreeinge as thou will.


Hilarious. Here needs no slander. We must follow but the simple
verity. If thou do think that it agrees not to thy fantasy, because of
the distaunce that it has from the month of November unto Februarye, at the
leastwise thou can not deny, but that it agrees with the time, between
yours, and that which the Romans celebrated for the Gaulois and Greeks that
were buried in the Bullock market. There is no difference as concerning the
time, but only in this, that yours is at the Plut. in Mar Pantheon and all
Saints
beginning of the month, and theirs in the end. Furthermore thou can not
deny, but that there is conformity between the Pantheon of the Panims, and
your feast of all Saints: And even as they had the feast of all the celestial
Gods, and that of the infernal Gods, and for the souls of the dead, have not
you also the like, celebrating after the feast of all the Saints which are
in heaven, that of the dead which are yet detayned and kept in Purgatory. They
do call Pantheon an ancient Temple which was dedicated unto Cyble the great
Goddess, Cyble.
mother of the Gods, and consequentlye unto all the other Gods, of whom he
bears the name. For Pantheon signifies as much, as if we should say, all
Pompo. lst. de Roma. antiq. Barth. Marl. de antiq. Roma To. pog. ls. 6. ca. 6.
S. M. uia la. Retende
Gods, even as we say, all Saints. For they had those Gods in such
reputation, as you have the Saints, in the honor of whom they have
celebrated the feast, and made sacrifices in that Temple, which is at this
day at Rome, and is called Saint Mary La Rotonde, because that it was made
round like unto a Bowl, for to represent the form and fashion of the world.
But in steed that it was dedicated unto Cyble, and to all the other Gods, it
is now dedicated unto Sayncte Mary, and to all the Saints, to the end that
all your papystleall Gods should have such honor, as those of the Idolaters,
and their feasts to he regysteed as well as theirs.

And so by that means Satan is always honored in steed of God, as he was
before under the name and title The mask of Satan
of Cyble and of other Gods and Goddesses, saving that he has changed
those old names into other all new and pleasant and favorable among the
Christyans, for to disguyse himself, to the end he should not be known,
and that under a goodly color he may the easelyer blaspheme God, and
dishonor the Virgin Mary and all the Saints and Saints under the color of
honouringe them. And without speakinge of other Saints and Saints, we may
well know, how he would The conformity of Cible and out Lady. Turrita
Cybloe. Virg. Aene. 6. Cyble wering a crown. Juno and Diana queen of heaven.
luno luctnd. Ovid. Fast. 2. Plant. in Aulul Terent. in And Horat. in car. secu.
Ourd. Meta. 9 S. Margaret Diand. Strongilio Diana the round. Praxitsles Plut.
in number.
have the Virgin Mary to hold the place of Cyble, Juno and Diana. For first
of all he has caused the Temple of Cyble and others to be dedicated unto
her. And as Cyble did wear a Crown, made after the fashyon of a Tower, so
has he found the means to represente the Virgin Mary by a crowned Idol,
and to attrybute to her yt title, that the Idolaters did give unto Juno and
Diana, calling her Queen of Heaven: and also gyuinge unto her the office to
aid and help women that are in travail with child, which among the Panyms
was given unto those two. Wherefore I beloeue that they have added Saint
Margaret, to the end there should be two, as well as the Panyms had.
Furthermore, as the Panims had a Diana, which was called, Strongilios, that is
to say, La Rotonde or the Round, because of the Kounde Image, which
Praxitiles, the ercellent Paintour had made for them, and that the Romans
had the Temple of Vesta round. Also has he found the practice to make for
us a Saynct Mary La Round, or Rotonde. I do remember that which Plinye
witnesses and other Autheurs, how that that Temple was also at the beginning
dedicated unto Jupiter the revenger, and afterward unto all the other Gods,
because that almost all the Images of them all were Pliny. li. 34. c. 3 and ^.
36. c. 15
there.


Theophilus. I believe that at the leastwyse Eusebius wpll not deem that which
their own books do witness and confirm, namely Platine, Durand and
Rergomeusis, In vi^ Bontfac 4 Rat. dmi. eff. li. 9. Rub defest. emni. fancto.
Boniface. 4. Phocas. Supl. chro. li. 10 The feasts of Martirs and Co sessors.
Gregory. 4. Durant. Rat. Ami. off. h. 7. Rub. ^de fest omnium Sanct. Platt. in
vita Grego. 4 Bergo. Suppl. chro. li. 11.
wytnessinge the same, how that first of all Pope Boniface the fourth,
demaundeo that Temple of the Emperor Phocas, who after that he had obtained
it, deoycated it unto our Lady, and to all the Martyrs, and commanded that
the feast should be celebrated the twelfe day of the month of May, in the
honor of the Mirgin Mary and of all the Martyrs, for that cause it was called
the feast of the Dhrgin Mary unto the Spartyrs, because that then the feasts of
the Confessors was not then made, until the time of Pope Gregory the fourth,
who transported and changed that feast, from the twelfe of Pay, unto the
first day of November, and there dedycated not only unto the Apostles and
Martyrs, but also unto the Trmitie, unto all the Angels, Confessors, Saints and
Saints in Paradise. And this was done about the year 831. Now it is good
reason, since that all the Saints and Saints of Paradyse have their feast,
that the ^oorc souls of Purgatory should have theirs also.

For they have a great deal more need then the Saints which are already at
rest, for to comfort and refresh them a little. And therefore Odillo, that
holy Abbot of Saint The feast of the dead Odillo. P. Damnia. Rat. diui. off.
li. 7. Rub de off mort. Rerge. li. 12 John. 16
Cluny moved with pity and compassion, found and ordained the first, that
after the feast of all Saints, the commemoration of the dead should be also
celebrated, first in Burgony, the which Pope John the sirtene allowed, and
commanded to be observed thorowout the other churches, about the year 982.
Wherefore thou may know and judge whether that such Ceremonies and manner
of dooinges be very ancient, and whether Jesus Christ and his Apostles, or
the ancient Fathers have been the Authors and inuentours of them: and whether
they are taken of their inutation. And to the tend thou should have better
deuetyon unto the feast, I would gladlye thou should understande, that it
has been the sauctitie and vertueo of that Pope John, who has allowed it and
recommaunded and betoo'se it to his Churches, and the praises that Platine The
manners and life of Pope John. Plat in vitn, lon. 16.
gave unto him, in writing his life, saying after this manner: that after that
he was come unto the Popedom, he burned with a marvelous hatred against ye
Clergy. Wherefore he was greatly hated of them, chiefly because he gave and
bestowed all offices, all divine and human things, unto Beneflces and offices
given by parentage.
his parents, friends and kinsfolk, not having any care of the honor of God:
of which error he has so put these in possession which came after him, that
it is come unto our age. He also witnesses that in that time appeared a
burning Comete, in sign and token of evils to come.

For then there was great famine and peltilence and great Bergo li. 12. Couicte.
earthquakes: of which evils Platine attributes all the fault, unto the pride
and rapacifie of the Pope, and for diso pising and contempninge of God and men.
That was also about that time as the transubstantiation and the
Transubstantiation. Berengarius. bergo. li. 12 Plat. in lo. 15 De cousec. did.
2. ca. ego.
Masses for the dead took great virtue and credit, and that Berengarius, whom
his very enemies were constrained to praise, because of his doctrine and holy
life, was constrained to benie himself, because that he loved rather to abide
in the sentence of the ancient church, touching the Eucharistia or sacrament,
then to receive that new oppnion, of that monstrous transubstantiation, which
has been the cause of so many Ioolatryes and horrible blasphemies. Thou may
thereby understand friend Eusebius, the great goodness which almost all at
one time are come into the Church, and what devotion we ought to have, seeinge
the estate of the same, and the authors of those goodly Ceremonies. It is not
then without cause that the burninge Comete has appeared, since that the fire
The signification of the Comete.
of Purgatory is waren so hot and flameth so much. But now it is not needful
that and do expound the causes which moved Odillo to do that he did, since
that they have been already touched before.


Hilarious. It suffices now, friend Eusebius, that thou should know and
perceive how you agree with the ancient Romans. There is not much
difference, but in the time, in that that they have taken November in steed of
February and May.


Thomas. We have yet an other, in the month of January the next day after the
feast of saint Hillary. But it continues not all the day, as in November, at
the least in our City. I know not whether that be One other feast for the dead
in lanuarye
the custom in all other countries, the feast continues but in the morning,
until such time as the high Mass is song. Ovid. Past. 1. Interessidie.
Feasts cue in pieces or a sunder



Hilarious. That is not far vyfferinge from February. We may put between
them that which the Romans voe call Intercises, that is to say, to cut a
sunder, break in two, and parted in the myddle: because that they were common,
both to the Gods and men, and that we must celebrate them, until the divine
service be ended: Afterward it was lawful to every one, all the residue of
the day to return to his labor and business. Also the Priests, in that
day, after that one has done unto them the service of wine, and that they have
gathered their grapes in the morning, and received the offeringes in their
Pass, the which by reason of those they singe it, do give leave unto every
one to travail as much as he will. I would gladly that they would voe so,
in many other feasts, in which they will not give leave unto the poor
laborers to travail, although that they have cleansed and emptyed Other
feasts of the dead.
their purse in the morning. There are also in many places other feasts for
the dead, as the Sunday after Caster, and after Pentecost, that they voe
answer thoroughly to The mondayes dedicated unto the dead.
that which Romulus instituted: besides all the mondayes of all the weeks
which are dedicated unto the dead. As touching the forbidding of marriage, it
agrees berye well The forbidding of marriage
with the ancient Roman law. It was forbidden the Romans certain days
in February, March, May, and June. But ours did begin them sooner, and
continued their forbidding longer time. For during all the Aduent, almost a
month, before The aduent
the feast of the nativity, their law is in force, until S. Hillary: by and
by afterward the Septuagesima begins in the which the forbidding begins
again, and coutinueth Septuagesima. ex concslie. hill. 33. 9. 4. Non oportes
and. c. nee vxorem. Rogatichs Decre. ext. do. for. The times of fastuings 33.
7. 4.
the space of three score and ten bays, until the Octabis of Caster.
Afterward come the Rogations, and Rouations in which law is in force until
Trinity Sunday, and almost three weeks before Saint John, as the decrees
voe contain the four times Vigiles, and all the days of fastings joined unto
them.


Theophilus. Who is he that doubts, but that the same is a great curse and
vengeance of God upon the Christian people, to be subject unto such a
tyranuy of body and conscience, and to be in worse condition then the Danims?
But they are well worthy of it. For since that they had rather to be made a
Panim then a Christian, of whom they would have but the name, it is good reason
that they be subject unto the laws of the Panims, and that GOD voe show unto
them in effect that they are unworthy of the name they bear, since that under
the title of Christians they follow no other study nor religion but of the
Panims. For the ignorance, superstition and curse is so greute, that
notwithstanding that that miserable people is already so much oppressed and
kept down with tyranny, and that a great part of the time of holy marriage and
of that holy Vrdmaunce of God is taken from them, yet. being not content with
the same, they themselves of their own will do deprive themselves at other
times and seasons which is not forbidden them, having no other cause nor
reason, but their superstition and enchauntments. For there are yet at this
days many, yea, among those unto whom the Gospel has been purely prenched,
which make it a great doubt not only to mary in the time which was forbidden
by ye priests, although they have liberty to do it, but chicfly in yt month of
Pay: And for none other cause but for a foolish opinion and persuasion that
they have, that the goods and houschould stuff of those yt are married in Day,
are wicked and evil fortunate. And I cannot judge that that opinion came any
other way, then of that superstition of the Romans of which thou have spoken
off.


Hilarious. I believe no less. But the better to try out that matter let us
consider now the holiness of those goodlye 33. 44. ca. Non oportet and ca. Non
liect ex conel. La^^he^. and m. irli pap. Lent. Shrostide. Saint Galiffre.
Saint Pansard Bacchanales Baechus The feast of fools. Qutriu^les Ovid. Fast. 2
laws. First of al ye Septuagesima, Sexagesima and Quinquegesima, dofal
commonly in these three months, January, February, and March. Afterward Lent
draws on who continues many times even unto ye month of April^the which for
his entering in, has his Shrouetide, that is to say, the great feast and
solempnitie of saint Galiffre and Saint Pansard which is in steed of
Bacchanales, the feast of God Bachus, the God of drunkenness, and of Comus the
God of the gluttons, I have also forgotten that the Romans did celebrato the
feast of fools which was called the Quirinales the eighteen day of February?


Thomas. Did it continue many days?


Hilarious. It had but one day, which namely was dedicated unto it, but if they
would do him no wrong, it ought to continue all the year. At ye least wise,
from Christmas unto Shrouetide, it is not evil kept among the papisticall
Christians, and chiefly The feast of the kings.
the day of the kings, and the others following.


Theophilus, We do honor them to much to call it The feast of mad men.
the feast of the fools. For it is more worthy to be called the feast of mad
men, and of those that are out of their wits.


Hilarious. But for to return unto the Bacchanalos, to Saint Pansard, and to
the forbiddinge of marriage, Genes. 2. d 23 1. Cor. 7. ^. 2 Heb. 13. ^. 4 Hist.
trip. ^. 2 ca. 13. ^o. 323. did. 3 ^. c. Nicena.
ought it not to have suffired the Pope to have (against the word of God, and
the ancient Counsel, namelye of Nice) forbidden at all times marriage unto
all those of the Church, Priests, Moonke ^ and Nonnes, but that he must also
extend his cruelty and tyranny, upon all other estates, almost the one half
of the year? How much more tolerable and reasonable is the ancient law of
the Romans then this new tyranny? What reason have they to allow it?


Theophilus. That same of the heretics Manacheans, Manicheans. August. de
he^^^ ad quid (...) dema. Call. Rho let aut, 26. ^^, 20
who have sustituted new Ceremonies as those here, and baue forbidden marriage,
and the use of certain meats, affirming that by those things, one obtayneth
the holy Ghost, whom also Tatianus has followed, who was the authoure and
Prince of the sect of the Eucratistes, which Herom. Eucratists. Tatianus.
were called by that name because they abstained from wines and from certain
meats and from marriage. For Eucratistes signifies asuch as sober, the which
Seuerus has augmented, of whom they are called also Seuerians. Seuerus. Plat
in vit. pi^. 1.



Hilarious. The Priests and Moonkes are very much afraid, least the race of
such people should perish. Therefore have they made so many laws and have
trauayled so much to maintain their errors.


Eusebius. Exo. 19. c. 15 Abstinence and separation from women 1. Reg. 21. a.
4. David and Abi melech. loel. 2. d. 16
mountain of Sinay, did not Moses admonish and warn the people to sanctify
and make themselves holy, and that they should not come near their wives for
three days? And what did David signify by the answer that he made unto
Abimelche, when he had said unto him that he had no common bread, but that
which was hallowed, and that he asked, whether y^ he and his youngmen were
clean and kept themselves from women. And David answered the Priest and said
unto him, of a truth women has been locked up from us about a three days?
Furthermore when the Prophet Joel exhorted the people unto penance, fastings
and prayers, wherefore said he among other things, let the bridegroume go
forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet? Does not the holy
Scripture declare sufficiently unto us, how we ought to dispose and give our
selves unto penance, fastings and prayers, chiefly when the solemn feasts
do approach? and that when we must go unto the Lords table for to The
preparation the lords table.
receive his precious body and blood, is it not then requisite, that we should
abstain both from women, and from all other carnal pleasures.


Theophilus. I deny not, but that God requires of us, a great honesty, movesty
and helmes, and that we sheult abstain, not only from things which of
themselves are evil and wicked, and by he^ forbidden at all times, but it is
also requisite some time, to abstain from things which Abstinence from things
l^vvfull. 33. 9 4. ca. Quo^^escunque Ambr. ser. de adunt. 1. The. 4. a 4 1.
Pet. 3. a. 1 1. Cor. 6. c. 15. ^^he. 5. a. ^ To keep his vessel in houor
are lawful and permitted, when there is a question of some thing of great
unportance: if such things might anything at all be a let unto us. And when the
ancient Doctors have spoken of such things, they have so understood it. But
although that God desires that every one should know, how to keep his
vessel in holiness and honor, and that none do defile his own body, nor his
wives, nor of any other whosoever it be, through to great concupiscence of the
flesh, and that he also requires in the holy marriage, a Christian continency,
chastity and sobriety, as from wine and other creatures. Must he therefore
forbid marriage unto some for ever, and unto other some a great part of the
time, without excepting any person whatsoever he or she be, of what estate,
condition or infirmity that may be in them?


Hilarious. You do wrong Theophilus. For they The Popes dispensations.
are not so rigorus as you make them to be, and have not such strayte and
rigorus laws, but that for money they will release and dispense with it. But
which is more, I believe that who soever will bring money unto yt Pope, and
agree with him, that he will dispense with the child to mary with his mether,
the father with his daughter: the brother with his sister: without having
regard unto consanguinitie, divine laws nor human.


Theophilus. I doubt it not, except the shame and fear of men do let and
hinoer it sooner then the fear of God.


Hilarious. By what right shall he refuse unto others, yt which sometime some
amongst them are permitted? For which I will have none other witness at this time
but the Cpitath of Lucretia, yt daughter of Pepe Alexander, the which was made
in Latin after this manner and to Pope Alexander
this effect.

Within this to^be here now does sleep, who had to name Lucrece The Epieath of
Lucre^^
In all things she co^pard was, to I hass whore of Greece.
Whom Alexander Pope of Rome, when she remaind in life
Esteemed as his daughter in law, and used as his wife.

Theophilus. I demand of thee friend Eusebius, if God has forbiden marriage
unto every person, estates and conditions, or in any times and seasons,
wherefore does yt Pope dispense for money? For that which God has forbidden
and prohibited, cannot be lawefull for any money that one can disburse. If God
has not forbidden it, wherefore does he forbid that which God has permitted?
you cannot deny, but that he is a Tyrant, these and a pillar of the poor
people.


Hilarious. I will resolve thy doubt and will vanquish thee by a plain and
clear induction, will thou not Induction.
grant unto me, that God is above the law, and that he is subject unto none.


Theophilus. I do not gain say it.


Hilarious. Afterward, do you not confess, that God which made yt law, can
dispense with it at his pleasure, and that where there is dispensation of God,
there is no more law?


Theophilus. I also agree unto thee in that.


Hilarious. For where there is no law, as Saint Paul Romans 4. ^. 15
witnesses there is no transgression, nor sin.


Theophilus. I do now perceive where unto thou will come. I well perceive that
you mind to conclude, that since that the Pope is God in y^ earth, he may well
dispense with those laws that he gives here in earth, and that after his
dispensation there remains no more sin, unto them which offe^de against his
laws, when those laws are taken from the^, by him that gave it the^. But of
this thy conclusion, I will bring forth yet another consequence, by the which I
will prove, yt he which does against the laws of yt Pope, which have no
foundation by the word of God, does not sin but against y^ Pope, and not
against God, for To sin against the Pope and against God.
there is no tra^sgression against God, but in that wheroff there is a law of
God. Now there is in none of all those things wheroff, we have spoken: any law
given of God. Wherefore who so that maryeth in those times prohibited, he
sins not against God, but against yt Pope only? not yt I will deem, but yt we
must obey yt higher powers and rulers, not only because of fear ye we should
have of the^, and of the power that they have over us, but also for conscience
Romans 13. ^^ (...) and obediences unto Magultaces Chay for consentence
sake, as the holy Apostle teaches us, giving us thereby to understand that we
ought to obey our Princes and Lords, with a good conscience, although that we
fear not they? punishment and bengeaunce, because we must serve them as those
which serve God and not men, which is but his instrument and servant. But the
same ought to be under standed, in that wherein the power is lawful, and that
one may obey it, without hurting the soul, and peril of conscience,
notwithstanding that one should receive damage, either in body or goods. For
in another case and condition Col 3 d 13.
the answer of the Apostle abides always firm. It is better to obey God
then men.


Hilarious. I well agree unto that thou say: But thou Act. 5. f. 19.
have not yet hit the white. For I am a more subtle Logyeioner then thou
think that I am, nor I stay not only upon common arguments. And therefore let
us return again unto nune induction, the which I have not yet ended. (...)
God the Pope 13 John. 14. d 30
I am very well contented to confess unto thee, that the Pope is a God in the
earth, but in that sense, as the devil is called in the holy Scripture the
prince of this world: 1. Cor. 3. 24.
the God of this world: the ruler of darkness: or in that sense, as we do
gods the Idols and strange Gods. But there is yet a greater God and more
puissant then Ephe. 1. d. 20
he, unto whom he and all other such Gods like unto him, are subject and
obedient. Now I demand of thee where The e. de of man's Isa.
to ought we to refer the end of man's life?


Theophilus. Unto him from whom it took his beeginning. Genes. 1. a 1 Genes.
1. 2 7 Esa. 41. 3. 2. Pro. 16 2 4 Act. 14. c. 15. Act. 17. f. 24. Bphe. 1. 2. 1



Hillarias. It is then of God, who is the beginning and end of all thing, who
has made al things for himself, of whom all proceeded, and unto whom it must
^t urne again.


Theophilus. It is very true.


Hilarious. I demand of thee more over, unto what end do thou think, that
all those popish ceremonies do tend: As for me, I can The end of the Popish
laws
perceive but that they have taken their sight and regard to none other end
but unto the money. If there be any which will deny it, I will prove it like a
good Logicioner, the cause by his effects. Since then that the final cause is
the money, unto whose honor all these laws do refer themselves, and that
the same is the author, I do also conclude, The great God of the people. Mammon
Mat. 6 c. 24. Luc. 16. e. 13.
that it is the God, unto whom all these things ought to be brought: the
which Jesus Christ calls Mammou, if you will know his name in yt Hebrewe or
Siriake tongue: Dr if you had rather in Greek, we will call him Plutus: whom
Aristophanes magnifieth so much, that he Plutus. Aristoph. in Pluto.
says, that there is no God so great, no not lupiter himself, upon which he
has not rule and dominion, and which is not subject unto him.


Theophilus. That agrees not evil, with the witness of Solomon, saying: unto
money are all things obedient.


Hilarious. If you will in like manner give it a latin Eccle. 10. d. 19
name, and to make it a Goddsse, you may call it Pecunia, The gods Pecunta.
that is money, as the ancient Latinists, who have made of it a Goddess.
Whereunto agrees very well the common translation, in that place which you
alleged of Solomon, saying, unto money are all things obedient, Wherefore I am
abashed, of that which the Poet luuenal has Call. leo. aut. li. 21. ca. 34.
spoken, for that men have not made unto it a Temple, nor consecrated any
Altar, since that it is so puissant a Goddess, unto whom is attributed the
title of the Dmnipotent and altogether mighty, which belengeth unto God
alone. For it is commonly said: Money does althings.


Theophilus. Saint Augustine following the authority of Varro, also says yt
the ancients have called yt God, Aesculanus.
in Latin, Aesculanus, because that the first money yt was made, was of Brass.


Hilarious. You may already perceive, that Plutus and Pluto were brethren: or
at the least cousin Germans: sauinge that the one reigned upon the earth, and
the other underneath the earth. Now forasmuch as that GOD, whether you call
him Mammon, Plutus, Pluto, Aesculanus, or Pecunia, be the Authoure, and law
gyuer of all those laws, by good right and reason he may dyspence with them.
And when they have his dispensation, there remains no more sin, as in
respect of the Pope.

For he dispenses with more greater things, insomuch that he will not suffer
the use of marriage, to eat flesh, and white meats, but that one had need,
to sell GOD, to eat, and to do that he would doc: I mean the Gods, that
he himself has made, and of which his Priests call themselves the makers,
which yet nevertheless are but the creatures of the Selling of God. The
Creators of the Creator. Stella derc. The creators of me Pope
Pope: Do not the most greatest Cardinals which for such do acknowledge and
confess themselves.

Wherein there stands a merueilous case, the which Solin has forgotten,
when that he made his book of the meruaples and wounders of the world.

For that is a case the like whereoff, was never seen, that the Creator,
should be a Creature, and the Creature, a Ceator: as it appears by that that
the Pope is the Creator of the Cardinals, his Creatures: Afterward the
Cardinals, his Creatures are Creators of their Creator? For they do create and
make the Pope. After the same manner would they dce with their God which they
make and unmake, afterward do make him again as they list.


Theophilus. For my parts, I will net much reply against thy solution: But I
know not whether that Eusebius will be contented. And therefore I will show unto
him other reasons. If the Pope and the Priests do love so much contynencye and
chastytye, as they make a show, wherefore have they not rather followed the
counsel of Saint Paul, then to sorge and make new laws altogether contrary
both to the Aposlolicall doctrine, and the law of God?

Who is he that better knows man, his virtue, constance and continencye, or
his infirmity, fragilitye and incontinency, then GOD who has made and
fashioned Genes. 1. 2.
him, and who has thoroughly proved him?

Then if God who best did know the burden of man, Psa. 139. 2. 1.
that he himself would not restrain him by laws of continencye, which
might have been an occasion of sin and incontinencie, but he has ordained
the holy marriage for a remedy, the which he would The ordinance and use cl
marriage Mat. 9. b. 9 1. Cer. 7. b11 Heb 13. a. 4.
have common unto all estates, and unto all sort of people which have not the
gyste of contynencye, and that it was permitted at all times and seasons.

Then wherefore is it that those here will compel so long time men and women
to live chaste and do separate the Spouse from the Spouses, the Dusbande from
the wife, for to give unto them occasion to fall into whoredom? And they do
not the same for two or three days as the Israelites did, when GOD would
manifest himself unto them in the Mount Sina.

They had good occasion to sanctify and prepare The answer to the place of
the 19. of Exodus.
themselves for to see and behold that great majesty of God, and to receive
that holy law, that he would give unto them. And yet nevertheless Moses did
not assign unto them but three days, for to separate themselves from their
wines.

Abimelech required no more of David and his The place of the 1. of Samuel. 21.
li. 5 The hallowed bread. Mat. 12. a. 3.
compaignions: although that he did give unto them of the hallowed bread,
which was not lawefull to eat but for the Priests of the law only. And
yet those things are not happened, but for one time. They have not made laws
nor rules yearly or perpetual, nor common unto all men.

In like manner also Joel gave not a prefixte day unto The place of loel. 2. c.
12. Exortation un to ^^pentance.
the Israelites, but aomonyshed and athorted them only to return unto the
Lord, and to leave off all other things, and to forget all carnal pleasures
and delites, for to run unto his mercy through true repentance infastinges
and prayers, to the end he may withdraw his beatings and scorgings, the which
he had already stretched foo^th ever them, But he compelled no man. Such
erhortations and admonitions are very honest and requisite in the Church,
chiefly in the times of calamities and miseries, when God threateneth us with
his furour and Judgment, But it is more then necessary to follow the
moderation ye which Saint Paul, in such case has used, chiefly The counsel
and moderat^^ of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 7 b 11
in this time now, for that the world is so much corrupted and depraved, and
so much subject unto her carnal affections. The Apostle knowing man's infirmity,
dursse not forbid marriage to any man, of what quality soever he were off: not
only for a day: but admonished and commanded, by Gods authority, unto all
those who have not the gift of continency and chastity, for to reframe
themselves The gift of ^o^tinen^^c
without being polluted and defiled, neither in their bodies or souls, through
the burning concupiscence and work of the flesh, to mary for to avoid
fornication and whosedome, and for to keep their bodies, hearts, and
consciences Separation of the husband and the wife for a time.
in all purity and holiness. And he would not only suffer, that the husband
and the wife should separate themselves, the one from the other, ercept it be
but for a small and little time, yea for to watch unto fasting and prayer. And
upon such condition, that the separation be not over long, but that by and by
they return together again, least that Satan, by that means do find
occasion to tempte them, through their incontinency, and to ^istame their
concupiscence: And that through the fragilite of the flesh, the one or the
other of the parties do not fall into some fault and inconvenience. And the
cause wherefore that holy Apostle has written after that sort of those
matters, that is because (as he says) he would not put the haulter about any
To put the halter about ones n^cke.
man's neeke: giving us thereby to understand, that those which forbid or
hinder the holy marriage, do put the rope about the neck of those unto whom
they have forbidden, and do put them in peril of dampnation. Wherefore I am
meruaylously abashed to think, to what end those worshypfull prelates of the
Church, have thought, in forbiddinge the marriage and espousals unto all, and
for so long time: and that the stews continued open at all times. Do they
not well declare thereby that they do follow the laws and decrees of that
great whore of Babylon, the mother of fornication? Apoc. 17. 21



Eusebius. Thou condempnest thy self by thine own words. For how will they
prove the whooredome, when they require continencye and chastity in marriage?
Thou regardest not, that in condempninge the Prelates, which are now in the
Church, and following thy affections thou do also condemn the ancient
doctors and counsayles. For how many times Ambr. s^. de aduent. and in Epist.
1. Cormt. 33. 9. 4. c. setatis quoties^unque, Christiano. Qu^.
have Saint Amborse, Chrysostom, Saint Hierome, Saint Augustine and
Saint Gregory, erhorted the married folk unto contineneye, and to absteyne
from carnal works in the time of fasting and prayers, and on the solemn
feasts: and chieflye upon those days that we must go unto the Lords
table.


Theophilus. Peradventure, friend Fusebius, thou speak better then thou
thinckest: Thou dyddest not speak altogether evil, that they have erhorted:
but there is great dyfference between erhortation and forbiddinge, counsel
and commandment. I deny not but that they have made such erhortations and
admonitions unto the people, as the holy Apostle did unto the Corinthians.
Wherein we may follow them, even as they have followed the Apostle: who as
witnesses Saint Augustine himself, would not only Li. de adulte. coning.
33. 9. 4. c. Apostolus
suffer that the married persons should make any separation from the bed, at no
manner of time, not for to watch unto fasting and prayer, but through the
consent of the one and the other. Forasmuch then as the ancient Doctors do
follow that rule, we will not speak gaynst them, if they use it only for
admonytions and erhortations, leauinge in such case every one at his liberty,
without layinge unto any man bond, weight or necessity, which may induce him
to sin, and that his infirmitye cannot bear it. For even as we ought not to
constrain and compel man unto more greater continency and chastity then he
may have, and that it is not lawful for him to use the holy marriage which God
has given unto him for a remedy, so we must not condemn those unto whom
GOD has given more greater gyste of continencye, if they use it to the honor
of God, both out of marriage and also in marriage. For the honestye and
continency cannot be too great in us.


Hilarious. No truly, if it be truly and without saynednesse, and that in
steed of chastity, there be not secrtnesse and priuinesse, and that one do
not receive the rule Chastity and secretnesse. The Monkish proverb
and the proverb of the Moonkes, saying: Si non cast tamen caute: that is, if
not chastlye, yet let it be privily.


Theophilus. So do I understand it. But on the contrary, as soon as one
comes to restrain the faithful more then God would, and that the Apostle
durst not take it in hand, there is no man of so great authority that I can
allow. For we cannot deny, but that among the aunciences there were some more
rigorous and contrary unto marriage then was lawful, and chiefly Hierome
contrary unto marriage
Hierome, who so much praised virginity and wydowhoode, that oftentimes he
did injury unto marriage: And it seems that he would condemn it. As it
appeared in his writings against Iouimanus and many others. The superstition
of Gregory 33. 9. 4. ca. vir. Sent. li. 4. did. 31. Sed sort.
Also thou can not ercuse Gregory of superstition, who says, that the man
which sleeps with his own wife, ought not to enter into the Church, except
that he be first washed with water, because that although that the marriage
be permitted of God, yet nevertheless man may not have the company of his
wife, without sinninge some thing. Wherefore he has need to purge himself.
And affirms that that custom has been of long time received and allowed
in the Romish Church.


Hilarious. Nevertheless I cannot understand, upon what place of the
Scripture that custom has taken his The Jewish vvasshings Mat. 15. a. 9
Marc. 7. b 13 Pers. Saty. 2.
foundation, except upon the traditions of the Pharisees and the washings of
the Jews or Panims, and upon the doctrine of Persius, saying.

And for to do as I thee bid fulfill this just request
In Tiber early plunge thy head, even twice or thrice at lest,
And take the river water then, and all besprinckle thee,
By force and virtue of the which, the night shall purged be.

Theophilus. But when one has grieuouslye sinned, can the water purge and make
him clean? I doubt not but that that superstition is yet of that which is
left of the error of those who altogether did condemn and forbid marriage.
But yet what superstition soever might have been in some of the ancients, yet
nevertheless they forbid not the marriage, nor the espousalles, unto those
which were not married, in what time soever it were, as afterward it was
forbidden by their successors, 33. 9. 4. ex concilio Laodicens. Hilerd.
Martini Pape. Nicol. ad co^sult Bulgar. ca. non oportet. Non licet. Nec vxorem
extra. de Ma. contrac.
in the counsels of Laodocia, Hilerdien, and in that of Pope Martin and
Nicolas, who did forbid to celebrate maryages in those times above lymited, and
did command to separate for a time, those that should do the contrary.


Hilarious. It is but reason, since that they have begun the dance and
morishe, to end it altogether. Sith that they have already determined and
concluded that in the Dbsequies, Mortuaryes, Funeralles, Feasts and in good
deeds for the dead, to follow the ancient Romans their ancestors, that
they would also keep the other dependaunces of those feasts and religions.
Sith then that they would have their Februales. they must have also their
Bacchanales which they celebrated at Shrouetide, and that then the marriage The
conformity and desormitie of Bacchanales and Shroftide
should be forbidden, and the spouse separated from the espouses, and the
husband from his wife, as the Panims had a custom, for to prepare
themselves unto the Bacchanales. But there is a small dyfference, in that that
the Panyms did first their Lent, afterward their Shrouetide. For when they
would consecrate themselves for to enter and be received in the Religyon of
Bacchus, or would prepare and sanctify themselves for to celebrate the feast
of Bacchanales Preparation unto the Bacchanales Diomsiales
and Dionysiales, they did abstain themselves a certain time, to touch a
woman, and also to lie with their lawful wives, as Ovid witnesses, wrytinge
of the separation of Hercules, after this manner. Ovid. Fast. 2.


Now after that they feasted had
they gave themselves to rest,
And laid them down in beds apart
as pleased their fancy best.
They did the same for to prepare themselves more devoutly to solemnize the day
and feast due unto God Bacchus which planted the Wine. It was ordained to
keep chastity and continence and to abstain at the least ten days
together, and after to wash and purify themselves in the tenth day: But they
did recompense and acquit afterward with all dissolution, whooredome and all
abomination, the abstinenco that they made before, as one may see and
thorowelye know by that which Titus Liuius has written. But our savage and
brutishe Christians begin by Shronetide, the Tit. Liui. dec. ^ li. 9. Savage
Christians.
which has his beginning immedyatly after Christmas, and they continue it
always in augementynge the dyssolutions more and more, until Shroue^ sundaye,
Shroue sund^ye.
and the feastyuall day of Saynct Galissre, for to begin the Lent with
better douotion, and to prepare themselves more deuoutiye unto the Lords
table, to ye which yet they bear not so much reverence, as the Panims did unto
their Bacchanales. For ye most part of the Priests themselves, who will not
mary the new married folk, and which do separate the husband from the wife,
with much a do they can be without their The poseall Mass of the whores of
the Priests.
whoores upon Caster day: But do customely cause the pot to be heated at the
fire, and do make ready the dinner whilst that Monsieur the Canon, the Curate
or ^iear makes a good face or countenance in the Church, and administreth to
others. Wherefore I greatly fear least that during the time that they caused
the wives to be separated from their husbands, they do play (if they can
find the means) such a craft and deceit unto the poor and simple husbands,
as the God Faunus did think to The craste and^ deceit vvhich^ Faunus did
think to do to Hereules being separated from his wise
play with Hercules whilst that he did lie alone being separated from bys
wives bed, for to prepare himself to the solempnitie of the Bacchanales. For
that good wise man did not think to fail (according to the witness of that
good doctor Ovid and divine, before alleged) but Fast. 2.
to go and sanctify the wife of Hercules in her bed, if he had not deceived
himself, in goinge to the bed of Hercules in steed of the other that he
sought, in the which he did sinde Hercules, who made him to fall backward.

God knows whether such fortune should happen always unto the husbands
when that such Faunus do come to sanctific their beds, if they should make
them oftentimes to stumble with their heads forward. They The blessings of y^
bed of the spouse. The Faunes, Satyrs and Bulls of the christianity
may well go to bless the beds of the sponses, for to learn the way, and
to vnblesse them afterward. For those are the true Faunes, Satyrs and common
Bulls, who will leave no woman undefiled, if thee would not be ruled by
others, but by them. But in their case there is no fable, as in Poetry, for
they lay on in good earnest without fayninge. Wherefore their Doctors
Chanesi. li. de (...).
which compare the Priests unto the Cock, do no wrong. For as there must
be but one Cock, for a great company of Pullettes and Hens, so is one
Priest or Moonke in a Town or Parish enough, for to keep women from being
barren. They will not leave off, if they may possible, but to lay Cgges: But
when they have laid, and hatched them, let him that lysi bring up the
Cheekins. They do altogether contrary to the Capons, whom one causes to
nourysh and bring up the young ones which they have not hatched. They give that
office unto the husbands, and they shall be like unto the Coockowe, who goes
away after that he has laid in an other Birds neaste, and takes no care
who shall bring up her young ones, What say thou friend Eusebius? Me
thincketh that I have already declared unto thee by the occasion of the feast
of the dead, the goodly conformyties, between your Relygion and the Panyms,
touching the purifications and sanctyfications. But I will yet declare unto
thee others, which do proceed of that same beginning, or of one kindred.
From whence C^^dlemas day.
do thou think that the feast of the Purificatyon of our Lady has
taken his original and beginning?


Eusebius. I do believe that it was ordained in the honor of God and the
Uirgin Mary, and in remembrance of the presentation that she made of her
son Jesus Christ, and of the goodly works of God, which were done that
day. Luc. 2. c. 2^.



Theophilus. I do not doubt, but that the ancient Fathers, have instituteh
many feasts to a good intent, chiefly for two causes. The ffrst, for to draw
The cause of ^ institution of lea^^
away the Panims and Jews by little and little, chiefly those which had
already received the Gospel, from their Idolatrye and accustomed
superstityon, and the better to pluck from them, that which they thought they
could not well obtain, except they did change them into some other
Ceremonies: to the end that they should not think that they were The
insirmitie of man.
altogether without relygion and divine service. For they were yet very weak,
nor could? not easely^ forget their old customs. Wherefore the ancient
Fathers have studied and determined to change the I^^^ishe and Panishe
Ceremonies into some other fashions more Christian like. Therefore have they
ordained many feasts, the which they would have made to serve for
remembrances and recoroations of the benefits of God, and for examples, which
might edyfie the Church or congregation, for to abolyshe the remembrance of
the Idols and strange Gods, which were so much rooted in their hearts.
Afterward, they did see by experience, that there was great infirmytie,
rudeness and ignorance in the most greatest part of the people, and that if
they had not some feasts and Ceremonies, many would follow those of the
Jews and Panims, and have fellowshippe with their sacrifices, and would set
but little by the preachinge of the word of GOD. For there are many, which
would never set their foot within the Church door, and would never be
found in the Christian assembles, if there were never any feast. And so by
that The co^temning of the Gospel
means they are enforced to let and stop such euylls and dangers. Wherefore
they have been constrained to ordain feasts containinge the commemoration of
the principal works of God, and the principal articles of the faith, the
better to imprint into the hearts of every one, to the end that there should
be none among the Christians, but at the least he should know the principal
points of the Christian religion, upon his fingers ends: But their
institution has not taken so good effect nor such issue as they looked it
should have done. For man is of such nature, that if he be without outward
Ceremonies, either he will become altogether without God, and religion: Man
without means, and how he uses the out ward things
or else he will forge and invent a new, after his own brain. On the
coutrarye, if one give bym ceremonies, for to hold him in religion, and in his
office, he will make of them Gods and Idols, and will put all his trust in
the outward visible, and materyall ceremonye and will forsake the principal
and spyrituall things, signified by those ceremonies: and in steed to serve
him as for degrees and shows for to attain unto the true spiritual religion,
and to enter. into the true Temple of God, stays himself upon the degrees,
and before the gate, and will not enter into the house: As we see by
experience in the people of Israel, who have always more esteemed the
exterior ceremonies, then those by which God would teach them. Now if the
same be happened unto the people of God, and to the Ceremonies ordained of God
himself. as all the Prophets do witness, what may happen unto the
ceremonies and traditions invented by men? Especially when the Church has
false Prophets, or neglygent and covetous pastors and Shepheardes, which have
no care of the health and salvation of the people, and which do not travail
to pull away the superstytion and Idolatry, but rather to augement and
increase it, for to abuse the ignorance of the poor simple people to their
profit and filthy gain: cursed and too execrable is that which we at this
day do prove and feel.

For in steed to have abolyshed by the feast of Candlemas the old Idolatrye,
one has augmented and confirmed it a great deal more: the which is so much
the more dangerous, that the mask and dysguisinge of Satan is better painted
out, and has found out names and tytles more goodly and favorable, as is
that of the blessed Virgin the mother of Jesus Christ, as has been already
touched, in speakinge of Pantheon.


Hilarious. Let us consider all the matter word by word, and thou shall see,
whether that in the feast of The feasts of yt Panims contay^ned in the feast of
Candel^ mas.
Candlemas we do not celebrate the Februales, Lupercales, Proserpinales, and
Florales, of the Panims. First the name of the Purisication agrees very well
with the name of February and of the Februales, which do also signify
Purification February Februales
purifications. Afterward that purification is celebrated in the honor of
the virgin Mary, in whose name, men do bless, consecrate, and be are
Candells, Tapers of War and Torches. The Panims had all the same, Lupere^es
Ser^. Pe^^p. ^^no Februla. Felrual^. Februala Pu^^^cations of women The
whips of the Lupele les. The (...) of luno. The robes and gowns of the priests
doing miracles
or the like in their Lupercales in that same time andmoneth, and in the feast
of the Godd else luno, the which they called Februla, Februalis, and Februata,
which signifies purified or purisicatiue, because that the purifications were
made in her feast, and chiefly the same of the women, the which the Lupercall
Priests do purisie, beating them upon hands and back, with scourges and
whippes made of Goats skill, and with the cloak of Juno, with which they do
cover them, chiefly for to make them bear children. But I am certain, that
for to do such miracles, the gowns and cloakes of the Priests and Moonkes have
more virtue, then the same of luno, and I beeleeue that the women which have
been covered with it, shall be barren by nature, except they return more
sertile and fruitful.


Theophilus. Saint Augustine makes also mention of a Goddess named Meria,
whom he also calls Februa, Meria,
because that the Panims do believe that she purges the women of their issue
of blood, and stays them every month, and chiefly after the conception and
delivering of child. But there is no doubt but that was not that luno, of whom
thou speak off.


Hilarious. We cannot doubt of it: for that office was also assigned unto her,
and for that cause they have called Fluon. ^.
it Fluona, by reason of the Flur and issue of blood. But our Priests have now
given that office unto the virgyn Mary, and do cause the women to be purified
after their delivery, when that they are risen from their bed as the Jews did.
As though Jesus Christ had not been yet come, and as though we were under the
Ceremouies of the law Theophilus, Durand also witnesses that in that same
feast the Romans from five year to five year, the first day Durand. Ral. d^^^
off. it. ^. Rub. le purif.
of February did purify all the night the Towns with Tapers and Torches
lighted in the honor of Februa the Goddess, the Mother of God Mars, whem they
accounted for the God of Battle, to the end he we ulde give unto Mars.
them victory. And they call also that feast Ambuibales, because of the
processions, in which they carry yt hosts and Amburbales.
Sacraments that they do sacrifice with, and in like manner the sacrifices
which they make by the Towns and Villages, and round about the same, and by
the fields, as we do in the Rogation week and on Christmas day. Furthermore,
Regations
men did sacrifice that same very time unto Pluto who for that cause, as
witnesses Isidorus, was named Februus, and they did in like manner do
sacrifice unto other Februus. pluto. Sacratices unto the infernal gods.
Watchings and Vigdes for the dead. The Cardelmas of Ceres and Preserpma.
Lactan. de fall. religl. li. 1. ca. 12.
infernal Gods, for the souls of their auncesters, and offered unto them
hosts. Watching all night, singing Vigiles with Tapers and Torches burning, to
the end they should have pity and compassion of the poor souls that be
dead. The women also, celebrated the feast of Candlemas in the honor of the
Goddess Ceres, and of her daughter Proserpina, because that Pluto, yt God of
hell, for her beauty had ravished at the beginning of that month, and that
her mother Ceres seeking for her by hills and valleys, being lighted in the
night with torches and lamps in Actna yt hill of Sicile, as yt pocticall fables
do witness.


Hilarious. Theu have all ^dged Durand, the master of yt papisticall
ceremonies, and I will allege unto thee an other, which is of no less
credit, of whom thou have already often times heard the witness, the which I do
bring forth again, for confirmation of the words of Durand, out of that book
in which he describes the feast of Ceres, saying among other of his words as
follows.

Yea there in steed of flaming lamp East. 4^

the Pine tree they did use,
Hereoff the torch then granted was
for Ceres sacred Muse.

Theophilus. For that cause (says he) that in remembrance Pope ^ergius
of the same, at the beginning of the month of February, they purified the
City, and went in procession round about the same. In steed whereoff Pope
Sergius has commanded and established the feast of the Purification of our
Lady. And if thou think that I speak without book, and Rat. Diui. off. 7.
Rub. de pu^^.
that I have invented ye same of my self, I do send thee unto your own
books, and chiefly unto Durand, of whom I think, that there wants not
much, but yt I have recyted unto thee word by word almost all that which thou
has^e now heard of me.


Hilarious. He ought also to add, that the weepings, lamentations and sower
looks that they do make in their temples the Passion week, the which they
call the great and holy week, and chiefly the apish tricks of the holy
Friday, are proceeded from yt original and beginning. For as yt women
celebrated the Cereales and Proserpinales with lamentations, representing the
sorrow which Ceres did take because of her daughter Proserpina which was
ravished, and in like manner ye Adoniales, in yt honor of Venus, bewailing and
lamenting her friend Adonis which was killed. Does it not also seem yt they
would in the virgin Mary and Jesus Christ her son, renew and set up again
all these old superstitions, nether more nor less then if yt holy virgin were
Ceres, Venus, or Isis: and Jesus Christ Adonis, or Adouis.
Osiris? For what difference is there between their divine service by yt which
they would cositerfeit the death and passion of Jesus Christ, and the same
which the ancient Idolators did make in the honor of Adonis and Osiris? For
they do celebrate every year in the month of June the feast, and in
remembrance of that that Adonis Theocri. (...). 23. Lue. in det syria^ Hiero.
tn E^^. c. 8.
was killed, and torn in peeced of a wild Bore, they beat and stryke
themselves every year, ^ntyll the blood comes forth, and make great
sorrwe and lamentations sh^^ow out the whole country. And after yt they have
made an end of beating themselves and weeping, they bid yt office after
Adonis, even as after those that be dead. Afterward the next day they did say
that he was alive again, and that they lifted him up on hie in the air, and
did shave their heads, even as the Egyptians did when Apis was dead among
them, and that they did celebrate the feast of Osiris, which is also called
Serapis For first (...).
of all the Priests of yt Goddess lsis do shave their heads and their beardes
and strike their breasts, and do lament, even as Isis lamented, when she had
lost but little son Osiris. Afterward, the child was brought again, as
though he had been found, and then all the sorrow was changed into joy.
Therefore the Poet caine calls him Osiris, who is never serched for enough.
(...) de sal. (...) li. ca. 21. luke. Saty. 8
for as Lactantius says, they do loose him always, and always find him
again.


Theophilus. I doubt not, but that the same is that same Idolatry which
Ezechiell rebuked, speaking of the women which wept for Thamus: as Saint
Hieromecrpoundeth Thammus. Eze. 8. c. 14
it, or at the leastwise altogether the like.


Hilarious. Now mark and consider all the trayue yt our Priests do hold upon
good friday. And thou will say that Good Friday.
they have lost Jesus Christ, or that he is dead, and that they would bury him.
And afterwarded a day after that Easter Allel^ya
Caster is come, Allelnya, whom they have buried, is raised again, and there
is no more question, but to laugh and rejoice, and to celebrate the feast
which the Panims do call Hilaria, that is to say, the joyful, and tt,at they
do celebrate H. (...).
it in the honor of the God Kis, in laughing and rejoicing, and rehearsing
some good thing to laugh at, as yt The God Ris Apul. aluti. aur. 11 3.
holy fathers do in their Sermons, on yt feasts of Caster, when they do give
the sweet nesegayes unto the Ladies, of which custom are procceded yt books
of De risu Paschalt, for to a waken their Auditories, and the better to
sanetifie the feast of the God Alleluya, with whom they do trumph all the year.


Theoplulus. They may well sake Jesus Christ. For he may be lost and dead
for them, crcept they learn to know and honor him other wise then they do:
For he has not taught us to celebrate the remembrance of his death and
passion after the example of that same of Adonis and Osiris: But has given
unto us the manner and fashion in the holy Supper such as it appertains unto
him and The true comme meration of the death of Jesus Christ
his Church, the which we ought to follow, and we need not to have so many
ceremonies and Panish superstitions.


Hilarious. For to make an end in painting and setting Floralet.
forth the Caster, we need to add no more but yt Florales, the which they
celebrated in that same time in the month of April, in the honor of the
Goddess Flora, with torches and lights, as at the feast of Candlemas it
appears by that that she her self answered unto Ovid, which brings it
in, speaking so of her feast: Fast. 5.


Those lights which served to their use in times full long ago
Unto the very like use serve, our present time also,
And they celebrated the same feast, for to keep the goods and fruits of the
earth, as the Cereales, both of them in yt same month: notwithstanding yt
Durand places them in the Cereales.
month of february, the better to agree with the feast of Candlemas, Let us
now lay together all those pieces, and let us consider how the devil mocketh
God, the Uirgin Mary, and all the Christian people: And how of the Uirgin
Dishonor to ye Virgin Mary
Mary, he is enforced not only to make one Idol but many, and has induced and
persuaded yt Christians, without yt they had any regard, to make her a Juno,
Februa, Venus, Ceres, Proserpina, and Flora. For we do honor her after the
same sort, or rather yt devil, under the title of her whom he has taken for
to cover and bioe himself, in stcede of those whom I have but now named. To
what end do these torches and holy candels serve, and al your processions?
Holy candells and processions. Representacion of ye light of the Gospel. Esi.
40. b. 6. Act 13 g. 47.



Eusebius. Pen carry the^, for to represent by the^ ye light of ye Gaspell yt
which Jesus Christ has carried and borne, which is yt true light of yt world,
for to illuminate and lighte^ ye poor Gentles and Idolaters, and the glory of
the people Israel, according to the prophecy of Esaias and of Simeon.


Theophilus. But must we present him with torchest Act. 13. g. 47. Luc. 2. c
32. Psa. 19. c. 9 Torehes of the Chrustans. Mat. 5 b. 14
candels? is not that rather the office of the Priests to light the Candle,
lamp and torche of the word of God, (which is the light of our feet,
lightning the blind, giving wise, doine unto the little ones and ignorant)
through the preaching of the Gaspell, and to set it upon a candlestick and
Mat. 15. b. 14. Mat. 2^. b. 16
upon ye table, for to give light unto all those which are in yt house of God,
not for to put it under the table and under a busshell, and to fill the peoples
eyes and all the Church of God, with smoke and darkness, for to testify and
witness that they are blind leaders of the blind.


Hilarious. They should have more reason, if they went a procession in the
night, as the Panims did. And it is not to be doubted, but that they carried
those torches and candels lighted, for to serve them for Purifications, and
drive away the evils from the City, and from their houses, after the same
manner as the Panims did. Te humiliter deprecartur us has candelas ad vsus
omnia and salutem animarum and corporum sine in terra sine in aquis, per
inuecationemsancts fur nominis and per intereessionem sancta Maria virginis
genetricis fily tul (cuius body sesla denels colimus) and per preces omnium
sanct, (...) benedicere and sanctificate dig ne^^. 1.



Theophilus. If they would deny it, they would be banquished of the contrary
as liars, as well by the prayer and blessing, the which they bse, for to bless
the tapers and torches, the day of the feast of Candlemas, as of that that they
use the Satterday before Caster or upon Caster even for to bless the fire and
the Pascal taper. Park then first of all that which they sing the day of the
feast of Candlemas as it is contained in the Pissell, not that I will recyte
word for word, all their blessing but only the principal points for to prove
our meaning, and by the which thou may judge of the rest. They sing unto God:
we hubly beseech thee, that through the muecation of thy holy name and by the
intercession of the holy uirgin Mary the mother of thy son, whose feast this
day we deuoutely celebrate, and by the prayers of al thy Saints, that it would
please thee to bless and sanctify these candles, for the use of man, and the
health of the souls and bodies, be it in the earth or in the waters: Behold
their own proper words rehearsed truly word for word, Where have Candells
for the health of the souls and bodies Benedie Doms ne Jesus Christ have
creaturam cere supplicanti bus nobis. etc.
they found, that the Candels do serve for the health of the souls and
bodies, and that they have any other use, theu for to give light unto the
corporal eyes, but in the books of the Panims. But by and afferwards they do
say worse. Park then their words, O Lord Jesus Christ we humbly beseech thee,
to bless this creature of war, and shead soorth in the same thy heavenly
blessing, by the virtue of the holy Cross, to the end yt as thou have guien
it unto makinde, for to put and drive away the darkness, it may recelue such
force and benediction, by the sign of thy holy Item: Benedico te creatura cera
in nomine Domini nostri and sancte Trio nstntis, us sis exterminatio diaboli
and omnium conterbur nalium esus. Charms The ad iurati of the holy water and
salt Exercisnius salis. Exorciso te creatn salis per De um
cross, in what place soever it shall be lighted, or set, that yt wicked
devil may flee and tremble, and avoid altogether amassed and made a fraide,
with all his ministers, from those habitations: and that he presume no more to
trouble those which do serve God. And by and by after, there is yet more. Ido
bless thee thou creature of war, in the name of our Lord God, and of the holy
Trinity, to the end thou may be the extermination and driving away of the
Devil, and all his complises. What mockery is this? must the name of GOD be
so abused in Charms and Witchecraftes? For wherein do these benedictions and
blessings dyffer from the charms and coniuratyons of sorcerers and witches,
as well as the Exorcisme and adiuration of their holy water and Salt, which
they put into it? What does that Exorcisine and adiuration signiste? I
exercise and adjure thee, thou Creature of Salt, by the living vinum per Deum
GOD, by the true verum, per Deum
GOD, by the holy sanctum per Deum qui te per Eliseum prophetam in aquam mitti
iussit, vt sanaresur steulitas aque vt effect^ris sale porcizatom. in salutem
credentiam vt sisommtleas te (...). (...). (...) lulian the Apostate The Temple
of Fortune The sp^^kings at the entrmg in and coming forth on the Temple
GOD by the GOD which comnaunded that thou should be put into the water, by
the Prophet Eliseus for to heal the sterilitie and barrennes of the waters, to
the end thou be made an adjured Salt, to the health of them that believe, to
the end that thou may be unto all those which will take thee, health of
soul and body, and that all fantasy, malice, dsuhtyle craft of the devil
may avoid, and depart, from the place where thou shall be sheade abrcade,
and all unclean spirit adjured, by him which shall judge the quick and the
dead, and the world with fire.


Hilarious. Thou will make us here by and by holy water. Since that thou have
made the Exorcisine, sing now the Oremus.


Theophilus. There are no less blasphemics in it: But since that thou will have
it thou shall. O eternal God, altogether mighty, we humbly innocate and call
upon thy infinite clemency, that it would please thee to bless and sanctify
this creature of Salt, the which thou have given for the use of mankind, to
the end that it may be unto all those which will take it, health of soul and
body, and yt all that which shall be touched with the same or sprinkled, should
be without any filth, and all the assault and cembat of the spiritual enemy.


Hilarious. I have heard many Priesses, who in steed to say: Careatomni
immundicia, do say, Careat omni mundicia. But they do use the figure which
the Gramarians do call, Apheresis: or for to speak better, the figure called
the ignorance of the Gramer. I do verelye think that all that which they
sprinckle abides well according to the prayer that they make, without
cleanenesse. Wherefore those whom they do sprinckle, when they make their
great Asperges me, may very well say, as Valentinian said who was the chief
Captain in the Court of Iuhan the Apostate, but yet nevertheless a good
Christian and afterward chosen Emperor.


Thomas. What said he?


Hilarious. At a certain time as lulian entered into the Temple of Fortune,
and that on both the sides of the doors the ministers and Priests of the
Temple were, who (according as they made men to understand) through yt
sprinckling of yt water did purge those yt did enter in (after the same manner
as cur priests do yet at this day to those which do enter or go forth of
the church) Valentinian, who did go before lulian the Prince espied a drop
of that water which had been shed upon his cloak, for which he was very
angry, insomuch that he gave a Priest and Minister of the temple The
sprinklings at the entering in and coming forth of the temple. A Priest being
stricken. A potheme of Diogenes.
a great stroke with his fist, saying: Thou have defiled me and not purged me.
He had as much good reason, as Diogenes, who at a certain time being entered
into a filthy and stinking bath, said: Those which do bathe and wash
themselves here, where do they wash them? Letting thereby to understand, that
those which bathe and wash them in those bathes, come forth more filthy then
they were before they entered, and that they have more need to be washed then
before, for they have gathered nothing but filthynesse. But this Apothegme and
sentence never agreed better then with our Priests, which defile all those
which go unto them how clean soever they be. But thou halt yet adjured and
coniured but the salt. Yet remains the water.


Theophilus. They do blaspheme yet moreover. For Exorcismus aqua. Exerciso te
creatura aqua in in nomine Dei patris omnipotentis, and in no mine Domini lesu
Christi ^^^^, eiusdem domins nostri and in virtute Spiritus sancti vt sias aqua
exoressata ad effu gandam onme polestatem mimici, and ipsum inimicum eradicare
and explantare valeas cum Angelis suis Apostaticis per virtutem etc. Hem. Huic
elemento multimodis purificatio^ nibus prepara to, virtute tue been dictiones,
infunde, vt ad abijcrendos demones morbos^ pellendos divine gratie sumat
officium, vt quic quid in damib vel in locis sidelum hec vndarespersit, careat
omnium immu^ dits.^, liberat a noxla: non illic resideat spiritus pestilens,
no^ aura corru^pens diseedant omnesinsidie laten it is inimite etc. Item vt
(...), (...). The coniuting of the water A plaster for all sores. The virtue
of Jesus Christ Changed and reserred to the creatures. The order and use of
ceremomes changed.
they pray that it may be adjured and coniured, for to drive away all the power
of the enemy, and to tear and pluck up the enemies themselves, with all his
apostate Angels, and for to drwe away the Devils, and diseases, and that all
that which shall be sprickneled with it, either in the houses, or in the place
of the faithful, should be without spot or hurt, that the spirit of
pestilence do not remain and rest there, nor the infectious winds nor air:
that al unclean spirits, and the terror of the venomous Serpent, and all the
assaults and ambusshes of the euemye, and all evil, be altogether driven
away. To conclude, they require that it may do all things. And so by that
means we shall have no more need of Jesus Christ. The Candles, the Ware, the
Salt and the Water, will do all.


Eusebius. You speak very evil. For you may well perceive how they yraye
unto God, that he would give unto them that virtue, by his son Jesus
Christ, who^ they acknowledge to be the author of all good things.


Theophilus. If they acknowledge him for such a one, what need have they then
of War, Salt and Water, for to obtain of him the goods which are necessary for
our bodies and souls? Can he, or will he not do that without those things?
wilt they bind and tie his grace, virtue and power, and enclose and shut it in
wax, salt and water, as they do require by their prayers? If those things be
not charms, sorceries and enchauntmentes, I know not what we may call
charms, sorceries and enchauntmentes.


Hilarious. When they do conjure and bless their wells and fontes and
christening places, they gape over the water and blow in it, as though they
had the holy Ghost within their throat, and that they would shut him in it. It
is very needful, that that holy Ghost whom they do plunge and shut in
that water can swim, or otherwise he shall be in danger of drowning.


Theophilus. Even as they do with the water and war, so do they with the fire
and incenie, upon Easter even, when they bless their Pascall of wax.


Eusebius. Since that all that is done unto the honor of God, can it be but
good?


Theophilus. How can it be to the honor of God, to attribute unto the
creatures, the honor which belongs unto him? Or to shut up and lymit his
grace, virtue and power by them? And to overthrow and turn vpside down
altogether the order of God, and the use, for which he has created them, for
he has not created the water, salt, fire and the ware for to purify the
souls: for to oriue away the Diuelles and for to be remedies to all corporal
and spiritual diseases: But he has created the water, for to drink: for to
wash away the filthiness of the body, for to refresh, sprinckle and help the
natural necessities for which God has ordained them. As much must we
understand of the fire, salt and ware, and all other creatures, which cannot
serve us, but according to their natural properties, and according to the
ordinance of God. Wherefore whosoever alters and changes that order of
nature, and use of the creatures, otherwise then he ought, attributinge unto
them any other property then that which God has given unto them, he
blasphemeth God, and is worthy to be taken for a Sorcerer and a Magitian. For
wherein does a The difference betvveene a good Philosopher and a charmer and
Magician.
good Physician and a Philosopher differ from a Charmer and Magitian, but in
this that those do follow the order of God in his creatures, and their
natural dysposition, and those heero do peruerte and overthrow it, and will
by words, charms and coniurations, change their nature and bring them to
other effects, then God has appointed them.


Eusebius. By thy reasons thou do also abolysh the use of the Sacraments.


Theophilus, That is an other thing, forasmuch as it is ordained of GOD, The
Sacraments
who may make his creatures to serve to what it pleases him. For he which is
the Lord, may use them either after that order as he has appointed them of
nature: or miraculously, above nature. Although, that who so would attribute
unto the water of Baptism, or unto the bread and wine in the Lords supper,
that which you do attribute unto your waters, saltes, fires, inceuse, and
wax, should be greatly to be rebuked. For all the virtue and efficacy of
the Sacraments do depend of the promise of God, of which you have nothing
in your ceremonies, invented and forged by your own sense and understanding,
without the word of God, no more then the Magicians and enchaunters have in
their witchinges and inuocations. Wherefore we cannot repute and take such
superstitions followinge the manner and form as you do hold, but for such,
as those have been of which you have taken the example.


Hilarious. But how can it be pleasing and agreeable to God, to forsake and
renounce Jesus Christ his son, and the Christianity, for to make themselves
Panims or Jews? Tell me Eusebius, if thou do not think that the Chaldeans
and Persians are worthy to be accounted and taken for Idolaters, to baue had
The fire y^ god of the chalde^s and Persians^
the fire in so great admiration yt they have worshipped it as God?


Eusebius. Who doubts of that?


Hilarious. Now what reason have you for to excuse your self of that same
Idolatry, more lawfully then they?


Theophilus. That Idolatry is the most ancient which has been almost amongst
men, chiefly before that there was any use of Images: And I doubt not but
that we refer it, unto the Idolatry of the fire, followinge also the opinion
of Saint Hierome and of Hier. and Nicol. in Genes. 12. d. 27. Tareh. Abraham.
Call. Rod lec. aut, li, 15. ca. 15
Lyra, that which Moses calls, Vr of the Chaldees.

For notwithstanding that that name is taken for the place, wherein Tarch the
Father of Abraham dwelled, yet nevertheless it is very like that that place
has taken his name of that fire, which the Chaldeans worshipped, as we see
daily that many Towns and Villages do take their name of the Gods, Saints
and Patrons which are there adored and honored, as are S. Claudus, S.
Hippolite, Saint Denis, Saint James, and others innumerable. For Vr,
signifies in the Hebrew and Chaldee tongue, fire and furnayse. And unto that
agrees well that which is spoken off in the book of Joshua, that Tareh the
Father of Abraham was an Idolater, although Joshua. 24. a. 2
there be no mention made that he worshypped Images and Idols: But it was
because he was defiled and infected with that Idolatry of the Chaldees, for the
which Abraham departed from his country, in not worshypping the fire in steed
of the true God.


Hilarious. That Idolatry has not been only among the Chaldees and Persians:
But it is also spredde abroad among other Nations, who of long time have in
like manner worshypped the fire under the name of Vesta, who was in great
honor and estimation among the Troyans before the war of Troy, and from
thence has been with the other Gods, carried into Italy by Aeneas, and so came
up the custom to keep a continual fire in his Temple at Rome within a Bore
or Pyxe, as they do now the holy Liui. lt. 1. and 5 Macro. Satur lt. t. c.
t. 12 plu. in Number. ex Camd Ovid. Fast. 1 and. 6.
hoaste. For that cause the Poets many times do call it, the Troyans fire,
and the fire of Laomedon, the founder and buylder of Troy. The Greeks also did
the like in Athens and Delphos. And Seruius wituesseth that they kept it also
in the Temple of Jupiter and of Minerua, by which they would understand the
earthly heaven and the celestial fire. And St^abo Stral^. li. 9
has written almost the like, that is to say, that there was an old Temple of
Minerua Poliade in which was kept a Lamp continually burning, and there was a
Covent of Nounes, I think that Pope Sabinianus did Plat. in vit. Sab^nt Call.
aul. lec. li, 15. ca. 14.
take example of the samo, when that he constituted and ordained that Lamps
should be continually kept burninge in the Temples, as Platine and Volaterran
do witness.


Theophilus. If they had the like that of which Saint Augustine makes
mention, which was inextinguible in a certain Temple of Venus, which the
Panims August. de cin Des. l^. 21. c. 6
had, they would make of it a great miracle, and would esteem it for a goodly
relike. For he says, yt it contimeth always burning in ye air abroad, wcout
ever being put out or quenched, either with the wind, water, or W any thing
that one can do to it. Therefore it was called inextinguible.


Hilarious. It must be, if that be true, yt it wae artyffcially made, or else
by magycall Art. But I think that they would make as great an account if
they had such fire, as yt same which the Greeks kept in the Temple of Apollo in
Arges, the which they did say, sell from keauen. I demand of thee friend
Theophilus, what thinckest thou has been the first cause of that Idolatry.


Theophilus. I cannot perceive that they have any other cause, but the same
which has ingendered all the other Gods among the Panyms, which have Phin.
li, 1. ca. 1
delfied and called Gods, all the creatures of whom men do feel, aid and
help. Seeinge then the great poritie which is in the fire, and the great
vitlytie that men did receive thereby, and how necessary it was Idolatry of
the sire and of the Planets. Lue. Flor, in Numa. Flat, de Pbilo. dogm. VA in
Camillo.
unto man's life, and how it represented the fires and celestial lyghfes, of
the sun and of other planets and stars (whom mey have also ^olden for
Gods, because of their great beauty and vtilytie) they did in like manner
think that they had just occasion to hold and take the fire for a God,
which they did see to be of one self nature with the celestial fire, which
always moves and gives life unto all things as the soul of them. They had
yet certain other occasions, in that that the holy Scripture oftentimes
compares God to the fire, and calls him, a consuminge fire: and that God
appears sometime: in the likeness God compared to the fire. Deuteronomy. 4. d. 24.
Hebr. 12. g. 19. Exo. 3. a. 2. Act. 7. d. 31. 3. Reg. 18. f. 33
of fire, and that the fire came down from heaven oftentimes, for to consume
the sacryfices of the holy Patriarchs and Prophets. They had more just
occasion to confirm themselves in that opinion, and more goodlyer appearaunce
for to allow their religion, then the Papists have for their Images and
Idols. For we cannot deny, but that the fire is a lyuelye Image of God,
which shows forth and reprosenteth unto us it self more lively, then all
the Idols which ever were in the world. And therefore God would appear in
the Rxo. 3. 2. 2. Act. 7. d. 31.
likeness of fire, and represent his gifts and graces, his virtue and power
by the same: the which he would never do by Idols and Images, and would
never appear in them, nor speak, nor do any virtue or miracles by them, but
has left the same for the Dyuell, Images the instruments of the Devil
who is served with such instruments, the which God has altogether rejected
and cursed, and has defamed them by defamed tytles, calling them filthynesse,
vanytie, The titles of ye Images.
lying, nothing, abomination and other like names, which oftentimes are
rehearsed in the books of the Prophets. Furthermore had not the Chaldeans and
Persians good occasion to prefer it above all the other. For since that all
the other were either of wood and of slone, or of gold, silver or other
mettalles, he did melte, burn and consume The power of the fire about the
others gods.
all, insomuch that there was not one, which could resist him.


Hilarious. Xerxes hing of Persia declared it very well Xetxes.
unto the Greeks, when he came into Greece with so The temples burned In Asia
great an army. For he burned all the Temples, Idolles and Images of Asia,
except the same of Diana the Goddess Solin. ca. 53. Temple of Diana the
Ephesta^ Act. 19. e. 24 Strab. ^^. 14, Ph. li. 16. c. 41. and. ^^. 36. ca. 34
of the Ephesians, because of the excellent beauty of the same, and for the
cunning buylding which was therein, that it was compted among the seven most
chiefest works which was in the world, which for their admirable and
excessive beauty, building and cunning, were called the seven miracles of the
world.


Thomas. Wherefore did Xerxes the same?


Hilarious. Because that the Persians had no Temples, The Persians without
Temple and Images.
nor Images, and did think that one did great iniurye unto the majesty of
God, which is infinite, to chutte and limite him by the work made with man's
hand, In like manner Plutarch does write, that the Romans have bad their
Temples without Images (after that the city In Num^. Dionys. Halicar. in Numa.
was builded) 170. years, because that they were taught by the king Numa, that
God was an invisible spirit, which never was created. And notwithstanding that
they do honor the fire under the name of the Goddess Vesta, yet
nevertheless they never made Image for to represent the one nor the other, but
were content to keep that holy fire, as has been said, and as it appears
by the witness of Ovid, saying.

Within the Temple fire remaind, Old. Fast. ^

and still vnquencht did lie,
The fire and Vesta wanted form,
to show their shapes thereby.
And a little afterward he says.
By Art of Syracusia framd,
there hangs in the air,
A little globe that represents,
the form of heavens fair.

Thomas. If the Persians did take the for God, they did not altogether without
reason, if they would not have locked and shut him up. For he does open the
gates, although yt one would shut him up and knows to go out every way.


Hilarious. The experience has been well showed in the Temple of Diana the
Ephesian. For notwythstandinge that Xerxes spared it, yet nevertheless his GOD
The temple of Diana burned Gehlia. Herostrotus Soli. ca. 53
would not spare it, through whose aid Herostratus did bring it to pass,
who did set it on fire, and bourned it altogether.


Thomas. Wherefore did he that?


Hilarious. He has confessed himself, that he did it for covetousness of
renown, to that end that men Covetous of renown
should speak of him. For he never did any virtuous act whereby he might
get a name. And therefore he took upon him to do such an act, to the
end that the remembrance of his name should be eternal amougest men.


Theophilus. Herostratus did let the Ephesians well to understand, that the
fire had more virtue then their Diana.


Hilarious. Thou understand not the cause, and how the Panims did excuse
the Goddess. Thou ought to understand, that the very same night that The
natiuitle cf Alexander Olympiss.
Herostratus did set the Temple of Diana on fire, Olympias the mother of
great Alexander, was in hauayle with child, and because that Diana was gone
thither for to help her travail to bring forth Alexander, she could not
defend her Temple. For thou do very well know that women did call upon
her in their travail. And therefore she beeinge absent, and busied about
Olympias and her son Alexander, she could not help her Temple nor resist
the God of the Persians, no more then the Gods of our Priests can at this day
resist it. For that cause the Chaldeans did meruaylously beast themselves
against all other Patyons, saying, that there were none that had such a God
as theirs, which consumes all other. Yet neuerthelesss if the tale or historye
be true which Suidas Suiadas in dict Canop. God Canopus.
did tell of a Priest of Canopus, he played or showed them a fine feate, of
whom he has written that the Priest of god Canopus which was adored and
worshipped of some in Egypt, seeing the arrogancy and pride of the Chaldeans,
fearing also to loose his good theere and fare, The craft and disceite of the
Priest of Canopus. Call. Rho. lec. aut. li. 15. c. 15.
if the majesty of his God were diminished, devised this craft and discepte.
In Egypt they used to make waterpottes of earth, having many holes for to
distill the water and to make it more pure, because that the waters of Egypt
are much troubled and full of mudde and slime that Priest did take one of those
water pottes, and stopped subtly with ware all the holes thereof, afterward
painted it with diverse colors, so that one could not perceive it. That
being done, filled it with water, afterward did cut of the head of an old
Image, the which he set upon that great water pol, so cunningly that it was
like to his god Canopus. After that, the Chaldeans came, who would prove the
power of yt fire of their God, against the God Canopus. The fire the^ being
kindled, and Canopus being cast into it, after that manner and sort as he was
trimmed and apparayled by his Priest. Now whilst that on either sides men did
behold which of those two Gods should have the victory, the wax with which the
holes were stopped, feeling the heat of the fire, did begin to melt, and the
water to drop out, which quenched the fire. And so by that means Canopus got
the victory through the craft of the Priest, and was judged worthy of The
victory of Canopus
divine honors.


Thomas. Behold a merry Jest to laughed at, at Caster.


Hilarious. You laughe at it, but the holy fathers do say things which are not
so good as that, and your priests do make miracles. which are not yet so
subtle, by the which yet nevertheless the poor people are abused. But let us
consider a little wherein the Papists differ from the one The fire and ^^ter
(...) gods of y^ Papists (...) on of the paseall tire. Rat d. ui. off. li 6.
Rab de benecer.
and the other of which we have spoken off, if they have not the fire and the
water for their gods. For what does signify the benediction and consecration
of the Are which they make upon Caster even, with their magical ceremonies? For
at the beginning of divine service, all the sice which is in the Temple must be
put out. Afterward they must a new, by striking upon a stone with a piece
of steel, or with a Crystal set against the sun: Afterward they must
keep it, not with all kinds of wood, but with the branches of the Vine. There
is here more to do then in the charms of the Enchaunters. And to what end do
all those sorceries serve?


Eusebius. Now dare thou so to blaspheme and call the divine service Sorcery?
which was done to represent, The interpretation of ye Benediction of ye new nee
that the fire of the old law is put out, by the death and passion of Jesus
Christ, who has accomplished and fulfilled all the ceremonies of the same,
and he is the slone and the Crystal which has been stricken upon the side,
and has kindled for us a new fire of the holy Ghost.


Hilarious. Me thinks that the interpretation should be two true, if you said
that the same signifies, that the Priests go about all that they can to quench
the fire of the word of God, which Jesus Christ the light of the world, has
brought in the earth, for to take in hand a new, and Luc. 12. g. 49. John. 1.
a 9 and 8. b. 9. a. 5. ler. 5. d. 14. and 23. s. 29
for to make us, in steed of the Purgatory, which is by yt blood of Jesus
Christ, a new Jesus Christ, and a new Purgatory in fire, to the end that
all at one moment or instant do declare themselves both Jews and Panims.


Theophilus. It is most true, that God commanded The signification of the
perpetual fire of the burnt offering Leuit. 6. b. 13.
the Priests of the old law, that the fire of the bournt offering or holocauste
should be always kept burning in the Temple. But that was to signify, that
the fire of Jesus Christ, and his offering and sacrifice is eternal, and
sufficient for to purge all the sins of the world and that Heb. 9. c. 11. and
10. e. 11. 1. Pet. 4. c. 13
we ought all to be pertakers of his cross and tribulations which are
signified by the fire in the Scripture: and we ought all to travail as much
as lies in us, to keep and maintain that fire of Jesus Christ: the
evangelical mynistry and the faith in his death and passion in the Christian
Church. For as much then as Jesus Christ has perfectly and wholly accomplshed
and fulfilled that which by that fire was signified, and ye it must be
accompilshed in us spiritually, not in outward appearance, what need have we
to invent new ceremonies and new Iewishnes: were it not as good to keep them
to the old, since that they will play the Jew with the Jews?


Hilarious. But which is worse, so play the Panim with the Panims, of whom
their manner of doings approaches nearer then of the ancient Jewish laws. For
as Plutarke witnesses, in Athens and Delphos, where ye Greeks Plutus in Number.
in like manner do keep a perpetual fire, if peradventure it were put or went
out, they must kindle a new and very orange, taken from the Sun. In like
manner also has Macrob. Satur. li. ^. ca. 12 The new fire of the Panims Val.
Max. li. 1. cap. 1. The fire of Vesta. Plut. in Camillo. ovid. Fast. 6.
Macrobius written, that the first day of March, the Romans kindled a new
fire upon the altar of the Goddess Vesta, the which fire must be kept by
the Mestales, the nunues of Vesta always burning in her Temple, like unto ours
at this day. Whereunto agrees in like manner the witness of Ovid, saying.

Men say that when the holy fire
in temple ceast to burn.
It was the use from time to time
with new to serve the turn.
And if it happen that through their negligence it be put out, they shall be
greuosly punished.


Theophilus. One may vanquysh them by their own confession, that they have not
received those tradition of yt Apostles. For they themselves confess, that the
custom to bless the Pascall taper and such manner of doings, have The
Paschall Taper Rat. diui off. li. 6. Rab. de den. cer Zozmie and Theodorus The
most puissaunt god of the Priests
been instituted by Pope Zozme and Theodorus the first.


Hilarious. We must not be abashed though they make great provision both of
Oil and War for to keep always yt fire in their churches. For they have no
greater nor puissanter God then he, of whom only they demaimd aid, invoke
and call upon for to maintain their Religion, and all their other Gods. For
what other refuge have they for to fight against the truth and to desende
lyings, but the Fagots and Fire? Wherefore me thinks that they should have
more reason, if they followed the example of the Persians, who notwithstanding
that they condemned those which had temples and Idols, yet The holy and ^^ered
fire of the Persias. ^rs. Mark. t. call. R^ls. lec. (...). 8 aa. 2.
nevertheless they had a custom, that the kings sheulde cause the sire to be
carried before them upon an Norse back, the which is called by the
Nistoriographers OriMasda, that is to say, the holy fire? or the sacred sire.

They also carried it in procession all abouts, in the same manner as the
Papists did carry the holy hoasten Christ's day, and as the Pope causes his God
to be carried before him upon a white ambling nagge, to the end he may The
holy ho^^ The pracction of the serst. God and the ho y fir e.
gee the more at his ease: altheugh that he esticme him self more worthy,
since that he causes himself to be carted of men, and his God of beasts. The
pecple also bsed to adore and worship that holy fire, as they do at this day
the holy host. And when they do carry it in procession. 365. Priests did go
before him, to the end there be as many in number, as there be days in the
year, doing the sauie in the honor of the son, who by his fire gives the
light of the day in the earth. Therefore also they carried it with them in the
war. And when they must remove the host, there was upon the kings
Tabernacle, a little Image of the sun, enclosed within a round hor of
Crystal, which shined and gane a great light. When the procession of the
holy and eternal fire began to march and go forth, they carried if before all,
upon the Aulters of silurr the whithe the wisest and holiest men whom they
called pagitians, did follow. After them. 365. young men, being clothed in
Purple and red, for to represent the color of the fire. I believe that after
their erample, the Pope and the Cardinals are pet clothed in red, in witness,
that either they are men of blood, being all bloody with the blood of the
righseous and poor innocents: or else that they are as a consuming fire in this
world, which consumes all, for to make the poor faithful fear, which will
not consent unto their blasphemies and tyranny: or in sign and token that they
are the Cooks and fire bronds of hell, for do tossed and broyle the roore sules,
and that they have the tharge of those iusernall firrs and of Purgatory. There
was in like manner in that processiou, charets, hearses and shrines, all
tryumed and engraued in gold and silver, for to carye and bear the other gods
and their Images, the which they have afterward learned to make, as the other
Panims by succession of time did. There were also, which carried goodly rods and
staves of gold, as are the crosses of our Abbots and Bishops: and the staves
which they do carry in procession, with the Cross. And those were also clothed
with white, as our Priests are. Wherefore since that our Priests do follow them
almost in all things, me thinks that they should have more show of
appearance to keep the holy fire in the pyr or bor, and to worship it and
cause it to be worshipped, as their God yt they have made of stower. For this
without the other, can have no great virtue, since that the fore must defend
them. Wherefore they do evidently declare, that they esteem it more puissant
and more strong, since that they have recourse unto it. Wherefore one may well
answer unto them, that which of old time has been answered by a certain
man, of the pron and of the gold, who was demanded which of them both was
the strongest.


Thomas. Pee thinks that it is the gold, for it does The strength of the
gold and of Yren.
all things.


Hilarious. But what can the gold do without yt iron? has it not need of the
iron for to keep and defend it? For who is most strongest, either he which
keeps, or he which must be kept.


Thomas. There is in th at a Sophistry.


Hilarious. There is no need to allege sophistry. For the thing is such in
beritie. There is nething but the foolish opinion and persuasion of men, which
makes them to judge otherwise. For as Saint Augustine says, what Augustine,
are all the metals but earth? what difference is there then between the iron
and the gold, but that the one is The gold pale
a blacker earth, and the other more yollow and pale? wherein he declares that
he is more fearful then the vson.


Thomas. It is not without cause that he is plae, for he has many enemies
which do lie in wait to take him.


Hilarious, And therefore what shall he do, if he hadue not the iron for to
defend him? For the iron, defends him, and the iron takes him, and which
is more, of which should one set best by, either of the yrou or of the gold?
Can we as well labor and til the land with the gold as with the iron, and make
that which we make of the iron?


Thomas. It is most true we cannot. But yet neuerthe ignorance and foolish
opinton of men, which esteem it to be so, because that the color seems
unto them more fairer and that it is not so plenty as iron? But take away the
opinion, and it shall be but earth as the iron. As Much may we say of the God of
the Priests, and of the fire. For I assure thee that if the sire did not make
them to fear him, that it should never have come unto such honor as it is
come unto, and it should be impossible to keep it in such digmtie.
Furthermore, if the sire of Purgatory were not of some balue, it should not be
so dear Perchandise, nor so precious. But what is the cause that men have it
in such reverence, and do forsake the living God, and the Savior Jesus
Christ, for to worship the worltes of their hands, but the false opinion
wherewith their understanding is corrupted and marred? For bestoes the word of
God, all the residue is but opiluons and lyings.


Theophilus. They should have no less occasion to worship the fire, then the
bread, and to make it a God. For if yt fire can purge and sanctify yt body and
soul, it is God The fise made a God. Romans 4. 2. 5 Est. 43. b. 11
If it purge and sanctify, it justifies and saves. If it instiffe and save,
it is then God. For there is none other iustifter and samour but him only. And
it is no harder for him to purge and save man, then to create and make him. The
work of yt redemption is no harder, then yt of the creation. Wherefore if ye
one apperteineth unto God alone, so does yt other.


Hilarious. There is yet another point, ye is, that the fire is ye principal
creator of the Priests God. For without it they cannot sees nor heat any
thing. It has power to make and unmake, as it has been well showed forth in
the A true lustory of the Priests god burned.
year of our Lord. 1542. in a little billage which is iii, miles from Castres in
Languidoc, where ye poor white god was burned, upon holy Thursoay, atnight,
with all his Tabernacle, his house and all the Tepistry woork and hangings.


Thomas. Now happened that great misfortune?


Hilarious. Nou must understand, ye that night before the day of holy friday,
they had a custom that all ye families and householders went to bisit ye poor
god, which was there deteyned and kept prisoner, with a great number of Tapers,
torches and lamps which they carried ^^ great devotion, saying: let bs go see
our God, which is at rest.


Thomas. To what purpose did they ye?


Hilarious, Think ye it was to comfort him, because ye upon those days there
he was so much tormented among the Jews.


Thomas. Are there Jews in ye country?


Hilarious. Why, is there a country where there is none?


Thomas. Not many among yt Christians.


Hilarious. Pore then in any other place, although there were none but the
pricsts which always and daily, through their blasphemies, do crucify Jesus
Christ: toward who they show themselves a great deal worse then ye Jews. For
they have crucifted him but once, but those, here do crucify him every day.


Thomas. Ketourne to thy matter, and expound unto us how the fire there kindled.


Hilarious. Nou must understand, ye in disiting himm in such fort, they brought
yt fire so near, ye it kindled and burned all. Tevves among the christiaus
Now when they had found ye nert day the goodly stur ye they had made, god
knows what pitious, lamctatio^s, wepings and cryings there was. Tamus, Ositis
and Adonis were never so bewailed and lameted. They did sing other lametatio^s,
then those of Jeremy, saying: O how wicked are we, al ye world will redeoche and
check us, that we are worse then ye Jews. For he was crucified among them, but
he has been burned amongst us. We must not be abashed, though they burn the
Lutherians, since that they burn their God. Yet nevertheless that ought not so
se^me unto them strange. For they have used it of long time, and have set and
put a Canon among the Cautels of their Mass, which commands, that when the
host shall be rotten or mouldie in the pyr, or that the worms, Spiders and Myce
have touched and eaten it, that it should be burned, and that the ashes should
be ^ut in y^ reliquare or holy place. The which thing was once objected and
propounded unto a Priest, amongst a great company of people, in a house at
Geneua. But he was not asraid to absolve the question, nor he was not so much
offended in burning their God, as those here. For he answered directly, if he
suffered himself to be crucified of the Jews, cannot he suffer himself to be
burned of us?


Thomas. The resolution was clarke like, and like a good Theologian. But what
was done in the end with these which burned it and suffered it to be burned.


Hilarious. There was great debate between y^ Priests and the procurors of the
Temple. For the Priest did lay the fault upon the procurors. The procurors on
the contrary, confessed that they had the charge of the Temple, but not of the
body of God, which would not suffer him to be touched and handled but of the
Priests. And said, that although they had been present, yet they durst not take
Exconci. Aurel An other history. The fire kindeled in the temp^e of Vesta
Metellus. Dyont. in Numa. Ovid. Fast. 6 Palla lium. The hand kercheife of
Chamber.
him from the fire. Yet nevertheless I think that if they had seen that
goodly stir they should have been entorced to have taken him out, and would
have had some compassion of him. They would have done as Cecilius Metellus,
who seeing the fire kindled in the Temple of Vesta, wherein was the Palladium
in great danger to be burned, did cast himself in the midst of the slaming
fire for to save it, or other wise it had been burned, as the holy
hand-kerchiefe of Chambery. Metellus made it agreat conscience to touch it with
his hand, because that it was not permitted to men to enter into that holy
Reliquare, nor to approach or come near that holy Palladium, but for the holy
Virgins Vestals, the Nonnes of Vesta. But when he perceived that they could
do nothing but weep, without helpinge any thing at all, he adventured
himself, for to deliver it from the fire, the which did so burn his eyes,
that he did lose his sight. Pli. li. 7. c. 43



Thomas What was that Palladium?


Hilarious. An Image of the Goddess Pallas, the which the Panims believed to
be fallen Ovid. Fast. 3
from heaven, as Numa made them believe of his Ancyles and of other seducers of
the Diana of the Ephesians. It was brought from Troy, and the Romans had
Ancyla, Luil. li. 1. Diana of the Ephesians. Act. 19. c. 24.
such an opinion, that all the good hap and evil hap of their Empire depended
upon the same, and that it should always flourish and prosper all the while
that they had that Image at Rome and that they did keep it well. Therefore
they kept it so diligently, and all the counsel was amazed, when they saw
the fire within her Temple.


Theophilus. The Priests have no less fear of their God, of whom also
depends all their dignity and majesty of their Empire.


Hilarious. It is very true, but they have a remedy which the Romans had
not. For if their Palladium had been once burned, they could not have an other,
as those of Chambery have done of their handkercheefe: And Jupiter would not
send them a new from heaven. But the Priests do make as many Gods as they
list, and make them to come down from heaven when it pleases them. But for to
return to our matter, after that that poor God was burned, there was two
great disputations. The first was, how one might discern the ashes of the
hoaste, from those of his Tabernacle. Some held Disputacions of the ashes of
the host
an opinion, that one could not do it, others to the contrary, affirmed that
the same was very easy, saying that God did that honor unto his body, that
the ashes of that should be whyter, more softer and smoother. Now when they
had gathered together the smoothest and softest. There was yet an other
disputation more barder, to wit, in what place they should put those holy
ashes. For dyscussing of that matter, they must hold a counsel of the
wysest and most prudent men, in the Citte of Castres, in the house of Monser
of Thaurines, to the which was called master John de Bosco a Iacopin, a Doctor
in divinity, borne in Anaxerra, who then preached that Lent at Castres. There
came also the Convent of the Iacopins, and old reverent father a teacher in
divinity, bringing with him a book, which they called the third part of Saint


Thomas. The opinyon of the greatest part was, that those holy ashes should be
put in the Reliquary.


Theophilus. It was a new practyse to bring money unto the Priests. For on
the one side their God had drawn his part and his ashes from the other
ashes.


Hilarious. That was sufficient to heal their purses of Apostumes, and to make
them have the flire in their bellyes. But de Bosco counsayled them, that they
should not put that Reliquary in any hye place, for to avoid the danger of
committinge Idolatrye which might come thereby. For he declared unto them
according to their own doctrine, that the body of Christ was not burned, but
the Accidents, and that those ashes were not of the body, but of the
accidents. Wherefore we must not worship them, since that the body is
flowen an other way. Ercept they will yet keep him prisoner within the dust
and ashes. The which thing should seem very strange, and full of
blasphemies, yea, after the doctrine of the Schoolmen. And therefore he
counsayled them for a clear resolution, that they The accidens burned
should bury those ashes behind the high altar, in some dark corner, and
that they should take heed they put not any title upon it, nor Epitaph, as
men do upon other sepulchers. For it should seem very strange to write:
here lies the Lord Jesus, or the ashes of the body of god. For there is none
so ignorant among the Christyans but knows that Jesus Christ has not been
burned, and that he lies no more in the sepulcher: But that he is raised and
ascended into heaven, where he is on the right hand of God his Father, from
thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead. Wherefore one may
say unto them, as the Angel said unto the women: he is risen, he is not
hear.


Theophilus. I believe that that God of the Priests defends himself as well
from the fire, as he defends himself from the myce, worms and spiders,
when they Accidens with Out substaiuice
do eat him, and that even as they live of the accidents without the
substance, so has the fire burned the accidents without the substance. And
according to the Philosophy of the scholasticall Divines, against the sen^ence
of Aristotle, and of all the old Philosophers, one may easily find accidents,
qualities and quantities, without substance, without body, and subject. Yet
nevertheless if they did well consider the virtue of the fire, they should be
contrained to allow mine opynion. And I would to God that they would
worship the fire, The trne fire. Mat. 3. c. li. Act. 2. 3. ^.
which has the only virtue to purge sins, to wit, the same with which
Jesus Christ baptized, which is the holy Ghost.


Hilarious. I do also desire that they would worship that water of life, the
which Jesus Christ has promised, which is the same holy Ghost. But they had
rather make the material water a God, of which we may lawfully say, as we
have said of the fire. For if they do make a God of the fire, they must in
like manner make a Goddess of the water, to the end they may have Gods and
Goddesses, and a Vulcan, a Vesta, Thetis or Amphittite, The gods of the fire
and water.
Leucothea or Naiades, and Nymphs, goddesses of the waters, as well as the
Panims had, for many times they attribute unto it as much virtue as to the
fire, and sometimes more. For if their water do quench and put out y^ fire of
purgatory, it has as much virtue and more, the^ God Canopus, furthermore, what
dyfference is there between their Aquaticall Theologye, and the same of the
Ibolatrous Greeks, the which the Romans have learned of them, The Aquaticall
theology
even as the Papists of the ancient Romans? As we may judge by that
which Ovid has written, saying:

Our old men thought and did believe, Fast. 2.

and in that hope did dwell,
That sin by purging losed was, Purgations.

and so let not to tell.
Greece was the first this order gave,
and therewith did suppose:
Offenders to be rid from sin,
and so let not to gloss.

Theophilus. That doctrine should he good if it referred it self to the
purgation of our sins, made or done by Jesus Christ and that it extended unto
his blood: But their thought is altogether otherwise.


Hilarious. They understand that of their purgations, of which we have spoken
off, and chiefly of the water. Of which superstition, the Panims themselves do
mock and have well had the judgment, to know that the same was but vanity,
as we have already declared by the Apothegine of Diogenes. And the verses of
Persius a boue alleged pretend to the same, as well as those here of Ovid,
which I will now rehearse.

Ah, too light credit do they give, Fast. 2.

which do suppose and think,
That that same fault of murder should,
by water be extinct.

Eusebius. We are of an opinion altogether differinge from the same. For we
do not believe, that through the sprinckling of the holy water, the mortal
Venial sins put away by water. Mortal sins. Mat 12. c. 32 1. John. 5.
c. 13.
sins are put away, but only the venial sins.


Theophilus. They are not then defaced and taken away by the same. For the
sins are not mortal, but unto those which sin unto death, and against
the holy Ghost, and which persevere in their sins, withour doing repentance,
and running unto the mercy of God. But unto Gods elect all sins are venial:
not by their nature, but by the grace of Jesus Christ. For there is no sin be
it never so little, which of his nature is not mortal, and worthy of eternal
death, if Jesus Christ make them not venial, and capable of pardon, to those
Venial sins. Romans 8. a. 1.
which believe in him, to whom there is no more condempnation. Wherefore I am
aba^shed of your Doctors, which take so much pains to purge the venial
sins. And amongst others the sprincklyng of the holy water: 4. Sent. did.
Tho. par. 4. q. 7. ar. 2. and in Ma 6.
and that they do allow so much the exorcismes and coniurations, namely of
Thomas of Aquin, which yet nevertheless do nothing dyffer from charms and
sorceryes. But I am yet more abashed, of that Canon, so Pope Alexan. 5. de
consec. did 3. cap. aquam.
full of blasphemye which is taken of Pope Alexander the fifth, whom you
account to be the first finder out and inuentour of holy water, who says
after this manner. We do bless the water sprinkled or myngled with salt
among the people, to this end that all being sprinkled therewyth, should
be sanctified and puryfied: the which thing we command all Priests to do
so. For it the ashes of a young Heyfer beeinge sprinckeled upon the people
do sanctify and make them clean, by a stronger reason the water beeinge
mingled with salt and hallowed with divine prayers does sanctify and make
them clean? And if the salt beeinge A comparison betvveene theasshet of a
Heyfer and the^roater 4. Reg. 2. d. 21
cast in the water by the Prophet Eliseus, has healed and hoplen the
barrenness thereoff, how much more the water beeinge hallowed with divine
prayers, does take away the sterrilitie of hamayne things, and sanctyfieth
and purges the filthiness, and multiplyeth and increases the other goods,
and puts away the assaults of the Devil, and defends men from
fantasies. O Lord God, what greater blasphemye can one hear, is not that to
turn all the word of God vpsyde down, and to overthrow all the virtue of
the death and passion of Jesus Christ? That which the holy Apostle attributes
unto the death and blood of Jesus Christ is it not here altogether most
euidentlye given unto the salt The blood of Jesus.: Heb. 9. d. 13 Leuit. 16.
c. 14
and water? For in steed that the Apostle says. If the blood of Dren and of
Goats and the ashes of an Heyfer, when it was sprinckeled, puryfied the
unclean, as touching the purifying of the flesh: Now much more shall the
blood of Christ (which through the eternal spyrite, offered himself without
spotte to GOD) purge your consciences from dead woorks, for to serve the living
God? In steed that the Apostle says, the blood of Jesus Christ, those here
do put the salt the water. But I will argue and reason after an other sort
against Alexander, If the ashes of an Heyfer and the holy water that they do
make, by the ordinance and commandment of God, cannot purge the conscience,
and can scrue but for a certain carnal purification, for to keep certain
discipline in the Jewish Church, and to prefigurate the true purgation which
by the blood of Jesus Christ ought to be in the Christian Church, but it was
necessary, that the only son of God should shed out his own blood, which
only has that virtue, how the salt and the salted water coniured by the
priests, without having either law, commandment or promise of God do it
better.


Hilarious. I should have been greatly ashamed to have stayed so long upon those
vain and chidish ceremonies, but that I did see that the most wisest, and the
most greatest Doctors have been abused and deceived and are fallen into so many
execrable blasphemies.


Thomas. How has y^ ben possible? If it be so as you say, I am greatly abashed
how y^ could be done.


Theophilus. It has taken as good effect among the superstitious Christians,
as among y^ panims. For even as the Panims and hipocrites, have been the Apes of
the Patirarches The error of y^ idolaters and hypocrites.
Prophets and true servants of God, so have those been here. For all that
which the Panims did, did seem to have some color and imitation of the law
which God gave unto his people. For that which they sacryficed in the
mountains, that they caused the chylbren to pass through the fire, and
sacrificed them unto Moloch, and the wasshings that they had, did seem to be
taken of the custom of the ancient Patriarchs, and of the people of Israel,
after that sort as the Turks do The vv^^^hings of the Turks.
follow them at this day: who do spend and bestow a great part of the
time, about such wasshinges and Ceremonies. But there is great difference.
For although they follow somewhat in outward appearaunce, the works of the
ancient servants of God, yet nevertheless The false imi^^cion of the
works of the Saints.
they fail greatly, in that that they do it without the commandment of
God, followinge only their foolish santasie and opinion: And they do it not
in such faith, to such intent, and with such a spyrite, as they did. For they
did them to render obedyence unto the commandment of GOD, the which Obedienco
was unto him a sacrifice more agreeable, then the Ceremony, which for that
end was ordained: Now these here cannot scriue God by such obedyence, since
that they have no commandment: But they do offend through disobedience,
despysinge the means that he has commanded, and choosinge others contrary
unto his will. Furthermore the true Israelites did not think to be purified
by those outward things, but had regard only unto the blood of Jesus
Christ, by them represented: And they trusted but only in the mercy of God.
But those ^eere do attribute the virtue unto the outward work, and to the
creature, saying that such Ceremonies, and Sacraments, have efficacy by the
virtue of the work done: Or if thou love rather in their natural
language. Ex virtute operis operati. Now Ex virtute operis oper. ^^^
if the Prophets have rebuked and condemned the vipocrites who have put the
whole trust of their health and Esa. 1. 2. 12
salvation unto the ceremonies commanded by the law of God, and have rejected
and reproved their sacrifices and purifications, how much more are our
hipocrits to be condemned, which do not only make a god of their works, but
which is worse, do make the same of the works which are nothing at all
commanded of God, but altogether condemned.


Hilarious. We may rightly compare them unto those good merchaunts, of whom
Ovid makes mention after this manner.

Hard by Capena gate there is Fast. 5.

of Mercury a well,
Wherein is virtue rare and strange
as cunning folks do tell.
For Merchaunts do thither repair
with pitcher ready pight,
And therewithal do water draw,
by virtue of whose might
The Laurel branch is dropping wet,
and all those things that shall
By Masters right be set to sale,
are sprinkled therewithal.
And after that his head is wet
by sprinckling of the bays,
Unto the Gods in wonted wise
his prayer thus he says:
Wash off (says he) my perjury
of those times that are past,
Wash of my false and fained words
my falsehood now off cast.
Because that they hold and account Mercurius for the God of the thieves, it
seems unto them that the one of the thieves will easelye absolve the other,
and that the larcenies, periuries and rapines shall be washed away as soon as
they shall cast a little water upon them. Wherefore our Papists knowing that
they have the like God in the earth, do the like.


Theophilus. Therefore it is more then need to cry with Esaias: Be ye washed,
Be ye The true vvasshings. Esa. 1. d. 16
clean. But how? Put away the evil from your thoughts, before mine eyes,
says the Lord. And with Jeremy: O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from
wickedness. And with Iere 4. d. 14 Mat. 27. c. 25.
Jesus Christ: Thou blind Pharisie, cleanse first the inside of the Cup and
Platter that the outside of them may be clean also. Give alms of that you
have, and beehold all thing is clean unto you. And therefore must we say Luc.
11. 5. 41
with David: O purge me with Isop and I shall be clean, wash thou me and I
shall be whiter then Snow. For Psa. 51. b. 9 The true holy water. The
sprinckling of Isope.
there is none, which can make that holy water, but he only, who has put the
ministry of his Gospel in his Church, which is the true sprinkeling of Isop,
which through the preaching of Jesus Christ crucified, sprinkeleth and purges
with his precious blood our souls and consciences.


Hilarious. There is nothing truer, then that thou say, as I will yet
declare more perticulerly First, as touching the purifications and sprinklings
of water, that is already too much proved, and of the same is taken that which
Ovid writes of Deucalion and Pirrha his wife, willing to enter into ye Temple
of the Goddess Themis, of whom he speaks after this manner, after the
translation of the English Poet.

Whose sacred liquor straight they took Ovid. Meta. 1

and sprinkled with the same
Their heads and clothes: and afterward
to Themis Chapel came.
In like manner Ovid rehersing the things which were Fast. 2.
called Februa, because that the ancients used it in their purgations, makes
mention of the woll, salt, meal, and bowghes which they caused to be
consecrated for diverse purifications of men, beasts and houses: the which
things the Papists have almost altogether the like. For besides the water and
the fire, the war and the salt, they have as many holy wolles, holy linen
clothes and sacred vestements. They have the holy bread, and the bread of
Saint The holy bread Q of S. Agathe
Agathe, which has also great power: and the holy bowghs upon the day of Palm
Sunday, and of Caster flowers. But the Panims do approach nearer to the
ancient law of Moses in their holy ashes, then the Papists. For The holy
ashes Aum. 19. 4. 1
the Jews did it with a red Cow, young and which never carried yoke. The
Panims did theirs with a young Calfe, newely taken from his mothers belly, the
which the most auncientest of the virgins of the Goddess Vesta, as we may say
the mother of the Prioresse burned in that holy fire which was made upon the
altar of the said goddess, as it appears by these verses of Ovid saying.

The eldest virgin amongst the^ then, those calves does burn with fire Fast. 4

To have the ashes not to seek, when time shall then requite.
That when the feast of Pales does, approach at hand so fast,
The people may be pure and clean, when it is on them cast.

Theophilus. I doubt not but that Panish superstition was some thing taken of
the imitation of the people of God but that which was done by the people of
God, unto his honor, and contayninge the misteryes of the redemption: was
done in Idolatrye and superstition without faith among the Panims: as it is
now among the Papists.


Hilarious. I am of thine opinion. But yet nevertheless me thinks that the
Panims have more show and color, for to defend them by the word of God. But
because that that holy ashes was done in the day of the feast of the Goddess
Pales, and that I have yet to speak of otter Goddesses here before mentioned,
let us return unto the feast of Candlemas and afterward let us fall again
to the ashes, after that I shall have a little followed certain other
conformities, the which I have already Call. lee. aut li. 17 ca. 18.
some thing began. I have already touched how you do attrybute the same
tytles unto the Uirgyn Mary, Titles of the Goddesses of the Panims.
which the Idolaters have given unto Juno, Diana, Ceres and Proserpina, whom
they have called some of them Queens of Heaven, the others Ladies without Luc.
1. e. 48. Our Lady.
a tail. She called her self the handemayde and servant of the Lord, and
you do call her our Lady, as though there were in Heaven Lords and Ladies, as
there is in the Earth: and a King and a Queen as there is a Sun and a Moon.


Theophilus. The Scripture admits but one king One only king and Lord. 1.
Tim. 1 d. 17 Apoc. 19. c. 16
of the world, immortal and invisible and only wise, unto whom only
belongs all honor and glory, and in whose thigh is written: King of Kings
and Lord of Lords. Upon which also we have the witness of the Apostle,
saying: Although that there be 1. Cor. 8. b. 5
many Gods and many Lords in the world (to wit after the reputation of the
Idolaters) yet nevertheless unto us, there is but one God and one Lord.


Hilarious. Afterward you do make the same honor Flora. Lact. de fall. re.
li. 1. ca. 20.
unto the Uirgyn Mary, which the Romans did unto the Harlot Flora, whom they
have made a Goddess and canonised her, because that she made them heirs of
her goods, which she had gained by whoredom. Chloris Ovid. Fast. 4. 5.
And afterward for to cover and hyde their honor, have called her Chloris,
and have given unto her power to make the Earth to fructify and increase. Do
ye not great honor unto that holy Uirgyn, to give unto her Flora, that
abominable bawd and harlot for a compaignion? or to put her in her place? And
the time agrees well to the feast. For the Florales and the feast of
Candlemas of Flora were dedycated unto Florales.
all lycenciousenesse, shameless plays, vpllaynies and dissolutions, the
which the false Christians do practice, all that time which is between the
Kings and Shroftyde, afterward they begin again at Caster and do
continue until the month of May, and almost all the year.

But chiefly at the feasts of Caster and in May after their Proserpina and
Hecate.
lamentations of Lent. Furthermore the Panims do hold Proserpina and Hecate for
the Goddess and Queen of hell, and do light unto her Torches and candels and
do beseech her for the dead, to the end she be favorable, as well for her
own part, as toward her husband Pluto. And you, do ye much less of the
Uirgin Mary, you do Queen of heaven and of hell
call her Queen of heaven: And you do make her Queen of hell and of the dead,
as the Poets do of Hecate, whom they do also take for Proserpina and Diana
unto whom they do attribute great power in heaven and in hell: as it appears
by that, that Virgill says. Aene. 6.


To cast in sacred fire redemption chief of deeds amiss.
And on Diana calls, in heaven and hell that mighty is.
Also in like manner you would make of Jesus Christ a Pluto, or at the least
the difference is not great. And if you will deny it I will have no more to prove
it, but your prose and sequence of the dead, which is in good time, but yet
nevertheless Prose and sequence for the dead
without reason, beginning in Latin: Lugentibus in Purgatorio: The which for to
make it the better to sound in thine ears friend Eusebius, and the better to
follow the style of the Fatists which have made it, I will revearse it unto thee
in verse word for word the best and I can and if thou do not find the ryme
so good as it is in Latin, be assured that there is more ryme and better, then
there is of reason. For I do not think that one can find greater blasphemy
against God and the Uirgyn Mary. If I do not translate it word for word, I
will yet at the least rehearse the sentence faithfully. Give ear then, and I
will pour it forth.

1
To all them that do dwell: in Purgatory pain Eugentibus in purgatorio etc.
Residium in si. ne istius Dialog 7.

Where fiery furies fell: and sorrows they sustain,
And torments do endure: void of solation,
Come show them some ^ecure: by thy compassion.
O Mary.
2
Thou art the well alone: which washest sins away,
Thou hydest every one: and none thou do denay.
Extend thy hand toward: these souls and succorr show
Which thus without regard: lie languishing in woe,
O Mary.
3
The dampened spirits to thee: so pitious do asplie
Desiring for to be: delivered foom the fire.
That by thee they may be: erepted for their pain,
And may in joys with thee: for evermore remain.
O Mary.
4
Of David only kay: which heaven openest wide,
These wretches help straight way: which dolors do abide
Let them delivered be: from dongeon and durance,
Where they do linked lie: in sorrow and greuance.
O Mary.
5
A rule art thou full right: to them that thee assye,
A lively lamp of light: to them that trust in thee,
Incontinent go pray: for these souls in distress,
Thy son that he straight way: their dolor will relesse.
O Mary.
6
O Virgin thus we do: upon thee cry and call,
These souls so tangled, to: deliver out of thrall.
And pardoning their misdeed: also we thee request,
That thou will be their guide: to everlasting rest.
O Mary.
Do ye not behold a goodly Letanie? may not Jesus Christ now rest? For the
Scripture attributes unto him nothing, which is not here altogether,
attributed unto the creature. Wherefore I will have none other proposition for
to prove that that proof contains the greatest blasphemye which may be upon
the earth, but only that either the same that I do say is true, or else that the
holy Scripture is false, and Jesus Christ is no more Jesus Christ, the Titles
of Christ John. 10. b. ^. Apoc. 3. b. 7 John. 14. a. 6.
door, the key, and he which holds it, which opens and sutteth, the way the
truth and ye life, by whom only we have access unto the father: or only
hope, the resurrection and remission of sins: or only advocate patron and
mediator? the which titles and many other like, the Scripture 1. John. 2. a. 1
attributes unto him only and not unto the creature whatsoever it be,
either in heaven or in the earth. Will thou now deny, but you do make of the
Uirgin Mary a Proserping: and of the other side a Ceres? whom in like manner
you do honor by putting on of white apparel, and Write apparel
with fastings and superstitious abstinences, even as Ovid has written of
Ceres, saying.

The Goddess Ceres best does like Fast. 4.

the garment made of white
And for her use in garment black
she no thing does delight.
Behold as touching the apparel. Give ear also to that Fastings. Fast. 4.
Coriat. le not. deo. l. cui.
which he speaks of the superstitious fastings.

Their feasting lasted all the day
till time of night drew near
And then they straight to supper went Call. lee. ant. li. 26. ca. 20. Fast. 4.

when stars in sky appear
As much did they in like manner unto Isis and Cible, whom you will bring all
into the Christianity under the Plat. de Osiri. and Isida.
title of that good virgin. And not being contented with ye ye do add yet
Juno Sospita, unto whom ye title was given, because that ye Panims did
attribute unto her the virtue to Juno Sospita. Ovid. Fast. 2.
heal and save men. For Sospita signifies as much as a saueresse or woman
sauer. Therefore al those ye were sick or Jupiter a savior.
diseased did call upon her with Jupiter the savior, Jesus Christ is not
sufficient for you for a savior, except you do add a saueresse or a woman
savior. It is not sufficient for you to have him for a Porter and key bearer
in heaven, but ye must join to him a she porter and she key keeper, to the
end that we should have the Goddess Carua The goddess Carua porter. Fast. 6.
as well as the Panims had, unto whom Ovid gives such power, as you do give in
that prose unto your new Uirgin Mary, the which you have forged and made of
your own mind. For she which was the Mother of Jesus would not commit
sacrilege, for to steal from Jesus Christ her son the honor which to him
alone apperteyneth. But mark well whether the verse of Ovid speaking of the
Goddess Carua, does evil agree with your prose.

Through her great force and mighty power Fast. 6.

that which is close and shet
She does set open and shut again
without any man's let.
Furthermore you apply her to you purpose, as they did the Goddess whom they
did call Muete and the Goddess The Goddess Muete. Dea Muta. Ovid. Fast. 2.
Palis. For after that they had ended that that belongs unto the dead, they
did also make a magical sacrifice, to ye Goddess Muete to which they did put
ince^ce, war, beans and other like things, and they did think ye it had virtue
against Sacrifice against the enemies and backebiters
their enemies, for to keep the^, and chiefly for to stop ye mouth of the
evil speakers and backebiters,


Thomas. The poor priests should have need to make such sacrifices against
you for to bridle your mad tongues and to stop your mouths


Hilarious. They have the Agnus Dei of war which the Rat. diui. off. li. 6.
Pope blesses ye great Satterday, which ought to have that virtue.


Theophilus. They need none other sacrifice, then to to be good people, of good
doctrine and a holy life, and duly to exercise ye office of shepheardes, as ye
true disciples and ministers of Jesus Christ, and they shall easily tie ye
tongue of all backbiters and evil speakers: or they shall do at y^ least that it
shall not hurt them, and that those which now do speak evil, shall find
themselves liars if they persevere and continue in The goddess Pales. Ovid.
Fast. 4. The purging fire.
it.


Hilarious. Yet there remains the feast of Palis, the Goddess of the
Shepherds, in the which also they did make the purging fires, and the
shepherds did leap upon the flames, thinking that by those fires they were
purified. I think y^ of that custom came y^ fires of Saint Brandons, The fires
of S. Brandon and of Saint John.
for those that were new married, and those of Saint John: afterward in that
same feast they made persumes, besides Hly as^hes.
the holy ashes of which we have already inademe^tion off, and of the holy
water, as well for to purge the men (...) of m^n and o^ (...)
as the beasts, and did make sprinklings upon them, for to ^eepe them from
euill^ The which ceremonies Ourd has all comprised in these vestek.

And surely I my self in hand. Fast. 5.

the sacnfice did take
The beme stalk, and the ashes which
the burned Calves did make.
And thrice I past the fiery slames
in order placed there
Which all be sprinkled with the dew
of droppong Lautell were.
And of the perfumes in that same book he says
Perfumes from virgins alter fetch
which Vesta will give thee
For by the vet^ue of her gift
thou purified shall be.
Thy pertumes shallbe Horses blood
And ashes of a Calfe
The third thing them shallbe the stalks
of beans for that behalf
Let shephearde then make sacrifice
at dawning of the day
Let him cast wateron the earth
and sweep the dust away.
Then sheepefoldes trymly let be decked
with boughs and brauncues green
And let their wreathes and garlauds gay
upon the doors be seen
Let bluish smoke likewise be made
of Brimstone good and fine
And let the Sheep smeerd with the smoke,
his bleating voice resign,
Male Olyues then with fire consume,
the Juniper and Pine,
And let the Laurel crackelyng leaves,
be burnt in chimney thine,
You have also the torches and holy Candells, and the encensings and perfumes,
your holy ashes, which you give the first day of Lent: and you have always
your holy water ready, and your holy torches, as remedies against all diseases
and dangers, of men and of beasts, and ye do give and vow them unto the
Virgin Mary, and to the Saints and Saints, as they did to the Goddess Pales,
which had the charge of the beasts. the Gods of and beasts. Objection. lob.
10. b. 9. and. ^2 b. 12 Psa. 103. c. 14. Genes. 3. d. 19. Psa. 40. b. 6



Eusebius. Is that a thing contrary unto the word of God, to put holy ashes
on the foreheads of ye Christians, for to admonish then of their mortail
condition, and fragilitie, to the end that man ddoe remember that he is but
dust, earth and ashes, and to the earth shall return again? Is not that a
good advertisement, for to abate the pride and arroganicie of man, and to
prepare him unto death and to the judgment of God? And afterward, how many
places of the holy Scripture are there which do exhort us to humble our
selves before God, with To wear sackcloth and afshes.
fackecloth and ashes? And of examples of the servant of God, which have
done the like? But you will not consider those places, but you had rather to
speak evil of it, and to refer it to the Panims.


Theophilus.


Hilarious. As much, as is between the work of a man and of an Ape.


Theophilus. It is no lie. For that which the auncientes The ashes of the
ancients.
did, they did it with a good heart, and not by outward gestures. They did
return again unto God by true repentance, confession of their sins, and
amendment of life. They made no Shrofeside nor did burste themselves with
eatinge and drinckinge. They did not give themselves to all dyssolutions, fot
to go the next day to have a few afshes put upon their foreheades, as
though they would play a Mask or a Jest, and to mock with God and with men.
Thery absteyned The fastings of the ancients Judge. 20. d. 26 1. Reg. 7. b. 6
Neehe. 1. b. 4. hest. 4. a. 3. Dan. 10. a. 3. Act. 13. 2. 3
not only from certain meats until noone, for to stuff and fill themsclues
afterward with other meats, and to eat until they burst: But they
absteyned first form vice and sin, and afterward from all pleasures,
delyghtes and pompes. They absteyned from eatinge and drindcking all a day
until night, and sometime continued their prayers until two of their own
voluntarye will and good heart, when they did know that it was erpedient for
them so to do, or for to macerate and chastise their body: or when they did
see the furour and anger of GOD kindled against their sins: or when they
had any great matter of weight to do, to the which faith is greatly required,
and the aid and assistaunce of GOD, and for to demand and obtain, the
prayer and orison, the which requires Prayer.
sobriety and abstmence, to the end the spirit be more free, fervent, and
more zealous to GOD. But they had no law, for to make difference between meat
and meat, other then that of Moses: nor which forbids them flesh, which by
the same was permitted them: nor that they bound them unto certain days, or
certain meats, and to fast under pain of deadly sin. The law of fasting
Mon^anus Here ticke Eusebius. hist. ec. ole. li. ^. ca. 18


For the first that made the law to fast was Montanus the her like, as the
ecclesiastical historye witnesses. Also they attributed not their health and
justification, to the merit of their fastinges and other works, nor they did
not present them unto God, for satisfaction of their sins: and yet less the
sackecloth and ashes, wherwyth they did cover themselves: But to the only
goodness and mercy of God. And they did not that, but for to witness their
faith and repentance, which did bring forth such fruits: and for to move
and sturrethem the better to call upon GOD, and to The profit of sackecloth
and ashes. Hypocrisy.
give themselves wholly unto him. For without the same, neither sackecloth nor
ashes, nor the abstinence of meats, will not profit, but for to provoke the
wrath of God, through such hypocrisy, the which nothing can John. 8. f. 44.
be more dyspleasing unto him. For since that GOD is truth, and the Father
thereoff, and the Devil is liar and the Father of lies, what thing can be
more contrary unto the nature of GOD, and his truth, which ought to shine in
his children, then hypocrisy the daughter of the Devil and of lies? and to
lie upon the spirit of God and his Church? For what other thing is hipocrisse
Hypocrite.
and dissimulation, but lying? And what other thing is the hipocrite before
GOD, but a dissembler,beguiler, and a scoffer, a mocker of God and men, and a
very traitor and deceiuer? who would be esteemed other then he is, and
thincketh to deceine both GOD and men, caringe but for to please men, as he
which plays his part upon a stage or seaffolde, only for to get praise
and glory: As our Lord Jesus Christ witnesses of the Scribes and Pharisees,
who do all their works but for the praise of the world: For as Mat. 6. a.
2. and 22. a. 5 Ierem. 5. a. 3.
the Prophet says, O Lord thou look only upon faith. If the best works
that God ever commanded be not profitable unto him that does them, if they
proceed not of a true and lively faith, without vnsaincdnesse, with a Hebr.
11. a. 1. 1. Tim. 1. a. 5
pure heart and a good conscience, without doing it to any other end, but to
the glory of God, and health of our neighbor, whereto then can the vare
ceremonies serve, The ceremonics
which of themselves are nothing worth, but forasmuch as they do serve to
more greater things, and that they are as the rudimentes, and begynnings, and
the first elements and degrees, for to come and attain unto greater things, to
yt which they prepare do: As yt letters, ye Alphabet and the first rules
Grammar, do prepare little children and young Grammarians, to a higher
knowldge, and more greater percfection: or otherwise all that should serve them
but in little steed. Therefore Saint Paul The rodlments of the relygion
Gal. 4. 2. 3
called the Jewish and Mosaiacall Ceremonies, the elements of the world. They
do also serve us as the scaffoldes which the Masons do make for to build a
house, the which are cast away after that the house is finished. For they are
of themselves vndrofitable, sauinge only that they voe serve for a better
thing. And therefore Fastings condemned Mat. 6. a. 2.
let us behold how our Lord Jesus Christ, condemned the fastings of the
Scribes and hipocryticall Pharisees: And by his Prophet Esaias, those which
absteyned only from meats and punished their bodies, and covered themselves
with sackecloth and ashes: But they absteyned not from doing evil, from
plaintes and process, from violence and rapines: as the most part of our
fasters are at this day, which do make it a conscience to eat a piece of porke,
beale, mutton or of other beasts, and do Abstinence fro^brutish flesh.
Devouring of man's flesh.
make it no conscience to eat and devour man's flesh, and the bowels, tripes
and entrayles of their Christian brethren, through their insatiable avarice
and covetousness. And yet nevertheless they play the Dipocrites, and kneel
down before the Priest, for to receive those holy ashes, as in sign and
witness of a great humplitie and abiection of themselves. But if they did
truly believe that they are earth and ashes, wherefore do A layned
humility.
not they fear the judgment of GOD, and leave off from their violences and
ertorcions? For they ought not to think, that with such maskes, they can
content and please God, which has no need of babels, for to pass away the
time. For the fasting has been chiefly The principal use of fasting.
used, among the true servant of God, for to help them in their peayer, the
which is almost always joined with fasting, in all the places of the
Scripture which makes mention of fasting. For that cause said Jesus Christ
unto his Disciples speakinge of that Devil which they could not drive out of
the LunatickeL That kind of devil Mat. 17. d. 27.
cannot be driven out, but by fastinges and prayers: Letting them thereby to
understand, that they wanted To drive out ye devil by fasting and prayer.
great faith, and that their incredulitye and unbelief was che cause that they
could not drive him out.

Wherefore it was most necessary for them to pray, the which requires
abstinence and sobriety, for to be more Incredulity. Prayers. Abstinence
from meats. The fasting and abstinence of the Panims Call Rhod. let. aut. li.
26. c. 20. Hierome Apul. sin. aur. li. 11.
spiritual and seruent. But otherwise, the fasting and the abstinence, which
has regard but to the meats, why should it be more praise worthy among
the Christians, then the abstinence of the Philosophers which do abstain
from flesh? or that of the Priests of Isis, and Cyble, who do abstain from
eating of bread? whom Saint Hierome rebuked, because they dare not eat bread
for fear to break their fastinges, but they must make great provision for
Phesauntes, Partriges, and other deyntie fowls. They do as ours do, which
dare not eat of the larde and fat bacon, but they seek bothsea and land for
to find out new delicate disshes. Is not the perpetual abstinence from wine
which the Lurkes kept to be preferred? But I will not at this time enter into
that matter of fastinges any further. For it cannot be ended in a small time.
But if the fastinges and such corporal exercises do little profit, except
1. Tim. 4. a. 3.
they have with them the things, by reason whereoff they are ordained, to what
end can sackecloth and ashes serve: especially after that sort as they are
given at this day, the which has no lykelyhoode or agreeinge with the custom
of the ancient servants of God? For they did not think to be puryfied and
sanctyfied by those ashes, nor that they should bring any health or
salvation unto the soul by that sprincklinge, as you do by yours. Let the
prayer, the which you do use in the censecration and halowinge of them: be a
witness in the which you do pray God, that it would The blessing of ashes.
Miltere digneris sanctum Angelum tuumde
please him to send his holy Angel from heaven, to bless and sanctify these
ashes, to the end they may be a healthful remedy unto all those which do
call upon his celis, qui benet dical and sanct ^fiees hes ^^ueres and ^.
name: and that althose which de pour them upon them, may receive bealish of
their body, and safegarde of their soul, for the redemption of their sins.
Those ashes should have as much virtue as the blood of Jesus Christ. They
should have yet more show and color, as already has been declared, to restore
the ancient Iewisth Ceremonye, The ashes of an Heyser. Numeri. 19. a. 2.
and to make ashes of the young heyfer, then to do that that they do, or to
make them of a Calfe, as the Pomaines did. For they should have more coulor in
the holy Scripture, in the which they shall find no institution of their
ashes.


Hilarious. If they do not find it in the holy Scripture. ought it not to
suffice thee, that it is found in the Balender of Ovid. But they do add
moreover that the Vestalles with those consecrated ashes, for the purgation of
the people: not only made with a Calfe, but Holy persumes: The macter so make
the ashes Feria 4. cineru^ ante missam be nedicuntur cineres facti de ramis
benedictis pretcritis annisi habentur in medio hoar ante altar etc. Purgaroty
of the quick and the dead.
also with stalks and poddes of beans, had perfumes of Brimstone, of Torches,
of the Laurel or Bay tree, of the Dliffes, of Rosemarye, and other like sweet
and oderiferant trees and herbs: of which your Missell teaches you to make
your asshe, to wit of the boughs which were blessed the year before: and of
the bands and begins which they do put on the little children in their
baptism and confirmation. Do thou think Eusebius, that those things do
evil agree with your Ceremonies, and the purgations that you have nas well for
the quick as for the dead. For since that the blood of Jesus Christ is not
sufficient for you, it must needs be that you have a Purgatory both for the
one and the other: But I have yet forgotten, that at the feast of the dead, the
Panims did shut their Temples, and cover and hide their images, as Ovid has in
like manner descrided by these verses.

The Gods of Churches were shut up, Fast. 2.

with close and privy doors:
And alters wanted sacrifice,
none incense on them poures,
Then did poor souls and bodies dead,
committed to the grave
Still stray abroad and feed on that
set for them then to have.
The Athenians also used Ceremonies altogether like unto yt feasts of
Praxiergide, which they celebrated in Athens in the month of February, to the
which the one holds the secret mysteries: one other pulls down all the
ornaments of the Temple, and an other covers the Image that was there. Do
not you receive and use yet at this day all in all, those same manner of
doings, the which you have referred to Lent, and do stop the Coel. Rhod.
lee.^ut. li. 14. ca. 9. To stop the Idols noses. The veil. 2. Cor. 3. c. 1^
noses of your Idols, and hang a veil before them, for to declare that it is
taken no more from you then from the Jews. I know not whether you be afraid
least they should smell. the garlike which you eat in Lent. I will leave off to
speak of other sperstitions and Idolatries which you have borrowed of the
Panims. For I should never make an end. But I will only show one part of
those which are descended from the feast of the dead, celebrated among the
Panims, and of the purgations y^ they have, as well for the quick as for the
dead: to the end thou should know that even as you have followed the^ for
y^ purgations of the buing, so have you done in those of ye dead.


Theophilus. It seems also y^ Tertulian would refer, that which y^
Corinthians Teriul. aduers. Martio. b. s. and li. dear. cor. Baptism for the
dead 1. Cor. 15. d. 29
did baptize themselves for ye dead, to ye Februales and purifiecations of the
panims, as letting to understand, that where the Corinthians did baptize
themselves for the dead, was a superstition which they did yet keep of their
ancient customs, crcept y^ in steed of yt panish superstitions, they did
abuse yt baptism, thinking y^ it ought to serve for the dead, as we do see in
our time yt they have applied it unto the Lords supper, by the means of Masses
yt which The supper. for the dead.
the superstitins Papists do think to profit the dead, in whose name the
Priest does communicate and sing it. Although that the words of Tertulian are
obscure and very hard, yet to cramine them together, it seems very well
that he means the same, and the auncientes have almost all taken it after
that manner: notwythstandinge that others do take it in an other sense, and
do interpret that place of Saint Paul, of those which do cause An other
interpretation of the place. 1. Cor. 15.
themselves to be baptized, when they were in extreme sickness and near unto
death. For the custom was that those which came to the says (which men call
the Catechumenis, because they are instructed in the faith The custom of the
Gatechumenus. Baptism deferred.
and Christian Religion) did not of custom cause themselves to be sodedinely
baptized, until such time as they were well instructed and taught in the
secret mysteries, and doctrine of the Christian Religion. And therefore bycayse
they had the baptism in great reuernce, and did believe that through the same
they had full remyssion and forgiveness of all their sins, and were
altogether renewed, many tarried and referred to be baptized, until they were
like to dye, thinckinge that when they dyed in such a state, they were more
purewr and cleaner from their sins: the which they could never have done,
if they had not truly believed and hoped for the immortalytie of the souls,
and the resurrection of the flesh. Although that the Apostles allowed not
such manner of dooinge. Those which do take the words of the Apostle after
such a sense and meaning, are induced to do it, because that they think,
that if the Apostle did understand and mean that of the Panish superstitions,
that he would not have passed it over, without To baptize the^ selves for the
dead.
rebuking that error: and do expound it that they should baptize themselves
of the dead: that is to say, as dead, and as people which repute
themseluesalready dead. I have the willinger touched this, for to give occasion
unto ye readers, to examine well that place and the exposition of the
auncientes and others.


Hilarious. We have sufficiently entreated of that matter Eusebius, and think
that thou shall have somewhat to do to separate against that which we have
propounded, for to prove that your ceremonies, and prayers for the dead are
taken of the true Church of Jesus Christ. For I have rehearsed unto thee one
part of the Popes Calendar, and me seems that he ought to give me good
wages for to end them all and his feasts: as Ovid has written those of the
Romans.


Eusebius. If thou had as well read the works of Saint Augustine, and of
other ancient Doctors, as the books of Ovid and other Poets and Autors of the
Panims, thou would speak otherwise, and thou should not have fallen into
such deep roots of errors and heresles in which thou art wrapped in, in such
for that thou can not come forth, what so ever thing one may propound to the
contrary.


Hilarious, I gladly desire, if that I am plounged in so deep[e error as thou
say that I am, that thou would aid and help me to come out of it: And
if I have not read the ancient Doctors so diligently, as thou think that
thou haste read, I would that therein thou would amend my fault, and
that thou could show me so good out of their books, that I might have
occasion to content my self. But I do now know by experience, that that which
I thought, is true. For I doubt very much, that even as I have said at the
beginning, all thy artillery, canons, and munititions with thy matter gunner
Eccius, should be all consumed into smoke, as it appears unto me at this
present. I did look for certain strong arguments and that a great number of
them, but if thou have no other weapons, thou art not so well armed as thou
vauntest thy self: except peradventure there be some thing more excellent in
the arriere guard.


Eusebius. Sing not the triumph before the victory. For thou art yet very far
from thy rekoning, and from that thou thinckest, the strongest is yet to do.
But with much a do one could speak a word before thee. Thou art of the nature
of women. For thou must always be balinge, and thou would rather dye, but
that thou wylt have the last word. Thomas has granted unto me this day, to
put forth my reasons, and to answer and rely unto yours: But even as
Theophilus and you do? So must I yet have a few days respite, before that I
can bring that that I have to say against you.


Theophilus. Thou do wrong to complain, as for my part of thou can not
say, that I ever did interrrupt thy talk, and but that I have always suffered
all that thatthou would speak, hearing thee in all patience and modesty.


Thomas. I am well content for my part, to give unto thee the day which I ought
to have for my self, if this here be not sufficient for thee. For I have not so
much learning and knowledge, but that I am more fitter to be a hearer then a
Dector.


Hilarious. We will give thee as long time as thou will. But peradventure you
do not understand where Eusebius grief lies and on which side his shoe
wringeth him. I know not whether he has yet eat or drunk to day. As for me
yesterdayes journey admonished me to take a little, and to drink a draught of
wine before I came: the which thing is the cause, that I am not so much
thirstly as I was the day before: although that we have been a long time about
the fire. As for Thomas. I believe that he has been no more evil avuised than
I, and that he is no less disposed to drink in the morning. Touching
Theophilus and Eusebius, I fear very much but that they are yet fasting. For
Theophilus is a man very studious and fover, which to eat little and late,
infomuch that I do more greatly esteem his sobriety and daily and ordinary
abstmence, then the fastings of y^ priests and Moonks. As for E^sel m^, he is
so superstitious that he favors ^em what Mooukish. wherefore I doubt not, but
for to make han obedient to y^ holy Mother the Romish Church, does fast, fith
that according to the ordinance of the same, it is the day of fast.


Eusebius. it is needful, that I and others do fast. For I am certain, that
if the fastin^g had none other mainteiners then thou and such as thou art, they
should be soon abolished. Hellarms. I know not what I should voe, but at the
least I am at this day aided to maintain them: and a little wanted, but that I
have learned theee to fast after the ancient manner. But thou ought not to
find that strange. For since that we have spoken of fasting, it was in like
manner requisite to practice it. Yet nevertheless the eueming and the night are
not yet come, which was the time and the hour that the ancients used to
reast themselves on the fasting days. but to the end thou have none occasion
to complain, I think it best, that thou do defer that which thou have yet to
say, until after drinking: and for my part, I promise thee to suffer thee to
speak as much as thou will, and I will keep so good silence, that thou shall
not check me, as thou have now done.


Eusebius. I am content with that thou say, so thou do keep thy promise.
But I greatly fear, that thou will do nothing.


Hilarious. Thou shall see, and before that thou do sleep thou shall have the
experience. For I will leave it ot thee and to Theophilus to do. Then let us go
to refresh our bodies, and in the mean time preprare thy self fot to fight
valiantly.


THE SVMME OF THE fourth Dialogue.
Because that the enemies of the truth do glory in themselves that they have
the ancient Doctors on their side, for to maintain their abuses and
supersticions: in this Dialogue Eusebius trauayleth all that he can, for to
uphold his Religion, and to prove his intent by the Ecclesiastical Doctors:
unto whom Theophilus shows how he corrupts and peruerteth the sense and
intelligence of their words, and how they do condemn the errors and abuses of
the Papists: by occasion whereoff, is also declared wherein sometime the
ancient Doctors have been deceived and overcome, following more the opinion of
men, then the certain witness of the word of god: And when, and how the
papistical Purgatory has begun: what foundation, stay and shore it has. It is
also amply entreated of what original and beginning the private and particular
Masses came, and the custom to sing them for the dead, and the dispising of
the holy sacrament of the supper of Jesus Christ, and of the true Christian
Communion. And therefore this Dialogue is entitled, the Age of the Mass and
of Purgatory, because that it shows how it was borne, increased and
augmented, and the Purgatory in like manner.

THE FOVRTH DIALOGVE which is called the Age of the Mass and of Purgatory.
THomas. As far as I can presume by the words which I have heard of Eusebius,
I trust that I shall hear you to bring forth a matter, the which will please
me well, and which I desire greatly to understand. For I see daily, that men do
blame you, which are taken and accounted for Heretics, to corrupt and pervert
the sense of the holy Scriptures. Men do unto you this honor, to say, that
you will not receive the witness nor the authority, but of the holy
Scripture, and that you do prove by the same all that which you put forth,
hut all the evil is in this, that you take them to your aduan^tage, and turn
and wrest them to your sense and carnal intelligence, and therefore you will
not receive the expositions of the good Doctors. But I will see now, how you
can bear it, and whether the Doctors of the Church are of our side or on
yours. And therefore I pray thee Eusebius, yt thou do pursue thine enterprise,
and that thou show forth so good places, that they cannot be easily plucked
from thy hands, as they have done those which thou have already taken of
Saint Ambrose.


Eusebius. If I would display and show forth all that that I might allege,
as well of the new and late Doctors as of the aun^ient, I should as well set them
a work, as Hilarious did vaunt himself of late to have set me on work, but
I have not determined to allege others, but of the most auncientest and of
those which are of more greater authorite in the church, by the which I will
plainly prove, that that which we do now in the favor of the dead, descended
from the primative Church and from the The proposition and intent of Eusebius
traditions of the Apostles. For if I would bring forth the Doctors of late
days, they would by and by reicete and despise their authority, and would
make none account of it: But when I shall have proved, that the ancient
Doctors of the Church are on our side, I shall by and by allow and confirm
the authority and witness of the late Doctors, and will more easelier stop
their mouths: except they be so past shame, that they care leproue and
condemn all the holy men and Pillars of the Church, which have shored and held
it up in the time of the Apostles, and to affirm that there are not so many
good men and so wise and learned as they are.


Theophilus. Thou shall not find us so unreasonable. Put forth thy case,
afterward Judge whether we have read and understood those of whom you do
glory so much in.


Thomas. I have heard thee speak friend Fusebius of S. Augustine
Saint Augustine namely among others, and I am of an opinion that he is the
chiefest, by whom thou may better fight, then by any other, if thou can
find in him a strong staff for to defend thee and to make war against
them. For I have understood that there is none among all the ancient Doctors
which will serve the^ better for to prove their sect, then he. Wherefore I am
sure, that if thou can do so much, that thou can prove that he is contrary
unto them, they shall receive a great overthrow, and thou shall make a great
breach in their Castle. For if he so whom they have their recourse, be their
enemy, they shall have others which will rise against them.


Eusebius. But so well assured theroff, as thou are certain that it is now
day. And to the end thou should not think that there are but vain words
in my case, I will show unto them the experience. What do those words signify
which are written in his Encheridion: which are also recited in y^ decrets
Confess li. 9. ca. 12. 13. Cha. 110. and 109 13. q. 2. ca tempus. 4. sen^. did.
45. Ne^ue.
and in the master of the sentences, saying: we must not deny, that the souls
of the dead are comforted thorewe the piety and devotion of their friends that
be alive, when the sacrifice of a mediator is offered for them, or that alms
is done in the Church. But those things do profit those who have merited
them during this life, The authority of S. Augustine for the suffrages of the
dead.
to the end that they may afterward profit them. For there is a certain
manner of living, which is not so good but that it requires those things
after death? nor so evil, but that after the same, they may profit him. But
there is in like manner some kind of life so good, that it requires not the
same. And again some so evil that The diversity of lives
it cannot have aid by those things, after that this life shall be ended. And
therefore he gets here all the merit, by which any may be relieved or
grieved after this life. Yet nevertheless, there is none which hops to be
able to merit toward GOD, when he shall be dead, whereoff he has not here
made any accempt. This then which the Church has frequented, for to praise
the dead, is not contrary unto that sentence of the Apostle, which says: we
shall all be brought before the Romans 14. c. 10. 2. Cor. 5. b. 10
judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive the works of his body,
according to that he has done, whether it he good or badde. For every one
acquireth and gets that merit, when he lived in this body, that those
things may profit him. For they profit not all men. And wherefore do they
not profit all men, but because of the difference of the life, the which
every one has lead in his body? Then when the Sacryfices, be it of the
Altar, or of alms deeds, what soever they be, they are offered for all the
dead which have been baptized, those are giving of thanks for those which
have been very good: and propitiations for those which have not been very
evil, for to make God favorable unto them. But for the most wicked and evil,
although that there be not aids and helps for the dead, yet nevertheless
those are certain consolations for the living. But they do profit those that
they do profit, either to the end that they may have full remission and
forgiveness: or without all ^eubt, to the end that the dampnation may be
more tolerable and easier to bear.


Thomas. Has Saint Augustine written that?

^usebius. Do thou think me so much a fool, that and would declare it
otherwise? I warrant you they would not let me pass so, if they might say
the contrary. But I am certain they dare not do it. And though they would,
they cannot. For the book is of faith and credit.


Thomas. Those words are very clear, not only for to prove the prayers for
the dead, but also the sacrifice of the ^ulter.


Eusebius. One cannot find a thing more cleerer. For it opens so plainly
all the matter perticulerly, and goes before the objections and replyings,
which those that do speak against it might make. For it deuideth the diverse
manners to live, and diverse merits of men: And gives In. ser^le vir. apo. and
in gles. super ulud. ^. Thessa. 4. Nolimus: de agentibus curs. promor. 13. q 2.
ca. non estimantus
to understand, that it must be he which would that such good deeds should
be profitable unto him after his death, should be here conducted in such
sort, that they may profit him: that is to say, that it must be that he dye
confessed and repentant. And he speaks not only this in this place, but in
many other like, amongst which he adds yet this: that notwithstanding
that that which we do for the dead, profit not all those, for whom we do
them. Yet nevertheless because we do not know to whom it profits. we must do
the^ to all, y^ we leave none out. For it is a great deal better that those
to whom it can neither profit nor hurt, should have more then they need,
then to want any thing unto those which have need. And in the same book he
says moreover: we do read in the second book of the Machabees, that
sacrifice was offered for the dead, but when one reads them not in the
ancient scriptures, the authority of the universal Church is not little, the
which has this custom, that in the prayers of the Priests, which they do
make unto God at his altar, the recommendation of the souls has also his
place. And did (...)
not Monica the Mother of Saint Augustine, require that they should make
remembrance of her in the sacrament of the altar? For that cause has Saint
Gregory written, that the souls of the dead are delivered in scure manners and
sorts, either by the oblations of the Priests, Vnde versus exsiella clerice.
and 10. chanes. de sacram. M^ssa, preces, ^ona, tetunia, quatuor ista.
Absoluimus animas quas purgans detinet ignis.
or by the prayers of the Saints: or by the aims of their friends: or by
the fastinges of their parents. I do not think, that these two learned men,
would have written such things, without having foundation of the holy
Scriptures. And it is not like, that the Church has kept that custom so long
time, but that she was well assured that it came from the Apostles, and
afterward was augmented and ordained by Origene, as witnesses Isidore. for
from the time of Saint Denis and Tertulian, who were next unto the Apostles,
they made prayers, sacrifyces and oblations for the dead. For Saint Denis
makes express mention D^rand in rati. diu^ off. li. 7 Rub de off. mort.
Diony. li eccle. hier cap. 7.
of the prayer which the Bishop made for the dead, that God would pardon him
all that that he might have committed through man's infirmity, and that he
would place him in light, and in the region and country of the living, and
in the bosom of Abraham (...) and Jacob. It is in like manner written in
Tertulian we do make yearly one day ^^oblation for the dead. I have
declared unto thee many witnesses and of great authority. I have alleged unto
thee the custom of the ancient Church: which is a witness which is worth a
thousand. I have alleged unto thee the practice of the ancient Doctors. They
do sufficiently declare, both they have used, and chiefly Saint Augustine:
who ^^^^^festly witnesses, that the same was ordained of the authors, 4. sent.
did. 45 neque. Sermo de verse. apo in glo. super illud. 1 Thessalonians. 4 Nelumus.
which the universal Church keeps, that is no say, that for those which are
dead in the communion of the body and blood of Christ, when one makes
remembrance of them in their place, in the sin very socrifice, that one
ought to may, and make remembrance, that one do also offer that sacrifice
for them.

Wherefore he says, that we must not omit the supplication, the which the
Church has taken in charge to do De cur. pro. mor agere. cap. 4. Quast ^d.
dul^^
for the spirits and souls of all the dead, which are departed in the
Christian society and company.


Theophilus. I think that thou have very strongly dysplayed and set forth the
principal weapons that thou can find for to defend thy quarrel, and that
if I have once satisfied those objections, I believe that the matter shall be
ended as soon as he touches the witness and authority of the ancient
fathers. As touching Saint Denis and the author of that book of the
celestial and ecclesiastical Hieratchies, I have already The answer and
solution to the objections.
ready told thee what it was. For who knows not, that that book of the
celestial Hierarchia, is more worthy to be some dreamer, then of Saint Denis
the Disciple Denis Areopagite. Act. 17. g. 34.
of Saint Paul? For it he had written either of the Angels or of the order of
the Church, he had would rather have followed Saint Paul his Master, then
the dreams of his own head: and he would not have spoken of such matters,
otherwise then he in his Epistles. If thou do diligently read that book of
Denis, whatsoever it be, thou shall there find, that the prayers which are
made at the burials are made for those that be alive, and not for the dead:
And does confirm that which we have already spoken off, of the manner which
the auncientes had to praise the dead. Wherefore it should not be needful
to reiterate that which already has been opened before, if thou would
understand that which one tells thee: But we are always to begin with
thee. I have already sufficiently declared unto thee, from what original and
beginning the commemoration which is done for the dead in the Church came
first, and what has been the custom of the ancient fathers, the which was
altogether contrary from that which is now in the Popish Church. Wherefore
that which thouhast alleged of Denis and Tertulian does confirm my matter,
as I will prove unto thee by Cyprian, that holy Martyr, who has read and well
vnderderstanded Cyprian.
Tertulian, if ever man did understand him. For he had him in such reputation
that he did call him The praise of Tertulian.
no otherwise but the Master through his great excellentnesse: Insomuch that
when he would read in his books, he said always, bring me the master.
And the better to declare the pleasure that he did take in readinge him, and
the fruit that one might therein learn and receive, they say that he laid
it at night when he went to bed, under vys pillolue that he night have it
always ready at hand, when he would occupye and look in it: as the
ancient historyes do also witness, that Alexander the great did myth the
books of Homere. For he gives us sufficiently to understand that the
commemoration and the oblations which are done for the dead, in that ancient
Church, were none other things then the praises and giuinge of thanks, which
the faithful did render unto God, for the mercy that he did unto their
brethren, whom he has called from this world: with the other things,
which have been already spoken off, which are yet done at this day in some
places in Almaigne, after the auncien^ manner. But they do call commonly the
oblation and sacryfice, the divine service, and that which they did in their
assembles in which they did observe chiefly four things: The first was the
prophecy and preaching of the word of God. After the prayers. Afterward the
supper, and last what does the sacrifice signify in the ancient church.
of all, the gatherings and almos for the poor. And they did call that
oblation and sacrifice: not that they did understand and mean to offer and
sacrifice: Jesus Christ, as the Priests say that they do in their Mass. But
because The order of the assembles of the ancient church. Act. 2 g. 46 The
christian sacrifices. Romans 13. a 1 Heb. 13 c. 15 Psalm 50. c. 14. 2. Cor. 8. 2. 4
that the Bishop and Pastor of the church, and all the Christian people did come
to offer and present themselves unto god, and did offer unto him their orisons
and giving of thanks, which are y^ true sacrifice of praise. And their alms in
like manner, for to comfort y^ poor people of Jesus Christ: They are those
which the Apostle calls offerings agreeable unto God. And they did make
co^memoration of the death and passion of Jesus Christ in celebrating the holy
supper. Wherefore we must not think, y^ they did make prayers and offerings for
the dead, to the end they should be delivered frdi^ the pains of Purgatory;
as has been done in our time: But the prayers were the praises, and thanks
that they rendered unto God, and exhortations and admonitions which they did
make by his word unto those that be living. The offeringes were of the alms
that the faithful did bring, for to succor and help the poor which were
living. And therefore long time among the auncientes, Hist. tri. li. 6. ca 28.
and li. 7. ca. 31. 32.
that divine so^^ke that they did in their assemblies, was called Collectes,
that is a gathering, for two causes. The first because that the people was there
assembled, and gathered into a Communion. The other because that in those holy
assembles, they did make gatheringes for the poor after the example of the
primitive Church. Behold the name of the Christian assemblies, which has long
continued among the auncientes, before that the name of Mass was borne. As it
appears by the ecclesiastical hystories, as well by that same of Eusebius,
as by that which is called Tripertite: As for the name of the Mass, it is now
enough. Although that some are yet of opinion, that that name came of the same
cause, wherefore the divine service has also been called Collectes:
gatheringes, and that it has been called mass, because that in the same the
offerings were brought, which were there sent, for to give them unto the poor.
For Missa in Latin, signifies things sent. And those that are of that
opinion, do think that all that which they do, and bring into those
assembles, was called Missa in the plural number: of which they have made
Missa and Miss, in the singular number. And by good right. For then when the
offeringes are distributed unto the poor, one may well call them Missa in the
plural number, that is to say, sent. For they were sent, and divided unto
many.

But now the Priests do wrong to call it, Missa, in the singular number,
that is to say, sent. For the offeringe is not sent but unto them. Wherefore
they should have more reason to call it, kept, then sent. For they do keep al
for themselves. They have well kept the name of Collect. But in steed of
Collect, signifies, among the auncyents, all the content of the divine
service, they do call by that name the prayers and Oremus that they do singe
before the Epistle, Wherein well appears what was the custom of the
auncientes: and that the Deacons did make the gathering for the poor: The
which those here do make for themselves, and do singe the Epistle unto the
Deacons. But for to return unto the prayers for the dead, and for to
understand that that which I speak is true. Mark what Saint Cyprian
writes, of one Cypr. li. 4. epist. 5. Celerin and his family.
called Celerin, who has had a family: the which almost all suffered
martyrdom, of whom he has written after this manner: It is long a gone, that
Celerin was crowned for a Martyr. Item, his uncle of the fathers side, and
Laurence his vndle on the mothers side, and Ignacius, which sometime have
fought and been soldiers in the worldly war, but beeinge the true and
spiritual soldiers of God, having overcome the devil through the profession
of Christ, have obtained of the Lord the rewards and crowns, through his
glorious passion. We do offer always, as you remember, sacrifices for them,
Sacrifices for the Martirs.
as often as we celebrate the passions of the martyrs. and that we make
commemoration and remembrance universally of their days. Since that he
witnesses that Laurence and Ignacius have received as being victoryous the
palms and and crowns of martyrdom, there is no doubt, but that they are
already holden for Saints and blessed: and do not think that they were yet
deteyned August. in epist ad Hebr. ca. 12 Extra de cele miss. cum Mat. ca. vlt.
Sent. 4. did. 45. Neque. Glosan 13. q. 2 caaempus. Imurs. m facit Martirs qui
orat pro Martiri
in the pains of Purgatory, and that we must make prayers and sacrifices for
them, that they might be delivered from their sins and pains. The thing is
so plain that none can deny it. For this sentence is very common and allowed
among you, and by your Canons: That he that prays for a Martyr, does wrong
and iniurye to the Martyr. For I doubt not, but that in success of time, all
things will be come worse. And above all I will advertise thee, that thou
have not proved unto me that that manner of doing was ordained by the Apostles
in the primitive Church. For saint Augustine and others, whom thou have
alleged, do make mention that the ancient fathers, have been the authors
and inuentours of that custom, and that the Church of long time has kept it:
But they declare not, that Jesus Christ nor his Apostles, have commanded and
ordained it. And although that that Denis which Dyoni. hier eccle. ca. 7.
has written the Hierarchies, makes only in one word mention of the prayer
for the dead which are buried, yet he proves not by the holy Scripture, that
we ought to do it: and he speaks not one word of Purgatory. But yet
that that he touches of the prayer for him which one buryeth, is written
after a sort, that he does sufficiently declare that if was a vow and a
desire that the faithful had of his health and salvation, and a witness that
they do give, not that the same came of an opinion that they had either of
Purgatory, nor of the pains which the souls of the faithful should suffer
after their departinge from this life. Wherefore their witness serves me,
for to prove, at the leastwise that such custom is not of the ordainaunce of
the Apostles, since that they cannot bring forth any other certain witness,
but that they report it unto the ancient fathers For by that which has been
already declared and expressed, it is easily to know what the commemoration of
Martyrs have been, and of the faithful that be dead sithence the time of
Tertulian and Cyprian. And doubt not but that that which the ancients have
done, was partlye and principally for to abolish the Parentales and other
superstitions which the Gentiles had about the dead, as already has been amply
declared. For they did think that it would be very hard so pull them away, if
in steed of their customs, they had not put in some other, for so content them
and for them to muse and study oil: As we may see by that Ad. Aurel. epi. 64.
which Saint Augustine has written, of gluttony and drunkenness which was
used in his time of the buryalls of the dead and in halowinge the Churchyardes.
He says that they cannot be abolyshed, if one do not forbid that villainy by
the Scriptures, and that the oblations which they make for the souls of the
dead upon their sepulchers, be not sumptuous, nor of great cost, and that
one should give cheerfully and without pride, unto all those that demand
it, and that they sell them not. But if there be any that will offer any
money, that it be distrubuted presently unto the poor. Saint Augustine
gives sufficientlye to understand that the auncientes have been constrained
to invent and bring forth many Ceremonies in the Church, for to chase and
drive away the Idolatry and superstition of the Panims: The which also
afterward were corrupted, as we may see this day by experience, insomuch
that they are more dangerous, then those of the Panims, I think that that
which has been already entreated, of the feast of Saint Peter's chair, the
which they celebrate in February, agrees to that very purpose whereoff Saint
Augustine has spoken.


Hilarious. It is most true, that those ancient fathers would have driven away
the superstition by such inventions, as we do drive out a pin with one other
pin. But they were not much profitable unto the Church.


Theophilus. After that manner came the custom to make commemoration of the
dead in the ecclesiastical assembles and in the celebration of the supper,
over and beside the causes before alleged. And afterward by little and
little, the superstition has begun, and is augmented unto this which we do
now see it. We have no example The beginning of Masses for the dead.
in all the holy Scripture, that the Apostles have done any thing of this.
About the time of Tertulian and of Cyprian, there was no question neither of
Purgatory, nor of prayers nor offeringes, for to deliver the souls, but such
which we have seen. About the time of Ambrose and Augustine, the superstition
did begin very much to take root and to increase, insomuch that in steed of
simple commemorations, giuinge of thanckes, and exhortations, which they made
in celebratinge the memory of the dead, they had already begun to dyspute,
that the prayers did profit them: and that the The beginning of Purgatory.
question of Purgatory was already begun to be sturred up. For it is very
easy for men, yea, the most sage and wysest, to fall into superstition,
because that it is natural unto us, and chiefly about the dead, by reason of
an affection and love that we do bear unto our parents and friends, whom
we cannot forget, although they be absent from us, but we do abide and
continue always affectioned toward them, as though we might greatly aid
them, yea, many times more after they be dead then before when they were
alive. From thence it comes that we are so much inclined to invent and
receive every thing that we think may serve them. And although in deed it
serves them to no end, yet nevertheless we cannot refrain our selves,
because that. we think that we do feel comfort and satysfaction to our
affection, iudgeinge the affection of the dead, after our own, our dealinges
is fowardes them, as toward God. What is the original and beginning of all
Idolatry, but our foolish fantasse and affection, by the which we do measure
God, thinkinge that The original and beginning of all Idolatry.
he takes pleasure to that that pleases us? Wherefore we serve him not
after his will, but after ours. For in making feasts, in reposinge our
selves, beeinge apparayled with goodly robes and gowns, making great cheer,
hearing goodly singinges and melodyes, walkinge about and passinge the time in
goinge a procession, w^e think that we do serve God well. But what service
do w^e unto him? Do we not rather serve our selves and our affections, making
unto us a God altogether like unto our selves, deliting our selves in the like
vanities? As much is happened unto us about the dead. Foolissh assestio^
toward y^ dead.



Hilarious. When a man is angry, yet it does him much good to revenge himself
upon some one, for to make him pass away his sorrow and anger, although he do
receive no great profit. Even so when a man is in sorrow and beauines, for the
death of his friend, he must have some solace and comfort, for to comfort his
sorrow and heaviness. And thereoff it came that the woman that loves well her
husband, or the mother, her child, oftentimes cannot refrain to kiss them
after that they shall be dead, or to embrace them, and some time with more
greater affection, then ever she did during the time that he lived. But
wheretoo profits all that, either to the quick or dead?


Thomas. Nothing at all.


Hilarious. And yet nevertheless y^ does great good unto her that does it, and
sh^e is so affectioned.


Theophilus. Of The original of Im^ges. Sap^en. ^. ^. b. 15
such affection came in like manner the beginning to make Images, as it showed
unto us in the book of wisdom, yea almost the beginning of all Idolatry, as
all y^ ancient Fathers do witness, especially Lactantius and Eusebius. Lact. de
fall. rcl li. a. ca. 13. Eusebius. de pra ena li. 3. ca. 8
For the men for the affection that they did bear unto the dead to comfort the
sorrow that they had, and to remember them, and besides to honor them, they
made Images, and set up sumptuous Sepulcres in their honor. Afterward they
began to buyld Temples and Chapels hard by their graves, and to set therein
their Images. Afterward in success of time, all was converted and changed
into great superstition and I^olatry. And even as it begun among the Panims, so
is it entered among the Christians, The beginning of the Idolatry among the
Christi^is.
by occasion of the Sepulcres of the Martirs. For they have begun to make
there their Ecclesiastical assemblies, to go thither to watch, and pray unto
God, and to celebrate the supper. Afterward they have builded Chapels and
Temples, and have ordained Annual feasts. And after that those foundations
were once set up, which was yet some thing tolerable, the thing was
afterward perverted. Insomuche that in steed of the Candles that they carried
for to watch all the night, they The ^ardell^ of a good (...).
began to offer them to the Saints, and to their Images. In steed of the
prayers y^ were made unto god, they have begun to address and direct the^ unto
them. In st^ede of yt supper (...) of S^mes.
y^ they celebrated in y^ name of y^ death and passion of Jesus Christ, they
have also begun to ado the ^ememoration of y^ Saints and Saints: And theroff
came yt Commemorantes which is in y^ Eauen of the Mass, in which they do make
Comm^morites
^^p^^sse remembrance, of some Saints and Saint^s. And afterward by little and
little, in st^ede of y^ simple co^mmoration which is done of y^ Saints and
Sanctes, they have begun to give unto every one of (...), his Mass al whelly,
insomuch y^ there is neither Saint nor Saints, but has one, and that they do
call upon it in steed of God, and unto whom y^ Priests have not given some
occupacion and office for to help and aid God in so many affairs. And after
y^ satan has so well augmented his stuff, under y^ title of Martyrs, and of
their Ce^memorations, to y^ end y^ nothing should remain, but y^ it should be
full of ^dolatry and superstition, he has also lou^d y^ means to make me muse
after y^ are dead, after an other manner. For to make them al to be worshipped
as Saints he could not. Also he knew very well, y^ after ye damned, men will not
much traualic nor bestow any cost. And therefore he has sound a third order.


Hilarious. There does lack but one, but y^ there should be as many as of y^
orders ^rders of the dead.
of ye beggars. But they have it already. For y^ Limb is, for y^ fourth order.


Theophilus. Therefore has he begun in a luckey hour, ye a since y^ time
of Augustine, to forge the Purgatory: although y^ the^, it was not received nor
allowed, as an article of faith, but they disputed only, as of an opinion,
which has some color and show. For although y^ S. Augustine moved y^ question,
and touched some thing y^ matter, The question of (...).
yet nevertheless he has determined or concluded nothing for certain, but
rather to y^ contrary. He has written, y^ there were some which did think that
there was a certain fire of Purgatory, and that the thing was not incredible.
But yet nevertheless, he ^urst not affirm it, but spoke of it as of a thing
doubtsull and incertein: notwithstanding that he ^^emeth to be of an opinion,
that the prayers made for the dead, did profit them. But when all shall be well
considered, what witness or what example does he allege out of the holy
Scripture, either of the old or new testament, sufficient for to prove and
confirm that doctrine? I^ he show forth unto me y^ custom of the ancient
Church, and the traditions of the Apostles, I will demand upon the same the
witness or example of the holy scripture, or of the primitive Church. For I am
certain he shall not find it. It is then necessary, that we do come to the
next age, as was the time of Tertulian, Ireneus and other like: and afterward
from The time of Tertul^^n and Cyprian.
thence unto the same of Cyprian. For I have already proved by their writings,
that in those times they did not make such prayers for the dead, as they were
after the time of Saint Augustine. For they did them not to the intent to help
and succor the dead, but they directed them unto God only, for to give him
praise and for to demand his grace and mercy toward the living: even as then
the Commemorations of the Martyrs which were done about their Sepuleres, to the
glory of God and consolation of the living, have b^ne converted and changed to
y^ invocation of saints, and they have made Idols of the^, so the
co^memoration which is done of other that be dead, has been changed into
meritorious prayers, for to draw the from pain, and successively sithency that
one has learned the custom to make a certain remembrance and mention in y^
ecclesiastical assibles they came afterward to y^ point to make y^
co^memoration in y^ supper Remembrance of the de ^^ in the supper.
for to witness y^ they held the^ of who^ in y^ same they made remembrance for
true faithful and catholic, and of y^ communion of saints which in y^ supper
is repres^t^d. (...) y^ same manner ought we to understand y^ which S. Augustine
has writ of y^ remembrance which they celebrated for y^ dead, in the
sacrifice of y^ altar and of a mediator, by which we ought not to understand a
sacrifice, in which Jesus christ our only mediator The sacrifice of the altar
and of a mediator.
is offered to god his ^ather, for y^ rediption of our souls, as he was offered
upon y^ tr^e of y^ cross, and after y^ manner as y^ priests do glory and boast
themselves at this present time to offer in their Mass, according to y^ witness
of their Canon. For there is but one such Sacrifice, the which Jesus has Heb.
7. d. 17
once offered, which of none other can be done, but of him alone, who is the
Priesse and everlasting bishop, after the order of Melchizedec, if we will not
be lie the holy Ghost, who spoke by the mouth of the holy Apostle.


Thomas. Of what Sacrifice then does Saint Augustine speak off?


Theophilus. Thou ought to understand (...) sorts of (...) The sacrifice of
reconciliation.
that there be two sorts of Sacrifices, which do comprehend all y^ other.
The first is y^ sacrifice of reconciliation and redemption, for to deliver the
sinners from the ire and wrath of God: But this apperteyneth but to Jesus
Christ alone, of whom y^ Leuiticall sacrifices were but a shadow The sacrifice
of thanks giving
and figure. The other is y^ sacrifice of praise and thanks giving, by which we
may comprehend al y^ works of the faithful, by which they do praise God, and
do trauiale to August. li. 10. de ciut. Dei. c. ^. 6
be joined unto him. As Saint Augustine does expound it. Now forasmuch as
the sacrament of the holy supper of our Lord, is one of the principal things
that the church But sacrifice the supper is.
has, for to glorify God, rightly it was called by the ancients, sacrifice,
as not long ago has been touched: not by reason that Jesus Christ is offered
unto God by us: But because that he offreth himself unto us, and that through
faith we receive it, and render unto him it, ankes for the great benefit that
he has done for us, giving himself to the death for us: and we confess and
protest, that we do not take nor hold any other for a savior then he
only, nor we accept any man's sacrifice but his. For that cause has the supper
in like manner been called Eucharistia by the Greeks: The which word signifies
giving of Eucharis^ia.
thanks. After the same manner have Saint Augustine and other anncient
Doctors of the Church understood it. And they understand not by the altar
any other thing The material (...) of the Church.
but the table upon which y^ Church has used to celebrate the supper, making
allusion unto the aulters of the ancient law and have regard to that
sacrifice of thanks gyung, which in the supper is offered unto god by his
church. Behold the estate which was in the Church touching that point, in the
time of Saint Augustine, which was about The time of S. Augustine
four hundredth years after the death and passion of Jesus Christ, in which
the church did begin then very much to degenerate and to be corrupted. For
after that one once had begone to myngle the commemoration of the dead with
that of Jesus Christ (for which only the supper is celebrated, not for
sinful men, who have not redeemed us by their death) from one opinion and
error, it is fallen into another, in such sort that men are fallen into such
dreaming^, that they have thought that y^ supper, to the which those that were
a live did communicate, did profyt the dead, and that they might take it for
them, and to their health and salvation, after the same manner as they did the
other suffrages in their name.


Hilarious. If we will understand that which saint Paul has written of the
Corinthians, which To take the supper for y^ dead. 1. Cor. 15. d. 29
baptized themselves for the dead, after the sense in which the ancients have
taken it, we should have no less reason to excuse them, then those here. For
if I may take the supper for an other man, wherefore may I not in like manner
be baptized for him? I think that they will not grant we that, that one may
be baptized for an other, and that Baptism for the dead.
that baptism does profit him, and yet less to the dead then to the living.


Theophilus. It is well found out, who have been of that opinion, that they
may be baptized for the dead, which without baptism were departed out of
Reisersperg. de mort. virt ser. Domi. 3. aduen Tho. 4. did. 45 q. 6.
this world, and that y^ baptism profits them. But the Doctors
questionaries, and namely. Thomas of Aquin, benyeth it and condempneth that
opinion.


Hilarious. If I may not then be baptized for the dead, whereto serves or
profits the supper that I shall take for them? For it has not been more
ordained for the dead then the baptism, but both of them were for the living,
as well the one as the other, since that both of them are Sacraments, given unto
the militant Church, and which is yet covered and wrapped in this flesh.


Theophilus. There is nothing more certain. And yet nevertheless behold how
the one of the errors has drawn the other after him, insomuch that they have
begun to apply the supper, for to comfort the dead, and it seems that those
for whom they do make commemoration, do no less participate, then those which
do there communicate in their name. But yet they have not holden themselves to
that, but are fallen into another error more importable, altogether to turn
vpside down and overthrow the institution of the supper, and have defouned it,
The supper d^^ormed.
insomuche that it seems nothing at all like to the communion that the Saints
have with Jesus Christ, and amongst them, but it was altogether like unto an
excommunication. For at the beginning, when that the Christians The original
and beginning of the private Masses.
did begin to communicate at the supper for the dead, that was no less
permitted to the lay people, and unto every one of the christians, as to the
ministers of y^ church, until such time as the supper has taken the name of
Mass, the which is not so ancient, as the Papists would affirm. The
antiquity of the name of Mass.
Lusebius. Will thou deny that Saint James the Apostle, has not ordained it
and song it, as the decretall witnesses?


Theophilus. It is very noedefull that a liar have a good memory, or otherwise
he shall often be taken in a trap. How shall they which are of diverse opinions
among you accord The authors of the Mass. De cons^dist. 1. ca. lacobus.
touching that point. For the one says that Saint Peter did sing the first
Mass in Antioch. An other the contrary that Saint James did sing it in
Hrerusalem. Others would refer it unto Basil the great. If they did understand
and mean by the Mass the supper. I will not altogether gain s^y them. For I
doubt not, but that those there have truly celebrated the supper, following
the example of Jesus Christ their master: But read all the books of the true
servants of God, which have been since Moses, unto the time of Gregory the
great (who has reigned almost about seven or eight hunoreth years after the
death of Jesus The time of Gregory.
Christ) and afterward tell me if ever thou have sound the name of Mass:
except it be in some wicked and corrupted ^ooke, or that it is falsely mutulod
with the name of good ancient Doctors: or if it be at some time found, it is
very seldom, and in an other signification and manner then it is now used. But
the name is but a small thing, if we do accord in the principal thing.
Although it were so, that y^ name of the Mass should be very ancient, and
that it is oftentimes found in the books of the ancient Doctors,
notwithstanding it follows not therefore, that their Mass was like unto
yours at this present. For how much might one have added unto it, sithence the
time of the Apostles, if it had been in the Church, since that ye do yet daily
add unto it, and ye never have done.


Eusebius. That same is done for the honesty and reverence of the Sacrament
and for his solempnitie, and moreover to bewrifie it. And therefore thou
deceauest thy self, in that thou think, that there is contradiction amongst
us. For we do not understand or mean that saint James, or Saint Peter, or any
other to have instituted the Mass, then Jesus Christ him self, the which
afterward his disciples did begin to ordeine and bewtyfie it, as we have
at this present, and consequently the other until this present hoar.


Theophilus. Saint Paul was the chiefest of the Apostles, and yet he came
after Saint Peter and Saint James, but he did not teach or learn the
Corinthians such apish tricks, when hoe declared unto them how they ought to
celebrate the Lords supper, but does protest, that he will add nothing unto
it nor diminishe any thing, but that he will give it them, in the same
form as he received it of his Master Jesus Christ. I do not boeleeue that
Saint James nor Saint Peter have done otherwise, nor all their compaigmons.
And you can no better confound your self, they in excusinge your self, as
you do. For at the least wife, by that you do confess, you do witness,
that you have not the Mass, such as ye have, neither of Jesus Christ nor of
his Apostles, nor of the primitive Church, but that it is of so many diverse
poeces, that one can not know the color of the first cloth.


Hilarious. Thou can no better compare it, then to a beggars cloak, to which
every one has set to a piece, which is so be guarded and patched, that there is
not one piece seen in that form and fashion as it was first made. But how can
you tell who made it? It is not yet made nor ended. For you do add unto it
daily, and it shall not be ended and perfected at the end of the world, if
other workmen then you do not put to their hands. Yet neruertheles if thou
had heard, Theophilus, a sermon that a Curate made unto his Parishyoners,
which is not very far from this A sermon of a Cura. c.
place, peradventure thou would speak otherwise.


Theophilus. He must bring forth better reasons, for to make me to change
my speech, then any could bring forth yet.


Hilarious. Thou may say, that there was never a more subtiller question
alleged in Sorbonne: he exhorted his parishioners to offer and pay well their
tithes. And the better to stirie them forward to do the same, he proponed
unto them, the example of Abell and Caine, saying: A bell hearing Mass.
Take ye heed you do not as that cursed Caine did, who would not pay his
tithes, nor go to Mass: but fellow the good example of Abell, who paid his
tithes willingly, and always of the best and fairest, and he never sailed to
hear Mass every day. If it be so, the Mass is more ancient then thou
say that it is.


Theophilus. Peradventure it is with the priests as it was with the Aegiptians,
The antiquity of y^ Aegiptians Esa. 19. Plat. in Timo. Vad^ ^a epist. lust. li
2.
who did glory so much of their auntiquitie: and did affirm, that it was ten
thousand years, that they had been in the world. And when they said it, it
was not two thousand years, that the world was created.


Hilarious. It must needs be then, that they were before the creation of the
world, at the leasle five or six thousand years. Peradventure they were created
Arcadins: whom The antiquity of y^ Arch^dia^s Ou^d. Fast. 1.
the Poets do write to have been horn before the Moon.


Eusebius. That is not the first sable that thou have forged, for to mock and
jest at the priests.


Hilarious. I do assure thee, without lying one word, that a Commissarie told
it me, who said upon his faith, that he himself has heard him, beeinge at
the Mass, in which that Sermon was made at the Lauds tune in the midst of the
same, when the Priest was come to the Offertorie, and that same is not chanced
far hence. For that party played his part here hard by, in the holy popish
ground, in which they do yet singe Mass. And notwythstandinge that that
Commissary dwells in that holy ground, yet nevertheless he was estonished
of that Sermon, insomuch, that as he told me, he went unto the Priest, and
said unto him: I cannot well understand that example which you have alleged
of Abel and of Caine. For at that time, there were but four persons in the
world. Caine did neither sing, nor heard y^ Mass. Since the^ that Abel heard
it, he could not singe and answer, or else they should have been like unto
the Priest Martin. It must needs he then that Adam did singe it, and that Eve
did hold Adam a Priest.
the Torch, whereby it also should follow, that the Priests then were married.


Theophilus. His conclusion was not evil. But I assure thee, that if the
Priests could prove that the Mass The antiquity and institution of marriage.
was as ancient as the marriage, and that God himself has as well commanded
and ordained it at the beginning of the world, and in the terrestrial
Paradise, as Moses witnesses that he has done of marriage, be assured, that
they would make their potage fat. And if they can in like manner show, that
Jesus Christ would be as well found at a new Mass, as at the marriages.


Hilarious. They would give much upon that condition, and not without cause.
For they did know very well that it would be auaylable unto them one time in
the year.


Theophilus. It is very true. But their principal and chiefest profit comes
unto them, because of the dead. And therefore they would no longer permit and
suffer, y^ it should be lawful and common unto al, as well lay people as clarks,
to exercise the office, and to communicate y^ one for the other, but it is
given unto the^ alone, as y^ most worthiest, iudgeing the other thereoff
unworthy. From thence are descended the private and particular masses, in which
all they Private and particular Masses.
alone do say that do communicate for the quick and the dead. It suffised them
not, to take the office to communicate for the dead, which were absent, but
which is more, would also make it in the name of y^ living, which are present,
as though they rejected them, and judged them excommunicate and unworthy to
communicate at the death and passion of Jesus Christ. I demand of thee then
Eusebius upon this, where thou have ever read, that the Christians have used
a supper and sacrament vicare, I Sacraments vi^cars
do call the sacrament end the supper vicare, which thou take for an other
alter the imitation of Tertulian, calling vicare baptism, the same of the
Corinthians for the dead. Ter. aduer. Mars. li. 5, and li. de resu. car.
Can thou allege unto me one only example taken from the true servants of
God. And that fashion to celebrate the supper perticulerly, is it not a right
excommunication, Excommunication for communion. The institution of the supper.
Mat. 26. c. 27 1. Cor. 11. c. 24. Marc. 14. c. ^2 Luc. 22. b. 17
and not a communion? For has our Lord Jesus Christ instituted his supper
only for the Priests? Would he not that bread, which he distributed unto his
Apostles, should be divided and distributed unto his Apostles, should be
divided and distributed among them? And that all should drink of that cup and
of that wine, which represents his blood? Wherefore has he commanded that;
but for to give us to understand, that as he gave his body and his blood for
the health and salvation of all men, that he would in like manner, that al his
elect should be pertakers, and that all should communicate with him, in y^ holy
supper, and should be fed and refreshed with his flesh and his blood, through
the virtue of his holy spirit? Even as then Jesus Christ was not only
delivered unto death for the Priests, but for all the faithful, both generally
and perticulerly, so he would not that there should be but the Priests which
should be pertakers, but all those for whom and unto whom, he gave it. For
as much then as he would not only by the holy predication of the gospel, but
also by the sacraments, and chiefly by the holy supper, feed and refresh us
with his flesh and his blood, and to make us feel the better the virtue and
efficacy, and to confirm our faith and to comfort our consciences: thou can
not deny, but that the Priests do great wrong unto the Christian people, to
deprive them from such a ^ood thing: For as much also as they do not admit to
their communion the people, they declare y^ they are of an other communion and
relygion then of his, and that they account them not for Christians, but for
Jews, Turks, and Infidels, whom we do reject and excommunicate from the
sacraments, and from our communion, because y^ they are enemies of our
religion. Is not that an act altogether repugnant unto y^ intention of Jesus
Christ, who would that his supper should be common and general to all his
people? and those here do make it perticulerly, Furthermore, wherefore is it
called a communion if it be not common unto all the Christian people, as the
name imports and signifies? of which also is taken the name of
excommunication, by the which we do signify the separation Communion and
excommunicatign. Mat. 18. c. 17. 1. Cor. 5. d. 11. 2. Cor. 13. a. 1. 1. Tim. 1.
d. 19.
and reiection of him, who through his evil deeds is driven out from that holy
communion, and cut off from the body of the Church, as a rotten member unworthy
to communicate with her to Jesus Christ, who is y^ head, according to the
ordinance that he has made, and the practice of his Apostles.


Hilarious. These are the most subtillest hosts, that ever The most subtillest
hosts in the world.
the earth did bear. For they do lay the table cloth, in their Inn, before
the people, afterward, they do drink up the wine all alone, in their
presence, and do eat all without participatinge any part to their
compaignions, and do lick their fingers the which they have wet in the
chalice, saying: Quia pius es, with such an appetite that they do cause I
desire unto women with child. Wherefore I am not abashed of y^ which the Turk
said, after y^ he had seen The saying of the Turk touching the Popish Mass
the Mass celebrated among y^ christians: that he did think that at the
sacrifice of the Christians, there was but little charity, since that there was
one which did eat and drink up all, without gyuinge part unto others
which stood by. But what would he have said, if he had known that after
that that good hoaste had laid his cloth and put his soppe in the wine, and
banketted all alone, he caused them to pay the shot that have tasted nothing
at all of it, but did only behold it a far off, not daring to approach or
come near the table?


Eusebius. You take all in the worst part you can. Although that the Priest,
which celebrateth the Mass, does communicate all alone really and
sacramentallye, it follows not therefore, but that all the assistentes do
perticipate To communicate sacramentally and spritually.
by faith and spiritually, as well as the Priest which sings the Mass. But
that is done, for the dignity and reverence of the Sacrament. For if it were
so common and frequented and used to all men, they would make none account of
it. And although that the common people do not communicate every day with the
Priest, yet nevertheless the lay people have their days, for to communicate
and celebrate the supper when they require it, and chiefly on the feastiuall
and solemn days, in which they do receive the body of Jesus Christ
sacramentally.


Theophilus. If it do profit as much him which does not communicate really
the Sacrament, as him which does communicate so that he have faith, as well as
the communicant, to what end then serves to go to the supper? And wherefore
has Jesus Christ said: deuyde this bread among you, and drink ye all of
this cup? we shall then need no more if we will not take the supper
really: But that the father may send his son: the husband his wife: the
master his servant, which may communicate for them, and they without moving or
wagginge themselves, shall communicate spyrytuallye by faith, so that the
intention and devotion be such in them. I am not ignorant but that the true
communication is spiritual and through faith, without which the outward
brings more damage then lprosite. But doste thou think that Jesus Christ
has instituted the sign and the extericure Cermonye of he Sacrament will, out
cause? and that he^ would not but that we our selves should communicate,
except we have some lawful let, which draws us back, as sickness,
imprisonment, fault of minstringe it, or other like doubt, which proceeds
not of our fault, of infidelity or dispisinge it? Truly I will not deny but
that in such a case, those which cannot be present at the suppen, should have
just excuse, and that they do communicate spiritually with Jesus Christ. But I
demand of thee. Eusebius, if thou would be content, that an other should
dine for thee^ and if in fasting thou shall be refreshed with the meat that an
other shall have eaten?


Thomas. As for my self I wil^not agree unto it. For that is no place in which
he must have a lieuetenant and vicare. I bad rather have him in all other
things then A vicare at the table.
in the table.


Theophilus. If you would not in coryorall things, wherefore will you accept
it in spiritual things and can I The vicare of says.
live of your soul, or you o^ mine?


Thomas. No.


Theophilus. Now for as much as the faith is the life of the soul, it must be
that every one do live of his own, and we must not say I believe: as my
maybe believes. But it must be that I my self do believe, and that I Abac.
2. a. 4 Rom 1. b. 1^ Gala. 3. b. 11
do know and understand that which I believe. Furthermore, since that the
word of God, the preachinge of the Gospel, the administration of the
sacraments are means by which God nourishes, keeps, augement^th, and
confirms the fatith in us, as the life, the body, by the means of bread, and
other meats, we ought to understand, that as there is no man that can take
food and nourishment for me, if I my self do not take it, so cannot he
hear the Gospel, nor receive the Sacraments, for me: But it is necessary
that I do them my self in proper person. If I will have the profit, yea,
though I were an Emperor. Now if tho living cannot do it for the living,
what can they do for the dead? In like The supper for the common people.
manner, as touching the general supper which is made among all the people,
how do the Priests handle yors? It was not inoughe for them to have usurped
the Sacrament for them alone, a great time, but that they must yet defrande you
of the moytie, the same days that The moytie of the supper taken away from
the people
you would communicate. For they do not give you to drink of that same wine
the which they do drink, but have establyshed and concluded, by their
counsels that it suffices the lay people to communicate under one kind
only, that is to say, of the bread: and that there should be none but they,
which should communicate under both kinds of the bread and wine. And the
same The Council of Constance and of Basile.
was determined in the counsel of Constance, holden in the year 1415. the xb,
day of June, in the 13. Sessions against the authority not only of the
word of God, but of all the aucinet Doctors, and also of their decrees and
Canons. Wherefore it is easily to judge of what spirit those were lead that
were there assisting, and which have made such determination, and have judged
John Hus and Hierome of Prague to be burned, who vphelde the doctrine of the
ancient Church. At the least they could not deuye but that they were
constrained to condemn either that counsel, or the same of Basle, which
afterward ordained that it was permitted to the Bobemians to communciate
under does kinds: the which was obtained by great disputation, as the
Chronicles do witness and the Epistles written of that matter. But there is
no doubt, but that the same of Basle is therein more agreeing to the ancient
doctrine. It is marvel that they do forbid the cup unto the lay people, and
their own canons in some places do judge those for sacriledgers and
excommunicate, which do take it but in one kind, and do not take y^ cup, as
it it is easily to see, de cosi did. 2. in many Canone.


Thomas. But there is great difference between that that you drink and
theris, For they think y^ theirs is no more wine, but that it is changed into
y^ blood of Jesus Christ, Transubstantiition.
through the virtue of their consecration. But they do account and take yours,
but for wine, because that it was consecrated.


Hilarious. They give it you but for to rinse and wash the teeth: if
peradventure there do stick any of the flesh which they have given you to eat.
For according to the witness which Humbert Cardinal, a Rorguignon has
rehearsed in the honorable recantatio^ that he made The honorable recantation
of Berengarius De con. did. 2 Lgo Berengarius.
for Berengarius, containing the faith of Pope Nicholas, the which they have
caused him to rehearse and recite, we must believe, that the body of Jesus
Christ, is there taken with the mouth of the faithful, and chewed and bruised
with the teeth. It is most certain, that their wine is no more blood, then
yours. But yer seeing the opinion that they have, and that they do esteem it
more precious, they do you iniurye, to deprive you of it.


Theophilus. I do marvel? how they dare deprive the people from the cup,
more then from the bread, since that Jesus Christ has said expressly, take ye,
and drink ye al. But there is no doubt, y^ the private and particular Mat 26.
c. 27. Marc. 14. c. 22. Luc. 22. b. 19
masses, have engendered this error. For even as ye Priests have vsurpled the
office to celebrate y^ supper for others, to make their dignity to be of more
value, so they would make theirs to differ from y^ same of others, and to take
y^ both kinds for themselves, and leave only but one unto y^ pleople, to y^
end they do estme, y^ the mass and supper, which ye priest celebrateth, were
more worthy and of more greater merit, then y^ other faithful, and that it
brings unto the^ more gain. For after that the people were persuaded in y^
opinion, every one did set the^ aworke, as workmen hired by days for to sing,
both for the quick and for the dead: whereof they received great gain, of
which we do yet at this day see y^ great riches and treasures of ye Monks of ye
order of S. Bener, and of Cluny, who by y^ other mo^kish orders have followed
The Convent of Monks.
which have been hatched, engibred and brought up of that came hen. Now when
they did perceive y^ their gain wared very great, they have always better
magnified their ^oorke, and went unto it with such a fervent yeale and
affection, that there was a Priest which would singe three or four Masses in
one day, so that they would give him money: i^ such sort that there was in no
Fair whatsoever it were and any merchaundise more frequented and used then
this heers in their shop. Wherefore Multitude of Masses for hid De con
did. 1. ca. sufficit.
the Popes were constrained to forbid, that no Priest should singe any more
then one Mass in one day, without dispensation, except in the sens^ of
Christmas: And they attributed that ordinance unto Pope Alexander, who
invented the holy water? It was in like manner decreede that none should take
upon him to celebrate, but that there should be at the least two What company
ought to have the Mass De con. did. 1. ca. Hoc. quoque
for to hear it. And they do add the reason, saying: If there be not two
at the least, how can the Priest say, Dominus vobiseum: The Lord be with
you? O rate pro me fratres: Brethren pray for me?


Hilarious. They must say: Dominus tecum: as the Angel Gabriel did.


Theophilus. Do ye not behold a goodly Philosophy? Although that I do
think, that they have also regard, that the mass ought to keep and hold
some show of the communion, the which could not have any great show or
color, except there be two or three at the least with the Priest. For that
cause I think, that they have in like manner taken the custom, to break
their heast in three pieces, because that it is written, that Jesus Christ did
break the bread, and gave it unto his Disciples. Then for to represent in
their particular supper, that Mat. 16. c. 27 Marc 14. c. ^2 Luc. 22. b. 19 The
breaking of the host.
fraction and distribution of the bread: which cannot be done unto one alone,
they do yet keep y^ fashion to break it after the example of Jesus Christ. But
because that they alone do eat it up all without distributing it unto others,
yet they would nevertheless counterfaite the example of Jesus Christ, giving
to understand that they do take the parts which they do make, in steed of
them, in whose name they are made, and for whose intent they sing them. And the
Master of the sentences and also Gratian, do De con. did 2. ca. ^riform
Sergius. 2. O^ porci. Plat.
make the author of that law and ordinance Sergius. 2. Who before y^ he was
pope, was called: hoggs snowt. But because that that name seemed to him vile,
he caused it to be changed into this same: since which, the custom
continued among the Popes, that when they are chosen into that office, they do
change all their names. All that The names of the Popes changed.
was done about y^ year of our Lord. 742. after the death of Charlemaine. The
Doctors which came afterward do tell the reason, wherefore that division of
the host is divided in three parts: And say, that that which is put and
Bonauent. li. 4. did. 12. Hilbert, in eleg de Eucha^istiu.
cast into the Chalice, and made wette in Wine, is offered for the health and
salvation of the living. The other two dry parts are for the dead, the one for
the praise of those which are now in Paradise. The other for those which are
in the pains of Purgatory, for to deliver them. Although that, there are
others which do attribute the wetting in the Wine, unto the blessed, which
are now in Paradise. But I am now abashed of those which have found out that
manner to wette and moysten the bread with the wine, that they have no regard
to their Canons which do rebuke and condemn very sharply some which had
that evil custom to wette the bread with the wine, and chiefly some Aegiptian
Churches. But they have made it no conseyence to do that which their
ancestors have forbidden and condemned to others. For all thing is permitted
unto them. Although that the Priest does make the supper all alone for all the
Saints and Saints in Paradise, and for all the quick and the de^d. And for
that cause was put into the supper, the Memento of the The memento of the
quick and of the dead
dead, in the Canon of the Mass, with that of the living, the which yet
nevertheless one cannot find in the ancient Missels of the Romish Mass,
written by hand: Wherefore it is most li^^st, that it has been at ded so
af^rwardes, by those which have applied the merit of the Mass unto the dead.
But they have done yet worse, for where the supper ought to be a
Comaieinoration of the ^cath and passion of Jesus Christ, and a sacrifice of
praise, ^or to receive Jesus Christ, not for to offer him up, there The s^pper a
(...) of re^^^tion.
have made a sacrifice of reconciliation, for to offer up Jesus Christ unto God
his father, for the redemption and salvation of the souls, as well of the dead
as of the living, which counteruayleth as much in resolution as so deny
altogether the Sacrifice of the death and passion of Jesus Christ. For as much
then as y^ supper, which ought to be common unto all the faithful, was
converted and changed into particular Masses, and that so many false opinion
have been adjoined unto it, the better to elcuate his authority and dignity
and the Priests which sing it, the use of the true supper of Jesus Christ has
been almost altogether abolished, and is so greatly despised, that almost none
makes any account of it. For even as the Priests The dispising and contemning
of the supper.
did run after their Masses, because of the gain, the people on the
otherside, did follow them because of the opinion that they had of their
dignity. And did make no great account of the commen supper, but they referred
themselves altogether unto the Masses of y^ priests, insomuch that there were
but a few, to whom they did esteem to communicate: But did give the charge
unto the Priests King Jews.
to do that for them. Wherefore King Jews the son of Charles, seeing the
people to communicate so rare and seldom in comparison to the ancient Church,
was compelled to make Laws and Statutes, that the lay people, should at the
least, communicate at the supper three times Statutes for the communion.
in the year: The which law Ansegisus has put in writing, and it was done in
the year of our Lord ^yght hundroth Ausegisus. li. 2. Ca 38 Fabtan. De con.
did. 2. and h^. Concilium Aga th^se and ^lib^^t. De cen. did. 2. (...).
and fifteen. The which nevertheless has not been yet observed, because of
the great estimacion that they had of the particular masses. For
notwithstanding that Pope Fabian and the Council Agathian and Ehbertin, had
decreed that y^ lay people which receiu^d not the Euchatiste? at the least, at
Easter, Whitsoutide and Christmes should not be compted for catholics, yet
nevertheless the supper is so greatly despised that the lay people must be
compelled and constrained by commaundings from the Emperor, Council. Latera
at the Council of Lateran, to communicate at the least once in ye year at
Easter, for to keep the old custom of the ancient Church, which then was
very much corrupted, as one may in like manner judge by the general Council
of Pope Innocentius, and by the Canon of The council of Pope Innocent.
Clement the third, which was made about a thousand two hundredth years after
the nativity of Jesus Christ: De pen. and remiss. omnis v^ (...) Albert. li.
de missae mist.
Although that Albert alleges other reasons, but those have been the causes.
Behold how the Christians have been led, and into what pit and depthe the
Commemoration of the quick and of the dead in the supper, has drawn them.
There remained none but the Greeks, which The conslareie of the Greeks.
have kept it well, and which have kept nearest and most constantly by y^
ancient custom of the Apostles. For yet at this day they do not allow the
particular Mass, and they take not y^ Euchariste but with company, and that
the minister does distribute it to the people. And this is very clear and
plain unto the Churches, which they have agreat number of the^, under the
seigniory of the Venitians. Also they could not suffer that one should
deprive them of the Cup or Chalice, the which is one of the parts of the
Sacrament, but do keep still that communion, as it was under both kinds,
from the time of the Apostles themselves in the Latin Churches, in Africa and
Europa, until the time of Frederick the first. Even so have they done in the
article of Purgatory, Purgatory retested of the Greeks
the which they would never agree unto, although that it was received and
allowed by the church of Rome.


Eusebius. But although they have resisted it of long time, were they not in
the end constrained to allow and acknowledge it, and to ab^ure their error and
heresy, at the council of Florence, consenting with the Romish The Counsel
of Florence.
Church?


Theophilus. Thou have said very well, constrained. For that Romish tyrant
never cease until he has seduced and brought subject unto him all other
Churches, either through craft and subtiltye, or else by force and violence. Yet
nevertheless, before that the Greeks consented unto him, how long time have
they resisted? And afterward, what are those that have consented and after
what sort? whether that the Purgatory such as they have preached unto us until
this present time, was founded and binlved upon the holy scriptures, and worthy
to be holden and taken for an article of the faith, as they have constrained
us, it follows that all the Greeks and all their Churches should have been
heretics until the year of our Lord a thousand four hundredth thirty and
nine, that ye Council was holden. But how and by whom was it celebrated? were
there not then Scisines and Antipopes in the Church? For some of them did draw
and gather Scismes and Antipopes. Plat. in vita. Eng. li. council. The Counsel
of Busle. Pope Martin. Sigismond Emperor.
themselves toward Almaigne and assembled themselves at Basle at the Council
begun by Pope Martin, the predecessor to Eugenius, at which was the Emperor
Sigismond with the Princes of Spain, Almaigne, Pannonia and France. Others
assembled and gathered themselves together and went to the Council of Ferrara,
which afterward was transported to Florence, because of the plague The
Counsel of Ferrora. Plague. Pope Engenius
which was so cruel and terrible at Ferrara, that all were very much afraid,
chiefly the Greeks, which trembled with fear. Wherefore Pope Engenius, who
ruled at that Council was constrained to transport and remove it to an other
place, and to end it at Florence. Yet nevertheless, forasmuch as the Greeks
were so long time holden and kept in the doctrine of the ancient Church, they
should not have lost much, to have perseuered and continued still in it. And if
they had well marked their case, God gave them warning enough and
aduertisements that he took no great pleasure in that that they did take in
hand, since that he assailed them with that great horrible plague. On the
otherside, they might well judge how well they could agree with the komish
Church, the which was divided within it self, and at discord in the house.
For Pope Eugenius held his Council at Ferrara and at Florence, and would not be
assistant to that at Basle, in which the Emperor was present. On the
contrary, those which were assembled at the Council of Basle, would not
acknowledge Eugenius for to be Pope, but did choose an other, to wit, Aim
Duke of Sauoy, who as then led an Hermits life A yme Duke of Sanoy. Ripailles
at Ripailles, but after an other sort then the ancient Hermits in times
past. For his Hermitage was a goodly and pleasant Castle, in a most pleasant
place, hard by Thonon, as it appears yet at this day. After his election
Pope Felix.
be was called Felix, were not all these things proper and fit for to give a
fair show unto those Councels? And Purgotory receyned by the Greeks.
that same of Florence in which the conclusion and agreement of Purgatory, was
made with the Greeks, ought it not greatly to be esteemed, for to have an
Eugenius for their President which has moved all Italy and al Christendom to
war? And how shall the Greeks that were sent be acquitted and discharged of
their office?


Hilarious. They have betrayed both their countries and their Churches, as they
have well declared by the dignities and offices which they have received of the
Pope.


Theophilus. Therefore has he so well recompensed them. For he has made
Rutenus and Nicenus Cardmals Rutenus. Nicenus
which were the chief: with Bessarion who was also a Cardinal and Patriarch
of Constantinoble. If they had faithfully defended the truth, the Pope would
not have Beisation
chosen them unto such honors.


Hilarious. He might as well make the^ Cardinals in such Rossensis
sort, as Rossensis was in England: or after the sort as the Tyrants have
given the red hatte unto the Martirs.


Theophilus. Although that he has done that, the better to keep by that
means the Greeks subject and bounce unto him and to his dectrine, yet
nevertheless he has not yet so well practiced it nor bound them, but that they
were by and by revolted and truned unto their first manners, and that they had
abandoned and forsaken the Popish faith, the which before they were ignorant
off.


Hilarious. Yet they should not have lost much, if they had never learned any
thing at all. But I am not much abashed though Bessarion has easelye
consented unto the papisticall Purgatory. For he was a great Platonist, and I
beeleeue that he was more exercised in the Philosophy of Plato, then in the
true Theology of heavenly letter. Where^ore it is no marvel, if he have
easily allowed Purgatory, the which he has already learned of his master Plato.


Theophilus. Thou may now understand Eusebius how the Church is fallen from
degree to degree, since the time of the Apostles, until the same of
l^ertulian, afterward of Cyprian, afterward of Augustine and from him unto
Gregory, and consequently unto our time: and how the superstition is so
increased and augmented, that by the means of the Purgatory and of the Mass
the merit of the death and passion of Jesus Christ was altogether abolished.
You must not then compare the time present and the estate of your Churches,
unto the same of S. Augustine. For there is to much difference between them. It
is ^^ evil lykelyhood, that the thing in those days was so much advanced. And
doubt not, that if y^ holy man had thought, that it would have fallen out so,
but that he would have resisted it more strongly then we do at this day. For
he could not have suffered, that the grace of Jesus Christ, of which he was so
great a defender against the Pelagians, should have been so altogether
destroyed. But the good man was overcome, because that then, the purity of the
doctrine of ye gospel and the estate of the church was already very much
decayed and corrupted, as we may easily judge, by that which Saint Hierome
witnesses of the life of Malchus. For he was not ashamed to write that the
time The Witness Which Saint H^ereme ytueth cllus time.
and age in which he lived, and Saint Augustine in lyhe manner, who was of the
same time, was but filthynesse and stinking in comparison of the same of ye
Apostles. Thou have already heard the plaint ye Saint Augustine made of man's
traditions, with which the Church was ouercharged. (...) lanua 1. 9.
Amongst which he touched the Iewishnes and superstion which was yet kept in
Africa. We must not then be abashed, if in those days, there came up new
opinions, touching the estate of the dead, the which the ancient Church was
ignorant off. We must not in like manner marvel although some great learned
men have been wrapped in them. For it happens commonly, that when men have
dreamed and invented some new opinion, they will also induce others, and are
angry against those that do resist them, insomuch that they will condemn
them, and if they be the most wisest and of greatest countenance, they carry
away the matter. After that sort was Aerius condemned, chifely because he
said, that it was Aertus.
not needeful to pray nor to offer for the dead. It happened to him as it did
to Vigilantius, Against whom Saint Hierom against Vigtlantius.
Hierome has written so outragiously, because that he allowed not, but rebuked
the watchings which they made about the Sepulcres of the Martyrs, because that
he knew already the superstition which would follow. S. Hierome was a great
learned man, but yet nevertheless a child might judge that he did great
wrong unto Vigilantius, and that he showed himself to be too much a man, and
more superstitious then he ought to be For at this present, ye time declared
unto us, that the reason of Vigilantius was a great deal better then that of
Hierome: and the abuses and Idolatries which have followed that custom that
Hierome has maintained, do mamsestlye declare, that then Antechriste
advanced the secret of iniquitye, to whom Hierome obeyed, without taking
any heed. Now let us think, that sorasmuche as such a manue as he was,
did defend so sharpelye man's tradytions and childithe supershtious, what
authorytye can the little ones have, which do put themselves against it or
withstand The opinion that Styne August in had of Pingarory.
it? and what shall the pore people do? Then when Saint Augustine did begin
to write, he did then find owers opinions of the suff^nges and prayers for
the dead, among those of the Church or the Doctors of the Church, and the
question of Purgatory stirred up and moved, the which he also has sifted and
fanned. He then perceiving the opinions and reasons of others, which were not
without appearance of wisdom and holiness (which are the titles which the
Apostle attributeh unto man's trabitions) Collo. 2. 3. 3.
was somewhat troubled and moved, and burst not altogether condemn them. That
was the cause wherefore he spoke of that matter after diverse sorts and
doubtfully, and that he seems some time to speak against himself. When he
had no regard but to the pure word of God, he has well spoken, as I will
make it by and by appear. But when he had regard unto the opinions and
reasons of others and grounded himself upon man's Philosophy, more then upon
the certain word of God, he found himself sometime in great perplerity and
doubt, and has followed sometime more his human reason, then the verity of
God revealed unto him. For when all shall be well considered, where in
differs that difference that he puts between the estates of the dead
from the Li. des^^^ and oper. ca. 16. Addul^^. q. 1 in Enchir. ca 68. 69 De
ciui. deili. 21. ca. 26.
doctrine of Plato? Furthermore, do we not see, that when he speaks of the
fire of Purgatory, for the other life, that he speaks always as bucerteine,
and as of an opinion probable and like to be true, the which he dares not
certainly allow nor disalow: But says that one may dispute of that question
and always leave it in suspense. Now who would think it like be true, that
that holy man, being a great keeper and an obseruer of the ecclesiastical and
catholic doctrine, would have so spoken and written of that matter, if in his
time that doctrine of Purgatory, had been received and allowed of the Church
for certain and sure, in that sort that those which at this Tho. in 4. did.
21. Autho. 1. Par. (...). 10. Cap 2.
present do receive so great gain would condcmpne as Her^tickes not only
those that do say the contrary, but also all those which believe it not to be
an article of faith necessary unto salvation. How could he call into doubt an
article of faith authorized and confirmed by the Church? now we cannot
deny, but that the doctrine of our faith is always one, eternal, and like
unto it self, and The doctrine of the Apostles perfect.
that the Apostles have so taught and instructed the Churches, that they have
not hyd from them any thing necessary unto their salvation, which ought not
afterward to be revealed, and chiefly that which touches the offices of
love and charity, without which we are nothing toward God. There is yet an
other point, that is, that Ra^. diui. off. li. 7. 3. q. 7. in grauib. 24. q. 1.
od^. 1. de ponderet extra de renun Nisi. 5. 1.
he himself is not of the opinion, that the prayers and ofteringes of the
wicked, may be agreeable to God. To the which opinion the papisticall Doctors
dare very well speak against, and affirm that it ought not to be holden, but
that it is too hard and rigorous (notwithstanding ye he allows it by the
holy Scriptures) because that it depriueth the dead from mercy and from so
many goodly prayers and suffrages, and would cause the charytie of those that
be alive to ware cold toward them.


Hilarious. I am not abashed. For they should lose much, if none should offer
unto them but good men? It is unto them, to whom ye sentence is to hard, not
unto the dead.


Theophilus. If they be so bold to reprove the sentence of the ancient
Doctors, when it is not fit for their purpose, although that it be confirmable
unto the Scripture, wherefore may not we reject it, when it shall be contrary
unto it? As touching that which thou have in like manner declared, of his
mother Monica, requyring Monica.
that they should make remembrance of her, in the celebration of the
Sacrament, it makes no great matter. That was the affection of a woman, as
that which she had to be buried hard by her husband. For there is no doubt,
that the affe^^ion that we have toward Li. confess. 9 c^. 11.
the dead, makes that we also desire, that others should have the like
affection toward us. and we must not be ^bashed, if such humame affections,
do reign sometimes in us. For we our selves do see, that those holy The
affection of the women that follovved Jesus
women, which followed Jesus Christ, from Galile, until he was buried,
willinge to anointe him in his sepulcher, did not think of his resurrection,
but did think to have found him dead: as the Angels rebuked them, Luc. 24.
a. 5. Mat. 18. 2. 1. Marc. 16. b. 6. Iolus. 10. ^ 11.
saying: why seek ye the living among the dead?

There is no doubt, but that there was yet in them humayne affection toward
the body of Jesus Christ, as we have toward the dead: But to the end that
we may have no more need to dispute much of it, wylt thou be contented if
I do allege unto thee Augustine, against Augustine? To whom had thou
rather stay, either upon Saint Augustine, followinge the opinion of men
without the Scripture, and speakinge doubtfullye as uncertain, or unto him and
other ancient Doctors, with the holy Scripture.


Eusebius. I do not think, that Saint Augustine would speak against
himself, nor ye he has been contrary unto the holy Scripture, nor to the
ancient Doctors.


Theophilus. Thou can not show unto me that he has affirmed the
Purgatory certeynlye: But I will declare unto thee places by the which he
has altogether abolyshed it. Mark how he has put none other Purgatory,
then the blood of Jesus Christ, he The witness of Saint Augusture against
purgatory of the Pope. De ciui. det. li. 10 ^. 1. 24. The true Pargatory. De
c^^. Dei. li 10. ca. 22.
says, speakinge of Porphyras a Platonist, that he has not known Jesus
Christ to be the beginning, through whose incarnation we are purged. For
he should have then acknowledged a Purgatory. And in an other place, he
says: We have then the bictorye, in his name which has taken man's flesh,
and has lived without sin, to the end that by him beei^ge the Priest and
the sacrifice, we are made the remyssion of sins. That is to say, through
the medyatour of God and men, the man Jesus Christ, who in his own person
has purged our sins, and restored be again unto God. For men are not
separated from God, 1. Timo. 2. ^. 5. lieb. 1. 2. 3.
but through sin, for which it lies not in us through our own power and
strength to purge them in this life, but therow the mercy God, through his
clemeney, not through our power. For that virtue which is called ours,
whatsoever it be, it is granted unto us through his goodness. Does he not
cleerelye show, that the purgation of sins is done in this life, and yet not
through our own righteousness nor virtue? Holve can it then be done in the
other life, through the virtue and merytes of an other and Furthermore, he
manyfestly says: the souls of the good men after they are De eiui. Dei. li.
13. ca. 9
separated from the body, are at rest, and we must not doubt of it: but those
of the wicked, are punished until such time, as the bodies of those do rise
again to eternal life: and of these here, to eternal death, which is
called the second death. But is it possible to speak more cleerelye and
purely of Jesus Christ and of the Purgatory that we have in him, then when
he says: De trinita. li. 4 ca. 13.
Through his death, that is to say, by one only and true sacrifice, which
has been offered for us, he has purged, abolythed and put out all that that
had any saultes in us. Wherefore the higher power and those of authority do
bold and keep us for to be punyshed: And by his resurrection has called
unto a new life we which were predestyned: he has justified those that he
called, and glorified the justified. Behold words very clear. And speaking
of the opinion of Plato, he says: Those which are of that opinion, do think
that after De ciuis. Dei. li 21. ca. 13
that one is deud, there is no other pains, then of Purgatory, for to purge
sins: Alyttlo after he says: We confess that in this mortal life, there
is a certain Purgatory pain. It seems that he somewhat agrees that the
tribulations and adversities that man suffers Purgatory in this world.
in this world, do serve him for a purgation of his sins: the which yet
nevertheless, they dare not to attribute but to Jesus Christ. Although that we
do commonly say, of him which has had much evil and grief in this world, ye
he has had here his Purgatory. For that tastes much of the opinion of
Plato. But Saint Augustine does not make there me^tio^, of any paine^ of
purgatoy, after this life, but he says plainly that the souls of the
faithful, do Enchi. ^. 67.
rest after the death of the body. But what will thou more cleerer, then when
he says: Some do believe that those also which have not abandoned the name
of Christ, and which have been baptized in his Church, and have not belie cut
off from the same, through any schism or heresy, that in whatsoever sins
they have lived in, the which they shall not deface and put away through
penance, nor redeemed through doing of alms beedes, but shall persevere and
continue in them continually, until the last day of their life, shall be
saved through the fire: Although that according to the greatness of their
sins and misdeedes, that fire shall be The fire dinturnall and eternal.
diuturnall but not eternal. But me thincketh that those that do believe
this, and yet nevertheless are catholics, are deceived through man's
benevolence. For Contra Pelag Hypogu. li. 5
the holy Scripture, if one do look and search in it, answers an other
thing. Thou see here Eusebius, that be speaks of the fire of Purgatory,
whatsoever thing he has spoken at other time. And says moreover, that there
is but two ways, to wit, one of dampnation and Two vvayes only
an other of salvation. But mark well his own words: The faith of the
catholics, through the divine authority, does first believe that there is a
kingdom of heaven. Secondly, that there is a hell, in the which every
apostate and stranger to the faith of Christ is punyshed. We are altogether
ignorant of the third. But we do not find in the holy Scriptures, that
there is any. It seems to me, that he speaks very clearly, and that
those authorities ought to suffice. thee, against all that that thou can
allege of the ancient Doctors, in the favor of Purgatory. Yet nevertheless
the better Other vvitnesses of the most. auncion doctors against Purgatory Ter
aduer. Marl. li. 4. The sieldes Eh^eus.
to vanquish and pull thee down. I will yet show forth unto thee some sentences
of the most ancient Doctoures. Mark what Tertulian says. It seems unto
every one that is wise, which have heard sometime spoken of ye fields Ehseus,
that it has some local determination which has been called Abraham's bosom,
for to receive the souls Abraham's bosom.
of his children, and that the same region or country is not celestial, but
it is yet never the less more higher then hell, in which the souls of the
righteous do rest, until such time as the consumation of the things,
restores the resurrection of all men, through perfect reward. I do not
praise that which Tertulian has determined of the place, without witness of
the Scripture, but I To affirm uncertain things
think it a very dangerous thing to define of such things without
witness of the same, and I had rather staio my self upon the sentence of
saint Augustine, which says, that it should be very good, that an
uncertain thing of which not only the Scriptures do make no mention of it,
but do speak the contrary, that one should affirm nothing: And alleges the
sentence of Seneca, saying: Thou ought to affirm nothing of uncertain
things, but keep thy judgment inoerteyne. Also Tertulian propounded not the
same, but as an advise, not as a biffinitiue sentence, and an article of faith.
Yet nevertheless, although that he said it, that sentence serves me, for to
show unto thee that it was no question, in Tertulians time, of Purgatory,
after the manner as you have taken it. For he puts but one place
indifferently for all the elect, and children of Abraham, which have been and
shall be until the latter resurrection. It well appears, that he was of
opinion, that they were not yet in the celestial habitations and chiefest
felicity, but yet nevertheless he assigns unto them Abraham's bosom, in
which all the souls of the faithful do rest generally, without putting any
difference between those of the ancient fathers, and ours, nor making mention
of pain nor any Purgatory. In like manner Ireneus, who was next the time of
the Apostles, is not of an opinion very much contrary and differing. For Irene.
aduer. ha res. Valentma.
notwythstanding: that he assigned unto the souls of all the Disciples of
Jesus Christ, and the true faithful, an inuysible place, which is appointed
and determined for them of God, in which they shall continue and abide until
the resurrection, the which they do look for: Yet nevertheless he assigned
but one place for all the Christians, the which he called Disciples of Jesus
Christ: And be says not, that some shall be in pain and other some at rest,
but he puts them there upon a condition, and he assigns unto all no
other pain, but the taryinge and looking for the resurrection: saying, that
the Disciple is not above the Master, and that as Jesus Christ is not by and by
risen after his death, but tarried the time that was appointed him of God his
Father, so must his Disciples tarry for theirs, as he has ordained them. It
is very true, that in the book which Recogn. li. 1.
is attributed unto Saint Clement, it seems that he would put a certain
kind of Purgatory, but although the book were of great authority, yet
nevertheless it would serve for nothing for the Priests Purgatory. For
although that he puts a certain difference between the most perfectest
servant of God, and the others which have not nor could not entyrelye
accomplish the rule of righteousness, but have yet some malice remaining in
their flesh, yet he assigned no pain unto those: Although that he thinks
that the others are in more greater glory, but says, that their souls are
kept in goodly pleasant and joyful regyons and countries, that in the
resurrection of the dead, when they shall have received their bodies, and that
their resolution shall be purged, they may come unto eternal life. Behold
his own words, the which he recited, as spoken of Saint Peter; unto Saint
Clement. But there is no appearaunce, that Saint Peter has holden those
words which were attributed to him in that book, nor that Saint Clement
has The book of Clement.
written them, although that the book is entitled in his name. For how
many propositions be there altogether contrary unto the doctrine of Saint
Peter and of all the Apostles? But put the case, that the book were very
auucient, and of the Author to whom they attribute it, if it be not
canonised, nor of the Apostolical authority: and which is more, he puts
no Purgatory, in which there is pame and torment: And when thou would
conclude by those words, that there should be some manner of Purgatory, I
will vanquishe and overcome thee by himself, either that there is none, or
else that it is for Purgatory is either far all, or else there is none.
all men: And that there is no man so holy, but that he must be purged in the
same. For there was never any so just and righteous: which has fulfilled and
perfected the rule of righteousness: which has been without sin: and which
has not prayed with all the Saints, according to the witness of David; for
his unquitye, Psa 32.
and says: pardon our sins: and in whom one could not find inoughe for to
purge, yea, after this life, except he had any other purgation, then that
which is made by the blood of Jesus Christ. But although The diuersltie of
opinions touching the suffrages for the dead.
there were none other reasons, for to prove that the suffrages for the dead,
and the Purgatory, are found out and devised by man's inventions, then the
diversity of opinions of those which have written and spoken of it, yet the
argument is very strong. for they do propounde the doctrine so uncertain,
that one cannot make any resolution, and a great deal less, then of the
opinions of the Philosophers: but do leave always the conscience uncerteyne,
against the nature of the word of God, which always is certain and clear.


Hilarious. Me thincketh that I do see them hold so their pro and contra,
that they would make of the Theology, Theologia Ac. ^ dem^a.
an Academia, in which one may dispute probably, on both sides, without giving
any certain resolution, but leave all things in doubt. For what foundation
has all that which they do affirm and say, but upon fables and man's
opinions? The which we may as surely deny, as they to affirm them: yea, by
more just reason. For we have more Scripture for to tell them the contrary,
then they have of apparaunt reasons, for to prove that which they affirm: for
they are Doctors, of which the Apostle speaks off, which do not understand
that which they speak, nor which they teach and affirm.


Theophilus. If they were so modest and reasonable 1. Timo. 1. b. 7.
as the Philosophers Academians, they should not be so much to be despised
and blamed. There is no doubt, but that it is required, that we be assured in
the doctrine of The certeyntie in the doctrine of the faith required.
the faith and religion. For there can be no faith, where there is but
opinions, without certain persuasion.

Wherefore the Theologians have not so lawful and just excuse, as the
Achademians. For when the question is but of human and natural things, it
is not so great a danger to follow the opinions of men, and to abide in
doubt: But when it is a question of faith and religion, it must be that the
conscience be assured: the which it cannot be, but by the certain word of
God. Now we do clearly see, that in such matters they go not but by The
disputacio^s of the babblers of divinity.
conjectures and presumptions, and every one of them says and speaks that
which comes in his fantasy: But if they do that but amongst themselves, by
manner of disputation, as the Academians did, and after the manner as saint
Augustine did put forth the question of purgatory, without affirming it, as
an article of says, we would let them dispute as long as they will. But
behold that which is worse, they would, that their opinions should be
received and allowed, as oracles and revelations descended from heaven: and
they pronounce and give their sentence, with more greater authority, then if
they did speak of the pure word of God: and do compel the Christian people
to believe and confess, as an article Temerine to affirm. Tho. m. 4. did 21.
of says, that which they have dreamed and invented, iudgeing and condemning
for heretics, all those which do speak against it: in such sort that it is
more dangerous to speak against, and withstand their decrees and decretals,
then the commandment of God. For our Lord Jesus Christ says, that all sin
committed by men may be pardened, (...) Sin (...) holy Ghost
except the sin and blasphemy against the holy ghost. But it is written in
the decroes and Canons: woe do commau^d, that all decretall constitutions of
all the Popes should boe Did. 19. ca. 51. Romanorum.
kept in such sort, that if any do commit any thing contrary unto them, that
he do know that pardon is denied unto him, and that he shall not have it.


Hilarious. I do then conclude by that Canon, that sin To sin against the
Pope.
against the Pope, is sin against the holy ghost, because there is no pardon.
We must not jest with them. I will compare them to the Academians, but I had a
great deal rather that they were like unto them, then such as they are.


Theophilus. It should be a great deal better to define nothing rashly, of
that whereoff they cannot be certain: The counsel of Saint Augustine. in
Genes. 11. 10
and to follow the Counsel of Saint Augustine, speaking of the rich man of
whom mention is made in S. Luke: It is better to doubt of secret things, then
to plead of uncertain things. I doubt not, but that we must under stand that
the rich man is in most extroeme hot pains and torments: and that poor
Lazarus in joy and comfort. But in what sort one ought to understand that flame
and fire of hell: that bosom of Abraham: that tongue of the rich man: that
finger of poor Lazarus: that thirst of torment: that drop of refressing,
with much a do we can find of those which do seek it with meekenes and
modesty: but of those which do debate of it with contention and strife, many.


Hillariu. If Saint Auguslin, had always followed, that which he teached
here, his doctrine would have been more pure, and would have spoken yet more
soberly then he has done of the suffrages for the dead: since that he had no
sure nor certain witness in the word of God.


Theophilus. Jesus Christ has not fore spoken without Mat. 24. b 24. The elect
in dager to b. seduced.
cause, that if it were possible, the very elect should boe seduced and
deceived by the false Prophets and false Christ's. Wherefore we ought not to
marvel although Saint August^n, and such as he was, have sometime been
overcome. But for us we ought rather to be more confirmed in the doctrine of
the Gospel, seeing it fulfilled before ou^ eyes, and we ought well to learn
by the example of others, to walk in the fear of God, without straying or
wandering any thing after our opinions and fantasies. For if already from the
time of the Apesties, Antechrist did bee^in his reign and work his secret of
iniquity, we must (...) doubt, but that he was much advanced in the time of
Saint Augustine. And the Apostle calls not without cause, his work and
business the mystery of iniquity. For The reign of (...) and he vvorking of
(...) ^^^. 59. a. 5.
he has proceeded and gone forward so secretly, craftily and subtly, that
the most holiest and best learned, have been overcome. use has of a long time
hatched his Cockatrice, and Basilikes eggs, before he could be perceived, and
has practiced his matters so subtly under the earth, that scant one could
know, to what end he tends, until such time as he has ended and finished
his work, and that Jesus Christ, by his Gospel, has opened and revealed it to
his elect: as we do see by experience, at this 2 Thessalonians. 2. b. 5
present time: And as I trust, shall do yet more hereafter. Wherefore we
knowing into what inconveniences our fathers are fallen into, yea the wisest
and most persect in attributing to much to the authority of men and to their
opinions and traditions. Let us take heed, to affirm and Rash determinations
and ^^^^nations.
propound unto the christians, as an article of faith, and doctrine necessary
to salvation, any thing, of which we have no certain witness by the holy
scripture, and of which by them we are not clearly resolved. For that comes
through to great temeritie and presumption, the which God will not leave
unpunished. But which is more, although the thing should be very true, and so
as it has been preached unto us, yet nevertheless, since that the word of God
does not make any express mention of it nor does clearly show forth, of
which we can draw any certain consequence, and of which we have no
commandment of GOD, we may safelye be ignorant of it, without danger of
our salvation. For since that the Scripture is given unto us for our
instruction, what thing we may safely he ignorant off, and what not.
not for us to inquire of the estate of the dead, but for to learn us the way
for to come unto the place of that holy eternal rest, and true felicity, we
ought to content our selves, to know that which is commanded us and which to
the same is necessary for us, and we may not be ignorant of them, without
damage and hurt of our salvation. And therefore, we have no need, but to
hold us to Jesus Christ, and to assure our selves upon his promises, being
certain and sure, that that which he has promised unto that poor thief
hanging upon the Cross with him, saying: This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise, Luc. ^3. s. 43.
touches and concerns every one of us, as much as him, if we be true
faithful. Behold the limittes which the Scripture appoints unto us, within
which we must dwell, without tormenting our selves after the estate of the
dead, and Purgatory, of which it makes not mention of it one word.


Eusebius. I know very well, that although I should allege all the Doctors
which have been since the death and passion of Jesus Christ, until this
present time, that I shall profitte nothing with you. For when you perceive
that they are contrary unto your opinions you will not receive them but when
you think that they do make for you: But you will runile to the Scripture, as
the pleaders which have an evil matter, do seek and find out all the
delays that they can, and do call always from sentence to sentence, what
soever wrong it be, or for to delay their condempnation, or under hope that
they have to find out some practice or shyfte for to deceive and overcome
their party, and to corrupt the Judges. Wherefore I do well perceive that I
shall be nothing with you, if by the clear and plain text of the Scripture, I
do ^ot sloppe your mouth.


Theophilus. If thou cansl do it, theu have gotten y^ victory. For unto the
same do apperteine the extreme or latter Unto whom do ^^perreyne the extreme
appe^^^vions in causes of ^d. ygloa
appellations. And therefore it seems to me, that you do greater wrong then
we, without any comparison. For we do not put our selves out of reason, nor
from the ordinary of justice, since that we do appeal to none other then to
our ordinary. Judge. For what wrong to we unto men, Ordinary judge
if from them we do appeal before God which is the sovereign Judge of al
creatures, which has already give his sentence of our differences, by his
word, and by the mouth of Jesus Christ his son, and of all his Prophets and
Apostles, unto the which we ought to stay our selves? Divine and humayne
counsels Mat. 18. Act. 15. b. 8.
But you not being contented with them, do appeal from God unto men: and from
the counsel of the Prophets and Apostles, of whom Jesus Christ is president
and chief through his holy spirit, to the councels of men, in which The power
of the Pope. Did. 34. c. ioctor. Glos. and did. 82. ca. Hrestyter. and Glo.
Apostolorum 17. q. 4. ca. 51. siquis. did. 40. c St Papa. Did. 96. c. Satis
etc. simplices and inscriptis.
the Popes do rule and are President: who according to your doctrine, have
such power and authority that they may dispense against the apostolical
doctrine, and the right of nature, and consequently against the Gospel and the
word of God. For the Pope has all the divine and human rights in the cabin
and chest of his breast, and that he ought to judge every one and ought not to
be judged of any man: insomuch that when he shall lead innumerable of people
and great companies into hell, no mortal man ought here to check and rebuke
him of his faults. For he is god, who cannot be judged of men.


Hilarious. It follows then, that if one do see him to go to all the devils
and to draw thither all the world with him, that none ought to say unto him
that he does evil. For he that says it, both Did. 40. ca. Si Papa.
judges and rebukes.


Eusebius. The Canons do not deny, but that he is to be rebuked, if he be an
heretic, and that he erreth in the faith.


Theophilus. But you do say that he cannot err. And The ^oye out ^f th: (...)
herefore when he is an heretyke and out of the faith dare we to rebuke him
and his doctrine: no not by our au^^ority and silence, but by the same of God
and of all his Prophets and Apostles, the which we do but propound: yea which
is more, by that or the ancient Doctors, as thou might have seen and
known if thou would. And if thou do not content thyselfe with that, I will
The witness of Antechrist against his Purgatory. De bapt. and ofsee. cap.
Maiores causat. God pardons not the moy^ie Versus Magistrales ex glosa Larga
D^i pietas veniam non dimidial it Nam. nil. aut. totum te lacrymante dabat.
show unto thee, how that wicked Antechrist condempneth himself of his own
mouth, and confesses that there is no such Purgatory, as he would establish.
For he himself confesses, after that he is much glorified, that God, which
has saved all men, knows no work of imperfection. And for that cause, be
pardons not sins in part. Therefore the gloss made upon that text
alleges, two verses containing that sentence: The great goodness of god, will
not pardon the half. For when with tears and weeping thou come unto him,
he will give thee all or nothing. Now if it were so that God reserueth one
part of the sins, for to be punished in Purgatory, as you do affirm, it
should follow that God works not but half with his servants, the which none
can say, without blasphemy: For the works of God are perfect. Wherefore Deuteronomy.
32. ^. 4
if thou have not Eusebius any better refuge in the holy Scripture then thou
have yet showed forth, thou have lost thy cause by the sentence of God, and of
all his servants: yea of Antechrist himself whom the virtue of God compels
to confess the truth, against his own nose and inspite of his teeth, as the
devils did confess Jesus Christ Mar. 8. d. 29 Marc. ^. c. 25
feeling his power, the which they could not resist.


Thomas. Thou do here what matters these people here have declared unto
thee, Eusebius: Thou had almost won me at the beginning of this
disputation, and confirmed me in thine opinion, when that I heard thee
propound the words of Saint Augustine. But now, after that I heard their
replyings, I am more uncertain then before. Wherefore I must here the rude of
that cause, and the last sentence, the which is given by the word of God. I
have determined to declare unto you the cause of my voyage. as I have promised,
after that Eusebius shall have done with you: But I am content to defer it
until tomorrow, to the end I may return unto you more resolved. Wherefore I
pray thee, Eusebius, that thou prepare thy self to fight with them valiantly
by the sword of the word of God, and that we may see the end of that
Purgatory, and also of the Limb, whereof the matter has been broken off, and
has not ben followed nor resolved. Yet nevertheless this is one point, the
which I desire almost as much the resolution, as of the Purgatory. And to the
end you may have the more leisure to debate of the matter, I will hold you no
longer. But because that it is now so late, therefore me thinks that it shall be
better to take the time at our pleasure.


Hilarious. I do like well Thomas his counsel.


Theophilus. I am content that we do suffer and grant unto Eusebius all that
he would have, to the end we give him none occasion to complain, that he has
had no time and the mean to defend his cause.


Eusebius. Since that it is so, I do agree to your opinion: But it is upon
such condition, which is of force, that before that I depart from you, either
that you be of mine opinion, or I of yours: whereupon say a dieu, farewell.


Unto the Reader.
It seems unto me good to add unto thee here the sequence of those that be
dead in Latin, the which was omitted in the margent, Fol. 167. where it is
translated faithfully into English meeter.

Oration sieve sequentia ad beatam Mariam pro defunctis.
Lugentibus in purgatorio,
Qui torrentur ardore nimio
Et torquentur sine remedio,
Subueniat tua passio.
O Maria.
Fonses patens quae culpas abluis
Omnes sanas and nullum respuis,
Manum tuam extend mortuis
Qui sub poenis languent continuis
O Maria.
Ad te pia, suspirant mortui,
Cupientes de poenis erui,
Et adesse tuo conspectui,
Et gaudis aeternis persrui.
O Maria.
Clauis David quae coelum aperis,
Nune beata succurre miseris,
Qui tormentis torquentur asperis,
Educ eas de domo carceris.
O Maria.
Lex iuslorum, Norma credentium,
Vera salus in te sperantium:
Pro desunctis sit tibi sludium
Assidue orare silium.
O Maria.
Benedicta per tua merita
Te rogamus mortuos suscita,
Et dimittens little debita:
Ad requiem sis eis semita.
O Maria.
FINIS.
The table of the principal matters of the second part of the Christian
disputations.
A.
A Bell hearing Mass. 184 Abragan, 154 Abstinence and separation from women.
141. Abstinence from lawful things. 141. Abstinence from beasts flesh. 170
Abstinence from meats. 171. Accidents burned. 161. Accidents without
substance. 162. Adam pressed. 185. Admirasion of the water and salt. 152. Adonis.
150. Aduent. 139. Aerius. 192. Eaesculanus. 143. Affection folish toward the
dead. 181. Affection of women that followed Jesus. 193. Alleluya. 150.
Alexander Pope. 141. 163. Alexander Nativity. 156. Amburbales. 149. Aneylia.
161. Anchiles. 129. Anniuersaries 128. 130 Anexagoras. 123. Answer to the
place of the 19. Chap. of Exodus. 117. 144 Antipopes. 190 Antiquity of the
name of Mass. 183. Antiquity of the Egyptians. 184. Antiquity of the
Areadians. 184. Antiquity and instruction of marriage. 185 Apes of the
Apostles. 126 Apparel white. 167 Appearing of spirits to what end they
pretend. 135 Appellations extremes to whom they belong. 198 Apoph^hegme of
Diogenes. 153. Artillery Papisticall. 116 Aspersions and sprinklings at the
entering in and coming forth of the temple. 153 Ashes holy. 168 Ashes of an
Heyfer. 171 Ashes of the Ancients 169 Ashes of the vestales. 171. Saint
Augustine. 175 Authority of S. Augustine for ye suffrages for the dead. 176
Authors of the Mass. 183. Authors of the eclestiall and Ecclesiastical
Hierarchia. 126 Aim Duke of Sauoye. 191
B.
Bacchanales, Bacchus. 140 Banquet and supper for the dead. 132 Baptism
deferred. 172 Baptism for the dead 172. 183 Baptized to be for the dead. 172
Beginning of prayers for the dead. 116 Benifices and offices given by
parentage. 139 Bellyes given to sloth under color of religion. 123
Bessation. 191 Berengarus. 139 Bying of the sielde of Ephron. 118 Blood of
Jesus. 163 Blessing of the brides bed. 147 Blessing of Torches and Tapers. 153
Blessing of the Pascell fire. 157 (...) 171 (...) ^^6. 138 (...) 195 (...) of
proposit^^^. 144 (...) and mourning for Jacob and Mosis. 117
C.
Candelles of a good saiut. 181 Candelles blessed and prucessious. 151
Candelles for the health of soul and body. 152 Candelmes day. 147 Caru^ the
goddess the porter. 167 Castor and Pollus. 1^1 The cause of the mourning of
the Israelites. 119 The cause of the institucio^ of feasts. 147 Celerin and his
family. 179 Cereales. 151 Certitude in the doctrme of faith required. 196
Ceremonies. 170 Chameleon. 1^3 Charms. 152 Chastity and secretly. 145 Chase
away the devil by fasting and prayers. 171 Charge of ceremonies. 130 Cloris.
166 Christians savage wild. 146 Combat of Mars and Mine^^a. 136 The true
Commemoration of the death of Jesus Christ. 151 Commemorantes. 181 To
Communicate sacramentally and spiritually. 186 Comparison of the Ashes of an
Heiser and holy water. 163 Conformity and deformity of the Bacchanales and
the Shroftide. 146 Conformities between the religion of the Pa^^ms and the
Popes. 136 Conformity between God mars and faint Ge^rge. 137 Conformity of
the feasts of the dead. 137 Conformity of Cyble to our Lady. 138 Constancy
of the Greeks. 190 Complaint of Saint Augustine. 130 Co^^uring of the water.
153 To put the Lord about the neck. 144 Co^empaing of the Gospel. 14^
Counsel and moderation of Saint Paul 144 Councile of Constance and of Basle.
187 Councile of Florence. 190 Councile of Lateran. 190 Councile of Basil. 190
Councile of Ferrara. 190 Councile of Innocent Pope and others. 190 Convent of
Monks. 183 Covetous of renown 156 Creatures of the Pope. 143 Creators of the
creator. 143 Craft and deceit of a Priest of Canopus. 157 Custom of the
Romans. 123 Custom of the Thracians. 122 Custom of the Cathercumenes. 172
Custom of the Lecedemonians. 123 Custom of the Lycians. 123 Custom ancient
of the Massilians. 123 Cyble. 137 Cygales. 133 Cyp^^an. 177
D.
Days appointed to mourn. and for what cause. 119 Days Aristotolicalls. 134
Days dedicated to the deed. 117 Dau^d and Abimelech. 141 Denis Areopag^te.
126. 177 Diana Strongilios or Diana Rotunda. 138 The disceite which Faunus did
think to do unto Hercules. 147 Difference between ^hisike and Philosphiie, a
charmer and a Magicyan. 154 Dishonor unto the Urigin Mary, 151 Little
dispenses and costs about the dead. 132 Dispensation of marriage. 124
Dispensations of the Pope. 141 Disputations of the bablers of Diuinytie. 196
Disputations of the Athess of the host. 161 Diversity of opinions touching
the suffrages for the dead. 196 Doctrine of the Apostles perfect. 193
Dionisiales. 146
E.
Easter. 150 Ecc^^. 115 Eggs of Serpents. 197 Elect in danger to be seduced.
197 Aeneas. 129 End of man's life. 142 End of the Popes Laws. 143 Eucratistes
and Seuerians 141 Epitaphe of Lucresse. 141 Error of the Idolaters and
hypocrites. 164 Example of David. 125 Excommunication for communion. 18^
Exhortacion to repentance. 144
F.
False following of the work of Saints. 164 Fastings condemned. 170 Fastings
of the ancients. 169 Fastings and abstinence of the Panims. 171 Fastings. 167
Fasting the principal use. 170 Fannes and Satyrs. 147 Februa. 131. 149
Feasts and Anniuersaries for the dead and their beginning. 128 Feasted for
the dead in February. 129 Feasts of Martyrs and confessors. 13^ The feast of
the dead. 138 An other feast of the dead. 139 Feasts of mad men. 140 Feast of
saint Peter's chair. 133 Feasts of the dead in May. 129 Feasts cut in pieces.
139 An other feast of the dead in January. 139 Feasts of fools. 140 Feast of
Kings. 14^ Feast of the Panims comprised in ye feast of Candels. 14^ Feralis
Coena. 132 Fire of Vesta. 158 Fire Diuturnall and eternal. 194 Fire kindeled
in the Temple of Vesta. 160 Fire and water the Gods of the Papists. 157 Fire
the God of the Persians. 154 Fire made a God. 159 Fires of S. Brandon and of
Ihon. 168 The true fire what it is. 162 Flora. 166 Florales. 151. 166. Fluona.
149 The force of gold and of Iron. 159 Fraction or breaking of the host. 188
G.
Gerion. 131 Gift of continency. 144 Gifts to do miracles in the primitive
Church. 126 Goddess Pecunia. 143 Goddess of Beasts. 169 God Ris. 150 God
compared to fire. 155 God Canopus. 156 Gods of fire and water. 162 The great
God of the Pope. 14^ The most puissant God of the Priests. 158 Good friday. 150
Gold why it is pale. 159 Gregory the first. 116 Gregory the third. 116 Gregory
the fourth. 138
H.
Handkerchefe of Chambery. 160 Harp of Orpheus and that of the pope. 131
Hecate triua and triformis. 131 Hercules. 131 Herostratus. 156 Hillaria. 150
Holy bread and the bread of saint Agathe. 165 Holy host 158 Hoostes the
subtillest in the world. 186 Humilytie famed. 170 Hypocrites. 170 Hymenius the
God of marriages. 136
I.
Ieto me contrary unto marriage. 145 Saint Iessiye. 140 Jest of a holy father.
134 Jews among the Christians. 160 Idolatry of the fire and plamrets. 155
Images Noses stopped and covered. 172 Images instruments of the devil. 155
Image of saint George cast into Saine. 137 Imitacion of the Jews and Panyms
and of Mahomet. 128 Incredulytie. 171 Induction. 142 Institucion of the supper.
185 Infirmity of man. 148 Interpretation of the blessing of the new fire. 157
Invocation of Saints. 181 Julian the Apostat. 132 Juno Sospita. 167 Juno and
Diana Queen of Heaven. 138 Jupiter a savior. 167
L
Laughing of the Souls. 134 Law of ^uma for the marriage of widows. 124
Laws of marriage what they ought to be. 124 Laws of the Romans of the
mourning of widows. 124 Law of the Jewish funeralles. 120 Law of fastings.
169 Laws cimles and obedience to Maiestrates. 142 Jews King. 1^9 Lent. 240
Liberty of the Gospel. 120 Liberty Christian. 11^ Lymit of man's affection.
121 Lugentibus in Purgatory. 166 Lupercales. 129. 149
M.
Manner by the which the souls are de^uered. 176 Manner and fashion of
mourning among the ancients. 123 Manners and life of Pope John. 139
Manicheans. 140 Man without means and how he uses the exterior things. 148
Mantell or cloak of Juno. 149 Marriage forbidden. 139 Marriage forbidden among
the Panims at certain times. 136 Saint Marie le Round. 137 Saint Margarete.
138 Mars. 149 Masses for the dead first begun. 180 Massalians and Romans.
123 Mass for the dead. 1^7 Masses private and particular. 185 The Caster
Mass of the whooremonger Priests. 147 Mass what company it ought to have. 188
Mask of Satan. 138 Matter to make the Ashes. 171 Means that we must keep at
ye mournings and funerals, and the viees of the Panims. 120 Memento of the
quick and dead. 189 Meria. 169 Metellus. 160 Mondayes dedicated to the dead.
129 Monica. 176. 193 Mortie of the supper taken from the people. 187 Montanus
heretic. 169 Mourning indecent for Christians. 122 Mourning of Samuel and
Paul. 125 Mourning of the ancient Israelits. 125 Mourning for the living and
those that be sick. 125 Mourning for the dead. 117 Mute the Goodesse. 168
Multitude of Masses forbidden. 188
N.
Names of the Popes changed. 189 Nativity of Alexander. 156 Nauclerus. 116
Nensuains. 127 Numa. 129 Nymphs of the Priests and of the Panims. 133
O.
Obey for conscience. 143 Objection. 117. 14^ Obsequies of the Greeks in
September 130 Odilo the good Abbot. 138 Office of Mercure 131. 131 Office of a
wise man. 123 Olimpias. 156 Onction with oil and extreme onction 126 Opinion
of Saint Augustine touching Purgatory. 191 Osiris and Serapis. 150 Order of
the Christian assembles. 178 Ordinance and use of marriage. 144 Order and use of
creatures turned vpsidedowne. 153 Order of Saint Benet. 188 Order of the dead.
181 Oracle of Apollo. 132. 133 Original of private Masses. 183. Original of
Images. 181 Orphens and Erridice. 131 Our Lady. 166 Ovid a Prophet of the Pope.
135
P.
Palladium. 160 Palis a goddess. 168 saint Pansard. 140 Pantheon and all
saints. 137 'God pardons not the moytie. 199 Pascall taper. 158 Perfumes
holy. 171 Persians without Temple or Images. 156 Philosophy Pitagorieall. 119
Phocas. 138 Place of the 1. Samuel 21. Chapter. 144 Place of Joel. 2. Chapter.
144 Plaster for all sores. 153 Pluto of the Christians. 131 Pope Sergius. 150
Pope Felix. 191 Pope Pelagius. 116 Pope Martyn. 146. 190 Pope Eugenius. 190
Pope out of the faith. 198 Pope what God he is. 142 To possede and keep his
vessel in honor. 141 Power of the Pope. 131. 198 Power of the fire upon the
Gods. 155 Prayer. 169 Praise of Tertulian. 177 Praxi^les. 1^8 Predecessors of
the Papists. 135 Preparation to the Lords table. 14^ Priest stricken. 153 Prose
and sequence for the dead. 166 Preparation to the Bacchanales. 146 Proverb of
the Moukes. 145 Procession of Mars. 136 Procession of the feait God and the
holy fire. 158 Prolerpina and Hecate Queen of Heaven and Hell. 166 Profit of
sackcloth and Ashes. 170 purgatorium sacrum quod vocant Febru^ 130 Purgations
of men and beasts. 168 Purgatory and his beginning. 180 Purgatory rejected of
the Greeks. 190 Purgatory is for all men or else it is not. 169 Purgatory
received by the Greeks. 191 Purgatory in this world. 194 Purgatory for the
quick and dead. 171 Of Purgatory a question. 181 Purgatious. 162 Punishment
for dispising the souls. 135 Purifications of women. 149 Purification after
the funeralles. 120 Purification. 149 Put on sackcloth and ashes. 169
R.
Reign of Antichrist and the working of iniquity. 197 The honorable
recantation of Berengarius. 188 Recyting of the Psalter. 126 Remembrance of the
dead in the supper. 182 Representation of the Euangelical light 151 Requeseant
in Pace of the bawd. 133 Robes of the Priests doing miracles. 149 Rogations.
140. 149 Rome, old and new. 128. 135 Romulus and Remus Lemuria. 129 Rudiments
of Religion. 170
S.
Sacraments. 134 Sacrifice of the Alter and of a Mediator. 182 Sacrifice of
praise and thanks giving. 182 Sacrifice to the infernal Gods. 149 Sacrifice in
the ancient Church what it signifies. 178 Sacrifice of the Martyrs. 179
Sacrifice of reconcilietion. 182 Sacrum Purgatorium quod vocant Februm. 130 The
saying of the Turk touching the Popish Mass. 186 Scismes and Antipopes. 190
Scrip of Mercury. 131 Selling of God. 143 Separation of the husband and wife
for a time. 144 Septanarii. 119 Septuagesima. 140 Sergius. 189 Seuerus. 14^
Shrofe Sundaye. 146 Shadows having teeth and bellyes. 133 Shadows of the
dead. 133 Sigismonde. 190 Signification of a Comet. 139 Signification of
February. 130 Signification of the fire of the perpetaal Holocauste. 157 Sin
against the Pope. 197 Sin against the holy Ghost. 197 Sun against the Pope
and against God. 142 Sins beniall deaced. 163 Sin mortal. 163 Souls and
wandering shadows. 135 Statutes for the communion. 189 Suffrages of the dead.
196 Superstition of Gregory. 145 Supper what sacrifice it is. 182 Supper
deformed. 183 Supper for the dead. 172 Supper populer. 187 Supper despised. 189
Supper sacrifice of redemption. 189 To take the Supper for the dead. 183
T.
Table set for the souls. 133 Tacianus. 141 Thanmus. 150 Temeritie to affirm
196 Temples burned in Asia. 155 Temple of Diana burned. 156 Temple of Diana
Ephesian. 156 Temple of Fortune. 152 Ternatii. 119 Theologia Academica. 162.
196 Thelogia Aquatica. 162 Three Popish crowns. 131 Theseus and Py^othus. 131
Time ordinary for the mourning of the Israelites. 118 Time prescribed for
mourning. 121 Times of sastings. 140 Tytles of Christ. 167 Tytles of Images.
155 Tytles of the Goddesses of the Panims. 166 Torches of the Christians. 151
Translation of the bones of Joseph. 118 Translation of Jacob into the land of
Canaan. 118 Transubstantiation. 139. 187
V.
Valentinian. 152 The Uaile. 172 Virtue of Jesus Christ ^anfferred to the
creatures. 153 Uictory of Canopus. 157 Uicare at the tuble. 187 Uicare of
faith. 187 Uigiles for the dead. 149 Uisitacion of the sick. 126 Use of
extreme unction. 126
W.
Washings of the Turks. 164 Washings of the Phariles. 146 The true washings.
165 Two ways only. 194 Water of separation consecrated with the Ashes of an
Heyfer. 120 True holy water. 165 The whippes of the Lupercalls. 149 The kind
of wine. 187 Witness of the faith of the Patriarks. 118 Witness of saint
Augustine against papisticall Purgasory 193 Witness of the most ancient
doctors against Purgatory. 194 Witness of Antichrist against his Purgatorst.
199
X.
Xerces. 155
FINIS TABVLAE.
THE THIRD PART of the Christian disputations.

By Master Peter Viret.

Translated out of French into English by John Brook of Asshe next Sandwich.

1. COR. CAPT. 1. XXX. Jesus Christ is made unto us of God, wisdom and
righteousness of sanctification and redemption.

MIEVLX VAVLT MOVRIR E^ VERTV QVE VIVRE EN HONCTE printer's device of Thomas
East, of a black horse standing on a wreath (McKerrow 206)

Imprinted at London by Thomas East.

THE ARGUMENT AND SVMME of the fifth Dialogue.
THomas declares the causes, for which he did enterprise and take in hand his
vioage unto Saint Patricke. And inasmuch as Eusebius could not maintain his
Purgatory by the aunerent Doctors of the Church, he labors and enforces
himself, if he can relieve it, through the aid and help of the holy
Scripture, and takes for his first defense and weapons the second book of the
Marchabees: by occasion whereoff, is entreated, the difference which ought to
be put, between the books that are Canonical and those that are Apocryph:
And it is in like manner declared in what authority and reputation that book
ought to be among the Christians. Afterward, although peradventure, there
shall be some matters, which may seem somewhat curious unto some men, yet
nevertheless shall be spoken of the Limbs, as well of the ancient fathers as of
the young children that are borne dead, and dead without circumcision and
baptism, and of the difference which may be between the^ which have been under
the new and old testament, as well little as great, as well quick as dead, and of
their condition and estate. We do entreat of those things very amply because
that many do move questions, and that there is good, prositable and necessary
points to be understood, for to correct many errors, abuses and false
opinions, thuching those matters, which are come among the Christians. There
shall be in like manner spoken of baptisine administered by women and declared by
lively and plain reasons, how Jesus Christ, is the only health and
satisfaction of all the elect, and children of God: and how the virtue and
efficacy of his death and pasion extends it self from the beginning of the
world unto the end of the same. Item, what is the true baptism of Jesus
Christ: the remission of sins, and the satisfaction worthy of the
righteousness of God. To what end the god works do profit the Christian.
What is the judgment of God upon the good and evil, and by what means some
are delivered, and other some do abide subject. Furthermore, how the judgment
is already done upon every one, and whether we ought yet to attend and look for
it: And how Hell and Paradise do begin already in this world, and when their
full and whole consumation shall be. It shall be in like manner declared, how the
place of the Machabees serves nothing at all to prove the Purgatory: And there
shall be also declared of the manner, by which the ancient people of God have
prayed for the dead, and for the coming of Jesus Christ, and wherein the
Christians may follow it, without speaking against the word of God. It shall be
also touched how in our time and by what means Satan endeavored himself to
establish his Purgatory, and the prayers for the dead, and what mask and
instrument he has chosen for to do that. We do call this Dialogue the Hels,
because that we do declare how many hels the Papisticall doctrine has forged
for us, and the lodgings and chambers that it has there builded.

THE FIFTH DIALOGVE which is called the Hels.
EVsebius. For as much as Thomas has reserved for himself one part of this
day for to make his Narration, and of his own accord has granted unto me
the greatest part, therefore it is good reason that he do begin first.
Wherefore I give him the choice, whether he will go before or behind.

Hilarious. I desire for my part, that Thomas do rehearse first the cause of
his enterprise and voyage. For I do much desire to hear it and understand it.


Thomas. Thou ought not to be much desirous of it. For thou can not hear
of me any thing which is much worth. Wherefore I am well content to hold my
peace, if you will. For I fear greatly that after that you have heard me, you
will mock me, chiefly Hilarious, who is so expert in that occupation. I
believe that it is the chiefest cause, wherefore he so greatly desires to
hear my words. Wherefore I think it best Eusebius, that thou do
proceede-forwarde and prosecute thy intent. For the matters that you have to
entreat off, are better then those which you can hear of me: And in hearing
you, I may profit, but in speaking, I can but spend the time, the which you
will employ and best nine to a better end. And therefore begin, and after if
there be any spare time, I will see what I shall do.


Theophilus. I believe that we shall have time enough. Fear not the^ to begin,
since y^ thou have already told us, y^ thou will not be over long. But thou will
make us find the thing good. For that cause do love to be entreated so much,
knowing that the more thou refusest to tell unto us that we demand, so much y^
more we desire it.


Thomas. I have regard unto another thing. I consider y^ which Solomon has
written, saying: if a fool do hold his tongue, he shall be counted wise. For he
compares Pro. 17. d. 28 Judgment by the world.
man, to a loohing glass, or a bell y^ which one does know by the sound;
whether they be broken or whole. So in like manner may one judge of man, in
hearing him speak, whether he be wise or foolish. For one perceives the
spirit of man, in his word. As his figure in a glass: and one may behold in
the same, the nature of him, as the complexion of the body in his water and
urine, by which it is easy to judge, what drogues he has in the shop of
his brain.


Hilarious. Thou will that one should say of thee, that which a Philosopher
once said of a certain man y^ he did see sit at a banquet, which spoke not a
word, although y^ all the others did put forth certain questions, and gave
unto him matter enough for to speak in his course. If that man (says
Apothegma.
he) be a wise man, he plays the part of a fool: if he be a fool, he
plays the part of a wise man.


Thomas. I cannot well understand that matter. For me thinks that it
contains and implies contradiction.


Hilarious. He gives thereby to understand, that even as too much speaking
apperteineth unto fools and idiots, so always to hold ones peace, agrees to
beasts, and not unto men. Wherefore there must be a mean kept in all things.


Thomas. That is the same to the which I pretend: And I do think, that I
speak enough according to the place and men with whom I am. And because y^ I am
not wise, for to speak well. I will at the leastwise through silence through
silence counterfeit the wise. For it is commonly said: it is evil to speak Latin
before learned men. When Common pro^erb
I am with ignorant men as my self, I do speak as a Doctor, especially if I
think that I have the moytie of a dragme or scruple more of knowledge then
they. But when I come before you, I do loose by and by all my babbling.


Hilarious. Thou would here very gladly make an end. But thou must first
declare unto us that thou have promised.


Thomas. Since y^ thou vrgest me so much, thou shall have it: But if thou do
mock me, be assured, that I shall have as good matter against thee, for to
render unto thee the like. For thou thinckest to hear some great secret, and
thou shall find thy self deceived: do thou not know me yet, Hilarious?
First of all, thou art not ignorant, how that I was never very wise. Thou
may then presume, what merchaundise I can bring forth of my shop, and
what Doctor contemplative I may be. Thou know very well that I am called


Thomas. Now if I be Thomas of name, yet I approach nerer of the nature of my
godfather, of whom I do bear the name then of his name. If he has been
incredule The incredulity of Thomas John. 20. ^^^.
and vnbleeuinge, insomuch that he would not believe the resurrection of
Jesus Christ, except he did see him, himself, with his own eyes, and touch
him with his hand, and except he did put his fingers in his wounds. So for my
part, I do doubt, and know not well whom I may believe. But I have greater
occasion to doubt, then Saint Thomas had. For he heard the promise which
Jesus Christ made of his resurrection, of which he had not so^iust an
occasion to doubt, since that he had already so many times found by
experience Jesus Christ true in all his words, and that he had all his fellows
and companions, who with one accord did tell him, how he appeared unto them
after his resurrection, and that they had seen him and touched him. But I,
which am but a poor idiot and very ignorant, what ought I to think, and
whereto ought I to stay my self, when I consider the diversity of opinions
which is among men, touching the religyon, and namely touching the estate of
the dead, and of the infernal and celestial regyons and habitations, yea,
amongst the most sage and wisest? As I have proved in these days among your
selves, who are of as contrary a sentence the one from the other, as the fire
and the water. Therefore have I taken in hand the voyage of Saint Petricke,
in which S. Patricks wels
as men say, one shall see the estate of all the dead: the torments of the
dampened which are in bell, and of the souls detayned and kept in Purgatory
and in the Limb, and in like manner the joys of Paradise. Therefore I do
trust and hope, that I may be there informed in the truth of all those things,
and that after I have seen them I shall be out of all doubt. For I know no more
to seek any other remedies. Yet nevertheless, sithence that I have beard
these matters debated more amply and clearly and better declared, then ever I
did before, I have very much lost my fantasy. You do well remember, that I
said, that after that I had spoken to the holy father, who has so well
disciffered that matter, that peradventure I should have gained my voyage,
without going unto him, I fear very much that before that I depart from you,
you will cut off all the way, and make it shorter. For I hope through the help
of God, that we will visit this day all those chambers and internal
habitations without moving our selves from hence, and before that we depart, if
that the one and the other of you do that, whereof you brag and vaunt your
selves you will. For you have promised on every of your parts, that you will
have recourse to none other Judge, but to the pure word of God. And as for me,
if you take it for the Judge, I am well content, The word of God judge and
guide Aene. 6. Psa. 119. c. 05.
to take it for my guide: And I am certain that it will guide me better, then
Cyble guided Aeneas.


Theophilus. If thou do not hold thy self assured, David, who speaks by
experience, can certify thee, saying. Thy word O Lord is a lantern unto my
feet. That guide will not conduct and lead thee unto thy fathers that are
dead, as Virgile did cause Aeneas to be lead of Syble unto his father
Anchises, but it will lead thee unto the living God, thy immortal father,
whom by the same thou shall hear speak, for to put thee out of all doubt.


Hilarious. There is also an other point, that when we shall have ended The gates
of dreams.
the voyage, we shall not go by ye gates of dreams, as Aeneas: or as our holy
father, whom we have heard dream so well, as all such as he is do, which
repose and rest themselves in any other bed, then upon the pure word of God.
For it has such virtue, that whosoever rests upon it shall never dream nor
rave: or it be dream, he goes not by the gates of Iuory, but by ye horn
gate, which is clear The gate of Iuory and horn
and through the which one may see as with the eyes: in such sort that such
dreams are more certain, then that which others do see with their eyes: as
it appears in those of Joseph and Daniel. But he that will lie or rest
himself in any other bed, shall never cease to dream and wander The dreams
of the Saints and of the erring Theologisters
astray out of the way: And all their dreams do go by the gate of Iuory,
which is thick as ye bones are, Wherefore one can perceive nothing by the same,
as we do see by experience in our Theologians and Sophists which are so
obscure and dark that one can see nothing at all. For after ye they have well
banketed and moisted themselves with that good Theological wine, they have ye
spirit of wine yt which the great God Bacchus has inspired them, and makes
The spirit of Bacchus
them to enter by the gate of Iuory, that is to say, between the teeth and
chawes, which causes so many exhalations of that divine licor well tempered
with wine, and so many fumes and heates to ascend and mount into the brain,
that they do dream more deeper, then the lowest parts of hell and the seat of
Lucifer. Afterward they return being ravished in their Poetical furor and
madness, as if they were departed all newly and fresh. But even as their
dreams are entered by the gate of Iuory by force of chewing and moving their
chawes and cockscombes, as the Organ bellows, so do they go forth by the
very same gate.


Thomas. Let us then go in by the other gate, and in such sobriety, that we
may know the things, as though we saw the^ wc our eyes. But who shall begin to
declare and show it unto us? me thinks yt Eusebius makes himself ready.
Begin then to knock, and cause it to be opened unto us?


Eusebius. I will enter first by the old testament.


Hilarious. But take good heed you lead us not awrye, and to take the one for
the other: For if thou do err and go astray, we will direct and lead thee
into it again.


Eusebius. But I will direct and lead you well. Give (...)
ear then unto that which is written of I^das Machabens, Therefore I t^^ trust
and hope, that I may be there informed in the truth of all those things, and
that after I have seen them I shall be out of all doubt. For I know no more to
seek any other, remedies. Yet nevertheless, sithence that I have beard these
matters debated more emply and clearly and better declared, then ever I did
before, I have very much lost my fantasy. You do well remember, that I said,
that after that I had spoken to the holy father, who has so well disciffered
that matter, that paradue^ture I should have gained my voyage, without going
unto him, I fear very much that before that I depart from you, you will cut
off all the way, and make it shorter. For I hope through the help of God, that
we will visit this day all those chambers and infernal habitations without
moving our selves from hence, and before that we depart, if that the one and
the other of you do that, whereof you brag and baunt your selves you will. For
you have promised on every of your parts, that you will have recourse to none
other Judge, but to the pure word of God. And as for me, if you take it for
the Judge, I am well content The word of God judge and guide Aene. 6. Psa.
119. c. 105.
to take it for my guide: And I am certain that it will guide me better, then
Cyble guided Aeneas.


Theophilus. If thou do not hold thy self assured, David, who speaks by
experience, can certify thee, saying. Thy word O Lords is a lantern unto my
feet. That guide will not conduct and lead thee unto thy fathers that are
dead, as Virgile did cause Aeneas to be lead of Syble unto his father
Anchises, but it will lead thee unto the living God, thy immortal father,
whom by the same thou shall hear speaks, for to put thee out of all doubt.


Hilarious. There is also an other point, that when we shall have ended The gates
of dreams.
the voyage, we shall not go by ye gates of dreams, as Aeneas: or as our holy
father, whom we have heard dream so well, as all such as he is do, which
repose and rest themselves in any other bed, then upon the pure word of God.
For it has such vortue, that whosoever resseth upon it shall never dream nor
rane: or if he dream, he goes not by the gates of Iuory, but by ye horn
gate, which is clear The gate of Iuory and herne
and through the which one may see as with the eyes: in such sort that such
dreams are more certain, then that which others do see with their eyes: as
it appears in those of Joseph and Daniel. But he that will lie or rest
himself in any other bed, shall never cease to dream and wander The dreams
of the Saints and of the e^ring Theologisters
astray out of the way: And all their dreams do go by the gate of Iuory,
which is thick as ye bones are. Wherefore one can perceive nothing by the same,
as we do see by experience in our Theologians and Sophists which are so
obscure and dark that one can see nothing at all. For after ye they have well
banketed and moisted themselves wc that good Theological wine, they have ye
spirit of wine ye which the great God Bacchus has inspired them, and makes
The spirit of Bacchus
them to enter by the gate of Iuory, that is to say, between the teeth and
chawes, which causes so many exhalations of that divine licor well tempered
with wine, and so many fumes and heates to ascend and mount into the brain,
that they do dream more deeper, then the lowest part of hell and the seat of
Lucifer. Afterward they refurne being ravished in their Poetical furor and
madness, as if they were departed all newly and fresh. But even as their
dreams are entered by the gate of Iuory, by force of the wing and moving their
chawes and cockscombes, as the Organ bellows, so do they go forth by the
very same gate.


Thomas. Let us then go in by the other gate, and in such fobrietie, that we
may know the things, as though we saw the^ wc our eyes. But who shall begin to
declare and show it unto us? me thinks ye Eusebius makes himself ready.
Begin then to knock, and cause it to be opened unto us?


Eusebius. I will enter first by the old testament.


Hilarious. But take good heed you lead us not awrye, and totake the one for
the other: For if thou do err and go astray, we will direct and leave thee
into it again.


Eusebius. 2. Match. 12. g. 43.
Give ear then unto that which is written of Judas Machabens, who sent to
Jerusalem two thousand Dragmas of stluer, for to be offered for a sacrifice
for the sins of those which were dead. In which place he did well and right.
For he had some consideration and pondring of the life that is after this time.
For if he had not thought that those which were slain did yet live, it had
been super fluous and vain to make any vow or sacrifice for them that were
dead. But for so much as he saw that they which dyed in the favor and belief
of God, are in good rest and joy, he thought it to be good and honorable for a
reconciling, to do the same for those which were slain, that the offense
might be forgiven. Is it possible to find a terte more cleerer? Wherefore did
Judas Macchabeus send such a sum of Silver ye number of two thousand Dragmas
The value of the thousand Dragmas
which are worth a thousand and two hundredth Crowns, if we account them after
our money, if he had not been certain, that the offerings and prayers of the
lining did profitte the dead?


Theophilus. Thou do here open unto us a goodlye field to dispute off, and
will eng^der to us many questions, the which I will propound unto thee, and we
will declare them at large one after an other, and afterward we will judge in
the end whereto that place can serve you, for to prove Purgatory. I do then
first demand of thee in what reputation thou have that books of the
Macchabees? The authority of the books of the Machabces.
and whether thou do hold them for canonical, or Apocripha?


Eusebius. I hold it but for such as it is, that is to say, holy, Canonical and
allowed of the catholic Church. For is it not contained in the Bible?


Theopilus I do not benie but that it is fastened and sowed in between or
among the books of the Greek and Latin Bible, but it follows not therefore
that it is Canonical, and of such Authority as the others which we have
received of the Hebrews, which always have been received and allowed of all
the catholic Church, without any contradiction.


Eusebius. I am not now abashed, though you will not receive the authority of
the ancient Doctors, since that you are so shameless, that you dare condemn
and reject the very proper books of the holy Scripture. I do know by
experience that you must have a Bible made according or after your own
pleasure. For you are like unto the ancient heritickes which will not take out
of the holy scriptures, but the places which they think most meet and
proper for to give color to their herefies: and do reject all the other, as
unworthy of the spirit of God. Is not that to great arrogancy, to make the
spirit of God, and his word to be subject unto your judgment? Thou may well
perceive Thomas, that now they do feel themselves much grieved, when they
are constrained to refuse the Judge, unto whom they have appealled: and which
in steed to be judged of him, they would judge him.


Theophilus. Stay a while


Eusebius. Thou have not yet gotten or obtained thy suit. Think not that we
are become Papists, since that we have spoken unto thee: And that we would
attribute unto our selves authority, power and judgment above the spirit of
God, as he does: we do leave that office unto Antechrist, to whom alone it
apperteineth. We have not used to reprove one only stllable of the holy
Scriptures: But if we discern and put difference between the books that are
Canonical and those that are Apocripha, thou ought not to accuse us Books
canonical and Apocripha.
therefore, except thou do, by that same reason, render culpable of the like
crime the ancient Doctors of the Church, chiefly Saint Hierome, and in like
manner your decrees and Canons: which do separate those that are Canonical
from those that be Apocrapha, amongst which they do put the books of the
Machabees.


Eusebius. I confess that among the Jews, it has not been received for
Canonical in their Sinagogue: but it has not been therefore rejected of the
Church. Wherefore I conclude, that those that beny, that they are not
canonical, are not the sons of the Church; but bastardes of the Sinagogue.


Hilarious. Thou have at the least kept that same of ^ccius, Behold one shot
of his Canons.


Theophilus. If it be so, Wherefore then did not S. Hierom enroul it among the
Canonicals, in that prolegne The judgment of saint Hierom touching the books
of the Machabee^. Hiero. Pauli.
in which be has recited them all in order? do thou think that he would
have rather omitted these here, then the other? And in the prologue that he
calls Galeatus, which he has set before the books of the Kings, both he
not make express mention of those books amenge the Apocriphas? and
principally of the second out of y^ which the place by thee alleged is taken?
For he says that he has found the first written in Hebrew: But not the
second, the which has been only written in Greek. The which thing, as he
says, may prove it self by the p^rase and manner of the speaking, the which
he used. To the which agrees well that which he writing against the
Pelagians, names Joseph for the author of the historye Joseph y^ anthor of the
books of the Machabees
of the Machabees, understanding that by him it was written. Then if by the
testimonye and witness of Saint Hierome, that history has been written by
Joseph, b^ee ought not to esteem it to be of more greater authority, the^ the
other books of Joseph, the which we do read ^ no receive, The books of
Joseph.
as histories, very profitable: But a great deal wantoth, that we should
attribute unto them so much authority, as unto those, the which we do know
without all doubt, to be y^ body of y^ holy Scripture. Therefore said S.
Hierome in the Prologne that he made before the book of the Prouer^es of
Solomon: The Church does read the books of the Machabees, but she receineth
them net among the Canonical.


Eusebius. Then wherefore has Saint Augustine written, De ciui. Dei. li 18. ca.
36
that the Church holds them as Canonical?


Theophilus. Consider well how he has written in that same place which thou
alledgest, speaking of the number of the times, which have been sithence the
returning from Babylon, until the coming of Jesus Christ. Did he not write,
that the account and number of them, are not found in the holy Scriptures,
which are called Canonical but in the other, among which are the books of ye
Machabees? Do thou not see and perceive that he seperateth those books from
the body of the holy Scriptures.


Eusebius. Wherefore do thou cut off fthe tail? why do thou not add, that
which follows afterward? The which (says he) the Jews hold not for
Canonical, but the Church does.


Theophilus. But does he not add by and by the reason wherefore, the which
serves to my purpose?


Eusebius. He says, that it is because of the vehement Martirs bescre the
coming of Jesus Christ
and merueilous passions of some Martirs, which have fought even unto death,
for the law of GOD, before that Jesus Christ came in the flesh and suffered
griefs and horrible torments.


Theophilus. He understands by those Martirs, the seven brothers of the
Machabees, The Machabees 2. Mac. 7. a. 1 Antiochus
with their mother, who loved rather that Antiochus should dismember and
torment them cruelly, then they would obely his commandments for to violate
the law of God. It is easy to understand by those words, that the Church has
not received those books, in such authority, as those which have been holden
alwaie sin the Prophetical and Apostolical church, nor to be sufficient, for to
allow and confirm, or for to build any doctrine, which ought to be hole^ for
an article of faith, and for to vanquish the heretics: But only in such
steed, as we have at this day the ecclesiastical histories, and legends of
martirs: not a heap of foolish and fabulous legends, made by a heap of
dreaming The legends of Saints Did. 15. ca. sancta.
and deceiving Caphards and Moonks, as are the lives of the fathers, the golden
legend, and other like, more worthy to be numbered with the Roman of Fierobras,
Orson, and Valentine, the erring kinghtes, Mandeuill, or the true narrations of
Lutian, and others like, made for pleasure, then among the Ecclesiastical
histories. But they have been in such reputacion among the wise men, as the
books of Josephus, Eusebius, Sozomenus, Theodoritus, Socrates, and such other
which have written the Ecclesiastical histories, and the lives of Martyrs,
for to keep the remembrance in the Church, as in a Chornicle for to edify
and comfort with good examples: But not that they are of such authority, that
they are sufficient for to set forth any new doctrine, of which we have
no certain witness in the Apoostlicall doctrine. And that it is even so as I
do say, I will not prove it by any other witness, then by the same which
thou bring forth against me: That is to say, Saint Augustine, who has
written in an other place after this manner, saying: The Jews have not the
scripture of the Machabees, as the Law, the Prophets and Psalms, to the which
the Lord Jesus rendereth witness, as unto this witnesses, saying: All must be
fulfilled which are written of me in the Luc. 24. g. 44.
Law of Moses and in the Prophets and in the Psalms. But that Scripture is
received of the Church, not without profit, if one do read and mark it
soberly. Does he not euidentlye declare by those words, how much the
authority of the same is abased in comparison of the others, the which Jesus
Christ takes for witnesses? As Much may one gather out of an old book,
which contains the exposition of the Creed, and bears the title of Saint
Cyprian. He plainelye shows that that book holdth no palce in the ancient
Church. Wherefore it is almost folly to strive and fight so long time, if it
were not, but that our adversaries do make the poor ignorant people believe,
that it is of the holy Scripture, and that we do deny it. After that sort
have been allowed The Canons the Apostles. Dsti. 16. casex againta. and can
canoner propter.
some books, called the Canons o^ the Apostles, the which some among the
ancients, and among the Popes and counsels have been holden some for
Canonical, and others for Apocripha, because that they do serve in many
things confirmable to the Apostolical doctirne: but they were not bound unto
them, as unto the holy Scriptures, which they cannot reject, as they have done
often times, when they have found, any Canon, which seems much to differ
from the Apostolical doctirne. Even so may we do of the books of the
Machabees. We may well draw out of them examples, for to exhort the faithful
unto paclence, constancy and Martyrdom, propounding and declaring unto them
the virtue and the faith of that good mother, with her seven sons, who stood
so constantlye unto death, for to maintain the Law of Good, who had not yet
nevertheless such an occasion to do that, as we, which have more sure and
certain witnesses of the resurrection and of examples more evident, as well in
Jesus Christ as in his Apostles and dysciples, then they had, And so said S.
Augstyne. But it follows not therefore that Did. 16. ca. ^none. Glos. at^
touching the doctrine which concerns the faith and religion, they should be
with equal authority with the others. And therefore the gloss made upon the
decree recysith them among the Apocripha.


Eusebius. I would gladly that thou would declare unto me a little more
plainly, what thou understand by the Canonicals and Apocripha.


Theophilus. I do call canonical, all the books of The e^onicall books.
the new testament the which we have: and of the do, in like manner, all
those which are contained in the Hebrwe. Bible, the which we have received of
the holy Prophets and true servant of God, and whose authors are certain and
known. And we do call them Canonical, which signifies as much as rules,
because they are of an infallible verity, and a certain and sure rule which
is given us of god, for to ruel and examine al other doctrine, and to prove the
spirits whelter they are of God, and for to live according to the same.


Eusebius. And what understand thou by Apocripha? Apocrypha.
Theophilus. Apocripha, signifies a thing hid, secret or obscure, which has
no sure or certain author: or which is not allowed as are y^ books, to y^ title
is applies and made at, which are not sufferable, but insomuch as their doctrine
is confirmable unto that of Canonicalls, the which ought to be ruled by them.
And they have no firm authority but that which those do give unto it. For in
steed that we may take a sure foundation and buylding, upon any place taken
out of the Canonicalls, we cannot do it in those here, if they have not
already their foundation on the other. They have not been called Apocrypha,
because that it was not lawful to have them in ones lybrary, and to read them
with judgment, for ones profit. For that was not forbidden. But have taken
that name, because that they were not of such authority, ye one should hold
them for a sure and infallible doctrine of the church of God: And they were not
red and expounded openly in the same, and with such authority, as those which
without doubt were holden for the certain word of God, to the which we are
bound to believe, and to submit and put our judgment under them, not to
eleuate it above them, or to judge them by the other books, which ought to be
subject unto them.


Eusebius. And wherefore have some of them more that authority then the others?


Theophilus. Because that of the one we are cert eyne, which are the pure
words of God: but not of the others, but to the contrary.


Eusebius. By what means? Is it not because the Church has allowed them and
not the other. Now since that their authority depends of the authority of ye
church if she do receine these here as the Canonical, and makes them of
equal authority, wherefore shall not they be in the same degree?


Theophilus. I do believe that thou do think that the church has
accustomed to legittimate the books, as Unto whom the judgment of the
scriptures do appertcine
the Pope does legittimate his bastardes. The Popish church may well take in,
hand that, but that is not the property of ye of Jesus Christ. And although
she would Legitimation.
legittimate them, yet they must be taken as bastards legitimated by the Pope,
which cannot be notwithstanding borne in lawful marriage, but do abide always
bastards and sons of fornication, How can the daughter engender and beget her
Mother, or her Father. How can the The authority of the Church.
Church give authority to the word of God, who of the same receives hirs,
and of the same is begotten and borne? Of whom receives the Sun his
brightness? Does he receive it of men, whom he illuminateth and lights?


Eusebius. No. But on the contrary men of it.


Theophilus. Is it clear and shining because that men do judge and confess
it to be such?


Eusebius. No. But because that it is such, the men that do see it, and have
the experience are constrained to acknowledge and confess it to be such.


Theophilus. Thou meanest notwithstanding that the Sun should be clear and
give light, because that men do think it to be so.


Eusebius. Thou do me wrong to impute unto me that which I never spoke,
but altogether contrary.


Theophilus. Thou have said it, by other words. Whereby thou do not
perceive thy self. For when The authority of the scripture
thou saydest, that the holy Scripture takes his authority of the church,
thou say that men do give light and cleerenesse unto the Sun. For as David
does witness, the word of the Lord is pure and clear, that is ye light which
gives Psa. 19 c 9
light unto the eyes, and gives wisdom unto babes. It is then certain and
true, not because the Church judges it such, but it judges it such because
that it is so, and cannot judge of it otherwise, no more then he which has
clear eyes can judge of the light of the Sun, of which the blind person is
not capable. Wherefore he cannot judge, no more then the Infidells and
reprohate can judge of the word of God, nor allow it. Then thou may by
this understand, that the certeynetye, verity and firmness does not depend
upon man's opinion and judgment, but upon the holy Ghost, and of the proper
force virtue and effects by which it does verify it self, and compels the
faithful hearts to allow and receive it as the light of the Sun does the
eyes. For the sheep do hear and understand the shepeartes voice, but not
that of the strangers. And all that that the Prophets have forshewed and
taught, the Apostles in like manner, have been verified and authorysed by the
virtue of him which has spoken in them, insomuch that all the world cannot
resist it. Now we cannot say she like of the books of the Machabees,
chiefly of the second. First, for that it is not found in the Hebrewe, and
that the style of the same witnesses The second books of the Machabees.
clearly, that it was first made in Greek, and was not translated from the
Hebrew tongue into the Greek tongue. We may take it for a certain rule, that
it has not belfe written by any Prophet, or man worthy to be accounted for
such a one. For the Prophets have written in their proper language, to wit,
Hebrew, or in the language of the The sangnage of the Prophets
Chaldees, sithence the time of the captinite of Babylon. Furthermore, it is
easy to know, that that book has been written long time after the return
of the people of Israel into Jerusalem, and the age of Esdras, Nehemias, The
last Prophets.
Aggeus, Zachary and Malachy, sithence which, we do not read, that the people
of God have had any Prophet that has written any thing: nor other books, of a
certain and autenticke author. Wherefore by. good right, this here is
accounted for Apocrypha. And although there were no other reason, for to
diminishe his authority, but the excuse which the author of the said book
made in the end of his work, that ought to suffice thee. Read the last
Chapter and thou shalt see it by experience. If he had been certain through
the spirit of GOD, that all that which he has written, proceeded from him,
as the Prophets and Apostles have done, wherefore should he excuse himself
both of the style, of The authority of the Prophets and Apostles
the manner of writing and of the faults that he might have committed? If he
had been always inspired with the same spirit, by which the Prophets and
Apostles have spoken, he would have spoken surely and in the authority of God,
as those who without excusinge themselves have said: The Lord has spoken it.
And Saint Paul with what authority speaks he affirming that the Gospel
which he has preached was so certain, that although Gal. 1, b. 8
an Angel came down from heaven, for to bring any other unto you, he ought
not to be received, but accursed. Learn then Eusebius to discern the books
of the holy Scripture, form the others: and think not that the church has
holden for Canonical, that second book of the Machabees, but as a book
which was not altogether to be rejected, and of which it might serve the
Church, for declaration of the Scriptures, because of the histories contained
in the same, which do give a certain openinge, for the intelligence of the
antiquity, as the histories of Joseph do. Yet nevertheless if one mark them
well, it shall be easle to judge, that the first and the second are not all of
one author: not only by the diversity of the style, (...) also because that
in the second, are reiterated some bistories, and many things which already
have been intreales ^^ in the first, and a great deal better then they are in
this. If one do find in any other book worthy to be credited of the old or
new Testament, any like place unto that which thou have alleged, the argument
should have some color by the show that the other would give unto it. But
forasmuch as it is alone, his witness is not sufficient, as it should be in
the one of the others. For God is as much to be believed by one only witness
as The vvstnesse of God.
by a thousand: where a thousand witnesses of men, without the same of God,
ought not to bold any place in the religion, But sithence, that the
superstition of the suffrages and prayers: for the dead has begun to have
crept into the Church, this book also has begun to take great authorytie,
in such sort that it oftener is read and song in the Popish Church, then
those that cont^yned more surer doctrine. And thu ought also to understand,
that the ancients have sometime put a difference between y^ Canonical,
Apocrypha and Ecclesiastical books, as it appears by the author which
has expounded, the Creed the which some do think that it was Saint Cyprian:
other that it was Ruffin. But whosoever if were of them both, they are both of
them very ancient, and have divided those books after that sort: Ye must
know (says he) that thee be other books after the Canonical, which are not
called of the ancients and of our prede^^^^ors Canonical, but
C^^lessasticall: as are the wisdom of Solomon, and the other wisdom, which
is called Jesus the son of Syrach, the which book is among the Latins, by
that general title called Ecclessasticus, by the which word the author of
the book is not named but the quantie of the Scripture. The book of Toby is
of the same order, and of Judith, and the books of the Machabees: the which
they would that they should be all read in the Church, but they would not that
they should have been settle forth, for to con^^rme the authority of the
faith by them. The other Scriptures, they have called Apocrypha: the which they
would not that they should be read in the Church. Thou (...) see here most
playnelye, how that they do attribute more authority unto the Canonical
Scriptures then unto the Eccleslasticall Scriptures: and unto the
Ecclessastical more then unto the Apocryph^: but they have not yet
nevertheless esteemed those Eccleslassastical (which they have many times
called apocrypha) of equal and such authority, as the divine scriptures: nor
they have called them Eccleslasticall for that cause, but because that they
were in such reputation, that one niyght read and sign them in the Church
(the w^^^^ was not permitted in the ancient Church) or because that their
antiquity or holiness of their authors added unto them a ^yttle more
authority then unto the other.


Thomas. By that account Eusebius then shall be vnweapened of his principal
staff that he thought to have.


Eusebius. If they would after that sort make the books either Canonical or
Apocripha at their pleasure: it is mere folly to disputs with them. For all
those which be not to their minds shall be Apocrypha.


Theophilus. If thou will not be confen^ed with the reasons by me alleged, go
and plead against Saint Hierome Ad Chroma. did 5. ca. sa^cta.
and your decrees. If the ancients had not used judgment and wisdom, how
many books would the heretics have brought into the Church under the name of
the Prophets, Apostles and of their Disciples: The which they have re^^csed
them, following that same rule, which I have given unto thee: as it appears
by your decrees, which are a great roll of them. But I will yet do more, to the
end I leave the^ not an occasion, to be miscontented wc me. I am content, by
way of disputation, to put the case that y^ book should be autentick and of a
divine authority. And although The place of the Machabees serves nothing at
all for Purg^ ^ory.
it were so, it would serve thee yet nevertheless nothing at all for to prove
that there is a Purga^ory, and that we must offer for the dead, to such intent,
and in such sort, as you do make it, And for to declare this unto thee more
plainly, I demand of thee, for to begin first ou^ matter, in what time was
that made, which the history contains? was it before the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, or afterward?


Eusebius. Before.


Theophilus. Tell me moreover, was Purgatory before the coming of Christ.
the Purgatory in that time, such as thou beleeuest it is now?


Eusebius. There is no doubt of it.


Theophilus. Since that it is so, tell me, what souls went thither? For either
it must be altogether empty and void, or else it must be that some went
thither, either those of the elect and faithful, or those of the Infidels and
reprobate. Now I do not think, that thou will say, that the Purgatory was for
the Infidels and reprobate.


Eusebius. One may so judge by that which is written Luc. 16. c. 19.
of the wicked rich man.


Theophilus. Since then that hell was for the reprobate, it follows then
necessarily, that the souls of the elect should go into Purgatory. If it
he so, to what end serves the Limb? For you The Limb.
do say, that all the Patriarchs, Prophets and true faithful, which are
departed out of this world before the death and passion of Jesus Christ, were
there kept and deteyned, and they could not go into Paradise, until such
time as Jesus Christ had satysfied for them. Wherefore I do conclude,
according to your doctrine, either that the Limb and Purgatory were all one
place and lodginge, or else that the one of them two was void and supers^uous:
or that there was but one, or for to speak the truth, neither the one nor the
other. For if the Limb were for to receive the faithful that dyed in the
faith of the promise made unto Abraham, what need was there any more of
Purgatory? bad they not Purgatory suffycient enough in the Limbs? Were they
not sufficientlye tormented to be excluded from Paradise, and depryued from
the joys thereoff, and from the fruytion of the glory of GOD, as you do
affirm? For what more greater torment can a faithful man have then to be
depryued from such a good thing? That is not only a Purgatory, but a very
hell.


Eusebius. I do know, that in hearing thee speak, that thou, which would
teach others, art yet in greater ignorance, and that thou understand very
evil this matter. The Limb then, was for those which were in such estate, as
those are now, which have finished their penance, and have made entire and
whole satisfaction for their sins in this world, which do go straight way
into Paradyse, sauinge that those there cannot yet enter, because that the
door was shut, until that Jesus Christ came to open it, and to break the
gates of Hell.


Theophilus. Wherefore was the Purgatory? Had it in it yet a certain other
sort of souls and of an other condytion, then those which went into the
Limbs?


Eusebius. Yea. For thou may well understand, that all the faithful, which
have proceeded and been before The reason upon which Purgatory is builded.
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, have not all of them been so holy and
so perfect, as the Patriarchs and Prophets. Wherefore it were no reason, that
incontinently after they are dead they should receive as much felicytie as
they, without they do first accomplish and end their penance in Purgatory,
and satysfie for their sins: the which they have not done in this world, as
the holy Patriarchs and Prophets have done: or otherwise GOD should not be
just. For what reason is it, that he which has lived in all viees and
sins all the time of this life until the last time of his death, in which
gee has had repentance of his sins, and has asked mercy of God, should
have no more grievous punishment, but should receive as great reward, as he
which al his life time has served God faithfully and has always lived in
holiness, righteousness and innocence.


Theophilus. Take heed thou do not blaspheme God, and do imurye unto his
grace and mercy. For I do greatly fear but that thou will be like unto the
brother of the prodigal child, who was envious against his Hipocrites envious
of the grace of God Luc. 15. g. 28. Examples of ye mercy of God.
brother, and murmured against his father, being angrye at the gentle
receiving and of the grace and favor that he did unto his son, whom he had
recoured, being reduced and brought into the right way: or least that thou be
one of the companions of the^ which were hired to work in ye vineyard, which
did murmr against the good man of the house, because y^ he did give as much
wages unto those whom he called at ye eleventh hour, and a little before
night, for to work in his vineyard, as unto those who^ he appointed from the
morning which have borne the burden and heat of the day. Wherefore do thou
not accuse our Lord Jesus Christ, who has answered unto that poor thief who
did hang upon the Cross ^^yth him: This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise? What good deeds Lu^. 23. l. 4^.
had he done before? Art thou envious of the grace which God does unto the
poor sinners?


Eusebius. God forbid. But we must understand, that as God is merciful, so is
he righteous. And if the thief which was crucified with Jesus Christ had had
that privilege, it follows not therefore, that all have Privilege
the like, or that they ought to have it. For as the law makers do say: the
privileges of a few, are not common laws to all men.


Theophilus. If that thief has received so great goodness by one singular
privilege, I do answer unto thee further, that none is saved but by
privilege.

For all we have meryted eternal dampnation, of our Salvation by privilege
Romans 3. 9.
nature. Inasmuch then as we be saved, that is, through a singular privilege,
which is given of God unto the elect by Jesus Christ, which is not common unto
the reprobate.


Eusebius. There is yet an other reason, wherefore that these went straight
into Paradise, without passinge by the fire and the pains of Purgatory: that
is, because that he had already done his penance in Pain for satisfaction.
this world, and has satisfied for his sins.


Theophilus. What penance or satisfaction could he have made? For the
theftes and murders for which he was hanged on the Gybet.


Eusebius. But it was the pain that he endured and suffered, and the death
that he has received for his demerites.


Theophilus. As much did his companion suffer which was hanged on the left
hand: but yet nevertheless his torments have served him nothing at all, and
he did not hear such promise of Jesus Christ as the other.


Eusebius. Because that he did not take his death and torment quyetly and
patientlye, and has not believed in Jesus Christ and demanded pardon of his
sins as his companion did.


Theophilus. Thou always come unto my count, and thou shall he compelled
to confess that there is nothing which was the cause of his salvation but the
faith which he had in Jesus Christ, and the mercy of God, The only death of
Jesus Christ does satisfy.
which he has obtained by the same, without that that God had regard neither
to his dignity or worthiness, nor unto his works, but unto Jesus Christ his
son, for whose love he has pardoned him, not for the forment and death,
which the these has suffered, and the satisfaction that he could do unto him,
but for the forment, death and passion which Jesus Christ has suffered and the
satisfaction that he has made for him, the which Saint Cyprian has Cypr.
lib. 4. de bapismo l^. sent 4. did. 4. sunt.
well understood, of whom the witness is alleged by the master of the
sentences. For although all the deaths and forments that all men have ever
suffered, Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, Martirs and confessors should be
put together, they should not be sufficient, for to put out the least sin in
the world. For God does not take only for satisfaction, the torment, but
regards the worthynes of the person, of which he receaueth the ransom, the
which was not found sufficient, but in Jesus Christ. Or otherwise if the
torment which man does suffer, were approved and allowed of God for
satisfaction, and cause to avoid the pains of Purgatory, there should be no
men more happier and blessed then the thieves, murderers, brigandes and other
malefactors, which are executed by Justice. And there would be, none which
would not but become a these or murderer, or to commit some fault worcester thy of
death for to be executed through Justice, to avoid ye pains of Purgatory. For
if the doctrine of your divines be true, ye fire of Purgatory surmounteth all the pain, that a The greatness of the pains of Purgatory.
man can suffer in this life, and it is so hot and burning, that the visible
and material fire of this world, is but as a painted fire in comparison of
that same.


Hilarious. I cannot understand in what place of the holy Did. 25. ca.
Apostolus. Tho. 4. did. 21. a^. 1. Ric. 4. did. 20. arg. 2. A^ber. 7. li. com
theo. ca. 2. Bona. 4. did. 18 Plutar. l^. de sera. numi. vind.
scripture they have seen that, I would rather believe that they have learned
it of Plutarch, who has witten, that the dolors and pains of Purgatory are so
great and so cruel, that there is as much difference between them, and those
that we do suffer in our body, and in the flesh, as there is difference,
between that which happens unto us in dreaming, and that which happens
unto us waking: In so much that all that which we do suffer in this world, is
but as a dream in the respect of the same. Fable of Gregory. Bart. fer. 4.
heb. 4. quadrag. Ser, de poen. purg.
Wherefore if the fable that the Theologians have rehearsed of Saint Gregory be
true, I shall not be abashed, that he had rather choose (when the Angel did
give unto him the choice of two things) to be in pain and sickness all his
life then two days in Purgatory, because that he prayed for Traianus, and
delivered him from hell. For although that he complained in his Epistles, that
he is so much greeuid with diseases, and so great dolours, that his life is
unto him nothing but pain, yet nevertheless it is very casle in comparison to
be a quarter of an hour in Purgatory.


Thomas. To what purpose has the Angel given unto him to choose one of those
two pains? By doing good, ought evil to happen unto him? Has he fetched out
Traianus, from hell against Gods will? If our Priests had such a payment, for
to draw souls out of Purgatory; I belaue that they would not be very much
hot after their masses.


Hilarious. It were necessary that since they have begun the fable, to end
it, for to make it accord and Fable of Theseus and Pyrothus Verg. Aene. 6.
agree with that of Theseus and Pyrothus, who as the Poets do witness are
punished in the hells because that they would take away Proserpina maugre the
God Pluto.


Theophilus. Difference bevveene the fire of purgatory and of hell. Ric. 4.
did. 20. arg. 2. Bonau^n. 4. did. 18. Albet. 7. li. com pe. tha. ca. 2. Thom.
4. did. 21. arg. 1. and 3 er. q. 46. ar. 6.
That is yet nothing in comparison to that yt I have said. They do kindle that
fire more. For they do affirm, that the same of Purgatory, and that of hell is
al one, and that there is none other difference, but that the same of hell is
eternal touching his office, but the same of Purgatory, is not but as touching
his substance, because that the souls go out some time. Wherefore they do
conclude that not only the pain of Purgatory is the most greenous that ever
was, but which is more. Thomas of Aquin has written that that pain exceeds
and surmounteth the dolours and torments which Jesus Christ has suffered in his
death and passion. What blasphemy can be more greater? For what hell can be
more truell then that which Jesus Christ has suffered for us, when he take
upon him the curse due for our sins, for to deliver us?


Thomas. Do they not allege some place of the holy Scripture, for to prove
that?


Hilarious. Barl. sermon de p^na Purg. example Anto. ^ par. su^.
Where shall they find it? their probatien is an example which they do commonly
put forth and propounde taken out of the chronicles of the Iacobins, of a
Friar of that order who appeared unto a very friend of his, by whom being
asked of the pains of Purgatory, answered that if all the world and all the
visible things were on fire and did burn, yet it could not be compared, to the
pain and beat of Purgatory: bost thou not think that the probation is
worthy of such Theologians.


Eusebius. Although that there were no Scripture, and that we had but our
natural sense the which God has given Man's reason ye foundation of Purgatory.
unto us, yet we might well judge that it is convenient and necessary that
there be a Purgatory, in which the sinful men may he punished, for those
sins of which they have not ended their penance. For it is not written with
out cause: Nullum malum impunitum: Nullum bonum irrenumeratum. That is, there is
none evil which shall not be vnpanished, nor no goodness which shall not be
unrewarded.


Theophilus. Although that those words are not reryted in the scripture, after
that manner as thou do receyte them, yet nevertheless. I am content to allow
it to be true. I do not deny, but that God is as just as he is merciful. The
Justice and mercy of God.
For otherwise he could not be God. But we ought to consider, by what means he
does exercise his justice and mercy toward us. There is no doubt, but ye our
sins do deserve Esa. 9. b. 6 John. 3. d. 34. Romans 3. 24. Gala. 3. d. 2^.
great punishment. And therefore has he given unto us Jesus Christ his son,
and has delivered him to death for us, that our misdeeds should be punished in
him, and that he do satisfy for us to his sovereign justice, for to obtain
of him grace and mercy in his name. Thou see the^ yt there is none Punishment
for sins.
evil which is not unpunished, for to satisfy ye rightousnes and justice of
god: but there is difference in ye manner of punishing For^^ he that has b^ne
the evil believes in Jesus Christ, and has full hope and trust that through
his death and passion he has obtained of God pardon and remission of his
sins, through that says, he is the true member of Jesus Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12
John. 15. Gala. 3. ^^
Christ, and adopted for the son of God. If he be a true member of Jesus
Christ, and a true child of God, he and his sins are punished in Jesus
Christ, who for that cense, has borne the judgment and tursse of God, for
all the elect. But if the sinner be an Infidel, and which has no part with
Jesus Christ, the wrath of God falls John. 3. d. 36
upon him and he cannot escape the Judgment of God, but that his sin be
punished in himself, in hell fire. And even as our evil deeds are punished
in Jesus Christ, so are our good deeds rewarded in him, and by him allowed The
revvard of good deades.
of the celestial Father, which crowns his good works in us. For nothing
pleases him but Jesus Christ his well-beloved son, in whom he deliteth, and no
works Mat. 3. ^^^
can be found agreeable, but his. For there is no goodness but in him.
Wherefore if we will have any good thing in us, we must seek ^ borrow it of
him. And if we will that our works be pleasing unto God, it is necessary that
Jesus Christ do them in us through his holy spirit: or otherwise, the heavenly
father cannot allow nor receive them for good, nor yet give unto them reward.


Eusebius.


Theophilus. I do fear moreover, that the doctrine which thou hold, does
induce and lead them unto that which Purgatory the nourse of sin.
thou say For how many has there been, who having that opinion to satisfy
in Purgatory for their sins, have given themselves unto al vices, during
their life, hoping that they will provide so well to their affairs, that for
gold and silver, they shall be incontinentlye delivered from the pains of
Purgatory after they be dead? And so by that means they did think, that it
was not needful to study to do good works. For they did hope to find in
their purse all that that should be needful for their salvation. But for
as much as it is a question touching Good works.
good works, whom do thou think can do them best, either the servant
which laboreth through fear and compulsion, who would do no labor if he
feared not to be beaten of his master, or if he hoped not but to receive a
good reward: or the son, who through an entier love toward his father, and
takes pleasure in none other thing, but to serve and honor him well, because
of the natural love that he bears unto him, and of the knowledge that he has
of the great goodness and benefits that he has re^^ed and does receive daily of
him, without any servile fear, but only for the reverence and good affection
that he has toward him?


Eusebius. There is no doubt, that those which serve only for fear to be
punished, or for hope of reward, cannot serve faithfully nor lawfully: but are
as the servant which serve to please the eye, and do good service whilst
Collo. 3. d. 22.
that the master is present: notwithstanding they have no good will toward him.


Theophilus. Yet nevertheless those which do follow the Works, Hipocrites.
doctrine, the which thou hold, are altogether like unto those here. For
either they do give themselves altogether to their pleasures and delites,
hoping that they will satisfy by money for their sins, and redeem
themselves? or if they study to do well, they do it not but through fear, as
a subject does serve a Tyrant, fearing ^o fall into his hands: or as
Merconaries and Hirelings, not for the love they have to god, but for the love
they have to themselves. And so by that means, either they do make GOD The God
of the Hipocrites
like unto a cruel Tyrant, or to a polling Judge and thief, who for money
absolueth the evil doers, and as a companion of thieves, takes his part of
the hootie with them: or else they make themselus god, and do worship the
works of their hands, since that by them they do save themselves, and merit
Paradise. Wherefore they have no need of Jesus Christ. I demand of thee,
which art but a sinful man, if thou would take for a true friend a man which
should do unto thee service only for y^ fear that he has of thee, least thou
should do unto him hurt? or for hope that he should have to fear thee
better, wout which he would make none account of thee, nor would not set by
thee? Eusebius. I would hold him for a true friend of the kitchen, Friends of
the kitchen.
which loves more his belly the^ me, of who^ he is a friend, and not of me.


Theophilus. And yet nevertheless, if thou do well consider the nature of the
Hipocrits, and Pharisees, who do attribute so much unto their works, thou
should find them of such an amitye toward God, for whose love they do
not that they do, but for the love of themselves: and do not serve god, but
after y^ manner as the beasts do serve men, or for the fear that they have to
be beaten, or for the nurrishment and food that they do receive. But without
staying our selves any longer upon that point, let us return unto our talk
of the Limb: since that thou put the Limb for the one, and Purgatory for
the other, what difference do thou put between those which were in the
Limb, and those which were in Purgatory, since that the one and the other,
according to your doctrine, were deprived of the fruition of God? I do greatly
fear, that in the end thy Limb and Purgatory will become hell For if the
holy fathers, as well Patriarchs as Prophets, were deprived from such a goodness,
wherein did they differ from the dampened and And in like Difference between
the L^^ he. Purgatory and hell.
manner those whom thou ledgest in Purgatory, what need have they of any more
greater torment, or of any other fire, for to torment them? And what solace can
they have more then y^ damned, if they were deprived from y^ loves of Paradise.
and yet besides that, to be detained in the fire? Hilarious. But at that time,
for that there was no Mass nor papistical Priests, for to pray and do
sacrifices for the dead they should continue a long time in those pains and
torments. And which is more, since that in that time, none could enter in
Paradise, when they had accomplished the time of their pains in Purgatory,
whether went they, when they departed from thence? They could not but depart
from one hell, for to go into an other, that is to say, from purgatory to the
Limb: where they were compelled to abide always locked fast, in the prisons
of Purgatory, until the coming of Jesus Christ.


Theophilus. For to speak the truth, I find no great difference, between
hell and those other two lodgings.


Eusebius. But there is great difference. For these here do hope to come once
unto the eternal felicity, from y^ which the dampened are altogether deprived.


Theophilus. There is then none other difference, but that the one are defeined
and kept in hell, and dampened for ever: the others are not but for a time. And
so your Limb, and Purgatory shall be in nothing different from the hell of the
Origenistes and Catabaptistes, who were The hell of the Origenists and
Catabaptists
in this foolish and false opinion, that there is neither man nor devil
dampened perpetually, but that all those which are deteyned in hell, after a
long space of time, shall be delivered, and finally all saved.


Thomas. Now bare they say y^, since y^ the holy scripture witnesses so
euidentlye, that the Esa. ^^. g. 24 Mat. 25. d. 46 Mar^ 9. 8. 48. Apo. 14. c.
^l.
pains of hell are eternal and y^ our lord Jesus Christ called y^ hell fire,
eternal and inextinguible?


Theophilus. What other reasons have y^ heriticks, for to fight against y^
verity the^ their humain opinions? or some place of y^ holy scripture,
depraved and corrupted by their false understanding? They have no building or
fou^datio^ but y^ it is easy to overthrow. But we have not now to dispute
against those old Origenistes, which are raised up again of y^ Catabaptistes,
y^ which are already vanquished enough, but we have to work against the
papists, who^ by good right we may compare unto those, and call the^ new
Origenistes as well as y^ Catabaptists There is no difference, but that the
Catabaptistes are not so much covered and disguised, and that they do raise up
again too openly the old errors and heresies, ye which are taken all ready
for condemned. But the Papists have found an other mask, and an other manner
to proceed, by which Satan in them, has found the means to redress and
amend that bell of the Origenistes, in dysguising only a little the building
after an other sort. For when all shall be well considered, I know not wherein
those whom you lodge in the Limb and Purgatory do differ, from those whom ye
Origenistes and Catabaptistes did hold and account for dampened: except you will
say, that the pain and hell of the one, continues more then of the other.


Eusebius. There is a great deal more. For notwithstanding that al were
tormented, yet nevertheless those which were in the Limb, were a great deal
less, then those which were deteyned in Purgatory. For there is no fire in the
Limb, and they have none other pain, saving that they cannot yet see the face
of God and have the full joy and The pain of the Limb
fruition of Paradise, the which they do farye for, much desiring it: which
was unto them a great torment, as unto every one which tarieth for the
goodness that he desires, and cannot have it so soon as he would. In like
manner those which were in Purgatory, and are yet at this The pain of
Purgatory
present, do not suffer so grievous torments without comparison, as the dampened
that are detained in hell fire: But they have yet nevertheless more fire then
those which were in the Limb.


Theophilus. Thou shall be yet compelled to come unto my sayings. For what
other thing may I conclude, by thy words, but that there is three helles,
between which three is no difference, but that the one os more cruel then
Three helles.
the other, as the torments and prisons of the Tyrants are. For Theologians do
affirm that there is two sorts of Poena damni. and poena sensus Leo de viim.
ser uim sest. mort.
pains in Purgatory, to wit, the pain of Dam, and the pain of the sense. By
the pain of Dam, they understand the damage and hurt that the souls do
receive for the long tarying and let that they have, to see the face of God,
and to be in possession of the joys of Paradise. By the pain of the sense,
they understand the torments which the souls do feel of the fire by the
which they are punished. Now judge, what difference can be. First, what more
greater pain can the dampened have then this here? Since that your Doctors do
affirm that the fire of Io. Maio. 4. sent did. 44. q. 1.
hell, and of Purgatory, is all one, as to his substance, and that after the
day of the last judgment, Purgatory shall be mingled with Hell, and they
shall be but one self thing? Thou can not here find any other difference,
saving that Purgatory is not a perpetual hell, neither an eternal hell fire,
but that it has a certain end: and that the Limb is a half Hell. For there
is but the pain of Dam, since that there is no fire. The which yet
nevertheless your Doctors ds affirm to be so great that it surmounteth all
the pains of the world. And for to prove it, they allege Saint Augustine,
saying. To be an estraunger from the kingdom of God, deprived from the
sweetness of God, is a pain so great, that there are no torments that may be
compared unto them. And Chrysostom says: Many are afraid of the Bell fire,
but I esteem a pain a great deal greater then the hell fire, tha fall from
that glory. Thou do then see, whether I do wrong to call the Limb, Hell.
But there is yet a difference between Barl. sermon. de poen. infer.
the pains of the ancient fathers, which were deteyned and kept in the Limb,
and the children that are borne dead. For that half hell, after your doctrine,
is unto them eternal: the which it was not unto the ancient fathers. But the
better to declare and show forth that matter. I Abraham's bosme. Luc. 16. c. 12
demand of thee what thou thinckest the bosom of Abraham to be, in which
Lazarus rested? I do not now dispute, whether the example that our Lord
propounded of the rich man and of Lazarus, is alleged as a true history, or as
a parable. For whatsoever it be, Jesus Christ by the same, declares and
shows unto us the estate and condition of the elect and reprobate, after this
mortal life, and declares father unto us that which we ought to hold and
believe. He makes Two vvayes only
mention but of two places only, that is to say, of hell fire, in which the
rich man was tormented, and of Abraham's bosom, in which Lazarus was received.
He puts not forth a third place: In like manner when he did send forth his
Apostles to preach, he plainly declared ye there was but two ways, the broad
way which leads to destruction, and she narrow way which leads unto life,
saying: He that believes Mat. 7. b. 13. Luc. 13. c. 24 Marc. 16. c. 16.
and is baptized, shall be saved: But he that believes not, shall be dampened,
Wherefore I would gladly know of thee, what thou understand by Abraham's
bosom: And whether thou do take it for Purgatory or for the Limb. For thou
can not understand it of hell, nor of any place that is nigh unto it: since
that Abraham answered the rich man, that there is a great space set between
those that are in Abraham's bosom, and those which are in hell Luc. 16. f. 26.
with the rich man, that it is impossible ye one can neither go nor come from
the one of ye places to the other.


Eusebius. By Abraham's bosom I understand the place, in which were received ye
Patriarchs, Prophets and other holy men which dyed in the faith of Abraham, ye
father of the believers, Gene. 1. 13. 16 Gene. 15. b. 6 Romans 4. a. ^ Gal. 3. 2.
6
and in the hope of salvation and benediction ye they ought to receive by Jesus
Christ our Lord, the true seed of the blessing promised unto Abraham.


Theophilus. Then thou do then take it for the Limb. For Limbus in the
Latin Limbus. Signification of the Limb
tongue, signifies the hem or guard of a gown or of any other garment.


Hilarious. Yea, in deed, whosoever will believe the witness of al good Latin
authors, as Virgile and other Aene. 2. 4.
like, which often times do use it, and not in any other signification. But
peradventure the papistical Theologians would here use their accustomed
license, which is to pervert The license of the Theologia^s
and mar all tongues and languages: giving unto them an other sense a
signification, and to make a new one, as the Iargon of the beggars and
Ostirians which none understands Pedlers French
but themselves.


Theophilus. It must needs be so: or else that they do take the word of Limb
by a Metaphore, comparison and stmilitude, for extermitie: as far as I can
judge, as well I by thy words, before alleged and allowed, as by those of you
Theologians. For in disputing of those internal habitatio^s, they confess by
their books, that it is uncertain, which is nearest unto hell, either the
Limb or Purgatory. As touching the Limb of the fathers, they affirm
assuredly, that in the time when it was, it was situated in a place more
higher. And as touching that of the children, they say, that after the latter
judgment, it shall be in the earth a little above the same: and hell shall be
in the bottom: and Purgatory shall be then all one with hell.


Hilarious. I would gladly knows what meatinges and measurings they use in
those low territories, and whether they do measure the lands and countries,
by cubits, else, rodes, miles and other like measures, such as the
Geometrians and Astronomers have. At the leastwise they are more skillful in
such Art then ever they were. For they do measure the regions and countries,
which yet are not. But for a full resolution, we can conclude none other thing
by their Geomitry and description, but that purgatory and the Limb are the
confins, or the suburbs either of hell, or of Paradise.


Theophilus. If ye Limb of the fathers were The suburbs of hell and of
Paradise.
one of the suburbs of hell, it must be yt the city should be a great way
off from the suburbs. For Abraham clearly witnesses that there is such a
distaunce, from his bosom, the which thou takes for the Limb, unto hell in
which the rich man was, that it is impossible to pass from ye one to the
other, because of the horrible goulfe and depth which is between them both.


Hilarious. Peradventure we may deceive our selves. For how do thou know,
whether they do pronounce Limb, for Lembe. For Lembe in Lembus lembe. Plaut.
in Marca and Bacch. Liut. li. 8. bell. punt. and 1. ab vng. Gene ^ d. 23. 1.
Pet. 3. d c
Greek and Latin signifies a little ship and very swift: or a gally.
Wherefore it may be, that they do mean, that the ancient fathers, were
detained and kept in that Lembe as in a ship, as Noe was in his Arc, to the
end they should not fall into that deep lake of Hell, and be drowned in the
goulfe of those deep rivers, of which we have spoken off so much. For all
their ease goes by poetical faynings. The Limb of the Infants
But howsoever they will take it. I dare prove it by the old men of our
country, that it is most lykest to be true that the Limb, at the least the
same of the poung children, ought rather to be in the suburbs of Paradise,
then of hell. For they do bold for certain, that the young children, which
for wanting of exterior and outward baptism, are sent unto the Limb, hearing
from thence where they are, the joys of Paradise, but they cannot see them:
the which is unto them a meruaylous torment. Nevertheless the good old men
would not have spoken so assuredly, if they had not heard it so preached of
the great Theologians and Doctors. Now sithence that from the Limb, the young
children do hear the joys of Paradise, reason declares unto us that ye Limb
ought not to be far off from paradise, but that it may have only some wall, or
a certain veil between them both which may hinder and let their sight, either
that they do make a great noise in paradise: or else that the ears of the
souls are merueylously sharp and attentius.


Eusebius. Since that the Doctors do say that it is situated and builded in a
place more higher, I doubt not but that it approaches nigh unto Paradise.


Hilarious. In steed then y^ Virgile places the Limb of the young children
at the entering in to hell, thou will make it at the entering in of Paradise.
Aene. 6.



Theophilus. Since that we do already esloyne and make our selves so far
from Hell, I do greatly fear, that in the end thy Limb and thy Purgatory
will not be sounds in Paradise. And therefore I demand of thee again, to
knows whether that the bosom of Abraham be a place of voluptuousnes and
pleasure,. or of sorrowfulnes and horror. And whether y^ the young children of
y^ Hebrews A question of the infants of the Hebrews dead without
circumcision Gene. 17. b. 10.
and Jews, which died before y^ viii. day, which was deternined and appointed
for to circumcise the^, did go into y^ bosom of Abraham wc the patriarchs?
either into Purgatory: or into hell, or whether they had an other Limb a vary.


Eusebius. Thou do propound unto me many questions together, to the which I
cannot answer according to the order which thou have kept in propounding them.
For I will begin with the latter, afterward I will descend unto the others.
As touching that which thou demaundest of the salvation of the young Infantes
of the Hebrews, I do answer as the Master of the sententes, even so as of
the children of the Christians, which dyed before baptism.


Theophilus. Thou will then say, that they do perish, The opinion of Lumbard.
^^ sent. 4. did. 1. St vero. Did. 4. ca. necesserum. and ca filius. ^ka. de
sacra.
both the one and the other? For the master of the sentences uses this proper
word, saying: that it is most true that they perish. If they do perish, they
are then dampened: the which I am sure thou will not confess. For you do put a
difference between the dampened and them. Yet nevertheless you hold them not
for the children of God. And therefore you deny unto them to be buried in the
Churchyard. And therefore that opinion of the master of the sentences has
seemed to the other scholastical Doctors too rigorous, which do witness that
they hold it not commonly Vnde versus ex chan. de sacram Nullus aborttn. us,
null^^ niss font renatus: Infra sancta de^ debet sepel^r^ vt an lex.
in that place, but they take it for an error, the which they have adjoined
with the others which they have heaped up together from their books.


Eusebius. If he did understand and mean that they went into Hell, I will not
follow his sentencs. But I believe that he means that they go no other where
but to the Limb.


Theophilus. But was that Limb whether they went, the very same, in which the
Patriarchs were shut in, or whether they had a chamber separated from their
lodging?


Eusebius. I believe that the young children have their Limb separated from
the others: or otherwise they should have had no more pain then the others
which have been circumcised: since that they cannot yet enter into Paradise, but
are all stayed in the Limb.


Thomas. I think, that you do not keep the promise which you have made neither
on the one side nor on the other, and that you abide not within the circuit and
field, the which you have determined for your Ioustes. For you are bound to
flight by the only authority of the word of God. And yet nevertheless, it
is already a good while, that I have heard any thing of you but the opinions of
the Doctors. Wherefore I would gladly (Eusebius) that you would follow that
matter, and I desire that thou would prove by the holy Scriptures that which
thou affirmest of the young children dead without circumcision and baptism.


Eusebius. Do thou think that I speak without the Scripture? the which I
will not yet allege with my gloses and expositions: But for to give more weight
and credit unto my probations, I would thou should bear the witness of
them by the mouth of the ancient Doctors, namely, of the worshipful Beda,
speaking after this manner. He which now cries Beda. Sant. 4. did. 1. S^
vero. John. ^. a. ^.
terribly and healthfully by his Gopell: except a man be borne of water and the
holy spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. The very same he cried
by his law: the soul of him whose foreskinne of his flesh is not circumcifed,
Gene. 17. c. 14
shall perish from his people: because he has broken my testament. Behold a
clear probation, as well for the children of the Jews, as for those of the
Christians.


Theophilus. How understand thou that threatening against those which were
not circumcised? For God has prefired eight days, for to circumcise the young
children. Now if they do dye before the eight day, and the term prescribed
of God, do thou think that the salvation of those children be in danger?


Eusebius. The word of God excepteth neither little nor great, but speaks
generally to all men.


Theophilus. But there could have been no fault, but in the transgressio^ of
the commandment of God. Since then that God had determined for them ye viij.
day, wherefore ought the young children to perish, which died before that
term? For since that God had lymitted the day. I doubt not but that those who
should have circumcised them before the day prefired should do contrary unto
the commandment of God.


Eusebius. I accord unto thee therein, in those which should have done that
without necessity, and Sent. 4. did. 1. S^ vero.
without the danger of the death of the young child. But I believe, that when
there should have been any danger they might circumeise them before that term.


Theophilus. And I believe the contrary. For I can prove my reason by the
Scripture, the which thou can not do thine. If it were so then as y^ say,
it should follow y^ god was not well advised, when he made that ordinance, and
that the Isralites should be wiser by right: and that he should do great
wrong unto them, since that he has not advertised them of that doing, and that
he gave none exception. It follows in like manner. if the circumcision had
been so necessary unto salvation, that all the women children and women
should perish, fith that they dyed all without circumcision: the which yet
nevertheless no man dares to affirm, since that there has been so many holy
women, of whom the holy Scripture bears us witness.


Eusebius. It is easy to reprove thy consequence. For in the institution of
the circumcision, it is spoken expressly of the males, not of the females.


Theophilus. The law yet nevertheless says, every soul, every person.
Wherefore if we must take the words by rigor, without a fit interpretation,
we must comprehend the females, if there had been none other places, which do
give unto us the intelligence and understanding of the law: besides that the
institution of the same does sufficiently declare, that it extends not unto
the women. The^ if the women be exempt, because that the law binds them not,
so are the Infants which dye before the eight day. For they are not bound by
the law before ye term: or otherwise, God would not have held his peace,
sooner then of there things which were not of so great importance. But when the
eight day was come, I doubt not, that if through contempning, negligence and
dispising, the circumcision had been omitted, but y^ the Lord Rebellion and
dispising the commandment of God.
would have been greatly offended: not by reason of the sign, but through the
rebellion and dispisinge of his word, the which he takes in great
displeasure: as he has showed the example of him that gathered sticks on the
sabbath day. It seemed that y^ fault was not great, (...). 15. d. ^^
nor such as though he had committed a murder. And yet nevertheless god
punished him with a cruel death, as though he had committed the greatest crime in
the world. It is then an other thing to have omitted any ceremony commanded of
God, through negligence, dispising and rebellion, or to have left it undone,
through necessity, or because that it was not possible. For when there is let,
such that man cannot avoid Necessity
it, and that this mind and will was good, and has trauayled as much as he
can for to execute it. I do not beleene yt god imputes the fault unto him
unto whom he was not bound. For the salvation of men consists in the
alliance which the Lord has made with us, by the which does the small and
great are received and joined together in the company and fellowshippe of the
people of God. We do not deny, but that that alliance is signed and sealed
by the sacraments, and that the baptism is but the sign and seals among the
Christians, as the circumcision was among the Jews. But it follows not
therefore that it is firm and certain enough without that sign and seal.
Wherefore there is no doubt, but that those which do shut up the kingdom of
heaven unto the infants for want and lack of the sign, do unto them great
wrong, and do beely the promises of God, which by them have pronounced them to
be his, before y^ they were borne, saying: that he is our God and the God of
our children. And therefore those which do make that outward baptism Gene^. 17.
2. ^
so necessary unto salvation, what other thing do they make of it but a
witchcraft and Magical enchauntments, attributing unto the material and
corruptible elements that which apperteineth unto the only virtue of God, and
whereto serves it? Wherefore we may well know the error and ignorance of the
scholastical doctors, which have judged that baptism Iul^. 4. sent.
necessary unto salvation. For which cause they have also permitted and
establyshed, that the women might and ought to baptize in time of necessity.
But the ancient Patriarchs an holy Prophets were not in that superstition:
and were not ignorant of the virtue and efficacy of gods promise and
allyaunce, nor of the reasons by me alleged: or otherwise the Israelites
should have greatly failed, and chiefly Moses, which was the Prophet and
conductor of the people of God, to Circumcision deferred
have dwelled at the least, the space of forty years, since the departing
from Egypt, until the entering into the land of Chanaan, without circumcising
y^ children. Yet it is to be believed, that during that time, many dyed,
without being circumcysed: and although none had dyed, did it not seem
rightly, that Moses, and all the other Israelites did against the ordinance of
god: since that they executed it not at the day appointed?


Thomas. Is it true that they have abode so long time without circumcising the
children?


Theophilus. If they had been circumcised, it should not have been written,
that Joshua caused them to be circamcised, after y^ they were entered into the
land of Chanaan. Joshua. 5. 2. 2
But by that example those holy men do show unto us, how we ought to understand
the matter of the exterior sacraments. For notwithstanding that it is written
of the Genes. 17. 2. 7 Romans 4. b. 11.
circumcision: This is mine alliance with your generations by an everlasting
ordinance: and that the bay of the giving and receiving has been limited,
yet nevertheless they have well understood, that that sacrament was a
public ceremony, for to witness the allyaunce of God betwoene that people,
and in the Jewish Church, as the Exo. 13. b. 12
Pascal Lamb and their other sacraments. Wherefore when they had just and
lawful let, and that they had not the time, and place, and other things
requisite to their ceremonies, they have made it no great conscience to omit
them, and did not think that thereby their salvation should be in danger, for
that they did know that it came not through their negligence and dispising of
God. As they had S^auation with out exterior sacraments
then the females saved through faith, and the spiritual and interior
circumcision, without carnal and exterior circumcision, even so did they y^
males, knowing y^ they were comprised in y^ aliance of God, by the which, of
his pure grace and mercy, he grants salvation unto his elect: y^ which he
gives through his holy spirit, as it pleases him, as well with out sacraments
as with sacraments as it appears in Cornelius and those which were in his
house, which have received y^ holy Ghost before they were baptized of S.
Peter. Cornellus. Act. 10. f. 44.
But yet they nevertheless did not despise the exterior ^ outward baptism,
although y^ they were already baptized by y^ holy Ghost For y^ man should be
very proud, which Honor unto y^ sacraments. Daniel. 9. a
would despise y^ baptism ordained by Jesus Christ, since y^ he himself, which
is y^ holy of y^ holiest, who alone can sanctify the sinners, and baptize with
the holy Ghost and with fire, did not despise the same of S. John Baptist. But
if the Mat. 3. c. 13
elect, as well little as great, which have been among y^ Gentiles The gentiles
saved without circumcision Ion. 35. 3. and 4 4. Reg. 5. a. d 14 4. Reg. 24. a
Job. 43.
and Panims, have been saved without exterior circumcision, as it appears in
y^ Ninevites, Nahaman, Job, Nabuchodonosor and other like, which have had
knowledge of God, and have had their recourse unto his mercy, wherefore shall y^
same privilege be denied unto those that be has, not only elected through his
eternal election, belonging unto all his servants, but also he has given unto
them y^ witness by the exterior sacraments, if they had such lettes and
excuses, and as reasonable as the Gentiles and Panyms could have? For why were
not the elect which were among y^ Panims accused, in being not circumcised, but
because that they were not in the land of Israel, nor in the visible church,
and among y^ people which he had chosen, unto whom he commanded such things.
If they had been among the Israelites, and that they might have communicated
with them, it had been requisite to be circum^^sed, and to use the same
sacraments. But when they were in a place, in which they had not that exterior
mym^re, nor could not have it, the Lord was contented with the means that it
pleased him to give unto the. Now if such necessity happened unto the
Israelites, I doubt not, but that the obli^ation of the law has ceased, when
the causes, for which it was given are ceased: and the spiritual circumcision
of the heart, suffiecth for it self and for the exterior, and the spiritual
sacrifices, for the material. For when they were in y^ wilderness, and that they
must be ready every day to remove their host and household stuff every hour,
when God commanded them they did well Judge, y^ God would not y^ they should
be murderers of their young children, whom they could not circumcise, but y^
they would be very sick and in danger of drath, if they had not had time and
place to look well unto them, as we may presume, by the Sichemytes, who were
so sick after Sichemites Genes. 34. d. 26
their circumcision, y^ they could not defend themselves against y^ two sons
of Jacob. And therefore Moses has well considered, y^ the circumcision was
made for man and Mat. 12. a 1 Mar. 2. d. 27 Luc. G. a. 5 John. 7. c. 22
not man for y^ circumcision, as he writes of y^ sabbath. And also y^ the
people were not in place, where they might have their church garnished and
bewtified as it ought to be. Then if y^ Jews, which had such express
commandment had very well such dispensation and exception, shall we put the
Christians and their young children in worse condition then y^ Jews? I cannot
marueil too much, of y^ question which y^ Theologians made, to wit, whether we
ought to account The question of the Theologia^s Gers in Flo. de baptis ca de
t^s na de con. did. 4. ca. ad. lunina 30. q. 1.
and take an Infant to be baptized, which for want of water should be cast into
a well, in pronouncing the sacramental words, which apperteine to the
substance and form of the sacrament? Upon which many Canonists and
Theologians answered y^ he was: and said y^ the same has been some times done.
Although y^ there are other of diverse opinions, and which do not take such an
Infant for to be baptized. Hillar. If I were y^ Judge in y^ cause, I would
condemn to death, as an homicide, him y^ should so cast away and kill y^ infant.


Theophilus. We may well know by such questions and theological resolutions, of
what spirit the doctrine which thou mainteinest Eusebius. proceeds, y^ which
puts such necessity in the exterior baptism, that those which do uphold
and follow it, are constrained, even to murder the Infauntes: or at the
least, they are in doubt and perplexity, either to kill them or drown them
after that sort, or to suffer the^ to die, doubting that they are lost and
rejected of God. I am much abashed, how God is become more cruel in this time
of grace and mercy, toward the children of the Christians, after the
manifestation of Jesus Christ his son, then he The condition of he children
of the christians.
has been toward the children of the Jews, before his coming.


Eusebius. What is he, that says that God is more cruel toward the children
of the Christian, then toward the children of the Jews?


Theophilus. Thou, and those which do follow the doctrine which thou vpholdest
and mayntainest. It is most true, that you do not speak it openly, but your
doctrine imports no less. For what rigor should God do, against the little
Infants of the Christians, if for want of being w^tte with a little water, they
were deprived eternally from the Joys of Paradise? I have already sufficiently
proved, that the children of the Jews, were not bound unto such necessity:
although that the commandment of the circumcision gives an express term,
the which is not in the baptism: wherein then ought the children of the
Christians to be more culpable, then those of the Jews? If it has pleased
god, to send unto the mother, any adversity, or sickness, which was the
cause that she has brought forth her child before her full time, what fault
can be in the child? and what consolation does your doctrine bring unto the
poor mother, being already sufficiently scourged and afflicted of the hand of
God, to make her believe that her child is condemned unto perpetual exile,
and banished from Paradise for ever? And that he is detayned in the Limb, in
the which without ceasing he curses Father and mother? At the least wise the
Carhards have preached and persuaded them so.


Thomas. Yea; I have heard them preach more over: that is to say, that it were
better that a Town, a Ceuntry, or a kingdom were drowned, then an Infaunt
should dye without baptism.


Theophilus. If the Infant did come unto the age of discretion, and that he
despisoth the baptism, I would not excuse his infidelity and rebellion. Or if
the father and mother, thorough their negligence, dispising and infidelity,
have made none account to baptize their child, I would not also excuse them,
but that they should yield them selves greatly culpable before God, and worthy
of grievous punishment. But I will not, yet nevertheless therefore, judge
rashely of the salvation of the child. For GOD 2. Tim. 2. c. 19
knows those that are his. And man has not power to danipue, him whom God
would have saved. And if it has not pleased God to show that grace and
favor unto the Father and Mother, that they cannot see their child alive, for
to offer and present him unto him and to his Church by the baptism, wherefore
shall he use such furor toward that poor Infant and the Parents, which are
already enough desolate and without comfort? What injury do you unto Jesus
Christ? These Infants borne dead should not have great occasion to bless his
coming, nor to sing with those which have received him, when he entered into
Jerusalem: Blessed be the son Mat. 21. a 9 Mare 11. b. 10. Luc. 19 f 38.
of David, which comes in the name of the Lord. They should have had more
just occasion to curse and detest him, since that in steed to amend their
condition, he has put them in worfe estate then the Jews were before his
coming: You cannot deny that absurdity and inconvenience, if you will
maintain your doctrine truly, the which declares it self altogether
contrary, to the doctrine of the gospel, full of all consolation, in steed of
which your doctrine brings but desolation and despair. Hilarious. I can
speak by experience. For I have known holy wo^men, walking in true
simplicity of heart and great fear of God, which were so troubled in their
conscience, because that such inconveniences happened unto them, and that they
were so persuaded, that with much a do, one could sinde any means to comfort
them and set their conscience at rest and in quiet: what soever things (...)
say unto them. Although that one told and affirmed unto them, that our Lady of
Lausanne showed grace unto the Infant, and that those which were present did
witness unto them of the goodly miracle that she had done in raya^ng to life
the Infant for to baptize it being dead, afterward did put him in the grave,
yet nevertheless all that could not assure them: and they could not be at
rest in their conscience, until such time as thorough the preaching of the
Gospel, they were delivered from those false oppinions of Caphards and
deuillishe doctrines.


Theophilus. That is that which satan and the false prophets do desire, the
consciences should be troubled and desolate: for then gain they most. They
have of me^ that they desire: and their fishing is best in troubled water.
Eusebius. Thou have concluded that according to our doctrine it should follow,
that Jesus Christ should have impaired the estate of the Christians. But
wherein? For those of the Jews shall no more enter into Paradise, then those
here.


Theophilus. If they went into Abraham's bosom, by the which thou understand
the Lymbe, there was no more greater punishment for them, then for the others
which were circumcysed: since that all do go thither indifferently: as I have
sufficiently showed unto thee. Afterward those which then were in the Lymbe,
hoped to be delivered, the which is denied unto the poor children of the
Christians. Wherefore it should follow, that Jesus Christ should rather come
for to show and bring unto them the wrath and judgment of God, then his grace
and mercy. Furthermore, those which were in Abraham's bosom, were not without
having some taste Consolation and comfort in Abraham's bosom
and perticipation of the Joys of Paradyse: as it appears plainly, by the
words of Abraham, answering unto the rich man after this manner: Thou have had
pleasure in this world. Wherefore thou must how suffer, Luc. 10. f. 25.
and that the chance be turned. And contrariwise Lazarus has suffered great
tribulations and iniseryes. Wherefore now it is meet that he be at rest and
joy. Thou can not deny but that these words are true. If they be true,
thou art constrained to confess, that in Abrahames bosom is consolation, rest
and joy. And how can these things be, out of the kingdom of GOD, Romans 14. c.
17
which is righteousuesse, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost?


Eusebius. I have not agreed to thee that the children of the Jews, being
dead without Circumsition, should go unto the Lymbe of the fathers, but into
another.


Theophilus. It behooves then to forge Lymbes. But where is the witness of the
Scripture, for to prove the same? And do the children of the Christians go
straight way unto the Lymbe of the ancient fathers?


Eusebius: No.


Hilarious. Then there is presently a chamber to heir.


Theophilus. Do thou not know into what dreams and foolishness that
doctrine does lead you? Truly I am ashamed. Wherefore I pray thee, that thou
do hold thy self content with that that I have answered unto thee: and that
now thou do come unto the question which I have propounded unto thee, to wit,
what difference thou put between the bosom of Abraham and Paradise?


Eusebius. I do not mean to pass thy question without aunswering unto it. But
thou let slip the principal objection which I have made unto thee,
without having satisfied me therein. John. 3. a. 5
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of GOD. Does he not by those words
openly declare, that the baptism of the water is necessary unto salvation?
And Whether baptism with water be necessary to salvation
that he which shall not be baptized with water, cannot enter into she kingdom
of heaven. For he has not only said: he that shall be borne a new of the
Spirit, but he has also added, the water, for to declare that the one and the
other are requisite. I confess^ that the water without the spirit suffiseth net:
and that the vis^^l^ (...), without faith, cannot save. For it is first
sayd^^^^ th^^ (...) afterward there is added, and is baptized shall be saved.
But I cannot understand, Marc 16. c. 16.
but that the baptism of the water is in like manner necessary unto
salvation. Or I know not to what end Jesus Christ pr^tended by those words,
that he has answered unto (...).


Theophilus. Before we do pass any farther, note d^^ygently, that
notwithstanding that Jesus Christ has said: Marc. 16. c. c. 16.
He that believes and shall be baptized shall be saved. Yet nevertheless in the
contrary proposition which follows he has not re^terated the baptism. He
has not said: he that believes not and shall not be baptized, shall be
condemned: But has made only mention of the faith and of the believing,
showing that without the same, none can be delivered from condemnation: the
which he has not affirmed of the baptism. And yet nevertheless he speaks
there of the outward and visible baptism: And not only of the same of the
young children, but of the ^lde and great ones, unto whom the apostles were
sent for to preach the Gospel. Now judge, if Jesus Christ has not required
the visible baptism of the great ones, as necessary unto salvation, how will
he require it of the young children? I will give none occasyon unto any man, by
my words, to despise the Sacraments. For thou know already what sentence I
have given against those that do despise it. But I do^^eane an^ sa^ that if any
good man were, either among the Turks, or among the Idolaters and Infidels,
which had knowledge of the gospel and true faith in Jesus Christ, and that it
was not possible for him to be baptized, I cannot believe, that he should be
dampened for lack of a little water: since that he has the principal, to
wit, the faith: or otherwise, the water should have more virtue and
efficacy, then the blood of Jesus Christ or at the least as much. And the
Priest which administreth the baptism, should have as much power as Jesus
Christ himself. For it should follow, that even as the water, or the Minister
in like manner, can do nothing without the spirit and blood of Jesus Christ,
that Jesus Christ's spirit also, nor his blood could do any thing without the
water and the Minister. And so Jesus Christ and his espirit should be as much
subject unto the Minister and the water, as the water and the Minister unto
them: And so consequently, his grace and mercy shall be bound unto the
corruptible elements and subject Salvation and health bound unto the elements
unto men. After that manner Jesus Christ should be no more a true God, nor a
true Savior. And so it is easy to judge, that such doctrine proceeds not of
God, since that it ^^pugneth evidently the grace of God: the justification of
faith, and the annalogy of the sa^ie, and bo^^^ ouerturne altogether the
mystery of y^ redeption made by Jesus Christ: The which thing, not only the
ancient Doctors, but also Sent. 4. did. 4. Sunt.
the Scholasticals and Questionaries have well perceived, namely the master of
the sentences, which proves by good Salvation with ou^ visible baptism De
ciuit. Dei. li. 13. ca. 7 De con. did. 4 baptismi. De vni bap. ^^. 4 li. 4. de
bap. glo. de cons. did. 4. b^ptism^. and Cypris. Baptism of de^ ^otion Vnde
versus ex Io. chan de sacra. Indan^^^rreus, contritus ad ^^. mina templi. Si
tibi defuerint aqua, presbyter and moriatur.
reasons, and by the witness of the ancient Doctors of the Church, that some
are justified and saved without baptism, amongst whom saint Augustine
comprehends all those which are dead, and have suffered martyrdom for the
con^^^^ion of Jesus Christ. In like manner the authority of Cyprian is set
forth by the master of the sentences, by the which he witnesses, that the
says, the repen^aunce and conuers^on of the heart does recompense and suffice
for baptism unto those that have not the time, nor place for to receive it,
and they do call it baptism of (...). And for confirmation of this, he
joins to the example of the thee^e which was crucified next to Jesus: the
which says he was not crucified for the name of Christ, but for his demerits
and wicked deeds: And he did not suffer because ^e believed, but in suffering
he believed. It is then declared in that thee^e how much says a^ayleth,
without the Sacrament of visible baptism: The which the Apostle says: The
belief of the heart justifies, and Firmiter in Cristum crede^s saluabitur
ille. Romans 10. b. 9
to knowledge with the mouth makes a man safe. But then he does accomplish it
inuisibly, when the necessitye shuts up and hides the Sacrament of
baptism, not the dispisinge of the religion. He may have some kind of
baptism, where he shall not have couersion of y^ heart. And the conversion of
the heart may be in some, without having received baptism: But it cannot be
there where baptism is despised: and we must not in no wise call that
conversion of the heart unto God, when the sacrament of De con. did. 4. c.
baptismi. Sent. 4. did. 4.
God is despised. Be hold the witness, the which upon that matter Gratian
alleges in his book of decretalls, and the master of the sentences, taken of
Cyprian, and adds the same of Saint Ambrose, touching the Emperor
Valenti^ian, who dyed without baptism, of who^ he says: Valentinian. Ambro.
de obit. Valent.
I have lost him whom I ought to have regenerated. But yet nevertheless he
has not lost the grace, the which he required. Now if we ought to have such
confidence and trust of the health and salvation of the great and old men
which could not have the baptism, by a more stronger reason we ought to have
it of the young Infants. For if they be of Gods elect, it is in his power to
baptize them in their mothers belly by his holy spirit, and to sanctify them,
as it is written of Jacob, of ^eremy, Saint John Baptist, Gene. 25. c. 22
^ere. 1. ^. 5 Lu^. 1. f. 64 Romans 10 Gal. ^. c. 15
and of Saint Paul, Eusebius. How can we then absolve the proposition of Jesus
Christ? For it is general, and exclusive without excepting any person.


Theophilus. As much may I say of that that he has said of his flesh and of
his blood, speaking in this manner: verily, verily I say unto Io^^s. 6. f. 33
you, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, ye
shall not have life in you. Does not that proposition counteruail^ as much, as
if he had said: whosoever shall not eat my flesh and drink my blood, shall
not have eternal life? none can deny the same. It follows then, that all
the young children are dampened and all those which do not communicate in the
Sacrament of the supper: if the Popish doctrine be true, that Jesus Christ is
really in the host, and that we must there eat his flesh and drink his
blood, after the manner as they have taught us. It shall not be then no less
necessary to keep the consecrated hoastes, and of the Gods in the box, for to
communicate to the little children, and to give unto them the Sacrament of the
Euchariste, as the same of baptism. For the words of Jesus Christ do urge no
less in the one of the places then in the other. And if thou do think, that
there is great difference; I will show unto thee easily, that many among the
ancients, have perceived and judged it to be so as I say: or otherwise, in ye
time of Charlemaine they would not have kept the Eucharistia, for to give it
unto ye little children, when they were sick, if they had not esteemed the
thing very necessary. Yet nevertheless it is written in the book of
Ansegisus, Abbot of Liege, that the Ansegisus.
same was done in that time there, and recites the canon which was made. But
yet at this day that error continues among the Bohemians and Morauians, the
which Error of the Bohemians and Morauians
yet nevertheless the Papists themselves do not allow: no more then that
which S. Cyprian and Origene did, which did distribute the supper unto young
children, when their fathers The supper give to infants by Cyprian and Origin
and mothers brought them in their arms, in coming to communicate the same.
And they gave unto them not only the bread, but also the cup. Now let us
think if already such errors were about the sacraments in that time there,
what may chance afterward. For Cyprian reigned about the year after the
death and passion of Jesus Christ two hundredth and fifty. Those worthy men
would not have so much attributed unto the Sacraments, if they had not so much
taken to the rigor and to the letter the words of Jesus Christ. Of the like
beginning came up the error of those which esteemed and thought ye he, which
after yt he was baptized, and having once received ye supper, could never be
damned, or at the least, should be once delivered from damnation, because that
Jesus Christ has said: I am that living bread that came down from heaven: if
John. 6. f. 5
anyman eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. They urge upon the letter,
and said that Jesus Christ could not lie, which has promised the same. Yet
nevertheless Saint Augustine rebukes and confuteth their error. Behold Aug.
li. 21. de cius. Dei Error about the Supper
y^ absurdities into which men do fall for fault of well examining the
Scriptures, and when they do take them according to the rigor of the letter.
For whosoever will, according to the opinion which the Papists have of the
Sacrament of the alter, take literally y^ which Jesus Christ said of eating of
his flesh and drinking his blood, there is no doubt, but that we shall be
constrained to confess, that all those which have once taken the supper, are
all saved: and y^ all those which shall not once receive it, are all damned.
And so it shall be no less requisite to give y^ supper unto the young children
and to give power unto women to give it them, then y^ baptism: they y^ would
take the words and those matters by y^ rigor. And therefore for to return to
the place by thee alleged, by the absurdities which should follow of thy
exposition, the which do repugne against the grace of Jesus Christ, as I have
declared unto thee, thou may well know, that we must not understand that place
after that manner, as thou do expound it. For Jesus Christ speaks not in
that place there of visible baptism, nor of his institution: Regeneration
Exposition of the place of saint John 3
But speaks of the regeneration of man: and shows what thing he must have
for to be a Christian, to wit, that it is necessary, that he do renounce and
forsake his first generation and nativity, which is altogether corrupted and
cursed, and that he be regenerated by the spirit of God, and 1. Peter. 1. d. 23
2. Cor. d. 17 1. Cor. 15. f. 45
through the incorruptible seed of his word, insomuch that he is made a new
creature, bearinge the Image of Jesus Christ, the true celestial Adam, even as
he has borne that of the old and terrestrial Adam. And therefore John. 3.
2. 3
has he said: Except a man be borne from above or a new, be cannot see the
kingdom of God. And after he expounds it by the other proposition following,
which signifies none other thing, then that which he has already said
before. For to be borne from above, or to be To be borne of water
borne again, and to be borne of water and the holy Ghost, are equivalent
manners of speakings: And the two propositions of Jesus Christ, are equipolent
y^ one to the other: and there is none other difference, saving that y^ last is
more ample, and expounds the first. For since that our first nativity is
carnal, it must be y^ the second be spiritual. Since that 1. Cor. 15. f. 47
the first man is of the earth earthly, it is requisite, that the second, which
is from heaven, be heavenly and spiritual. Now that regeneration and
transformation cannot be made, but by the spirit of God. For as it is written
in that same place: That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh. That that John.
3. a. 6.
is borne of the spirit, is spirit. And therefore Jesus Christ willing to
expound unto Nicodemus y^ which he had said before: Except y^ a man be borne
from above or a new, he cannot see the kingdom of God: Afterward says:
which shall not be borne of water and the holy Ghost: because that the holy
Ghost, author of that regeneration, is given from above: which works a second
nativity in us, which is celestial and spiritual.


Eusebius. But what needed it to add the water? was it not sufficient to name
the holy Ghost.


Theophilus. Wherefore has John Baptist said, speaking To baptize with the
holy Ghost and with fire. Mat. 3 c. 11.
of the ministry of Jesus Christ: That he would baptize with the holy Ghost
and with fire: what needed it, since that he named the holy Ghost, to add unto
it the fire? Shall it be therefore necessary to constitute a baptism of the
fire, as some do say, that some Christians which are amongst y^ Indians,
Aethiopians and Persians do, who for that Indians
cause did use the fire for baptism of the fire?


Eusebius. One may well perceive there, that Saint John takes the fire by a
Metaphore: and that he understands no other thing by the fire, then the holy
Ghost, of whom he has already spoken the better to expound the nature of the
same: for as the fire, is pure and clean, and cannot suffer any spot The holy
ghost is a fire.
or filth, but purges, makes clean, and illuminateth the consciences, and
enflameth them to the love of God. For which cause, he was sent unto y^
Apostles in y^ liknes of tongues Act. 2. a. 3
of fire: the which S. John did foresee and forespeak off, using such words.


Theophilus. Thy exposition does please me very much. Wherefore if thou make
it no difficulty, to take in that place the fire, for the spirit of God and
for more ample exposition of his nature and properties, wherefore ought thou
to make a doubt to take y^ water in that place for that same signification,
seeing y^ agreeing y^ the water has with the nature of y^ holy Ghost? For
there is no less reason: but a great deal more appearance. For Saint John
puts the holy Ghost first, and the fire afterward. Wherefore it seems,
either that he understands two things separated: or that he expounds the
thing more clear, by a more darker thing: Although that thy answer does
sufficiently satisfye that objection. But in that place Jesus Christ puts y^
water first: and afterward, as if he would Holy Ghost water
expound his Metaphore and comparison, and give unto it more greater
brightness, he declares what he would signify by that water: to wit, the
holy Ghost: unto whom he gives that name for many causes. First, because that
as the fire is an element marvelous pure and clean, and so necessary unto
man's life, that it is impossible for men to lack it, so is it of y^ water: the
which is also by nature clear, pure and clean and very proper for to
represent the same of the holy Ghost. For it washes, purifieth, cleanses and
refreshes the hearts and consciences, for to comfort them, and to make them
bring forth fruit pleasing unto God: in such sort that the water causes the
earth to fructify and renoweth and makes it fertile, and washes away the
filthiness Heb. 6. b. 7
from the body. It quenches and puts out in like manner the fire and heat
of wicked carnal concupiscences, as the water quenches out the fire: and
que^cheth the thirst and alteration of the poor feebled souls, and refreshes
them for ever. The second cause is, that he would have opened unto us the
intelligence and understanding of ceremonies, baptismes and purifycations
contained in the law of Moses and of y^ prophets in like manner, by which the
holy ghost was promised, chiefly by Esaias and Ezechiel: unto Esa. 44. ^. 1
Ezech. 36. g. 33.
whom he makes allusion and has had the regard thereunto. Therefore he would
expound them unto us, and give us to understand, that those waters promised of
God, did signify none other thing, the^ the abou^dance of the holy ghost,
which ought to be shed forth upon all flesh, as a river and a flood of water,
which waters and ouerfloweth all the earth. The which Saint Peter
witnesses to have been Act. 2. 2. 1
accomplished both in him and in the other Disciples of Jesus Christ, the day
of Pentecost, according to y^ prophecy of Joel. And therefore Jesus Christ,
would as well in Joel. 2. g. 29
that place, as in speaking unto the Samaritane, and bidding those which were
in the temple to come drink of those living John. 4. b. 14 and 7. f. 38
waters, use those manners of speakings: And for to declare unto us in like
manner, to what end he has instituted the sign of the water, in the
baptism. And that it is true, I do take Saint John for a witness: who
expounding the words of his Master, says: that he understands by those
waters, y^ holy Ghost y^ which the believers ought to receive. Thirdly, by that
form of figured speaking, be teaches us in like manner, what the Christian
man ought to be, that is, regenerated by the holy Ghost, setting forth the
water and the wind, which are bodies more subtle, thinner, cleerer, and purer
then the earth, which is an eleme^t more weightier, vnpurer, thicker and
materyall. These words then do signify as much as if he had said, that in
steed of that weighty, earthlye, carnal and corruptible man, we must be
regenerated into a new man, heavenly, spiritual and perfect: as much
differing from this here which is earthly and fallinge, as the water and the
wind do differ from the earth: And it must be that the same is done by the
holy Ghost which is the true water, which makes that purification in us.


Eusebius. Thy exposition is not without a fair show. But ought I therefore
the sooner to receive it, then the same of the ancient Doctors, who in that
place by the water, have understood the baptism which is given by the
water: and chiefly Saint John Chrysostom.


Theophilus. I am well content, to magnify with the ancients In. Io. ca. 3
hom. 24.
the Sacraments, as much as shall be possible: So that thou will understand
them so as they themselves would they should be understood. For although that
I would receive the exposition of Chrysostom, it follows not therefore, that
by the same one may conclude, the element of the water to be so necessary unto
salvation, that without the same, man cannot obtain it. For we must consider,
that when the scripture and the ancient Doctors do speak of the sacraments,
they have not regard only The style of the scripture and of the ancient
Doctors touching the sacraments
to the outward sign, but do stay themselves principally upon the thing
signified by them, the which they do understand properly. And therefore
following their intellygence, we may expound those words after that sense, as
if Jesus Christ did say: he which shall not wash away his sins, which shall
not receive truly the holy Ghost, and which shall not be received into my
Church, and into my flock, after the manner as I have ordained that he
should do by the baptism, shall not enter into the kingdom of God. It
follows not therefore, that he which shall have here all the things
comprised and signified by the baptism, ought to be rejected and forsaken of
God, if he lack but the water. But yet the better to content thee, I will
declare unto thee evidently, that not only the ancient Doctors, but also the
scholasticalles and questionaries, do confirm my sentence. For the master of
the sentences, having moved the same question which Sent. 4. did. 4. His autem.
thou have propounded, touching those words of Jesus christ, answered that the
same place ought to be understood, of those which may be baptized, and do
make none account The exposition of the schoolmen upon the place of the 3.
chapter of Saint ^ohn
of it: or that one may thus expound it: he which shall not be regenerate of
the water and the holy Ghost, y^ is to say, of that regeneration which is made
by the water and the holy Ghost shall not be saved. Now y^ regeneration cannot
be made only by the baptism, but also through penance and by the blood. Behold
the very words of the master of the sentences who understands by the blood,
the same of the Martyrs, which is shed for the witness of the truth. For your
own doctors perceiving the absurdities and inconveniences which would follow
if one would understand that place of Jesus Christ of the exterior baptism,
and to Three sorts of baptism
take it rig^rously have been compelled to say, that there should be three
sorts of baptism, that is to say, of the De cons. did. 4. ca. baptis. Glos.
ss. Bap.
water: of the holy Ghost: and of blood: by the which division, they do
confess openly, that there is an other kind of baptism, then the same of the
water, by the which man may be saved. There is the baptism of the holy Ghost
and of faith, which may be without the same of the water. Upon which the
master of the sentences Sent. 4. did. 4. His autem Aug. de vni bap
alleges Augustine, saying: Thou do demand which is greatest, either
faith, or the water? I doubt not but that thou will answer unto me, that it
is the faith. If then that which is least can sanctify, shall not that which is
greater do it better, to wit, the faith, of which Jesus John. ^^. c. 25
Christ has said: he that believes on me, yea though he were dead, yet shall
he live.


Eusebius. Objection of the necessity of baptism Aug. ad Fortunat. De cons.
did. 4. ca. Cathecumenian.
S. Augustine nevertheless concludes of the words of Jesus Christ, that none
can come unto eternal life, without the sacrament of baptism: but those which
do shead their blood for the truth, in the Church. But which is more, he
says: we do not believe that any Cathecumenian has eternal life, although
that he shall dye in good works, if he be not baptized or martyred. You do
well know that in the ancient Church, those which had received the Gospel,
and were not yet baptized, were called Cathecumenes, because that one
Cathecumenes.
had instructed them in the faith. And following that same matter, he says
more over. We believe that there is no way of salvation but for those that are
baptized.


Theophilus. I believe that thou art not ignorant, how your Sent. 4. did. 4.
q. 1. ca. 10. (...) aur. open. de ver^ contra (...) 1. p^^ce.
own doctors, do answer to that place: Among which Holcot repugneth Saint
Augustine, saying: that his exception is not sufficient, and that the man which
knows Jesus Christ, may be saved without baptism, by an other means then by
martyrdom. But which is more, he affirms, that the man which believes
himself to be perfectly baptized, and yet nevertheless is not, shall be out of
all danger of dampnation: and says that that says should s^rue hun to
salvation, although that it were builded upon a falsitie. But what is he among
us, which is perfectly assured whether he be baptized or no. How can we know
it, but by the witness of an other? Therefore the ma^ster of the sentences
answers, upon the ob^^ctions made by thee, that we must understand the
words of saint Augustine, according to the declaration that he has given in
other places, in which he entreats that matter more amply: And therefore
says he, we must understand those things, of those which have had Sent. 4.
did. 4. His autem. Solution.
the time and leisure for to be baptized, and have not done it. For if any
having faith and charity would be baptized, Salvation with ou^ baptism.
and cannot, being overtaken with necessity, the benignity and liberality of
y^ most puissant God, recompenseth Aug. li. de fide. ad Pet. and in Eccle. do.
ca. 44.
y^ which wanted in the sacrament. For when he may pay, if he do not pay, he
abides bound: But when he cannot and yet nevertheless he is willing to do it,
God which has not tied his power unto the sacraments, imputes it not unto him.

I have alleged unto thee the very words even as they be written in the book
of the master of the sentences which yet proves by saint Augustine, that the
invisible sactification, has been in some, and has profited Aug. in leui. q.
88.
them without the visible sacraments, saying after this manner: the visible
sanctification, the which is done by the visible sacrament, may be without the
invisible: but it cannot profit. Yet we must not nevertheless contemn and
despise the visible sacrament. For the contemner of the same, cannot be
sactified inuisib^^e. And notwithstanding that Holcot allows that which
others have written of the baptism of blood, he declares yet nevertheless
sufficiently enough, that he which without Sent. ^. did. ^. q. ^. cas. 10
Baptism of bl^^le
being baptized sheddeth his bleude, for the name of Jesus Christ, is not
baptized by that blood which has been shed: But that the Church holds him
for baptized, because that by the same, he has sufficiently witnessed, that he
has not despised baptism, but that he would willingly receive it, if it had
been possible for him: Since that he has showed such faith in the Gospel of
Jesus Christ.


Eusebius. I grant that thou say, as touching men of age, unto whom the
faith and repentance do recompense the want of baptism. But of young
infantes it is otherwise. For since that there is neither ^aith nor repentance
in them, they cannot be saved without baptism. Therefore says the master of
the sentences, that those which dye without baptism, yea though The sentence
of Saint Angust^ touching the children that die without baptism L^. de fid.
ad pe^re dia. De cons. did. 4. ca. Fer^missume
one bring them to be baptized, shall be dampened: and does prove it by saint
Augustine, saying: hold this for a suertie and doubt nothing at all of it,
that not only men having already reason, but also the young infants, which
begin to live in their mothers belly, and do there die, without the sacrament
of holy baptism which is given in the name of the father, the son, and the
holy ghost: or those which without the same do pass out of this world after
that they are borne, shall be punished with eternal fire. For although that they
have not had sin by their proper act and work, yet they have nevertheless
drawn unto them by their conception and nativity, the dampnation of original
The Limb of the young infants destroyed
sin.


Theophilus. Thou have now beaten down the Lymbe of the young infants. For if
the words of Saint Augustine be true, according to the sense which thou
give unto them, the little infantes dying without baptism, are all dampened
and punished in eternal ^re. They are then in hell. Wherefore it is not now
need to forge and make for them a Lymbe. By that means all the doctrine of
your doctors is here overthrown. And therefore they have not all allowed that
sentence, but have judged it too rigorous and cruel, in such sort, that some,
for that cause, have called S. Augustine, the hangman of the young In^ants:
notwithstanding The hangm^ of in^ants
that he is well worthy that they do speak of him more reucrently. For I do
not think, that he himself would that these words should be taken after
such r^gour and extremity. And therefore it is need to consider the occasions
which might have moved him to write after that sort. For if the necessity and
the impossibility excuses the great ones, wherefore shall the little ones ^e
less excusable, which have yet more excuse, then the great ones may have? For
when they dye being young, or in their mothers belly, or out of it, what fault
then was in them, that they were not baptized? has God conceived more greater
hatred against them then against the great ones? although the baptism of the
water should be as much necessary unto salvation, as you do make it, if there
be any exception for the ene, by what right and reason may it be denied unto
the others, when the cause and the excuses are equal? But we ought to
consider, that in the t^^e of Saint Augustine there might be a great sort of
people, which had not the Sacraments in such estimation and reverence as they
ought to have, (as we Errors about the Sacraments
have proved it in our time) in which some have so much attributed unto it,
that they have made of the visible signs a Jesus Christ, and an Idol. The
others to the contrary do hold them as signs, without virtue and efficacy,
no more then the signs which the soldiers do bear, for to show what Prince
they do serve.


Hilarious. But have we not had Anabaptists, which would baptize them selves
again, and have condemned Anabaptists
the baptism of young Infants, willing to defer it until they should come
unto the age of discretion?


Theophilus. Let us not doubt, that from the time of Saint Augustine, but that
there be many found, more negligent, then they ought to he, touching the
sacraments: the which thing has compelled the aun^ients to magnify them so
much. And therefore those which are come after them, not considering the causes
wherefore they did ye same, have taken the words rawly, without a fit
interpretation, and without taking beede to their manner of speaking
rethorically and figuratively, which has been the cause that they have made
Idols, as though the virtue of Jesus Christ, and of the Christian religion were
in those visible signs. We cannot deny, but that in the time of those good
ancient fathers, many after that they had known the Gospel, tarryed not long
time to cause Baptism delaied
themselves to be baptized: yea, often times until the latter end of their
life. Now they did the same, some through negligence others, because of the
opinion that they had, that thorough the baptism, all the sins that might be
in man, were defaced and put out. For that reason they tarryed as long as they
could, for to depart out of this world more purer and clean from their sins.
But which is worse, some under that hope, did take the greater holdnesse to
sin. Whom Chrysostom rebukes, showing unto them, that peradventure God will
not give Christ. in epist. ad Hebr. De cons. did. 4. ca. quando
them the grace, to have space to be baptized, if they did tarry until the
hour of their death, and if they did abuse so the baptism, as he has seen
that it has happened unto many, who thorough that vain hope and trust, have
been deceived. In like manner also has Basil the great made a sermon
expressing that matter and rebukes very sharply those which do so. Even as
then the great and old ones have delayed their baptism, it is not to be
doubted, but that for these same reasons, they have done the like toward
their children. And therefore we must not be abashed, if saint Augustine has
written and spoken after such sort of baptism, for to correct such faults,
negligences and opinions, and the better to incytate and stir up the
Christians to give their endeavors in that, as well for them as for their
little children. For that To baptize twice in a year.
cause it was auncyently established in the Church, that they should baptize
twice in a year. That is to say, at Easter and at Whits^^tyde ^ although that
the baptism De cons. did. 4.
was permitted at all t^^e in case of (...). There was yet an other reason,
which ^ight have given (...) unto saint Augustine to speak so. He did see and
pe^ce^ue that many (...) infected with the here^^e of the Pelagians Pelagians.
which did not attribute much unto the grace of God, and did (...) at all
original (...), but did greatly mag^^fie the virtues and strengthes of men.
^or which caus^ they had not the baptism in grea^e estimation.

And therefore would ^aint Augustine declare the nature of original sin,
and induce men to give and Original sin
bear more greater honor unto the sacraments. Then the better for to
manifest the same, he declares how the young infants which have not yet
committed any a^tuall sin, are not yet nevertheless without sin worthy of
death and eternal dampnation, because of their corrupt nature which they have
drawn, as from a right inheritance and proper heritage, of their fathers and
mothers in their conception and nativity. For they have been conceived and
borne in sin and in^quitie: and Psa. 51. ^ 27
can be none others, then such as the sinful beginning, from which they are
come. For that which is borne of the ^^esh, is flesh: And a wolf cannot
engender but Io^n. ^. 2. ^
a young Woolfe: a Serpent a young Serpent. And even as we do not leave off
or cease to hate a young Woolfe, although that he has not yet eaten any
sheep, or a Serpent, notwithstanding that he has not yet cast forth his
venym, but do judge him worthy of death, because of the perverse nature that
is in them: so ought we to esteem, and think that God has no less occasion
to hate and condemn us, even from our mothers belly, because of our
per^ersitie and natural malice engendered with us. And though he should dampne
us eternally, he should do us no wrong, but only that which our nature
meriteth and deserves. For although that the young infant has not yet done
any work, which we may Judge to be evil and wicked, since that he has not
yet the understanding, discretion nor the power to do it, it follows not
therefore, but that the peruersitie and malice, which is natural in man, has
already his root in him, as one part of his paternall in^erita^nce, the which
cannot please God. For although that it brings not yet forth her fruits, yet
they do remain still there, as in their root, which will bring them forth in
his time: As the venym is already in a Serpent, although that he bite not: and
the nature of a Woolfe, in a young Woolfe, how innocent so ever he seems to
b^^.

But from whence do the fruits of the flesh proceed, and the sins which
man commits, when he is of age, but of that vicious root, of that
original sin, and corrupt nature? Then Saint Augustine did no wrong, to
aggrauate that natural corruption, and to say that the infant, from his mothers
belly is culpable of e(...) fire, not only the men that are of age, if they do
dye without baptism: if he do understand by the baptism the grace and
mercy of GOD which by the same is represented and communicated unto the
elect: As I think verily, that he did chiefly understand it.

For if he would take it by the rigor, for the exterior baptism, and the
material ceremony, I cannot nor may not agree with him: since that he
^lledgeth not sufficient witnesses of the holy scriptures, for so prove that
proposition so rigorous and so repugnant unto the b^untie and grace of GOD, as
we have already sufficiently declared: But I esteem and judge rather, that
he understands by the baptism made in the name of the Father, the Sonn^and
of the holy Ghost, the virtue and efficacy and the thing figured by the
exterior Baptism, which is the true sign and witness of him, which is
spiritual and interior, as the sign and exterior ceremonye, by the which
yet nevertheless, he signifies and comprehends all the virtue of the
baptism of Jesus Christ, after the manner, as the holy scripture has
accustomed to use. For in the same Signs and figures for the things ligned and
figured
the sign and the figure are oftentimes taken for the thing signed and
figured, comprehending the whole for part because that the scripture
addresseth it unto the faithful, which do not receive the sacraments in vain,
and without a spiritual meaning: Therefore the Apostle says: All ye that are
baptized have put on Christ. And yet nevertheless, Simon the Magitian was
baptized outwardly Gal. 3. d 27 The says of Simon Act. 8. b. 13.
by Philip, and yet I do not believe that ever he did put on Christ, since that
he did not truly believe.


Eusebius. Notwithstanding it is written in the Acts, that he believed.


Theophilus. It is certain. But yet nevertheless he has well declared
af^ewardes, that the same which he has done was but dissembling, and that he
had never true faith. But saint Luke, who has written the history speaks
after the common manner of speaking, as we do say, that a man has received
the gospel: or that a Jew has made himself or is become a christian, and
has believed in Jesus which yet nevertheless may do it, by hypocrisse, and not
in deed. Yet nevertheless we do speak even as the things are showed unto
us, leaving the judgment of y^ heart unto God. So has saint Augustine
expounded that which saint Luke has spoken that Simon Magus has believed.


Hilarious. I think, Eusebius, that thou ought to content thyselfe with the
answer which Theophilus made unto thee. For it is so clear and easy, and so
much confirmable unto the Annallogie of the faith, that none can speak against
it, except he do love rather to contend and strive through obstination, then
to content himself with reason. And if thou do diligently consider, and well
way that which has been answered unto thee, thou m^ist profit by it many
ways. For by the same thou may know what ought to be the use of the
sacraments: what ought to be the true baptism and the true regeneration of a
Christian. If thou do understand that, thou shall be (...) more in doubt,
nor in (...) of the young Infant^^ which dye without baptism: But wylt leave
them in the hands of God, and (...) refor^e all unto his mercy. And if thou
be once come unto that point, th^^ shall also know the (...) o^ those which
do carry their children that are bor^^ dead (...) they did in that (...) unto
(...) of grace of Geneua, or unto our (...) of Lau^anne.


Thomas. They did also carry them unto the holy cross, and unto our Lady of
Butter. Our Lady of butter.



Hilarious. There (...) now then but a Lady of Cheese, (...) of Butter, the
which is now altogether (...). W^^ should have but a little judgment, if
we ^^^we not those great abuses, and to judge of those false (...). Further
more, by th^se same reasons thou may judge of the (...) of those which do
give authority unto the wise and (...) ^^emon to baptis^ the young (...) of
women
(...) they (...) danger of (...)


Eusebius. (...) there in that Hillanius Th^^(...) can tell thee.


Theoph^^^^. There is first of all this evil, that those that require such
baptism, are of an opinion that it is so necessary unto (...), that without
the same their child cannot be saned. Wherein they do (...) unto the grace of
Jesus Christ, and do presume (...) of the virtue of his holy spirit, and do
render public and open witness of their superstition and infidelity.
Again, they sin in that that they do dishonor the Sacraments, when they
give and bestow them unto others then unto those unto whom God has given the
charge to administer them. Wherefore they cannot fail, either on the one side
or on the other, but that they are greatly to be rebuked. For if they do add
to it necessity, it appears already into what error they are. If they say
that they do not put to it necessity, and that they do not tie the grace of
God unto the corruptible elements, and exterior ministry, wherefore then do
they give that authority unto women, without the word of God? Wherefore do
they take any other (...) then the same which is given them of Jesus Christ?
Wherefore do they separate that which God has joined together? For the
baptism and the administration of Sacraments are joined together with the
(...), and (...) be separated, without over throwing the orna^ which Jesus
Christ has put and set in his Church. Now even as the institution of the
Sacraments is a public Ceremony and joined together with the ministry of
the Gospel, so ought they to be Ministers of Sacraments
administered publyckly in the Church, by those self same unto whom the
ministry of the Gospel is committed, and which of God and of the same are
^lected pastor^ and ministers. And therefore Jesus Christ has not given charge
to baptize unto others then unto those unto whom Mat. ^8. d 18
he has commanded to preach his gospel, and to exercise the Evangelical
ministry in his Church. For it is expre^^y 1. Cor. 14, ^. 34 1. Timo. 2. d. 1^
Ecclesiastical offices.
forbidden women to speak in the Church, and to usurp upon them any
ecclesiastical office: the which thing is not permitted but unto women, and
yet not unto all indiffer^^ly, but unto those which are elected and lawefully
ordained to the same, the which he does sufficiently declare, when he
commanded by his Apostle, y^ all things should be done honestly ^. Cor. 14. g.
40
and in order. For if in y^ ^^uile administration order be required, and that
it is not lawful to exercise y^ offices, but to the officers, d^ we think y^
Jesus Christ requires less in the ecclesiastical policy? and that he will
suffer, that the same that he has set should be overthrown? Those then that
will allow the baptism of women, ought first to show in what place God has
ordained it: what witness or example of the Scripture they have. If that is
wantinge them, as I am well assured that it is, they shall be constrained to
confess, that that baptism is given without faith, and that it is builded but
upon man's opinion.

For faith comes by the hearing of the word of Romans 10, d. 17
God. If then it have not the word of God, it can have no faith. If it have no
faith, it is then sin. For all that Romans 14, d, 23
which is done without faith is sin. We may then Mat. 21, c. 25 Mar, 11, d,
30 Luc, 2^, ^, 4
ask them, even as Jesus Christ asked the Pharisees, touching the baptism of
John. Baptist: to wit, whether it were from heaven or of men. Also in like
manner that baptism of women, whether it be of God or of men? If they answer
y^ it ^^ (...) God, where are the witnesses of the Scripture. I^ they answer
it is of men, as they shall (...) constrayne^ to say, they shall be compelled to
confess, that it is the proceeded from an other author contrary unto God: ^^th
that Jesus Christ directs men unto heaven and unto God, declaring thereby
that that which is not of the one, is of his contrary. I cannot then conclude
but that that baptism is proceeded of any other, but of the adversary of God,
which would advance, women unto the ministry and ecclesiastical offices,
from which God would draw and pull them from it, for to declare themselves in
all things contrary unto GOD. Even so has he done women priests
Martionistes Epiph. Tom. 3. lib. 1. contr. Mart. h^. 42 De cons. did. 4. ca.
Baptisandi, and constat. Mul^er. E^ con^. Car^^ (...) 30. q. 3. Super quis.
Vnde versus ex Chans. de Sacra. Baptizat. laicus, multer si mors t^meatur. Est
tamen officium solum modo presbyterorum. Mortis in periculo sufficit omnis homo.
among the Pa^^ms, which have used women Priests: And among the heretics
Martionistes, who with their master Martion, have permitted women to baptyse,
as Epiphanius witnesses. Behold the examples and witnesses which you may
have, for your baptism of women.


Eusebius. I do agree unto all that which thou say, as touching the
publyke office, and having no necessytie. For the Counsels, Canons and
ancient Doctors, do not say much less, but do witness playnelye, that it
is not lawful for any person to baptize, but unto the Ministers of the
Church, as the Bishops and Priests do. But they do understand the same,
when there is no extraordinarye necessity, and danger of death. For in such
case they do dispense and permit to do it, not only unto lay men and
handycrafts men, but in like mann^r unto women.


Theophilus. We do not dispute of that which men do permit, but of that which
god has commanded. I find no necessity, but when God gives us y^ means,
and that there may be falt in us. Nevertheless if it be needful to arm th^selues
with y^ authority of men, in this matter, yet we will prove that the (...)
for v^. For first of all, (...) i^ (...) that ^^er Jesus Christ has said ^^to
(...) and baptize, Wherefore saint August^^ ^ath (...) ^^ (...) ^^^ly of the
woeman, but of the pri^^te and p^^ticul^r man, to wit, whether he do^ (...)
i^ (...) i^ (...) of neces(...) To the which ^e^ (...) the rather for to (...)
it th^^ (...) the ^eas^, D^ c^^s. did. 4. in neces^^tate August. contr. parm^.
li. 2. c^. 13.
wi^e it is a thing (...) that ^^ (...) ^ot (...) that it is lawful, but
confe^^eth (...) that there (...) ^ certain fault, although that ^ee made it
light. But he has taken it, as it happen^th (...) ^^to the good Mariners, who
through the ^iol^^c^s ^^ the (...) are constrained to (...) from their right
(...) and to follow whether the tempests and winds will drive and carry them.
There ^s no doubt, that (...) from the time of Sain^t Augustine, that error
and custom was not any thing at all received. Wherefore Saint Augustine ^^rst
not altogether condemn it. No more also durst he ^o allow it, nor
altogether excuse it o^ (...) Yet nevertheless, if we do follow the rule of
Jesus Christ, that will put us ^ut of all doub^e. Although that we yet have
on our side, the fourth Council of Africa, which has forbidden the same,
without any exception. The ^ouncel of Africa. C^nc. Carth. 4. C^^. 100.
It is most true, that in the ^e^re^s ^f Gra^ian, that Canon is alleged, but
not according to the truth: as it is written in the book of Counsels. For
he adds to it the exception, which is not in the true oryginall.


Hilarious. Although that ^here were none but the witnesses of the Priests,
they do sufficientlye declare that it is evil. For when one brings the
^hildren to ^ee baptized, they do demand: is there any thing but good? They
demand the same, for to know whether that the Infant has been baptized by the
woem^n. If it has not been baptized, th^^ answer, that all is well or there
is nothing but good. It follows then that th^re was an evil when the child
was baptized by them.


Eusebius. They d^^ not understand it so as thou take it.


Hilarious. I believe thee well, and I doubt not but that God will make them
speak, ^^ he has made Ca^p^^es to prophecy, without understanding themselves.


Eusebius. For that thou (...) thy self so much, that we have no witness of the
Scripture, how will thou the^ The example of Zipphora. Exo. 4. f. 25.
excuse Zipphora, the wi^e of Moses, who circumcised her son Eleaser, in
Moses own presence, how has then Moses pe^^^itte^ the same?


Theophilus. The example is not like, but rather against thee, then for thee.
For first, thou see that Moses did not esteem the circumcision so necessary,
as you esteem the baptism: since that he made so small account to circumcise
his ^onne, although that he had more express commandment, th^^ we have of
baptism: Furthermore, notwithstanding that that place is very obs^ure, because
that Moses rehearses the history ^o short and briefly. Yet nevertheless i^
one do examine it thoroughly, one shall not find that that example can be
better applied, then to the ^ispi^^ng of the circumcision and of the
Sa^^a^^e^^es. For that which is written, that the Lord or his Angel, came
before him and assalted him, minding to kill him. (...)ently declares that the
Lord was ang^^, because that Moses, notwithstanding that he had the ^^^e and
the occasion to circumcise his son, has not done such diligence as he ought
to have done. Wherefore the Lord punished him. But as soon as the child was
circumcised, he was delivered from that danger, and the Lord did not pursue
him any more: But there is an other reason, when the Infantes do dye, and
that there is no negligence, nor default in the parents. As touching that that
Zipphora did the office to circumcise, and not Moses, we must consider that
then Moses could not do that, because that he was pressed and grieved by the
hand of God, who would have killed him. Wherefore, for to save his life,
Zipphora laid to hi^ (...) For none other could have done it but she.


Eusebius. Now thou art compelled to confess that which I demand. For thou will excuse Zipphora bycaus^ of the necessity which constrained her: no more
also do we allow the baptism administered by women and others then the
ministers of the Church: but in case of necessity.


Theophilus. I have yet other reasons against thee. The first is that we do
not read, that God has given express commandment unto men only, to
circumcise, as he has do^e of baptising. The second is, there was not th^^ any
form of the Church, nor polici^ and public ministry among the Medianites,
and where Moses was.

The third is, that it is lykest to ^ee true, that Zipphora did that by the
commandment of Moses her husband, who feeling himself stroke^ of God,
admonyshed her to do that for to save his life. For otherwise, how could ^he
have understood and known, that her hus^ande had been in danger of death,
for such cause, if he had not aduertysed her of it. Although that Moses
writing briefly has not re^^^rsed all those things at large. But he has
made them sufficiently to be understood. Now if Moses did command her,
she did it not without the word of God: Since that Moses was a Prophet: yea
him, by whom God addressed and gave his ordinance in the Church of Israel.
Furthermore, although that it be so, yet that example is not sufficient, for to
build the baptism of women, against the ordinance of Jesus Christ: For we
ought The examples of the Saints ought not to be all drawn into a general
consequence
not to draw into a general consequence, the particular examples of Saints:
and that which by a singular privilege and dispensation has been sometime
permitted them, if we have no express commandment as they have had: or the
same occasions and circumstaunces. Besides that, that there be some examples of
holy men, the which the Scripture allows not always, notwithstanding that it
rehearses them, or if it do allow them in those there, it follows not
therefore, that it does the like in us, if we have not a certain vocation and
calling of God.


Thomas. I greatly fear Eusebius, that in disputing after this manner, the
Lymbe and the Purgatory which thou vpholdest and mainteinest, will be
altogether destroyed and overthrown. For as far as I can judge, the same of
the young children is altogether thrown down to the ground, if thou do not
help it. The Purgatory has but a little more hold: There remains now but
the Limb The Limb of the Fathers.
of the fathers, of which I do very much desire to know the resolution, and to
understand whether it be all one with Paradise. For Theophilus has already
almost proved it to be so, speaking of the estate of those which were in
Abraham's bosom.


Eusebius. I do not deny but that the ancient Fathers, which were detained in
the Limbs, had already a certain participation of the celestial joys, but not
so great, as they have had after the death and passion of Jesus Christ.


Theophilus. I hope that we shall be soon agreed and that there shall be in the
end no other difference between the Saints which are dead under the old
and new Testament, then between the living, which have been both in the one
and in the other. Thou can not deny (...) but that One only church and
eternal.
the Church of Jesus Christ has begun, thence ye creation of the world, and
the first that ever was last and righteous, and the which shall so continue unto
the end and conclusion of the world, and shall continue eternally.


Eusebius. I do confess no less.


Theophilus. I^ follows by the same reason, that the Church of the
patriarchs and prophets, which have been before the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ is none other but ye very same of his Apostles, Evangelists and
Disciples: and that the faithful of the people of Israel and those of ye
christian people are but one people and one church. For they had one very God:
one very Christ and the very Heb. ^^. c. ^
promises: one very spirit of faith: and hau^ eaten of one manner of spiritual
meat, and did all drink of one manner 1. Cor. 10. 23.
of spiritual drink with us, as the Apostle witnesses.


Eusebius. Then there shall be no difference between the ancient Fathers and
us. To what end then served the coming of Jesus Christ?


Theophilus. I have not yet said so. For I do find great difference.


Eusebius. What?


Theophilus. Difference between the old and nevve Testament.
As great as is between a star and the Sun, from the day break and
dawning to hye none: between the shadow and the body: between the Image and
the truth: between the thing promised, and the thing given.


Eusebius. Thou will yet come unto my matter. For it seems by those words,
that thou leauest to the auncientes but the shadows and figures and that thou
give unto us the body and the thing figured. There is then great difference.


Theophilus. Yet thou understand me not very well. I do not deny, but that
they had all that which we have: but not so clearly, so excellently and so
gloriously, nor in such abundance of glory and majesty: For by 2. Cor. 3. c.
1^
the coming of Jesus Christ the knowledge of God, and the intelligence of the
holy Scriptures has been more greater, and more ample then before: not only
in the land of Canaan, and to the people of Israel, but in all lands,
countries Act. ^. ^.
and nations and the spirit of God with all his gifts, graces and riches, has
been distributed in more greater abundance efficacy virtue and magnificence
then ever it was


Eusebius. Difference between the dead under the old and nevve testament.
That which thou speak off, touches not yet but to the living which have
lived as well under the old as the new testament. But what difference do
thou put between the living and the dead, under the one and the other?


Theophilus. That should be too great temeritie and rashness in us, to define
of the estate of the dead, and to affirm any other thing then that which
stands manifestly unto us by the holy Scriptures. Yet nevertheless, because
that in the same there are some places, which give light unto us of that same.
I will not make it any great repugnaunce to put in that matter, such
certain difference between them, as we have put betwne the living.


Eusebius. It seems then, that thou would say that the gates of Paradise
were no less open, before the death and passion of Jesus Christ then
afterward. And that there was none other difference, between the heavenly
joy and fruition of the ancient fathers, and of the Christians that are dead,
saying that now all have it more ample and more excellent.


Theophilus. As for my part there where I have not the scripture well
expressed, I do leave unto every one his free judgment, so that it be ruled
by the word of God. Touching my part, I will expound unto thee, that that I
can draw and comprehend out of the holy scriptures, by the which it is
sufficiently made known unto us, that notwithstanding that Jesus Christ has
been immolated and offered upon the Cross for to satisfy the righteousness
of God for us, at the time which was ordained him of the father, yet has he
been The sacrific^ of Christ is eternal. 1. Cor. 5. b. 7 Heb. 13. b. 8
ne^erthelesse killed and offered in the presence of God, from the beginning of
the world. For it is written: Jesus Christ was yesterday and to day, and the
same contynueth for ever. By those words, the Apostle comprehends all the
time past, present and to come. To which Jesus Christ himself had-regarde,
when he said, Abraham did see my days and rejoiced. For although John. 8. g.
58
that in respect of us he was crucyfied in the fullness of time, in those
latter days, yet nevertheless in the presence of God, he has been a^^ayes:
and his sacrifice has been eternally presented unto him. For with God there
is up difference of times, as in us, because that all Romans 8. c. 15 Gal. 4. ^. 4
things are present to him, and that he is above, and out of the same. For a
thousand years before him, are to Psalm. 90. a. 4. ^. Pet. 3. b, 8
him but as one day. Wherefore in the same sort as the death and passion of
Jesus Christ serves now to us, which believe that he has been crucified
for us, although that he hangs no more in the cross, so I hold it for
certain, that it profits those which lived before that he was cruci^^ed, and
have believed that he ought to come and dye for them, even as we believe that
he is come, and that he is dead for us.


Eusebius. To what end has served then his coming?


Theophilus. Do thou yet not understand it? If a man were detayned and kept
in prison for certain debt that he owes, and that he has a certain friend
who comes to be his suertie and to pledge him, body for body, and goods for
goods, and that the creditor and prince receives and allows him for his
pledge, suertie and hostage, shall not the prisoner be delivered by means of
that suertie? But yet nevertheless, upon such condition, that either he, or
his suertye do pay and satisfy for him, at the time as shall be appointed him.
After Christ our suertie. Genes. 3. c. 15
the same manner has God done, with those good ancient fathers. For sithen^e
that he made the promise unto Adam, of the seed of the woman which should
break the serpents head, the which afterward he has r^^^^rated and
confirmed more amply and more clearly unto Abraham, Gen^^. 12. ^ 15 20. 48 2.
Reg. 7 Psalm. 40 Psalm. 130
Jacob, David, and to all the other patr^ark^^ and celebrated by all his
Prophets, and by all the sacrifices, oblations, figures and ceremonies
commanded in bys law, Jesus Christ offered himself to God his father, for to
be our pledge and suertye: and gave himself to him as a pledge, for all those
which have believed in his promises, made of him. But upon such condition, that
Iere. 23. ^. 5 and ^3. c. 14 (...) ^. ^. 47
he being very and true God, according to the good pleasure of the father, for
to satisfy his will and his righteousness, took upon him our flesh and
presented himself before his judgment at the time as by his providence was
constituted and appointed him, for to satisfy in our steed. Now since y^
Jesus Christ has once answered for his brethren believing in him, the
heavenly father has excepted it, as well as though, he had already satisfied
it, as afterward he has done it in his time.


Eusebius. Do thou think that (...) of glory in the other ly^e.
there is in the other life any augmentation and increase of joy and of glory?


Theophilus. To the end thou may not rebuke me in over rash defining of such
things, I will propounde unto thee the witnesses of the scripture, by which
thou may comprehend that which we may judge off. Mark then first the witness
of the Apostle, which says, writting of the holy prophets and servants of God
which were before the coming of Christ: that all those there, having Heb. 11.
^^.
obtained witness by faith received not the promise, God having provided a
certain better thing for us, to the end that they should not be come unto
perfection, without us. He says not, that they have altogether received the
promise: For it was made first of all to them. But he understands the
accomplishing and the fruit of the same, of which they have not been
altogether deprived: But they have not had it so perfectly, as we have it now:
For since that he speaks of fulfilling and ending, he signifies then, that
there is already great beginning of felicity: But the perfection was not yet,
nor shall be until the consu^mation and restoring of all things. For the term
of consu^mation and perfection, are relatiues, the which we must necessarily
refer unto some beginning. To which agrees the answer that GOD made unto
the souls of the Martyrs which demanded vengeance against the persecutors of
the Church: unto whom the Lord answered, that they should tarrye until the
number of Apoc. 6. c. 10
their brethren were fulfilled.


Eusebius. make me to understand that more clearly.


Theophilus. As Soon as we b^gin to know God in A comparison of the life
present and of that to come. Heb. 6. ^. 4 Io^^. 5.
this world, and to believe in Jesus Christ, we begin also to taste the
goodness of the celestial life and of the world to come: But we have not yet
perfect joy. Yet nevertheless sithence that we have once tasted that
celestial goodness we grow from day to day, from knowledge to knowledge, from
faith to faith, from good to be better, until we become unto the age of a
perfect man, to the fullness of Ephe. 4
Christ, to the eternal felicity and ended blessedness. Now if already in
this vale of misery, our soul, being charged with this terrestiall body, shut
up and kept in the same, as in a dark prison, altogether wrapped in miseries,
sins and maledictions, receives such consolation and joy, there is no doubt,
but that after that it is delivered from that prison and capti^^tie and has
put of all earthly corruption, it may grow into all goodness and perfection:
or else in vain has Saint Paul said: I des^re to be losed and to be with
Christ, which thing is to ^e best of all. P^il. ^. d. 2^
And yet nevertheless it has not her ^e^i^^tie and perfect glory, until the
resurrection of his glorious body, And that it be again united wi^h it, and
se^ God face to face, and know him as we have been know^^ of him: 1. Cor. 13.
d. 12 1. Cor. 15 d 28 1. John. 3. ^ ^ Colos. 3. ^, 3
then when he shall have vanquished all things, and shall be all in all. For it is
not yet appeared, what we shall be: but our life is hid in Jesus Christ. Even as
then, those which do now depart out of this life, have not yet such joy, as
they shall have after that Jesus Christ shall appear in glory, ^or to judge
all flesh, when we shall all arise, so by the like reason we may esteem and
think, that the ancient fathers, which have been before the comm^ng of Jesus
Christ, have not had altogether such joy and felicity, before ^is resurrection
as afterward. For if the Angels themselves, which always do behold
Augmentacion of the felicity to the Angels
the face of the heavenly father have received increase of the science and
knowledge of God and of their felicity by the coming of Jesus Christ, and
there ought to receive it more ample in the resurrection of the just and
righteous, we must not doubt, but that as much shall happen unto the blessed
spirits and just souls. Wherefore we may easily know by the same: how
great and admirable the mystery and secret of the redemption of mankind is:
and what is the excellency of the Church of Jesus Christ: since that the angels
themselves do^ receiu^ so great profit and increase in all goodness.


Thomas. By what place of the holy scripture can thou prove that which thou
speak.


Theophilus. They are sufficiently expressed in the Epistles of the Apostles
for saint Peter, speaking of that matter, says that of the Prophets and
ancient fathers, that it has been revealed unto them, y^ not to them selves,
but unto us, they should administer the things; the which (says he) now are
declared unto you by them 1. Pe^er. 1. ^ ^^
which have declared the gospel, by the holy ghost sent from (...) the which
the Angels do desire to behold. The Angel^ had not that desire, but that they
did feel a great goodness. But saint Paul shows unto us the same yet more
expressly and declares unto us sufficiently that since that the Angels are the
ministers of God appointed Psalm. 9^. c. 11 Hebr. 1, c. ^
to the health of men, which cannot be in perfect and full blessedness as we
which are their compagnions, burgesses and citizens of the kingdom of heaven
with them, neither are we also come thereunto. For even as they do rejoice over
the sinner that repents and which Luc. 15. c. 10
ret^urneth unto God: also without all doubt, since that abo^e all things they
do procure our health and salvation, it cannot be, but that they are very
angrye and sorye when they see us yet pressed with sin and death and to
strive against them in great anguish. Forasmuch then as their ^^^y^itie is
joined with ours, it is certain that theirs without ours cannot be perfect.
For it is written expressly that the saints shall judge the Angels and the
world 1. Cor. 6, ^, 2.
And the Apostle affirms, that now unto the rulers and powers in heaven
might be known by the congregation Eph^. 3, b. 10
the manifold wisdom of God according to the eternal purpose which he
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord. If the Angels then do learn yet and
profit in the knowledge of the goodness of God, the which they do daily see
to be manifested by new miracles toward the Church, so in like manner it
must be that they do acknoweledge us for their judges, and princes in Christ,
and because of Christ it is easy to know that there is yet a certain thing
in them which does seek his perfection of Jesus Christ. Therefore it is
written that through him all Christ the restorer of all things Ephe, 1, b, 10.
Collo, 1, ^, ^^.
things are repaired and restored, both in heaven and in earth. Wherein the
scripture teaches us, that his coming was not only healthful unto men, but
also unto all creatures yea unto the Angels themselves, which had no sin. For
even as the f^ll of man has drawn after him the ruin of all other creatures
and has made them subject unto malediction with him? so every creature sigheth
and groneth with him also, loo^^^g for their redemption Romans ^. d. ^^
and deliverance, the which is joined together with his. Now if the Angels
cannot be perfectly cons^mated in all blessedness without us, which are their
compaignio^s, how shall our other brethren do which are joined nearer unto us,
and which do yet t^^^e for the redemption of their bodies, and the consummation
of their joy? the which they cannot have without us, and a great deal less
then the Angels.


Thomas. We^ may also conclude by the contrary, that the tor^ents of the
devils Torments of the reprobate aggra^ated.
and reprobate do increase: and that they shall be greater and more grievous,
after the latter judgment, then they are at this present.


Theophilus. Saint Peeter does give us most evident witness, writing of the
wicked and reprobate after this manner: how will God spare them, if he have
not spared 2. Peter. 2. 2. 4.
the Angels that have sinned: but has cast them down into hell, and delivered
them into chains of darkness, to be kept unto judgment? And by and by after
he says moreover: the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptation, and how to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment. We cannot
deny, but that the devils 2. Peter. 2. b. 9
and reprobate are already in torment, and but that they are already drowned
in the bottom of hell, since that they are rejected of God, and that they are
in his wrath ^ indignation. But yet nevertheless by the words of saint Peter
we may easily understand that they do attend and ^ari^ for yet, a certain
more grievous judgment, and gods anger more fearful then they have feeled.
But for to make thee to understand more plainly that which I think, I will
expound it unto thee by a similitude and comparison taken of the very words of
S. Peter. When a malefactor has committed some certain great crime, worthy of
death The beginning of gods judgment
and grievous punishment, there is no doubt, but y^ he feels his
condempnation in his conscience, as soon as he has committed the evil deed. He
has his conscience which is his Conscience. C^nsc^^ncia (...) ^^st^^.
accusor: for a witness: for a judge and for a hangeman: and it can be none
otherwise. His conscience ^yteth and I^^^nal. Sa^y. 13. Cur tamen hos tu.
Euasisse pute^ quos d^^^ cons^^^ sacti. Meus reddit attonitos, and surdo
verbere c^dit. Occultum qu^ ti^nt^ an^mum tortore st^gellu^. Item. Exemplo qu^d
cunque malo committitur ipsi. Displicet autori prima haec est vl^^^, quod se
Iudi^^ nemo no^^ns absoluitur. Item. Nocte d^^que suum gestat ^n pectore
testem. Spartano cut dam respond^t Pythia ^ates Deuteronomy. 28. c. 15.
accuses him. Afterward he comes to be vanquished of his misdeedes, by his
own proper witness, which avayleth more then a thousand witnesses. And after
it has vanquished him, it condempneth him. And even as it constrayneth them to
witness against themselves, so it constrayneth them, to condemn themselves,
insomuch that although all the Angels and all the men of the world, would
clear them and pronounce them to be righteous and just, yet nevertheless they
cannot absolve and clear themselves, nor avoid their own judgment. Now
after y^ sentence given, it must be that it be put in execution, and that the
malefactor be delivered into the hands of the hangeman: the which he need not
to seek far, nor out of himself. His conscience with the rest, does yet
that office: the which whippeth and tormenteth him so cruelly that he cannot
have rest day nor night. If he see any talk together, he thinks they talk
of him. If he see but a leaf of a tree to wagge he thinks that they are
seriants sent for to take and carry him to prison. If he think to sleep and
take rest, he dreameth that he is in the hands of the judge which sends him
to the hangeman, and that they do lead him to the gallows. And in waking and
sleeping, he cease not to imagine and think of hangemen, ^ortures and
Gybettes: Wherefore the Prophet has not said without a cause: That the
wicked are like the raging Sea, that cannot rest, whose water ^ometh with the
mire and gravel.

Even so the wicked have no peace, says the Lord. Esa. 57. d. 20. Genes. 4.
b. 8, Mat. 27. ^. ^. Act. ^. c. 1^.
Have we not the example very evident in Caine and in Judas? From whence
proceeded that violence of man's conscience but from GOD? Which makes his
enimyes to feel his judgment and his furour, in such sort that they
themselves cannot bear it? But are constrained to condemn them selves and
despair: which is a certain witness that there is a judgment and ^ God
unto whom we must render account. The which The witness of conscience, that
there is a GOD.
we ought all to understand and know, although we should never hear
speaking of God, nor of his holy scriptures: and although we should have none
other witness but the same here: the which God has naturally printed into the
heart of every one, the which ought well to suffice us. For as saint John
says: if but hearts condemn 1. John. 3. d. 20
us, God is greater then our hearts and knows all things. That is as much as
if he had said, if we ourselves do condemn us, may not God well condemyne
us? Since that we have such a fear and such a horror does not our heart
admonish us sufficiently, that we have a superior and governor which will not
suffer such things? Since that there is not so great a Prince, not so great a
Tyrant, which feels not that hell in his conscience. Although there be not a
man upon the earth above him of whom he may be afraid. Do thou now see,
how the hell The beginning of hell and of Paradise.
of the wicked begins already in him, here in (...) world? The which our
Lord Jesus Christ, would not have us to be ignorant off, saying: be that
believes in the John. 3. 5. 6.
son of God, has eternal life, and shall not taste of death. For he is
already passed from death to life, but he that believes not in the son of
God, he is already judged and condem^ned. Does he not show us here with the
finger how the faithful begins already his paradise in this world, and
the infidel and unfaithful his hell.


Hilarious. There is nothing more certain then that which thou speak. And
although we had not the witnesses of the Scriptures, we have the witness of
nature, printed into the hearts of all, which has constrained The Fu^yes and
she devils Iuuenal. Sat. 13 ^ug. Aene. 6 Cic. in ora^. pro Piso.
the Poets to invent and find out that fayning of the furies, the which we may
call she diuelles. They do assign their habitation in the helles, and say that
they do torment the wicked and reprobate people, most horribly as well in this
world, as in the other. By the which they understand none other thing, but the
torments and assaltes of the evil conscience, and that worm which dies not,
The worm of conscience Esa. 66. g. 24 Mar. 9. g. 41
but gnaweth and deuoureth incessauntly.


Theophilus. I doubt not. But let us see how y^ ^el increases day by day. If
the malefactor be already so much tormented before that the Judge has laid his
hands upon him, before that he be put in prison, before that he has been on
the rack, vanquished, judged and condem^ned: Let us think what torment he
ought to have, being in prison, after that his process is made and concluded,
looking and tarying for his sentence and cruel death every hour. In what
anguish think thou that he is in? Do thou think that the horror that he
has of the looking for of the torments, which are prepared for him, are unto
him a great deal less pain, then the torments and the death that he looks
for?


Eusebius. Truly I believe that there is no great difference, and that he
dies so many times, as he lives hours and minutes.


Theophilus. Thou see how he is already judged, and yet he is not. He is
sufficiently judged and condemned as to himself, since that he has his
conscience, his confession, his witness and his process against himself, and
that he accompteth himself already as dead. But nevertheless, there is yet a
more greater horror to be brought to judgment, to hear the sentence of his
Judge, to be condemned and executed openly, notwithstanding yt he is already
sufficiently condemned being in the prison, yet nevertheless the Judge must
pronounce openly his last sentence: and that his judgment be put in execution.
As much may we say The degrees of the Judgment of God.
of the Devils and reprobate. Whilst that the wicked do live here in this
world, they are like unto malefactors, before that they are apprehended and
taken. When God calls them from this world, he cyteth them before him, ^or
to appear in judgment: And they are as though they were cast in prison,
lookinge for their latter sentence, which shall be given them in that great
^aye, in which all process, all causes and appeals shall end. Behold the
cause wherefore Saint Peter makes 2. Pet. 2. 2. 4
mention of the bonds and chains, with which GOD binds y^ devils, which he
has reserved to his judgment, using human and material comparisons, for to
declare unto us y^ heavenly and spiritual things. That is the cause wherefore
the wicked spirits do pray unto Jesus Christ, that he will not send them
into the deep, complaininge Mat. 8. d. 29 Mar. 5. 2. 7
and lamentinge, because that they did feel by his coming their judgment to
approach nigh. And therefore they cried: O Jesus thou son of David, art thou
come hither, to torment us before our time be come? We cannot doubt but that
they were already tormented before, as the malefactor, which is in the ^^ockes
and chains. But they have dreadful fear when they do see their Judge, and
that they do feel their last sentence to draw nigh.


Thomas. It is to be meruailed at, how the one of the matters brings in the
other, and gives understanding of it. Thou have delivered me from one great
doubt, and thou The estate of y^ souls after they be separated from the body
have instructed me how I ought to answer unto a very hard question, the
which was propunded unto me not long a go: that is to say. If after that the
soul is separated from the body, whether y^ it goes straight way into
Paradise, or into hell? For if it goes into Paradise, or into hell, it seems
that the judgment is already done, and that we must tarry no longer for it: or
if we ought to look and tarry for an other, that y^ souls of the faithful or
unfaithful, have not yet a place assigned unto them, for to receive felicity
or malediction. And therefore some do say, that they sleep until that great
journey. But thou have taken from me the doubt, and have satisfied me
thoroughly.


Theophilus. We must not be abashed, although those that sleep do dream.
But we ought rather to be The sleepers
abashed, to see those that be awake to dream, and to believe and give credit
unto the dreams of the sleepers. For if it were so, the works of God,
against their nature, should rather diminish then increase and the faithful
ought more to fear the corporal de (...) then the unfaithful: For by the
death, the unfaithful should be at rest, and the faithful should be
deprived from that portion of the eternal felicity, the which they have
already tasted off in this world, the which they ought to have mor amply, after
that they be delivered from the prison of this mortal body. I believe most
assure^ly, that if Saint Paul had thought that he must have slepte so long
(...) in body and soul, after his decease, without having more ^^^ple
fruition of the heavenly goodness and joys, then he had in this world, that
he would never have said. What to choose I wotto not: I am constrained of two
Philip. 1, c. 22.
things, I desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ which thing is best of
all. Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. For in
steed to receive more greater goodness as he desired, he was ^^mpayred and
made worse: and that portion of the heavenly goodness that he had already
tasted off, living in this body, was better for him, then to be altogether
spoiled of it, and to sleep, being insensible as a stone, two or three
thousand years.


Hilarious. Cycero was but a Panim and an heathen man, who was not very
certain nor assured of the eternal life, nor perfectly resolved of the
immortalytie of the souls, but yet nevertheless he says, that he would not
live nyntie years, in such sort, that after that he had depassed three score
years, he should sleep the residue of Tus^. q. ^^. ^
nentie years: But which is more, he adds is that matter: the Hogs
would not desire that, much less I By that account, he esteems the life
of Hogs better then that of man, all the while as he abides a sleep: because
that the sleeper is an Image of death, The Image of death.
the which always represents himself in sleeping.


Theophilus. And therefore I do conclude, that notwithstanding that the
Lord by his prouydence has constituted and appointed that the bodies do
sleep in the earth, as in their hedde, until the ressurection, that the
number of their brethren shall be fulfilled, yet nevertheless the faithful nor
the unfaithful, never are without their Paradise, and their hell: the which
the more as they do approach to their consummation and end, so much y^ more
do they increase and augment, until such time as they are come until the
latter degree of felicit^e or infelicitie: bene^iction or malediction.


Thomas, After the same manner as thou proceedest, thou will leave us neither
Lymbe nor Purgatory.


Theophilus. As touching the Lymbe, if one do take it for the bosom of
Abraham, and the condition of the ^uncient fathers, which have been before the
coming of Jesus Christ. I will not much dispute of the words, if we agree in
the thing. I am well contented to confess, that the condition of the
auncientes, as well those that be lining as those that be dead, compared unto
ours, in respect of the same, may be esteemed as a prison, in price of a 2,
Cor. 5.
palaice: If we do behold the shadows and figures, under whose darkness
they have been deteyned and kept, in respect of us: and the servitude and
bondage of the Mosaicall law, vsinge such comparisons as Saint Paul: Gas^ 4.
^. 2
who compares all this ancient people unto young children, which are under
their Tutor and Master: and unto servants which are under the fear of their
Master, in comparison of the Christian people: the which he compaseth unto the
true natural and perfect children, which are already out of bondage and
government, saying, that they have not received y^ spirit of bondage and fear,
but the spirit of adoption and of liberty, Upon which we ought to note, y^ the
Ro^. ^, ^. ^^
Apostle denies not simply, but that those good ancient fathers have had the
same spirit of adoption and of liberty, as we have received, and but y^ they
were the sons of God, and as perfect in their estate and condition,
altogether as we. But for to magnify y^ virtue and glory of Jesus Christ,
means to show unto us y^ the goodness y^ we have received by him in his
coming, are ^^ut any comparison a great deal more excellent: insomuch y^ one
may call their light darkness, in regard of ours: as he calls that of Moses,
in comparison 2. Cor. 3
of that of Jesus Christ. Touching the Purgatory, I have already sufficiently
declared what I think of it. And I do not see that the place that is alleged
of y^ book The insufficiency of the book of the Machabees for to prove
Purgatory. The example of Judas
of the Machabees, is sufficient for to confirm it: although that the book be
very ancient and worthy of credit and to be believed. For although that Judas
Machabeus had done that which is there recited, it follows not therefore that
we are bound to do the like. For the particular examples of some, are no
general rules for all: even as I have already touched, speaking of y^ example
of Zipphora. Afterward, that witness is all alone, and is there recyted,
more for to allow the resurrection, and for a public witness of repentance,
then for to induce to pray for the dead, as promisinge deliverance from
Purgatory, unto those for whom it is offered.


Eusebius. It is very true that the text says expressly that Judas Machabeus
dooinge the same, had a holy and a devout thought of the resurrection, but it
is said immediately afterward: that the advice and thought to pray for the
dead, to the end they may be delivered from their sins, is holy and well
done.


Theophilus. Yet the same concludes nothing, for the Purgatory. For according
to your doctrine, the souls which are in Purgatory, are already delivered
from their sins, and there rests no more but the pain. And therefore we
should rather say, Vt a poems saluantur, that is to say, that they may be
delivered from pains, then: Vt a peccatis saluantur: that they may be
delivered from sins.


Eusebius. Thou do not consider that sin contains two things: to wit,
the fault and the pain. I confess, Pain and fault
that the true Christians, through the faith in Jesus Christ, are delivered from
the fault. But it follows not therefore, but that they must yet bear the
pain and satisfy in Purgatory.


Theophilus. Whereto then serves us Jesus Christ. And whereto prof^teth us the
forgiveness of our sins.


Eusebius, Jesus Christ serves us to abolish the original s^^ne and the fault
of our sins, that they make us not culpable of eternal damnation, at the
judgment of God: and to mitigate and make less the pain, the which we have
merited and deserved.


Theophilus. I can understand none other thing by Grace but half
thy speaking, but that God is as a prince, who at the request of one of his
very friends, or of the friend of the Malefactor, shows grace unto the
Malefactor, upon such condition, that if he have deserved to be burned, or to
be put upon the wheel, that he should have only but his head cut off: or
if he had deserved to have had his head cut off, that he should have but one
of his ears cut off, or that he should be but only whipped: or that he
should be raunsomed with some piece of money, the which he was bound to pay,
yet besides his grace and pardon. Do thou esteem and think such grace and
pardon to be whole and perfect? or whether thou will judge that the Prince had
wholly pardoned the Malefactor?


Hilarious. Not I.


Eusebius. Is not that sufficient enough, that Jesus Christ has delivered us
from eternal dampnation, and that we do the rest if we will: or otherwise
we should be saved to good cheap.


Hilarious. Art thou afraid of that Eusebius? or art thou angry and not well
content with the goodness that God would do unto us?


Theophilus. Behold Eusebius, what Jesus Christ thou make for us, and what
credit thou give him toward God his Father. If he cannot obtain for us
perfect grace, Half a savior.
and full forgiveness from pain and fault, he is not a perfect Savior. And
God is not God. For your own Doctors do witness, and namely Raymond, who as
oftentimes as God Raymond.
pardons any thing unto any one, he pardons him wholly. For otherwise God
works not perfectly. Whereupon Vnde versus Gratta magna Det, ventam non
dimidiabit Aut nihil aut totum prop^tiando d^bi^.
they do allege the Verses which I have already once spoken off.


Hilarious. By that account Jesus Christ should not have so much power and
credit as the Pope, who by his Bulls and pardons, promises full forgiveness of
pain and fault. Grant at the least as much to the pardon of Jesus The Pope
more puissant then Christ. God compared unto tyrants
Christ, as unto the Bulls and pardons of the Pope.


Thomas. Take heed Eusebius, thou make not God a Tyrant: who being not
content to chastise and punish the revels and reprobate, cannot pardon those
which demand grace and mercy, whatsoever request one do make unto him, but
that he keeps still some root of ve^geaunce, without forgetting the iniurye
that has been done unto him, but that he receive satisfaction and recompense,
either on his body or his goods. The heavenly Father 1. Tim. 2. b. 6
being content with the ransom of his son Jesus Christ, for whose love he
has defaced and rent in pieces our bond, that our debtes and sins do come
no more in remembrance: or otherwise he should not be true in his promises,
which he has made unto us by his Prophets and servants.


Eusebius. To what purpose is it then written. That it is a good thing to pray
for the dead?


Theophilus. Since that the book is not allowed nor received for autenticke in
the true Church, that should be great folly to stay upon it any longer, if I
would not bear with thine infirmity, and content thee more fully. I do leave
off to allege a conjecture very like unto that which I have spoken off.


Thomas. Put it forth.


Theophilus. I have sometimes thought, that that proposition, which is as a
conclusion, taken out of the history going before, was not put by the author of
the said book: but rather of some studiou^ reader, which has no^ed the same
in the margent, and that it has been added to the text, as it oftentimes
happ^neth in many good authors. And I am not alone in that opinion but many
wise and learned men besides me. And if one do examine the thing well, it is
easy to see, y^ the continuation of the narration seems to be broken and
marred, and that y^ sentence has been put in, y^ which was a curtein annotation
and consequence, which some did make upon y^ text: as it oftentimes happens
in reading the books, and noting the places y^ which we would have to serve us.


Eusebius. What reason have thou for to prove the same?


Theophilus. First this, for that I see oftentimes the examples and copyes of
many books to varye: the which variety oftentimes is happened for such cause.
Furthermore, I consider that in that time there was no mention made of
Purgatory. Wherefore if we must pray for the dead, it is most lykest, that
the prayer should have been ordained to that end that they should be
delivered from the Lymbes, if there had been any, then from the pains Prayers
for the resurrection
of Purgatory: or for the coming of Jesus Christ and the resurrection of the
flesh. But I do not find in all the holy Scripture, as well of the old as of
the new Testament, that ever the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, have
instituted or ordained, that one should make any special or particular
prayers, for the dead, neither for to draw them from the Lymbes nor from
Purgatory, nor for the resurrection of their bodies. I will not deny, but
that the holy Fathers have greatly desired the coming of Jesus Christ, and but
that according to their desire they have made earnest prayers and requests
unto God, even as we do pray daily, that Gods kingdom may come, desiringe
generally, all that which apperteineth to the fulfilling of the same. But it
follows not therefore, that we must especially ordeine particular prayers in
y^ church, for to demand perticulerly all things apperteining unto y^
kingdom, and depending of the same. For in making such prayers, we regard not
our selves nor our neighbor, but only the glory of God: the which we desire
to be eralted and magnified, without consideration of our persons nor of others,
but insomuch as our health and salvation is joined together with y^ glory and
^raltation of his kingdom: But not in such sort y^ it is required or requisite
to use any other manner of prayers, tho^ those of which we have the express
word of God, and the examples of the true servants of God. And if it should
have been otherwise, it is impossible that God would have omitted it, without
making express mention in his holy scriptures, as I have already sufficiently
declared un to thee by reasons so evident, that none can gain say them.


Eusebius. Thou will then conclude for a full resolution that in the word of
God is no mention made of Purgatory, nor of prayers for the dead? and that we
have no need to pray for them?


Theophilus. I will abide firm and steadfast in that sentence, until such time
as I have found authority, or example in the holy scripture worthy to be
followed: the which I am certain, that one shall not find: except peradventure
we would pray for the dead, even as Daniel, and other good Prophets, and
princes of Judah have made confession and prayers for their sins, and those of
their fathers and predecessors: not How one man pray for y^ dead Daniel, 9, ^
4. Reg, 22. d 2. Cor 34. f
to that end that God should pardon those which were already dead. For they
cannot put to more, nor take away any thing from them, since that they were
already before their Judge: But they prayed to that end that God should not
impute unto them the sins of their fathers. Eusebius. How should he impute
them? since that he has said by his Prophet: The son shall not bear the
fathers Ezech, 18. e. 20
offenses, but the soul that sins shall dye.


Theophilus. I do agree to thee, that if the father has How the child
bears y^ offc^ce of his father.
been wicked and the son do turn from his iniquity not willing to follow
it, that the iniquity of the father cannot hurt him, no more then his
righteousness can profit him, if the father has been a good man and the
son wicked: But when the son is a follower of his fathers iniquity, since
that by his doings he allows it, he yeldeth himself culpable not only of
his own, but of his fathers also, to the which he subscriveth and augmenteth
it. And of those the Lord speaks when he says: that he will visit the sin
of the fathers upon the children unto the Exo. 20. a 5
third and fourth generation of them that hate him. Therefore, when the Lordo
did threaten to punish his people, and that he yeldeth the causes of his ire
and wrath, he 4. Reg. 17
checketh them not only for the sins of the living, but heapeth together and
rehearses also al those of their ancestors and predecessors. And our Lord
Jesus Christ menaced and threatened the Scribes and Pharisees: that all the
innocent blood which was shed from Abell, shall be required at Mat 23. d 35
Luc, 11, g, 5^
their hands. Wherefore we must not find it strange, if the Prophets and
true servants of God in their confessions and prayers, have prayed for the
sins of their fathers and predecessors, that they should not be called to
account for to kindle and provoke the wrath of God any more upon them, the
which thing in like manner has Judas Machabeus done, as the historye
witnesses, in the which it is written, y^ they found under the cotes of those
that were slaiue, jewels that they had taken out of the temple and from 2. Match
12. f. 4c
the Idolles of the Iamnites, which thing is for^idden the Jews by the law.
Then every man saw, that this was the cause wherefore they were slain. And so
every man gave thanks unto the Lord for his righteous judgment which had
opened the thing that was hyd. They fell down also unto their prayers, and
besought God, that the fault which was made, might be put out of remembrance.
For we cannot deny, but that sometime, for the sin of one man alone, God
punishes all the people: As it appears Acham. Joshua. 7. c. 18
in Acham. Which defiled his hands at the destruction of Jericho. But how
oftentimes has God punished the cruelty of the fathers and predecessors, upon
their successors and their children? as do witness as well the historyes as
the Prophecies of y^ Amelechites, Moabites, Amonites, Madianites, Idumeans,
Babylonians and of the Israelytes themselves.


Eusebyus. That which thou say should have some show, if that place did not
make express mention of prayer, to the end that those that were dead should
be delivered from their sins, as though they themselves had been yet bound
and kept in them.


Theophilus. Although that the How those that are dead are punished in their
successors.
dead, in as much as they have already ended their course, have no more place
of repentance, nor of remedy, of whom, we have certain witness in the word of
God, yet nevertheless because of the coniosiction and fellowship which they have
had with their families, or with their people, there is no doubt, but that
their sins, which do redound upon others in part, because of them, and for
which it must be that others do suffer, and that their sins be unto them
aggrauated, cannot rightly be called theirs. For notwithstanding y^ for their
part, they have received already punishment, nevertheless they kindred and
familyes, as it happened unto Achab, and to all his house. And we must not
think that 4. Reg. 10. a. 1.
punishment little, since that oftentimes, the fathers and parents do fear more
the dishonor and damage unto their children and lynage, then their own, as we
do see sometime by experience in those which are brought to the gallows, who
although they cause the^ to dye without showing mercy, yet they think it a
great grace and favor, if one grant them, that they will not let their bodies
to hang on the Gibet, for fear of dishonor and infamy: the which yet
nevertheless redoundeth more unto their parents and friends then unto them. But
they forget themselves: or rather they think that they do yet foele and shall
feel that dishonor, infamye and public shame, which shall continue to their
infants and lynage. And although that they be sufficiently tormented with
their evil, yet nevertheless they feel a great ease and refreshing if they
understand that their children have none evil: and their torment is
aggrauated and increased, if they understand the contrary. For that cause the
Prophets do threaten not only the wicked sort of their own ruin and
destruction, but do foreshewe unto them that of their children, and the
euilles which shall happen unto them, as it appears in the prophecy of Esaie
against Babylon, and others Esa. 13. and 14.
like. But for to stop all those evils, and for to appaise the wrath of God
kindled upon us, as well for our sins as those of our fathers, there is no
better prayers nor offerings then to run with true repentance and amendeme^t
of life, to implore his mercy. Behold the good prayers for y^ dead, to that
end that their sins be not counted wish ours. Although that it be after
whatsoever manner and (...) wilt take that place, it suffices more at this
present, to have showed unto thee, that thou can not by the same prove thy
purgatory, although that the book should be of the holy scripture. And if
thou will give unto it any credit, it may better serve thee, for to prove the
Lymbe if there be one then the Purgatory. But since that Jesus Christ is come
and that you confess that he has drawn the ^athers from the Lymbes, the
example of Judas Machabeus can have no more place among you: since that
according To pray for the resurrection of the body and the coming of christ
to your doctrine, the cause is ceased.


Eusebius, Put case, that there were no more neither Lymbe nor Purgatory, can
we not at the least pray for the resurrection of the dead? And for the second
coming of Jesus Christ, the which we do look for, as well as the ancient
fathers have prayed for the first, and have desired and sighed after it?


Theophilus. We may well pray, as I have already said, and ask of God, all
that which apperteyneth to the perfection of his kingdom: But to make prayers
which are called prayers for the dead, and to pray in particular, Apoc. 6. c,
10
that God would raise up again the bodies of those which are dead, and that
Jesus Christ would soon come to judgment, I have no commandment of God, nor
example in all the holy scripture, but rather to the contrary. For when the
Lord answered unto the souls of the saints (which complained of their
persecutors) that they should ^arry until the number of their brethren were
fulfilled, he does sufficiently show by the same, that he has prefered the
time, the which cannot be plucked nor driven back. And since that the thing is
altogether certain and that we are already all assured, what need is it then
to make particular prayers?


Eusebius. We are as much assured, that all things which ought to come, are
passed by the counsel of God, and that he will give us Esa. 40 c. 13 Esa. 14.
^ 26
all that which shall be requisite to our health and salvation: that all the
hairs of our head are numbered: and none shall fall to the ground without his
will: and his kingdom Mat. 10. d. 29 Luc. 12. ^. 7
shall shall come and shall be exalted above all creatures, but we may not
leave off therefore to pray continually ^ to demand those things of God.


Theophilus. It is an other thing of us, which are yet in our voyage and
earthly peregrination, ^ of those which have already ended their course: unto
whom we can no more add too nor dimynish. For all the while that we are yet in
the battle, we may empaire or amend, and we have always need to invoke
and call for the aid of God, both for us and for our brethren which are yet
in combat and fight with us. And which is more, God commands us so to do:
not that he Mat. 6. d. 33 and, 7. b. 8 Luc. ^. b. 9
knows not better then we, what we do lack, before we do ask, and that he
is not willing to give it us, but he does it for to hold and keep us in his
fear, and to learn us to sanctify his name and to exercise our faith toward
him, and our love toward our neighbor, whilst that we may serve him in
this mortal peregrination. But after that the voctorie is gotten or lost, and
that one is once come and arrived to the haven and port, to which he must go,
the cause and the occasion is no more such.


Eusebius. Thou have said before that the souls of the blessed and the very
Angels were not yet in their full glory. Also we cannot deny, but that the
bodies of the faithful that are dead are yet kept in death, since that they
are in corruption, from the which they shall not be 1. Cor. 15.
delivered until their resurrection, that death shall be altogether abolished.
What evil is it then to pray for the dead, that their body may be delivered
from corruption, and that they may have their perfect consummation in body and
soul.


Theophilus. I have already satisfied thee in that, if thou understand what
difference there is between the living and the dead. And although we had none
other thing but that, the scripture makes no express commasidement, that
ought to suffice thee, For if it were a question To pray for the Saints
which are in Paradise.
to work subtly and sophistically in the word of god, I should well have
as much reason to put forth, that we must make prayers in particular, for the
virgin Marye: for all the Prophets, Apostles, Saints, and Saints of Paradise:
Yea for the Angels, and for Jesus Christ himself.


Hilla^ius. It should be requisite then by that account, to make out of hand a
new Letany. In steed where the Pr^estes do sing, saint Michael, pray for us:
A nevy Letany
saint Mary mother of God, pray for us: saint Peter, pray for us: and so
consequently of others, we must say, O Lord we pray and beseech thee, for
saint Michael, saint Gabriel, saint Mary, saint Peter, saint Paul, and ^or all
the saints and saints of Paradise, that thou do put them in full ^oye, and
perfect ^elicitie, and that thou ^aise up their bodies to eternal glory.


Theophilus. If our d^e examine well the greatest part of the prayers, which
the priests make for the dead, even as they are written in their Messell and
Breuiaries, one shall be constrained ^o confess that such prayers cannot be made
in the name of others then of those whom they do invoke and call upon in
their Letanyes, and that they be of like condition.


Hilarious. I have heard the Cordeliers mock at Friar Friar Christopher. Mass
of Req^^em for the Saints.
Christofer, which was one of their order and covent, because that he did sing
the Mass of Requiem, for the Saints and Saints of Paradise. But if he had
known how to defend his cause, it had not been without reas^n. For he might
have very well alleged for his warrant, the Memento of the dead, and almost
all the mass of Requiem, and other like prayers which seemed not to have ^en
made to any other end, then to pray for y^ saints which are in rest. This
ma^ster Dector who would find out for us a new manner to pray for the dead,
under ^olour of the resurrection and of the coming of Jesus Christ, it came
well for him, for to mainte^^e and uphold his cause against the other
Cordeliers, which mocked him.


Thomas. Of what Covent was that Friar Christofer:


Hilarious. Of the Covent of Riue at Geneua.


Thomas, Wherefore did he sing ye Mass of Requiem, for the saints?


Hilarious Thou ought to understand that he was a man so expert in Theology,
and so well exercised in books, that he knew not very well how to read in his
own Missell and Bravery. Wherefore he could sing but the Mass of Requiem,
the which with great labor he had learned by rote of heart, and it served him
as a plaster for all sores, and diseases.


Theophilus. He did better then all ye others. For as there is but one baptism
of Jesus Christ One only baptism of Jesus Christ.
and not the baptism of saint Peter, of S. Paul, nor of any other whatsoever
it be, so there is but one supper of Jesus Christ. There is not of saint
Fraunces, saint Tybaud, saint Roch, and of other like innumerable. Now if the
Mass be in steed of the supper, there ought to be but one: and we ought not
to say the Mass of saint Paul, saint James and of other saints, no more then
of the supper and of the Baptism.


Thomas. And how did he make his mass of Requiem agree with the saints?


Hilarious. In steed where others do name those, in whose name they do sing
the Mass in their Mementos and Oremus, he did but change the names, and name
those of the saints under the title of which he ought to sing Mass, even as he
should have done for one that is dead. Thomas. I do understand his practice
now. He was not altogether without wit. And as much y^ Mass of Requiem served
him all alone, as all the other did to his compagnions.


Hilarious. All one.


Thomas. But who is that doctor of who^ thou speak off?


Hilarious. It is Monsiour the Carolus.
doubtful, which is come out of the Charbo^iere or Colehouse of Paris, I would
have said from Sorbonne. Thomas.

What is his name?


Hilarious. I would name him but y^ I fear I shall do him pleasure.


Thomas. Pleasure? nay rather displeasure?


Hilarious. I do not tell scorn to speak, For thou ought to understand,
that the man, of whom I have told thee is so much ambitious and covetous of
name and fame, that it is al one to him, so that men speak of him.

And I believe, that if he could obtain that by any such proves, as that of
Herostratus, who burned the (...) of Diana the Ephesian, for to make himself
to Horostratus
(...) spoken off, he would do no less. And I would to God that he did no
worse, then he. For Herostratus burned a temple full of Idols, which caused al
Asia to commit Idolatry. But this fellow here, as the Giants did, The war of
the Giants
would make war against the heaven: fight against God: burn his temple, and
resist the holy Ghost, and the truth that he has known.


Theophilus. He has very well declared it in all places where he has been:
But god has always confounded him, with all his enterprises. God have mercy
on him, except he be of those which sin unto death, for whom saint John has
written that we must Sin unto death. 1. John, 5. d. 16 Ismael. Genes. 16. c.
12,
not pray for. I can give him no fitter a name, then that of Ismael, whose hand
is against al men, and al men's hands against him.


Hilarious. It is impossible to find out a better comparison. For he could
never agree with any man, among those with whom he has lived and dwelled,
whether thy were Gospellers or papists: but has troubled them all, and they
have been constrained to chase and drive him away from them, as a plague and
troubler of the Church.


Theophilus. Therefore the true church of Jesus Christ has been constrained
to drive him out of her house, Gal. 4. d. 30
eue^ as Sara did drive away Ismael with his mother Agar, because that he
mocked her son Isaac, in such manner Sara and Agar. Isaac and Ismael. Genes
21. b, 9
as this fellow here always mocked the true children of God. And therefore
the Church could not acknoledge him for her lawful son, but sent him out
after his mother Agar. For he is more fitter for the Sinagog, then for the
Church.


Hilarious. What think thou, who has induced and persuaded him to propounde
so many curious, vain and unprofitable questions, for to trouble that poor
church of Lausanne, of which he thought to have been made bishop, The church
of Lausanne.
and was already by his imagination. Because that he was already old, and
that he had a gray heard, I am abashed how that he could not think well y^
those subtle Sorbonists did not agree with that poor Church, the which was
yet tender and newly planted, and but a grass.


Theophilus. I do leave the judgment of the heart 3. Reg. 2. g 44 Psalm. 139.
b. 23 Act. 1. d. 24
unto God, who knows it: But as far as I can judge by his works, and by
his beginning, proceeding and ending, I cannot perceive and understand but that
he did it for two causes chiefly. First to please the Papists, Apostles of
the circumcis^on. Gal. 5. a Phil. 3. a
even as the Apostles of the circumcision went about and endeavored themselves
to please the Jews, and to hold with them, for to avoid the cross and
persecution, and to have their favor, and for to make the true Apostles of
Jesus Christ more odious unto all the world. The other is, for to show
himself, and for to get the brute and report that he was a wise man, more
expert and of more knowledge, then all other preachers, and that there was
Vain glory
none that searched out and understood the holy Scripture so profoundly as he.
For he was angry that he did see others, which had put their life in danger
for the glory of God, and the edifiyng of the Church to be of some estimation
toward the good. And therefore he would invent a certain new fashion, proper
unto himself alone, to the end that he should not seem that he had brought no
new thing, but that he had learned some thing of others. Therefore he was
ashamed to follow their way, and went about but to renew all things, for to let
men to understand, that all that which others had made, was nothing worth, but
that he was the great reformer of Churches, and yet nevertheless be took no
care to reform the wicked manners.


Hilarious. I have understood that he called the good ministers, skirmishers,
who, for to advance the gospel, have Skirmi^shers.
broken the first I^e or given the first onset, and which have put their
heads, there where he dares not to put his little finger.


Theophilus. Also he himself has said, in dispising others, that he was not
of those small skirmishers. But it was answered him to the contray, that he
auailed then nothing in war, and that he was not worthy to be taken for a
good soldier: For a good champion must know to do all things, and that he
must be found amongst the blows and in the skirmishes and alaromes, not
only at the retraict, and to receive wages. He despised the simplicity of the
holy Scripture, and calls the Theology inferior and base, and would forge
and invent for us a metaphisicall The metaphisicall Theology.
Theology.


Hilarious. Also peradventure he would by the same as well extract the fifth
essence of the holy Scriptures, as the Alcumists do of metals. At the least, I
doubt not but that it will happen of his metaphisicall Theology, as of the
Alcumy, which has a fair show and to be of great value, but it consumes away
into smoke. He speaks nevertheless against the Purgatory of Priests.
Wherefore I am abashed of that which I have heard spoken, that at this present
he endeavors himself to set it up again in that poor town of Metz, y^
which he is gone to trouble, when he understood that Jesus Christ would reign
there: But I greatly doubt, that the kitchen constrains him to the same. For
otherwise the har^th would be cold. But he may as well do that, as to be
angry and pleased again, and so many times to change and rechaunge his coat.


Theophilus. We may well make him such a monster, as Euse. de pra e^an. ^^. 14.
ca. 2
Eusebius Cesariensis did make of the Philosopher Archesilaus, in his books of
the preparation of the Gospel, and Archesilaus.
to compare it to him, of whom he writes in these words. They said of him,
that as touching his fore parts, he was Plato, and as to the hinder parts,
Pyrro, and the middle Diodorus. For he has troubled and marred the eloquence
of Plato, through the subtilties and sophistries of the Philosopher Diodorus,
and by the subtle disputations of Pyrrho: and now saying this, by and by that,
he was easily rolled and lead now here and now there, as a man not knowing any
thing, and having no rest: And yet nevertheless he seems through the shadow
of eloquence, that he knows much: and he was never in that mind, y^ he would
say twice one thing, and that he would abide firm and steedfast in one
opinion. For he esteemed not a man to be ingenious and witty, which preserved
and continued in one matter and doctrine. And therefore he was called a
cauiller, sophister and troubler, which knew nothing, and would not y^ others
should perceive any thing. He troubled every one through his sophistries, and
was as the serpent called Hydra.
Hydra, which has seven heads: But he cutteth them off with his own sword,
speaking against and gainsaying his own Doctrine, denying that which he has
affirmed, and destroyinge that which he before has builded.


Hilarious. It is impossible to painte him out better. For Gerion.
he is as a Gerion with three bodies. He is a Papist, an Evangelist and a
Lutherian. He is a Sophister and a Sorbonist, and yet he would be accounted for
a faithful and a Christian, and holds himself neither to the one nor yet to
the other. Hydra had never so many heads, as he has of opinions contrary the
one to the other, and he needed none other Hercules for to cut them off, then
himself. For the truth which GOD has compelled him to speak, as unto the
wicked spiri^es, is a Hercules sufficient Hercules.
enough for to vanquish the false doctrine, that he now mainteineth.


Theophilus. By the same thou may know the study Mat. 8. b. 14. Man. 1. c. 29
of Satan, and how many ways he transfigureth himself into an Angel of
light: and what is the nature of the 2. Cor. 11. d. 1^
false Prophets. God by all his Prophets and Apostles has commended to us the
faith in him, and the love toward A sign for to judge the false and true
Prophets.
the living, without making any mention y^ we should have care of the dead. The
Devil to the contrary, by his false Prophets and Apostles, endeavors
himself with all his power, to draw us from the faith, unto vain Ceremonies,
and from the care that we ought to have of the living and of the poor
members of JESUS CHRIST, which with us do suffer want and indigence, for to
make us stay after the dead. They bring them meat and drink, and suffer the
poor Christian brethren which are round about them to dye for hunger. This
miserable Doctor, perceiving that he could not A new transfiguration of Satan.
there where he was, maintein the Purgatory of y^ Priests, and their broiling of
souls, be would set up a new Purgatory for the body. But when he perceived
that he could not bring it about, he is returned to carry a coal to the same
Purgatory for the body.
of the Priests, for to heat it again. Wherein he manifestly declares, what
faith and conscience he has, and how much one ought to trust to his doctrine.


Hilarious. Me thinks, that he should have no less appearance, to build a
Purgatory for the body, then the Priests to have builded one for the souls.
For if there be any reason, wherefore the souls ought to suffer for their
sins, after that man is dead, me thinks that the body ought not to be quit
and free, but that he has more merited it, because that he was the occasion
through his flesh, and the instrument for to make the soul to sin. Wherefore
if you think Eusebius, that God should be unjust, as thou have alleged, if
he do not punish the souls of the sinners in Purgatory, he should be no
less, if he do not punish the bodies in like manner, which have been always
companions and instruments to the souls, in all the sins that they have
committed. And therefore God will not only punish the souls of the reprobate
in hell fire, but the bodies also: even as be will glorify the elect in body
and soul, in the resurrection of the Iustes.


Theophilus. Also this good Doctor would give us to understand, sithence y^ he
has entered into that dreaming, that all the prayers which the Church made in
the name of the dead, were for the bodies, and for their resurrection, and not
for the souls: and condempneth the Priests and their Purgatory, and be made
no doubt to say, that we must pray for the Saints: for Saint Peter, S. Paul,
and the others, in such sense as he understands, even as it has been touched.


Thomas, I do understand well of whom you speak. I remember, that at the
disputation which was holden at Lausanne, he spoke clearly, not only against
the Purgatory of Priests, but also against the transubstanciacion and
corporal presence of Jesus Christ in the host.


Theophilus. It is true, but in the mean time, thou take no heed of the
subtlety of Satan, and by what means he would be served of that Sorbonist
doctors. Because y^ Satan did see those errors to be already too much
uncovered and opened, and that he had no more hope to uphold them, chiefly in
those Churches here aboutes, he has chosen this instrument, for to set
forth that opinion, the which could not serve to any edification, but for to
trouble the Church, chiefly in this time now, that the opinions of men are so
diverse, For how goodly a reason soever he can allege, notwithstanding that he
condempneth openly the Purgatory of the Priests, and their suffrages for the
dead, yet nevertheless, since that he puts forth that proposition: we must
pray for the dead: It were impossible, but that in every point, it should he
evil spoken A troublesome doctrine.
off and offensive. For the Idolaters and superstitions, which were yet in
their old error, touching that matter, do draw that proposition to their
advantage, to the confirmation of their Purgatory, and care not for all his
other reasons and sophistries, the which the most part cannot understand,
others will not. It is mough for them that they can say: Monsieur the Doctor
has preached, that we must pray for the dead. They do arm themselves with
that proposition, against the truth, as with a buckler, and do condemn more
boldly the wholesome doctrine. The other poor simple people, which have already
some knowledwe of the abuses, were not also without being troubled, fearing to
have been evil taught. For all could not easily comprehend those sophistical
subtilties, but do abide in perplexity. Notwithstanding that that dream
which he did put forth, was not new: It has already at an other time been
put forth by others, the which yet nevertheless they have not followed. Those
which were best instructed and most firm in the doctrine of the Gospel,
although that they had their spirits sharp enough for to comprehend that
which they said, yet they were not out of danger. For since that this
proposition abides and continneth: we must pray for the dead: And this here,
the Church has always duly p^ayde for them that they should be delivered
from death: it was much to be feared, that by succession of time, but that they
should fall again to the first error, and that the Devil which was driven
away, would return again with seven other wicked spirits, worse then the
first. For after that the understanding of man has been corrupted through some
false opinion, he is easy to fall again, and to withdraw from Mat. 12. d. 44.
his purpose all that which approaches any thing at all.


Hilarious. I doubt not, but that the same was the mark, to which Satan
pretented: the which he has yet better declared, when be induced and persuaded
that poor man to return again, as the dog, to eat that which he had
vomited, and to bay and ^arke against the ministers of the truth, enforcing and
endeavoring himself to reedif^e the errors and heresies, which he had before
condemned and destroyed.


Theophilus. It is a great deal better that he declared himself what he was,
then to dwell in the Church of Jesus Christ for to trouble it, and to end that
that he has taken in hand. For in steed, whereas before they did but sing
Mass for the dead, whom they presumed to be detained and kept in
Purgatory, they must also sing Mass and offer for the Saints which are in
Paradise, according to his Theologye. For it should have been as easy to give
color unto such Masses, as the scholasticall Doctors do give unto those
which they do singe in the name of young children, which are dead in their
innocence, immediately after their baptism. Masses for the young children



Thomas. What need have they? For I believe that they will not deny, but that
they account them for saved.


Theophilus. They confess that they are in Paradise? Tho. did. 12. li. 4.
deffc. enche. Reisersp. de. mor. v^rt. Sermo dom. ^. aduent.
and that they have no need to do it for their salvation: But they affirm
that it is good yet neuerthelsse to singe Mass for them, for to signify and
witness y^ they are of the Church, and members of his mystical body. And so
by that means, the Priests cannot fail to get money of every side, both of
the old and young: or under the title of Purgatory, or of the communion of
the Church, or of the resurrection of the body, or of the consummation of the
eternal selicitie. In so doing, they must yet at the end come to pray for
Jesus Christ, and to singe masses for him, as for his members, until such time
as his kingdom he fully consummated and ended, and that he has put all his
enemies under his footstool.


Thomas, Now I have heard al your matters and well considered of them, I know
that we have been meruailously abused, Wherefore from henceforth I remit and
forgive the Priests, I will stay my self but only to the pure word of GOD.
As touching my voyage, I am come back again. I have seen that which I
desired to know. I think that Eusebius is as much pressed and overcome as I,
and that he has no more greater harneys nor weapons for to defend his
Purgatory nor his Lymbes, Eusebius. It is most certain that I have my spirit
much troubled with so many matters, and not without cause. But nevertheless I
have not yet all disployed and showed forth my arguments and reasons. You
have now robbed me of the place which I have propounded unto you of the book
of the Machabees, under the title that it was Apocripha: But those that I will
propound unto you now, shall be taken out of books so Autentickes and
Canonical, that you can by no means reject them. And if you can show by
euydent reasons, that I do not allege them to the purpose, and that they do
serve me nothing at all for to prove my intention, I will confess my self
vanquished, and will give you my hand for to be of your side.


Hilarious, What pretendest thou to maintain by them, either the Lymbe of the
young children, and the baptism of women: or the Lymbe of the ancient
fathers: or the Purgatory? For Theophilus has overthrown this day all that.


Eusebius. Thou shall understand it, when thou shall hear it. But at this
time we have sufficiently enough discussed of the matters at one time, and
there r^maineth yet enough for a good while. Yet nevertheless I do hope that
we shall see the end.


Thomas. I desire the same very much, and that we may agree as soon as shall be
possible, that we may all abide and continue of one good resolution.


Theophilus. God give us his grace, as I hope he will.


THE SVMME OF THE SIXTH and last Dialogue.
IN this latter dialogue Eusebius puts forth the places of the holy
scripture, the which they allege commonly for the defense and confirmation of
purgatory: to the which Theophilus answers, and expounds them after the
true sense of the scripture: and confuteth the false interpretacions of the
Sophisters: and declares many good points and places of the holy scripture.
It shall be also entreated of the power of the keys: and how the Pope and his
would stretch them even to the other world. It shall be in like manner spoken,
of the Popes power and deite: of ^ubile, and of the virtue of the bulle,
pardons and indulgences. Afterward shall be touched the opinion of them which
think that there shall be preaching in the other world: And a manifestation of
Jesus Christ to salvation, for such as have not known him in this world.
Whereupon shall be entreated the place of Saint Peter, touching the preaching of
Jesus Christ unto the dead, and to the spirits that were detained in prison:
and for the end and conclusion of all those matters, the funeralles of
purgatory shall be celebrated, and he shall be buried. For that cause this
dialogue is called, the Requiescant in pace of purgatory. For he is dead and
buried.

THE SIXTH DIALOGVE WHICH is called the Requiescant in pace, of Purgatory.
THOMAS, Although friend Eusebius, thou have resisted Theophilus and Hillarie
as much as thou can, and that thou have fought valyantlye, yet nevertheless
thou could not so vertuouslye defend thy self, but that the forewarde, the
wings and the horns of thy army, and almost all the whole host is
discomfyted and overcome: there rests no more now but the arrierewarde. If
it defend it self no valyentlyer, and that it be no better armed then the
others, thou shall carry no good news to the Pope of that combatte, and thou
shall give him no great occasion to receive thee among his Capitaines, and to
reward thee ritchly.


Eusebius. I do not fight for the Pope, but for the truth. It is to me all
one who dee gain or win the battle, so that the victory abides with the
truth, and that Jesus do reign in his Church.


Theophilus. I am very glade for the good affection that GOD has given unto
thee, and that thou art not like unto a heap and company of ambicious and
glorious men, who what so ever evil cause that they have, will never confess
them selves overcome and vanquished, but esteem their glory more dearer then
the same of Jesus Christ.


Eusebius. It is very true that at the beginning I was much offended with your
words. But when I considered that which I have heard of you, I knew not well
to which side to turn. You have already very much overcome and failed me,
nevertheless I have yet many places of the holy Scriptures, which hold me in
suspens, and leave me in a great scruple and doubt in my conscience, until
such time as thou have showed me by lively and evident reasons, that I must
understand them otherwise then they have been expounded unto me: or else you
shall be constrained to change your matter, and to deny and unsay all that
you have said even until this present time.


Hilarious. Propounde them all by order, and Theophilus will addres and guide
thee to the true understanding.


Eusebius. For to keep the better order, I will begin by the old testament,
and afterward will follow The disposition of this dialogue
the new, after the order by which the books of the same are disposed and
set, alleging out of every one of them the points which may serve to my
matters. I will put forth unto thee that which Thoby commanded his Thob. 4. d
18.
son, saying: Set thy bread and wine upon the burial of the righteous. But
thou will answer unto me, that that book is Apocripha, or only
Ecclesiastical, and not The book of Thobie.
Canonical, as thou have already done of the same of the Machabees.


Theophilus. Truly I may answer thee so. But although it were Canonical,
where too would it serve for thy matter?


Eusebius. Very well, following the interpretacion of Eccius, which expounds
it of the Almoses for to refresh The exposition of the place of Thoby.
the poor, that they should pray unto God for the salvation of the dead.


Theophilus. He that would follow the exposicions of Eccius, there is not a
place in the Bible which he has not corrupted and marred, for to make it serve
to the popish tyranny. In the book of Thoby, and in that place there, there is
no mention made of praying for the dead. And although those words preceded
thereunto, he ought rather to have said: Set thy bread upon the burial of
the sinner, then upon that of the righteous. For the sinners shall have more
need of such prayers, then the righteous. But he says altogether contrary.
For he adds: eat and drink not with the sinners and wicked: The which is
better expressed by the Greek, saying: Set thy bread upon the burial of the
righteous, and give it not unto sinners. Wherefore it is most likest to be
true, since that before he has spoken of Almoses, that he recommendeth by those
words, chiefly the righteous and faithful, even as saint Paul, above all
other recommendeth those of the household of faith. Now there are many manners
and ways to bestow ones bread and wine upon the burialles of the righteous:
The first is (...) stovve ones bread and wine upon the burtial of the
righteous Thob^^^^^
in burying them honestly, as Thoby did, without sparing that which was there
unto needful and requisite. For the Hebrews by the bread, wine and water,
do understand all the things necessary unto man, and unto man's life. The
other is, when we do help our brethren, and succor so their necessities:
that they dye not for want of vittailes, nor go down to the grave without
being buried. If we do otherwise, we kill them, when we f^^de them not, and
that they do dye through our default. The third is when we comfort through
Almoses the children and friends of the dead. Then we shed forth our bread
and wine upon their burialles, behold the holy water that they desire. And it
is a great deal better to do after that sort, then to play the glutton with
the gluttons, drunkerds and wicked. But the manner of spech is somewhat
obscure, because that the book, notwithstanding that it was written in Greek,
yet nevertheless it keeps the phrases and manners of the Hebrew speech.


Hilarious. He that will then follow the counsel of Thoby, must no more
banquet and feast the Priests, since The place of Thoby (...) to the (...).
that he forbids to give his bread and wine unto sinners and the wicked.
For there is not a people upon the earth, of a more execrable life, nor which
do more abuse the goods which GOD has given unto man: Amongst whom one may
well account and number Eccius for one of the principallest Captains of God
Bacchus. For he was very angry, that day he was not dronken in. Wherefore it is
no marvel, if he would maintain the spitt and the fryingpan. But yet no
ueil (...) although he and all such as he is would press and take the words of
Thoby by the rigor without admitting any exposition confirmable and agreeable
to the word of God, it should have had more color for to allow the ancient
custom which the Panyms had to carry bread upon the burialls and to An other
p^ace taken out of the psalm, 66
power thereon wine, even as already has been spoken, then for to prove the
bankettes of the priests, and the prayers for the dead. Nevertheless we are
well assured that neither Thoby nor any other holy man but have had regard not
to allow such supersticious.


Eusebius. Let us leave of Eccius and the pristes, and answer me unto that
which is written in the book of the Psalms: We have passed through the fire
and water, and thou have drawn us out, and set us in joy and comfort. How
understand thou that place? The which many Theologians do expound it of
the fire of purgatory, by the which the souls must first pass, for to be
purged, before that they can enter into the celestial rest. To which agrees
very well that which saint Paul The place of the 1. Cor, 3. c. 11
writes to the Corinthians, saying: For other foundation can no man ^ay, then
that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. And if any man bylde upon this
foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, timber, hay or stubble, every man's
work shall appear. For the day shall declare it, and it shall be showed in
fire: And the fire shall try every man's work what it is. If any man's work
that he has buylt upon, bide, he shall receive a reward. If any man's work
burn, be shall suffer loss, but he shall be safe himself: nevertheless yet as
it were through fire. What fire can we here understand then that of purgatory,
which purges? wherefore one is sauid by the same. The which we cannot
understand of y^ same of hell, from which none can be delivered, nor
consequently saved. What aunswerest thou to that? I do here break a little the
order that I had thought to have kept, and do leap from the Psalter unto the
Epistles of saint Paul: But it is because that the matters are like, and that
the one of the points may the better be discussed and opened with the other.
For we cannot understand that fire, through which one goes and passes, but of
the same of which saint Paul speaks by the which one is saved. For none can
pass from the same of hell, but it keeps and holds fast all that that
comes to it. Declare and expound unto me these two places, and afterward I
will go strait way to the new Testament, and will keep order as I have said.


Theophilus. As touching the place of the Psalms, Answer to ye place of the
Psalms.
it is most clear, that in that Psalm the Prophet speaks of the tyranny
and oppression, and of the great afflictions and adversities which the people
of god have suffered, from which God has delivered them. And the better to
comprehend all in a sum, the great evils and dangers, in which that people
has been drowned and plunged, he speaks it in the person of him: we are
come unto the fire and water, and thou have led us by them. He uses commonly
the comparison of the fire Esai^. 4. ^ 4. ^ere 49. ^ 27 1. Pet. 1. b 7.
and water, because that there is nothing which sooner will kill and dispatch a
man, then the fire and water, when they have once power over him. And therefore
they are many times taken in the holy scriptures, for the temptations
persecutions, passions, dangers deaths, and judgment of God, by the which
all is examined, proved and tried as by the fire and water, and there is none
that can escape, if the Lord do not deliver and draw him from it, as it is
here spoken afterward. As touching 1. Cor. 3 ^^^. The exposition of the place
of the Corrithians
the place of Saint Paul, he pretended an other thing, then to the fire of
Purgatory, as it is easy to know by his own words. Wherefore I do make thee
thine own judge of the cause, and I demand of thee first, whether thou art
of an opinion, that it behooves that all the holy Prophets, Apostles and
Martyrs, do pass by or through that fire of Purgatory?


Eusebius. Noe.


Hilarious, Those which allege that place for to prove the Purgatory, dare
not to confess that. For they magnify and extol so much the merittes of
Saints, that they have made a treasure in their Church, of those which they
have of The tresure of the Church.
superaboundance, the which they do vaunt themselves to distribute unto others.


Theophilus. Nevertheless the Apostle speaks in that place of the
principallest members of ye church, to wit, of the Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, Doctors, Preachers, and consequently of all those which do edify
by their doctrine, whom he calls masons and buylders. He says that every
ones work shall pass by the fire, and that the workman also shall be examined
by the same. Wherefore, either you shall be constrained to confess that that
fire cannot be understood of the same of Purgatory, or that there is neither
Saint nor Saints but is compelled to pass by the same, for to prove and try
his work, since that he excepteth none. But says plainly, that every man's
shall be tried by the fire: The which thing saint Augustine was not ignorant off,
but uses the same reason, De ciui. dei. li. 21. ca. 26. Trac. defid. and oper.
c. 16. Ench. ca. 68
against those which would maintain by those words of the Apostle, that those
which believe in Jesus Christ, shall be all saved, how wicked a life so ever
they have lived, and builded upon the foundation, which is Jesus Christ,
provided that they had not altogether abandoned and forsaken the foundation. He
takes not that fire, for that of Purgatory: But for the tribulations,
adversities, and persecutions of this world. Although that some will say, that
the like is done yet in the other world, he says that he will not repunge
their opinion: the which as he says may be true. But yet nevertheless he
dares not to affirm it, but expounds that fire of the tribulations of
Theophila. in 1. Cor. 3.
this world here. Theophilacte, who almost in all his commentaries has
followed Chrysostom, notwithstanding that he is not of the most auncientes,
and that he has written sithence that the church has been very much marred
and spoiled, and that already that fire of Purgatory was ve^ye much kindeled,
yet nevertheless he made here no mention at all, not of one only syllable:
But takes that fire for the same of Hell: saying, that the sinner shall be
saved: that is to say, that he shall be reserved whole and entire, for to burn
in the fire and to be punished perpetually. But for to come to the true and
more clear understanding of those words, Saint Paul means here briesely,
that all buylding, all doctrine, and works builded and invented without the
word of God, shall turn into smoke and vanish away altogether, without being
able to abide and continue firm, notwithstanding that all that shall be builded
upon the true foundation, which is Christ, who cannot bear up any buylding,
if it be not pure gold, silver, pearls and precious stones, taken from his
word, which is more pure Psalm. 19 c. 11
then the gold and silver fined and tried seven times. And therefore the
Apostle uses here a metaphore, translation, and comparison. For even as he
compares the pure doctrine A comparison of the d^^^ne and hum^^ne doctrine.
of y^ gospel to the gold, silver and precious stones, which cannot be consumed
by the fire, but are by the same tried and do appear more fair and clean:
So he compares the doctrines dreamed and inuen^ed by the brain of man, unto
wood, hay, chafe and stubble, and by good right. For even as those things
cannot abide the fire but are consumed and perished as soon as they feel it, so
in like manner shall men's doctrines perish, and cannot abide and continewe
firm, when they shall come to the touchstone. It happens unto us oftentimes
that we delight and please our selves in our own works, and we think that we
have made a fair and a goodly piece of work. But we must bring it to the
touchstone: the which shall not be after our own judgment, but according to
the same of GOD, who is the judge of us and of our works. Therefore says he,
that the day shall declare it, and that the fire shall try what every man's
work shall be. He calls the day of the Lord, The day of the Lord.
all times, in which he manifes^eth his presence unto men, by any manner of
ways: the which he does chiefly by the manifestation of his truth, and
revelation of his Gospel. By the fire, although that in the Scripture it be
many The fire.
times taken, for the temptacions and tribulations, yet nevertheless it agrees
best here to the sense and meaning of the Apostle, to take the fire for the
towchstone which proceeds of the holy Ghost, which is the true fire, which
consumes all doctrine invented by men, the which cannot abide the spiritual
towchstone but vanishes away as soon as one proves the spirits, whether they
be of God or not. As Much happens of all the works, proceeding of such
doctrine, the which cannot bear the judgment of God. But to the contrary, it
happens to the ^ Pet, ^, b. 7
truth as to the faith, the which even as the gold, becomes more fairer, and
shows it self more pure, when it is tried and examined in that furnayce, and
approaches nearer of that spiritual judgment. And therefore when the word of
the Lord is manifest by the virtue of the holy Ghost, then all things are
revealed. We shall know what work we have made: whether it has any ^ault in
it or not: and whether we have lost our time: or whether we be worthy of a
reward. If we have not builded a matter agreeing to the foundation, when the
truth and the judgment of the spirit of god presses our conscience, or that
the temptations also and the afflictions do compass us round about, we are
compelled to condemn our work, and we shall prove that that which we esteem
to be of some weight and importance, is nothing at all, and that in which we
put our hope and trust, cannot serve us, neither confirm nor assure our
consciences,


Eusebius. But how are we saved by the fire, if our works are lost, and by the
same consumed?


Theophilus. The Apostle declares it sufficiently himself, To be saved by the
sire.
if we do mark of what people he speaks. He speaks not of Heretics,
Apostates, seducers and false Prophets, which teach false doctrine, contrary to
the faith, and which are separated from Jesus Christ and from his body, which
is the Church, by their infidelytie and peruersitie. But he speaks of the
Masons and buylders of the Church, that is to say, of Euangelycall Pastors and
Ministers, which have not forsaken the foundation, nor y^ head, which Col, 1.
c. 18. and. ^, b. 10. ^^hc. 1. d. 22
is Jesus Christ, that is to say, which have not turned themselves from the
principal points and articles of the Christian religion, and from the says in
Jesus Christ, and from things necessary to salvation: But have mingled some of
their inventions and traditions amongst the doctrine of the Gospel: and have
failed in some little and small things which are not very dangerous. Those
then to whom such things shall happen: shall receive damage and loss: For
their wor^e, and that which they have added to it of theirs shall perish: and
shall have no more profit, then if they were altogether dispossessed of them:
But they shall have rather shame and confusion for them. Yet nevertheless they
shall be saved, but as by the fire: not their fault their errors and ignorance
and their buildings, builded without the word of God, may be agreea^le to God:
But because of the foundation which they have holden and kept, and of the head
of which they remain members, and of the faith which abides in them, shall be
purged and delivered from error and ignorance by that fire of the holy Ghost,
with which they shall be illuminated. But yet nevertheless herein, men will
liken The (...) of foolish builders.
him unto a foolish buylder, which shall buyld upon a good and sure foundation
of stone and a rock, a house or buylding of wood, ^^ye, chasse and stubble,
which think to have made a goodly piece of work, and knows not his fault
until that he sees that the fire bath taken and consumed it altogether. Then
he knows by experience, that be has lost his time, and the cost and expenses
that he has bestowed about it; and that be is forced to begin his buylding a
new, ^^ though he had never put his hand unto it, saving that the shame and the
loss abides with him. We call our selves all Christians, and do confess
that there is but one foundation and one head, Jesus Christ, But although that
in that behalf we do all agree, yet nevertheless when they come to build upon
that foundation, all shall not be found good Masons. For many will be Masters,
before they have been good scholars and apprentices: and will not follow the
rule and the instruction of the master Masons, well expert and cunning in their
mystery and occupation, but thincking to make some fairer thing, do build
after their own fantasy. They do preach or hear the Gospel, and will serve
god after their affection, and as they think good: And thincking to make some
fair piece of work they mar it altogether. But they do not know it by and
by, until such time as the fire of the Gospel and of the spirit of God,
which is the true Judge, and the truth revealed unto men destroys all the
goodly outward appearaunce, and makes it to be seen such as it is, and not
such as it appears outward: As we see by experience, in the Moonkish
sects, and in many other ceremonies, superstitions, Idolatryes, and works
invented of men, in which we do glory and boaste our selves, and think
that we have done mough for to merit four Paradises, and for to make God to
be in our debte. But when the Gospel is purely preached which beats down all
error, all vain supersticion and man's trust, then we shall know our fault, and
be ashamed of that of which we think to be much esteemed. Or when God sends
unto us some great affliction temptation and adversity, that his judgment
presses us, that he examineth and prourth our works, as the fire proves and
tries the gold in the furnayce. Then we shall know our hypocrisy, folly,
vanity, and false religion, the which we do not think but to be pure
godliness and righteousness: And as the holy Apostle, esteeming as dongue all
that which before we esteemed as gold. But forasmuch as we have Philip. 3.
b. 8
not renounced and forsaken Jesus Christ, nor the faith which we have in him,
we are not altogether lost, through the fault that we have committed, but it
happened unto us, even so as unto him which has escaped the fire. But he has
yet neuertholesse lost his house, and all that which was in it, because that it
was not builded with good stuff: and could save but his body all naked his
life. Wherefore he must buyld it altogether new: do thou not think Eusebius,
that this exposition agrees better to the sense and meaning of the Apostle,
then that of your Doctors which would turn and wrest it, to their sense and
understanding, against the same of the spirit of God, and of Saint Paul, and
of the ancient Doctors, which have never expounded it of the fire of
Purgatory, but almost al of them to the sense as I have expounded it, chiefly
Ambro. in 1. Cor. 3. The custom of the false and tru^ doctors
Saint Ambrose. I cannot be too much abashed of the manner of doing of those
which will uphold man's traditions. When we will propone any thing in the
Church of Jesus Christ, for a doctrine of salvation and an article of faith, we
ought first of all dilygently to examine, whether that which we would put
forth, has any certain and sure foundation in the word of God. If we find
that it is commanded of God and comprised in the holy scriptures, we may and
ought boldly to propounde and affirm it. On the contrary, if the Scripture
does make no mention of it, it is not lawful only to open the mouth, for to
speak one word, and for to propounde for certain a thing uncertain. For
cursed is the man, which puts forth for a sure doctrine, a thing, of which
he himself is not certain, and of which he cannot say with the Prophet and the
holy Psalm. 116, b. 11 2. Cor. 4. c 13
Apostle: I have believed it and therefore I spoke it. For we ought to beware
and keep our selves, as from death, to teach unto others, to believe and to do
that, which we our selves believe not, and of which we are not certain. Now it
is impossible to be assured and certain of such things, then by the word of
god the which we ought to follow in all things. But I see clean contrary in
those which have taught men's traditions, in steed of the word of God. For in
steed to take counsel of it, before they do institute any thing, they have
first propounded and persuaded the people, that which comes in their out
being much advised, whether God has commanded or forbidden it. It suffices
them so that they have some show and appearaunce. And when they perceive that
one will examine their Doctrines by the rule of the word of God, then fearing
to be overcome and condemned, they seek if they can find any thing in the
Scripture for to prove their intent: the which they ought to have done before
they put tho thing forth. But sithence that they have once ordained and
published it, and have perceived and felt the profit, it grieueth them sore to
recant and gainesay it. And therefore they do all their endeavors, for to
find in the Scripture some color, for to beautify and show forth their
work: And there is nothing, so that it has any appearaunce at all, but that
they draw it violently, deprave and mar it, for to make it serve to their
purpose.


Hilarious. They do as those which do fight together, which take and catch
all that comes to their hands, for to defend them with, be it swoorde,
lance, staff forke, pole, fire brande, stones, dunge, mire, dust, ashes, and
all that which they can catch or come by, without regarding any thing but to
defend themselves and hurt their enemy. For that is all one unto them, so
that they escape, ^ carry away the victory. These Theologians Proue^b^. Rogula
Lesbia. Arist. ^^. ^ mora. Eras. chil.
do make me to remember the old pronerbe, of the rule Lesbia, the which was
of Lead: Wherefore the Masons of Lesbia boowed it as they would. And in steed
that they ought to measure and compass their work by the same, and the stones
which they hewed and the walls which they builded, and to correct and amend
them if they were not right and well compassed, they did clean contrary. For
they did bend and make crooked their rule for to make it to agree with their
work, where they ought to make the work to agree to the same. And so it
obeyed them in all things. And whereas they should correct and amend their
work by the rule, they corrected and amended the rule by their work. Even so
are many of the laws, the which one makes them to agree to the manners,
whereas by them they ought to be corrected, and not the laws by ma^s
affections.


Theophilus. There is not a thing the which at this day they do more abuse in
that sort, then the holy Scriptures. There is not a rule more firm, more surer
and certain, and yet nevertheless the false Doctors to all purposes do
turn and wrest it to their sense and understanding, as we do see by
experience in that matter of Purgatory. For sithence that once that error was
brought into the Church of God, as soon as was found in the holy Scripture
one word that made mention of fire, they have by and by drawn and applied it
to their purpose, and have taken it for a certain proof of Purgatory,
without having regard, that the fire in the same is taken more then in a
thousand places, as well in the old as new Testament, in so many diverse
significations, chiefly in the psalms, Esaias, Jeremy, and in the other
Prophetical and Apostolical Scriptures, of which it is not now need to bring
forth the examples.


Hilarious. Thou have heard a sufficient declarati^n of that place, of which
thou ought to content thy self Eusebius, and to keep thy self from
following the example of your Doctors, which do draw and wreast the holy
Scriptures, for to make them singe what it pleases them, more cruelly then ^
Tyrant would draw and handle a malefactor on the rack and on the gallows.


Eusebius. They do say the like of you.


Hilarious. But it is ea^^ly to judge unto whom that office agrees best.


Eusebius. And how understand thou this place of Saint Matthew? where he
says: Agree with thine adversary The place o^ Man. ^, ^^, ^5.
quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him, least the nouersary deliver
thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Minister, and then thou be
cast in prison. Verily I say unto thee: thou shall not come out thence til
thou have paid the uttermost farthing. What other prison may we understand
here, but the same of Purgatory? For from that same of hell there is never no
hope to come forth. But since that it is here spoken of the coming forth,
after they have wholly and fully satisfied, we cannot doubt, but that the same
prison is Purgatory, in which the souls are detained and kept in pains,
until they have fully satisfied for all their sins.


Theophilus. Since that thou expoundest the prison in such sort, I demand of
thee, who is the Judge, of whom is here made men^ion off?


Eusebius. It is God.


Theophilus. And who is the adverse party?


Eusebius. The Devil.


Theophilus. And who is The Sargeants of Purgatori^,
the Sargent or Minister?


Eusebius. The Angel.


Theophilus. Thou will then say that the Angels do conduct and lead, the
souls into Purgatory, to the place of pains and ^orments?


Eusebius. Who then? the Devils? Shall it be reasonable, that the faithful
should be put into the hand of the devil, for to he subject unto him whom
they have vanquished and overcome? and punished? by him over whom they have
triumphed?


Theophilus. They have not yet well triumphed, if they be yet so detained and
kept in sins, that for them they must be kept in a fire, altogether like unto
that same of hell, for the time that they are there. Me thinks that that
office should be more decent and meet for the Devils, then for the Angels.
For it is not like to be true, that the Angels should be the hangmen of the
souls of the faithful, and that they should take pleasure to imprison and
torment so cruellye their neighbors and brethren, which are Citizens of
Heaven with them. I have read in the holy Scriptures, that the Angels carried
the soul of Lazarus into the besome L^^. 16. b. ^0
of Abraham, into a place of joy and rest, and that they have delivered Saint
Peter and the Apostles out of prison: But I have never read that they have lead
them Act, ^^ b. 7 ^eon. de ^tin. se^^. d^^^or. Aut Flo^e^^ia Sum.
into prison, nor into places of torments, nor that they did lead the rich
man into hell.

For as much as your Doctors confess that the Devils do hold themselves next
to the souls of those which are purged in Purgatory, and do accompany them,
for to rejoice themselves of their torments and to mock them of the same: They
may best gi^e that office unto them, and to exempt and omit the Angels. But
what appearaunce has it with thy exposition? If the Du^el, or the sin ought
here to be understood for our adverse party, it follows then that Jesus
Christ commands us to agree and to be at one with the devil and sin. But
how can we be agreed with him and with God? Furthermore, he would that that
same agreement should be done whilst that one is in the way, that is to say,
in this life. For after that man is dead, he is out of the way. It must then
follow that he must make here his good deeds, before he do dye, for to
avoid that prison of Purgatory. And the same shall be for to confirm the
proverb of the Priests, saying: that better is the candle that goes before,
then that Proverb The candl^ before.
that comes behind?


Eusebius. How will thou interpret that place?


Hilarious. Since that there is an allegory, and that your Doctors do play so
with the word of God, I will also play and jest with them. First, although
there were none other reason, but that you will hear build the Purgatory upon
an allegory, it is sufficient enough, for to overthrow and pull down all your
foundation. For there is not a Theologian The use of alleg^^^es.
which confesses not but that the Allegoryes are not sufficient for probation
and confirmation of doctrine, whatsoever it be, if it have none other
foundation, more cleerer and more plain in the word of God: but is more
proper and fit for to beautify and set out the matters, to delight and move
the auditors and hearers, then for to prove and confirm it. For one may
expound them after diverse manners, according to the dexterity and wit of
him which declares them.

And therefore if I would ieste and play with the word of GOD, as your
Doctors do. I might allegorise Exposition allego^^^all.
and declare that place, expoundinge the Judge for the Pope, which is the God
Pluto. The aduersari^ for the Priests. For they do quarrel with us always
for to get money from us, and we can never be at one, and agreed with them,
except they have al, and that they have eaten us quick and dead. The Sergeaunt
that is the Angel and the God Mercury. For according to the Poetical Merc^^y.
Theology, he had wings and ^aryed the souls to hell, and was the God of
gain, of deceipts and larc^nyes as already has been touched. Now who leads
the souls into Purgatory, but that S^rgeaunt here of God Pluto? As the cause
of the gain and hope of the money and ransom which our Merchaunts and
adverse parties do look for? They would gladly that we should agree with them
whilst that we are in the way, in this present life: and that we should
distribute unto them all our goods, without leaving any thing, neither to our
children, parents, nor friends. I am very certain, that after that we have
given them all, and that there is no more hope to get any more ransom of
us, that there shall be no more prison for us, nor Sergeaunts for to lead us
thither. Do thou think Eusebius, that my interpretation is not as good as
thine? I am well assured, that as to the sense and meaning of the words of
Jesus Christ, neither the one nor the other approaches nigh unto it, and less
thine then mine: but according to your Theology, mine is more sufferable and
more true.


Thomas. Thou will then say, that the one and the other are nothing worth: and
therefore Theophilus, expound unto us the true sense and meaning of Jesus Christ.


Theophilus. We must well note and mark that which Hilarious has said of
Allegories. How much difference there is between thi^ here of Jesus Christ,
and those which y^ expositors do make commonly. For in these words The sense of
the words of ^ Jesus Christ.
of Jesus Christ, there i^ an example and a comparison wrapped in with an
Allegory. For Jesus Christ would not here declare any other thing, but into
what dangers and inconu^niences those do put themselves, which had rather to
go to the ^igour of right then to agree friendly with the adverse party,
before they do come to judgment: to that end that he does the better
incitate and stir forward men unto amity and brotherly reconcilyation, of
which he speaks in this place. After the same forte does Saint Bretherly
re(...) Ch^^s^ ^^ M^. 5. Homil. 16.
Chrysostom expound it, without making any mention of Purgatory, and he
allows not those which do understand by the adverse party the devil, but
interprets that place o^ ^lees an^ process. Now our Lord Jesus the better to
move the hearers to brotherly reconc^lyation, takes example upon the
pleaders, as if he should say: If thy adverse party do bring thee into
judgment, th^^ can do no better for thy honor and profit, then to agree
with him, before thou prove and try the rigor of right. For if thou agree
friendly with the party, he may show thee some fa^our and forgive thee the
deb^e, and thou shall avoid the dishonor, shame, and the cost^s, which is
bestowed upon the playnts. On the contrary if thou do not agree, thou can
not so well avoid the payment: but the Judge shall know it, and thou shall be
condemned and compelled to pay to the uttermost all the debt, without rebating
one farthing, even as those which for debt are detained and kept in prison,
until the end of the payment. Behold the example and the similytude which
Jesus Christ propounded unto us, for to bring us to reconcilyation. But he
declares not amply that which he would have us to understand by the same: but
it su^^seth him to have set us in the way, and he has opened unto us the
understanding of that which he would teach us, which avails as much as if he
had said: Whilst that thou art yet alive and that thou have time, return in
grace, and agree with thine adversary, that is to say with thy brother and
neighbor, whom thou have offended, and to whom thou art bound. For we are
debtors, unto all thos^ to whom we have done injury and wrong.

And therefore let us not suffer that the blood of our brother should demand
ve^geaunce, and deliver us into the hand of the Judge. Le^te us not tarry
until we be cy^ed and that the day be assigned unto us, for to a^peare in
his judgment: But let us con^^rre our contrauersies friendly the one with the
other, whilst he gives us leisure, and he himself as a rightful arbitrator
exhorts us to do it.

For be we assured that if we do it not, after that he shall tarry long time,
he himself will set us agreed. But that shall be to the great cost and
expenses and to the great hurt and shame of him in whom he shall find the
wrong, and who shall be the cause of the controversy, and of the let and
h^^deraunce which shall be in the agreement.

For he ought to be assured that his malice and obstination shall be unto him
dear sold, and that he shall not be abated one only farthing: for if he be
condemned to satisfy to the righteousness of God, even to the uttermost
penny, there is no more hope of health and salvation. For since that the
sentence is once given, and that man is out of this mortal life, there is no
more time to demand and ask agreement.

On the other side, it is impossible that man can ever have wherewith to
satisfy God, since that through his infidelytie and peruer^^tie he has made y^
satisfaction of Jesus Christ unprofitable for himself. It follows then
necessarily y^ that prison is not purgatory, but hell, which has The prison.
no issue, nor place of ransom. Wherefore that place concludes nothing for
the Purgatory. And although it be said that man shall not come out of that
prison, until that he has paid the uttermost farthing, we must not
therefore conclude y^ he shall come out at any time, but rather that he shall
never come out. For that manner of Do^^^.
speaking is very common in the Scripture, and ought to be understood as y^
which is written of y^ Raven which Noe did send out, which returned not
again: until that Genes. ^, b. ^.
the waters were dried up.

It follows not therefore that he returned again at any time afterward.
And Saint Augustine expounds that same place, eue^ as that which is written
by that same Euangelyst, speaking of Joseph, saying, that he knew not the
Virgin Mary, Math. ^. d 25
until she had brought forth her first begotten son. We must not conclude by
these words, with Hel^^dius, that he has known her afterward. For he means
none other Helindius.
thing, but that he knew her not, when she ^^re Jesus Christ. But it follows
not therefore that he has known her afterward: Or otherwise he should be
forced to conclude, that Jesus Christ shall reign no more, after that he shall
have put all his enemies under his feet, therefore it is written, that the
Lord has said unto him: Sit thou on my right hand, until I put all thine
enemies thy footstool. Psa. ^^^. ^^.
Thou do then see that the exposition of Saint Augustine, overthrows
yours. And that which I say of that place, must be also understood of that
which is writt^^ afterward of the servant which would not have compassion The
sense and me^ning of the parable. Man. ^^. ^. ^0,
upon his companion, nor forgive him the debt. There is no difference, but y^
Jesus Christ by that example declares unto us, that we must not hope to
obtain pardon of God, except we have done first all our endeavor, to obtain
it of those whom we have offended, and to satisfy and become friends again
with them. Also in like manner by the other he declares unto us, that we ought
to have no more hope, if we do not pardon those which shall offend us.


Thomas. We must not then, by that reckoning, tarry to pay our debts, and to
amend the iniuryes done unto our neighbors, until we be dead, for to make
satisfaction afterward in Purgatory to the Priests, unto whom the wrong was
not done and the debts were not due.


Theophilus. Even as by that example Jesus Christ exhorts every one of us,
to agree with our neighbor, during this life: So he admonishes us to do the
like toward GOD, using the very same similytude in the Gospel after Saynct
Luke: Declaring unto us thereby, that if we do know how to provide and The
(...) ^^d meaning of the words of Sa^^t Luke. ^1.
g^u^rne our affairs and dooinges after the world, and to agree with those
unto whom we are bound, for to avoid the loss and inconveniences into which
we may fall, we ought by a more stronger reason to travail to do so with
God, whilst that the time of our visitation indureth, and that he gives us
time and space to agree with him through true repentance. For after y^ the
sentence shall be given, there shall be no more remedy. Thou may then
Eusebius know, if thou do well understand the meaning of the words of Jesus
Christ, that they do destroy Purgatory, in steed to build it. For he gives
us no hope that we may take order and remedy for our affairs and business
after we be dead, but he would that we dispose it both with God, and among our
selves, before that we depart from hence, and that we appear before his face.


Thomas. Thou must then seek some other way, Eusebius. For as far as I do
perceive and see, that place will not help up thy Purgatory.


Eusebius. Then before we go out from that Evangelist, tell me Theophilus, The
place of Saint Mat. ^^ c 31. Luc. ^^. b. ^0
wherefore Jesus Christ has said, that the sin against the holy Ghost is not
pardoned in this world, nor in the world to come.


Theophilus. That point is one of the chiefest arguments which your Doctors do
put forth for the defense of Purgatory. But what will thou thereby conclude?


Eusebius. That which Saint Gregory concluded, who Dialo. 4. D^st. 25. ca
Qual^s.
wayed and marked well those words, and said, that by that sentence is given us
to understand, that there are some sins, which are pardoned in this world,
and others which are in the other world, which out to be purged before the
judgment, and for the which it is to be believed, that there is a fire. If in
the other world there be forgiveness of some sins, it cannot be in Hell.
Then of force it must be in Purgatory.


Theophilus. I do greatly marvel of that Logic, which makes such
Silogismes and conclusions: That sin is not pardoned in this world nor in the
world to come. There is then some which is pardoned in the world to come: the
which cannot be but in Purgatory. Wherefore there is a Purgatory. There is not
a Sophister so ignorant, which ought not to know, that according to the rules
of their Logic, one cannot draw a consequence whatsoever it be, of
propositions altogether negatiues. If then of negatiues, a consequence negative
is nothing Ex puris negatiu^^ nihil sequitur.
worth, how shall the affirmative be good, such as you would here conclude?
Why one you not conclude rather. This sin is not pardoned in this world nor
in the world to come. It shall be then never pardoned, For if there be a
pardon, it cannot be but in this world or in the other. The consequence after
this manner should be good. For the Antecedent has comprehended all the times
and places to whom the sin may be pardoned.

And after that sort does Saint Mark expound it, of Mar 3. d 19
whom the gloss is more certain, then yours. For in steed of that that Saint
Matthew has said, neither in this world nor in the other, he has said: never.
Wherein it appears that those two propositions are equivalent and of
equalytie. That sin is not pardoned neither in this world, nor in the other:
and that sin is never Propositions., Eq^poll^^is.
pardoned. Furthermore, you do contesse, that it must be that the fault of
sin, the which makes man subject to dampnation, be already pardoned in this
world, and that there remains but the pain, the which he must bear and
suffer in Purgatory. For you do put none other difference, Di^ersitie of
pardons.
between the souls of the blessed which are already at rest, and those of
Purgatory, and the dampened, but that the Saints which are already in Paradise,
are pardoned of pain and fault. Those which are in Purgatory, are not pardoned
but of the fault, but they must hear and suffer the pain due to sin, until
such time as they have satisfied for it, and that they be perfectly purged.

But yet nevertheless because that the fault is pardoned them, their pain is
not to them eternal, as the same of the dampened, because that the fault of
dampnation is ta ken away from them, the which abides and continues upon the
reprobate. Now Jesus Christ speaks here of sin which dampneth, the which
agrees not but to the reprobate. Wherefore he speaks of the fault of sin,
the which is not pardoned in Purgatory, according to your doctrine, for in the
same one can but release the pain.

It follows then, that although that we do agree and grant unto you that
there is some forgiuensse of sin in the other world, even as you would
conclude of the words of Jesus Christ that the same should nothing at all
relieve and help up your Purgatory. We must then Sin against the holy Ghost.
consider the manner of speaking, by the which Jesus Christ would declare, how
great and detestable that sin is, and to take away all the hope of pardon,
unto those which in that point will resist the truth known, and will go about
to quench and put out the light of the holy Ghost, which is offered unto
them.

And therefore he was not contented to say: that sin shall never be forgiven
and pardoned. But the better for to augment and amplyfie the thing, he would
use that manner of speaking, which comprehends the judgment of God, the
which already every man feels in his conscience in this life: and that latter
judgment which shall be manifested in the resurrection.

Wherefore he says briefly, that in this same life, in the which God has
given to man, time and space to convert and turn himself unto him, that
sin shall never be pardoned, and yet less in that latter judgment, in which
God will give his latter sentence: except peradventure there were some, which
in him had some hope.

But it follows not thererefore that he has forgiveness of any sin, in
the world to come, which shall not be here pardoned. But to the end that
thou may yet better know, that Jesus Christ has not spoken in that sort
without just reason, we must consider that he furnishes us here with a good
witness against the Originists and Anabapti^^s, which do promise forgiveness
of sins Against the Crigeniste^
unto the Devils and reprobate in the other world. Although I do not
believe, that Origines was of such an opinion: For his books do witness unto
us the contrary. But for to return unto the words of Jesus Christ, since that
Jesus Christ says so clearly, that that sin, which is proper unto them,
shall not have forgiveness in this world nor in the other, it follows then,
that it shall never have: or else it must be that they find out an other third
world, even as they have found out a temporal eternity, to the which they
do give an end: and an eternal A temporal eternity.
fire, which is temporal, not perdurable. But although it should be so, that
there should be in the world to come some forgiveness of sins, it follows
not therefore, that it is necessary to have there a Purgatory. Now first of all
there is no certain witness that there is any remission and forgiveness
after this life, but a certain humayne conjecture and presumption. Then if
that proposition be builded upon humayne conjecture and presumption, yet that
which affirms the Purgatory is best, since that the same is none other thing
but a conjecture and presumption, builded upon other conjectures and
presumptions. For put the case that there should be forgiveness in the other
life, could it not be in any other place rather then in Purgatory? or at an
other time, then you do there limit? Could it not have been given, either by
and by after that one is dead, or delayed until the latter judgment? But
which of the auncientest doctors of the church is there, that ever has
expounded that place in such sense as thou take it? Chrysostom expeundeth it
after this Chriso. in Mat. 12. ^omel, 42
manner: Since that that sin is not venial unto you, you shall be grievously
punished both in this life and in the other. He means none other thing by
those words, but that the Jews which resisted the holy Ghost, shall not be
only punished in this world, for to be chastised and corrected 1. Cor. ^^, 2
(...) ^ Luc, 6. c. 23
as the Corinthians were: or only in the other world, as the rich man was: but
they shall be here and there, as those of Sodom and Gomorra. For they were
Gen^^, ^^, ^, 24
destroyed by the Romans, and have not escaped eternal dampnation. There is
nothing in this exposition which can serve you. Those which are of an opinion,
y^ the s^^les do abide uncertain of their salvation, or dampnation, and that
they may yet profit or empaire between this and the great judgment: In like
manner those which do esteem and think that the gospel shall be preached unto
the souls of the dead, to which it has not been here declared, shall they
not have more color here to build their reasons and arguments, then you for
your Purgatory? For at the leastwise, those latter here shall have more
appearaunce, a^cording to the scripture, because that they may or can allege
some places, which do seem expressly enough to favor that opinion. And yet
they have other reasons very apparent, where you have not but certain cold
conjectures Now Jesus Christ, who is the infallible verity would not, that
we should build the articles of our faith, upon conjectures, but upon the
express verity. For since that he and his Apostles do witness, that they
have man^fested John, 15 Act. 20 ^^. 20
all that which was necessary to our salvation, and has commended to us so
much the love toward our brethren, it is not like to be true, but is
repugnant to the witness of Jesus Christ, that they have spoken unto us so
obscurely, and have given unto us only some conjectures of this matter, and of
the love that we owe unto the dead, the which the Priests do wrest it more,
then that which is due unto those that be living.


Hilarious. Because that Jesus Christ has spoken so obscurely, therefore they
would make commentaries and gloses, for to declare it, because that it brings
unto them more profit.


Thomas. Thou have opened a place, Theophilus, of which I would gladly be
resolved, that is to say, Pre^ching to the dead.
of the preaching to the dead. For to tell the truth I have oftentimes dreamed
and mused after it, because that I considered, y^ according to the witness of
the Scripture, n^ne ^ohn, 35^
can have salvation, but through the faith in Jesus Christ. Now if we do
compare those which have known Jesus Christ and have believed in him, with
those which have not believed, and which have never hard him speak, the number
of those here shall be very little, in respect of others. Wherefore it follows,
that there should be a merua^lous number of the damned, and that the mercy of
God shall not be so great as his rigor and judgment. Now it is strange to
man's reason, to judge that God will dampne so many, chie^^y, since y^ he has
had as many which have not known Jesus Christ, for want that one has not
showed him unto them. Wherefore me thinks that the opinion of those here is
not much out of reason: And I would gladly know what places they can have of
the holy Scripture for to prove it, for I will accord and agree almost sooner
to that, then to the opinion of Purgatory.


Theophilus. Thou have moved a question, the which cannot be expressed and
absolved in few words. For we must first declare what knowledge of Jesus
Christ is necessary unto salvation: and how it has been always preached from
the beginning of the world, among all people and nations: And how it has been
sufficiently manifested unto the elect for their salvation, and to the
reprobate for their condempnation: Insomuch that they are all inexcusable, and
they cannot allege ignorance sufficient for to excuse them: And it is not
needful that they have any more preaching after this life. But I had rather
that we would omit and leave off that matter until an other time, that we may
speak more amply of it, and better to satisfy the question which is made
daily, touching the salvation or dampnation of our predecessors, which have
lived in error and ignorance. Yet nevertheless because that the places,
which we have accustomed to allege, for y^ preaching to the dead may also
serve to the matter at this present time, I am contented y^ we do entreat of
them, for to declare that they are not firm enough for to prove the same: nor
the Limb. nor Purgatory in like manner to which the others would make the^
serve. But for that that it may be, that Eusebus does put them forth amongst
his defenses, it were better that we do delay that matter, until such time as
he brings it in by course, in following his matter by order: or if be do it
not, thou may put me in remembrance Thomas. Yet nevertheless before that
Eusebius pursues the other places that he has determined to put forth or
open, I will propound unto him an argument, concerning the point of which we
have entreated off, that is to say, of the remission and forgiveness of sins
in the other world? Whereupon I demand of thee Eusebius: when Jesus Christ did
give the keys of the kingdom of heaven unto his Church, as well in y^ person
of S. Peter as unto al y^ church generally, and that he declare the power of
them and of the ecclesiastical ministry, has he not said namely: That which
thou shall The power of the keys, Mat. 16 c. 19 and. 18. c. 18
bind in earth shall be bound in heaven, and that which thou shall loose in
earth shall be loosed in heaven. He says not: That which thou shall bind or
unbind, in heaven or in Purgatory, or in hell, or in the other world, or in
the other life, and in an other earth, but speaks of this here in the which
the keys have been given, and in the which the Euangelical ministry has his
vigor and strength. I will not reiterate that that you said of the forgiveness of
fault and pain. For all that is against you But me thinks that the Pope and
those that have received the power of him, do very evil understand their
office, willing to extend and stretch the power of their keys, pardons and
indulgences, unto The power of the keys and the Indulgences for the dead.
the other world, and unto the dead, which have their estate a part and
separated from ours, and are no more under the judgment of the church which is
in earth, which has not to regard but on the living.


Eusebius, Alexander of Ales, and Gabriel Biel have very well satisfied y^
objection. For they do In. 4. Sent. Res^erper. de mor virt sermon. Dom. in sexa.
answer, y^ the dead ought to be accounted, to be yet upon the earth, as
touching y^ absolutio^ or ligatio^: binding or unbinding, until y^ they are
passed and entered into the kingdom of heaven. For whilst y^ the souls are in
purgatory, they are upon the earth, since that they are not yet in heaven, and
that Between whether the souls of purgatory are prented.
they are yet of the Church militant, and not of y^ triumpha^t. Furthermore,
even as those which are in the earth are yet in the way, and not at the end and
full mark, so are those which are detained in Purgatory: They are in passing,
for to go to the country, as touching the purgation, by the which they are
purged and pass to the country, as by y^ way. Although y^ they are at the end
and mark as touching the confirmation. For they can no more sin nor merit.
Furthermore, all the while that they are aided, and receive comfort of the
temporal and earthly goods, by prayers, one may well hold and account them
for to be yet of this world, since that they do communicate with us of the
goods which are there.


Hilarious. He will account then of the dead, as of the Monks, which are dead
to the world in some points, Monks dead to the world
but not in other some. They are dead to the world, as to that that they do
serve and profit no person, no more then the dead. But they are not dead, as to
eating and drinking, and to other carnal works. For in y^ there is not a
people which do better live in the world, nor which are more of the world.
Even so shall it be of the dead. They shall be dead to us, for to give us any
more aid and succor. But they shall not be dead for to hurt us and to eat and
consume our goods and substance. It is said in a common proverb: Proverb.
Mortus non mordent. The dead do byte.
That the dead do not bite: But there are none living more biting, then such
dead men, except the Priests and Monks which do become unto us so biting, for
to bite us under the name and title of them.


Theophilus. The Pope aduaunceth himself to be the liuetenant of S. Peter: But
wherefore The Pope the (...) of Saint Peter.
does he attribute unto himself the office of S. Peter?


Eusebius. Because that S. Peter can no more execute it.


Theophilus. Wherefore can he no more exercise and execute it?


Eusebius. Because y^ he is no more conversant among the living, and because he
has ended and finished his course, and has ended his ministry among men.


Theophilus. Thou come now to the matter. If then Saint Peter has not
below the Heaven power to absolve us, nor they of the other world, those
which are in this here, how shall the Pope have more power, for so absolve
below the earth, and they of this world, those Absolucion of the quick and the
dead.
which are in the other? Since that he attributes unto himself the office of
saint Peter, for that that Saint Peter is absent from those that are living
wherefore (...) not content himself with the living. What has he to do with
the dead? If in the other world there be an premission of sins, and the (...)
of the (...): (...) take place, wherefore does he not leave (...) of the same
unto Saint Peter, and to the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs and confessors which
are there. For if it be needful to pardon sins to the dead in the other
world, those which are there present, and know their (...) they not better do
it then the Pope: (...) which (...) ^^^sent, and altogether ignorant (...)
estate and condition? They say that they cannot pardon sins to those that be
alive, nor absolve them except they confess themselves unto them ^^^ to know
and judge of them how can they (...) and give (...) unto the souls of the
dead, (...) not, and (...) confession, nor know whether they be (...) or not
whether they be de^eined ^. hell (...) Purgatory, or already The office of a
Lieutenant.
passed and arrived into (...) I (...) think that a liuetenant is (...) the
place of an other; which cannot (...) prop^^ person. Then if the Pope be the
(...) of Saint Peter: in this world, because that S. Peter is no more here,
how can he be his liuetenaunt in the other world, in which Saint Peter is, and
he is not? Behold a sort of liuetenauntes, the most straungest that ever was
in the world. For in steed to hold and keep the place, in which they ought to
be pr^sent, in the name of those that are absent they being absent, would
hold the place in which they cannot be in the name of those which are there
present. Wherefore I would counsel the Pope and his, to let the dead alone
from hencesoorth, and to meddle no more with them, and that they do leave the
charge unto Sain^t Peter and to Math, ^. c. 22
the other Apostles and Saints which are with them.


Hilarious. If Jesus Christ has said unto one of his Disciples: let the dead
bury the^ dead, we may well say unto those here: let y^ dead absolve y^ dead,
and be you careful but for those that be ti^ing. For I do assure them, that
they shall have enough to do to govern the living, and they shall ^nde
themselves more ^indled and let then they think, and more then they would.
Wherefore I believe that they shall be forced to let the dead al^ne, and to
leave all the charge unto Saint Peter and unto his compaignions: or for to
speak better (...) God; which has both the quick and the dead in his (...)
Wherefore we have no need to ^^men^ neither the quick nor the ^end unto y^
Saints nor Saints, ^ut (...) unto the Lord Jesus, who is the Judge and Savior
(...) the Pope says also that he is (...), I know not what shall be his
Church. For if the Pope be liuetenaunt of Jesus Christ: and the office of a
(...) is ^o hold the place of him that is absent, it follow^^^ then that I^su^
Christ i^ not in the Popish Church, but h^ (...) a (...). And so by that means
the Popish Church shall be without Jesus Christ (...) without God. Then of
necessity it must be that the Devil (...), and that be is the ^ead and the
God, as be is the God of this w^^ld. For in the Christian Church, Jesus Christ
has no need of a ^^^ar neither liuetenant, since that he (...) always
present, and that he has promised to be in the midst of his Disciples, and
with them until Mat, 18. c. ^0 and. 28. d 20
the ^nde of the world. Except we will call his ^uly spirit, his ^ear after the
imitation of Tertulian because that it r^igneth in us by him, and qiutheneth
us. ^husebius. Me thinks that no reason can persuade ^^^. For the answer
(...) I have alleged unto you of Alexander of Ales, has already satisfied all
your objections and replyings, (...) although that S. Peter and the Apostles
are in the other world, they are not therefore in Purgatory.

Wherefore their ministry and their power of their ^eyes, cannot be stretched
and pulled out the ^her, but are in heau^, in which there is no more need.


Theophilus. Also, ^^ more is the Pope neither the priests. I know not whether
that The keys of Saint Peter and the Pope.
their key be longer, then that of Saint Peter, or whether that there were more
space from the heaven unto Purgatory, then from y^ earth.


Hilarious. But how know thou, whether that Saint Peter has carried his key
with him or (...). For if the Pope have it, Saint Peter has it no more.


Theophilus, Saint Peter had two names, and was called before Simon, Now I
believe in deed, that the Pope may have the keys of Simon, not of Simon
Peter, but of Simon Peter. Mat. 16. c. 19 John. 1. ^^. 42
Simon Magus: the which argee not with the true ^oore, which is Jesus Christ:
nor with the true lock which is the word of God, the which is ^^^o the true
key of knowledge The keys of Simon. John. 10. ^. 7 Luc. 11. g. 52
for to open unto us the kingdom of heaven.


Thomas. He has then changed the key.


Theophilus. There is nothing truer.


Thomas, And his, to what door does it agree?


Hilarious. Unto that of the cofers ^ scrips, for to stuff and fill them,


Thomas. Then Purgatory is in our purses.


Hilarious. We have sufficiently pre^ed it. Purgatery of purses.
For they have so well purged us, that thou will say that they are made of the
(...) of the D^^ell. For any one cross may not ^ary in it, where that
Purgatory is.


Thomas. It must be called then from henceforth, Pag^tory, Pagatore.
or purge purse. Now if the Purgatory be so ^^e, it is not now needfall that
the key be too long for to open it. But whatsoever it be, the Popes have been y^
subtilest lockyers, and the greatest ^othsmiths y^ ever was in the world. The
great lockyer.
For there was never none, as far as I can see, which has made and
counterfaited more keys, nor which has made them to agree better to all locks.


Hilarious. The experience does witness it.


Theophilus. I do think yet upon an other reason, against y^ of Eusebius. If
thou will limit y^ ministry The priesthod of the dead.
of Saint Peter and of the Apostles, within the compass of heaven, and wilt
not suffer their power to be stretched forth even to the confins and end of
Purgatory, at the least thou shall not deny me, but that there be some
Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, and Monks in Purgatory, (...) thou will say y^ the^ do ^o all straight way into paradise, or into (...). Now if,
they be in Purgatory, wherefore ^^e ye not suffer them to have that office, in
the places, where they are present.


Eusebius. Because for that they are sinners as others are and subject unto one
judgment they are of the same condition as the others, and they cannot give
them that whereoff they themselves have need, and cannot have it for them,
Furthermore, as soon as they are dead, they are deprived from that office.


Hilarious. I have two reasons for to beat down thy answer: The first is
that I am abashed, that the Pope and his do attribute unto themselves the
power to pardon all sins, how great and wicked soever they be, yea, all
Sodomy, and if need he, the sin against the holy Ghost, notwithstanding
that it be irr^missible, and do give bul^ and pardons for all, so that one
do bring them money, and that they have also power to pardon the ve^^all
sins in Purgatory. For according to your own doctrine, none are there
detained and kept but for the venial sins. For the mortal sins, have no
purgation in the other world, but they must be punished in hell. And as to
that that thou say, that they are sinners, and subject to the same pains in
Purgatory, so are they in this world, and leave not off therefore to absolve
themselves the one to the other, although they should have killed Father and
Mother: and so make themselves The papisticall cream. Character indelibilis.
as white as the Collyers. Furthermore, you do call the impression of your
Cream and holy Oil with which you do anointe the Pristes, when they do
take their orders, Charector indelibilis, that is to say, a mark and a sign
which cannot be put out nor defaced. If it be so, the P^iestes do abide and
remain always Pristes, although they be dead. For you will not confess, that
that impression and mark is only done unto the body: But you do affirm,
that it penitrateth and pearceth even to the soul: of which it can never be
defaced nor abolyshed, yet nevertheless thou know better then I.


Theophilus. They do attribute unto it such virtue, that they do affirm for
cert^ine, that a pr^est, notwithstanding so. Chanes. de sacra. Corp. Ch^^.
that he be an heriticke, or an apostate, or desgraded, yet nevertheless be
shall have power always to consecrate the body of God, as well as others, if
he do pronounce the sacramental words upon the host, with the intencion to
consecrate.


Hilarious. Behold yet to confirm better my purpose I do not doubt for my
part, but that that Character is the mark, wherewith is marked the conscience
of those The burning of the consience 1. T^^oth, 4. ^. 2.
which shall give heed unto spirits of error and deuilish doctrine, and which
are Apostates of the faith, according to the prophecy of saint Paul. That is
the mark of the great whore of Babylon without which one cannot sell The mark
of the whore. Apoc. 13. c. 8
nor buy, nor have any place in the Popish Church. That is a mark clean
contrary, unto that which the Angel printed in the foreheads of the elect of
God. Now since Apoc. 7. ^, 4
that the Apostles of Jesus Christ, and the true bishops and priests, which
by them were ordained, have not had that Cautor that is to say Mark (I had
thought to have said Charecter) I am not abashed, if they have not such power
in the other world, as the Pope has in the same and in this. But it is an
other thing of him and of his which do depart out of this world, with this
Cauter (I do beguile my self always) I do say The example of Friar Roger.
with that Char^^ter, which they do bear always with them. Wherefore they
ought to have no lesser power there then here. And y^ same I will prove by y^
example of Friar Rogers a C^rdelier, which is recyted in the book of the
conformities of saint Fraunces. It is there written, that after that he was
dead, he appeared unto a certain woman, who confessed unto him all her
sins, and he gave her obsolution. If h^ being dead had the power to come to
hear the confession of the living, and to absolve them, wherefore shall not
his other compagnions beeinge dead have, and chiefly the Popes and Bishops,
who have ordained them and confirmed them, as much power among the dead?
Furthermore, if according to the witness of your Doctors, others may satisfy
for us, not only during our life, but also after yt we be dead, wherefore Tho.
did. ^5 q. 2. and did. 20 q. ^. ar. 3. and did. 4^. q. 4. ar. 1.
cannot we after that we be dead satisfy for our selves, and to cause Masses
to be song in Purgatory, since that there are so many Priest's Popes, and
Bishops for to do it? What think thou Thomas.


Thomas. Thou say well. But I think that they cannot have their hoasts and
singing cakes.


Hilarious. Yet they had nevertheless fire enough for to seethe or bake their
gods.


Thomas. If it be so, as they say, there is too much. And therefore I think
that they cannot have hoasts, chalyces, aulters, nor vestements. For the fire
will schorch and consume it all.


Hilarious. Thou make a good reason. But by that count, how can the bulls and
pardons of the Pope be kept and preserved from the fire, which are sent thither
by hole cart loades, and which some do cause to be buried with them, for to
carry them thither, since that they are but paper and parchment? The bulls in
purgatory
As Much may we say of the rule and habit of Saint Fraunces. What say thou
Theophilus.


Theophilus. There is yet an other point. If they will say that those which are
in Purgatory, can no more merit, neither for themselves, nor for others, they
cannot say the like (without speaking against the doctrine, which they have
given us) of ye saints which are in Paradise. For they do affirm, that they
pray unto God for us, and that they are our intercessors and advocates toward
The intercession of the Saints for us.
him, and that in seeing God, which sees all things, they do see all as in a
Mirror or looking glass. If they do pray for us which are yet in this life,
because of the great Grego. Rat. (...) off. ^^. 7 Rub. de off. Mort.
love and charity that they have toward us, wherefore do they not also
willyngly pray for their brethren deteyned and kept in the fire of Purgatory?
For they should have a great deal more reason to do that, if they had any
care or charge of men. And that for many causes.

First that the estate and condition of the one and the other agrees more,
then it does of the dead to the living. Secondly, because that they themselves
can better perceive of their estate and condition, and whether they be more in
pain, or whethether they be out of it, then we. For there is more agreeing of
the spirits to the spirits, which are separated from the body, then to us
which are yet wrapped in them. And which is more, if yt the souls of Aug. li.
de ^ur. pro mor. Again. 13. q. 2 Fatendum Ra^. d^^^. off. R^b. de off. mor.
Purgatory do know, either by divine revelation, or by the report of Angels,
or of ye souls of them which daily do depart out of this world, that which
is done upon earth, as your Doctors do testify and affirm, can they not
as well report and tell unto the Saints that which is done in Purgatory? It is
not like to be true, i^ there be any, but that they are better advertised then
we, and that many ways. And if they be advertised, I cannot believe, that they
are so inhumayne and ungentle, if they do pray for the living, but that they
do pray a great deal more for those poor souls: since that they are in so
grievous torments, without any comparison that may be in the world. I do
speak always according to your doctrine. And this is the third reason, by
the which I will conclude against the Priests, either that the Saints do not
pray for the living: or ye it is in like manner necessary and a great deal
more needeful that they pray for the dead. Now if they pray for the dead, I am
of an opinion, that we leave unto the^ all the charge. For it agrees better to
them then unto us, since that they are no more of this world, but of the other,
in which are those that are dead: and that we have no more cure and charge but
of the living. If they will deny that they do not pray for the dead, I have
more just and lawful reason to deny unto them, that they do not pray for the
living: Except peradventure they would say, that the Saints were as cruel, as
th^^ which will suffer those poor souls always to burn, which do bring unto
them no money.


Hilarious. Thou have put forth very strong reasons.

But I will a little help Eusebius, to defend his cause, and will propounde
and put forth reasons against th^^e to which thou shall have much a do to
answer. Thou speak of the saints, what will thou say, if I prove unto
thee by lively and strong reasons, that the Pope The Pope has more povv^r
(...) the sa^^ts
has more power and authority then they?


Theophilus. That should be an other ^atter.


Hilarious. I will make thy self confess it. Who has more power and
authority, either God or the saints?


Theophilus. There needs not an answer unto thy question. For one may
understand it without speaking. There is not a Papist, but will ^asely
confess, that there is not a saint, which has virtue nor power, but so much
as God will give unto him.


Hilarious. I have my meaning, and I will now make thee ye^de thy self
vanquished. For thou have already confessed unto me of thine own prop^^
mo^th, and have confirmed my proposition, the which I ^^l yet better prove unto
thee, and I will conclu^e all our dispu^a^ion in a little sillogisme. And I
will take for my Mayor and for the first proposition of my antecedent, that
which thou have confessed unto me. Take then my Syll^gisme. God has more power
and authority then the Saints. Now the Pope is God. ^^go, the Pope has more
power Syllogism^.
and authority then the Saints. The Mayor is already confessed by thee. It
rests now but for to pr^ue the Minor, and the second proposition: and
afterward the consequence and conclusion s^albe cert^ine and ^^^uby^able. Now
but that the Pope is God in ^arth, thou can not d^ny^st, for many reasons,
the which I will not n^we The pope is god ^^ ^ more then god.
sh^we forth. But I will do more. For I will pr^ue, that he is not only the
God on earth, but which is more, in heaven and in hell, and that he does make
things which God never did make.


Theophilus. By that accempt, the Pope then shall not have not only more power
then the Saints, but more then God himself.


Hilarious. It is very true, and thou thy self shall Judge it, provided that
thou do hear my reasons. I will not allege for confirmation of my theme,
that which saint Paul has written of Antechrist, the man of sin, Antechrist.
2 Thessalonians. ^, 2. ^. ^
the son of perdition, which exalts himself above all that is called god,
or which is worshipped, so y^ he shall sit as god in the Temple of God, and show
himself as God: Notwithstanding that that Prophecy and titles do agree
meruaylously well to that God of whom we speak. But I will proceed by an
other way, the which shall serve for an exposition of those words of Saint Paul.


Theophilus. If thou do as thou say the Pope and all the Papists shall be
much bound unto thee. For they say only that he is God in earth. Now if he be
but God in the earth, he has then nothing in heaven: And he must not open the
gates of Paradise unto the souls of Purgatory. And so I may serve my self
with their publyque witness, for to prove that which I said of his keys,
which cannot be stretched forth out of this earth.


Hilarious. A man may easily reply thereon. For according to their doctrine,
Purgatory is in the earth. Wherefore, since hat he is God in earth, he may well
have some power. There should be an other reason, if Purgatory were The place
of Purgatory. Plut. l^. de fa^^^ qu^ v^situr in Luna^.
betweee the Moon and the earth, where Plutarch puts it: except they will
say that with the earth they do also compare the air and all the other
elements, making the Pope as well God in the air, water and fire, as in the
earth: at the least thou will not deny, but that he may well have the keys of
hell, for to lead thither the souls: and The keys of hell.
that he is the God of the same, if it be in the center of the earth, according
to the common opinion of his Doctors. But for to come unto the matter, thou
which art a Theologian know, that there be two manner of ways to The manners
to know God ^xod. ^^. ^ 23 To see God before and (...)
see and know God. There is a manner to see him before: a^^ a manner to see him
behind. To see him before, that is to say in his being, glory, and majesty,
it is not given unto mortal man. For he shall not be capable of such vision
and knowledge. And therefore he answered unto Moses, who desired to see his
glory, that he should not see ^ ^o. ^^. ^. 20
it before, but he would show unto him only his hinder and back parts. I do
understand and mean according to that which I have learned of some
Theologians, that to see and know the back parts of God, that is to see and
know him by his works, by his effects, and in his creatures. For since that he
is incomprehensible unto man in his substance, glory and majesty, the way and
manner that he has given unto man for to know him, is this: to wit, by his
word: by his works: by his effects: and his creatures: with which man ought to
content himself without enquiring curiously of the nature and essence of God,
the which we cannot comprehend. what knowledge of god is necessary for us
For we have no need to enquire what ^e is in himself: but what he is toward
us: the which he has manifested unto us chiefly by Jesus Christ his son: by
the works that he has done and made in him and by him, and that he does
always. And ye manner of knowledge, after the manner of ye speaking Argument A
posteriori
of ye dialecticians and Logitians, may be called A posteriori. I will then
prove A posteriori, the deite of ye Pope: that is to say, by his works and by
his effects.


Thomas. I will make here a little incident or state. Thou have now altogether
astemed me, in hearing thee speak. For thou art run more deeper and
profounder in Theology, then ever Theophilus has yet done, which
nevertheless is a better Divine and Theologian then thou art.


Hilarious. I have also learned the greatest part of that which I know of
Theology of him. But I would also that thou should know, that
notwithstanding that you do account me but for a fool and a babbler, yet I am
notwithstanding some thing wiser then you do think, but that wisdom
continues not with me much.

For I will now cast my self into an other Theology, contrary unto this. Yet
nevertheless for to enter thereunto, and the better to declare the difference
that is between the divine Theology and the Theology Papal, I will begin
my probation by the author^tie of Jeremy saying: Iere. 1^. d. 20
Can a man make those his gods? He rebukes the Idolatry of the people of
Israel, and therefore he makes that Man making gods.
demand, as of a thing impossible. For how can a man make gods, since that he
cannot be made himself, if God do not make him? How shall he then make gods?

Yet nevertheless the Pope attributes that power unto himself. Wherefore it
must needs be that he be more then man: yea more then God. For we do not read
that God did ever make gods, to take God in his proper signification. For he
alone will be God, and there can be no more but one alone: or otherwise he
should not be God. Except One only god. Deuteronomy. 6. ^. 4
we will do as Plato, to have a great God, which makes other little gods.
Therefore has he said that he is God, Psa. 42. ^, ^ and. 48 ^
and that he will not give his glory and power to none other. But the Pope
takes authority and power not only to make Gods and Saints, but also to
unmake them again: the which I will prove unto thee briefly. And without
alleadgeing many examples for to avoid proli^itie, I will put forth but one,
by which one may judge of the others. I will take Boniface the eight of whom
Platin gives this witness, for y^ ep^loge and conclusion of his legend,
Boniface the ^.
saying: In this sort and manner died Boniface, he which enforced himself more
to give terror and fear unto emperors, kings princes, nations and people, then
to induce and lead the^ in religion: and which endeavored himself to give and
take away kingdoms: to chase and banish men and to bring them again at his To
take away and give ^ingdome^.
pleasure: having more greater thirst and desire of the gold, the which he got
out of al parts, more then one could declare. Now this differs not from that
which the Decrees and Canons d^ witness of the power. of the Pope, saying:
That it aperteineth unto him that he may give, take away, change transport the
empires and kingd^ms, principalites and s^ig^^or^es, as many among the^ of long
time have practiced, and showed by effect, of whom the examples shall be to long
to rehearse. Now we cannot deny, but that y^ same is an act proper unto God
alone, according to the witness of Dan^el (...) ^, 3, 4. ^
and of all the Prophets. Since then that the pope usurps unto himself, that
is already a c^rt^^ne witness of his de^tie: And without abandoning and
forsaking Boniface, Plat in ^it. B^^^f 8 (...) ^ing of (...)
he himself did not show himself ne^lygent in that matter, against Philip
king of France, of whom he demanded the Arch^^a^ry of Na^bon, for to declare
unto him, that if he did not release out of pr^s^n a Bish^ppe which by him was
sent thither, that his kingdom was co^^^^a^^ unto the Church, and that the
king was excommunicated and cursed: and that he would deliver and absolve all
the Frenchmen of the oath and f^a^t^^ that they made unto the king.


Theophilus. Behold there a goodly act of deity. But there is nothing which
is more common unto them then that.

H^ll^rius. I will yet declare unto thee of others which are no less
aua^leable, the which Plati^^ rehearses in like manner. What do y^ words
signify y^ he said unto Prochet the Archbishop of Genes, when he did cast down
himself Prochet Archbyshoppe of Genes. (...) d^ ^^. (...) The as^hes of pope
Bo^^ace, Me^eto homo. quia (...) ^^, and ^^ (...) reuer^^r^^. G^bell^^s. Memeto
hom^ quia G^bell^^^^ ^^, and cum Gibell^^^ (...) re^^r(...).
at his f^^te upon Ashwed^^sday? Where the Priests were accustomed to say:
Remember man that thou art ashes, and into ashes thou shall ^etourne again: he
said unto him, in changing some words: Remember man that thou art a Gibell^
and with the Gibelli^s thou shall return into ashes. And after that he had
said unto him that, he did not put the ashes upon the head as the custom is,
but did cast them in his eyes, and deprived him of his Archbishoprick^:
Afterward he restored ^t to him again, when he did understand that the
Card^^als were not (...)red and come from Genes. Thou do here s^^ that he
makes and vnmaketh Bishops, as he list, and speaks as a God: He makes men
to r^t^^^n^ into ashes, even as from ashes they came. And for to make that
goodly act show the fayrer, I will rehearse unto the two others, which are yet
more better witnesses of the Popish d^^tie.

The first is of Stephen the sixth, who wa^ so mad against The ^^g^ and
Pope Formosus, that after that he had taken his counsel, madness ^^ Pope
Stephen against ^o^^osus.
caused his body to be taken out of his tomb, afterward spoiled him of his
pontifical and Popish apparel, and in steed of them caused him to ^ee cladded
with lay men's apparel, and did cut off the two fingers of the right hand,
the which the Priests used in their consecration, afterward, caused them to
be cast into the ^^ud Tiber, and commanded that he should be buried as a lay
man, in the grave and burial o^ y^ lay men. Now consider, ^f one Pope has such
power over an other Pope, which nevertheless is God, and not only God, but
can make God, and vnmakers of Gods, which do take power of him to make Gods,
let us think what power he can have over others. For in the time that
Formosus was Pope, he could not have been in the Popedom, nor in the order of
Priesthood, but y^ he did make Gods, of his two fingers which were cut off,
and cast into Tyber. Furthermore, how many Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, and
Monks were made Plat. in vit. Steph. ^. St^ll^ ^leri^or^ O ^e^era^d^
sacerd^tum dign^tas, si digne and sacerdo ta^^^er vixeris ^ntra quorum manus,
velut in v^ero virginis, filius d^i incarnatur. Item. Iste qui crea^^t me,
ded^t m^hi crear^ s^. Qui crea^it ^e sine me, creatur med^ante me. The
creatours of the Cr^a^our
during his Popedom: which all of them were forgers, and makers of Gods? And
yet nevertheless they could not have that power but of him. Wherefore one
might rightly say of him: The Lord, the God of Gods. For there is not a Priest
of how small learning soeu^r he be, which according to their doctrine, but
dares to attribute unto himself the power to make Gods. For which I will have
none other witness, but their book, entitled Stella clericorum, in which are
written such words: O how venerable is the dignity of the Priests, between
whose hands the son of God is incarnate, as in the womb of the Virgin: And
afterward speaking^ ^n the person of the Priest. He which has created me,
has given me power to create him. He which has created me without me, is
created by the means of me. Afterward, he concludes: since then that the
Priest is of so great a dignity, that he is the creator and maker of his
creator, and of every creature, it is not convenient to loose or damn him.
They do^ find it inconvenient that God should damp^e the priests, because that
they are the creators Item Cum ergo ta^ ^e dignitatis sit sacerd^^ quod creator
sit sui creator^^, and tot^^ creaturae, ipsu^ perdere vel damnare inco^uenien^
est. Vnde Isidorus. Sicut patrem interficere filiu^ impos^bile est, sie
creatorem perdere creaturam in convenient est. Sylla and Mar^^is.
of hun. And yet nevertheless the popes may well condemn the popes, yea, out
of this world, sithence that they are before God their sovereign Judge, which
are not only priests, but which is more, do make the priests. Do thou
find this strange Thomas?


Thomas. To speak the truth, those Gods do handle very evil the one the
other.


Hilarious. I doubt not but that which pope Stephen has done unto Formosus,
does not seem strange unto thee. But pope Sergius the third has done unto
him worse.


Thomas. Then that poor soul Formosus was most unhappy after his death. They
have done against the proverb, which forbids to fight with the dead.


Hilarious. Thou may have well said it, if thou had heard the history all
out. The cruelty of L. Sylla against Marius was not so great. But I think
nevertheless but that those popes have taken their patron upon him. For so did
he cause Marius to be taken out of y^ earth after y^ he was dead to be avenged
of him. And Sylla fearing that one should not do to him the like after he was
dead, commanded that his body should be burned. For until his time the
famelly of which he came off, accustomed to bury the bodies of the dead, and
had not as yet burned them as others did. But for to return unto Sergius,
thou must understand. First, that he has so reproved all the acts of
Formosus, that those whom Formosus did make priests, should return Plat. In
vit^. Serg. 3. Sergius and Fermesus.
again to take their orders of him, judging those unworthy to be priests whom
Formosus had made, if they did not the same. And not being content to have done
that dishonor unto Formosus after his death, caused his body to be taken out
of the sepulcher again, and did not only cut off the fingers, or the hand, as
Stephen his predecessor did, but did cut of his head as a malefactor, even so
as though he were a live. Afterward did cast the body into the stud ^yber, as
unworthy of burial and human honor. ^hou can not now deny Theophilus,
but that the popes have power ^oth over the Gods, and over the quick and the
dead. And for more greater confirmation hereoff, To excommunicate the dead. 2.
4. q. Sane. 2
they have their Canons, which do give unto them power to judge, not only the
quick but also over the dead, and to excommunicate and accurse the heretics,
but which to more, Pope Boniface has better declared his divine power, against
S. Harman, whose body and bones he caused to be Herman condemned by the Pope.
Plat. in vit. Bonis. 8.
dug up, who^ those of Ferrara have honored and accounted for a Saint
already the space of xx. years, and condemned him for an heretic, and burned
him: As some say that they have also done y^ like of wikchf, who nevertheless
was of better learning the^ his adversaries. But that same is always common to
all the papistical sect, as de Roma the defiler of the faith has well
confirmed it those years past, in two poor faithful Christians at Aix in
Prouence. He has stocked and imprisoned them so much, and has so scorched
and burned their feet and anckles within their boots, which he filled with
grease, and so putting to fire, that those poor people and martyrs of Jesus
Christ could not tarry the time to be altogether burned, but they died whilst
that he was absent, and were buried by y^ hangma^ in unhallowed ground, because
that they were accounted by them for heretics. Yet nevertheless that cruel
tyrant de Roma could not be ^f ^oma the ^hler of the ^aith.
contented with all that, but was very angry because they buried them, and caused
the^ to dig the^ up again, and to burn the being dead, since y^ he could not
burn the^ being alive. On y^ contrary, even as Boniface, has caused this S.
Ha^man to be dug up and to be condemned for an heretic and bu^ned Saint
Herman.
him, who nevertheless was accounted for a Saint^ he has also canonised S.
Jews, who was of y^ blood roial, who as Saint Jews. canonized.
some men say, was professed of y^ order of S. Fraunces. Also in like manner,
pope, Felix and Gregory have ordained that one should celebrate yearly, feasts
and sacrifices in y^ memory of y^ martyrs. Now what other thing is y^ but to
judge the^ saints and to deify them? But to y^ end y^ every one do not
attribute unto themselves the power to make Gods as the popes, and that every
one do not honor him y^ comes in their fantasy. Pope Alexander y^ third has
ordained y^ no man should be holden and accounted for a Saint, and that no
divine honor should be attributed unto him except that he were first enrolled
among the Saints and canonised, by the commandment and ordinance of the
Apostolical seat. That commandment and degree is written in the decretals,
in the title of the relics of Saints. Since then that he canoniseth and makes
Saints, afterward when they are made he vnmaketh them, it follows then that
he makes and vnmaketh the Gods, and that he is Judge both of the quick and of
the dead. For all that is God unto man to whom he gives the honor due unto
God. Now we cannot deny but that the superstitious and Idolaters do give unto
their Saints and unto dead men, the ^onor Dead men the gods unto Idolaters.
due unto God alone. Wherefore it follows that they are their Gods, as well
as to the Idolaters, those whom they have accounted for Gods, which
nevertheless were dead men, which have been canonised by the kings, Princes and
Senates, and the common error of the people, even as the Herodia. li. 4.
pope and the superstitious do yet use at this day. Since then that the pope
makes and vnmaketh such Gods, which are dead men, and judges, condempneth,
and absolueth them, it follows then that he is the Judge of the quick and
the dead: the which is also declared, by the example of y^ Emperor Henry y^
fourth, who was excommunicated: afterward was put into a cruel prison, in y^
city of Liege, by his proper Henricus. 4.
and only son, in the which he was strangled: and so as many do affirm, by
the commandment of his own son, who secretly sent unto him the hangman.
And therefore for that he dyed excommunicated, he was not buried in the holy
ground, until that he was absolved and delivered from his exco^municating,
after his death, by y^ pope: by y^ means of which absolution, he was carried
to Spire, to the sepulcher of his fathers. Will thou now deny, that the pope
has not more power then the Saints, and that he is not greater Lord then
Jesus Christ, and as much to be feared or rather more then God? For Jesus Christ
has said, and witnessed ^^^rely, that his kingdom is not of this world.

But the Pope will have it both in this world and in the other. Furthermore, he
admonishes us not to fear those Math, to, c. 28
which can but only kill the body and do no more, but let us fear him only
which is able to destroy both body and soul and to cast them into hell. Since
then that the Pope attributes unto himself such power, that after that y^ he
has killed the bodies, he persecuteth still the souls after the body is dead,
and excommunicateth the dead and sends them into hell, who will deny that he
is not God, and that he may not use the authority of his keys, as well
toward the dead, as toward the living? And that his bulls and pardons do not
extend and stretch forth unto The virtue of the bulls and pardons.
the dead and to the souls of Purgatory? As it appears by the doing of Pope
Sixtus the fourth, Innocent the eight, Pascale the fifth, Calistus, and a great
many other Popes which have given full remission by their bulls and indulgences
both to the quick and the dead: And oftentimes for small causes: As for to go
and visit a certain Chapel: to make a certain voyage, and other like
matters: But upon condition, that he have always ready money. And the better
to witness that Popish deity, Pope Boniface the eight would not have his
Iubile among the Iubile of the Pope. Plat in vit. Bems. 8. ^ubile of God.
Leuit. 5, b. 11
Christians, as God had it among the Israelites, but of an other sort. For God
ordained the year of the great Iubile, from fifty years to fifty years,
for to comfort the poor people: for to render and restore the wages and
possessions unto the poor that are in debt: for to deliver the poor bondmen
out of servitude and bondage, and for to prefigure and foreshew the year of
grace, and the deliverance and liberty which Jesus Christ ought to bring unto
the Christian people, according to the prophecy of Esaias and of the Luc, d. c,
16 Esa. 61, a, (...)
other prophets. But the Pope Boniface in the year 1300 as if Jesus Christ was
not come, and that he had not by his coming declared unto us the year of y^
great Iubile, which shall endure until the end of the world, and by the
which we are affranchised from the ser^tude of sin, death, devil, and of
hell, as putting himself in the place of Jesus Christ, has constitute^ his
Iubile, by the which he has promised full remission of sins, unto all those
which will come visit at Rome the Church of Saint Peter, and of Saint Paul:
And has commanded that it should be always celebrated from an hundredth
years unto an hundredth years. For he fears least the old custom of the
ancient Panims should in succession of time be altogether abolished.


Thomas. What custom?


Hilarious. They have accustomed The plays of the panyms.
to play in the honor of their Gods, jests, histories and diverse other plays,
which they do call seculer plays, because they do not celebrate it but from an
hundredth to an Luds seculares.
hundredth years. And therefore the Heraldes do cry which declare and publish
them: Come and see the games the which none of you shall never se any more.


Eusebius. But Boniface has done clean contrary to that y^ thou say. For
he has constituted the Iubile for to abolish the memory of those Panish plays.


Hilarious. He has changed plays into plays, and those which profited him
nothing at all he has changed the^ into others more profitable for him. But
the other Popes which came afterward, seeing and perceiving that that Iubile
was too long for them, and that they could not have so good a part for their
pray, have abrogated and made shorter the time. And therefore Pope Clement the
sixth has remitted it from 50. years to 50. years. Clement. (...). Plat. in
vi^. Clement. 6. Sextu^ B^nauenture de^^ied. Alexander. 6
And after him, Pope Sextus the fourth, who has dei^ied and put among the
saints. S. Bonauenture, has again remitted it from xxv. years to xxv. years:
and has celebrated the first, in the year 1475. Afterward, Alexander the
sixth, who was pope in the year 1500. following the example of Sextus, has yet
better enlarged that Iubile. For ^e has not only held and kept it at Rome,
but has so enlarged it thorowout all Christendom, that there remains almost
no city, village, nor parish, but that he has made them p^rta^ers of it.


Thomas. They may then be well called Gods liuetenaunts in earth. For since
that they do it (...) y^ ^^^t, Jesus Christ is well at leisure. He ^ught to
have no great care, neither for the quick nor for the dead, since that he has
such liuetenauntes: we shall be compelled The Pope the judge of the quick and
of the dead.
to change our Credo, and whereas in the same we consesse that he shall come
from heaven for to be the Judge of the quick and the dead, we must give that
title unto the Pope.


Hilarious, A good Sophister will easily absolve thy doubt. For we confess
that Jesus Christ shall come at the time appointed. Wherefore they will
conclude that Jesus Christ is not yet really and in every deed, Judge of the
quick and of the dead, but that he shall be: Or if thou will that I do tell
thee in their language: That he is Judge, Non actu sed habitu and aptitudine,
but that the Pope is, not only in power remote and future, but actu, and in
potentra propinqua propinquissima: that is to say, of act, d^ede, work and
power near and present.


Thomas. Beholve a goodly solution. In the mean while then, Jesus Christ shall
rest, and the Pope shall doc^all.


Theophilu^. I am abashed, if their bulls, indulgences and pardons have such
power. How Gregory has passed them Gregory. (...). has made no mention of the
bulls for the dead.
over, without making any mention of them, when he comprehended all the means
by which the living, might comfort the souls of purgatory. For he did put and
declare ^nt four, and touched not one word of the bulls and pardons. But there
is yet an other point, that which y^ doctor Hostiensis, which is of great
reputation among the papises, Hostiensis contrary unto the bul^es.
was not of opinion that the pope can do such things by his pardons and
indulgences, but has holden the contrary. ^ea, and the other doctors, as
Bonauenture, Thomas of Scolastical doctors doubting of the bulls. Re^sperg.
de mor. (...). ser. d^m. sexa.
Aquin, Alexander of Ales, Giles, D^rand, Richard, Peter of Tarentais^, and
many other like, hau^ had sometime the thing in doubt, and have only disputed
of it, as of an opinion: afterward have taken upon them baldness to define
upon it, and to give their sentence, as if they were well assured of it. But if
that which they do write of the bulls and pardons be true, it is great felly for
the papists, to bestow any more any pennye, nor half pennye, neither for the
funerals, nor for y^ masses, vigils, nor other suffrages for y^ dead, and that
they should reject a^ other manner Bulls doing all things.
of doings, for to hold themselves only to y^ bulls and pardons, and to buy
them for to draw the s^ules from Purgatory. For it should not cost them so
much, and should have sooner dispatched and ri^ away the poor souls from
Purgatory. For if the Pope has in his hands the treasure of the The treasor of
the church, and the dispensation of the same. Alex. de A^es. In. 4. Sent.
Re^sperg. de mor. virt. sermon. D^m. in sexa.
Church, and has the power, as Alexander de Ales witnesses, by the power of
his keys, and by the means of his indulgences to distribute and bestow them,
as well to the living as to the dead, the Papists have no more need of any
other thing. For even as they have by their Masses and other inu^ntions,
abolished and put out the virtue of the death and passion, and of the sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, so the Popes, which have been the authors of the bulls and
indulgences have abolished masses, suffrages, and al meritorious works, for the
quick and for the dead, which their predec^ssors have invented, without the
word of God. And so by that means one shall have no more need, not only of
Jesus Christ, but also of their masses, nor of all that that they can do: but
it is sufficient for all, to have paper and parchment written, and bulls signed
and sealed with wax or with lead. ^ut which is more, I am very much abashed,
how they dare to attribute so much power over y^ dead, to their bulls, keys and
absolutio^s, since that the Pope Gelasius and their decre^als and Canons do
witness and openly confess, that the church can bind^ and unbind those y^ be
living, and not the dead: and that w^e do not read, that the same was ever
commanded or done, not of Jesus Christ himself, which al^ne has the power to
do that. But has said namely unto S. Peter: All that that thou shall bind or
unbind upon the earth, shall be bound in heaven. He has said namely, upon
earth. For he has never The power of y^ ^e^es limi^ted in this world. 24 q. 2
ca. Quod aut. and le^atur. Mat, 16. c 19
said, that he that shall be dead being bound shall be vnb^und. Behold the very
words of the Canons, which do well way the words of Jesus Christ, and do
confirm y^ that I have said, of the authority of the keys, at the least in
this place: in which is said very plainly, that by those words of the gospel
is declared, that none can be excommunicated, or absolved after he is dead. For
he says: That which thou shall bind or unbind upon earth. He says not
under the earth, declaring that we may bind and un bind those that be alive,
for y^ diversity of their merits but we cannot give sentence of the dead.
Behold the question that Gratian propounded, and the resolution in his own
words.


Thomas. How can that agree with that which has 24. q 2. ca. Sane.
been already alleged of the very Canons, which do give power to
excommunicate the Heretics after they be dead. It must needs be that the
canons be contrary the Contrariety of the Canons.
one unto the other.


Theophilus. That is not new nor rare with them. But the glosers do excuse
that by their interpretacions and exceptions. I do not deny, but that we may
condemn To excommunicate the doctrine of ye dead.
dempne after that one is dead the false doctrine that a man and an Heretic
shall hold during his life, if then it be manifested, even as it might be
done by some of them of whom they do allege the examples, for to advertise
the Churches, to the end that the faithful might the better keep themselves.
But to excommunicate and curse the persons, I know or see not how that can be
bo^ne with all by the holy Scripture, ^ith that they are before their Judge,
unto whom the Angels did send the Devil, as is written of Michael the
Archangell, who The angels durst no^ curse the devil. (...) pist. Iud. b. 9
disputing with the Devil about the body of Mo^es, durst not use railing
judgment against him, but said unto him: The Lord rebuke thee: Yet
nevertheless those here dare to enterprise more against men both quick and
dead, then the Angels durst against the Devils: although that they hold them
already for most certe^^e to be condemp^^ed of God.


Hilarious. I am yet abashed of one thing. If the Pope have such power to give
full remission from pain and fault by his bulls and moulgences, as well for
the quick as for the souls of the dead, I marvel that he has not already
long sithence made empti^ and cleansed Purgatory: and that he has not fetched
out all the souls, since that he gives so many pardons daily and hourly, and
not only he, but al ^is Cardinals, bishops, priests and monks.


Eusebius. In. 4 sent. Re^s^erg. de m^r. v^r. ser. d^m. (...).
There is a goodly answer unto that question. The first is, for that there
goes every day new into Purgatory. The other is, even as Saint Thomas and
saint Bonauenture do answer unto that objection, that it is very requisite
and needful, before that the indulgence and pardon be auayleable, that it
have reasonable cause: The dispensatio^ of the treasure of the Church.
and that the dispensation of the goods and treasure of ye church (in which are
assembled and comprised all the merits of Jesus Christ and all the merits of all the Saints and Saints, which ever were) should be done with moderation and
discression: Unto whom the pardons do profyt.
or otherwise god will not accept it. And therefore the pardons and indulgences
are not given unto any person, either for him or for any other, be he quick or
dead, but by reason of some good work that he has done, either for him self,
or in the name of those for whom the pardon is given. And therefore is
lymitted the power of all those which have the charge to give them, and al do
know, be they Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Moonks or Priests, The
power to give pardons lymitted.
how many they may give every day: except the Pope, which has not his power
limited, except he use the^ unreasonably, ye pardons the^ yt he will give, shall
not be available with god.


Hilarious. I understand what thou would say. The pope has heaped up
together all ye merits of Jesus Christ, of the patriarchs, prophets, Apos;tles,
Martirs, confessors, virgins, saints and saints of paradise, and of all the
Christian Church in a treasure, and a garner of which he alone has the keys
and can open or shut, and distribute little or much, when he will and as it
pleases him. The great Lockyer or locksmyth.
For he is the great lockesimth. But all the others are but as his servant, of
whom he lymitteth the power and the office of every one, in such sort, that
they cannot distribute, but that that he has delivered unto them, and of whom
they have the keys. Wherefore if it behooves that he have in ye treasury and
garner a great many of several cha^bers and cabins, of which many must have
the keys every one his own, for to depart and bestow that whereoff he has
the dispensation, without daring to touch the rest, except that sometimes,
those little varlets and lockesmithes do pick the lock and the door of the
great loksmith Pick locks.
and great treasurer, he knowing nothing thereoff, and that he be not
therewithal content: although that under his name and title, they streth
forth their power, as seems good unto them, and do forge keys, bulls and
pardons as many as they list, and always at the costs of the poor people. Now
the great lockesmith has no lymit, but that he has always reasonable cause,
for to give bulls and pardons as many as one would, so that money do come: or
otherwise he will suffer the poor souls to be roasted and tormented in
Purgatory, as long as the world shall continue, for want of one leaf of paper
or parchment with a little wax and lead. As concerning the others which have
the days limited that they may give pardons, I have a certain doubt, the
which I would yt I were resolved of it by thee Eusebius. For since yt the one
has power to give two or three thousand, an other two or three hundredth, an
other an hundredth fifty, forty, thirty or twenty, either more or less. I
would gladly know of thee what Clockes of Purgatory.
horologes and clocks, and what quadrans they have in purgary, for to measure
those days there. For since that there is no sun, moon nor stars, what days
and what years can they have? For the time is taken of the morning, of the
heaven and of ye course of ye sun. But those which are in purgatory, have
nothing of all this: Wherefore I cannot comprehend what years, what months, days
and hours they can have: and whether they be very long or short. Example of
the long days in Purgatory.
As far as I can imagine, by an example which Antonius Florentin recites in
his sum, ye days ought there to be marvelous long. For he says, that an
Angel carried thither a soul of a man, to whom he promised, that it should
tarry there but an hour. And as soon as that Angel did come again to see
that soul, it did begin to cry out upon him, and to call him liar, deceiuer
and traitor.


Thomas. To what purpose?


Hilarious. It said unto him: Thou have promised me, that I should be but an
hour and I have been here already more then an hundredth years. But the Angel
answered unto him: There wants a great many my friend. For thou have not
yet tarried a quarter of an hour.

Wherefore I do conclude, that it must needs be that the days and years be
there very long, since that a quarter of an hour is there compared to a
hundredth or thousand years of ours: or else that the fire is there meruaylous
hot, and that the time continues long to the poor souls.


Eusebius. I will tell thee as touching the pardons, it has been long time
sithence, that many people do know that there is in them great abuses.
Wherefore I will not much break my brains to maynteine them.


Theophilus, I do also judge it lost time to speak of such abuse, if I did
not see yt sithence ye time of Gregory, so many people to have been abused, and
that so many great Doctors, which are most esteemed amongst the Sophisters and
Schoolmen, have written of it, and have confirmed it so assuredly.


Hilarious. The power of the deal over the Popes
I know that thou do begin already Eusebius, to agree with us. I believe
that thou art of this opinion, that the Pope ought to let the dead rest,
without reigning over them, since that they have more power over the Pope, then
the Pope over them: as I will prove it by an example taken from the Autentike
book, which is entitled the conformities of Saint Fraunces. For I have never
read that the Pope has raised to life any dead person, and that he came to
answer before him, of all those whom he has cyted, condemned, absolved, or
excommunicated. But that book does witness manifestly that Friar Walter a
Cordelier and Bishop of Poytiers, has Pope Clement the (...) by Friar Walter
being dead.
caused to be cyted after his death by a Cedule, Pope Clement the firt, for to
appear before the eternal Judge, because that he had unjustly deposed him
from his office.


Thomas. And did the Pope appear there by virtue of that Cytacion?


Hilarious. If the book lie not, that was no jest. For at the very same day
which was prescribed unto him, the Pope dyed of a sodeyne death, and departed
sodeinely for to go and answer there. What say thou by this Eusebius? If
this history be false, it is a great dishonor for the Cardeliers, who do make
great account of that book, and do hold it to be very precious among them,
as a relicke, and revelation. And for the Pope also which has confirmed the
order of saint Fraunces, and of the four Mendicants. I know not what good
means we may here find for to maynteine that buylding, and The foundacio^ of
the order of the Mendica^ts.
the honor and authority both of the one and of the other. For since that the
Pope has confirmed the order of Saint Fraunces, the order of saint Fraunces is
builded and stayed upon the Pope, wherefore when the Pope shall fall, which is
the stone and foundation of that Church and of that buylding, also shall fall
the buylding, the order and the rule of ye Mendicants. Now we cannot deny, but
yt example does ruinate and overthrow ye Pope and all his power. I do not
dispute whether yt the history be true or false. For I believe that is as true
as it is true yt the Pope is God, and saint Fraunces conformable and agreeing
to Jesus Christ, as yt book full of blasphemies enforces it self to prove it.
But I consider only, that since that the Cordeliers have written such an
history, and do maynteine it by their books, that they do abate as much the
authority and power of the Pope, as the Pope does confirm their rule and
order. For how can this witness agree, with this proposition? The Pope cannot
err? And with the exposition which Eccius and his like do make of those
words? Thou art Peter and upon that rock I will build my congregation, and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

If the Pope be that rock or stone, and that stone is fallen, it must needs
be that all the Popish church do fall with it, and the orders of the four
Mendicants, which are his four Euangelysts, and his principal pillars. And
The Popes evangelists.
so by that means the Cordeliers whom the Pope has made, do unmake the
Pope, which has made them, and the creature vnmaketh his creator, and the
creator his creatures.


Theophilus. It chanced to them, as to the Madianits, The papistical
Madianites. Judge 7, g. ^2.
which destroyed themselves the one the other, with their own weapons, when
they heard the sound of the trompets, and pitchers of the army of Gedeon, and
saw the light of his torches. So in like manner since that Jesus Christ, our
true Gedeon, has put the trompets of his gospel. The true Gedeo^
into the hands of his little army, the which, by virtue of his holy spirit,
he makes to sound even unto the ends of the world, and causes the light of
his word and gospel to shine through out the earth, we ought not to doubt, but
that all those Madianits shall be in short time discouraged and discom^ited,
according to the Prophecy of Esaias: notwithstanding that the flock and company
of Esa. 9. (...)
Jesus Christ be little. For it is puissant enough by virtue of their
captain: besides that they themselves shall be discomfited with their own
sword, and shall fall into ruin, with their Purgatory which has but a little
hold or stay except thou do bring unto it again some stone and mortar for to
repair and amend it.


Eusebius. I will employ all the means or ways that I can find out. And
therefore mark and regard how thou shall ryd and discharge thy self of that
which is written in Saint Luke. where Jesus Christ says: The servant The
place of Saint Luc. 12 (...). 47.
that knows his masters will and prepares net himself neither did according
to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes: But he that knew not his
masters will, and yet did commit many things worthy of stripes, shall be
beaten with few stripes. Now it is even so, that in hell there is neither
little nor much. For the pains there are infinite. And therefore it is called
the hell fire, the ertreame darkness. Wherefore it follows that that pathe
Mat 22 b. 17
of which is here spoken off, cannot be understood but of the same of
Purgatory, in which may be more or less.


Theophilus. There should be no hell if thou will so interpret the scripture.
What opinion have thou of those The judgment of the Sodomits and Gomorria^s
Genos. 19. c. 24.
of Sodom and Gomorrha: Do thou think that they be in hell or in Purgatory?


Eusebius. I believe that they are in hell: since that their iniquity has been
so great, that it must needs be that God has consumed them, through the fire
of his judgment.


Theophilus. If there were found among them some, who feelyng the judgment of
God upon them, have remembered the preaching and admonitions which Loath made
unto them by the word of god, and which have had repentance and were sorry for
their sins, in requiring mercy of God with a good heart and good affection
in the midst of the fire: I will not maynteine that God has refused unto
them grace and mercy. For he has promised unto E^e^h. 18, (...). 2^
the sinner, as often as with a good heart he shall return unto him. Now if
there be any such among them, I leave that to the judgment of God, who knows
all things and those that are his. For he punishes sometimes some 2. Timo^. 2.
c. 1^.
men with corporal pains, with the reprobate, the which notwithwanding he
condempneth not with them to eternal dampnation, he punishes them corporally,
as he chastises and corrects his elect by aff^ictions, either because The
punishment of ye elect with the reprobate.
that they have been neglygent in rebuking the wicked and vicious: or else that
they have given some consent unto their vices, and have not had in
recommendation the honor of GOD as they ought to have had.

But because that they have not abidden and continued hard hearted, and have
not sinned against the holy Ghost, the Lord mittigateth their pain, and is
contented to chastise and correct them corporally, for to humble them, to make
them to acknowledge their fault, and for to be an example unto others: As the
Apostle witnesses of the Corinthians, who for the dispising of the Supper of
Jesus Christ, were chastised of God with diseases and death. Such might be the
kindred of Loath. For it is not like to be true that Loath would have taken
allyaunce The kindred of Loath.
with them, if they had been altogether as abominable as the others of the
city. Yet nevertheless because they were unbelieving and of incredulytie, and
that they lightly regarded all things, they were punished with the others, for
to give others to understand, that it is not good to dwell among the wicked
and to support their iniquity. Yet nevertheless I leave the same to the
judgment of God, who knows the hearts. But I only speak this to the end
we doee not judge rashly of his secrets and judgments, and except we have
express revelation: but those that have perseuered in such a heart and such
affection as they had, when they would have done vyolence unto Loath, and to his
guests which he had received into his house, and are dead in that wicked mind,
I doubt not but that they are perished. For we have the express word of god,
of the condempnation of such persons. For I doubt not that of those Jesus
Christ speaks not, when he spoke unto his Apostles, of those which re^ected
the preaching of the Gospel: Verily I say unto you, that those of Sodoma Math.
10. b. 15
and Gomorrha shall be handeled more easily in the day of Judgment then those
there. In what place shall be that handlyng? That shall not be in Paradise. For
where there is no pain, there needs no mitigation. Neither shall it be in
Purgatory: For according to your own doctrine, it shall then cease. It must
needs be then in hell.


Eusebius. But how can that be in hell, since that the pain there is infinite.


Theophilus. Thou must understand, that there is not so little a pain, which
is not infinite and importable, unto him which is forsaken of God, but yet
nevertheless God may and can make his judgment, his wrath and indignation to
be felt unto some more then to other some. But it follows not therefore, but
that all men are constrained to carry it, and but that it is a burden
importable to all men. Therefore it is so often written, that those which shall
have most sinned shall be most punished. Now those unto whom God has given
more favor and grace, and has given more knowledge of his will, then the
others, do sin most griuously. For they declare a more greater ingratitude,
malice and stubbernesse, and have less excuse. But it follows not therefore,
that the ignorance and negligence does excuse the others, but that they
Ignorance does excuse none.
have their part, Jesus Christ manaseth with a more grieuouser judgment those
which shall reject his Gospel because that God has showed unto them more
grace and favor, then unto the Sodomites and Gomorrians. Wherefore they do
render themselves more culpable and inexcusable. But although that the Gospel
has not been preached so clearly and plainly unto the Sodomites and
Gomorians, as unto us, yet Jesus Christ does not excuse them therefore
altogether, nor absolueth them of the judgment of God. But for to amplyfie the
ingratitude and malice of Punishment upon those which do reject the gospel.
those which reject the benediction and blessing of God, he compares them to
the most execrablest that ever were upon the earth. Not for to justify the
others, but the better to confound those here, demonstrating unto the^ that
their iniquity is so abominable, that God condempneth thom which may be
accounted and taken for good men, in comparison of these: not that they are,
but in comparison of the excessive iniquity of those here. After this manner
we must understand that place of S. Luke, without dreaming out a Purgatory.
For the pain of which Jesus Christ speaks off, may be here in this
world: or at the day of judgment: or in hell, as the same of the Sodomites,
Gomorrians and their like. Or thou shall be constrained to put into Pargatorye
all the wicked and reprobate, which have been sithence the beginning of the
world. For the Lord does always menace and threaten with more grievous pain
the successors sors, then the predecessors, because that they do agrauate
always more and more the judgment of God upon them, because that the light
is more greater revealed unto them, and that they have more examples of the
judgments of God, yt which they despise: and do yield themselves culpable, not
only of their wickedness, but also of the sins of their fathers and
predecessors, allowing them by their doings.


Thomas. The sleepers and dreamers may take from that place an argument for to
prove their dreams, because it seems by the words of Jesus Christ, that the
pain of the Sodomits and Gomorrians is differred until the day of judgment.
But thou have already shortened and cut off the way for them, in declaring unto
us bow the judgment is already done, and how it is yet to do.


Theophilus. These two places ought very well to incitate and stir us forward
to follow verity and to seek it. For ignorance exempteth us not from the
judgment of God, the which comes of our fault, chiefly in these days, that
the Gospel is so clearly revealed unto us.


Eusebius. Therefore I desire to know and well understand all those places
which might yet trouble my brains, among which there is one in the acts of
the Apostles, which some men do interpret for the Purgatory. It is there
written, that God has raised up Jesus Christ, and (...) place of the Act. 1.
d. ^4
(...) s^d the sorrows of Hell. Now he has not loosed the sorrows of the
hell fire or gebenne, which are eternal: nor of the Limb. For there is to be
had joy and consolation. It follows then, that the same ought to be
understood of the sorrows of Purgatory. As much may we say of many like
places which are in the Psalms, as these here, unto which David said: The
sorrows of hell compassed (...)
^e. Then Lord have brought my soul out of hell. God shall deliver my soul
from the power of hell, when (...) Psa^ (...), ^3
he (...). And Job says in like manner: O y^ thou wa^idest ^eepe me and hide
me in the hell, until thy wrath ^ere stilled: and to appointe me a time,
wherein thou might remember me? what other hell can we here understand,
then Purgatory?


Theophilus. I am abashed of ye great ignorance of such interpreters of the
scripture. For first, in ye place of the acts, it is not in ye Greek copies
the sorrows of hell, and it was not so written of S. Luke. For he has said,
the sorrows of death, and not of hell: although that in your common
translation it is written as thou say. But although it were so, all should
come to one end. For the text does plainly declare, that Saint Peter speaks
in that Sermon of the resurrection of Jesus Christ, and that he himself
expounds hell, for the tribulations, extreme sorrows, the death, the pit,
the sepulcher, the low places, and the estate and condition of the dead, from
which Jesus Christ is raised. He makes there no mention of the Limb, of
Purgatory, nor of the gehenne or hell fire. That same solution suffices for
all the other places by thee alleged. For that is very common in the
Scripture, to take hell in that signification, as it appears by those places
the which thou bast put forth. For how many times says the Prophet in those
same places? The sighings of the dead have environed me. I have called upon
thee in my trouble. I have Psalm, 2^. 30, 49
cried unto thee and thou have healed me. Thou have delivered me from those
that go down into the pit. He means none other thing by those words, but
that he sets forth and declares that hell from which he was delivered.
Wherefore I am greatly ashamed, both of Eccius and of Cochleus, for that they
were not ashamed, to allege such places for to maintain their Purgatory.


Eusebius. Whatsoever thou say, it seems nevertheless The place of the 1.
Cor. 15 To b^ baptized for the dead
that already in the time of Saint Paul, the Christians were of an opinion,
that the living might give some aid unto the dead, by that that he writes
of those which did baptize themselves for the dead. Now that could not
profit, neither those which were in Paradise, nor those which were in hell. It
must be then that it profits those of Purgatory.


Theophilus. Thou ought already to have understood by that which has
been said of that place, that it can serve nothing at all for Purgatory. I do
not deny unto thee, but that in the time of the Apostles, there were suffrages
and prayers for the dead. But that was among the Panims and Idolaters, as it
has been already very amply entreated off amongst us. And doubt not, but
that there remains some root of such superstition in some of those which are
called Christians. But if it were so as thou do understand it, it follows
not therefore that Saint Paul allows that manner of doing: As the ancient
Doctors themselves do witness it, namely Saint Ambrose. For I may well take
Ambro. in 1. Cor. 15.
an argument against a Papist (which will deny unto me the resurrection, or
immortality of the souls) with their manner of doings toward the dead, for
to beat him with his own swoorde, and yet I will not allow nevertheless
their superstition. But it is not needful to stay any more upon that place,
since that I have already declared unto thee, how the auncientes have
understood it, and how it is also expounded by others. For whatsoever
exposition that thou may give unto it, it cannot serve for thy purpose. And
there was never any of the auncientes, which has dreamed, that the same was
done because of Purgatory. For Epiphanius witnesses, Epipha. li. 1 Tom. 2.
here is. 18.
that those which baptized themselves for the dead, which were dead before that
they had received Baptism, did it to that end that when they should rise
again in the resurrection, they should not be punished for that they have
not been baptized in this world. He says that such was their opinion.
Wherefore it is easily to know, that they did not think of Purgatory.

He touches yet an other exposition of that place, the which he allows.
But yet it makes less for thee. To conclude, that place serves as much for
your broylers of souls for to prove your Purgatory, as for the Marcionistes
heretics, who as witnesses Theophilactus, do draw them to their purpose,
for to prove their Theophilact. (...), Cor. 15
baptism, which they receive for the dead. For when any dyed among them
without baptism, they had a custom, that one that was a live should enter
within the beer of the dead, or where the dead was laid. Afterward they did
come unto the beer and demanded of the dead, if he will be baptized? Then the
live man, which was there hid, in a low place under the beer, answered yt he
would. Wherefore they did Baptize him in steed of the dead.


Hilarious. They had yet more appearance, the^ our Bishops and Priests which
baptized the bells.


Eusebius. If those two arguments do seem unto thee weak and feeble, I will
alldge unto thee a stronger. When S. Paul did write unto The place of the Phil,
2, b. 9
the Philippians, that unto Jesus Christ is given a name above all names, yt in
the name of Jesus, should every knee boow, both of things in heaven and things
in earth, and things under ye earth. What understands he by those which under
the earth do boow their knees unto Jesus Christ? That cannot be understood of
the devils. For they have not accustomed to honor God, nor the damned also.
For their office is rather to blaspheme him. It must needs be then that they
be in Purgatory which do boow the knee unto Jesus Christ, which do honor him,
or otherwise ye words of S. Paul should not be true.


Theophilus. If by boowing the To bow the knee.
knee, S. Paul did understand the true divine service, the true invocation,
and the true honor which the elect do owe unto God, there should be some
reason and appearance in the argument. But S. Paul by that manner of speaking,
The seignyary of Jesus Christ.
means none other thing by boowing the knee, but that to Jesus Christ is
given such domination, that it is necessary that every creature be subject
unto him, and obey him, and acknowledge him to be Judge and Lord: the which
the good and the elect dowillingly and with a good heart: the wicked and
reprebate, in spite of their teeth. But they are nevertheless campelled. For
they cannot resist the virtue and power of Jesus Christ, which makes his
enemies his footstool. But the Apostle uses such Psalm. 110. ^. 1
manner of speaking, for to follow the style of the Prophets, and to declere
unto us that which the Lord has said by I say: I do live says the Lord:
Every knee shall Psa. 45. d. 23.
boowe unto me. The which the Apostle expounds by other words, saying: we
shall be all brought before the judgment scate of Christ. Afterward he
confirms ^om. 14 b. 10
that proposition by the very words of the Prophet, declaring that all that
comes to one effect. For because that the good and evil are compelled to
render obedience unto their Lords, and that they do declare commonly their
subjection and humility in boowing the knee and doing reverence before their
Lord, the Scripture uses such manner of speakinge for to signify the
obedience, reverence and subjection, that every creature must she we toward
God. Although that the same may be done diverse ways either by bowing the
knees, and without bewing the knees. For the Angels and the souls can no
better boowe their knees then the Devils: since that all of the^ have no knees:
which cannot be but to bodies: if we do not understand any otherwise those
figures of speaking. And therefore there is no inconvenience, to understand by
those which do boow the knees under the earth, the Devils themselves with all
the reprobate, which shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
and shall be compelled to acknowledge him to be their Judge, in great Who do
bow the knees under the ^rch.
horror and fear, as they have already showed by experience, in the time that
Jesus Christ was yet in his mortal body and passible, before that he was risen
again. For the wicked spirits were constrained to obey him, and to confess
him to be Christ and to pray unto him: Although that it was against their
wills, saying: O Jesus thou son of God, what have we to do with thee? Art thou
come hither (...) d. 10. Mar. 1^ 24
to torment us before the time be come? We know that thou art the holy eve of
God: And they besought him, saying: If thou cast us out, suffer us to go our
way into The prayer of the (...)
the herd of swine. In the very same manner as they are compelled to entreat
and beseech Jesus Christ, and to confess him, so shall they be compelled to
boow the knee unto him. And if they did that unto him whilst yt he was yet
mortal and passible, what shall they do now, since yt he sits immortal and
glorious at the right hand of God his father? And if they do beseech or pray
to Jesus Christ, may they not as well boow ye knee unto him? In ye sense the
ancients have understood, and Theophilactus expounds it expressly of ye
devils, Theophi. in Epist. phi^. 2.
which shall be constrained to give glory and honor unto Jesus Christ.


Eusebius. If thou have escaped yt place, I believe, yt thou shall not escape
so easily of the like, written in ye Apocalipse, where it is said: And all ye
creatures which are in heaven and on the earth, and under the earth, and in the
The place of the Apoc. 5. (...) 13
sea, and all that are in them heard I, saying: blessing, he nor, glory and
power be unto him that sits upon the seat, and The praise given to God of
all creatures.
unto the lamb for evermore. Thou can not here say but that it is spoken of
ye true praise and of the true honor which is due unto God, the which ye
devils, nor the reprobate cannot give unto him. And yet nevertheless it is here
said, that there be creatures under ye earth, which do give unto him that
praise, which can be none other the^ the souls of purgatory,


Theophilus. You do lack but the leg of a Fly for to build your arguments.
Do thou not see yt the holy Ghost uses an enumeration, by the which he
witnesses, yt all creatures in all places do praise their creator, and Jesus
Christ the true lamb, by who^ all is restored? But being not contented to use
an universal proposition, he also woult by enumeratio^ of creatures in
particular, conclude yt in general, because that that manner of speaking does
better express the thing, and does amplify better the glory of God, declaring
yt there is not an element, nor any place where God is not praised and
magnified, from the highest part of heaven unto ye bottom of ye earth and from
every part of the world. For as he writes, that the heavens declare ye glory
of God, and the firmament shows forth his handy works. Also there is not a
creature whatsoever it be, neither Psalm. 19. a. (...)
in Heaven nor in the air, nor in the water, nor in the earth, nor under the
earth, not so much as an Ant or Pismer, neither a worm, plant, tree, nor
stone, which preaches not, sings, prayseth, and magnifieth according to his
nature, in his manner.


Eusebius. How can the mute and dumb creatures speak, being without reason
and insensible, which have no sense, reason, understanding nor speech? It must
needs be that we do understand that of men.


Theophilus. How can the Angels and the blessed souls, speak and praise God,
which have no mouth as we have? And how can the Firmament, the Sun, the
Moon, and The speaking of the muet creatures and those that have no bodies.
the stars declare and show forth the glory of God, and declare his virtue
and power? for they have no soul, nor mouth as men have. Yet they have
nevertheless their mouth agreeing to their nature, for to render unto God the
honor which apperteyneth unto him. Even so ought we to understand of al other
creatures, which are all the lively Images of God, which declare unto us those
meruailes, and do speak better having no mouth, then the Images which have
mouths and speak not, and which cry not through their throat. And therefore
how many creatures Psalm. 1^5. b. 5
may there be under the earth which do praise God in that manner? And
notwithstanding that the dampened and reprobate do not praise him in that sort
as he is praised of the elect, yet they are nevertheless constrained to praise
and glorif^e him against their wills, and they cannot do nor speak any thing
which serves not unto his honor and glory.


Eusebius. Since that by thy expositions thou have already pulled out of my
hands all the arguments that I have against thee, I will display at once that
which remains behind. What will thou say upon that other place taken from
the same book? in which is spoken of the holy Apo^ 21. g, 27
city of the celestial Jerusalem, after this manner: there shall enter into it
no unclean thing. To which agrees that which is written in Esaias. This shall be
called the holy way, Esa. 35. d. 8.
no unclean person shall go through it.


Theophilus. What will thou that I should answer thee upon the same. There
is none that will deny, but that he must be purged from all his sins, before
he can come unto the eternal life. For flesh and blood cannot 1. Cor. 15. ss.
5^
inherit the kingdom of God. But the purgation is not done by the fire of
Purgatory, but by the blood of Jesus Christ, by the which we are washed and
purified, when through Apo. 1, b. 5 Act. 15. b. 9 John. 15 a. 3
the word of god and through faith our hearts are sprinkled. Therefore said
Jesus Christ unto his disciples: you are clean because of the words which you
have heard. We are purged, when we obtain remission of our sins, and that
the Lord forgets them, not imputing them unto us and remembering them,
according to that which is written. Blessed are those whose iniquities are
forgiven Psa. 32. a. 2
and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes no
sin.


Thomas. I do greatly fear Eusebius, since that thou art already come unto the
Apocalips but that thou will be by and by at the end of thy knowledge. For
that is the end of the new Testament, and of all the canonical Scripture.


Hilarious. I believe that he has conducted and lead us even unto the
Apocalips for to bury his Purgatory to the end we may help him to sing his
Requiescant in pace. For I believe that he will dye here, and that he shall
Requiescant in pace of purgatory.
pass no further. Your Doctors do write that after the Judgment, Purgatory
and hell shall be all one. But I believe that that Purgatory which thou would
have proved in the Apocalips, to be none other thing then those pondes of fire
and brimstone, in which the beast which The wells and ponds of fire and
brimstone. Apoc. 19. d. ^0
has engendered Purgatory, is cast with her false Prophets into the eternal
bottomless pit.


Theophilus. What say thou Eusebius to the same? Have thou no more refuge? Or
whether thy arriere word be altogether disconfited?


Eusebius. I have no more wherewith to revenge me, The place of the. (...) Pet.
3. d, 19
except I show forth that place of Saint Peter, which witnesses that the
spirit of Jesus Christ preached unto the spirits which were in prisen: By the
which prison I cannot understand but Purgatory or the Lymbe. ^r^^ching to (...).
At the leastwise it must be that thou do allow the one or the other.


Theophilus. That objection comes well to purpose, for to answer also to
the question of Thomas, and to those which would have a preaching of the
Gospel in the other world:


Thomas. I am very glad that thou have not forgotten it, and that the
occasion serves so well.


Theophilus. But before I will enter into it, I will again admonish thee, that
I will not define nor determine any thing of the estate of the dead, besides
that which the holy Scripture has expressly revealed unto me. Wherefore I do
conclude that although it should be so that those esteem it to be true, yet
nevertheless I shall not be of that opinion, that any person should trust unto
it and that he should leave off to do his endeavor in this world, to seek
Jesus Christ: since that the Scripture does not promise unto us clearly any
either remedy, nor any other preaching and revelation for our salvation after
this life. Therefore I would gladly allow, in this matter that which Gregory
writes touching Purgatory. For notwithstanding that he did believe that in the
same one might be purged Advertisement.
from his sins, yet nevertheless he says, that it is most sure to govern
himself so in this world, that one needs not of that remedy in the other,
but to have there his recourse and hope.


Thomas. I am of thy opinion. But expound unto us at the least the places, that
one may allege them, to that purpose for to have the intellygence thereoff.
1. Pet 3, d 18



Theophilus. That which has most show is that which Eusebius has touched, in
which is written yt Christ has once suffered for the sins, the just for the
unjust for to bring us to God and was killed, as perteining to the flesh: But
was quickened in the spirit. In which spirit he also went and preached unto
the spirits that were in prison, which were in time passed disobedient, when
the long suffering abode exceeding patiently in the days of No^ etc, The other
is by and by after, where he says, that the wicked 1. Pet. 4, b. (...).
shall give account unto him that is ready to Judge quick and dead. For unto
this purpose verily was the Gospel preached unto the dead, that they should be
judged like other men, in the flesh, but should live before god in the spirit.
Behold two places, after which many learned men have much trauayled, and have
expounded them many ways. Yet nevertheless it has been most commonly taken
for the Lymbe after that it was forged and invented, because that he speaks
of the spirits which were in prison or in the lower parts, to whom Jesus
Christ has preached. Those there have understood by those spirits, the
souls of the ancient Fathers. By the prison, the Helles and the Lymbes, in
which they were detained. The others, which are so affectioned after the
Purgatory, that there is not a place in all the Scripture, which they endeavor
not to wrest and draw, either wrongfully or ouerthwartly, and have taken that
prison for Purgatory, and the spirits, for the souls that are there. But these
here have less show, and do put themselves more out of reason then the
others. Chiefly, since that there is none of the Ancients, yt I know, not of
those which have believed the Purgatory, that have understood it after that
manner, and which have alleged it to that purpose. Wherefore it is not
needeful to answer them any further. But for to come to the exposition of
those places, I will first advertise you, that there are diverse
interpretacions, the which I will recy^^ some, to the end that thou should
not think that I do condemn all the others which have expounded it: Or that
I am more arrogant then all men, and that I do attribute more to my sense and
iudgdement, then to any other.

If I define rashlye of a thing, the which all the Expositours have found it
so obscure and hard, that many among them have been constrained to confess
that they cannot understand it. Then I will touch the diverse expositions,
which are more sufferable. Afterward I will signify unto you that which I
think to be most proper. There are some which do not understand that Saint
The first exposition.
Peter speaks here but of the living unto whom Jesus Christ has preached
the gospel, as well in his own proper person, as by his Prophets and Apostles,
which have all spoken by his spirit. Wherefore one may well say, that Jesus
Christ has preached unto the^, since that it was not they that did speak, but
Jesus Christ who by his holy spirit did speak in them. Those here do take
the words of Saint Peter by a Metaphore and by an Allegory, and do
understand by the spirits which were in prison, the dead, unto whom it is said
in the chapter following that the Gospel was preached, saying that saint Peter
by that second place expounds the first. Now by these dead, unto whom has
been preached, they understand not the dead: but do take that word, by a
Metaphore, understanding The living called dead.
by the dead, the sinners which are dead thor^w sin: the which he has called
before the spirits which were in prison, because that the soul which is dead
through sin, is holden by the same, as a prisoner which is in bonds and
fetters, in the stocks and in prison. Those which do expound it after that
manner, notwithstanding that they do accord as touching the interpretation of
the words, yet nevertheless they do a lyt^le differ, touching that spirit,
by the which Jesus Christ went and preached unto the spirits which were in
prison. For some do expound What is the spirit which has preached to the
dead.
it for the manifestation of Jesus Christ which has been before his coming.
Others, for that which has followed his coming. These here do understand by
the spirit the holy Ghost which Jesus Christ sent, A and. 2. (...) 4
and gave unto his ^pos^les, by the which he has preached the Gospel to the
Jews and ^entiles, which before were rebellious and disobedient unto the word
of God. ^phe (...), (...), 2
Wherefore he calls them rebellyng and disobedient spirits, detained in the
captivity of error and of sin. For although that Jesus Christ ascended into
heaven, and has taken his body from us, yet nevertheless he is always Mat,
18 ^ohn, 20 1, Cor. 12.
among us, by the virtue of his spirit, by the which he speaks in his
Apostles, Ministers, and Euangelycall Pastors, and preaches and admonishes
always the sinners, and touches their heart, and conducteth and leads their
spirits by his, for to make them enter into his Church, and for to save the
elect in the same, as those which were saved in the Ark of Noah. There is
nothing in this ^enes. 7. (...), (...) 1, pet. 2. (...). 5.
exposition contrary to the Analogy of the faith, and the sense of the
Scriptures. But yet nevertheless it seems to some to be a little allegorised
and vyolated and to stray a little too far front the Apostolycal simplycitie.
Although that it be tolerable and Christian like. Others do understand by
the spirit of Christ, his eternal virtue, by the which he has been long time
agone the Savior and Judge of the world, as he is at this present, the
Savior by the water, as he does now by the baptism. And therefore they do
understand that he is gone by his spirit, by his divine virtue, and by his
word, through out the world, as he passed through out Aegipt, declaring his power
among the Egyptians and saving the Israelites. As Much has he Exo. 12. and 13
Genes.
done in the time of the floude: and does yet at this day. For he declares his
Judgment unto the wicked, and has drowned them in the floude, even as now he
declares it unto all, to the end that his servant may be saved in the Arc
of the Church, and the others drowned by the Judgment of God. Therefore is
Noe called the herald The herold of righteousness.
of righteousness for to declare, that by the same, the spirit of Jesus
Christ declares unto men the righteousness and Judgment of God, as a king
declares the war by an herald of arms, unto those which do rebel against
him, and refuse peace. And the word which Saint Peter 2. Pet. 2. (...), (...),
used when he said, y^ Jesus Christ has preached unto the spirits, does not
signify only to preach, but also to publish a commandment and an ordinance
as an Herald. And that word herald, the which Saint Peter used speaking of
Noe, is taken of the very same, of which he uses, saying that Jesus Christ
has preached unto the spirits. And as to that that Saint Peter calls them
spirits, they The spi^^ts p^^so^e^s,
think that he did it having regard to their thoughts and affections, being
possessed with evil spirits. And do build their interpretation upon that
which is written: God did see y^ all the thoughts of man's heart was given
Genes. 6. a, 5
unto evil. And upon that which Saint Paul (speaking of the power which is
given unto him by ye ministering of 2, Cor. (...) b. 5
the Gospel) says that it is for to beat down every high thing, which
exalts it self against God, and for to bring into captivity the thoughts
and spirits of men to the obedtence of Christ, delyuering them from the
subjection of the wicked spirits which do hold capti^e the spirits, and
understanding of the reprobate. They do understand then by the spirits which
were in prison, those which were in the spiritual prison, or whose spirits
were deteyned in captivity and prison, by the wicked spirits. They have yet
regard unto that that the scripture calls those Genes. 6. a. 2
which perished by the floude, the sons of God, which did see the daughters
of men: and to that which is there written, that the Lord did strike and
destroy every soul and takes from the mids of them every spirit, and that
he has said in threatening them, that he will take from them his spirit. For
that cause they think that Saint Peter was induced to call such men spirits,
because that whilst that their spirits did sleep and were detemed by the
wicked spirits, they were overcome and drowned by the waters of the sloude, and
the spirit was taken from them, as to him which was strangled and c^oked in the
water. They also have regard to that, that that word which Saint Peter has
used, which we do interpret prison, does also signify, the watch and ward
which is kept in the night: Insomuch that they think that Saint Peter had
regard unto the parable of Jesus Christ, which admonishes every one to watch,
as the faithful servant looking for his master, who knows not what hour he
will come, whether it be in the second, third, or fourth The sense and
meaning of the words of Saint Peter.
watch of the night: and for a full resolution, they will fall upon this
sense: Although that Jesus Christ be dead as touching his flesh, body and
humanity, yet nevertheless he is quickened by the spirit, that is to say, by
his eternal virtue and divine power, by the which he is not only risen from
death, but also has given unto us his quickening flesh, and has turned death
into life, quickening by the same all those which were dead through sin, ^ohn,
6
And to the end that none should despise Jesus Christ, because that he is dead
and was crucified as a vile and an abject person, he declared that he is so
dead, that there is no life but in his death: and that none can live but by
him: and that he is not only to day, but everlasting, and that by the same
spirit and divine and eternal virtue he Heb. 13. b. (...)
is already an other time come unto the world and has judged and condemned
the rebels, the proud and perverse spirits, oppressed with wicked spirits,
which were not under their keeping, but did sleep, not thinking on the
judgment of god, until such time as the flood overwhelmed and drowned them, as
he does yet at this present, by Genes, 6, and 7
that same spyrite, by the which he Judges an condempneth the world, and
saves and quickens his elect even as he did in the time of Noe.


Hilarious. It seems that that exposition is also a little vyolated and far
fetched, nevertheless it comes not evil to purpose, but seems to agree
well enough to the letter of the text of S. Peter.


Theophilus. Because that the place is obscure and hard, I dare not to define
and pronounce of it rashly. But I would gladly put forth these expositions, to
yt end you may judge of the^, and for to awake ye spirits, for to find out
some better thing. Nevertheless I think that this here is the simplest, yt is
to say, that S. Peter willing to show forth the efficacy and virtue of Jesus
Christ and of his An other exposition
death and passion, witnesses that it was so great, that the living have not
only felt and perceived it but the dead also, unto whom it is come. But in
what manner or after ^ ^ unto the dead
what sort? How is it communicated unto us, and all his gifts and graces but
by his spirit and divine virtue? Even as then by his spirit he has given
unto us his quickening flesh, which is unto us spirit and life, and has John,
6, (...). ^3
communicated unto us his virtue, so has he manifested himself by the same
spirit unto the dead, both during their lyse and after their death. For it is
said of Abraham, that he did see the day of the Lord, and rejoiced. John, 8.
(...). 56.
If he has then already during this mortal life, felt the efficacy and virtue
of Jesus Christ, long time before that he did offer his eternal sacrifice,
we cannot doubt, but that he and all the others, which were in his bosom,
have felt it more fully, when he did manifest himself more fully.

By this we may well understand, whereto this place can serve to prove
Purgatory. For if the virtue of the death and passion of Jesus Christ be of
such efficacy, that it goes unto the dead, what need have we then of Masses
and Suffrages of the Priests for to comfort the dead, and to apply unto them
the merits of Jesus Christ? since The predicatio^ to the dead.
that none can do it but he himself, by the virtue of his spirit which
quickens the quick and the dead. Now he calls that manifestacion
predication: not that he has preached verbally or by mouth, toward the dead,
such as is among the living, but because that even as by the preaching and
Euangelycall ministering, Jesus Christ is manifested unto us and do feel the
virtue and efficacy of his death and passion.

Also the spirits of the dead have theirs, but in their manner, and such as
apperteineth unto them: even as we do understand that God gave himself to
his Angels to be known, and to make them taste of his bounty and goodness,
but by an other mean then unto us, because that their condition was contrary.
We must not then dream The descending of Jesus Christ into hell.
out a Lymbe and a material prison and a locale descending of the spirit of
Jesus Christ into hell: and a preaching such as we have. But we must
understand all those things spiritually. For as it is not needful that Jesus
Christ should descend locally from heaven, for to make us feel his virtue, so
it is not necessary to descend into hell. For the virtue of his spirit is
such, that it fills heaven and earth, and is spread abroad every where.


Hilarious, As I think, our dreaming Theologians had very much leisure, when
they settled themselves to dispute, whether the soul of Jesus Christ did suffer
in the hell. Amongst the which, some of them are found to be of opinion,
that he did.


Theophilus. If they had well understood that which Jesus Christ said unto the
thief: This day shall thou Lue, 13. ff. ^3
be with me in Paradise, and how Jesus Christ descended into hell, when his
soul was sorrowful, and in anguish, even unto the death, and that he has
dronken up the cup of the wrath and furor of God, and has borne his judgment
and our malediction and curse, and the dampnation due unto our sins, insomuch
that he was stricken and beaten of God, and has suffered death, after which he
descended into the sepulcher or grave, they should not have needed again to
make the soul of Jesus Christ to descend from Paradise, in which it was, for
to go into hell. For it is sufficiently given unto the spirits of his elect
to understand, which have received consolation, and unto those of the
reprobate, declaringe unto them from what goodness they were deprived without
descending or assending.


Eusebius. To what purpose then does he speak of the prison? and what other
thing can he understand but the Lymbe? of which it is also spoken in Zachery,
saying: I have let thy prisoners out of the pit where is no water. The Li^^e.
Za^h, (...), (...)



Theophilus. By the Words of Zachery the Lord gives us to understand none
other thing, but that by the bleud of the alliance that he has made with Syon,
he will deliver his people yt are captive, kept in ye bottom of all miseries.
By the prisoners, he vnderstandeh his people that be in The prisoners. The
wells.
capti^itie, by y^ evils he understands a captinitie, a goulse and bottom of
all miserye, from which it is not possible for them to come out by any means
if God do not deliver them himself. Therefore he calls it Wells for to
declare the depth: yea yet without water, in which one cannot swim: to the
end they may the better know their misery, and the grace and mercy of God
toward them. When S. Peter did speak of ye prison of the spirits, The prison
he did it for to amplyfie the better ye grace of the Gospel, comparing those
which were under ye servitude and bondage of ye law, and under those shadows and
figures unto those which shall be in a prison in respect of those which have
received the light of ye gospel. But we must not therefore dream, that ye
bosom of Abraham was a prison, or a Castle, as we have already declared in the
other disputacion. But we must be advised and know yt those things are spoken
by a comparison, as we have already declared the examples.


Thomas. It seems that Saint Peter speaks not, but of the reprobate. For
after that he has spoken of those spirits which were in prison, he adds
which late or sometune were rebels.


Theophilus. (...). Cor.
He speaks generally of all. For even as the Gospel is a sweet savor of
life, to life unto those which are saved, and a savor of death, to death unto
those that perish, so the death of Jesus Christ brings a great rejoicing,
both to the Angels and to all the blessed spirits, and more greater confusion
and grievous dampnation unto the wicked and reprobate. But after that he spoke
generally of the spirits he pursued not all the two parts, but stayed himself
only to the disobedient and rebels, because that he is fallen into that
matter speaking of afflictions. Wherefore for to comfort the faithful, he
Gene^. (...). (...)
s^ayed to declare unto them ye virtue which Jesus Christ has, for to save
his, as he saved Noe and his family in the Arc: and for to punish the wicked
and persecutors, as he has drowned the Giants by the flood. For that cause he
stayed to declare the Judgment of god, as in the chapter following, saying:
that Jesus Christ shall Judge the 1. P^^. (...). b. (...).
quick and the dead. For unto this purpose verily was the Gospel preached
unto the dead, that they should be judged like other men in the flesh, but
should live before God in the spirit.


Thomas. By that which thou say, thou do declare unto us that that place,
concludes not yt there is any other Limb nor Purgatory, then such which thou
have showed unto us from the beginning. But what say thou touching the
preaching of the which we have spoken which ought to be done unto the spirits
after this life.


Theophilus, First of all as touching those which are Those which have not
believed in this world.
departed out of this world, without having one grain of that seed of the
fear of God, but have altogether resisted his spirit, and the natural light
and knowledge that he has given unto them, or at the preaching of his gospel
we cannot leave unto them any preaching, nor any other remedy after their
death, for their salvation: except we will fall into the error of the
Origenists and Anabaptists. John. (...) c, 1^
For it is written: He which believes not in the Son of God is already
condemned. But if it be a question of the elect, which have had already in this
world some grain of the seed of God, which have walked in his fear, although
that they have been yet wrapped in many errors. and darkness, there is an
other consideration. Not that I do understand that the gospel is preached
unto them after they are departed out of this life, otherwise, saying that they
shall have more full knowledge of that, that they have only here known, as
amongst the midst of darkness. For if they be the sons of God, the seed of
god 1. John. (...). (...). 9 Cornelius Act. 10 (...).
which is in them shall save them: As we may judge by the example of Cornelius
the Centurion.

Before that he had heard the preaching of Saint Peter, he had not perfect
knowledge of Jesus Christ. He was yet a Panim: but he was not therefore
altogether without the seed of the fear of GOD, nor without some beginning of
faith and obscure knowledge of JESUS CHRIST: Or otherwise his prayers and alms
deeds should not have been approved of God, whom Heb. 11, b, 6.
one cannot please without faith. If he had then dyed before that S. Peter was
come unto him, I do not think therefore, that he had been altogether rejected
and forsaken of God: and that that knowledge sufficed him not to salvation: or
that he had not given himself more fully to be known of him either by some
divine inspiration: or by some other means, such as it pleases him: yea, in
the Article of the death, or at his last gasp, rather then to suffer him to
perish. As we may presume as well of the Jews, as of the Panims, who before the
coming and manifestation of Jesus Christ in the flesh, had the law of God
written in their hearts: notwithstanding that they have Rom 2. (...). 1^.
not had altogether so full knowledge of Jesus Christ, as we have at this
present. For although that the knowledge What knowledge of God is necessary
to salvation.
of Jesus Christ be unto all men necessary to salvation, it follows not
therefore, that none can be saved, if it be not full and perfect in him. For
who ever had in this world so full knowledge of him, and a faith so perfect,
that he had nothing to say? There was never such a one found in this world. It
suffices then that that knowledge and faith, has taken root in us, and that
we do travail as much as we can possible to augment and increase it. And
afterward when we shall do our endeavor, as much as we can, the Lord which
has begun his work in us will bring it to pass, and will supply and
recompense through his grace the default of the faith and knowledge which we
have received of him (even as he does of our works, which are all imperfect,
because of the imperfection of our faith) so that there be not dispising, and to
great negligence in us, which cannot be but to the reprobate. Even then as GOD,
by his great mercy supporteth the imperfection of our faith, and cease nor
leaves off to receive us for his children, so that the seed and the root of
the same be quickened in us, so I cannot uphold and maintain by any witness
of the holy Scripture, that any should have just occasion to hope for salvation
after this life, which from the same shall be departed without any knowledge
of God and of Jesus Christ his son. Wherefore I do hold me to that which
the Scripture has revealed unto me, and do leave the rest with the secret
judgments of God, which are hid from us and covered. But yet nevertheless I
think that it is always most sure, to travail very much after the knowledge
of the truth, whilst that we be in this world, that we may have so much as
is needful for our salvation: and that our despising be not any cause unto us
of dampnation. And if we do our endeavor, we are very sure that the Lord
will not fail us, and that he will not hide himself or withdraw himself
from us, if we do seek him and desire to approach and come unto him. For it
is impossible, that he will hide himself from those whom he has chosen, and
who^ he has purposed to glorify, and to make them blessed by his knowledge.
And notwithstanding that we have not all of us, so great and high knowledge of
him, nor so many of his gi^tes and graces as his Prophets and Apostles, yet
nevertheless he will give us as much as shall be necessary and expedient for
us: wherewith we ought to content our selves. Behold that that I had to say
upon that point, and whereto I will stay my self, without seking any further.


Thomas. And I with thee: And praised be God for that I did find your company,
in which I have heard so many good doctrines, and debating of so many good
points of religion, of which I was before in great doubt, and had my conscience
much troubled. But now, the grace of God has resolved me, and has set my
conscience at rest. And thou Eusebius, have thou changed thy opinion?


Eusebius. I do yield my self: and do confess that I can no longer
withstand the truth: and do render thanckes unto GOD which has delivered me
from those great darkness, errors and abuses, in which I was fallen into
and drowned. For I was in great danger to be altogether lost, if God through
his grace had not retired and pulled me back. And so much as I did think that
I was in the right way, so much was the danger the greater.


Thomas. I am very glad to hear such words of thee. For he that would have
sworn unto me at the beginning when I did see thee so contrary unto Theophilus
and unto Hilarious, that thou should have come unto this resolution, I would
never have believed it.


Eusebius. No more would I. But that which is impossible to men, is possible to
God, who has the hearts of Mat. 1^. d, ^6 Pro. ^1. a, 1.
his in his hand, and changes them as it pleases him. And therefore we ought
never to vispaire of the conversion or of the salvation of any man, whilst
that we do see some little spark of the fear of God to shine in them, until
such time as we do there openly see resistaunce against the known truth and
the spirit of God.


Hilarious. I have not lost altogether the hope. For I was well assured, that
thou would not resist the truth through malice, but only through ignorance.
And God will not leave such men willingly always in error, but will draw
them out of it in the time that he has ordained: As we have the example of
Saul the great persecutor, whom he has made an Apostle and Evangelist of
Saul^ being a persecutor, made an apostle Act 9. (...). 1.
the Doctrine which he blasphemed, and has turned a mad Wolf, into the
most excellentest Pastor yt ever was in his Church. But since that God has
showed unto us that grace and favor, that we be all falled into a good
concord, and unity, and that he has converted and turned our war, into so
great a peace, we ought as well to remember to prepare the Funerals for the
The burning of Purgatory.
Lymbe and Purgatory, since that they are dead and ready to be buried. But
let us be advised who shall furnishe the funeral pomp, and the Suffrages and
Obsequies, and who shall do the office.

Then must ringe the Belles Thomas, and Eusebius shall carry the Cross: and
Theophilus the holy Water stop: and I will carye the sprinckle and will do
the office, and the Priests and Moonkes shall mourn.


Thomas. I need not to ringe the bells, for his death will be sufficiently
published abroad without that: And the Priests will soon know of it without
Bells, when they shall see their Kitchen to be so cold, and that the fire
shall be altogether extinct and put out. You say in speakinge of the
lamentations which the Priests do make after the dead, that they do make
pitious moan about them, as to the outward appearaunce by wrything their
mouths, but do laughe inwardlye in their hearts. But I do not doubt, that
in this forrowe and lamentation here, that they will not do it faynedly, but
that they will weep earnestly. For they did never bury parents nor friends,
whose death was so dear unto them, and which did bring unto them more greater
sorrow nor damage.


Hilarious. I do greatly fear least it happen unto them as to the labourer of
whom Esope speaks off. He rehearses a fable of a woeman who had newly
buried her The fable of ye feigned mourning of a laborer.
husband, who did go every day to his grave to weep and lament. Now there
was a labourer which ploughed in a field which was not far from the
Churchyard. Wherefore he seeing that woeman, and was in love with her,
insomuch that he left his Oxen, and went also unto the grave, and being
there set down, did also weep with the woeman. When the woeman asked him
wherefore he so lamented, he answered her: because says he, that I have
buried a fair and an honest woman, for whom I am much sorrowful and sad. But
after that I have well wept and lamented, I am eased of my sorrow. And the
woman said unto him: Even so is it chanced to me of my husband. Whereupon the
labourer answered unto her. For as much then as both of us are fallen into one
misfortune, wherefore may we not marye together? For I will love thee, as I
loved my first wife, and thou shall leave me in like manner as thou did
love thy first husband. By those words ^ee he did put that into the woemans
head, in so much that they accorded together. But whilst that he used that
deceit and plaide the Fox with the poor woman, there came a thief more wily
the^ he, which stole away his Oxen and carried them away. When he was returned
and that he found not his Oxen, he did begin to weep and lament, and to
strike his breast very bitterly. The woeman also came: and when she had found
him weeping and lamenting, she said unto him Do thou weep yet. And he
answered unto her: now I weep earnestly. Before his tears were fained and
did but weep^ outwardly, and laughed in his heart as our Priests do at the
Funerals and Obsequies of the dead. But I am altogether certain, that there
shall be no iestinge nor Crocodiles tears, in the burying of their
Purgatory. For as soon as he shall be dead, the Mass shall not live long
after. And so they shall have two bodies which will bring unto them great
sorrow and heaviness. But I believe that they will not bestow so much money
about them, for to make their good deeds, as they have gotten and heaped
together by their means. But let us suffer them to weep their fill, as well
as they have made others weep, and let us singe when they weep. Nevertheless
I will yet do for them this service, to make for them a lamentation and
complaint, to move them the better to pity and compassion upon that poor
dead body. For me thinckes that I do hear them already lament in this wise.

Now let us lament we Moonkes and we Nuns.
Priests, bawdes and whoores, with our bastard sons.
For now the hot Furnaces quenched are
that have made us fat with their deintie fare.
Now we may count our selves in evil case
for the good time we had has lost his place.
And dead is he that did heap up in chest,
Money wherewith we made our Gaudemus.
Alas he is now at peace and at rest,
Wherefore let us sing an other Oremus.
Let us suffer them to sing that in steed of Vigiles and of Libera me, and of
their Fidelium, and I will make his Epitaph, which shall serve him for his
latter Oremus.

O gentle sir John, who of Purgatory
Have gotten so much of silver and gold:
Make speedely to be known to all of the Popry,
To sing Requiem aeternam for his sweet soul.
By him an Epicures life thou did lead,
But now alas he is dead an has no place:
And with him thy earthly kingdom is dead.
Sing for him then Requiescant in pace.

Thomas. Amen. Now since that he is buried let us go to Supper, that he may
have also his funeral Supper, and that we may as well banquet as the priests
in those of the dead in the days of their Anniuersaries and years mind.


Hilarious. Let us go.


FINIS.
A Table of the principal matters of the third part of the Christian
disputacions.
A.
ABsolution of the quick and the dead. 275. Advertisement. 293. Against the
Originists. 272. Alexander. 283. Amongst whom are reputed the souls of
Purgatory. 274. Anabaptists. 238. Ansegisus. 234 Angels dare not curse the
devils. 285. Answer to the place of the Psalms. 263. Antechrist. 276.
Antiochus. 215. Apocripha what it is. 216. Apostles of the circumcision. 257.
Apothegma. 211 Archesilaus. 257. Argument a posteriori. 279. Ashes of Pope
Boniface. 280. Augmentation of the felycitie to Angels 246. Authority of the
book of the Machabees. 213. Authority of the Prophets and Apostles. 217.
Authority of the Scripture. 217. Authority of the church. 217.
B.
Baptize with ye holy Ghost and fire. 235 Baptize two times in the year. 239
Baptism delayed. 239. Baptism only of Jesus Christ. 256 Baptism of women.
241 Baptism of water, whether it be necessary to salvation. 232. Baptism of
devotion. 233. Baptism of blood. 237. To be baptized for the dead 290
Beginning of ye judgment of God. 247. Beginning of Hell and Paradise. 248.
Bonauenture deified and made God. 283. Boniface the eight. 280. Books
Canonical. 216. Books of Thoby. 262. Book second of the Machabees. 217
Books Canonical and Apocripha 214 Books of Joseph. 214 To be borne again of
water how it is be understood. 234. Bosom of Abraham. 225 Boow the knee. 291
Bulls doing all things. 284 Bulls in Purgatory. 277. Burying of Purgatory.
299. Burying of the conscience. 277.
C.
Candell before. 268 Canons of the Apostles. 215 Cathecismenes. 237
Circumcision deferred. 229 Christ the restorer of all things. 247 Christ our
pledge. 215. Church of Lausanne. 256. One only and eternal Church. 244.
Charecter indebilis. 276. Charles. 256. Clement the sixth. 283. Clockes of
Purgatory. 286. Comparison of the divine and human doctrine. 264. Comperison
of the life present and that to come 246. Condition of ye children of ye
christio^s. 230. Conscience. 247. Conscientia mill testes. 247. Consolation in
Abrams bosom. 231. Contrarieties of Canons. 285 Cornelius. 298. Counsel of
Africa. 242. Cream Papisticall. 276. Creators of the Creator: 281. Custom of
the true and false doctors. 266.
D.
Day of the Lord. 264. Dead do bite. 274. The dead how they are punished in
their successors. 253 Degrees of the Judgment of god. 249 Descending of
Christ into hell. 296. Difference between the Limb, Purgatory and Hell. 22^.
Difference between the fire of Purgatory and Hell. 221. Difference between
the old and new Testament. 244 Difference between the dead under the old and
new Testament. 244 Dispe^sation of ye tresure of ye church. 284 Disposition of
this Dialogue. 262 Diversity of pardons. 271 Doctrine troublesome. 259 Doctors
scholasticall doubting of the bulls. 284. Dreams of the Saints and of the
rauing Theologasters. 213 Dreamers or sleepers. 249.
E.
Eccius. 262. Increase of glory in the other life. 245. En^ant how it shall
bear the iniquity of his father. 253. Error about the Sacraments. 238. Error
touching the Supper. 234. Error of the Bohemians and Morians. 234. Estate of
the souls after the separation from the body. 249 Eternity temporal. 272.
Evangelists of the Pope. 287. Example of the long days in Purgatory. 286.
Example of Judas Machabeus. 251. Example of the mercy of God. 220. Example.
212. 286 Example of Friar Roger. 277. Examples that the Saints ought not to be
all drawn into a general consequence. 243. Example of Ziphora. 243.
Exposition of the place of Saint John ca. 3. 234. Exposition of the schoolmen
upon the pl^ce of Saint John. ca. 3. 236 Exposition of the place of Thoby.
262. Exposition of the place of the 1. Cor. ca. 3. 263. Exposition
Allegorical. 268 Excommunicate the dead. 282. Excommunicate the doctrine of
the dead. 285 Ex puris negatiuis nihill sequitur. 271.
F.
Fable of Theseus and Pyrothus. 221. Fable of ye feigned mourning of a Laborer.
300. Fable of Gregory. 221. Faith of Simon. 240. Fire. 265. Foundation of the
order of the Mendicants. 287. Friar Christopher. 255. Friends of the kitchen.
223. Furyed and she devils. 248.
G.
Gates of dreams. 212 Gate of y^ory and of horn. 213. Gentiles saved without
Circumcision. 229. Gerion: 258. Gibellinus. 280. God of Hipocrites. 22^. God
compared to tyrants. 252. Good works. 223. Grace half. 251. Great Lockyer.
276. 2^5 Greatness of the pains of Purgatory. 221. Gregory the first made no
mention of bulls for the dead. 284.
H.
Half a savior. 251 Hangmen of Infants. 238. Harman condemned by the Pope.
282 Saint Harman. 282 Hell of the Origenists and Catabaptists. 224. Helindius.
270 Henticus 4. 282 Hercules. 258. Herostratus. 256. Herostratus burned the
Temple of Diana. 256. Herald of righteousness. 29^. Holy Ghost a fire. 235.
Holy Ghost water. 235. Honor to the sacraments. 2^9. Hostensis contrary to the
bulls. 284. Hipocrits envious of ye grace of god 220 Hydra. 258.
I.
Ignorance excuses (...). 289. Image of death. 250 Indians. 235. Incredulity
of Thomas. 212. Insufficiency of the book of ye Machabees for to prove
Purgatory. 2^1 (...) of saints for the dead. 277. Joseph author of the book
of the Machabees. 214. Isaac and Ismael. Iubile of the Pope. 283. Iubile of
God. 283. Judgment of the Scriptures to whom it apperteineth. 216. Judgment
by the word. 211. Judgment of the Sodomites and Gomorrians. 288. Judgment of
saint Hierome touching the books of the Machabees. 214 Justice and mercy of
God. 222
K.
Keys of saint Peter and of the Pope. 276. Keys of hell. 279 Keye changed.
276. Kindr^^s of Loath. 288
L.
Languages of the Prophets. 217 Our Lady of Butter. 241. Legends of Saints.
215. Legittimation. 216. Lembe. 226. Lembus. 226. Limbus. 225. Saint Jews
canonized. 282 License Theological. 225 Limb of the Infants destroyed. 238.
Limb of the Infants. 226. Limb of the Fathers. 244. Limb. 219. 297 Limb
what it signifies. 225. Living called dead. 294 Lud^ seculares. 283.
M.
Madiani^s papisticall. 287. Machabees. 215. Man making Gods. 280. Manner to
know God. 279. Mark of conscience. 277 Mark of the great whore. 277.
Mar^^^nists. 242. Martirs before the coming of Jesus Christ. 21^. Masses for
the little Infants. 259. Mass of Requiem for the Saints. 255 Man's reason the
foundation of purgatory. 222. Men that are dead, Gods to the Idolaters. 282.
Mercury. 269. Ministers of Sacraments. 241. Moonkes dead to the world. 274.
Mortui non mordent. 274.
N.
Necessity. 228. New Letanie. 255. New transfiguration of Satan. 258.
O.
Objection. 2^3. 222. 232. Objection of the necessity of baptism. 237. Office
of a Lieuetenaunt. 27^. Offices Ecclesiastical. 241. The only death of Jesus
Christ satisfies. 220. One only God. 280. Opinion of Lombard. 227
P.
Pagatory. 276. Pains of the Limb. 224 Pain for satisfaction. 220. Pain and
fault. 251. Pains of purgatory. 224. Pardons to whom they profit. 285.
Pelagians. 239. Poena damni and poena sensus. 224. Philip king of France. 280.
Pickelockes. 286. Place of purgatory. 279 Place of Saint Luke. ca. 12. 287.
Place of the Acts. ca. 2. 289. Place of Saint Matthew ca 12. decl^^ed. 271.
Place of the Apoc. ca. 5. 292. Place of the 1. Corinthians. ca. 15. 290. Place
of the Philippians. ca. 2. 291. Place of Saint Peter. 1. ca. 3. 293. Place of
Thoby contrary to the priests. 262 Place of Saint Matthew. ca. 5. expounded.
267. Place of the second book of the Machabees, serves nothing at all for
purgatory. 219. Plays and games of the Panims. 283 Pope God, and more then
God. 278 Pope Clement the sixth, cyted by Friar walter being dead. 286. Pope
Lieuetenaunt of Saint Peter. 274 Pope more puissant then Christ. 252. Pope has
more power then the saints. 278. Pope Judge of the quick and the dead 284.
Power of the keys and indulgences for the dead. 274. Power of the keys. 274.
Power of the keys lymitted in this world. 284 Power to give pardons lymitted.
285. Power of the dead upon the Popes. 286. Praise given to God for all
creatures. 292. Prayers for the resurrection. 252 Prayers for the Saints that
be in Paradise. 255 Prayer for the dead how that may be done. 253 Prayer for
the resurrection of the body and the coming of Christ. 254. Prayers of the
devils. 291. Predication to the dead. 273. 293. 296. ^he Priests or women
Priests. 242. Priesthood of the dead. 276. Prison. 297. Prisoners. 29^ Prochet
Archbishop of Genes. 280. Propositions equipolents. 271. The latter Prophets.
217. Proverb common. 211. 267 Privilege. 220. Punishment upon those that do
reject the Gospel. 289. Punishment of the elect with the reproreprobate. 188.
Punishment of sins. 222. Purgatory the nurse of sins. 222 Purgatory by what
reason it is builded. 219. Purgatory before the coming of Christ. 219.
Purgatory of purses. 276. Purgatory for the body. 258.
Q.
Question of the Infantes of the Hebrews dead without circumcision. 226.
Question Theological. 230.
R.
Rage of Pope Stephen against Formosus. 281. Raymond. 251. Rebellion and
dispising the commandments of God. 223 Reconciliation fraternall. 269.
Regeneration. 234. Regula. 267. Renumeration of good deeds. 222. Reward of
foolish builders. 26^. Requ^escant in pace in Purgatory. 293. De Roma the
defiler of the faith. 18^
S.
Sacrifice of Christ eternal. 24^. Salvation without exterior Sacraments. 229.
Salvation without Baptism. 237. Salvation ly^^ to the elements. 233 Salvation
without visible Baptism. 213. Salvation by piruiledge. 220. Sara and Agar.
256. Saved by fire. 265. Saul a persecutor made an Apostle. 299. See God before
and behind. 279. Seigniory of Jesus Christ. 291 Sense and meaning of the words
of S. Peter. 1. Epist. Cap. 3. 296. Sense of S. Mat. words. Cap. 5. 270. Sense
of the words of S. Luc. Cap. 11. 270. Sense of the words of Jesus Christ upon
the 5. Cap of Saint Mat. 269. Sense of the parable. 270. Sentence of Saint
Augustine touching the children that are dead without baptism. 238. Sergeants
of Purgatory. 268. Sergius and Formosus. 281 Shed out ones bread and wine upon
the graves of the just. 262 Sichimites. 230 Sign to judge the true and false
Prophets. 258. Signs and figures for the things signed and figured. 240 Silla
and Marius. 281. Sillogisme. 178 Signification of Limb. 225. Sim^n Peter. 276
Sin against the holy Ghost. 272 Sin to death. 256. Sin original. 2^9.
Sextus 283. Skirmishers. 257. Solution of Baptism. 237. S^^e of the Scripture
and of the ancient Doctors touching the Sacramets. 236 Stella Clericorum. 281.
Speaking of dumb and incorporal creatures. 292 Spirit of Bacchus. 213.
Spirits prisoners. 295 Spirit that preached to the dead what ^^ it is. 294
Supper given to Infantes by Ciprian and Origene. 234. Suburbs of hell and of
Paradise. 226.
T.
Theology inferior and metaphisical. 257 Those which have not believed in this
world. 298. Three sorts of baptism. 237 Treasure of the Church and the
dispensation of the same. 284 Treasure of the Church. 264. Three hells. 224
Torments of the reprobate agrauated. 247. Transfer and give kingdoms. 280.
True Gedeon. 287. Two ways. 225
V.
Vaineglory. 257. Valentinian. 233. Value of twelve thousand ^ragmes. 213
Virtue of Jesus Christ come to the dead. 196. Virtue of the bulls and pardons.
283 Use of Allegories. 298.
W.
War of the Geants. 256. Wells. 297 Wells of Saint Patricke. 212. Wells of
fire and brimstone. 293. What knowledge of God is necessary to salvation. 279,
298 Who do boow the knee in hell. 291. Witness of God. 218. Witness of
conscience that he is a God. 248. Word of God Judge and guide. 212. Works of
hipocrites. 223. Worm of the conscience. 249.
FINIS TABVLAE.
blazon or coat of arms of Thomas East of a black horse on a wreath atop a
chevron between three horses' heads erased, a crescent for difference (McKerrow
209) MIEVLX VAVLT MOVRIR EN VERTV QVE VIVRE EN HONCTE

Imprinted at London by Thomas East, dwelling by Paul's wharfe. 1579.


