A Christian Instruction, containing the law and the Gospel.

Also a Summarie of the Principal points of the Christian faith and Religion,
and of the abuses and errors contrary to the same.

Done in certain dialogues in french, by M. Peter Viret, sometime minister of
the word of God at Nymes in Province.

Translated by I. S.

Seen and allowed according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

Imprinted at London by Abraham Veale, dwelling in Paul's churchyard at the
sign of the Lamb. ANNO. 1573.

To the honorable and virtuous Lady, Elizabeth, Countess of Lincoln, John
Shoute wishes increase of all godly honor and knowledge.
WHEN I HAD TVRNED into English this work, I considered in my self, that in
aunciente time and also in this our age, men have accustomed to dedicate their
trauayles unto such virtuous personages as they have honored. And I examining
my self, unto whom I moughte address this little labor of mine, thought
good to presume upon your goodness, and to address the same unto your
honorable Ladyship knovving this work to be a meet subject for the exercise
of noble spirits, in the which they may see the great mercies of God toward
mankind, and learn how to be thankful for the same toward his divine
majesty: It may please you therefore (good Madame) to accept this present, at
the hand of him, who wishes unto you great increase of spiritual blessings,
and that after this momentayne life, you may be one of those which shall ever
wait on the Lamb in the heavenly Jerusalem, which was slain for the
sins of man before the foundation of the world was laid, to the end he
might make us acceptable unto God, by whom we have redemption thorough his
blood (even) the forgiveness of our sins, according to the riches of his
grace.

From London the 4. of January.
To the Christian Reader.
SEeing that the chief cause for the which God created man, is to be served
and honored by him, our duty is the^ to seek to understand how to honor and
serve him: and we cannot know how to serve, honor, nor obey him, but by his
word: and albeit his word be such as it is able to give instruction both to
learned and unlearned, having in it milk for children and strong meat for
men, yet is it necessary to use for our better instruction, the help of the
worthy fathers in the study of the same, whereby we may the better and more
certainly judge of that which we shall read, by the which mean we may the
more easily know our good God his benefits unspeakable presented to us in his
dear Christ, and what we are by our Lord Jesus Christ, and what we are of our
selves, without which knowledge none can be a true Christian. For if we know
not that our only salvation is founded by God in Jesus Christ, and that our
eternal life proceeds only from the free mercies of god without any jot
of our deseruings, surely we cannot be saved. For if we will be accepted at
the hands of God for his faithful and obedient children, we may not present
unto him any works of ours for satisfaction for our sins, either in part, or
in all, albeit we ought and are bound to do good works. For if we have in us a
lively faith, we cannot but do good works. For as faith is a fruit of our
election, so are good works a fruit of our charity toward our neighbor,
which charity is a fruit of our lively faith, which works thorough
charity, as S. Paul says: but if we will be acceptable unto God, we must
utterly cast down our selves before him, acknowledging our selves worthy of
eternal damnation a thousand times, and embrace Jesus christ wholly with all
his merits, who has satisfied the justice of God for us, fulfilled the law,
paid our debte, carried away with him captives in unspeakable triumph, Satan,
sin, death, and Hell, and has taken possession for us of the heavenly
inheritance, and there sits at the right hand of God the father, making
intercession for us continually. And to the end we may well know how we do
obtain these inestimable benefits by Jesus Christ, I have turned into our
natural language this work, in the which are sufficiently and excellently
handled all the principal points of our Christian religion. I have added to
the end of this work, the exposition of Master Viret upon the preface of the
law, which conteyneth sundry excellent doctrines: I have done it to help to
advance in the way of their salvation al such as are ignorant of the tongues:
wherefore I beseech God that they which shall read it, may so profit
thereby, that God may in them be glorified, and their souls edified.

THE SVMME OF the principal points of the Christian faith and Religion, and
of the abuses and errors contrary to the same.
How needful it is, that all Christians do well know what faith is,
vvherby they are made Christians, and what things she does comprehend. Chap. 1.
WHOSOEVER does believe the testimony which God in his word does yield of
his will, holds already for certain, that the salvation of men, by the
which God will be glorified in them, rests in the only faith in Jesus
Christ, Romans 3. d. Romans 10. b. Ephe. 2. b
and that from the heart men believe to justification, and with the mouth men
make confession whereby they are saved. Wherefore seeing it is so, it is
needful, not only that every true Christian do well understand what is the
nature of the true faith, and which are the principal points that she
contains (without the which she cannot be a true and perfect faith) but
also that he be well resolved in them. For faith can not be a true faith,
without the true knowledge of the things that she believes, so far as God
has revealed by his word, and is requisite for every man to know for his
salvation. Wherefore they which know not, nor do understand at all that which
they say they do believe, have no faith at al, but by imagination and fantasy,
whatsoever they do persuade themselves to have.

Of the summaries of the faith of the christian Church named Symboles. Chap 2.
FOr that cause the ancient Church has comprehended all the points of the
Christian faith in certain Summaries, which are called commonly, the Nicene
Creed, the Creed of Athanase, and that of the Apostles. This name of Symbol
was given unto them, as well for that they did conteyne in sum the principal
points and foundations of the Christian doctrine, which are more at large
expounded in the holy Scriptures: as also for that they are the true marks
and tokens of a Christian man, in every one that believes, and confesses the
doctrine contained in them. Wherefore it is requisite, that every one know at
the least that same which is commonly called, the Creed of the Apostles,
which is the most common and most short of them all, according to the which,
the Church does daily make public confession of her faith, as follows.

I believe in GOD the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth: And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord: Which was conceived by the holy Ghost:
borne of the virgin Marie: suffered under Ponce Pylate: was crucified, dead,
and buried: he descended into hell: The third day he rose from the dead: he is
gone up into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
almyghtie: From thence shall he come to judge both the living and the dead.

I believe in the holy Ghost: The holy universal Church: The communion of
Saints: The forgiveness of sins: The resurrection of the body: The life
eternal. Sobeit.

Of the understanding of the matters contained in these Summaries, and how
necessary it is. Chap. 3.
Now forsomuche as it is a hard matter to be brief and plain both at once,
it is certain that the matters contained in these Summaries, are so briefly
comprehended in them, that every man can not easily understand and comprehe^d
what they do import, saving only such as are well exercised in the holy
Scriptures: And beside that, that there are few among the common people that
know the said Symboles, unless it be this, which is the shortest of the
three, which the Christian Church does hold. There is yet this evil, that many
have not learned it, but in an unknown tongue: wherefore it profits them even
as much as if they had not learned it at al, seeing they do no more understand
it, than if they had never heard speking of it. And as touching these that have
learned it in their vulgar tongue, there are also many of them, that have only
learned to pronounce it by mouth, without any understanding of it, as do
little children, or birds that are taught to speak: not understanding what
they say. Therefore it is more than necessary, that that which the principal
points contained in the same do import in substance, be expounded somewhat
more familiarly and plainly, to the end that men may the better know, how
every one does understand them, and whether the faith of the heart do agree
with the confession of the mouth. For many which make that confession by
mouth, do oftentimes follow doctrines and religions clean contrary to that
which they confess. Wherein they do belie themselves, denying by their works,
that which they confess by word.

Of the principal points whereupon the true Christian faith is builded: and
first of the unity of God. Chap. 4.
Now the first ground work and the first article of the faith of a Christian
Deutero. 6. a John. 4. c and. 17. a
man is, Esaias. 40.9. Apocalip. 1. d 1. Timo. 1. d Genes. 1. Psalm. 86. e and.
103. a Exodus 34. a Matthew. 28. d
that he believe, that there is one only true God, which is a spirit
invisible and eternal, without beginning and without end, almyghtie, all
wise, all good, all lust, all merciful, and all perfect, maker of all
creatures.

Of the Trinity of persons, in the unity of the divine essence, and of their
proprieties, and of the creation of the world. Chap. 5.
FVrther, albeit that there is but one only God, in one only divine essence,
this notwithstanding, Genes. 1. John. 1. a. b John. 1. 1. John. 1. Colloss. 1 c
Hebr. 1. a John. 14. b d g. and. 15. d and. 16. b Act. 1. a and. 2. a
the Christian faith does acknowledge in that divine essence, the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, accordingly, as God has declared himself in his
word, the which albeit he be distinguished in three persons, yet
notwithstanding those three divine persons are but one only God, in one self
same essence: in the which, the faith does consider ye father, as the fountayn
of all divinity, and the Creator of all things, visible and invisible: and the
Son as the eternal word and wisdom of him, by the which all things ar made,
ordained and placed as they are: and the holy Ghost, as his infinite power, by
the which he does susteyn and govern them, according to his eternal
providence.

Of the providence of God. Chap. 6.
Now this providence of GOD is so conjoined with the creation of the world,
that it can not be separated. For he may not be Creator, but he must also be
the guyder and the directer. For even as none other was able to make such a
work but only he, Even so none other is able to guide and govern the same,
but only he, which is the woorker and maker. John. 5. e Hebr. 1. a Ephe. 4.
a Psalm. 8. a Matthew. 10. d
Then this Providence imports, that nothing is done at adventure: To wit,
without the most just ordinance of God. For his providence extends both in
general and particular, to all things, that are as well in Heaven, as in
earth, in such sort, that he has a care for man, whom he has in
special recommendation amongst all his creatures, even unto one very hair
of his head, even as Jesus Christ does witness.

Of the eternal Predestination of God, and of the manifesting of the same, and
where we ought to seek it. Chapter. 7.
Prouer. 16. a Roman. 8. f and 9. b. c Ephesians. 1. a Romans 11. d Esaias. 4. c Romans
10. c John. 6. e and. 17. b
Therefore even as he has created all to serve to his glory, even so has he
ordained of all men, in his eternal counsel, that which has been his pleasure
to do, and forthwith the means by the which he would be glorified in them,
as well in his mercy, as in his just judgment, the which judgment can never
be but just, although it be incomprehensible to man: and how he does manifest
this eternal counsel to his chosen in Jesus Christ his son, by the
preaching of his Gospel, which he sets forth unto us, as the true book and
register of the eternal election of God. Also he gives them the grace by the
very same means to understand the same, and to receive it through true and
lively faith.

Of the author of sin, and of the incomprehensible wisdom of God, which is
in his eternal ordinance. Chap. 8.
ANd albeeit that nothing may be done neither in heaven, nor in the earth,
Psalm 115. e Amos. 3 b Lamentation of Hiere. 3. e
without the most just ordinance, and the holy will of God, or otherwise he
should not be God almighty: yet notwithstanding, this ordinance and will
carries with it no constraint to the will of man, in sort that they never
offend, but willingly, thorough their own malice. Wherefore what soever may
happen in the world, God may not be holden for author of sin, nor of any evil
what so ever: but the devil only, and the naughty will of man, which is alyed
with the devil. Then it follows that whosoever makes God author of sin
and wickedness, in so much as it is sin and wickedness, does attribute to
God that which is propre to the devil, and does blaspheme God horriblye, not
putting any difference between his works and those of the devil. For God
has so well provided for the order of the causes ordained by him, the which he
would should serve to his glory, that he can not ordeyne nor do but justly,
whatsoever he ordeyneth or does, how wickedly or unjustly soever the devil
or man do. For he is so excellent a worker, that he can very well draw good
out of the evil that the devil and man do, and that by his incomprehensible
wisdom, and by his infinite power and goodness, to be glorified in the same:
and in the just condemnation of those that shall do the evil which he has
forbidden, and do not live in his obedience, walkyng in the vocation that he
has called them unto.

Of man, and of the creation and fall of him by sin. Chap 9.
Gene. 1. d 1. Corin. 11. b Genes. 3. a Romans 5 b John. 8 d Roma. 6. c Psalm.
43. a Roma. 3. b and. 5 c.
AS for man, the Christian faith holds, that he was created to the image of
God, in the estate of innocence, truth, and justice: and that he being fallen
from that estate, by his own sin, and thorough his own fault, following the
counsel of ye devil, he has yielded himself in such sort slave of sin, by the
which he has deserved eternal death and damnation, by the just judgment of
God, that he can not of himself but sin, and daily to provoke more and more
the wrath and curse of God upon him.

Of the redemption and restoring of man, and of the only mediator Jesus
Christ. Chap. 10.
Therefore, John. 3. b 1. John. 2. a and 4. b c and. 9. b 1. Timo 2. b Romans 8. g
and. 5. b 2. Timo. 1. e The. 3. b Esaias. 43. b and. 44. a Ierem. 17. a Exodus 30.
a Deutero. 6. c and. 10. d Matthew. 4. b Luke 4. b. 1. Timo. 2 b Ioh. 14. and 15.
a
God his creator having pity on him, has so loved the world, that he has
given his only son Jesus Christ, for mediator, patron, advocate, and
intercessour between him and man, to reconcile them to him, even when they
were his enemies. Wherefore it follows, that he has done this, not having
regard to any deserving of man, who neither had nor could deserve but only
eternal death, but has only regarded his own goodness and mercy. Wherefore as
there is but one only God, creator, gouerner and conseruer of all things, nor
any other savior than he, nor in whom man may trust, nor worship, nor
invoke: no more is there likewise but one only mediator Jesus Christ, by whom
man may have access to God, and find favor in his sight, and recover that
which through his own faulse he has lost.

Of the true invocation and prayer toward God. Chapter. 11.
Matthew 6. b Luke 11. a. John. 4. c Esaias. 29. d Matthew. 15. a
ANd for so much as the invocation is an honor which belongs to GOD only,
and can not be given to any creature whatsoever, how excellent so ever he be,
without idolatry, sacrilege, and blasphemy against God our Lord Jesus
Christ, himself has given to his church a form of prayer, the which he has
willed to be observed in the same, and by the which, he has willed all
prayers and supplications to be ruled and measured. And has done it, to the
end that in stead of honoring of God by them, he should not be dishonored,
through default of praying unto him, and inuocating his name, in such sort as
he requires, willing to be honored in spirit and verity not only with
lips and with hypocrisy, and with outward show.

Of the order of prayer which Jesus gave to his Church. Chap. 12.
THat order of Prayer which he gave to his Church, is written in these words
in the Gospel of S. Matthew. 6. chap. and that of S. Luke. 11. chap.

Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our offenses as we forgive them that offend us. And lead us
not into temptation. But deliver us from the evil. For thine is the kingdom,
the power, and the glory through out all ages Sobeit.

Of the principal faults which we must avoid when we pray. Chap. 13.
Seeing then that our Lord Jesus Christ has given this rule to Christians, who
soever demau^deth of God any other things than are contained in that order of
prayer, and by any other mean, and to any other end than that which Jesus
Christ has set forth unto us in the same, can make no acceptable prayer to
God, but is to him turned into sin. The like is of those which pray in an
unknown tongue, not knowing what they say. For first it is certain, that
their prayer can not please God, but so far forth as it is made in true
faith. On the other side, true faith is not without understanding what it is
that she demands of God: seeing it is so, then it follows well, that he
prays without faith, that prays, not understanding what he prays, and by
consequent does mock and dishonor God.

Of the mean by the which men may be heard of God in their prayers. Chapter.
14.
FVrther, as our Lord Jesus does not teach us by his doctrine, to adresse
our prayers to any other than to God his father, Ephesians. 1. a John 1. b Ephesians.
2. d Hebr. 4. d Romans 8. g
even so we can not assure our selves by true faith, yt he is our father, and
that he will hear us as his children, but only by ye mean of Jesus Christ, his
well beloved son. For it is only he, by who^ we are made ye children of God, by
his only grace, where as of our own nature we are the children of wrath: for
that same cause we have access to the Father, by ye same very mean, as by our
true Mediator and advocate, through whom it must come to pass that we and our
prayers may be agreeable to God the father.

Of the nature of the true mediator, and of the union of God and man in him, in
one self person. Chap. 15.
ANd forsomuche as it is necessary, that the mediator by whom it must come to
pass, that this agreement be made, have of the nature of both the parties,
which are to be agreed, and that he have agreement with both the parties, or
otherwise he should have no mean to agree them: None may be sufficient to such
an office, except he be very God and very man, in the which the divine nature
may be united with the humain nature in one self person, without confusion or
change, either of the one, or of the other.

Of the divine and human nature of Jesus Christ, and of the sanctification
made by him. Chap. 16.
Therefore Jesus Christ being the very son of God, and very God eternal,
John. 1. a 1. John. 1. a and. 5. b Esaias. 7. c Matthew. 1. d
and of the same essence with the father, as concerning his divine nature, has
taken humain flesh, in the time ordained by the father in the womb of the
virgin Marie, Luke 1. d Esaias 53. b. c 1. Petr. 2. d and. 3 d Galath. 3. b
Roman. 3. b Hebr. 9. d Matthew. 3. d and. 17. a
by the work of the holy Ghost: in the which flesh and human nature he
has born our sins, and the wrath and curse of God, the which we have
deserved, and he has borne it to deliver us from it, by the merit of his only
death and passion: by the which he has satisfied for us, as the only
well-beloved son, who only was able to do it as he in whom only the father
has set his whole delight.

Of the error touching the invocation of Saints Chap. 17.
FOr so much then as there is none other, but that only Jesus Christ, who
has suffered and endured for our sins, it follows well, that there is none
other but he alone, by whom we may be saved, and that is sufficient for that
office, and by the which we may have access to the Father. If it be so, it is
then fully apparent, that none may also take, neither angel, nor man saint,
nor woman saint, (no not the very virgin Marie, mother of Jesus) for
mediators, patrons, and advocates toward God, nor have recourse unto them by
praying, or inuocatyng of them, or by making any vows unto the^, or to their
relics and images, without plainly renouncing Jesus Christ, and without
greatly dishonouring, not only God, but also the virgin Marie, Act. 3. c. 20.
d 14. c Apocal. 19. b
and all the saints also in stead of honoring them. For if in their life time
they have refused such honor, and have confessed and testified by their death,
that this honor does belong to none, but to Jesus Christ only, how should
they approve it after their death, contrary to their proper testimony and
doctrine, which they have sealed with their blood?

Of the virtue of the death and passion of of Jesus Christ, and of the true
purgatory of the Christians. Chap. 18.
BY like reason, 1. Corin. 6. c 1 John. 1. d Hebr. 5. c and 7. d. 9. d. and 10.
d
the christian faith does also hold, that the only blood of Jesus Christ, and
the sacrifice that he has done upon the cross for poor sinners, is so
sufficient to satisfy the judgment of God, and to cleanse man of his sin,
that there needs none other Purgatory for them: as in deed there is none
other to cleanse them, neither by fire, nor by water, nor by any other mean,
neither in this world, nor in the other. In like sort, there is none other
ransom nor satisfaction toward God, but only his. Therefore he that seeks
satisfaction any where else, be it in his own works, or those of other men,
or in any kind of creature, and that in all, or in part, the same he or she
refuses wholly the raunsom and satisfaction made by Jesus Christ.

Of the Purgatory and satisfaction of the Papists. Chap. 19.
THen it follows, that all the doctrine of the Papists concerning Purgatory
and their satisfactions which they seek in themselves, and in their works, or
in those of their Priests and Monks, and in their offerings and suffrages, as
well for the living, as for the dead, are man's inuentio^s, full of blasphemies,
and wholly contrary to the word of God: whereby as much as in them is, they
make of none effect, the merit and benefit of the death and passion of Jesus
Christ, and do openly renounce the same.

Of the communication in the benefits of Jesus Christ. Chap. 20.
NOw eue^ as no man may find salvation, nor life in any but in Jesus Christ
only, and by his mean, no more is it also sufficient, that he be only
presented to me^, if they have not forthwith true communication with him, to be
partakers of him.

Of the faith in Jesus Christ. Chap. 21.
THe only mean to attayn to this communication, Roma. 3. ^. 4. a c. 5. a
Galath. 2. d Roma. 8. c 1. Cor. 12. a Act. 15. b Ephe. 2. b
is thorough faith only in Jesus Christ, the which is the instrument by the
which man receives the grace that God offers unto him in his son Jesus
Christ, by the virtue of his holy Spirit, by the which he woorketh in the
hearts of men, making them clean, by the mean of that Faith, the which is
a pure gift of God, propre to his true elected.

Of the justification by faith. Chapter. 22.
Tite. 1. a Roma. 3. d. and 5. a 1. John. 1. c Ephe. 2. a Philip. 3. b Ephesians.
4. c Galath. 3. d Psalm. 32. a Roma. 4. a
IT is also the cause why Faith is plainly called by Saint Paul, the faith of
the chosen, and for the which Justification is attributed unto it: that honor
is given unto it, for so much as man does acknowledge himself by the same,
such as he is of his own nature: To wit, a poor and miserable sinner, the
child of wrath, subject to death and eternal damnation: Therefore spoiling
himself of his own justice, and of all trust in his own works and merits,
he does embrace Jesus Christ, to be cladde with his justice, to the end that
by it his sins may be covered, in sort, that they come not in coumpt at the
judgment of God, and so that the poor sinner be reputed just, as though he
had never offended: and that because the Justice of Christ is allowed unto him
by faith, as though the same justice were propre to the man to whom it is
allowed.

Of the mean by the which God gives faith to men, and of the manifestation
of the word of God, and of the true use of the same. Chap. 23.
Seeing then that faith is the only mean ordained by GOD to obtain these so
great benefits, John. 17. a Romans 10. c. 6. a Matthew. 28. d and. 15. b Mark.
16 c Galath. 3. d Esaias. 29. c Deutero. 4. a and. 12. d Prouer. 30. a
as he only has given the same to those that he has chosen thereunto, even so
has he him self ordained the mean to come to the same: that mean is the
preaching and manifestyng of the word, by hearing whereof, he brings his
chosen to his knowledge: And as they obtain eternal life by that knowledge,
even so do they learn by the same, being regenerate by his spirit, to serve
and honor him, according to his holy will, according to the which he will
be served and honored, and not after the will and fantasy of men: for the
which cause he condemns all service and all religion, that is founded upon
any other foundation, than upon the only and pure word: in the which he makes
plain declaration of his good will, wherefore he wills that all men yield true
obedience to the same.

Of the declaration of the will of God by the law, the which he has given to
men concerning the obedience and the service that he requires of them.
Chapter. 24.
Therefore to the end that men should enterprise nothing of their own head, in
such matter, he himself would give them a law and rule, by the which he has
showed them, how they should rule and govern all their affections, and all
their words, and all their works, to frame them all to his obedience. For the
same cause he has declared unto them in that law what things were good or
evil, and how much they did either please or displease him, and how he might
be either honored or dishonored in them.

Of the law of God containing a summarie of the declaration of his will.
Chapter. 25.
ANd to the end that every man might the better comprehend all these things,
and imprinte them the more easily in his memory, he has given a summarie
declaration by the Law which he gave to the Church of Israel, by his servant
Moses, in such words.

Hearken Israel, Exodus 20. a Deute. 5 a. b. c.
I am the Eternal thy GOD, who has drawn thee out of the land of Egypt, out
of the house of bondage.

The first commandment.
Thou shall have none other Gods before me.

The second
Thou shalt make thee no cut image, nor likelynesse what soever of things that
are there in heaven above, nor here in earth beneath, nor in the waters under
the earth, Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, and thou shall not serve
the^. For I am the Eternal thy God, mighty, jealous, visiting the iniquity
of the fathers upon the children, even into the third and fourth generation of
them that hate me: and showing mercy in a thousand generations to those that
love me, and keep my commandments.

The third.
Thou shall not take the name of the Eternal thy God in vain: for the Eternal
will not hold him innocente that shall take his name in vain.

The fourth.
Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day, six days shall thou labor, and do
all thy work, but the seventh day is the rest of the Eternal thy God: Thou
shall do no work in the same, neither thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter,
neither thy manseruant, nor thy woman servant, nor thy cattle, nor the
stranger that is within thy gates: for in six days the Eternal made the
heaven and the earth, and the sea, and all the things that are in them, and he
rested the seventh day. And therefore the Eternal blessed the day of rest, and
sanctified it.

The second Table.
Honor thy father and thy mother, to the end that thy days may be prolonged
upon the earth, the which the Eternal thy God gives thee.

The sixth
Thou shalt not kill.

The seventh.
Thou shalt not commit whooredome.

The eight.
Thou shalt not steal.

The nynth.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

The tenth.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, nor his wife, neither his
manseruant, nor his woman servant, nor his ox, ne yet his ass, neither any
thing that is his.

Behold, these ar the very words which Moses received of the Lord, ingraued
in two Tables of stone: in the fulfilling whereof, he does not regard the
outward work only, but chiefly the affection of the heart, according to the
which he judges of the works, be they good or evil.

Of the Summarie that Jesus Christ has made of the law of God. Chap. 25.
ANd because that God has breefly comprehended in the first Table of the law,
those things which he requires of men, toward his own person: and in the
second, that which he requires also of them, toward their neighbors, for
his sake: Matthew. 22. d. Mark. 12. c. Luke. 10. e.
our Lord Jesus has made an other Summarie yet more brief, in the which he
comprehends in two points: all that which is contained in these two tables,
in manner following, being taken out of the books of Moses.

Hearken O Israel: The Eternal thy God is one God only: Thou shalt love the
Eternal thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
understanding and mind. It is the first and great commandment. And the
second is like to the same. Deutero. 6. a Leuit. 16 d. Matthew. 9. c.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Of these two commandments
depend all the law and the Prophets. And all that which you would that men
should do to you, the like do you to them.

Of the true fulfilling of the law of God. Chap. 27.
But even as no man can serve God a right, according to his will, except he be
well instructed first in his law, and in his word, even so it is not
sufficient to have been well instructed, if it be not put in use. And
therefore, the knowledge of the same serves but to greater condemnation, if
there be nothing else. And because that man of his nature is so corrupted
through sin, that not only he can not of himself accomplish perfectly any
one of the commandments of God, but on the contrary, can do nothing else but
continually resist his holy will: Therefore he has need of Jesus Christ,
chiefly for two causes. The first to satisfye for man, in that wherein he is
not able, to the end that Jesus Christ through his obedience, Romans 5. b. f. 1.
Corin. 15.
might recompense the fault that is in man, thoroughe his rebellion. The
second is, to the end that manne being Justified thorough Faith in Jesus
Christ, as is already said, and so foorthewyth regenerated by his Spirit,
and reformed to the very image of GOD, moughte be the better disposed to obey
his holy will, Romans 6. c. Galath. 5. c. d
to dedicate and consecrate himself wholly to his service.

Of good works which are the fruits of true faith. Chap. 28.
IT is then easy to judge by these things if they be well understood, that so
much is wanting, that the faith in Jesus Christ and the justification that men
obtain by the same, without their works, do abolishe good works, and the
affection of the true and faithful to the same, that there is nothing that
does more establyshe and confirm them, and that does more inflame men to do
them. Matthew. 12 c James. 2. c
For as the soul can not be without life, nor the fire without heat and
light, nor the good tree without bringing forth good fruit: even so faith can
not be a true faith, if she be not a living faith: and she can not be living,
but is dead if she be without good works, which are the true fruits and the
true signs of faith. But to the end that none may be deceived in the matter of
good works, he must understand, that God does not esteem, nor does allow
for such, any other than those which are commanded by him in his word.

Of the principal points contained in the holy Scriptures, which do
summarily comprehend all that which is required in the true service of God.
Chapter. 29.
THen if we shall speak of the true service of God, Psalm. 59. c Exodus 20. a
1. Samu. 16. ^
we may reduce into four points, all that which he requires in the same,
according to the declaration which he has made in his holy Scriptures. The
first is, that man put all his whole trust in him alone, awayting for all his
salvation of him alone, through Jesus Christ. The second, that he call upon
him in all his necessities, for all things as well corporal as spiritual,
according to the rule which he himself gave unto him. The third is, yt he
render graces and thanks to him for all the benefits that he has received, and
that he does daily receue of him. The fourth, that he yield himself obedient
unto him, in all things that he shall command him, as well in respect of his
own person, as in respect of his neighbor.

Of the true service of God which is spiritual. Chap. 30.
John. 4 c Exodus 20. a Deuter. 5. a 1. John. 1.b
ANd for so much as it concerns the substance of the true service of God,
seeing that he is a spirit, he requires also to be served and honored in
spirit and verity, and not in visible things, such as are material and
corruptible, as are images, alters, temples, pilgrimages, and other such like
superstitions and idolatries inverted by man. For if his good pleasure were,
that the ancient ceremonies of the law should be abolished in the coming of
Jesus Christ, of whom they were figures to bring men to this true spiritual
service, it is easy the^ to judge how he might endure that men should forge new
ceremonies, through great presumption, according to their own fantasy, to
serve him after their pleasure, and not after his.

Of the ministry of the Gospel, and of the principal parts of the same,
and of the true use of the sacraments. Chapter. 31.
Matthew. 28. d Mark. 16. c
FOr that cause he has ordained the ministry of the Gospel in his Church to
teach all men according to that doctrine, Luke. 24. g. Matthew. 26. c Mark. 14.
c Luke. 22 b 1. Cor. 10. d
thoroughe the preaching of the same. Whereunto he has adoyned his holy
Sacraments for many causes.

The first is, that they should be unto us for greater confirmation of the
doctrine, (of the which, they are as the seals) and in like sort of the
says which proceeds of the same. The second cause is, to the end that they
may serve us for aduertisementes, to bring us to acknowledge the benefits the
which we have received of him in Jesus Christ, and to communicate daily in
the same more and more, and to yield him thanks, by the means of his holy
Sacraments, even as he has commanded. Finally, he has also ordained them
to separate us, in matter of Relygion, from every assembly, and from all
persons, which follow any doctrine or relygion contrary to his, and to make
common and solemn profession and protestation of the Faith that we have in
him, and of the doctrine and Religion which we follow.

Of the obedience that all men do owe to the ministry of the Gospel: and of
those which do despise it, and of the protestation and profession of the
christian doctrine, whereunto every one is bound. Chap. 32.
John. 8. f and. 17. d Matthew. 26. c 2. Cor. 11. c
FOrsomuche as it is so, it is certain, that God has bound all men to that
ministry, wherefore all they that will be accounted for true Christians, are
bound to yield themselves obedient to the same, chiefly in three things. The
first is, in hearing the doctrine which is set forth to the Church by the
mean of that holy Ministry. The second is, in making confession and
profession of the same, by the Communion of the sacraments, which are as
dependaunces and as the marks of Christians, when they are administered,
according to the order after the which they were ordained by the Lord. The
third is in submitting him self to the christian discipline, the which the
Lord has ordained for the policy, according to which he will that his
church be governed, not after the laws and traditions of men, but according
to his pure word. The which discipline and policy is so necessary, that
without it the ministry of the Church can not be honored and mainteyned as is
requisite, but that of necessity all must be there in confusion. Wherefore all
those that will not be subject to those things, declare them selves to be
rebels to god, and to his church, and unworthy to be accounted true members
of the same, and true Christians.

Of the number of Sacraments of the true Christian Church. Chap. 33.
AS concerning Sacraments, Matthew. 36. and 28. c. 1. Cor. 11. e.
which ought to be holden properly for lawful sacraments, he has ordained
two in the Christian Church, the first, is Baptism, the other is the supper.
The others that have been added to these, by the Papists, may not be accounted
for true and lawful Sacraments, for so much as they have no certain
foundation in the word of God, without the which no Sacrament is lawful.

Of baptism, and of the true use of the same. Chap. 34
AS for baptism, it is a sacrament, in the which the lord does represent unto
us our regeneration. Matthew. 3 b.
Whereof the baptism is as the seal, and as a visible testimony, whereby he
testifies unto us, first, that he receives us into his house, which is his
Church, and that he does aduowe us to be his children, and to be heirs of his
kingdom. Galath. 3. d Romans 6. a Ephesians. 5. e. f ^. Peter. 3. d 1. Timo 3. d 1.
John. 1. c. d Apoc. 1. b Hebr 9 d 2. Corin. 6. b.
After that he does testify to us also that he has purged and cleansed us from
our sins, by the blood of his own Son, and that he has regenerated us as
new creatures, by his holy spirit, as the water, which is the sign of this
holy sacrament, does testify and represente in deed. For that representation
is not vain, without the truth and true communication of the things
spiritual, which it does represente, toward those that be faithful, which
have the instrumente to receive them, to wit, faith, without the which we may
have no communication with Jesus Christ.

Of the baptism of young children. Chap. 35.
ANd albeit that the little children can not have faith by the hearing of the
word of God, as the great may, yet notwithstanding, this sacrament does not
apperteyne only to those that are of years and are capable of the preaching of
the Gospel, and have already made profession of their faith, or are in age to
do it, but it belongs also to their children, because they be comprised in
the alia^ce, Genes. 17. a. b
the which their parents have with God, thorough the virtue of the promise that
he has made them. Wherefore the Catabaptists and all others that reiecte little
children from baptism, do them wrong, and do frustrate in that respect the
virtue of God his aliance, for the Children of the Christians are in no worse
case tha^ were those of the Jews, whom God would not have shut forth from
circumcision, in stead whereof the Christian Church has now baptism.

Of the children that are borne dead, and of the true foundation of the
salvation of all men. Chap. 36.
ANd although that this sacrament be ordained to that end, it follows not
for all that, that we must think, that the little children which dye by the
will of God, before they can receive this outewarde Baptism, be in any danger
of their salvation, only for want of this baptism, forsomuche as it happens
not through contempt of this holy Sacrament. For their salvation, 1. Corin 13.
b. Ephesians. 1. a
nor that of any man whatsoever, is not tied to the visible signs of baptism,
nor of the Supper, but depends of the only election and grace of God, by
mean of the benefit of Jesus Christ, and of the virtue of his holy spirit:
and then he communicates this benefit to his elect, in such time, and by
such means as please him, and works in them at all times, Luke. 1. b.
Jeremy. 1. b
according to his good pleasure. For he may sanctify them even in their
mothers belly, as he has done many, whereof we have apparent witness in
the holy Scriptures.

Of the administration of the Sacraments and to whom it belongs. Cha. 37.
ANd seeing that the Lord has given the charge of administration of the
Sacraments, even unto those self same to whom he has committed the
administration of his word, then is it not lawful for any to administer them,
but for such only, to whom that charge is given by just and lawful vocation
of God, and of his Church, in the which it is not lauful for any man, to take
in hand any thing without lawful vocation.

Of the Baptism administered by women, and of the error that therein is.
Chapter. 38.
Wherefore they are greatly to be blamed, and chiefly women, which take in
hand to baptize children. For the baptism which they take in hand to
administer, has none other foundation but only upon the ignorance that is
in them, of the true use of Baptism, and upon the superstition wherein they
have been nourished. For according to the doctrine of the Papists, men have
thought that the salvation of little children has been tied and knit to the
outward and visible Baptism, and not to the invisible and inward baptism of
the holy ghost, which inward baptism is the true substance of the true
baptism, whereof the outward sign is a figure and representation.

Of the Supper of our Lord, and of the true use thereof. Chap. 39.
Mark. 14. c Matthew. 26. c John. 9. 1. Cor 11. c 1. Corin. 14. d
AS for the Supper, it is also ordained, first to confirm us, and as it were to
seal us in the same the remission of sins, the which we obtain by faith in the
death and passion of Jesus Christ, and the true and spiritual communion that
we have by the same, with all the gifts and graces of the same. The second is,
to yield thanks unto him, and to give testimony of our faith toward him,
and of our charity which we have toward our brethren, and of the union with
his Church. The third, to represente to us by the bread and wine, which are
there distributed, the whole and perfect spiritual nouriture, which we have
by the mean of the body, flesh, and blood of Jesus Christ, to the end that we
may be spiritually nourished into eternal life, according to the benefit
which we have already received by our regeneration, whereof the Baptism is to
us as a Sacrament: in the which we have in the Supper as it were a guage of
our resurrection, the which we do believe and wait for. Wherefore even as
the bread and wine be there given to us visibly and bodily, even so are the
body and blood of Jesus given to us in deed but inuisibly and spiritually, by
the mean of faith, and by the virtue of the holy Ghost, for he is the mean by
which we have true Communion, and true union with Jesus Christ, and all his
Church, the which is his body, whereof all true Christians are members.

Of the signification of the signs of bread and wine in the Supper, and of the
agreemente and difference of them, with the things that they signify, and of
the error of the popish transubstantiation. Chap. 40.
Colloss. 1. d 1. Corin. 13. d. Ephesians. 1. d
WE then take the bread and the wine, not for the propre body and blood of
Jesus Christ, and the very natural substance of them, as if the bread and
wine were transubstantiate and converted into that very body and blood, to
eat and drink them bodyly and carnally, or to worship them as Idols, in
stead of Jesus Christ, as the Papists do: no more do we take them only as
common bread and wine, but we hold them as very signs of that body and
blood, which were given for us to death, and of the which we are spiritually
made partakers in deed, Example.
according to the testimony which Jesus Christ yeldeth unto us by his word, in
this holy Sacrament: in the mean while the bread and the wine do no more
change substance nor quality in the same, tha^ does the water in baptism, or
the wax wherein the seal of the Prince is imprinted: also as the body and
blood of Jesus Christ are not naturally nor bodily conjoined with them, but
only in manner which is proper to sacraments, that manner is such, that albeit
the sign be not ye thing it self, which it does signify, yet is it not
without the same, which is communicated to the faithful, spiritually in this
Sacrament, even as the sign is administered unto the^ corporally, by the mean
which has been above spoken of.

Of the commemoration of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ in the Supper. Chap. 41.
ON the contrary, 1. Cor. 11. e Matthew. 26. c Ephesians. 5. e Hebr. 5. b 7. d g, d
2. 10. b. Act. 3. d. 7. g. Ephesians. 1. d. Colloss 3. a
we ought to be assured, that this holy Sacrament was not ordained, to make a
Sacrifice, in the which Jesus Christ should be offered again, for the
redemption of souls, as well living as dead, but to make commemoration of the
sacrifice the which Jesus Christ himself has made once, of his own body and
blood, by the which he has once bought and sanctified for ever all the
children of God. Wherefore he has ordained this holy sacrament, to refresh our
memory, and to stir us up by this, mean to acknowledge him, and to render
him immortal thanks, in waiting that in his last coming, he may appear from
heaven, where he now sits at the right hand of God, until the last day.

Of the Supper, and of the Mass of the Papists, and of the principal points
wherein it is different and contrary to the true Supper. Chap. 42.
Seeing then that the institution of the holy Supper of the Lord, and the end
for the which it was ordained, is wholly ouerthrown in the Mass and supper of
the Papists, it is plain, yt neither the one nor the other, not only can not be
accounted for the Supper of the Lord, nor celebrated to such an end: But
over and above that, who soever will be accounted a christian, and a partaker
of the true table of the Lord, may in no wise communicate nor assist, neither
at the Mass, nor Supper of the Papists, if he will not communicate at the
Lords table, 1. Cor. 11. e. Luke. 22. b
and at the devils table altogether. For first, where Saint Paul says
playnelye, that we must show the Lords death, in his Supper, and that
nothing be declared nor said in the Church, but in such a tongue as all men
may understand. All is said in the Mass and supper of the Papiste, in a tongue
which the poor people understand not: And they do not declare unto them the
Institution of the holy Supper of the Lord. The which thing is even of as
great effect, as if there were no word of God at all, seeing it is not
understood: Without which word, the Supper can not be the Supper.
Moreover, the signs are there so confounded with the things which they
signify, that they be all one thing: wherefore that is as much as to have
sacraments without signs. Thirdly, the bread and wine are there worshipped as
Idols, and as Gods newly made, wherein there is not one idol only, but two,
as if the blood were separate from the body. Fourthly, they be there also
offered in stead of Jesus Christ, in such sort as the mass is holden for a
Sacrifice made for the redemption of souls: It is holden also for a
meritorious work, which brings Salvation unto men, as does the Death and
Passion of Christ.

Fyfthely is, that albeeit there be a certain kind of Communyon in the common
Supper of the people, yet in their Masses there is none at all: For so much as
the Priest which says it, makes his supper all alone, not admitting any one
thereunto. Wherefore such a supper may better be called an Excommunication,
than a communication. For there is no communication nor communion where nothing
is common, and where one man alone takes all that which should be distributed
to al men in common. Now then if there were none other fault in the mass but
only these five, so much lacks it to be accounted the Supper of the Lord,
that not only all the true use of the same is there wholly overthrown, but also
Jesus Christ is therein fully renounced, by those which communicate there, or
believe it. And by the same mean the virtue and efficacy of the death and
passion of Christ, is there utterly of none effect and abolished.

Of the proof that every man ought to make of him self, to communicate
worthily at the supper, and of the things required in the same. Chap. 43.
FVrder seeing that the holy supper is ordained to such an end, as has been
already declared, none may communicate in the same, but to his condemnation, 3.
Things.
which comes not with these three things following. The first is, a true
acknowledging and sorowfulnesse for his sins toward God, which can not be
without true confession of the same toward god. The second is a steadfast
belief of the forgiveness of his sins by Jesus Christ, and a true
assurance of salvation through him. The third is a true and perfect charity
toward our neybor. 1. John. 1. b 1. Corin. 10. d. and. 12. f.
For this holy Sacrament requires all these things for so much as it is the
sacrament of the agreement and union that we have with God by Jesus Christ,
and with all his Church and all the true members of the same. Wherefore it must
be of necessity, that every man examine him self in these points, that he may
go to it worthily, and not to his condemnation, according to the doctrine of
Saint Paul to that purpose.

Of the penance and sanctification of the Christians, and of the true original
of the same, and of al good works. Chap. 44.
AS concerning the repentance and pe^nance which is required of every
christian, the holy Scripture understands not thereby, that which improperly
the Papists call penance. For they through great abuse and ignorance of the
language, do call penance, their satisfactions, by the which they think to
satisfy God, by their own works, and by their Ceremonies and superstitions.
But the word of God takes penance and repentance, for a true acknowledging
and sorrow for sin, the which true acknowledging and true displeasure do
proceed of the true fear of God, and of a true reverence and love toward
him, conjoined with a certain assurance of his goodness and mercy, and with
a true amendmente of life, by the which a christian man does dedicate him
self to the service of God, as in time before he was dedicated to the service
of the Devil, to the end he may serve to justice and holiness, where before
he served sin and iniquity. Gala. 5
For in this lies the sanctification of man, the which sanctification is the
very fruit of true faith, which works thorough charity, as she is the
original of every good work.

Of the true and Christian confession and absolution, and of the remission of
sins. Chap. 45.
AS concerning confession and absolution, the word of God does not acknowledge
or receive any such, as the Papists do make in the ear of their preests, Esaias
4.3 d Psalm 32. b and 103. b.
to have absolution and remission of their sins by them. For the holy
Scriptures show us none other that can pardon sins, but only God. And by
consequent they appoint us none other, to whom we must make confession, for to
obtain absolution and pardon. In like sort we have no example in all the true
servants of God, of any other confession and absolution for the remission of
sins toward God, the which he gives not but in his Church, and to the
true members of the same.

Of the power of ministers of the Church, to pardon or reteyne sins. Chap. 46
AS for the ministers of the Church, they have none other power to pardon or
reteyne them, but so far as they use the keys which the Lord has
committed unto them, as to the ministers of his Church, to whom he has given
them, and in so doing they do declare by his word, how the sins be forgiven
to those that believe, and retained to the unbelieving. This is the true
absolution of the Christian Church, by the which God does ratify, and bind
or unbind in heaven, that which they declare and do bind or lose upon earth
by his word, and in his name. For this power is given unto them, Matthew. 10. b
because he speaks by their mouth, and it is he himself that binds and
loses, and that does pardon and retain sins, by that same very word,
whereof they are but ministers. This is the true and lawful use of the keys,
the which the Lord has given to his Church: the execution whereof the
Church has since committed to the ministers, the which she has chosen
thereunto by lawful vocation.

Of brotherly reconciliation. Chap. 47.
Matthew. 18.
Moreover, even as God would that every man should confess his faults, to
obtain forgiveness, even so he would that such as have offended, Matthew. 5 d.
James. 5. d.
either the Church in general, or any of the members of the same and of their
brethren in particular, should acknowledge and confess their fault, so far
forth as the true discipline of the Church and Christian Charity do require,
and that they reconcile themselves with those whom they have offended, and
have done wrong unto. For such thing is required, to repair the slander and
offense which they have made, and to entertain the peace, the union, and the
Christian charity in the Church.

Of the satisfaction toward our neighbor. Chap. 48.
THis reconciliation brings with it also satisfaction of that wherein every
man is bound to his brother, so far forth as he shall be able to do by
Christian charity. For albeit, that there is none other but the satisfaction
of Jesus Christ only, that may satisfy for us at the judgment of God, yet
for all that the same does not abolish this satisfaction, which is to satisfy
unto men, for so much as it is a fruit of the true repentance and of the true
justification and sanctification of a Chrstian man. For it is not a sign that
a man does in deed repent him of his fault, and of the wrong that he has
done to his brother, so long as he shall not recompense him according to the
means that God shall give him.

Of the Church and of the foundation of the same, and of her head. Chap. 49.
THis faith and doctrine, is the true faith and doctrine of ye true Christian
church, upon the which she is builded, and by the which she does communicate
of all the benefits of Jesus Christ, of which we have spoken heretofore. a.
Cor. 12. d. Ephesians. 1. d Galath. 1. d
For we understand by the Church, the fellowship and co^munaltie of all the
true faithful, which are the members of the body of Jesus Christ, which do
acknowledge him for their only head, and none other whatsoever: but do condemn
the Pope which makes himself the head, as very Antichriste. And in like
sort they do also account the Church the which acknowledges him for her head,
not for a true christian Church, but for a Sinagogue of Satan.

Of the marks whereby to know in this world, which is the true Church, and
who are to be accoumpted for true members of the same. Chap. 50.
THe marks whereby men may know in this world which is the true church of
Jesus Christ, are these, to wit, the lawful administration of the pure word
of God, and of his holy Sacraments, and the allowing of the same, with true
obedience toward the ministry the which the Lord has therein ordained. I
do comprehend under this alowing and obedience, the submission and the
discipline, the which Jesus Christ has ordained in his Church, and the pure
and full observation of the same, as it has bin observed and practiced in the
ancient Church, ruled by the doctrine of the Apostles. On the contrary, the
marks of the Sinagoge of Satan, and of the members of the same are the
contempt and reiectio^ of ye holy word, and of the true usage of the
Sacraments, and of the lawful discipline, which ought to serve as Christian
policy, in the church of the Lord.

Of the Magistrate. Chap. 51.
ANd as the true Church does acknowledge the ministers of the Gospel, as the
true ministers of God, ordained by him. For the administration of spiritual
things, even so does she acknowledge the magistrates as ministers of his
Justice, ordained by him for the conservation of the public peace, Romans 13.
a. b 1. Peter. 2. c. 1. Timo. 3. a.
and therefore she does willingly submit her self to them, in all things for
God. For she knows very well that God would, that every man should be subject
unto them, in all things which are of their charge, and that they which
resist the same, resist the ordinance of God, and do set up themselves against
him.

Of Marriage. 52.
AS concerning Marriage, albeit to speak properlye, the Christian Church
accoumpteth it not for a Sacrament, as do the Papists, and in such sort, as
they hold for sacraments baptism and the Supper: yet notwithstanding, she
accompteth it a holy ordinance ordained of God, and not of men, and for the
lawful conjunction of the man and of the woman, whereby God has willed, that
mankind should be conserved and multiplied. And therefore she does allow and
aduowe it for an honorable estate unto al men, of what estate or condition so
ever they be, and accompteth the bed unspotted, and the remedy the which God
has ordained against the incontinencie of all those which have not the gift.
Contrarily, she accompteth for unlawful conjunction, and for abominable
whooredom and pollution condemned of God, all other conjunction between man
and woman, and does condemn as false Prophets, and Apostates of the faith,
and ministers of Antichriste, all those which forbid any manner of person
to marry, that is capable, and in what place or time so ever it be.

Of the doctrine of the Church, and of man's traditions, and of those which
she does acknowledge for true or false ministers. Cha. 53.
FOr final conclusion, as the Church holds, receives and allows for
heavenly and divine doctrine, all the doctrine contained in the Canonical
books of the holy Bible, as well of the old as of the new Testament, and
takes it for the true foundation of her Faith: On the contrary, she does
reject and condemn all doctrine that is contrary to the same, as diuellishe
doctrine, and all traditions of men, whereby they will honor him according to
their own fantasy: For the Church knows by the very testimony of GOD,
Esaias. 29. d Matthew 15. a Mark. 7. b
that he is served in vain with the traditions of men: And therefore she can
not acknowledge any for true ministers of the Lord, but such as bring his
pure word, but does reject all those which in stead thereof, do bring to
her the doctrine of men.

The end.
THE SVMMArie of the christian doctrine, set forth in form of Dialogue and
of Cathechisme. Of the principal cause and end of the creation of man.
Demand. WHat is the principal cause why God created man to his image and
likeness? Prouer. 16. a Esaias. 43. a



Answer. To be honored and served by hin.


Of the true service of God.
D. Wherein lies the honor and service that he requires of man?


A. In the true obedience toward his holy will.


D. By what mean may we know what his will is?


A. By the declaration which he him self has made in his word the which
is set forth to us in the holy Scriptures.


Of the principal points whereunto men may apply all the doctrine contained
in the holy scriptures.
D. Which are the principal points whereby God declares unto us his will,
in the holy Scriptures?


An. We may bring them generally into two.


De. Which is the first?


An. The law.


D. And the second?


An. The Gospel.


Of the difference that is between the law and the Gospel.
D. What difference do thou put between the law and the Gospel?


An. I take the law, Exodus 20. a b. c. Romans 3. c. d. a. Corin. 5. d
for that doctrine by the which God does teach us wherein we are bound to
him, to wit, which is the evil that we ought to flee, and the good which
we ought to follow to please him according to his holy will.


De. And by the Gospel, what do thou understand?


An. The doctrine by the which God does teach us, by what mean we may
satisfy that which he requires of us in his law, and obtain pardon and
forgiveness of the offenses which we shall have committed, contrary to his
holy will.


The law of God.
D. What does that law first conteyne, whereof thou have made mention?


An. Harken O Israel: It is I that am the Eternal thy God which have drawn
thee out of the land of Egipte, from the house of bondage.


The first commandment.
Thou shalt have no strange Gods in my sight.

The second.
Thou shalt not make thee any image, nor likelynesse of any things that are
above in the heaven, or here below in the earth, nor in the waters under the
earth, Thou shalt do them no reverence, and thou shalt not serve them: For I,
I am the Eternal thy God, mighty and jealous, which do revenge me of the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children of their
children, yea even to the third and fourth line of those same which hate me,
and do show mercy in a thousand generations to those that love me, and do
keep my commandments.

The third.
Thou shall not take in vain the name of the Eternal thy God: for the Lord God
will not account him guiltless which shall take his name in vain.

The fourth.
Remember thee to keep holy the day of rest. Thou shall labor six days, and
shall do all thy labors, but the seventh day is the rest of the Eternal thy
God: In it thou shall do no labor, neither thou, nor thy son nor thy
daughter, nor thy manseruant, nor thy woman servant, nor thy cattle, nor the
stranger which taryeth with thee: For in six days the Eternal made the
heaven and the earth, and the sea, and all that which is in them, and he
rested him the seventh day. And therefore the eternal has blessed the day of
rest, and hallowed it.

The fifthe.
Honor thy father and thy mother, to the end that thy days may be long upon
the earth which the Eternal thy GOD does give thee.

The sixth.
Thou shall not kill.

The seventh.
Thou shall not commit whoordome.

The eight.
Thou shall not steal.

The nynthe.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

The tenth.
Thou shalt not covet thy neighbors house, nor his wife, nor his manseruant,
nor his woman servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is his.

Of the sum of the law.
D. What does it in effect comprehend?


A. That which Jesus Christ did comprehend in the summarie that he has made.


D. What summarie is that?


A. Hearken Israel: The Eternal thy God is God only, Thou shall love the
eternal thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
understanding. This is the first and the great commandment: And the second
which is like to ye same, is: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. On
these two commandments depend the whole law and the Prophets. Al such
things then as you would that men should do to you, do you even the like to
them. For it is the law and the Prophets.


Of the corruption of man, and how hard it is for him to do well.
D. Is man able by his own virtue and power to fulfill this law?


An. He is so far from it, that there is nothing so contrary as is his will
to the will of God, whilst he dwells in his nature corrupted with sin. Roma.
8. b 1. Cor. 2. d Romans 6. d.



De. What is the cause hereof?


An. Sin, to whom he is become subject thorough his own fault, and the
natural corruption that he has gotten by mean of the same.


D. What may he then deserve toward God, by all that ever he may think, say,
or do of himself?


A. Death and the eternal curse of God.


Of the redemption of man.
De Romans 8. b. Galath. 3. d
And is there no mean to deliver him?


An. There is none other but that same which is declared by the doctrine of
the Gospel, of the which we have even now spoken, to ye which the law does send
us.


De. And what mean does the Gospel set forth to us, whereby to obtain so
great a benefit? Romans 4. d 2. Cor. 5. d



An. It is Jesus Christ the very son of God.


D. How is he delivered by Jesus Christ?


A. By the satisfaction that he has made for man, in the sacrifice of his
death and passion, and by the perfect Justice that he has won to him.


Of the communication or partaking of the benefit of Christ.
D. But is that sufficient that Jesus Christ dyed for the sin of man?


A. For So Much as he has satisfied the judgment of God for them, it is
requisite that the same satisfaction be applied and communicated, Romans 3. d
Galath. 3. b
to all those that would obtain salvation by the same.


D. By what mean may this same be applied and communicated unto them?


A. By the only faith in Jesus Christ, which only may make a christian man.


Of the Faith.
De. What understand thou by that faith?


An. A true and certain trust in the mercy of god, by Jesus Christ.


D. Which be the principal points that it does conteyne?


An. They are breefely comprehended in this little summarie, called ye Simbole
or gathering of the Apostles, by the which the faithful do daily make
confession of their faith in the Church.


De. Which is this summarie?


The Simbole of the Apostles.
An. I believe in God the father almighty maker of Heaven and Earth, and in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost,
borne of the virgin Marie, has suffered under Ponce Pylate, was crucified,
dead, and buried, he descended into Hell, the third day he arose from the dead:
he is gone up into the heavens, he fitteth at the right hand of God the father
almighty: and from thence shall he come to judge the living and the dead: I
believe in the holy Ghost, I believe the holy universal Church, the communion of
Saints, ye forgiveness of sins, the rising again of the flesh and the
eternal life.


Division of the matters contained in the Simbole of the Apostles.
De. What does it comprehend in substance?


An. We may bring the whole into two principal points.


De. What does the first conteyne?


An. That which we believe of God.


De. And the second?


An. That which we believe of his Church.


Of the faith toward God.
De What must we believe of God?


An. There are two things to consider.


De. Which is the first?


An. The divine nature of him.


De. And the second?


An The works whereby he has declared himself to men.


Of the unity and Trinity in the divine essence.
De. What have we to consider of the first point touching the divine nature?


A. There are again two points to note.


De. Which is the first?


An. The unity which is in the being of God.


D. Which is the second?


A. The Trinity of persons which is in ye same.


D. What do thou understand by that unity and Trinity in the divine
essence?


A. I understand that there is but one only God in the unity, of the which I
acknowledge the father, Deuter. 6. a m. 28. d
the son, and the holy Ghost, as he has declared himself in his holy
word.


Of the principal works of God, by the which he has declared himself to
men.
D. And as touching the works, by the which he has declared him self, what
can thou say?


A. There are three principal, unto which we may reduce all the rest. 3.
Principal works of God.



D. Which is the first?


A. The work of the creation.


D. Which is the second?


A. The work of the redemption.


D. Which is the third?


A. The work of vivification and sanctification.


Of the creation of the world, and of the Providence of God.
D. What do thou understand by the work of creation? Gene. 1. Act. 17. f
Psalm. 147. b. c. d. Matthew 7 c. d and. 10. e



A. I do not understand only that same word, by ye which he has made and
created all things, but also his eternal providence, by the which he does
direct and govern them, as well in general as in particular.


D. Do you mean by this, that he which is the Creator, is also the directer?


A. It can not otherwise be, but that the world must incontinent perish if he
had left it forsaken one minute of time, without dealing with it.


Of Predestination.
D. Do thou comprehend under this name of Providence, none other thing but
that which thou have already declared?


A. I do comprehend also under the same, the eternal predestination of God.


D. What do thou understand by that predestination?


A. The eternal ordinance of God by the which according to his good will and
pleasure, he has ordained before the creation of ye world, all that which it
has pleased him to do with mankind, to be glorified in them.


D. What does this ordinance comprehend?


A. The election of the chosen, and the refusal of the reprobate.


D. What do thou understand by the election of the chosen?


A. The ordinance by the which God has chosen those in whom it has pleased
him to be glorified through his mercy in his Son Jesus Christ.


D. What understand thou by the reprobation?


A. The ordinance by the which he has ordained to leave in their just
condemnation, those same in whom it has pleased him to be glorified through
his just judgment.


Of the incarnation of Jesus Christ and of the redemption had by him.
D. Matthew. 1. d. Luke. 1. c. John. 1.^. b. Roma. 8.^. 2. Cor. 5. d. 1. Peter.
1. c. d. 1. Peter. 2. d
What comprehends the works of redemption?


A The Incarnation of the son of God, and all that which he has done for
the salvation of man, in his human nature.


D. What understand thou by the Incarnation of the Son of God?


A. That Jesus Christ being very God eternal was also made man, and has
satisfied the judgment of God for us, in our flesh and nature, united with
the divine nature.


Of the union of the divine and human nature, in the person of Jesus Christ,
and of his office.
D. Will thou then say, that Jesus Christ, John. 1. a. b. Romans 9. b. Psalm.
146. 2. Iere. 17. a.
is very God and very man, in one self person?


A. If he were not so, he could not be our savior, redeemer, mediatoure and
Advocate as he is, nor yet the true Christ and anointed of the Lord.


Of the works of vivification and sanctification.
D. What do thou understand by the works of sanctification and vivification?
Romans 8. f. Ephesians. 1. a. Tit. 2. d.



A I take it here in general, for that work whereby God does viuifie and
regenerate into new life, and does sanctify and consecrate his elect to him
self and his service, bestowing upon them the benefits of his son Jesus
Christ, by the virtue of the holy Ghost.


D. Do thou mean, that God does present unto us, his gifts and graces, by
his Son Jesus Christ, and that he makes us partakers and capable of the^, by
his holy spirit.


A. Even so do I mean, Romans 5. a 1 Cor. 12. a. b. Tit. 3. b.
and that he is the only mean, by ye which we may have vnio^ and communion
with him.


Of the Church.
D. For so much as we have spoken of God, and of his works, there remains
yet, that thou tell me what thou haste to say concerning the Church? Ephe. 5.
f. g



A. I understand the Church to be the company of all those which are united
and joined to Jesus Christ, through true faith in him, as members of his body,
by the virtue of the holy Ghost, which is the true and very band of that
union and conjunction.


D. Understand thou that they be the true Church which are sanctified and
consecrated to God by true faith, in such sort as thou have even now said?
That is the very cause, for the which she is called holy and the communion of
Saints.


Of the things which we ought to believe of the Church.
D. Which be the principal points that we ought to believe concerning ye
church? 2. Cor. 10. d and. 12. b Ephesians. 1. d.



A. We may well bring them into two.


D. Which is the first?


A. It is that there is a Church, that is to say, one such company and
communaltie as I have even now spoken of, united by the spirit of God, of the
which all the faithful, which are through out the world, are true members.


D. And the second?


A. It is touching the benefits of Jesus Christ, which are communicated to
this holy company, by the virtue of the holy Ghost.


Of the benefits of Jesus Christ toward his Church.
D. Which be these benefits? Romans 8. c Ephesians. ^ b. Colloss. 3. a. Tite. ^. d.



A. We may again consider them in two sorts.


D. How may that be?


A. The first is in the possession of the same, into the which we do enter,
being even here in this world.


D. And the second?


A. In the full enjoying and consummation that we shall have in the other life.


Of the possession of the benefits of Jesus Christ in the church during this
life.
D. What understand thou by the possession that we have alredie in this
world? Ioell. 2. ^ Romans 1. b 10. b.



A. That even as there is no salvation out of the Church, so al they that are
true members of the same, do there find perfect salvation, the which we do
fully comprehend in the Simbole of the Apostles, under the remission of sins.


D. For what cause is that done? 2. Cori. 5. d 1. John. 2. a.



A. Because it comprehendith the agreement which we have with God, and the
justification, by the which we are holden for just in his sight, from whence
then afterward proceed the other benefits, which are also communicate unto
us by Jesus Christ.


Of the consummation of the benefits of Jesus Christ.
D. What understand thou by the consummation of these benefits? Matthew. 25.
d 1. Cor. 15. g.



A. That same eternal and blessed life, in the which we shall live eternally
with him, in the kingdom of God in body and soul, being fully regenerate and
reformed to the Image and likeness of him.


Of the fruits and effects of the law, and of good works.
D. Act. 13. f. 15. and 26. d. Romans 3. d. 4.
Now that we have spoken of faith, and of the principal points to which she
has regard, tell me if this faith be sufficient, to save us?


A. Yea in deed, if it be true, Galath. 5. a Esaias. 64. c. Ephesians. 2 a. Luke. 17.
a Deute. 27. d. Romans 1. a. 1. Peter. 1. ^. Psalm. 143. Romans 3. c. d. Philli. 1.
d Act. 26. d
and not feigned.


D. Need we then not to do good works to be saved?


A. Albeit that we can do no works, of our selves, by the which we may deserve
any thing other tha^ eternal damnation, it follows not for all that, but
that we be bound to do the good works which God requires of us.


D. Thou art not then of mind that faith does abolish good works?


A. So far of is it from abolishing them, that on the contrary, there is
nothing that does more establish them, but not to seek man's salvation in them.
John. 1 b. Ephesians. 2. b



D. How understand thou this?


A. Even as faith, which is a very gift of God, is given us, to obtain by the
same, remission of all our sins by Jesus christ, she has also this virtue,
that through her, man is regenerate and made like to the image of God, Tite. 2.
d. 1. Pet. 1. a.
to obey him according to his law, where before he has bin a rebel against
him.


D. Will thou then say that faith is not true faith, if she be not declared
by works which God requires of us in his law?


A. It is faith, James. 1. ^.
as the fire that is without heat and light, is fire.


Of the good works which God requires of the faithful.
D. Seeing the matter is so, tell me then in brief what works god requires
of us in his law, to testify of our faith, as well toward him, as toward men?


A. We may comprehend them all summarily in two points.


D. Which is the first?


A. The invocation of the name of god.


D. The second?


A The charity toward our neybor.


Of the invocation of the name of God.
D What things comprehendest thou under the invocation of the name of God?


A. I do comprehend three, in taking it generally as I take it here. Psalm. 50.
c. and. c Ephesians. 5. d Hebr. 13. c Romans 10. d 1. Cori. 10. d



D. Which is the first?


A. The supplication and prayer: whereby we have recourse to God in all our
necessities.


D. The second?


A. It is thanksgiving, whereby we acknowledge the goodness that we have
received of him.


D. The third?


A. It is the profession and confession of our faith and religion, by the which
he will be aduowed and glorified in us toward al men, as our God.


Of the sum of the first table of the law.
De. It seems to me that these three points conteyne as it were a su^me of all
the first Table of the law. Roma. 10. ^



A. If we add thereunto faith which is the true fountain of all these things,
1. Corin. 6. ^
this summarie shall be full and perfect.


D. How so?


A. For that that it shall comprehend the manner, how God will be served and
honored of us, as well in heart as in word and in outward works.


Of the sum of the second Table.
D. What does the charity toward our neighbor comprehend?


A. We may in like sort bring it all into two points.


D. Which is the first? Exodus 20. Ephesians. 6. a. 1. Peter. 2. a 1. Cor. 13. b
Leuit. 19. c. Matthew. 7. b.



A. The honor and obedience which we owe to all those that the Lord has
appointed superiors and governors over us.


De. The other?


An. The care which we should have both in general and especial the one of
the others, as of our selves.


D. What do thou understand by this care?


A. That we ought with all our power to procure the honor and profit of all
men, and to let their dishonor and hurt, as well in soul as in body, and
goods, and name.


D. It seems to me that thou haste again here made a little Summarie of all
the commandments comprehended in the second table of the law.


A. It is even so.


Of Prayer.
D Following on the same which we have said of Faith, and of the works and
fruits of the same, I have yet to demand thee one thing concerning the
invocation of the name of God.


A. What is it?


D. It is concerning prayer, and the manner how to pray, which things we must
use.


A We can not follow a more certain rule in that respect that that which
Jesus Christ himself has given us. Matthew. 6. b Luke. 11. a.



The form of Prayer given by Jesus Christ.
D. Which is the form of Prayer?


A. Our father which art in heaven: Thy name be hallowed: Thy kingdom come:
Thy will be done in earth as in heaven: Give us this day our daily bread:
Pardon us all our offenses, even as we forgive them that have offended against
us: And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil. For thine
is the kingdom, power and glory for ever and over. Sobeit.


Division of the matters contained in the Lords Prayer.
D. What does this form of prayer comprehend in sum?


A. We may divide the whole in two parts.


D. Which is the first?


A. The preface of the same.


D. And which is the second?


A. The requests therein made.


Of the address of the Christians in their prayers, and of their true advocate
in the same.
D. What does he teach us in that preface? Psalm. 50. c.



An. To whom we ought to direct all our Prayers, and by what mediator and
advocate.


D. To whom must we make our prayers?


A. To God only, John. 14. b. 16. c.
as to our very heavenly father, unto whom only that honor is reserved, and
is due.


De. And whom shall we take for advocate and mediatoure toward him.


An. Him only by whom he is made our father, Romans 8. g. 1. Timo 2. b 1. John.
2. a.
and through whom we may call upon him as upon our father.


D. Which is he?


A. Jesus Christ, his well beloved Son, by whom only we are made the
children of God, where as naturally we were the children of wrath.


What things we ought to demand of God, in our prayers.
D. What say thou touching the request made in that form of prayer?


A. That it is not lawful for any man, to desire or demand of God, any other
thing than that which is contained in them.


D. What is it that is comprehended in them?


A. All that which man may justly desire and demand, as well for the glory of
God, as for his own salvation and all his necessities.


A division of the requests contained in the Lord his prayer.
D. How many requests be there in the whole?


An. Six.


De. By what order are they disposed?


A. The three first have regard chiefly to that which concerns the glory of
God.


D. And the other three?


A. To that which is necessary for man, as well for this corporal life, as
for his eternal salvation.


D. Wherefore did our Lord Jesus Christ in this matter observe this order.


A. To teach us, Matthew. 7. d 1. Corin. 10. g
how we ought to frame all our desires to the glory of God, and that we ought
to have the same in most special recommendation, and to submit unto the same
all those things which we require of him for us.


Of the ministry of the Church, and of the use of the same.
D. Now seeing that true faith, is the very foundation of our salvation, and the
true fountain of all good works, tell me now, how we may obtain the same.


A. Thou moughtest already understand it, by that which we have said, of the
vivification and sanctification of the faithful, by the holy Ghost.


D. I understand well that it is a gift of God, which is given to us by the
holy Ghost, but God is the mean by the which the holy Ghost is served in
this work?


A. The ministerye of the word of God, which he has ordained in his
Church to that end.


Of the parts of the ministry of the Church.
D. Mat. 18. b. c.
What conteyneth this ministry?


A. We may make three parts of it.


D. Which is the first? 1. Corin. 1. b.



A. The administration of the pure word of God.


D. The second?


A. The administration of the sacraments ordained in the same.


D. The third?


A. The conservation of the discipline of the Church.


Of the discipline of the Church.
De. What meanest thou by that discipline?


A The policy which ought to be had in the Church, to keep all things in
good order in the same, according to the word of God.


D. To what end serves that policy?


A. It is so necessary in the Church, that without the same, the admistration
of the word and of the sacraments, can not there be entertained and conserved
in his right and authority, as is requisite.


Of the Sacraments that are in Christ's Church, and of the things that are to be
considereed in them.
D. What call thou sacraments?


A. The signs taken of visible things: the which Jesus Christ has joined to
his promises, Mat. 26. ^ 28. d.
even as it were to seal unto us the truth of them, and to confirm the same
unto us.


Them. What things are there to be considered in them?


A. There are three things principal.


D. Which is the first?


A. The word of God, 1. Cor. 11. c. Romans 4. b.
which is the very foundation.


D. The second?


A. The visible signs which are as seals.


D. The third?


A. The things signified as well by the word as by the signs.


Of the things that are to be considered in the word.
D. What is there to be considered in the word?


A. Two things.


D. Which is the first?


A. The commandment of God, by the which we are bound to his holy Sacraments.


D. The second?


A. It is the promise by the which he does advertise us of the grace that he
does offer and bestow upon us in them.


Of the use of the signs.
D. To what purpose serve the signs?


A. To represente to the eyes, and to the other corporal senses, the things
that are signified by the word.


D. What profit comes of this?


A. It serves for greater declaration of them, and for a more greater
confirmation of the faith.


D. Do they serve to any other purpose than this.


A. As God by them on his part declares, his good affection toward us,
aduertising us of the good that he will do to us. We also of our part, do set
forth and declare our faith, 1. Cor. 11. e. 1. Peter. 3. d.
and our heart and affection toward him by them.


D. The sacraments then by this accoumpte, are as witnesses and solemn oaths,
by whom wede as it were homage to God, and do make profession of our faith and
Religion.


A. It is even so.


Of the number of Sacraments which are in the Chucrhe of Christ.
D. How many Sacraments are there in Christ his Church?


A. There are but two which may be properly accoumpted for true Sacraments.


D. Which is the first? Matthew. 28. d Matthew 26. c 1. Cor. 11. e.



A. That of baptism.


D. And the second?


A. The supper.


Of Baptism.
D. What is baptism? Tite. 3. b Ephesians. 5 e. f. Galath. ^. d Romans 6. a.



A. It is a sacrament by the which Jesus Christ does offer unto us the
remission of our sins, and our regeneration, under the figure of the water,
as he does in deed communicate the same unto us by his holy spirit.


D. Does it any thing else?


A. In like sort it testifies to us that he receives us into his Church, as
true members of the same.


D. And of our part, what do we?


A. We testify in like sort, that we acknowledge him for such an one as he
declares himself toward us, and that we believe that he makes us partakers
of all his great riches.


Of the Supper.
D. What is the supper?


A. It is a Sacrament by the which Jesus Christ does present unto us under the
signs of bread and wine, the communion that we have with him, and with his
Church.


D. Is there nothing else represented unto us in it?


A. The spiritual nouriture that we have by faith in his flesh and in his
blood, which have been given for us.


D And as touching the rest, do we not there make the same profession of our
faith that we do in baptism.


A. It must be so understood, for so much as such is the nature of all
Sacraments, and one of the principal ends and purposes for the which they are
ordained of God.


To vvitte whether the bread and the wine be converted into the body and blood
of Jesus Christ in the Supper.
D. Do thou think that this bread and this wine that are given for signs in
the Sacrament, be the very natural body and blood of Jesus Christ?


A. If they were his very natural body and blood, they could then not be the
signs of it.


D. Why not?


A. For so much as if it were so, there should be no difference between the
signs and the things which they signify.


D. Is there none other inconvenient?


A. There is also this inconvenient, that if it were so this doctrine should
be wholly contrary to the articles of our faith, and namely to that of the
ascension of Jesus Christ into heaven.


Of the conjunction of the signs in the supper, with the things that they
signify.
D. Do thou then think that the body and blood are united and joined
together naturally and corporally, with the bread and the wine?


A. No, especially for two causes.


D. Which is the first?


A. Seeing there is question of spiritual nouriture, in this holy Table, we may
not imagine here a material meat, which is eaten on the same table, as is
bodily meat.


D. Which is the second?


A. It is that we shall fall into the same inconvenient, whereof we have even
now spoken, touching the articles of our faith.


D. Do we then receive there nothing else but material bread and wine?


A. Yes that we do.


D. What is it?


A. The very body and blood of Jesus Christ, signified to us by them.


Of the presence of the body and blood of Jesus Christ in the Supper.
D. How may we receive them, if they be not there, even as thou say?


A. I said not but that they were in deed in the supper, or otherwise it should
not be the true supper of Jesus Christ.


D. How do thou the^ understand it?


A. Albeit that I deny the body and the blood to be there naturally and
carnally, I deny not therefore but that they be there given and received
spiritually in deed, even as that sacrament witnesses it unto us.


D. Thou do not then deny the presence of the very body and very blood of
Jesus Christ in the supper?


A. No.


D. What will thou then say for full resolution?


A. I will only say, that the manner of that presence, is not carnal and
material, but spiritual and divine.


Of them to whom the communion of Sacraments does belong.
D. Seeing then we understand what the true nature of Sacraments is, show me
now which they be to whom they ought to be administered.


A. It is easy to understand by that which has already bin said of the nature
of them.


D. How do thou understand it?


A. Seeing they be as seals of the word of God, and of the alliance that he
has made with his people, and as a protestation of our faith toward the same,
the matter is very plain, Romans 4. b
that they belong but only to those which vouch that doctrine and aliance, and
are comprised in the same.


Of the proof that is required of every man in the Supper.
D. Because that the supper is not administered but to such as are already at ye
age of discretion, 1. Cor. 11. f.
show me how every man ought to prepare himself for to receive the same?


A. Saint Paul gives the rule when he admonishes every man to prove
himself.


D. What means he by that proof of himself?


A. That every man do diligently examine him self, whether he have in him the
things without the which he may not worthyly communicate at the holy Sacrament.


Of the principal points upon the which every man ought to examine and prove
himself.
D. Which be those things?


A. There be chiefly three, as men may judge, by the matters that we have
handled heretofore.


De. Which is the first?


An. It is true repentance, and a true acknowledging of his offenses and
sins, for the which Jesus Christ dyed, as he declares unto us by the same
holy sacrament.


D. Which is the second? Mark. 1. b



A. True faith in the only grace and mercy of God, which is offered and
granted unto us in Jesus Christ, and by Jesus Christ, as that Sacrament also
testifyeth.


De. The third? 2. Cor. 10. d



An. True charity and union toward all the members of Jesus Christ, as it is
represented unto us, in that we there eat all of one self bread, and drink
all of one self cup.


Of the ministers of the Church, and of Magistrates.
D. There rests now but one point, it is to wit, by whom these
sacraments ought to be administered. Matthew. 28. d 16. d



A. By those same ministers, to whom the charge to administer the word of
God, has been committed by lawful order, as he has ordained in his Church.


De. Is it lawful then for none other?


An. As GOD has ordained that there should be in the common wealth certain
Magistrates and officers, for the administration of civil and earthlye
matters, to the end there should be no confusion: even so has he willed his
Church to have her ministers chosen by lawful vocation, as his officers for
the administration of Ecclesiastical and spiritual matters, Ephe. 4. b.
to the end that every thing be there handled and governed by good order.


THE END.
A FAMILIAR exposition of the principal points of the Cathechisme, and of the
Christian doctrine, made in form of Dialogue.
Of the true service of God, and of good intents. The first Dialogue.
Of the chief felicity of man, and of the end for the which he was created
of God.
MATTHEW. WHat is that which naturally men do most desire in this world?


Peter To be happy.


M What is it to be happy?


P. It is to be exempte and delivered from all evils, to live in perpetual
rest and joy, and to enjoy al good things.


M. And wherein consists the true and chiefest felicity of man whereby he may
be happy in such sort as thou have declared? Gene. 16.19. b. Prouer. 19. a
Esaias. 43. a. Ezeche. 36.



Peter. It consists in that, wherefore GOD has chiefly created him to his
image and likeness, and has put him into the world. Psalm. 115. ^ Roma. 11. d
1. Cor. 6. d. Colloss. 1. c Deuteronomy. 4. b 6. a. 32. a Matthew. 1. a John. 17 a Ephe.
1. b. c



M. Which is then the principal cause for the which he has created and placed
him in the world?


P. It is to be glorified in him and by him.


M. Which is the very true mean whereby God may be glorified in man, and
by man?


P. By the true knowledge of him, which causes man to honor him as his God
and creator, with that honor which is due unto him, and that he requires of
him.


Of the true honor and service of God.
M. What is that honor which God requires of man? 1. Par. 15. a Miche. 6. b
Deuteronomy. 10. c



P. That he do him homage, and submit him wholly to him thorough true
obedience toward his holy will.


M. By what mean may a man know that will of God?


P By the declaration that God him self has made by his word.


Of the sum of all the Doctrine contained in the holy scriptures.
M. Which be the principal points to consider in that word reveled by God.


P. There be two, to the which a man may apply in general, all ye doctrine
that it co^teyneth and sets forth to man.


M. Which be they?


P. The law, and the Gospel.


Of the law of God, and of the office of the same.
M. Understand thou by the law those commandments only which God gave to
Moses in two tables of stone?


P. I do co^prehe^d the^ under this name of law: Exodus 32. d 34. a. 30. Luke.
24. c Deuteronomy. 5. Psalm. 19. c 2. Tim. 4. d To. 3. c. 4. c 5. d. 7. b 2. Cor. 3. b.
c Galath. 3. ^
but I do comprehend in ye same also all the rest of the doctrine of God,
contained in the holy scriptures: whereby he sets forth to us ye very same
things that he commands us in those two tables.


M. Declare the same somewhat more plainly.


P. I comprehend under the name of law, all the doctrine by the which God
has showed unto us, the good which he allows and requires of us, as by
right we are bound thereunto: and in like sort the evil which displeases him,
and from the which he wills that we keep our selves for his sake, to ye end
that in all things thoroughly, we yield unto him that perfect obedience which we
owe unto him.


M. Has ye law of God none other office?


P. It has this office also, that by ye same mean it shows us our offenses
and sins, by the which we stand detters to the judgment of God, and
preaches to us forthwith the wrath and curse of him that we have deserved in
offending of him.


Of the Gospel, and of his office.
M. What understand thou by the Gospel?


P. I understand all the doctrine of the holy Scriptures, by the which God
declares unto us the grace that he will show us by his son Jesus Christ,
and the means whereby we are made partakers.


M. Do thou understand that doctrine to be contained in any other books of
the holy Scriptures, than in those of the four Evangelists?


Pe. I understand that it is contained in all the holy Bible, and chiefly in
the Books of the new Testament.


Of the difference that is to be considered between the law and the Gospel.
M. What difference do thou then put between the law and the Gospel?


P. I take the law as a Proctor fiscall, or a criminal judge, which does
accuse us, and makes our process before God, in such sort as it yeldeth us all
condemned before the judgment of God, as transgressors of all his
commandments: and by that mean, declares us all worthy of death and
eternal damnation.


M. If it be so, the law serves us rather to condemnation, than to salvation.


P. It is true, but it is not by the fault of the law, but by our fault: To.
7. c. 8. a
for the law of his nature is good, holy, and just: but because that of our
nature we are wicked, and do not accomplish it at all, it does in stead of
justifying of us, condemn us.


M. And the Gospel what news brings it unto us?


P. Very good, and much better for us than the law, as also his name declares.


M. what then does Gospel signify?


P. A message of good, Romans 3. d 5. c. d 2. Cor. 5. d. Galath. 3. d Heb. 12. c.
f.
happy, and ioyefull news.


M. Hold me no longer in doubt, but tell them me.


P. It shows to us the grace by the which we are discharged and set free
before the judgment of God, and delivered from that death and eternal
damnation, to the which we are justly condemned by the law, and it declares
unto us by and by the means whereby we obtain that grace, and of whom.


Of the covenant and agreement of the law and the Gospel.
M. Seeing that the law (as thou say) is to us a messenger of death and
damnation, whereto does it then serve us, but only to condemn us?


P. It serves us in such sort to condemn us, that if it did not condemn us
in this point, the Gospel could not bring us so great wealth as it does.


M. How do thou understand this?


P. If we understand not of our disease, we will not repair to the physician,
which only may deliver us, for we would not think that we had any need.
Likewise, if we should not know our condemnation, we should think we had no
need of grace, Gala. 3. d Hebr. 7. c. 3. b Math. 17. a g. b. Mark. 9. b. 2. c
Luke 9. c. 5. f
and therefore we should not demand it.


M. Will thou then say, that the law is as it were a physician, which shows us
plainly our disease, and how dangerous it is, but he can not heal us, but
sends us to an other?


P. It is even so: And for that cause Saint Paul says, Act. 3. d Heb. 12. g.
2. Timo. 6. c 1. c. Apo. 19. c. 1. Peter. 2. d
that the law is given us as a schoolmaster of little children, to direct us
to the Gospel, and by the same mean to Jesus Christ, which is the chief and
great master, which is also set forth to us in the Gospel, as the chief
Physician. For there is but he only that can heal us of that deadly disease,
to wit, to deliver us from that eternal death, which the law shows us.


Of the cause for the which God vvoulde him self declare his will unto man
by his word.
M. I understand now well, that God would himself declare his will unto man by
his own word, which comprehends all the doctrine of the law and of the
Gospel, but for what cause has he done it?


P. Because he will not be served according to the fantasies of men, but
according to his own only will. Deute. 12. a ^^^. 10. c.



M. What is the cause of this?


P. It is because that there is but his will only that is just and reasonable,
and that ought to be a rule of all reason and justice unto me^. For the which
cause, he has generally forbidden all men, Col. 2. b. d. Deuter. 4. a 12. d.
Pro. 30. a.
of what estate or condition soever they be, to add or diminish any thing to
or fro his law and word, which he has revealed as well by his Prophets and
Apostles, as by his own son Jesus Christ.


Of the good intentes of men that are not governed by the word of God.
M. How think thou then of those which say, that whatsoever is done to the
honor of God, and with a good intent, is well done?


P. I deny not but that which is done to the honor of God, does please him,
and that which is done with a good intent, is well done: but to the end that
no man deceive himself under this fair color, I say, that nothing can be
done to the honor of God nor with a good intent, but that which is done
according to his word, for the word of God is the very true and only rule of
all good intents, and of the honor wherewith he ought to be honored.


M. But if a man do think to do well, and does that which he does to none
other end but to honor God, is not that enough?


P. If there were but that required, it had not ben nedeful that God should
ever have spoken: or that he should ever have given a law unto man, to teach him.


M. Wherefore say thou so?


P For that that it had then ben sufficient to have let every man live
according to his fantasy, and that he had only commanded, that every man
should do that which liked him, without giving them any other law, where he
has done clean contrary, Deuter. 4. a and. 12. a
saying: Do not every one of you that which shall please you, but that only
which I command you.


Of human traditions.
M. What thynkest thou then of laws and of men's traditions, which have been
set forth by men, Esaias 29. d Matthew. 15. a Mark. 7. a
contrary to the word of God, touching his service?


P I will say nothing to thee of my self, but only that which god himself
has said by the mouth of his prophet Esaias, and that which he has yet
afterward more confirmed by that of his son Jesus Christ.


M. What has he said?


P. That he is served in vain by the doctrines and commandments of men.


Of the service of God according to the traditions of men.
M. Do thou think by that, that they which serve him in that sort do lose
wholly their time, and that he does not accept it at their hands?


P. They do not only lose their time, 1. Sam. 15 ^ Matthew. 6. d Hebr. 11. d
Romans 14. a
but they do also greatly dishonor God, and do provoke his wrath upon them.


M. How so?


P. For so much as whatsoever is done without faith cannot please him, but
is sin, which greatly displeases him.


Of the difference of the true and false faith.
M. But if they which serve God according as they have been taught of me^ do
the same faithfully, may they then do it without faith?


P. It fares with this good faith, whereof thou now speak, John. 6. g. 17 b
Romans 10. d Tit. 1. a. Hebr. 11. a
as it does with good intents, whereof we even now spoke.


M. How understand thou that?


P. As there ar no good inte^ts, but those which are governed by the only rule
of the will and word of God, even so is there no true faith, but that which has
certain and sure foundation in the same word.


M. Show me the same something more plainly.


P. When thou do any thing at adventure, can thou do it with certain
assurance?


M. I confess that I do it in dout.


P. Thou may then understand thereby, that thou do it not in faith.


M. Why not?


P. Because that faith and doubt are as contrary as is to be certain and
uncertain.


M. How may that be?


P. Because that faith is never without true assurance of that which it
believes and follows.


M. Why may it not be without such assurance? To. 1. d. 8. g. Ephesians. 3. c. a. c.
Philip. 2. a Hebr. 11. a. b. Iam. 1. a.



P. Because that she is builded upon the sure word of God, by the which she
is assured of his good will.


M. What follows thereof?


P. That she does nothing at adventure, but is ever certain, that that which
she believes, and that which she does, is pleasant to God.


Of the assurance of the conscience by the word of God, and what commodity
comes thereby to man.
M. WHat commodity does this assurance bring to man?


P. The gretest yt he could desire.


M. Show me what it is.


P. It is not only one, but two, which are very great.


M. Which is the first?


P. It is yt man shows by the same the reurence that he bears to the
majesty of God.


M. Wherein? Deuteronomy. 6. a. 10. ^



P. In that yt he fears not only to offend him, in yt which he plainly
knows to displease him, but also in yt whereof he is yet in dout.


M. What reverence of God is there in this last point?


P. There is this, yt man has the majesty of God in such estimation, and
bears him so great reverence, yt not only he will not wittingly offend him,
but also he will not put himself in any hazard, nor do any thing at adventure,
whe^ther is question of ye honor and service of god. Romans 5. a. 8. ^ Ephe. 2.
d. Galla. 4. a. Heb. 4. d.
And therefore he will ever be assured of his will.


M. Which is the other point?


P. The quietness of a good conscience that man has by that mean, when he is
assured that he pleases God, by an assurance so certain, founded upon the
witness of God himself.


Of the Law of God. The second Dialogue.
Of the manifestation of the will of God by the law of the two Tables.
M. Seeing then that we must in every respect govern our selves according to
the rule of Gods word, Exodus 20. a 32. d. 34. a. d Deute. 5. a. b and 9. b.
following the resolution which we have even now made, show me now first of
all, what is that he commands us in his law?


P. He himself has made us a brief gathering or collection of the principal
points that the doctrine thereof comprehends in his commandments that he
has given to his people, by the hands of Moses his servant, written in those
two tables of stone, whereof thou haste even now made mention.


Of the number of the commandments contained in the two tables.
M. How many commandments does the first Table conteyn?


P. Four with the Preface, which the Lord used at the beginning.


M. And the second?


P. Six, which being joined to the first four, make ten in the whole.


The first table of the law.
M. WHich is that preface whereof thou have made mention?


P. Harken Israel: It is I that am the Eternal thy God, who has drawn thee out
of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.


M. Which is the first commandment?


P. Thou shall have no strange Gods before me.


M. The second?


P. Thou shall make no image nor likeness of the things that be there above in
heaven, nor here below in the earth, nor in the waters under the earth.

Thou shall do them no reverence, neither shall thou serve them: for I my self,
I am the Eternal thy God, mighty and jealous, who do venge my self of the
iniquity of the fathers upon their children, and upon the children of their
children, yea even to the third and fourth line of those that hate me, and do
show favor in a thousand generatio^s to them that love me and keep my
commandments.


M. The third?


P. Thou shall not take in vain the name of the Eternal thy God. For the
Eternal will not hold him for innocent that shall take his name in vain.


Math. The fourth?


Peter. Remember thee to sanctify the day of rest. Six days thou shalt
labor and shalt do all thy business: but the seventh day is the rest of
the eternal thy God. Thou shalt in the same do no kind of works, neither
thou, nor thy Son, nor thy daughter, neither thy man servant nor thy woman
servant, neither thy cattle, neither the stranger which abides with thee.

For in six days the Eternal made the Heaven, the Earth and the Sea, and all
that which is in them, and did rest in the seventh day. And therefore the
Eternal did bless the day of rest, and sanctified it.


The second Table.
M. REcite them of the second table, and show me which is the first thereof.


P. The first of that table, is the first following the order of the four going
before.


M. Which is it? Honor thy father and thy mother, to the end that thy days
may be long upon the earth, that the Eternal thy GOD gives thee.


M. The sixte.


P. Thou shalt not kill.


M. The seventh.


P. Thou shall not be a fornicatour or adulterer.


M. The eighte?


P. Thou shall not steal.


M. The ninth?


P. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.


M. The tenth?


P. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, nor his wife, nor his man
servant, nor his woman servant, nor his Ox^, nor his ass, nor any thing that
is his.


Of the sum of the law.
M. WHat do the commandments of these two tables conteyne in substance?
Matthew. 22. d Mark. 12. a. Luke. 10. c



P. Jesus Christ has given us the sum, reducing into two points, all the
doctrine comprised in them.


M. Which is the sum?


P. Hearken Israel: the Eternal thy God is God only. Thou shalt love the
Eternal thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul: and with all thy
understanding. It is the first and the great commandment. Levy. 19. d.
And the second like to the same is. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self: Matthew. 7. d.
All the law and the Prophets depend of these two commandments: All things
then that you would that men did to you, do you the same unto them, for it is
the law and the Prophets.


Of the division of the matters set forth in the law.
M. WHat do these two points comprehend in effect?


Pet. The first comprehends all the commandments of the first table.


Math. What do these commandments of the first table comprehend in
substance?


P. All that which God requires of man, especially touching his own person
and majesty.


M. And the second point of the said su^me what conteyneth it?


P. All the commandments of the second table.


M. What is it that God requires of man in them?


P. That which he would that all men should do one to an other, for ye love of
him.


The division of the points contained in the first table: and of the
principal parts of the true service of god.
M. Which be the principal points that he requires of man, especially
concerning the person and majesty of God?


P. A man may in mine opinion, reduce them all chiefly in two generally.


M. Which is the first?


P. The faith toward him.


M. And the second?


P. The testifying and manifesting of the same.


Of the faith toward God.
M. WHat requires he in the first?


P. That man hold him for the only and true God, setting all his heart and all
the trust of his salvation in him only, and in no other thing whatsoever.


M. Is faith then the chief and principal foundation of the honor and
service which man owes to God?


P. It cannot otherwise be.


M. Wherefore?


P. For that yt eue^ as it is impossible to please God without faith, even so
all that which is done without faith, may be but sin, as we have heretofore
said.


M. What is the cause thereof?


P. It is because that faith is the true fountain of that true and perfect
obedience which God requires of man toward his holy will. Deuteronomy. 6. d. 10. c.
d. 32. f.
Wherefore he requires it forthwith in the first commandment of his law,
with the whole heart of man.


M. Show me this somewhat more familiarly. Esaias. 43. b.



P. I will say in effect, that God requires that man do so set all his heart
and al his trust in his God, that, he attend from him only, all goodness, and
of none other whatsoever, Hebr. 11. a Romans 14. b.
and that in all things he depend of none other but of him only.


Of the testifying and declaring of faith, and of the parts thereof.
M. WHat meanest thou by the testifying and showing forth of faith, Matthew. 7.
c. Galath. 5. a. Hebr. 11. James. 2. c. d.
which thou have placed for the other point?


Pe. The testimony whereby man gives to understand by the fruits that his
faith brings forth in him, that it is not vain, fained nor dead, but that it
is true, lively and sound.


M. Which be the fruits that yield such testimony?


P. We may bring them all into three points.


M. Which is the first?


P. The calling upon the name of God.


M. The second?


P. Thansgiuing.


M. The third?


P. The charity toward our neighbor: but this apperteyneth more aptly to
the second table of the law.


Of the invocation of Gods name, and of the true worshipping of him.
M. WHat meanest thou by the invocation of gods name?


P. I mean a pure affection of heart, whereby faith makes a man to run only
to God in all his necessities, Psalm. 50. e. 14 4. d. John. 4. c. Deuter. 4. c.
Matthew. 5.6. a. Esaias. 1. d.
and to worship him in spirit and truth as he requires in the second and
third commandment.


M. What is it to worship God in spirit and truth?


P. It is to honor God with a true affection, proceeding from a pure and
clean heart, and not by Images and other visible and corruptible things, or
else by shows and outward ceremonies.


Of thanksgiving.
M. WHat meanest thou by thanksgiving, which thou have set forth for the
second point?


P. I mean that even as God will have man to call upon his name, Psalm. 50. c.
116. b. Hebr. 13. c
he will also that he acknowledge the benefits yt he has received of him, and
that he yield him thanks in such sort as he himself has ordained, for the
glory of his name, which is also a point that he requires in the third and
fourth commandment.


Of the outvvard testimony of faith, which God requires of man.
M. Seeing that God will be served in spirit and truth, as thou have said, is
not he contented, that even as man in his heart believes in him, that even so
in his heart he call upon his name, and yield him thanks?


P. That should be sufficient as toward God. Psalm. 7. e. Iere. 17. b. Act.
1. d. Apoca. 2. f.
For so much as he knows well what is in the heart of man, without any need
of other testimony.


M. Wherefore is it then that he yet requires, that man yield outward
testimony?


P. He does it chiefly for two causes.


M. Which is the first?


P. It is to that end that man deceive not himself, making himself to
believe that he has true faith in God, when he has none at all.


M. How may he know whether he have faith or no, Mat. 7. d. 13. d 25. a. James.
1. d. 2. c. d. Mat. 7. c James. 2. c. d.
by that mean which thou speak of?


P. Eue^ as the tree is known by his fruits, and the workman by his work,
and the cause by his effect.


M. It seems to me that which thou say, is a better mean to cause others
to know whether he have faith or no, Romans 2. b. 2. Peter. 1. b. Math. 5. b.
John. 15. b. Romans 10. b. 1. Peter. 2. b.
then himself.


P. If others may know it by this mean, there is no doubt but such a
testimony which he yeldeth to others, may well serve him for a proof, and
greater confirmation of his faith, when he shall see these fruits himself.


M. Which is the other reason that thou have also to this purpose?


P. It is to the end that God be glorified also before men, by the confession
and testimony of the faith that is in the heart of the believing man.


Of the means ordained to man by God, whereby they may make profession of
their faith.
M. WHat means has he ordained to make confession, Math. 18. c. 28. d. Exodus
10. b. 31. d.
and to yield testimony?


P. The chief are the assemblies of the faithful, in the which he does
precide by his holy spirit, and by the ministry of his word, for whose
causes he has chiefly ordained the day of rest.


M. What means are there in such asemblies, Deuter. 5. b. c.
to make there this confession?


P. There are three chiefly.


M. Which is the first?


P. The allowing and confession of Lords doctrine, which is there set forth
by the preaching of the Gospel. 1. Corin. 14. c.



M Which is the second?


P. The public and common prayers of the Church.


M. Which is the third?


P. It is the communion of the Sacraments administered by the ordinance of God
in those assemblies.


M. I would willingly learn of thee which be these Sacraments?


P. It were better that we deferred this matter to an other time, to the end
that we continued the purpose which we have in hand at this present, touching
the matters comprised in these commandementes of the law of God.


Of the charity toward our neighbor.
M. WE have already handled two points touching the fruits of faith, tell me now
which is the third and last? Leuit. 19. d. John. 13. d. Romans 13. b.



P. It is the charity that God requires of every man one to another.


M. Seeing that faith has his proper regard to God only and to the
commandments of the first table, and charity has his regard to our neyboure
and to the commandments of the second table, as thou have said heretofore.
Tell me now what agreements there is between faith and charity. Math. 5. g.
1. John. 3. d. 4. c. d. 5. a.



P. Seeing that faith has regard to God, he can not be without perfect love
of him, neither the perfect love toward him may be, but forthwith it
extends to all his children, and to all those that he recommendeth unto us.


A division of the matters contained in the second table.
M. WHat does this charity toward our neighbor comprehend?


P. All the commandments of the second table of ye law.


M. Which be ye principal points of this charity whereof thou speak?


P. We may likewise bring them all into two.


M. What does GOD require in the first?


P. The honor and the obedience that he wills all inferiors to yield to
their superiors, whom he has given unto them for leaders and governors, in
what estate soever they be, even as the fifth commandment of the law does
conteyne.


M. What requires he in the second?


P. The duty whereunto he has egally and generally bound al men one to
another, and the honesty and justice that all men ought to keep in their
conversation in this world toward their God. 1. Thessa. 5. d. 1. Corin. 9. b.



M. What understand thou by that justice and honesty?


P. That man keep himself pure and sound, as well in his soul as in his
body, to the end he be not defiled, either by any violence or wrong that he
shall do to his neighbor, in any thing that may be, nor by any whoredom or
filthiness whatsoever.


Of the points wherein every one is bound to his neighbor.
M. Matthew. 22. d 1. Cor. 10. c. 13. b. Philip. 2. a Romans 13. c. 12 c. d.
DEclare to me more exactly what our duty toward our neighbor imports.


P. That we have the same care for all men in general that we have for our
selves.


M. But wherein ought we to have this care for others?


P. There are two points to be considered herein.


M. Which is the first?


P. That we take heed that we do them no dishonor nor hurt, in any wise, be
it in the soul, body, goods, or name.


M. Which is the other?


P. That we procure their health, honor and profit with all our power, in
all things as the other five commaundeme^ts following do declare.


Of the weakness and defaulte of power that is in man to accomplish the
law of God.
M. ALL that is very just and very reasonable, but is it in the power of man, to
yield to God so sound and perfect obedience as he requires of him? Gene. 6. b
8. d. Iere. 7. b. Romans 8. b. 1. Cori. 2. d Gala. 5. c. d.



P. He has not only not that power, but contrarily, it is fully impossible for
him, to yield unto God such an obedience. For according to his nature, he has
no pleasure but to resist against his holy will.


Of the fall and restoring of Man. The third Dialogue.
Romans 6. d. 7. c. Ephesians. 2. a. 4. c. Galath. 5. c. John. 3. d.
Of man's Free Will.
M. Has man no free will, where by he may do the good that God commands
him, and refuse the evil which he forbyddeth him?


P. He has free will without any power to do good: But on the contrary, so
prompt to all evil, that he desires not, (neither can he) any other thing but
to do evil, for the time that he remains in his corrupt nature.


Of sin, and of the nature of it, and what original sin is properly.
M. Genesis. 3. Romans 5. b. 7. c. John. 8. d. Romans 6. c. 2. Pet. 2. d. Ephesians. 2.
a.
WHat is the cause of this unhappiness?


P. Sin whereunto he became subject through his own fault, in such sort,
that he is as a servant and slave to sin.


M. How is sin the cause?


Peter. Because that it brings to him two euilles, the greateste that may be.


M. Psalm. 51. b. Ephesians. 2. a.
Which is the first?


P. It is the wrath and curse of God, whereof sin makes man guilty.


M. Which is the second?


P. It is that corruption of nature whereof I have already spoken, which
makes man so inclined to evil, that he cannot of himself think, speak, nor
do any good, but procure daily more and more the wrath of God upon him, by
all that which he can think, speak, or do.


M. That corruption of nature, ought it to be accounted for sin?


P. It is properly that which is commonly called original sin, which is the
spring and fountain from whence all the others do proceed. Wherefore if there
be any sin that deserves to be accounted sin, it is that same.


Of the mean whereby man may be delivered from sin, and from the wrath
of God, which sin brings to him.
M Seeing then that man can find in himself no remedy to with-holde him from
that bottomless pit of perdition, John. 1. a. Romans 5.7. d 8. a. Ephesians. 2. b.
4. f.
where is it that he shall find it elsewhere?


P. In God only, who only can reform him to his Image, as at the first he
did, Col. 2. c. 3. b 2. Timo. 1 c Tito. 3. b. Exodus 20. e. Deuter. 5. a Hebr.
12.5. 1. Timo. 6. d
and formed him according to ye same.


M. But by what mean may he obtain so great a good thing of God, considering
that he has so greatly offended him, and procured his wrath?


P. It is certain, that no man may have access to God, to obtain salvation
of him, without a mediatoure, by whom he may be made at one with him.


Of the causes for the which there is neither man nor Angel sufficient to
the office of mediatoure between God and man, and of the greatness of the
wrath of God against sin.
M. Romans 3. c. 5. b.
ANd who is this mediatoure, which may make this appointmente?


P. For so much as all men, are in like fault and condemnation, there is none
among them sufficient for that office, of what holiness and quality soever he
be.


Mat. Where must he then be sought? Shall it be among the Angels which have
no sin?


P. The very Angels can not be sufficient thereunto. Job. 4. d. Colloss. 1. b
Ephesians. 1. b. Deuter. 4. d Nahum. 1. d Exodus 33. d. 34. a Psalm. 145. a. Job. 46.
d. 1. King. 8. c Daniel. 6. g. 13. b. Isaye. 40. c. Psalm. 146. c. 1. Ti. 6. c.
d. 2. Peter. 2. a Jude. ^. Roma. 5. d. 1. Cor. 13. f Hebr. 2. d. Exodus 34. a.
Romans 3. e. d



M. Why not?


P. Chiefly for two causes.


M. Which is the first?


P. It is that the wrath and curse of God, is so heavy a burden, that there
is no creature whatsoever he be, neither in heaven nor in the earth, that may
bear it, but that he shall be beaten down with it utterly.


M. What is the cause there?


P. It is because that ye offense through sin committed, is done against God
which is infinite, and an eternal prince and king, wherefore it deserves also
pains infinite and eternal.


M. Have we any testimony of the same?


P. The angels which have sinned may be sure testimonies unto us.


M. In what sort?


P. If that they which were so excellent creatures, could not themselves bear
that which they had deserved for their part, how may one amongst them bear
all that that all mankind has deserved together?


M. This reason is very plain. But which is the other cause, that makes that
the very Angels are not sufficient to such an office?


P. For so much as seeing that the offense was committed by man, it must also be
repaired in him, and by him.


M. For what cause?


P. To the end that God may be found true and just, and also merciful
together.


Of the setting forth of the just judgment, and of the mercy of god, in the
rede^ptio^ of man.
M. Gene. 2. c. 3. c. d. Exodus 20. a. 34. a. Ezech. 18. e Iere. 3. d. Psalm.
103. b.
HOw doste thou understand ye same?


P. If god did not punish man acording to the desert of his transgression, and
according to the threatenings that he himself has given unto him, and the
sentence that he has given against him, where should the truth and justice of
God be?


M. I understand well this point, but what will thou say of his mercy?


P. In like sort if he punished man according to his desert, where should then
this mercy be, by the which he shows forth his infinite goodness more than by
any other virtue, whatsoever that is in him?


Of the only and true mediator Jesus Christ.
M. John. 3. b. Romans 8. f. g. Romans 5. b. 1. John. 4. b. Esaias. 9. b. Iere. 23.
b. Psalm. 45. b. John. 1. a. b. 1. Tim. 3. d. Roma. 9. b. 1. John. 1. a.
If there be neither man nor Angel sufficient to that office, what other mean
rests then, by the which that fault of man may be repaired by him, and in him.


P. Because that man could not among all the creatures find any, God has
provided according to the piety and compassion that he had of him, being moved
by his only mercy and inestimable charity.


M. Which is this mean?


P. It is yt he has given his only son Jesus Christ to do this office.


M. And what mean has he observed in this work?


P. It is that Jesus Christ being the Eternal and true God, Math. 1. e. d.
Luke. 1. d. Act 3. c. 2. d Esaias. 53. b. c 1. Peter. 2. d
and of one only essence with the father, took humain flesh in the womb of ye
virgin Marie, by the very ordinance of God his father.


M. What need was there that he should take humain flesh upon him to execute
that office?


P. It was even so necessary to the end that in the same, he might satisfy
the just judgment of God for all men.


Of the union of the divine and human nature in the person of Jesus Christ,
and of the causes of the same.
M. Was it necessary that ye same mediator should be very God and very man
together, in one very person?


P. It is even so, and chiefly for three causes. Romans 5. d. Hebr. 2. d.



M. Which is the first?


P. It is, that if he had not been very man, he could not have suffered in our
flesh and nature yt which he has suffered, and was to suffer for us.


M. And if he had not suffered ye same, what inconvenience should there have been?


P. That he should not have born for us in our nature and flesh the wrath and
curse of God which we had deserved: and then he should not have satisfied the
judgment of God through his obedience, to put away by the same, in our own
flesh and nature, the rebellion by the which we have deserved this judgment.
Nahum. b. Hebr. 10. g.



M. Which is the other cause?


P. It is that if he had been but only man, and that he had not ben united with
God, being very God and very man in one very person, he could not have been able
to bear this burden of the wrath of god, which is so great and so importable,
but that he should have been swallowed up, how just or innocent soever he
should have been. Esaias. 43. b. Iere. 17. a. John. 6. g.



M. Which is the third?


P. It is that he should not have been able also to have brought salvation and
life to man, if he had not had the fountain in him self by mean of his
divine nature.


Of the sacrifice and satisfaction of Jesus Christ, and of the virtue thereof.
M. WHich is then the mean whereby Jesus Christ has satisfied for us in his
human nature and flesh? Esaias. 53. a. b Math. 27. Romans 4. d. 5. a. 8. a. 2.
Cor. 5. d. Ephesians. 5. a. 1. Pet. 2. c. d 1. John. 2. a. Hebr. ^. c. d



P. It is the sacrifice that he himself has made of his own body and blood
by his passion and death.


M. How is the sacrifice of Jesus Christ of such virtue?


P. For two principal causes.


M. Which is the first? Phili. ^. ^ Hebr. 5. ^. 9. d.



P. The pain the which he being innocent has endured for us, which were
culpable, by the which pain, he who had not deserved it, has delivered us
from it which we have deserved.


M. Which is the second?


P. It is the perfect obedience which he has yielded to God his father, in
recompense of the transgression and rebellion which was found in us.


Of the communication in the benefits of Jesus Christ.
M. IS it sufficient that he is dead, and that he has yielded to God his
father one such an obedience?


P. If that same were enough, all should be saved indifferently, as well
infidels as faithful men.


M. What is more required then?


P. That the same satisfaction which Jesus Christ has made to God his
father, may be communicated and appiled to us.


THE FOVRTH dialogue, is of the justification and sanctification of man.
Of the faith in Jesus Christ, and of the Justification thereby.
MATTHEW. Which is the mean whereby to comme to that Communycation, whereof
thou have even now spoken, and by the which we must communicate with Jesus
Christ? Act. 13. f. 15. b. Romans 1. d. 3. d. Galath. 3. d. Romans 6. a. 8. a. b 2.
Cor. 1. b. 2. Cor. 5. d. Galath. 3. d. Ephesians. 5. g. 1. Peter. 1. a 1. John. 1.
b. c.



Pe. There is none other but the only faith in Jesus Christ: For by the same we
are justified before God, and not by our works neither in all, nor in part.


M. What is it to be justified before God?


P. It is to be accoumpted for just, at his judgment, as if we had never
sinned.


M. How may this be done by the mean of faith?


P. Because that the spirit of God, by whom it is given us, does join us
with Christ, as members of his body, by the means of the same faith, in such
sort that the justice of Christ and all that ever he has done for us, is
imputed and ascribed to us as though it were our own proper.


Of the justification by faith and by works.
M. WHy is this honor rather given to faith than to works?


P. Because there is no justice that may satisfy the judgment of God, unless
it be perfect as is that of Jesus Christ.


M. Why may not that of Jesus Christ be as well allowed unto us by our works,
as by faith? Romans 3. d. e. 4. a. b. c. Galath. 3. Galath. 2. d.



P. Because that they are things altogether contrary, to be justified by faith
and to be justified by a man's own works.


M. What contrariety is there in that?


P. If that man could find justice in himself and in his own works, whereby
he might satisfy unto God, he should then have no need of that of Jesus
Christ.


Of the satisfaction toward god by works.
M. ANd if he may not satisfy in every point may he not yet at the least
satisfy in part?


P. If he cannot satisfy him in the whole, no more can he in part.


M. For what cause?


P. Chiefly for two causes.


M. Which is the first?


P. It is that God receives no justice for satisfaction, if it be not sound
and perfect, and worthy of his majesty: as we have already touched.


M. Which is the other?


P. It is that man being naught and unjust of his nature, can do no work that
may be just (as we have also said) if he be not first made good and just.


Of the works whereby man may satisfy at the judgment of God.
M. Do thou mean by this, that the good and just work makes not the man
good and just?


P. I do not altogether deny, Psalm. 14. a. b. Tit. 3. b. Tit. 2. d. 1. Tim.
2. b
but that the good and just work makes the man good and just: but I say, that
man's work can not do this, because there proceeds none such from him.


M. Which is then the work that may do this?


P. That of Jesus Christ, whereof we have spoken heretofore: which brings
unto us this commodity, when we are made partakers of him by the mean of
Faith, as we have already said.


Of the causes why justification is attributed to faith only.
M. Show me now for full resolution, what is the chief cause why
justification is ascribed to faith? Romans ^. ^



P. Because that in stead of bringing to God any thing that is of man, he
brings him to Jesus christ to receive of him thereby, that which he can not
find in himself.


M. For what cause is this done? Romans 3. ^



P. To the end that man may be found just before God, not by his own
justice: for he can not but by that of Jesus Christ.


Of the satisfaction by faith.
M. THy meaning is then yt this justice of Jesus Christ makes a man just, Romans
3. c. d. 4. d. 1. Cor. 1. d. 2. Cor. 5. d. Romans 7. a. 8 a. b. Ephesians. 2. a. b 1.
Thessa. 4. a. b. Tite. 2. c. d.
before God, as though he were wholly innocent: forsomuche as GOD esteems him
for such an one, accepting the Justice of his son Jesus Christ, for full
satisfaction.


P. It is so, and it brings yet beside that, an other very great commodity.


M. What is it?


P. It is that where as before he could do nothing but evil, this faith
does sanctify him, disposing him to the obedience of the will of God, 1.
Peter. 1. a. Romans 6. c. d. Matthew. 1 c. d Esa. 7. c. Luke. 1. c. 2. d. Matthew. 3.
d. Luke. 3. c. John. 1. c. 3. d. John. 17. d. Hebr. 10. b. Romans 8. b. c Galath.
5. c. d. Romans 8. b. e Galat. 5. c. d
and to all good works, to the end that he may serve to justice and to
holiness, where as before he served to injustice and to sin.


M. How is it that faith does sanctify man according to thy saying?


P. There be two things to consider in this sanctification.


M. Which is the first?


P. It is that Jesus Christ having taken our own flesh in the womb of the
Virgin, in the which he was conceived by the working of the holy Ghost, has
also sanctified it in his. Of which thing beside the testimony that we have of
the Angel in the holy Scriptures, the holy Ghost has yet yielded more ample
testimony in the baptism of Jesus Christ, when in form of a dove, he did
descend upon him, which is our head, in whom all his members were forthwith
sanctified.


M. Which is the other point?


P. It is that faith which embraces and receives wholly Jesus Christ with all
his gifts and graces, is never in man without the spirit of him, nor the
spirit of him, without his fruits, which are altogether contrary to the works
of the flesh, to wit, of the corrupted man that is not regenerate by the
spirit of God.


Of the true spring of good works.
M DEclare unto me if thou understand by this, that faith is the fountain
of all good works, and the good root which makes man a good tree, to bear
good fruit, where as before he was an evil tree and bare evil fruit?


P. It cannot be otherwise.


M. I think then it is the cause why Saint Paul, speaking of the true
Christian faith, does call it the living and working says thorough charity:
James. 2. c. d.
and why Saint James says that the faith that is without works is dead.


P. There is no doubt of it.


Of the accomplishing of the law in Jesus Christ, and of the difference that
is between the justification and sanctification of a Christian man.
M. Seeing then, that man is so reformed by the mean of faith, thou will
then say that he is otherwise disposed to obey the law of God, than he was
before, when he was yet in his own natural. John. 3. d. James. 1. c. 1.
Peter. 1. d Romans 7. c 2. Cor. 5. a. 1. John. 1. d. Psalm. 143. a. Romans 7. d.
Phili. 3. b. c 1. John. 2. a



P. It is easy to understand by that which we have already said.


M. May we then in no wise obey the law of god, except that we be first
regenerate by his spirit, and reformed to his Image?


P. No in deed.


M. If we ca^ in no sort obey, we are then far off from yelding perfect
obedience to the whole law.


P. It is true.


M. What is the cause thereof?


P. It is for that that our regeneration and reformation, is never fully
perfect in us, so long as we are wrapped in this corruptable flesh in this
world.


M. What other remedy is there then?


P. It is to have recourse to the justification which we have already obtained
thorough the faith in Jesus Christ, by the which we do also obtain daily
remission of all our sins. For albeit that our sanctification be not yet
thoroughly perfect, yet notwithstanding that same lets not, but that our
justification is already perfect.


M. Do thou mean that our justification does supply that which wants of
our sanctification.


P. I can not tell whether thou take my words, as though I meant that we
might satisfy toward God in part, by our good works, the which we impute to
satisfaction, and that Jesus Christ should satisfy only for the rest for us, by
the same that may be on his side being allowed unto us by the justification. For
if thou did so understand it, thou should greatly deceive thy self.


M. Wherein?


P. Chiefly in two points.


M. Show me the first. Esaias. 43. b. Act. 4. b. 2. Timo. 1. c.



P. It is in that thou should spoil God at the least of a great part of
the honor which is due unto him, for the salvation which we have of him, by
Jesus Christ, and the other part we shall attribute to man.


M. In what sort?


P. In that that by this mean he should be our savior, but for the one
half, and we for the other.


M. Which is the other point? Esaias. 54. c. Luke. 17. c



P. It is that thou should present to God, a satisfaction ouermuche
imperfecte.


M. I confess, if I should present unto him but my works: but when I shall
present unto him my works for satisfaction, and the^ the satisfaction which
Christ has made for me with them: What imperfection then may more remain?


P. If the satisfaction of Jesus Christ be sufficient, thou need to present
none other to God: if it be not sufficient, Job. 4. d. Psalm. 130.
thou can not satisfy that which may there want by any thing that thou
can do.


M. Why not?


P. Because that God can allow nothing for satisfaction which is not pure,
sound and perfect as he is.


Of the distinction that ought to be had between the cause of our salvation,
and the testimony of the same.
M. Expound unto me somewhat more plainly thy meaning in this.


P. I will say unto thee for the first, that we must put difference in this
matter between the cause of our salvation, and the testimony of the same, and
then afterward between the sanctification by Jesus Christ which is imputed
to us, and that which is joined to our person.


M. What think thou to be ye cause of our salvation? Galla. 3. d. Ephesians. 3.
d.



P. Jesus Christ dwelling in us by faith.


M. What meanest thou by the testimony that we have of the same?


P. The sanctification whereof we now speak.


M. How do thou understand that it is the testimony of our salvation and
of the cause of the same, and not the cause it self? Romans 8. b. c. Gala. 5. c.
d. Matthew. 7. c. John. 8. c. f.



P. For because it testifies that Jesus Christ dwells in us, as the effect
testifies of his cause.


M. What follows thereof?


P. That the cause is there, seeing that we see the effects, to wit, Jesus
Christ with all his gifts and graces.


Of the difference that must be put between the sanctification by Christ,
which is atributed unto us, and that which is joined to our person, as a
quality sticking to the same.
M. ANd what inconueniente were it to hold our sanctification, for the cause
of our salvation?


P. For the better understanding of all this matter, it is meet that I expound
unto thee yet the difference between the sanctification of Jesus Christ which
is allowed us, whereof I have eue^ now spoken, and that which is joined to our
proper person, and then the fruits of the same. Luke. 1. d, Act. 4. c. Hebr. 7.
d.



M. What difference do thou put therein?


P. I do call sanctification properly that, which we consider in the very
person of Jesus Christ, the which sanctification is not properlye ours, as a
quality co^iuncte to our person, but only by imputation. Gene. 15. a. Romans 4.
a. d. 1. Corin. 1 d.



M. What meanest thou by that imputation?


P. That it is allowed unto us, as his justice is attributed and allowed unto
us, by the justification which we obtain in him by faith.


Mat. Is that the cause why Saint Paul says, that God has made Jesus
Christ unto us wisdom, justice, sanctification, and redemption?


P. There is no doubt of it, but it must be considered, that beside this kind
of sanctification, Romans 6. d. 1. Thessa. 4. b 1. Peter. 1. c. John. 17. c.
Hebr. 10. b.
that is so imputed and allowed unto us, there is yet an other, that is joined
to our very person, not only by imputation, but as a quality sticking in us,
which proceeds from that first kind of sanctification, whereof we have even
now spoken.


M. What virtue has every of them in us?


P. The first does fully sanctify us before God, because it is full and
perfect.


M. The other, is it not of the same nature and force?


P. No. For it sanctifies us but in part. Roma. 7. c. d. Galla. 5. c.



M. For what cause?


P. Because that it is but begone in us and not perfect, wherefore it cannot
fully sanctify us except it be full and perfect.


M. And when shall it be so? 1. Cor. 15. f. g.



P. When our regeneration and reformation to the Image of God shall be. 1.
Thessa. 5. d.



M. It shall not then be in this mortal life?


P. It is true, but it shall be in the life to come, Col. 3. a. 1. John. 5. a.
in the which our life, which is now hidden in Jesus Christ, shall be showed,
and what we be shall appear, when we shall be made like to the glorious body
of Jesus Christ.


Of the cause of the difference that is in these two kinds of sanctification.
M. WHat is the very cause of this difference that thou put between these
two kinds of sanctification?


P. I call the first perfect. Luke. 1. d Daniel. 9. f.
For that that it is the very sanctification not only of the which Jesus
Christ is sanctified in his flesh and humane nature, but also by reason
whereof he is called the holy one of holy ones. For so much as by the
communication of the same he does sanctify all his elected, Ephe. 1. a. 5. f.
to make them holy and without blame before God, who has chosen them
thereunto.


M. If it be the same sanctification wherewith Jesus Christ is sanctified, and
does sanctify others, it is very certain that it cannot be but perfect.
Ephesians. 3. d. Col. 2. a. b. John. 1. b. 4. b



P. If it be perfect in him, it is also perfect in us, in so much as dwelling
in us by faith, we have him with all the holiness that he brings with him,
the which we ever draw out of him, as of his true fountain, the which we have
is our selves when we have Jesus christ.


M. If we have in Jesus Christ the fountain of all holiness, whereby we are
continually and perpetually sanctified: What other imperfecte sanctification
may then be in us? Romans 7. d. Tite. 3. b. 1. Peter. 1. a. Romans 6. d.



P. That which we consider in our own proper flesh and nature, regenerate and
renewed by the spirit of God, which is as it were watered with ye streams of
that fountain of all sanctification, to make us bring forth the fruits of
true sanctification and holiness, in the stead of the fruits of sin, which
it brought forth in time before, Hebr. 5. b.
as the earth, which being cursed and barren, is afterward made fertile, and
bears better fruits by the blessing of God.


Of the cause of the imperfection that is in the sanctification joined to our
person, and of the works which proceed thereof.
M. THou will then say that this second kind of sanctification is not only
adherente to the person of Jesus Christ, Roma. 8. b. c.
and that it is not only ours by imputation, as is the first: but that it is
also adherente to our flesh and nature, as a new quality which Jesus Christ
has put into us by his holy spirit, which makes our flesh holy in it self,
to do afterward holy works.


P. It is even so. Galla. 5. c. d. Ephe. 5. b.



M. Thou will then say also, that the holy works which men do, being so
sanctified, be the fruits of the same sanctification.


P. It is even so: but because there remains continually much of our
natural corruption in our flesh whylest we are in this world, there can
proceed from us no work so hollye, but that it is found very foul, Job. 4.
c. Esaias. 64. c.
and far off from that perfect holiness which God requires of us in all
our works.


M. What will thou conclude by that?


P. That our works be so far off from worthynesse to be presented for
satisfaction, and to obtain salvation by the^, be they never so holy, that if
he should judge of them according to the rigor of his judgment, he should
find nothing therein but matter of condemnation. Romans 11. a. 2. Timo. 1. c
Ephesians. 2. b. Tite. 3. b. Matthew. 7. c. 2. Peter. 1. b



M. Thou may not deny for all that, but the good and holy works are very
agreeable unto him?


P. If it were otherwise, they ought not to be done: but thou must note herein,
that they be not acceptable unto him, as cause of our salvation, but as
testimony of the same.


M. How understand thou that they be testimonies of our salvation?


P. In that that they testify that Jesus Christ is in us, and that he there
works by his holy spirit. Wherefore it follows that we be justified and
sanctified by the justice and sanctification of Jesus Christ, Romans 8. b. Gala.
5. d. 1. Cori. 1. d Romans 7. d. 1. John. 1. d
the which God beholds, and for the regard thereof he does bear with the
imperfection that yet remains in us, and does pardon us that wherein we do yet
daily offend him.


Of the means that we have tovvard God, in recompense of the imperfections
which always dvvell in us.
M. IT seems unto me that thou will say in effect, by all this discourse
which thou have made, that what regeneration and sanctification soever there be
in our flesh and nature, we are not yet for all that so pure nor so perfect,
but that we must have continual recourse to the justice and sanctification of
Jesus Christ, which is ours, Romans 4. a.
not as a quality of justice and sanctity sticking and joined to our person,
but only for that that it is allowed and attributed unto us, as though it were
our own proper.


P. So it is, John. 13. b
and therefore Jesus Christ has said to the same effect, that he that was
already washed, had yet need to wash his feet.


M. What means he by that manner of speech?


P. That albeit that we be justified already, sanctified and purified of our
sins, John. 15. a.
by the faith that we have in him thorough his word, yet for all that, for so
much as there rests in us always certain filthynesse and corruption,
which proceeds of our corrupted nature, which is not yet thoroughlye well
renewed and reformed to the image of GOD: we have always need to go to wash
and cleanse us of our filthynesse, in the true fountain of all purity,
justice, and sanctification, which is opened to us in Jesus Christ: for we
have no remission of any one sin of ours, 1. John. 1. c Act. 15. b
but only in him, by the means of the justification that we have by Faith in
him.


THE FIFTHE dialogue, is of the faith in God.
Of the true foundation of Faith, and of the difference that it makes between
the Christian religion, and all other religions.
MATTHEW. Seeing it is so that man receives of God, all these great goodnesses,
whereof thou have made mention, by the mean of the only faith in Jesus
Christ, it follows then according to thy saying, that Jesus Christ is the
true foundation of the same. Romans 5. a. 8. c Galath. 4. ^



P. It is not to be doubted. For we cannot lay hold upon the mercy of God, nor
be assured, that he is become our loving and merciful father, but only in Jesus
Christ and by Jesus Christ his beloved son.


M. Then if it be so, it follows, that Man has no true faith in GOD,
John. 5. d 1. John. 2. d
but that whereby man does embrace him in Jesus Christ, when he believes in
him.


P. It is very true, and therefore that faith is the very point which
discerns the christian Religion from all others, and the Christians from all
other people. Romans 10. b.



M. But seeing that the faith is in the heart, whereby man believes to
justification, how can it distinguishe the religions?


P. I do not here speak proprely of the distinction which is made by the
outward confession which men make, but of that which lies in the true
foundation and in the propre substance of the religion, which has his only
foundation in God and in his word, Hebr. 11. a
albeit that under the name of the faith, I comprehend also the confession of
the same.


M. Do thou mean that all other religions which are not grounded upon the
faith in Jesus Christ, are no true religions, but false?


P. If religion may be religion without having a God which is honored
thereby, they may be accounted for religions, and not otherwise.


M. Why say thou so?


P. Forsomuche as there is no true God, but only he which has showed himself
in Jesus Christ, Romans 1. a. Hebr. 1. a Matthew. 10. d
no more can he also be known nor honored as God, but in Jesus Christ.


How that all religion is without God, saving the Christian religion.
M. IF that be true, the Jews, the Turks, and all other men, which believe not
in Jesus Christ, nor in the Gospel, have then no God.


P. No in deed, but only by imagination.


M. Why say thou so?


P. For So Much as God can be none other than he is.


M. I understand it well: but what will thou conclude thereof? Malach. 2. b
Psalm. 102. d John. 1. c Colloss. 1. b Hebr. 1. a. Esaye. 44. c. Psalm. 50. d



P. That seeing that God can not be known such as he is, but in Jesus
Christ, who soever does not acknowledge him in Jesus Christ, knows him not
at all. Wherefore he forgeth to himself an other God than the true God.


M. In what sort does he forge him?


P. In so much as he makes and pourtraiteth God, not such an one as he is in
deed, but such as he has been able to imagine him in his brain and
understanding.


M. Thou then call other gods, and strange gods, the imaginations that men
do conceive of God in their understanding, whereby they do imagine and esteem
him other tha^ he is, and did manifest him self in his son Jesus Christ,
and in his word.


Pe. What think thou then that the strange gods are? 1. Cor. 8. b.
For seeing there is but one true God only, it follows then very well, that all the others which men call gods, are not gods at all, but only by the
imagination of men. Ephe. 2. c Act. 4. c. 17. c. Romans 1. c.



M. Is that the cause why Saint Paul did write to the Ephesians, that the
Pagans were without God?


P. There is no doubt thereof. For albeit they had many by name, and by
fantasy, yet notwithstanding they had none in deed, seeing they were ignorant
of the true God.


Of the summarie of the christian faith, and for what cause it is called the
Symbol of the Apostles.
M. Seeing it is so as thou say, it seems to me then to be well done, and
very needful to consider yet some thing more near, the principal points,
that this christian faith does comprehend, which is of so great virtue as
thou haste said.


P. They are contained in the form of the ordinary confession, which the
christians make daily, the which is commonly called, The Symbol of the
Apostles.


M. What signifies this word symbol?


P. It is taken of the Greeks, Plautus. Terentius in Andriana.
of whom the Latins have borrowed it, to signify an enseigne of
acknowledging, and the part that is gathered of every man in any thing, as when
every man gives his shot.


M. Why is this confession of faith called by that name?


P. Chiefly for two causes.


M. Which is the first?


P. It is because that it conteyneth as chosen and gathered together into a
sum, the chief points of the doctrine set forth by the Apostles, John. 17
c. c. 22. e Matthew. 28. d Mark. 16. ^
whom Jesus Christ has given and sent as universal doctors of all the
world.


M. Which is the second?


P. It is, for that this doctrine is the true mark whereby every man that
voucheth the same, yeldeth certain testimony that he is a membre of the
Christian Church, as the men of war declare by the enseigne which they
bear, what prince they belong unto, and serve.


The Symbol of the Apostles.
M. WHich is the sum of this faith the which thou call Symbol?


P. I believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and of earth: And
in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord: which was conceived by the holy
Ghost: borne of the virgin Mary: suffered under Ponce Pylate: was crucified,
dead, and buried: he went down into hell: the third day he arose from the
dead: ascended into heaven: he sits at the right hand of God the Father
almighty: and from thence shall he come to judge the living and the dead. I
believe in the holy Ghost: I believe the holy universal Church: the
communion of Saints: the forgiveness of sins: the resurrection of the
body: and the eternal life.


Of the general division of the principal points contained in the Symbol of
the Apostles.
M. HOw many articles and principal points be there in this sum?


P. Men do commonly distinguish them in twelve: but me thinks we may reduce
them all into two generally, out of the which men may draw the others
afterward.


M. Which be these two points?


P. The first is touching our faith toward God, the second concerns his
Church which is builded upon the same faith.


Of the faith that a Christian man ought to have in God.
M. WHat ought we to believe of god?


P. There are first two principal things to be considered in this matter.


M. Which is the first?


P. That which he has declared unto us of his divine nature by his word.


M. Which is then the second?


P. That which we ought to believe of his works, by the which he has
declared unto man what was his power, his wisdom and goodness, and the other
virtues and proprieties which are in him, of the which we can have no
knowledge but by his works.


Of the unity and trinity that is in the essence of God.
M. Deu 6. a. 32. Esaias. 44. a. 1. Cor. 8. b. Matthew. 3. d. 28. d. John. 14. b.
c. 15. d.
WHat things ought we to consider concerning his divine nature, according as he
has declared unto us in his word?


P. There be two principal.


M. Which is the first?


P. It is the unity which is in his divine essence, whereby we are taught
that there is but one God in whom we believe.


M. Which is the second?


P. It is the trinity of persons, that is in that unity of the divine
essence, the which we do confess when we say, that we believe in the Father,
Galla. 3. d. Act. 20. d.
in the Son, and in the holy Ghost.


Of the difficulty that is in this matter.
M. IT seems to me that there is great contrariety in this matter.


Peter. Wherein?


M. In that that it seems that it is as much as if one should say, that
there is but one only God, and that there be three.


P. We ought not so to take the^, seeing that we confess but one only divine
essence, albeit that we acknowledge in the same, the father, the son, and the
holy Ghost, in such sort distinct in proprieties of persons, that yet for all
that these three persons are but one only and very God.


M. Can thou expound the same unto me something more plainly by some
similitude?


P. As there is but one Sun in the world, no more is there but one only God:
John. 1. c. 17 d. Act. 17. g. Hebr. 1. a. John. 1. a 1. John. 1. a. Colloss. 1.
c. John. 14. b. d. 15. d. 16. b. Act. 1. a. Ephe. 2. a. 1. Cor. 2. a b 1. John.
3. d. 5. b.
and as the Sun shows himself by his beams, even so God, as father, does
show himself by his son Jesus Christ, which is his word and Eternal
wisdom: and as the Sun by his heat does make us feel his force, even so
God makes us to feel his virtue by his holy spirit which is his infinite
power.


Of the principal works of God whereof mention is made in the Simbole of the
Apostles.
M. Seeing that we have spoken of the things that we ought to consider in the
essence of God, and in his divine nature, declare unto me now yt which thou
have to say concerning his works, by the which he has declared himself to
man such as it has pleased him to be known of him.


Peter. The Simbole of the Apostles does comprehend chiefly three, out of the
which a man may draw all the rest.


M. Which be they?


P. The first is, the works of ye creation of al things.


M. And the second?


P. The works of the redemption of man.


M. And the third?


P. The work of vinification, the which we may also call the works of
sanctification.


M What do thou understand by that work of vivification and sanctification?


P. I understand the virtue that the holy Ghost has to make us wholly
partakers of Jesus Christ, and of all his benefits.


Of the union that is between the father, the son, and the holy Ghost in
their works.
M. ACcording to this purpose, the father, the son and the holy Ghost have
they any thing particular, concerning their works, or else have they them all
common together, and chiefly those whereof thou have now spoken? Gene. 1. John.
5. c. John. 1. a. Hebr. 1. a. Galath. 4. ^ Romans 1. a.



P. Seeing they are but one only God, it is certain that they can do no work
wherein they may be separated the one from the other.


M. It seems to me notwithstanding, that in this sum of the faith, men do
attribute as proper to the Father, the work of the creation, and to the son,
that of the redemption, and to the holy Ghost, that which thou call
vivification, and sanctification.


P. That must not be understand as though these works were done by diverse
workers. 2. These. 2. c. 1. Peter. 1. a Psalm. 19. a. Act. 14. c. Romans 1. c.
Hebr. 11. a.



M. How do thou then understand it?


P. After that we have first confessed that we believe in one only GOD, we
then by and by after declare also, how he is manifested by his works, such
as we have said that we ought to consider him in his divine essence and
nature, and what it is that we believe.


Of the moderation and measure that ought to be holden in this matter.
M. IT seems to me that this matter is very high and hard for man's
understanding to comprehend.


P. There is none more high nor more incomprehensible.


M. What is there then to be done in the same?


P. Without enquiring of more than we may understand and comprehend, Exodus
33. d. Romans 11. d. Deuteronomy. 4. a. b Romans 10. d.
it ought to suffice us that God which in his divine nature and essence is
incomprehensible, is even so declared in his word, upon the which only we must
stay and build our faith.


THE SIXTE DIalogue is of the creation and of the Providence and predestination
of God, and of the vocation of man.
Of the work of the Creation.
MATTHEW. Seeing then we believe in one only God the Father, the son, and the
holy Ghost: What is that that we ought chiefly to believe concerning the work
of the creation?


P. As concerning that work, that the father has created all things as well
visible as invisible, by his godly eternal word and wisdom which is his
son, in the virtue of his holy spirit, which is his infinite power.


Of other works of God that are conjoined to the work of the creation.
M. IS there not some other work of God comprehended in that of the cretion?
Gene. 1. Psalm. 146. b Iere. 32. c. e. Act. 4. e. 14 c. 17. f. Psalm. 33. b.
John. 1. a 1. John. 1. a. Collo. 1. c. Hebr. 1. a. Gene. 1. a. ^ohn. 26. d.
Psalm. 104. d. Luke. 11. c. John. 15.



P. We may join thereunto two at the least, which are in such sort joined
with the same, that they cannot be separated.


M. Which is the first?


P. The providence of God.


M. And which is the second?


P. His eternal predestination, which is a dependence of his providence.


M. Think thou that we may account the providence and predestination of God,
among his works?


P. I see not why I should make more difficulty of it, than of the others
whereof I have made mention heretofore. For as he has wrought if the work of
the creation, even so does he continually work by his providence in governing
by this same, all that which he has created, and in putting in execution his
eternal counsel, in ye which he has predestinate man, to that wherein it
has pleased him to be glorified in him. And therefore Jesus Christ has said,
my father works even to this present, John. 5. c
and I work also.


Of the providence of God.
M. WHat meanest thou by the providence of God? Psalm. 104. b. 107. c. 147. d.
Psalm. 115. a 135. b.



P. That even as he is creatoure of all things, he is also the conseruer which
does by his eternal power and wisdom guide and govern the^, and by his
sovereign goodness, in such sort that nothing comes by adventure, neither
in Heaven nor in the earth, without his counsel and ordinance, and his most
just will, be it in general or in particular.


Of the eternal predestination of God.
M. WHat do thou also understand by the eternal predestination of God? To.
5. c. d. e. Ephe. 1. a. b. c



P. I understand his eternal ordinance, whereby he has ordained before the
creation of the world, that which he has determined to do withal men, to be
glorified in them, as well in his mercy, as in his just judgment.


M. How is he glorified in his mercy, according to that eternal ordinance?


P. In showing the riches of his glory in the vessels of mercy, which are
his chosen, the which he has prepared to glory.


M. How is he also glorified in his just judgment?


P. In showing his wrath, Roma. 9. c. Ephesians. 6. c. Romans 9. c. 2 Thessalonians. 2. c
and giving to understand his power, after that he has endured in great
patience, the vessels of wrath prepared to perdition.


Of the vocation of the elect, and of the degrees whereby God brings them to
salvation.
M. IN what sort is it that GOD shows the riches of his glory in his
elected? Romans 8. f. g. Math. 25. c. Act. 13. g.



P. When he calls them by his Gospel to justify them by faith in his son
Jesus Christ, to the end that afterward he may glorifye them in the Eternal
life, the which he has prepared from the beginning.


Ma. Thy meaning is then that God does call, justify and glorify al those
whom he has chosen?


P. Saint Paul does yield us certain and euidente testimony, when he says,
That those whom he before did know, those has he predestinate to be made
like to the image of his son, to the end he should be the first borne
among many brethren, Romans 8. f.
and those whom he has predestinate, he has also called, and those whom he
has called, he has also justified, and those whom he has justified, he
has also glorified.


M. It seems to me, that thou put here four degrees, to wit,
predestination, vocation, Justification, and glorification.


P. Thou see that S. Paul makes as many.


M. Will thou conclude by his words, yt all those which are chosen and
predestinate, are also called, justified, and glorified.


Peter. It follows necessarily, or otherwise the Election and Predestination
of GOD should not be certain, and should not come to that end whereunto God
pretends thereby.


Of the outward and inward vocation.
M. Does it follow in like sort, that all those which are called, are also
chosen.


P. Thou haste to note upon this question, that there are two sorts of
vocation, to wit, the one outward, and the other inward.


M. What meanest thou by the outward vocation?


P. I mean a common and general vocation, by the which God does call by the
outward preaching, all those to whom the gospel is preached, be they chose^
or reprobates.


M. And by the inward vocation?


P. I understand a vocation, whereby God does not only call man by the outward
preaching of his word, but makes them to feel the power and efficacy of the
same by his holy spirit, in such sort that they do not only hear it with
their outward ears, but do also receive it into their hearts by faith, whereby
they are justified.


Of the effects of the inward and outward vocation, and whereunto they serve.
M. Will thou say, that all those which are called by such vocation are
chosen, and in like sort that all those which are chosen are so called?


P. It must be so understood. For such a vocation is an effect of the
election whereby a man may judge of the cause.


M. And as concerning those which are called of that first calling, which thou
call outward, may they be called without being chosen? Matthew. 20. b



P. Thou may judge by that which Jesus Christ said: There be many called,
but few are chosen.


M. Thou meanest then in mine opinion, that the very reprobates may be called
by outewarde vocation, but that it profits them nothing, except the inward be
there joined with it. John. 3. e.



P. As concerning them, it serves them but to their greater condemnation. For
it is to their greater condemnation, for so much as the grace of God was
offered unto them, and that they have rejected it through their ingratitude and
unbelief, as though it had never ben offered unto them, yet in the mean time,
it is not altogether in vain,


M. Whereunto does it then serve?


P. To declare better the peruersitie of me^, and to make them more inexcusable
at the judgment of God, and to set forth the better his great justice in
their just condemnation.


M. It then follows by that which thou haste said, that those which are not
called, but only by this outward calling, are not also justified, nor
consequentlye glorified?


P. It is easy to judge. For if they were justified, they should have also
received the word of God through faith, which only does justify, and without
the which none can be justified, as thou haste here before heard. And if they
had the faith whereby man is justified, they should not be only called by that
outward calling, but also by the inward, which is ever joined with faith, of
the which the faith is a sure testimony.


Of the cause of unbelief, and of Faith.
M. ANd what is the cause that the one sort through unbelief do reiecte the
Gospel when it is offered them, and that ye others receive it by faith?


P. It is not to be marvelled at, when men by their unbelief and unkindness
reject the Gospel: but it is marvel when some are found that do receive it
by faith.


M. Why say thou so?


P. For that that man being corrupted through sin, 1. Cor. 1. a. d and. 2. d
Roma. 8. b.
is of such nature, that he does not only not understand any thing of Gods
matters, nor of his word: and in very deed he can not, but that which is
worsse, he will understand nothing of it, but does hate and deride it.


M. Seeing that all men are corrupted by sin, it then follows necessarily,
that they be al naturally as perverse and wicked the one as the other, and that
they can not nor will not believe in God, nor follow his word.


P. It is even so.


M. How is it then that many of contrary nature are found, which not only
receive by faith the word of God, and Jesus Christ our Lord, but are also
ready to lay down their life, and to abandon the same for the confession of
their faith?


P. Thou must understand that they which do this, Matthew. 16. c.
that thou speak of, are not such of nature, but by the grace of God, by the
which they are renewed and transformed into a new nature, and are made new
creatures. For it is not flesh and blood that has reveled it unto them, but
the heavenly father.


Of the renewing of man, and of the gift of faith.
M. IN what sort is this change of nature made, Ezec. 11. c. d Hiere. 31. f
32. g Hebr. 8. c 10. c. 2. Cor. 3. ^
and this renewing by ye grace of God?


P. When God by his holy spirit does change their enhardened hearts of stone,
into tender hearts of flesh, and that he does with his finger write and
imprinte his word in their hearts, to make them to walk after the same, as he
has made promise to his elect by his Prophets Jeremy and Ezechiel.


M. Seeing it is so, man can not then believe ye gospel, and believe in Jesus
Christ, which is set forth unto us in the same, if God give him not the grace,
giving him faith to believe it.


P. It is true: and therefore it is written that faith is the gift of God,
Ephesians. 2. b. John. 6. c. Math. 11. d.
and that none can come to Jesus Christ, if the father draw him not: as also
no man can know the Father, but he to whom he is revealed by his son Jesus
Christ.


M. We may not then ascribe the honor of our salvation to our freewill, nor
to our humane powers, but only to the grace of God.


P. Thou concludest very well.


Of the causes of election and reprobation.
M. But seeing that all men are of one very nature wicked and perverse, what is
the cause why God does sooner show this favor to some, than to other some?
Romans 8. e. f Ephesians. 1. b.



Pe. I can yield thee none other reason, but only the good pleasure of God,
which can be but just and reasonable, for so much as he is the rule of all
justice, the which according to his eternal purpose, does call to this grace
those whom he has chosen, to make them by his only goodness and mercy,
partakers in his Son Jesus Christ, in whom he has chosen them to this
effect, before the creation of the world.


M. And what will thou say of the others, unto whom he shows not this
favor?


P. That he by his just judgment does leave them in their corrupted and
perverse nature, Romans 9. c.
as they have deserved by ye same, to declare his wrath against sin in their
just condemnation, as he has declared his louingnesse and mercy, in the
favor that he has showed to his chosen.


M. Thou will then say that al men of their nature have deserved to be left
in their perverse and corrupted nature and damnation, and that in so doing, God
can do them no wrong, but only right and justice, and that it is a special
grace that he does to those whom by his mercy he draws away from such a
corruption and curse.


P. We ought even so to believe.


M. Seeing it is so, the reprobates and the wicked have nothing then wherein
they may justly complain of God, and accuse his just judgment, by the which
they be justly condemned.


P. It is easy to judge.


M. And in the like, the elect have nothing wherein to glory in themselves,
but only in the grace and mercy of God. Roma. 3. b. 11.



P. Saint Paul does confirm unto us that which thou say, when he says
that we have all sinned, and that we have all need of the glory of God, and
that he has enclosed all men under unbelief, to the end he may show mercy
to all men, to wit; to the end that all those which are saved, be saved by
his mercy, whereof he makes them partakers in Jesus Christ and by Jesus
Christ, and without whom none may obtain salvation.


The seventh Dialogue is of the redemption and of the person of Jesus Christ.
Of the work of the redemption, and of the things that are to be considered
in the person of Jesus Christ.
MATTHEW. Act. 4. b.
Seeing it is so that we cannot find salvation but in Jesus Christ, nor by none
other mean, but by faith in him, declare unto me now what it is that we
ought to believe of him, to the end that our faith may be sound toward him.


P. Thou entrest now into the second work of God, the which we have called
the work of the redemption.


M. I understand it well so. And therefore expound to me the principal points
that we have to consider in the same.


Peter. We have there chiefly three.


M. Which be they?


P. The first is concerning the person of Jesus Christ, the second concerning
his office, and the third touching his two commings.


M. What have we to consider touching his person?


P. Three points.


M. Which be they?


P. The first is touching his divine nature.


M. And the second?


P. Touching his humane nature.


M. And the third?


P. Concerning the union of the two natures.


Of the faith of the Christians concerning the divine and humane natures of
Jesus Christ.
M. WHat must we believe of his divine nature?


P. That he is very God without beginning and without end, of one essence
with the father, and that he is his eternal word and wisdom.


M. And concerning his humane nature?


P. That he is very man, having a very man's body, of our flesh, of our blend
and bones, and a very humane soul as other me^ have, and that he was made in
every point like unto us, sin excepted.


How the divine and human natures which are in the person of Jesus Christ,
do not make two Jesus Christ's, but one only.
M. Apoca. 1. b. 21 b. 22. c. Proverb. 8. c. John. 1. a. Romans 9. a. John. 1. b.
Matthew. 2. d. Luke. 1. c. 2. a. Galath. 4. a. 1. Timo. 3. d. Philem. 2. a. Ephe.
5. c. Hebr. 2. b. c. 4. d.
WHat can thou yet say of the union of these two natures, beside that which
thou have already spoken when thou handledst the office of mediatoure of Jesus
Christ?


P. It is that they be so united together, that they remain always in their
very natural, in one very person.


M. What meanest thou thereby?


P. That being so united, they make us not two Jesus Christ's, to wit, the
one God and the other man, but one only, which is very God and very man
together, in one only person, even as the body and soul of man make one only
man, and one only person, and not twain.


M. This union of these two natures the^ is very necessary to our salvation?


P. Thou may well know that, as well by that which we have already said
touching this matter, as by the office which was assigned unto Jesus Christ by
his father. For there is no one Jesus Christ, which being but only God, could
have saved man, nor could have dyed for them: and an other being but only man,
might dye for them, but could not have power to save them, nor to bear the
judgment of God for their sins.


Whether the divine nature be in Jesus Christ in stead of the soul, or else
that he has a very humane soul.
M. Do thou mean by this that the divine nature of Jesus Christ, is in
stead of a soul to the human nature?


P. If the divine nature were in stead of a soul to the humane nature, and
that Jesus Christ had no very humane soul, he should be no true and perfect
man.


M. For what cause?


P. Because that the principal part of man, which is the soul, should be
wanting in him: for this cause, I have said heretofore that Jesus Christ was
very man, compounded of a very humane body and a very humane soul.


How the eternal word of God became fleslie.
M. THou have said heretofore that Jesus Christ was the eternal word of God.
John. 1. b.
Now Saint John says that that word which is very God eternal, became
flesh.


Pe. What meanest thou by that? Do thou think that the same word of God
was converted into flesh, in such sort that it was no more the eternal
word of God, but flesh, and that the Son of God, which is that word of God,
being God before that time, did so become man, that he is no more God, but man
only?


M. Thou have given me well to understand by that which thou have even now
said of the divinity and humanity of Jesus Christ, that we may not so think
of him: but because Saint John makes mention but of the flesh, when he
says, Hebr. 2. d.
that that word became flesh, a man might think that he spoke, but of the body
and not at al of the soul, but that this word of God united with the body,
was to it in stead of a soul.


P. If Saint John had mente so, he would rather have said as it is elsewhere
said in the holy scripturs, that Jesus Christ had taken the seed of Abraham,
to wit our flesh, and not the Angels.


M. Why is it then that he makes mention but of the flesh, seeing that it is
the least and most vile part of man?


P. I can yield unto thee chiefly two reasons.


M. Which is the first?


P. It is because the holy Scriptures do take often times a part for the whole.
Genesis. 6. b. c Esaias. 40. b. Luke. 3. b. Joel. 2. f. Act. 2. c. Eze. 18. c.
Roma. 13. a Esaias. 40. b. 1. Peter. 1. d. John. 1. b.
And therefore it takes now the flesh and now the soul, for ye whole man
complete.


M. Which is the second reason?


P. It is that when the holy Scripture does use the name of flesh, to signify
the whole man, she uses that manner of speech, to admonish men of the
infirmities that are in them, to the end they may understand that they are but
men mortal, and not Gods immortal.


M. Has Saint John had regard thereunto, when he said that the Son of God
was made flesh?


P. There is no doubt of it. But it is in an other regard. For albeit that
Jesus were very god as touching his divine nature, and that he took our flesh
without any spot of sin when he was made man, and that he has united his
divine nature with the humane nature, yet for all yt he was so exempte from all
sin, yt notwithstanding he would be subject, without sin, to al ye infirmities
and miseries, whereunto men are subject because of their sins.


M. Thou meanest then, that this word of flesh emporteth all that same, and
that it does better express in what manner and to what condition and end the
son of God did take our nature to him and was made man, Matthew. 8. c. 9. a. 11
c. 16. d. 17. b. 18. b. 16. d. 24. b. c. d. 2^. e. 26. a. b. c. Hebr. 4. d.
than if he had spoken otherwise.


P. It is even so, and therefore he does also call himself so oftentimes the
son of man, to give us to understand that he is not only a very natural
man, descended of the race of Adam, of the which al others are descended, but
also that he made himself subject to all the miseries and necessities of man,
whereunto men are subject, always excepted any spotte of sin.


Of the conception of Jesus Christ, and of the nature of his flesh.
M. Now seeing that that humayne flesh which Jesus Christ has taken for us,
is exempte from all sin, where is then that he took it? Did he bring it from
Heaven with him, or else did he take it upon the Earth?


P. When thou confessest that he was conceived of the holy Ghost, and borne of
the virgin Mary, thou confessest that he took it upon earth, in the womb of
that holy virgin.


M. But could he not have passed through the womb of the virgin with a heavenly
flesh, without taking any thing of her flesh?


P. If he had brought from heaven that flesh which he has, and that it were a
flesh of a heavenly and divine nature, which he should not have taken in the
womb of the virgin, and of the proper flesh and blood of her, we could not
say truly that she had conceived and borne him, and consequently that he were
very man of our proper flesh and blood, which we have of our first father
Adam.


Whereunto the genealogy of Jesus Christ, according to the flesh, does
serve us.
M. I Think S. Matthew and S. Luke would give us to understand that which
thou say, when they did write the genealogy of Jesus Christ, Matthew. 1. a. b
the which is brought forth by S. Matthewe, even from Abraham, and by S. Luke
from Adam even to Jesus Christ.


P. They have had regard to that which thou say in deed, Matthew. 1. a. b.
Luke. 3. g.
but they would show further, that he was the true Christ, and the true Savior
and redeemer that was promised to Israel, because that he was descended of
the live of those of whom the holy Ghost has forespoken by the mouth of
the holy patriarchs and Prophets, that he should descend.


Of the works of the holy Ghost in the conception of Jesus Christ.
M. Luke. 1. c.
But if he have taken his flesh of the line and of the proper flesh of men,
who are all sinners, how could he be more without sin in his flesh, than
other men?


P. The angel has answered this difficulty when he said to the virgin that
she should conceive the son of God by the power and workyng of the holy
Ghost.


Mathevve. What meanest thou by that virtue and working of the holy Ghost?


P. I mean that the holy Ghost wrought in that conception so by his divine
power, that the flesh which Jesus Christ took of the Virgin Marie, was in
such sort sanctified, that he did purify and exempt it from all sin, and
from all the corruption, whereby the whole nature of man is corrupted, because
of sin that is naturally in it.


Of the true substance of the body of Jesus Christ.
M. WE may not then imagine in Jesus Christ, a body that is so heavenly and
divine, that it is not a very man's body, of very humane flesh and substance,
but we must believe in deed, that he is of very humane substance as we are.


Pet. Thou concludest very well: And in like sort also, we may not imagine,
that this humane body of Jesus Christ, is a body only in appearance as a
fantasme, as some heretics have affirmed auncientlye. For if he had not
taken a very man's body, we could have no hope of Salvation by him.


The eight Dialogue is of the communion between Jesus Christ and man.
Of the communion of the nature, which Jesus Christ has with man, and not
with angels, and how necessary it is to man's salvation.
MATTHEW. DEclare to me the cause, why man can not be saved, if Jesus Christ
had no communion of nature with him?


P. Why are not the angels also which sinned, saved by the death and passion
of Jesus Christ, the which are called devils in the holy Scriptures, as well
as man, who has sinned, as they have done.


M. Because that Jesus Christ was not sent by the Father to that effect, and
he also came not to save them, but man only.


P. For that cause also he has not taken the nature of angels, Hebr. 2. d.
to have communication of nature with them, and to unite it with his divine
nature, to satisfy for them in their own nature, as it pleased him to be
united with man by union of nature, to satisfy for them in their own flesh,
as though they themselves did satisfy in their own person, the which he has
endured and represented before the judgment of God.


M. Thou will then say, that it was necessary that the son of God should
communicate with our flesh and blood, by that same union of nature, Hebr. 2. ^
and yt without this union and communication, we cannot be saved and redeemed by
him.


P. If it had not ben necessary that he should have had such union and
communication with us, to reunite us, and to call us again into the savor of
God, it had not been needful that he had been made man.


M. God has then done us an honor, and showed us a favor in the person of
his son, how poor and wicked sinners soever we be, which he has not done
to the angels which sinned?


P. In that same we may know how much he has loved us of his own goodness,
and how great and infinite his charity was toward us. Wherefore we should
also by the same very mean, well learn to know how well we ought to love
him on our parts.


Of two sorts of union and communion which Jesus Christ has with man,
without the which no man can obtain salvation.
M. But is it sufficient for the salvation of man, that the son of God was
made man, to bear the judgment, the wrath and curse of God in their own
nature, and their own flesh?


Pe. If that were sufficient, al should be saved indifferently, as well the
reprobats as the elect, and the unbelievers as ye faithful, as we have alredie
touched it heretofore.


M. Is there then any other manner of union and communion, whereby we must be
united and joined with Jesus Christ, to obtein salvation by him?


P. Thou may judge by yt which we have already said of the comunio^ that we
have with him thorough faith, and of the justification by the same.


M. I do very well remember, that thou have already somewhat touched it: but I
would very gladly yt thou did expound the same unto me somewhat more largely.


P. The communication of the which we have now spoken, is natural, and
therefore it is common to al men with Jesus Christ, in so much as they be of the
same nature, and of the same flesh that he has taken for us.


Ma. And the other?


Pe. It is spiritual, and therefore it is more special: for it is not
generally common to al, but it is only propre to the elect and faithful.


Of the spiritual marriage between Jesus Christ and his Church, and first
of the union of nature that is required in this marriage.
M. EXpound to me what this union and communion contains more tha^ the first?


P. I will declare unto thee by similitude of marriage, Ephe. 5. e.
whereof S. Paul has used to this purpose, in ye epist. to the Ephesia^s.


M. Expound unto me then ye similitude.


P. Nature does show us and also teach us, ye alia^ce and communion of marriage
could not be between man and woman, Genesis. 1. ^.
if they were not both liui^g creatures of one very kind, and of one very flesh
and nature.


M. Albeit that the brute beasts have been created of the same very matter,
whereof man and woman ar created as concerning the body: yet for all that, I
know well that there is great difference touching the kinds, and that man and
woman have a far other union and communion of flesh and nature together,
tha^ wc other living creatures which we do call beasts.


P. And therefore after that god had created Adam, and that his pleasure was to
give him an aid in marriage, Gene. 1. d and. 8. c. d Ephe. 5. g Matthew. 19. d
he would create this aid, which is the woman, of the very flesh and
substance of Adam himself, to the end that they should be one very flesh and
one very body: as in deed Adam did right well know when he saw the woman
immediately after that she was so created. Wherefore he said: This here is flesh
of my flesh, and bone of my bones: and therefore man shall leave father and
mother, and shall stick to his wife: If there be great difference between the
nature of the man and of the woman, and that of other living creatures
concerning the very body, the difference is yet much more great concerning
the soul, forsomuche as the other living creatures were not created to the
image and lykelynesse of God, Give. 1.8. c. d 1. Cor. 11. b.
as man was, wherefore they have not a soul of a heavenly and divine nature as
he has.


P. Thou see then already here the union and communion of Nature that man and
woman have together as well of body as of soul, Gene. 1. d. 8 c. d. 1. Cor.
11. b
and the difference that is between them and all other living creatures in all
these two points.


M. I do now understand well this union and communion of nature which is
between man and woman without the which they could not be allied together by
marriage as man and wife.


P. Thou ought in like sort to understand, that we may have also no
communicatoin with Jesus Christ, if we have not first the same communion of
nature with him, whereby he was made man like unto us, as touching the nature
and substance of the flesh.


M. I have well understood that which thou have already said to that purpose,
Hebr. 2. d.
concerning the communion of nature, the which he has of nature with us and
not at all with the Angels.


Of an other more special vnio^ and conjunction which is proper to marriage,
which is between Jesus. Christ and his Church.
M. NOw it is not enough to be united and joined together by marriage to be of
one very humane nature, and that ye one be masle and the other femasle, but it
is also requisite, that there be a more near and a more special union and
conjunction. 1. Cor. 7. a.



M What is that other conjunction?


P. It is a conjunction which is made by aliance, by the which the man and the
woman that are united and joined together by the same, have a special
communion between the^, the which the husband has not with other women, nor
the woman with other men.


M. I do well understand that there is no such conjunction and communion of body
and goods and of al things among al other men and women that are not married
together, as there is between the man and the wife, by the alliance and
conjunction of marriage that is between them.


P. It is very true. For this union and communion is such, that the husband
has not power of his own body, but ye wife, as also the wife has not power
of hirs, but the husband.


M. If there be such communion and conjunction of body, there is no doubt but
it is also of all good and evil that may happen unto the^ together.


P. It is eue^ so by ye special communion which Jesus Christ has with ye
faithful, and that ye faithful have with him by the power of the holy ghost
which joins the^ with him, by true and living faith.


M. Thou meanest then that there is so great difference between the communion
yt is between Jesus christ and ye faithful, in respect of ye unfaithful as is
between yt which is between the man and the wife, in respect of other me^ and
women?


P. It is even so. For ye only communion of nature makes not communion of body
and goods between al men and women, as does the conjunction of marriage, the
which the husband and the wife have together.


M. Thou will the^ say in like sort that the communion of nature the which
Jesus Christ has common with all me^, does not carry with it such communion of
al things, as does that which he has special with the faithful, by means of ye
faith which they have in him.


P. the unbelievers have nothing common with Jesus christ but yt they ar me^ of ye
same human nature: but ye faithful have this more, which is ye principal,
that all that they have is common to Jesus Christ with them, and that which
Jesus Christ, has is common to them also.


M. What is it that Jesus Christ may take of them, for so much as they be all
none other than poor and sinful men?


P. He takes upon him their sins, Psalm. 33. b. c. 1. Pet. 2. d 1. John. 3. a
and the pain which is due unto them, as though he himself had committed
them, and that he were guilty, to discharge and deliver them.


M. He takes then nothing of us, but only the evil which is in us?


P. What other thing may he take, seeing that there is none other thing in us?
But the nature of the alliance and communion which we have with him thorough
faith, brings it: for otherwise, there should be no perfect communion, and so
the alliance should not be full, if there were no participation of good and
evil, such as it should and ought to be among those which be allied.


M. Then on the contrary it must be, following the nature of this communion
and alliance that we receive of Jesus Christ, the good things which are in
him, as he does the evil yt is in us?


P. It is so to be understood.


M. Behold a communion and alliance which is greatly to our advantage.


P. It is wholly to our advantage, and therefore it should so much the more
inflame us in the love of God, and rauishe and carry us away in admiration of
his goodness, and of Jesus Christ our Lord, and of that most excessive love
wherewith he has loved us.


M. That same communion, is it the same that is in the Symbol of the Apostles,
upon the which we are at this present, the communion of Saints?


P. It is the very same: And because it is made by the power of the holy
Ghost, we will speak more largely of it, when we shall speak of the holy
Ghost, and of the Church.


How that Jesus Christ can not be the savior of mankind, unless he have as
well an humane soul, as an humane body.
M. I Understand now well by that which thou have expounded unto me concerning
ye humane nature of Jesus Christ that we could have no salvation by him, if he
had not a very body of our flesh and substance, and that we were flesh of
his flesh, and bone of his bones: and except we had such alliance with him,
as there is between the husband and the wife. But I would gladly yt thou did
show me something more plainly the causes for ye which it is also requisite for
our salvation that Jesus Christ have an humane soul as well as an humane body.


P. Even as we could not be saved if he had not suffered in our humane flesh,
and borne the pain for us which we have deserved by our sins, it is even
the like concerning the soul.


M. For what cause?


P. For because that if he had suffered but in our body and in our flesh, he
should not then have satisfied but in our flesh and in our body, and for them
only, and not for the soul: And so should it have come to pass, the body
should be saved, and not the soul, from the which, sin cheefely does
proceed. For the body should not sin at all, if sin were not first in
the soul.


M. Why say thou so?


P. For So Much as the body is but as it were the instrument of the soul, by the
which she works, and does her works: wherefore if there be fault in the
work, the fault may not be attributed to the instrument, but rather to the
woorker which works, or else if there be fault in the instrumente, it is
greater in the woorker, which woorketh evil.


Mathewe. Thou will then conclude that it was necessary, that Jesus Christ
should suffer for us, not only in body, but also in soul?


Peter. He has right well declared it, when he said: My soul is heavy,
Matthew. 16. Luke. 22. c.
even to death: and when he did sweat blood in great abundance, even for very
sorrow and anguishe that he felt in his soul, in the which he has
suffered, more than in his body, for so much as he bare the judgment of God
in the same chiefly, which the body could not apprehende, but in as much as
the feeling of it is come to it by the mean of the soul.


Matthew. The passage which thou haste even now alleged, seems to me very
clear and plain, against those which esteem the Godheade of Jesus Christ
to be in stead of his soul.


Peter. Jesus Christ him self has yet more confirmed that which thou
say, when he yielded up his spirit upon the Cross, and that he said:
John. 19. c Matthew. 27. f
Father I commend my soul into thy hands.


M. Luke. 23. f Matthew. 1. d.
This passage shows plainly, that by the death of Jesus Christ, there was a
very separation of spirit and body, and so consequently of the soul, for so
much as the spirit is also taken for the soul.


P. The matter is very plain. For if the divinity of Jesus Christ had been in
stead of his soul, without a very humane soul, he could not have died of a
very humane death, for so much as it can not dye, except there be very separation
of both body and soul in man.


The nynth Dalogue is of the offices of Jesus Christ.
Of the signification and exposition of the name of Christ, and of his offices,
the which that name does comprehend.
MATTHEW. I Do now well understand all the matter which thou have now handled:
there rests that thou expound unto me that which thou have to say yet
concerning the office of Jesus Christ.


P. Forsomuche as we have already spoken largely enough, when we did speak of
the mean by the which man is delivered from sin, and made agreed with God:
Luke. 23. f Matthew. 1. d Luke. 1. c. and. 3. c
that which we have already said, may serve us much to that which yet rests
to be spoken of.


M. What will thou then say more?


P. We have nothing here to consider, but only that which the name of Jesus
Christ does importe.


M. And what does it import?


P. First he is called by the name of Jesus, which signifies Savior, to
admonish us that he was sent unto us from the Father to save us, Act. 4. b.
and that we may have salvation by none other, but by him only.


M. And what imports the name of Christ?


P. Three offices which belong unto him, for whose cause he is called by that
name.


M. Which be these offices?


P. The office of a prophet, of a king, and of a Sacrificator.


M. What signifies then the name of Christ, which comprehends so many
things?


P. It signifies anointed, and because that in the ancient Church of
Israel, the Prophets, kings, 1. Sam. 10. a and. 15. c
and sacrificators were anointed by the ordinance of God, ^. Kings. 19 c.
in testimony of their vocation and office they were called by that name, and
in like wise because they were true fygures of the very anointed of the Lord,
Exodus 40. b. Leuit. 7. b. Psalm. 133. Luke. 2. d Esaias. 6. a. John. 3. d. Psalm.
45. b
which is the very son of God which was anointed by the holy Ghost, who was
given to him without measure, above all other men.


M. Thou will then say that Jesus Christ is also named with that name, as well
because of the same vinction, as because that all those offices were enjoined
to him by the father?


P. It is even so.


Of the office, of a Prophet of Jesus Christ, and of the per fection of his
doctrine.
M. Show me now what every one of these offices imports, and begin by his
office of Prophet.


Peter. As concerning his office of Prophet, he is not only a Prophet, as
those which in the Scriptures are called by that name, but of an other sort
much more excellent.


M. What is the difference that thou there put? Hebr. 1. ^



P. I find there difference chiefly in two points.


M. Which is the first?


Peter. It is that God has not spoken in his Church in the person of Jesus
Christ only, in the manner that he has heretofore spoken by his Prophets, in
sundry sorts more covert and dark: John. 1 c. 7. b. Math. 17. a. 2. Cor. 3. d
but has spoken by his own Son, plainly and with an open face, and has
showed unto us by him ye doctrine of salvation, so fully and perfectly, that we
may not attend any other perfection in this world, as touching that point.


M. Thy meaning is then, that seeing Jesus Christ is come upon earth, he has
brought the doctrine requisite in his Church, so perfect, that no man may
add any thing more thereunto, and that none ought from that time forth to
look for any more ample and perfect revelation and manifestation of the will of
God.


P. Saint John does witness it unto us, when he says that no man ever saw
God, but the son which is in the bosom of the Father, has declared him unto
us. For this cause Jesus Christ him self has said that he has declared to
his disciples, John. 1. c. John. 15. c.
all that which he has heard of his Father.


Of the power and efficacy of the ministry of Jesus Christ, and of that
which he gives to the ministry of others.
M. Which is the other point that thou have yet to expound concerning the
difference whereof thou have made mention, touching the office of prophet of
Jesus Christ?


P. It is that Jesus Christ is not a Prophet, having none other power but to
show forth the word of God by mouth, as the other ministers of the same do.
2. Cor. 3. a
But beside that, he has the power to imprinte the same in their hearts by
the virtue of his holy spirit, and to give it virtue and efficacy in the^.


M. Thy meaning is then that the other prophets and ministers of the word of
God have not that power.


P. Not of them selves, but so far forth as Jesus Christ does work in them
and in their ministry, by the divine power of his holy Spirit. And
therefore, when he commanded his Apostles to go and preach the Gospel, and
did give unto them power to pardon and retain sins by him, he forthwith
gave unto them the holy Ghost brething upon them in token of the same, John.
20. ^ Act. 2. a 1. Cor. 3. b.
and afterward did send him to them upon the day of Pentecost, after that he
was ascended into Heaven.


M. I think that that which thou say, is the cause why Saint Paul said,
he that planteth and he that waters, are nothing, but God which gives the
increase.


P. It is true. And for that cause in somuche as he is man, he has planted and
watered by his outward ministry, but in that that he is very God, he has
also power to give the increase, and does daily give it by the ministry of
his servants.


M. In so doing, he does there daily the office of prophet.


P. If he did not so, all the rest, as well Prophets as Apostles, and all the
ministers of the word of God, should travel in deed in vain.


M. Does he also the like in the administration of the Sacraments? Math. 3. c.
Luke. 3. d. Act. 1. a.



P. Thou may easily judge by that which Saint John Baptiste said, that as
for him, he baptized but with water, but that there should be an other, to
wit, Jesus Christ, which should baptize with the holy Ghost and with fire.


M. It seems to me that this passage which thou haste even now alleged,
does confirm all that which thou have already spoken of the power of the
ministry of Jesus Christ.


P. It is very certain: For as he gives virtue and efficacy to the
Sacraments, even so does he to the word, and to the preaching of the same,
and in like sort he does in the Sacraments, as in the administration of the
word, for the reason is like.


Of the office of King of Jesus Christ.
M. I Do now well understand this point concerning the office of Prophet of
Jesus Christ: continue the others which also concern his office.


Peter. The second point is touching his office royal.


Math. What does it importe?


Peter. That he is the true and eternal King of the people of GOD, which he
has boughte with his blood, Psalm. 2. b Act. 20. f 1. Peter. 1. d
and delivered from the captivity and tyranny of the devil, to set them in
full spiritual liberty, and to lead and govern them as a spiritual king,
and to make them partaker with him of his heavenly kingdom. Is this the cause
why he is called our Lord?


P. It is certain that this name and title is proprely given unto him in
respect of the work of the redemption, 1. Pet. 2. b
by ye which he has won us to himself, and for the which cause, his people
is called the won people.


Of the office of Sacrificer of Jesus Christ, and of the parts thereof.
M. Let us now come to the third point of the office of Jesus Christ which
is touching his office of Sacrificer.


P. It is an office which does also comprehend three very excellent things
the which Jesus Christ has fully accomplished in perfection.


M. Which be they?


P. To teach, to pray, and to offer sacrifice.


Of the office to teach.
M. THe ancient Preests of the law, had they all these offices?


P. It appears that they had ye office to teach, Malach. 2. b
by yt which is written in Malachie. The lips of the Sacrificer do keep
knowledge, and men shall require the law at his mouth. For he is the
Ambassador and messenger of the Lord of hosts.


M. Touching this point, Jesus Christ has very well discharged himself, for
he has not spared to teach the people, yea in his own person.


P. No man may doubt thereof.


Of two most principal parts of the preestly office of Jesus Christ.
M. But it seems to me that this point is already comprehendid under the
office of Prophet. Psalm. 10. b Hebr. 5. b 7. c. Hebr. 5 a.



P. It is true, and therefore he is called properly the Eternal priest after
the order of Melchisedech, because of the prayer and of the sacrifice by which
he has bin intercessor for us, and has made our attonemente with the father.


M. The ancient preests of the law had they also that charge to pray and to
sacrifice?


P. The holy Ghost does tell it us plainly in the Epistle to the Hebreus, not
only that this office did appertain to the anciente preests of the law, but
it does also declare unto us the cause why it was necessary yt this office
should be assygned to Jesus Christ.


M. What is it then that is mente by it?


P. That every priest was ordained to pray first for his own sins, and then
for those of the people, and in like sort to sacrifice, to the end that God
should be reconciled unto him.


How that none may be a perfect sacrificer but Jesus Christ only.
M. ANd if the preests of the law were ordained by God thereunto, what need
was there then that this office should be assigned to Jesus christ?


P. The passage which I alleged to thee even now, does give plain matter to
the solution of thy question, with that which we have already handled
heretofore to this purpose.


M. How?


P. For so much as the preests of the law had need to pray, not only for the
sins of the people, but also for their own, the same may give thee to
understand, that they could make no sacrifice to God, which should be
sufficient to appease his wrath toward his people.


M. Why so?


P. I have already showed thee heretofore that there is no man that may do any
work which may be acceptable to him, if first the person which does it, be
not acceptable to him. Now sin, of his nature, deserves the wrath of God,
and not his love and favor.


M. Do thou then mean, that because al men are sinners, there are none
which are agreeable to him? and if their persons be not agreeable to him, no
more can their works please him?


P. No, so long as he does consider them in their own nature, without his
grace in Jesus Christ, by whom only man is made agreeable unto him.


For what cause no sacrifice nor any other work of man whatsoever it be,
may be able to make satisfaction to God.
M. IS there yet any other reason than yt which thou say?


P. Eue^ as God is perfect so is there no work that can be pleasant unto him,
except it be perfect.


M. Do thou then mean that there is no work of man, be it never so
perfect, which is not imperfect in his sight?


P. I have sufficiently showed it them heretofore. Wherefore it follows, that
there is none that may fully satisfy him.


M. I have very well understood already that thou have said, that there was
no work that might satisfy him neither in part nor in all, but I do not yet
well understand, what reason there is in it.


P. And yet notwithstanding I have already declared it to thee.


M. It is true, but I am not yet well satisfied. For if a debtor cannot pay the
whole sum that he owes, and if he pay part, is there not always so much
rebated and diminished of the principal sum?


P. Albeit that that which thou say has place among men, yet
notwithstanding, he that has not satisfied the whole sum, stands still
bound even according to the contracts of men, for she rest which he owes and
is not clearly discharged, until he have paid all, unless that of favor ye
creditor will acquit him, otherwise if he will keep him prisoner until he have
paid the last mayle, he may as well do it for a little sum, as for a great,
and for a part as for the whole.


Matthew. I grant the same. But in the mean time thou must confess, that
the debtor is less bound than before. Wherefore is it then that this has not
as well please with God as with men, and that he does not always accoumpte
that which is paid, and go in hand to rebate so much as has bin paid unto
him?


P. There be three points to consider in the same.


M. Which is the first?


P. It is that he which is faulty in one point of the law, is faulty in
the whole.


M. And which is the second?


P. The impuritie of the works of man.


M. And the third?


P. The obligation by the which they are already of right by their nature bound
to god.


Why one only sin makes a man guilty of all the law and of damnation.
M. I Do well understand thy meaning. For first, it seems to me by thy
words, that it should follow, that he who has committed but one sin is as
guilty as he that has committed many, or has committed all.


P. Saint James, whose opinion I have followed, James. 2. b
says not so.


M. What says he then?


P. Who soever breaks one point of the law, the same commits high
treason against God, from whence it follows, that by the same he deserves
eternal damnation, albeit he had committed but that one only.


M. How understand thou it?


P. Seeing that God is an eternal Prince and king, every sin committed
against his majesty, which is eternal, does merit also eternal punishmente.


If those which have most sinned shall be most punished by Gods judgment.
M. IF he then be also damned that shall have committed few sins, as well as
he that shall have committed many, it is then as good for a man to exceed as
it were with the raines laid on his neck, as to refrain and abstain from
many, from the which a man might keep him self.


P. That follows not.


M. What reason can you allege to the contrary? Romans 14. b. Luke. 12. f.
Matthew. 10. b. Luke. 10. b.



P. It is, that albeit, there be eternal damnation for all the reprobates, yet
notwithstanding, he that shall have most sinned, shall not fail to be most
punished, for so much as it is written, every man shall receive his hire
according to his works.


M. Haste thou none other passages of the Scriptures more euidente, to prove
that which thou say?


P. Jesus Christ him self does say to that same purpose, that the servant
which knows the will of his master, and does it not, shall be beaten with mo
stripes, than he that has not done it, being ignorante of it.


M. This passage is very plain.


Pet. Thou have also that which Jesus Christ himself has said, that those of
Sodom and Gomorre shall be more softly dealt with at ye day of judgment, than
these which shall have cast off the Gospel from them.


Of the impuritie of men's works, and how God judges of them.
M. I Do now understand this point well, wherefore thou may proceed to the
other, which is concerning the impuritie of men's works.


P. That is, that seeing men are corrupted by sin, there ca^ proceed from
them no work whatsoever it be, have it never so fair a show before men,
which is not so foul as nothing may be more.


M. It follows then that they ca^ do no good work, and the best that they can
do are all evil of their nature, if God will examine them according to the
rule of his justice and perfection.


P. Thou say very truth, wherefore so far is it off from being able to
apease Gods wrath, but yt they daily provoke ye same more and more, so long as
he beholds them such as they be of their nature, for god judges not as me^
do.


M. What difference is there then? Does he not judge that to be good which is
good, and evil that which is evil?


P. If he should judge otherwise, he should not be just nor good, but because
he is a good and just judge, he judges of men's works as they ought to be
judged of in deed, and not as men, which do not judge but acording to the
outward appearance.


M. What is the cause thereof?


Pe. There be two. The first is that they cannot know and found the hearts as
God can. The other is also because that they be so blind in their own works:
1. Samu. 16. b. Ieremi. 17. b. Act. 1. d. Psalm. 7. c. 1. Chro. 28. b
wherefore they cannot see in them that which God sees in them, because they
do not consider their natural corruption as they ought to do, neither do they
know it as it is requisite.


Of the obligation vvherby man is bound to God, and for what cause he cannot
make recompense by the good works which he does, for the evil works which
he has committed.
M. COme now to the third point, which is concerning man's obligation toward
God.


P. Even as men are bound not to do that which God forbids, eue^ so be they
bound to do that which he commands them.


M. What follows of that?


P. For somuche as there is double obligation, the one cannot abolish the
other. For if I do one part of that which God commands me, I remain always
yet bound for that which is yet to do.


M. But in the mean time the same is already done, and in that respect thou
have already satisfied for that part.


P. Albeit that my heart were so perfect that there were nothing in it to be
blamed before God, that notwithstanding, it could not serve me for
satisfaction, for because I remain a debtor, seeing that I ought already yt
which I have paid.


M. I grant thee that.


P. Now if the good works done may not satisfy for those which be undone, how
shall they satisfy for the evil works which I shall have done against ye
express commandment of God?


M. I have no more to reply. For I see well that I cannot recompense an evil
work with a good: and that for two causes: The first, because that I can not
do any which is verily good: The other, because I owe the good which I should
do, and yet I am still guilty for the evil which I have committed. Luke.
17. c.



P. And therefore Jesus Christ has said: When you shall have done all that
which is commanded you, say ye: We are unprofitable servants, we have done
that which we ought to do.


For what cause there is nothing but the only sacrifice of Jesus Christ, which
may satisfy at the judgment of God.
M I Do now know more manifestly what thou will conclude by this whole
discourse, and by that which thou have already said concerning this purpose,
that there is none but Jesus Christ which may do sacrifice, or any work
acceptable unto God.


P. If that me^ might do it of themselves, he then should have been given to
us in vain by the Father, to do that which an other might have done, beside
him. Galath. 2. d.
For as Saint Paul says, he should have died in vayn, if we might have been justified by the works of the law.


M. Thou will then say in effect, that there is none other true and perfect
sacrificer, which may offer unto God perfect sacrifice to make an agreement
between him and mankind, but Jesus Christ only: for so much as he is perfect and
without sin? Note.



P. Beside this reason, thou haste yet to note, that which we have already
heretofore said: that even as the pain due to our sins is infinite, even so
the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, is of merit and virtue infinite.


Math. And what is the cause thereof?


P. It is not only because he is without sin, and without spotte, as we have
already heard, but also because he is the true and natural Son of God,
and that his humane nature is joined to his divine nature, which is infinite,
of the which ye humane nature takes his virtue.


Ma. If this divine nature were not joined with his humane nature, could it
not give life of it self, except it took it of the divine nature?


Peter. Thou haste already heard how that his divine nature is the
fountain: And therefore Jesus Christ has said: John. 6. g.
The flesh profits nothing: to wit, if it be considered as separate from his
divine nature, and from his holy Spirit, but it is the Spirit which gives
life.


M. What means he by that spirit giuyng life? Colloss. 2. b 2. Cor. 5. b



Pe. It is ye God dwelling in Jesus Christ corporally as S. Paul says, to
wit, really, and in deed, reconciling the world to himself.


Of the perfect obedience of Jesus Christ, which makes his office so
perfect.
M. Which is the principal cause that makes this Sacrifice of Jesus Christ
so perfect, in such sort as it has power to reconcile us unto God, and to
satisfy fully for us at his judgment?


Pe. The perfect obedience which he yielded to God his Father in the same, the
which is much more great and infinite, Phil. 2.^
than the rebellion and transgression: in recompense whereof, he has yielded to
GOD so perfect an obedience.


Math. When was it that he made this sacrifice, whereby he has yielded such
obedience unto God his father?


Peter. When by the Eternal Spirit he offered himself upon the tree of the
Cross, in the which he has borne the curse and judgment of God, which we
had deserved by our sins, Hebr. 9. d. Galath. 3. b. Ieremi. 17. a. Galath.
3. c.
and he has turned that curse to us into a blessing, because it is the seed
of Abraham, by whom GOD has promised blessing to all the nations of the
earth.


M. Is it then the cause why we confess that he has suffered under Ponce
Pylate, and that he was crucified, dead, and buried?


P. It is even the same.


Of the office of intercessor, and of Advocate of Jesus Christ, and of the
virtue of the same.
M. ANd when he offered up this Sacrifice, did he also then the office of
intercessor, praying the father for us?


P. The one of the works is not without the other. For he became not pledge
and surety for us, but forthwith he was also our advocate, and did fully
handle our cause, to obtain for us pardon of our sins of his father, whereof
he had no need for himself. And therefore he has demanded that pardon for
us, the which is not only granted us, but also his justice, his innocence,
his obedience and satisfaction are accounted ours, as though they were ours,
and as though they proceeded from us. Romans 8. ^



M. Does he at this present that office of mediator and advocate?


P. Think not that he has done it only for one time, but thou ought to
understand, that he makes intercession without cease for us.


M. That notwithstanding he was sacrifised but once, and can be no more, even
as he could but once dye.


P. It follows not therefore, but that the virtue of his sacrifice which he
has once offered for us, and also his prayer which he made in the same, be
such, considering they be infinite, that they do extend from the one end even
to the other end of the world, Hebr. 13. b.
and from the beginning even to the end of the same. For Jesus is before
yesterday and to day, and for ever.


M. If Jesus Christ do make incessantly intercession for us, in such sort as
thou say, it is then requisite that he be perpetually in Heaven before the
Father, not only in his divine nature, but also in his humane nature, in the
which he has satisfied for us, and for whose cause he is our intercessor,
mediatoure and advocate.


P. If he were not risen again and ascended into Heaven, we might not only
not hold him for our mediator and advocate, but also we might not account him
for our lord and our king.


M. For what cause?


P. For that that he should not have been victorious of our enemies, which are
the world, the flesh, sin, death, the devil, and hell, and should not have
delivered us, but should himself have been vanquished by them.


M. We are then assured of this victory whereof thou speak, by the
resurrection and ascension of Jesus Christ.


P. We are not only assured, but also ye victory is the fruit which comes
unto us by that resurrection and ascension, as also the perpetual intercession
by the which we are assured, that we have the son of God in Heaven for our
intercessor and advocate.


Of the two commings of Jesus Christ.
M. Have we yet any other points to consider upon the work of redemption done
by Jesus Christ?


Pet. We have also therein to consider the two commings of him.


M. Which is the first?


P. It is this same whereof we now speak, in the which he took our flesh to
accomplish in the same all the works whereof we have spoken until this
present.


Math. Which is the second?


Peter. That wherein he shall come, not in the baseness and infirmity of the
flesh to suffer for us as he did in his first coming: but in glory and
majesty, to glorifye with him all those which thorough says shall have
received him for their savior and redemer, when he was set forth unto them by
the Gospel: and condemn as judge of the living and of the dead, all these
which would not have received him, and acknowledge him for such an one, and
to make al his enemies his footstool.


Of the person of the holy Ghost. The tenth Dialogue.
Of the work of vivification, and of the principal points to be
considered concerning the holy Ghost.
MATTHEW. WHat is there now to be done in the matters that we have yet to
handle following those which we have already heretofore handled.


P. Seeing that we have already sufficiently spoken of the work of redemption, we
may now speak of the work of vivification and sanctification, which is
properly attributed to the holy Ghost.


M. Which be the principal points to consider in the same?


P. There be chiefly two.


M. Which is the first?


P. It is concerning the person and the nature of the holy Ghost.


M. And the second?


P. Concerning his gifts and graces, and the distribution of them.


Of the divinity of the holy Ghost, and of the proprieties ascribed to all the
persons of the Trinity.
M. WHat have we to consider of the person and nature of the holy Ghost?


Pet. That he is very God of one very essence and divinity with the Father and
the son from whom he proceeds.


M. How understand thou that the holy Ghost proceeds from the father and
the son, considering that he is one very God, and of the same nature and
essence with them?


P. Thou must ever remember, that we consider in the nature and essence of God
the father, as beginning of al divinity: the son as his eternal word and
wisdom, whereby he does manifest himself: and the holy Ghost, as the virtue
of the father and the son, by the which he works in us, to make him self
known such as he declares him in his son Jesus Christ, and to make us
partakers of all his treasures, graces, and heavenly riches, the which the
father has opened unto us in him.


If there be any beginning in the divine essence, and how the holy Ghost
proceeds from the father and from the son.
M. If the son and the holy ghost be one very god with ye father, in mine
opynion they be also eternal, and without beginning and without end, as he
is.


P. It is not to be doubted.


M. And yet for all that it seems to me, that first thou imputest beginning
to the father, and after that thou placest the son, which follows
afterward, as though he had the father for his beginning and then the holy
Ghost as following the^ after, and having two beginnings, of the which the
second depends of the first, to wit, the father and the son.


P. When I speak so, thou must think that I admit no beginning neither in
the father, the son, nor in the holy Ghost, as if they were creatures,
considering that I confess that they be one only God, and that there is in God
neither beginning nor end.


M. I do well understand that.


P. In like sort thou may not think that I put the one before the other, as
though the one were the beginning of the other, in respect of time, in such
sort that the father should be before the son as touching time, and then the
father and the son before the holy Ghost, in such sort that the father should
be the first, and the son the second, and the holy Ghost the third and last.


How we ought to understand the order which is in the persons of the
Trinity.
M. IT seems to me for all that that thou say so, and I cannot otherwise
understand it, if thou do not better declare unto me thy meaning.


P. Thou must understand that a thing may be called first or last in diverse
sorts, and according to diverse considerations.


Ma. What meanest thou by this? For the first, a thing is called first in
respect of time when it is before an other, and more aunciente than the same.


Matthew. Thou haste declared unto me that I must not so take it in the dyuine
essence and nature, for somuche as in the same all is there eternal without
beginning and without end.


Peter. It is true, but for the second, a thing may be before an other in
honor and dignity, albeit that it be not first in time, as a king or prince
shall be first in dignity amongst his subjects, albeit many of them may be
more aged than he.


M. Do thou say that the father is before the son, and the father and the
son before the holy Ghost in this manner?


Peter. No. For in the divine nature there is nothing of more or less, but
there is equality in all things.


M. Thy meaning is then that no one person of the Trinity which is in the
unity of god, is more worthy or more great than the other.


P. We may not otherwise understand it, for if it were otherwise, either there
should not be one very essence and divinity, but sundry, and consequently
sundry Gods, of which some should be greater, and some less: or else it must
needs be that God should be greater and more worthy than him self.


M. All these co^sequences would be very strange.


P. There is no doubt. For if they were sundry Gods, they should be no Gods, no
not at all. For God cannot be but almighty, all perfect, and all infinite.


M. Thy meaning is then that he must necessarily be all alone.


P. Thou may so very well understand it, for sundry cannot be all might,
all perfect, and all infinite.


M. I do well understand all that.


P. There is also a third manner whereby one thing may be before an other.


M. What is it?


P. It is when a thing is of such nature, that it may be without an other, the
which notwithstanding cannot be without it.


M. I cannot well understand what thou say unto me, unless thou declare it
more plainly unto me by example.


P. One is before two, for so much as two cannot be, but one must be first,
seeing that two are but a double, to wit, twice one. But one may very well be
without two.


M. Thou will not say yet that the father is before the son and before the
holy Ghost in such a manner?


P. No. For the Father cannot be without the son, and the holy Ghost, as the
son and the holy Ghost cannot be without the father.


M. Show me then in what other sort the father is before the son, and the
father and the son before the holy Ghost.


P. Thou must fourthly note, concerning things that be equal of time, of
dignity, and of nature, that for as much as a man cannot consider and
comprehend them all at one time or instante, we do consider them the one after
the other, and we place the one before the other, even as we comprehend and
dispose them in our understanding. And even so, that which we first consider
and comprehend, or that which first is showed unto us, is first in order in
respect of us, albeit that it be equal to the others, of time, of dignity,
and of nature.


M. In so doing that which we place first or last, is neither first nor
last in it self, but only in our understanding and in regard of the same,
which because of his weakness, is enforced to depart that which is joined
together, and to divide that which cannot in it self be separate, to the end
that he may the better comprehend by parts that which he cannot wholly at a
time comprehend.


P. Thou say very well.


Matthew. Is it then thy meaning, that in this sort we please the Father as
the first in the divine essence, and the son as the second, and the holy
Ghost as the third, albeit that all these three divine persons be in one very
essence and equal in all and by all, both in time, in dignity, and in nature,
and in all things which belong to the nature of God?


P. We may very well take it so. But there is yet a fyfte manner, which is
also very agreeable to the point upon the which we are, the which has a
certain agreement with that before cited.


Matthew. Which is it.


Peter. It is among the things that are in such sort of one very nature,
that the one cannot be without the other, and yet for all that the one is as
the spring of the other, and the other as a dependaunce of the same.


Matthew. Give me an example of the same.


Peter. The light and the shyning or brightness, cannot be the one without
the other. For the light does engender and bring forth the shyning. And
albeit that the one be not before the other, yet we give the light the first
place, as though it were before the shyning as the mother of it, even as also
we consider the sun before his beams and his heat, albeit they be all at
once.


Matthew. Thou meanest then that God has so declared himself to us in his
works and in his word, and by such mean, and in such order.


Pet. It cannot be otherwise understood without overthrowing of all that which
is set forth to us in ye holy scriptures of ye unity of god, and of the
Trinity of persons, in ye essence of ye same.


P. Seeing that it is so, ye which thou say agrees always wc yt which I eue^
now said, to wit, ye that which we place first, second, and third, amongst
the persons which are in the divine essence, is more in respect of our
understanding, than of the divine nature, wherein, to speak properly, there is
neither first, second nor third, seeing there is no difference, neither of
time, nor of dignity nor of nature: but only in the order according to the
which God has manifested himself to us in his word, according as our
capacity may best comprehend him.


P. Seeing that God is eternal and infinite in himself, and that we cannot
comprehend him in that infiniteness and eternity, it has pleased him so to
show himself to us, making himself meet, as thou haste already said, to the
rudeness of our understandings. And therefore he will that we know him, and
that we speak in such sort in the which he has declared himself to us by
his word and by his works, and not otherwise.


Of the difference that must be put between the essence and the gifts of the
holy Ghost.
M. I Do now sufficientlye understand thy meaning touching this point, of the
nature and divinity of the holy Ghost: come to the other which is concerning
his gifts.


Pe. Thou have to note first, that because the Father does communicate to us
by the virtue of the holy Ghost, the graces the which he does offer and
present unto us in his Son Jesus Christ, these graces are called by the name
of the holy Ghost. And therefore in the Scripture it is spoken of the holy
Ghost, as though there were sundry of them.


M. Give me an example of that which thou say.


Peter. Esaias, Esaias. 11. a,
speaking of the graces which should be in Jesus Christ, and of the excellent
gifts of god, wherewith he should be endued in his humane nature, has said:
The spirit of the Lord shall repose upon him, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and of force, the spirit of knowledge
and of fear of the Lord: There is also mention made in other places of the
holy Scriptures, Romans 8. c. 1. Cor. 12. a. b. 2. Cor. 4. ^
and chiefly in the Epistles of Saint Paul, of the Spirit of adoption and of
faith, and of (...) prophecy, and of other such like gifts, which we must
understand not of the essence of the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 5. d
but of his works and effects.


M. Thy meaning is then, that we must distinguishe between the nature of the
holy Ghost, and his gifts and graces?


P. We must so understand: For when we say, according to the testimonies of ye
holy scriptures, that the holy Ghost dwells in us, we do not mean that he
dwells in us in his nature and proper person united with us, as the divine
nature was united in Jesus Christ with the humane: but that he there dwells
by his virtue, and by his gifts and graces, whereof he makech us partakers.


The eleventh Dialogue is of the gifts of the holy Ghost, belonging to the
only elect.
Of the number of the gifts of the holy ghost, and of the distributio^ of them.
MATTHEW. How many be the gifts of the holy Ghost?


P. If then could number all the graces which God gives unto men, thou
moughtest also number all the gifts of ye holy ghost.


M. It follows then that there is no number certain.


P. No in deed, except we will presume to number that which is infinite.


M. That notwithstanding, it seems to me that the Theologians account
ordinarily seven gifts and graces of the holy Ghost.


Peter. These Theologians of whom thou speak, are Papisticall Theologians,
which know neither what is the holy Ghost, nor yet his gifts, and
therefore less the number of them. But because they have read near such a
number of gifts of the holy Ghost, in the passage of Esaiah, which I even
now alleged, they have concluded, that they were all comprehended in that
number, or at the least they say so.


M. Thou have yet for all that a number of others, which are not there
comprehended. Saint Paul speaks yet of many others chiefly in the Epistles
written to the Romans, To. 12. b. c 1. Cor. 12. a b.
and to the Corinths, which are not comprehended in this number, as ar ye gifts
of to^gs, of prophecy, of healing, and such like, which he says are all of
one self spirit, which gives and distributeth to every man according as is
expedient for him.


M. He does not then distribute them all to every man.


P. Seeing he does distribute them according as it is expedient, it follows,
that he distributeth to every man so much as is necessary.


Of the diversity of the gifts of the holy Ghost, and of the difference of
them.
M. Seeing he distributeth them not to all, it follows then that they be not
all necessary to man's salvation. For if they were all necessary thereunto, no
man could be saved, except he had them all.


P. Thou have here to note, that albeit there is but one only and one very
spirit of God, which distributeth all his gifts, yet notwithstanding his
gifts be diverse. Wherefore there must be difference put between them.


M. How take thou this difference?


P. In that that there be some that are so necessary to every man's salvation,
that no man can be saved except he be made partaker of them in his proper
person.


M. Be there others without the which we may well be?


P. There is none but they be very profitable and necessary to the Church.
For if they were not profitable and necessary, they should be superfluous and
vain: which thing we may not think of god. For he has not done and
ordained any thing without good and just cause, without necessity or great
profit and commodity.


M. I do well understand it so.


P. And therefore we must here consider, that a thing may be profitable and
necessary in two sorts.


M. Which is the first?


P. I will give thee example touching the gifts whereof we speak: For there
be some which profit nothing, but only to those which have them in their own
person, and without the which none may be agreeable to God nor saved. There be
others which may profit those which have them not, and not those which have
them, albeit they have them not in their own persons: and the Infidells may
have them, and they not serve them but to their condemnation.


Of the gifts of the holy Ghost necessary for every man to obtayn
salvation thereby.
M. Give me example of the one sort, and of the other. Romans 3.4. a and. 5. a
Gal. 2. a. Romans 8. c



P. For the first, seeing that none can be justified nor be made the Son of
God but only by faith in Jesus Christ, it follows well, yt none can be saved
without this gift of faith. And therefore S. Paul does call this gift and
grace of God, the spirit of adoption, by the which he adopteth us for his
children in Jesus Christ, by the mean and work of his holy Spirit.


Matthew. What understand thou by that adoption?


Pet. Thou know well that men do call children adoptiue, those which be
not natural children to them which do choose and accept them for their
children: but they are it only by the love and favor of him which takes
them for his children, and gives them such right as he might give to his
natural children.


M. Say thou then that the like is with us toward God? Ephe. 2. a John. 1.
b. Ephe. 1. b.



P. Seeing that of nature we be the children of wrath, it does then follow
that we be not Gods natural children, but that he makes us his children,
and accompteth us for such by his only grace, which he shows us because of
the love wherewith he has loved us in his well-beloved Son Jesus Christ, without
any of our deseruings, but wholly the contrary.


M. Thou call then that grace and that gift of God, Spirit of adoption?


P. S. Paul calls it so, for those causes which I have alredie declared unto
thee.


M. Seeing it is so, there is no one of all the elect of God which is not made
partaker of this gift. Romans ^. f



P. Forsomuche as God has predestinate all his chosen, to make them like to
his son Jesus Christ, and enheritors of his heavenly kingdom with him, there
is no doubt but yt this gift is so joined with the eternal election of God, yt it
may in no wise be separate, no more than the effect from his cause.


M. It follows then yt this gift is common to all the elect of God, and propre
to every of them, and that on the contrary, all the reprobates are clearly
shut from it. It is certain that the reprobates are never made partakers of
this gift: For if they were made partakers, it should be a very sure testimony
that they were of the elect, and not of the refused: forsomuche as it is
written, that they which are chosen, are chosen to be afterward called, Romans
8. f
justified, and glorified, and to be made fully like the Son of God.


M. Will thou say the like of the gift of faith?


P. Not only of the gift of faith, but also of the gift of charity, of hope,
of the fear of God, and of perseverance, and other such like, which are in
such sort propre to the elect of God, that none others are made partakers of
them.


Whether charity justify with faith, or else faith only, and what
difference there is between faith and charity in such a case.
M. IF it be so as thou say, we are not then saved only by faith, but also
by charity, and consequently by works, and by all the other virtues which thou
haste now named.


P. Why say thou so?


M. Because that thou haste placed those same virtues among the gifts of the
spirit of God, which are necessary to salvation.


P. In this thou have to consider, the difference that is between the cause and
his effects.


M. I understand not what thou would say. Romans 8. e.



P. I will say that the gift of faith is necessary for our salvation, as the
gift which Saint Paul does call the spirit of adoption, because that faith
is the mean whereby me do communicate of the justice and of all the benefits
of Jesus Christ, as we have declared heretofore. And therefore the holy
scripture does ascribe unto it justification.


M. What say thou then of charity?


P. I say that it is a gift which depends of the gift of faith, as the
effect of his cause, and as the fruit of the free which brings it forth.


M. But for somuche as charity cannot be separated from faith, if faith be
true faith, it follows then, that if we cannot be justified without faith, no
more may we then also without charity neither consequently be saved without
the one and the other, seeing that our salvation proceeds of our
justification.


P. It seems at the first sight that thy conclusion is rightly framed, but it
is far wide.


M. Show me then the fault that is in it.


P. Should thou conclude well, if thou did conclude in this sort: The
light of the fire cannot be separated from his heat, it follows then that
the light cannot shine without heat, and that the heat does shine as well as
the light?


M. Me thinks if I did so conclude it were not much amiss.


P. That notwithstanding in making such a conclusion thou should confound
the things which are distinguished. For albeit that the light and the heat be
in the fire joined together, as they are also in the Sun, yet thou see
plainly, that the office and property of the light is other than that of the
heat, and that of the heat other than that of the light, and that the effects
also be diverse.


M. It is true.


P. And therefore, either they must be distinguished the one from the other,
without separating of the^ notwithstanding, or else they must be so confounded
together, that it must be one very thing, to wit all light or all heat.


M. Thou meanest in mine opinion, that albeit that faith can not be separated
from charity, yet for all that it is so distinguished from the same, that it
has an other office and an other propriety, than has charity.


P. It is easy to see. For the office of faith is to present us before God all
naked and void of all justice, and in his promises to take hold of his graces
and mercy, the which he offers to us in Jesus Christ his son, by whose
mean we have communion with him, and are made partakers of all his benefits,
as we have already declared.


Ma. Thy meaning is then that charity has not that office.


Peter. It is true. For albeit that faith cannot be without charity, yet
faith goes before it in order, the which does engender it afterward.


Mathevve. How so? James. 2. d



Peter. After that we are made partakers of the benefits of Jesus Christ
thorough faith, after that GOD by the same has justified us by his holy
Spirit in Jesus Christ our Lord, he does also sanctifye us, communicating
unto us his gifts and Graces which are the fruits of Faith, to the end that
we should be dedicated and consecrated unto him all the days of our life, to
serve and honor him as his children, regenerate by his holy spirit into a
new life.


Ma. Thou do report faith to justification, and charity to the work of
sanctification which are both works of the holy Ghost.


P. Thou may understand it by the discourse which we have already made of
justification and sanctification.


In what sort charity is necessary to salvation.
M. Charity is not then necessary to salvation, nor other like virtues, but
faith only.


P. It is necessary there unto and not necessary.


M. I do not well understand this speech, for it is contrary in it self.


P. I say yt faith is necessary thereunto as cause of salvation, without the
which we cannot obtain it, for the causes which I have already declared. For
so much as it is the instrument the which the holy Ghost gives us wherewith
to receive him, when he is offered unto us by Jesus Christ, and the mean
whereby he does communicate him to us in him and by him. But charity is not
there joined as a cause of salvation, without the which we cannot be partakers
of it, but as a thing joined unto it, the which follows faith in such
sort, which is the true cause of salvation, as I have already said, that she
cannot be separate, no more than the heat from the light, or the moving or
feeling from the life and from the soul. But yet notwithstanding we have not
salvation thereby, no more than brightness by the heat, the which we have of
the light, or else life by the motion and feeling.


M. Charity then and good works may not be taken for causes, by the which, or
by whose mean we obtain salvation, but only so far as they cannot be
separated from true faith, James. 2. d
by the which we are made partakers of it.


P. It is even so.


M. Thou have here opened unto me one point that was very hard to understand,
the which seems to me very well worthy to be diligently noted. For there be
few which do well understand it.


Peter. If all men did well understand it, there would be no more differente
between the Christians touching justification, and touching faith and works,
and grace and merits, and the causes of our salvation for that which we have
said of charity, is also understood, of all the other virtues and works of
the regenerate man, as I have already said, which are the fruits the which
Saint Paul does call the fruits of the spirit, Galath. 5. c.d.
and the which he does oppone to ye fruits of the flesh.


Of the regeneration of a Christian man.
M. Seeing that thou art lighted upon the point of regeneration, me thinks
that it should be also comprehended among those gifts of the holy Ghost, the
which thou say do belong but to the elect of God, and be so necessary to
salvation, that none may attain unto it without them.


P. It must be so understood, for it is of the chief of them, and in very
deed it is the principal point which makes us to understand the cause,
why we do call work of vivification and sanctification that third work of
God, whereby we say that God has declared himself unto men.


Ma. Expound the same to me somewhat more plainly.


P. This word of regeneration, as thou may well understand, emporteth as
much, as a man moughte say new birth, as if after that we are once borne, we
are borne yet again.


Mathevve. I see well that the word of regeneration, imports even so.


Peter. And therefore it imports forthwith a reformation of the man, which
is a rising again from the dead, which is wroughte in the Spirit, as the
last resurrection shall be wroughte in the flesh.


Mathevve. What meanest thou by that resurrection of the Spirit?


Peter. Seeing that thorough sin man is dead of spiritual death, which
brings afterward death of the body, he is as it were risen from that death,
when by Jesus Christ he is in such sort delivered from sin, that he is by
the virtue of his holy Spirit made as it were a man thoroughly new, or as
a man who having been dead should have recovered his life, and should
be raised again.


Mathevve. Thou put then so great difference between the man which abides
still in his first nature corrupted through sin, and he which is delivered
from the same corruption, and is quickened and regenerated by the holy Ghost,
as thou put between a dead and a living man.


P. There is no difference, but in as much as the spiritual death is much more
worthy to be called death, than is the corporal death, and that the estate of
the man dead thorough sin, is much more perilous and dangerous than is the
estate of the man which is dead but bodily.


Of the life of the regenerate man.
M. Seeing that man is as it were risen from death and borne a new, when he is
regenerate by the holy Ghost, it follows then necessarily that he do other
works, after that he is regenerate, than he did before his regeneration.


P. Thou may well understand that if there be so great difference between
the man regenerate and the not regenerate, as is between a dead and a living
man, it must also necessarily come to pass, that there be as great difference
between the works of the one and the other. John. 3. ^



M. I do even so understand it.


P. And therefore Jesus Christ has said, that what is borne of flesh is
flesh, and what is borne of the spirit is spirit. For even as a dead body
can bring forth but infection and corruption, even so on the contrary, a living
body does the works of life, because of the living soul that he has more than
has the dead body.


M. It follows then, that the faith whereby man is viuified and regenerate, is
unto him as the soul, which brings to him spiritual life, and that the
unfaithful, and not regenerate man, is as a body without a soul. Abac. 2. a
Romans 1. b



P. S. Paul following the prophet Abacuk, gives thee plainly to understand
that it is so, by that which he says: The just man shall live of his faith.
Wherefore if the just man do live of his faith, it follows then, that Faith
is to his soul, to give it spiritual life, that which the natural soul is
to the body, to give it corporal life.


Matthew. There are then two things to be considered in the regenerate and
spiritual man: to wit, Faith which is in him as the soul which gives him
spiritual life, even as the soul natural which gives corporal life to ye
body, and then the works of ye spirit are joined to it, which are the works
of faith, which is the spiritual soul, even as the works of life, proceeding
from the soul are in the living man.


Peter. Thou may well judge, that as the living man has not only life, but
also moving and feeling by the power of the soul that is in him, even so the
man regenerate by the spirit of God, is disposed by the same to do spiritual
works, which are the works of life, where as he did the works of death,
whilst he was dead through sin not being regenerate by ye spirit of God.


The twelfth Dialogue is of the gifts of the holy Ghost, which are common to
the elect, and to the reprobates.
Of the gifts of the holy Ghost which me^ may have and not be chosen of god,
and without the which the elect may be saved touching themselves.
MATTHEW. I Do now better understand than before, why thou do call the
third work of God, the which thou attributest to the holy Ghost, work of
vivification, and for what cause the holy Ghost is called the quickening
spirit. There rests now that we speak of other of his gifts, which thou
haste said may serve to the Salvation of them which have them not, without
serving at all them which have them to their salvation.


P. I will show thee by example that which thou ask, we may place in this
rank the gift of toungs, the gift of prophecy or preaching, the gift of
miracles, and such other like.


Math. Does GOD sometime communicate these gifts unto the reprobates and
unfaithful?


Peter. Thou do not doubt but that he does distrybute them to the elect
and the faithful when it pleases him.


Math. I may not doubt thereof, seeing I have the examples of the prophets and
of the Apostles which witness it unto me.


P. But albeit that these gifts be communicate to diverse of the elect and
faithful, yet they are not given generally to all, neither to every one
specially, and as the others whereof we have already spoken: and on the other
side, they be not given in equal and one measure to all those to whom they be
given. For the one sort have them in greater number and greater abundance than
the others.


M. Give me example of that which thou say.


P. Saint John Baptist was so excellent a Prophet, Matthew. 11 b Luke. 7. d
that he was by Jesus Christ preferred to all the other Prophets which were
before him: and yet we read not that he had the gift of tongues, as the
Apostles had.


M. It seems also to me, that it was not necessary, forsomuche as he was
not sent but to those of his own nation.


P. And therefore I say with Saint Paul, that the holy Ghost distributeth his
gifts to every man, as is expediente for him. But to come again to S. John
Baptist, no more had he the gift of miracles. For it is written of him
plainly, that he did none at all.


M. I think also, that there were many of the Prophets which had but the gift
of prophecy, without the gift of either miracles or toungs, forsomuche as they
did prophecy but in the Church of Israel, John. 10. g Exodus 7.8.9.10. 1.
Kings. 17. d 2. King. 1. c.d 2. a. 4. f.g. 5. c. d. 6. c
and among people which understood their natural speech


M. We find not many prophets yt have had the gift of miracles, as had Moses,
Elie, and Elizee. But the Apostles had both the gift of prophecy,
miracles, toungs, and such like.


Of the gifts of the holy Ghost given to the wicked.
M. I I know now well by these examples, in what sort these gifts he
distributed to the faithful, albeeit they be not distributed to every one in
very number and portion, even of those which are made partakers of them: but
thou haste not yet proved how these gifts are also sometime bestowed upon the
reprobates and unfaithful.


P. I will show thee first the testimony of Jesus Christ which says, Matthew. 7.
d These are co^mrers, sorcerers, and such like,
that many shall say unto him at the later day, Lord, Lord, we have
prophesied, and driven out devils, and wrought great effects in thy name: unto
whom he shall say: I know you not, depart from me ye workers of iniquity.


M. Peradventure they shall boast them selves falsely of that which they never
did.


Pet. To resolve this difficulty, thou have beside it the examples, Numeri.
23. a 6. a. 24. a 2. Pet. 2. d 1 Samuel 19. a ^^hn. 11. g Matthew. 10. a Luke. 9. a
not only of Balaam, of Saul, and of Cayphe, which have prophesied, but also
of Judas, unto whom not only the gift of prophecy and office of Apostle
was given, as it was to his other fellows, but also the gift of miracles.


M. How may thou know for certain if that Judas had the gift of miracles?


Peter. Because that when Jesus Christ did give it to his Apostles, Judas was
not put out of the number, but was comprised in the number of twelve, unto
which the Evangelists witness, that this gift was given by Jesus Christ.


Math. That which thou say, has some appearance.


Peter. And on the other side, thou may not find it strange, that the gift of
miracles was given unto him, which is far less necessary to the Church than
the gift of prophecy and office of Apostle.


For what cause God sometime does communicate to the wicked of the gifts of
the holy Ghost, the which he does not communicate to the elect.
M. Seeing that these gifts be so noble and so excellent, it abasheth me that
God sometime distributeth them to ye unfaithful and reprobate, rather than to
the faithful and elect. For albeit that in the time of Balaam, Saul, Cayphe,
and Judas, many of the faithful and chosen were endowed with these gifts, yet
notwithstanding the greatest number of the^ had the^ not at al, but had only
those gifts which are proper and common to all the elect and faithful.


P. It is true: but thou must note that God will have it so, chiefly for two
causes.


M. which is the first?


P. It is that he will give us to know what difference we ought to put between
these gifts, to the end that his elect might know which are the most
excellent, and what favor he has showed to them more than to the others, in
communicating them unto them.


Math. Which is the other reason?


P. It is that God will show how passing excellent a woorker he is, which
can use al instruments both good and bad, yea the very devils to make them
serve to his glory, and to the edification and salvation of his Church when
it pleases him. But seeing that he may well do by his elect that which he
does by these wicked instruments, why does he not rather this honor to his
children than to his enemies.


P. He does no dishonor to his children, but does them great honor, when he
constrayneth the very wicked to serve them will they nill they.


M. There is a point well worth the note.


P. On the other side he honors the enemies the more, but puts them to
greater confusion, and makes them more inexcusable, in so much as thorough
their own fault, they have abused his gifts.


Of the gifts of God which are most excellent and most to be desired.
M. FOr so much as I can understand by thee, thou esteemest the first gifts
whereof thou spakest, to be much more excellent and necessary to every one
in his particular, than the others whereof thou spakest in the second place.


P. Thou may well think, that the gifts which God has chiefly prepared for
his elect, are the most principal, and those whom he most esteems, and of
the which also he wills that we have most care, and namely for two causes.


M. Show me the first.


P. It is, that these gifts make us more like to God than the others do. For
we are reformed in deed to his Image by them:


Mat. Show me something more plainly what thy meaning is.


P. Albeit that all virtues are in God in all excellency and full perfection,
yet notwithstanding the chief virtue that he will have acknowledged in him,
and by the which he will chiefly be glorified, and that also which makes him
to us most amiable, and which is most convenient and necessary for us, and
which does best declare unto us his true nature, it is his goodness.


M. Will thou also conclude thereby, that he does more esteem those gifts
which make good those who have them, than the gifts which may be in men
without making them good, and yelding those better which are partakers of
them, albeit they might serve others, to bring them to the communion of these
other more excellent gifts.


P. It is so.


How the gift of prophecy may serve to the salvation of those which have it
not, and not of them which have it.
M. THy meaning is, so far as I can understand, that a man may have the
gift of prophecy, by mean whereof God will call his elect to his knowledge,
and notwithstanding he by whom he shall call them, shall not himself have the
same true knowledge wherewith God makes himself known to his elect, and by
the which he makes them like to him self, and are brought to honor him.


P. I do so understand it.


M. But how may a man give that which he has not?


P. How may a whetstone make sharp an iron, seeing it is but a stone and it
self cannot cut? And how may a bell call and cause people to come to the
sermon whereunto it self goes not, nor may go.


M. Is it the like of the matters which we now handle?


P. Thou have two point is to l^^e in this.


M. Which is the first?


P. It is that the ministers by whom God is served, do not communicate the
gifts of God, but as instruments, but it is God himself which does
communicate them by them, as he which is the Lord and master, which has them
in his power to distribute and retain at his pleasure.


M. I think in deed if these gifts were in the power of the ministers and
instruments wherewith God serves himself, al those which should hear their
doctrine, and which should receive of the^ the outward Sacraments, which
they administer, should be made partakers of the gifts of God whereof they be
ministers and dispensators so far as touches their ministry.


P. Experience teaches us yt which thou say. Yet notwithstanding we may not
contemn the ministry of man, when it pleases God to serve himself with
the^ whatsoever they be, provided that we be assured that they set forth to
us purely the things of God.


Of the true knowledge of God proper only to his elect, and of the general
which is common to all men.
M. WHich is the other point that thou say I had to note upon this matter?


P. It is that we must consider the knowledge of God in two sorts.


M. How is that?


P. There is one knowledge of God which causes men as soon as they have it,
to glorify him as belongs unto him. That is the true knowledge of God which
deserves such a name, and which is proper to the only elect of God, and is
never separate from true faith in him.


M. What other sort of knowledge is there yet?


P. There is one general and common to all as well faithful as unfaithful,
the which is sufficient enough to condemn all men before God, but not to save
them.


M. How do thou understand that it is sufficient to condemn, and not to
save? For it seems to me that it were better not to have such a knowledge
than to have it.


P. It is the knowledge of God, whereof Saint Paul speaks in the beginning
of the epistle to the Romans, the which condemns men, in somuche as they
have sufficient knowledge of God to know that they ought to honor and
glorify him, and yet notwithstanding, they neither honor nor glorify him
according as he has declared himself to them, and as they know him: Romans 1. c
wherein they show their malice, peruersitie, and ingratitude, the which
makes them wholly inexcusable.


M. But seeing that this knowledge is not so great that it can induce us to
glorify God as is meet, is there at all no excuse for them?


P. If they did glorify him according to the measure of their knowledge, there
should be yet some appearance in that which thou say, albeit that ignorance
shall excuse no man, forsomuche as it proceeds of sin, whereof the fault
cannot be imputed but to man. But they show their natural peruersitie and
malice in the same, that they make none accoumpte to glorify God as God,
accordingly as they know him.


How that the wicked which prophecy do understand or not understand, their
own very prophecies.
M. THy meaning the^ is, that they which have the gifts of God, whereby they
may serve to the salvation of others and in the mean time do not profit
themselves, have even such a knowledge of God, as is that whereof thou now
haste spoken.


P. There are yet diverse considerations upon the which thou concludest. For
there are some which have prophesied of things which they themselves well
understood, and there be others which understood not their own prophesies.


M. Give me example thereof.


P. Balaam did well understand that which he prophesied of the children of
Israel. For he well did know that people to be blessed of God. But Cayphas
prophesied not understanding what he said, for he meant of one, and the spirit
of god who made him to speak so, made him to speak an other which he
understood not himself.


M. Caiphas was then the mouth of God and the mouth of the Devil all at once.


P. He was the mouth of God, in so much as God made him to say, that his
people could not be saved but only by the death of his son Jesus Christ,
but he was the mouth of the Devil according to his intent after the which he
so spoke. For he did not speak according to the meaning of the holy Ghost, but
as a murderer an enemy of truth, pretending the death of Jesus Christ,
because of the hatred which he had toward him.


How that the true knowledge of God comprehends both the understanding and
the will.
M. IF Cayphas understood not his prophecy, I do not greatly marvel although
it profited him not. But I do more marvel of Balaam, that he did not better
proffite by his, than he has done, forsomuche as he has had sufficient
understanding to lead him rather to follow the people of GOD than his enemies.


Peter. There are yet two points to be noted herein, by the knoweledge whereof
thou may understand the better the cause which let Balaam to proffite
better by his prophecy, and by the knowledge of God which he had. And in like
sort thou may judge of all others like.


M. Which are those two points?


P. A man cannot well honor God, if first he know him not as he ought to
know him, and he cannot know him in such sort except he be first delivered
from two great evils which are in him by the mean of sin.


M. Which are these two great evils?


P. The one is the ignorance that has possessed his understanding.


M. And the other?


P. The malice which has corrupted not only his understanding, but also his
whole will, and consequently all the affections which are in him.


M. Does the true knowledge of God comprehend the understanding and the will
of man?


P. If the true knowledge of God does cause man to honor him, it must then
necessarily come to pass, that thereby manne is reformed as touching his
understanding, heart, will, and all other his affections, seeing that he cannot
well honor God, Deuter. 6. a. Matthew. 22. d Luke. 10. c.
if he love him not with all his understanding, and with all his heart, and
with all his soul, and with all his power and forces.


Of the true and full reformation of man, and of the parts thereof.
M. BY what mean may a man be so perfectly reformed as thou say?


P. After that the understanding of man through sin has been blinded by the
darknesses of error and ignorance, the which it has brought to himt, he
understanding, can not be well reformed, if God by his heavenly light do not
drive away these darknesses, and the ignorance that there is, to give him true
knowledge of God his Creator.


M. In what sort also is the will reformed?


P. When God has changed it from evil into good, and where it is rebellious
to his, he makes it like unto the same.


M. Will thou then say that a man is not fully regenerate if his will and
understanding be not also reformed?


P. He can not be fully, if that all that which has been corrupted in him
through sin, be not repaired and restored by the grace of God.


How that ignorance and malice are contrary to true regeneration and
reformation, and how there is either more or less ignorance and malice in
some than in other some.
M. But if a man be not thoroughly regenerate and reformed of all these two
parts, may he not at the least be of one of them?


P. If he be not of them both, we may not proprely call him regenerate and
reformed. And yet notwithstanding, I confess that among them which are not
regenerate and reformed by the spirit of God, some have more malice than
ignorance, and others more ignorance than malice, which are the two vices the
most contrary to true regeneration and reformation that may be, which
comprehend the understanding and the will. For ignorance is proprely reported
to the understanding, and malice to the will.


Of those which offend more through malice than by ignorance.
M. Show me by example what thy meaning is.


P. Let us take again in hand ye example of Balaam. Thou may well know by
what he has said and done, that he was more malicious than ignorant. For he
knew well enough the way that he ought to walk: but covetousness wherewith he
had his heart filled, did let his will not to agree with the knowledge of God
which he had.


M. If I have well understood that which thou haste already said of the
knowledge of God, it seems to me, that a man may not call that of Balaam
true knowledge of God, forsomuche as it was not such that his understanding
was so well lightened by the spirit of God, that he did foorthwyth draw and
guide his heart and will to glorifye GOD as he ought.


Pet. That which thou say is true: And therefore I did not clean exempt
Balaam of ignorance, when I said, that there was in him more malice than
ignorance, but I would give to understand that there was ignorance in him,
albeit the malice was the greater: For if he had known God as he ought to
have done, he had forthwith loved him, and would have endeavored himself
rather to please him than the king Balaac, and would not have preferred the
worldly honor and profit which he looked for at his hand, to ye honor of God,
and to his gifts and graces.


M. Give me yet some example to this purpose, by which I may better
understand this matter.


P. Take Annas, Cayphas, 1. Cor. 2. b Act. 3. c.
ye Scribes and Phariseyes, and such like. For albeit they did not truly know
Jesus Christ as ye apostles and the other faithful did, yet had they knowledge
enough to co^demn them because yt their own malice did more let the^ to
acknowledge and receive him as their Savior, Matthew. 12. b John. 5. g ^. g.
than did the ignorance that was in them.


Of those which sin more through ignorance than through malice.
M. I Am satisfied with the examples that thou haste already alleged of those
which sin more of malice than of ignorance, Give me now examples of the
others which offend more of ignorance than of malice.


P. Seeing we have spoken of phariseys, thou haste an evident example of S.
Paul, Act. 8. a. 9. a 1. Tim. 1. c
if thou do consider when he was a pharisey and a persecuter, before yt he was
converted to the Gospel.


M. I know well that he was then a great persecuter of the Christians.


Pet. He does plainly confess it himself. But he did not persecute them
with so evil a conscience as the Scribes and Phariseis did persecute Christ
and his apostles For he did more of ignorance than of malice, as he himself
does witness. 1. Tim. 1. c



M. But was there also no malice in him?


P. As I do not clearly exempt from ignorance those which offend more of
malice tha^ of ignorance, even in like sort do I not exempt clearly from
malice those which offend more of ignorance tha^ of malice.


M. Thou meanest then that both sorts have both ignorance and malice in them,
and that there is no difference between them, but only in the muchnesse or
litlenesse of the ignorance and malice of either sort.


P. Thou moughtest well understand it by that which I have said: And therefore
we say, that they which offend more of ignorance than of malice, Romans 10. ^
offend by zeal without knowledge, and the others which fight against the
knowledge which they have, do sin and fight more openly against their own
conscience, and in very deed oftentimes go so far, that they sin against the
holy Ghost, Matthew. 12. ^
the which as Jesus Christ wilnesseth, shall never be pardoned of God, because
that he fights openly against the grace and the gifts of the holy Ghost,
without the which no man may ever obtain pardone.


M. I would gladly that thou did expound unto me some thing more
familiarly what this sin of the holy Ghost is: for there be very few that
are fully resolved therein.


P. I would show thee mine opinion, but the matter would be too long for this
present, wherefore let us follow our purpose which we have begone.


Of the comparison between those which offend of malice, and those which
offend through ignorance.
M. I Judge these last which offend of malice to be much worse than the first,
and further off from the kingdom of God.


P. Thou iudgest right well: For there is yet better seed of Religion and
greater testimony of the fear of God, and of love toward him, in those which
sin of ignorance and through zeal, without knowledge, than in them which sin
as of purpose determined, and against their own conscience, which testifies
unto them of the good which they will not follow, and condemns the evil which
they do.


M. It seems to me also that they which offend more of malice than of
ignorance, be further of from the nature of God, and that they have more of the
nature of the devil than the others.


P. It is even so: for the devil has much more malice than ignorance.


M. I think in deed that he does not often offend of ignorance, but only of
malice that is in him.


P. And therefore I said heretofore that there was nothing wherein man did
more resemble God, and wherein he did better express his image, than in
goodness. For it is a virtue the which God does never communicate but to his
elect.


Of the difference which God uses in the dispensation of his gifts between the
elect and the reprobates and how the wicked corrupt and abuse the gifts of God.
M. ANd does he communicate his other virtues to the reprobates?


P. To speak proprely, God does not communicate his virtues to the wicked and
to the reprobate: For albeit he bestowed upon them of his gifts and of his
graces, yet are they not virtues in their person, as they be in God and in his
elect.


M. Why so?


P. Because they do abuse and pervert them as does the devil, in such sort
that whereas they should serve to the honor of God, it is no thank to the^ that
they dishonor him not by them: And on the other side, because they do so foul
the^, not reporting the^ to the glory of god as they ought to do, but do
clean contrary, they do infect and enpoyson them, as much as in them is, by
the venim which the devil has put into their hearts and understandings, in
such sort that they be in them, so far as concerns their person, as a
meat, which of his nature being good, might be corrupted by poison.


M. Declare this to me some thing more easily, and give me some examples.


P. We consider in God chiefly his power, his wisdom, and his goodness,
which are three excellent virtues, to the which all the others may be
referred. Now if his goodness were not joined with his power, and his
wisdom, his power should be tyranny, and his wisdom cautele and craft, as
it is in the devil. But the goodness that is in him, is the cause that he
never abuses his power and his wisdom, but makes it always to serve his
justice and clemency, his mercy and charity, and all his other like virtues
which proceed al from that infinite goodness which is in him, which is the
fountain, and which is goodness it self.


M. Will thou say by this that God does communicate of his power, of his
knowledge, and of his wisdom to the wicked and reprobates?


P. I say more than that, for I say he communicates of it over to the very
deuilis: but not of his goodness nor the true virtues which proceed of the
same.


M. How understand thou it?


P. We cannot deny but that the devils he marvelous strong and mighty, and
much wiser than are all men. No more may we in like sort deny but that they
have received this power, knowledge and understanding of God, wherefore we may
call them mighty, and wise in the sense that men take these names.


M. It seems to me that we may say the like of Tyrants and of many other
men, of whom the one sort are mighty and strong, and the others skillful,
wise and grave according to the world: and an other sort have both these
qualities together, and yet for all that they be not honest and virtuous men,
but vicious and wicked.


P. It is because they do abuse these gifts of God, and therefore their power
is violence and tyranny, and their wisdom and understanding cautele and
malice. For the true power and wisdom may never be separate from goodness
and other virtues.


What cause men have to glory of the gifts of God, and of what quality, and
which be those men that ought to be most esteemed.
M. I See now well that men have no great occasion to glory in the gifts of
God which they have received, if they have not received those same, whereby
they may be made the children of God, and made like to him, in goodness,
justice and holiness, and by whose means they are fashioned and framed to
make all the others to serve to his glory, who has given them unto them,
considering that they serve them not but to greater condemnation, if that they
have not those which are the principal.


P. There is yet this more, that without these gifts whereof thou speak,
the most excellent and most of estimation in the world may not greatly glory
in any thing whatsoever, wherein the devil has not more just occasion to
glory than they, yea verily, if they should prophecy or should do miracles.


M. And yet me^ do much more esteem those same gifts, and power, knowledge,
wisdom, eloquence and such like gifts, than they do goodness, justice,
holiness, innocence, and such other virtues which follow and accompany
them. For if a man be but an honest and virtuous man, not having those other
gifts which are of more great show before men, and which men have in greater
admiration, he shall not be esteemed, but shall be contemned as a poor vile
and abiecte man. On the contrary if a man have these other gifts, although
he be otherwise vyciouse and wicked, yet shall he be evermore esteemed and
advanced among men.


Peter. I confess that which thou say. And so by the same very mean the
Devil might be preferred unto the honestest manne of the world. For as I
have already said, he is more excellent than any man in all those things
whereof the most brave and most excellent of the world may glory and vaunte
them.


M. I see well they do greatly deceive themselves therein, and that an honest
man, which has the true fear of God and lives holy, is much more to be
esteemed, than al ye most mighty, skillful, wise, experimented and discreet,
and all the most excellent that a man might find in all things, if ye fear
of God, goodness, justice and holiness be wanting.


P. Thou concludest very well. And therefore Jesus Christ said to his Apostles,
which did glory because the devils were subject to them, by mean of ye gift
of miracle which was given to them: Rejoice not, Luke. 10. d
said he, in that that, the spirits are subject to you, but rejoice in that
that your names are written in Heaven.


M. What means he thereby?


Pe. That they should much more esteem the favor which God had showed unto
them in that that he had chosen them to be his children and heirs, John. 17.
b.
and that he had made them partakers of the gifts, by mean whereof they have
obtained such a benefit, than in that that he gave them the gift of miracles,
yea indeed, than in that that he made them Apostles. For Judas was chosen an
Apostle, and had the gift of prophecy and of miracles, as we have already
said, but for that he was not of the true chosen which were chosen to be the
children of God, the gifts which he had received of him served him not but only
to more greiuous condemnation. And therefore Jesus Christ did call him Devil,
because he had not those other more excellent gifts of God, John. 6. g.
by which he moughte have been reformed to his Image as the other Apostles
were.


M. Thou touchest here things which do well deserve to be noted, to the end
that we please not our selves nor glory at all but in the grace that God does
show us in Jesus Christ.


Peter. For that cause Saint Paul does also witness, that if a man had the
gift of tongues in so great perfection that he could speak the very language
of Angels, 1. Cor. 13. a
and although he could by the gift of miracle remove mountains from one
place to an other, yet notwithstanding it should be nothing if he had not
charity, the which does testify, that there is true faith in the man that
has it, but also makes the man like unto God, 1. John. 4. b.
insomuch as Saint John says, he is charity it self.


The thirtenth Dialogue is of the Church, and of the ministry of the same.
MATTHEW. I Do now well understand the difference that thou put between
the gifts of the holy Ghost, and how much some are more excellent and more
necessary, and more to be desired than others: And therefore if thou have no
more to say at this present, neither concerning his person, ne yet his
gifts, it seems to me, that it shall be good that we speak now of the
Church, whereof we have not yet spoken.


Peter. It is one of the chief points, which we have yet to handle. For the
Church is the same wherein God does open all the treasures of his graces and
gifts, whereof we have even now spoken, and for whose sake he gives them, to
whom he gives them.


Matthew. Show me then what the Church is.


Peter. If we take the name of the Church in general, it signifies
assembly or company, John. 17. ^. Ephesians. 5. ^.
but when we speak of the Church of God, we take it not only for an assembly
and company of all sorts of people, but for a company and assembly of men,
the which GOD has chosen from others, and has consecrated and sanctified
them unto himself in his Son Jesus Christ by his holy Spirit.


Mathevve. Is that the cause why she is called holy?


Peter. Yea, and why she is also called the Communyon and Communaltye of
Saints. Ephesians. 2. b. d. 5. c. Collos. 2. d. 1. Cor. 6. e. 12. d.
For there is none other communaltie or company which is holy, and is
governed and guyded by the Hollye Ghost, but only this, which does
acknowledge Jesus Christ for her only Head, King, John. 9. f. John. 17. c
Romans 1. a. 1. Cor. 2. a. 2. Cor. 1. a. Ephesians. 1. a. 2. a
Savior and redeemer.


M. Which be those Saints whereof she is called the communion?


P. They be all the true faithful which by faith are made members of Jesus
Christ which is the holy one of holy ones, the which has given his holy
spirit to his Church to sanctify it. And therefore Saint Paul does call
all Christians Saints.


Of the sanctifieng of the Church, and of the members of the same.
M. Ephesians. 2. d. 4. b. c. d. 2. Cor. 1. d. Romans 6. b. 8. b
BY what mean is it that God does sanctify his Church to himself by his
holy Spirit?


P. By faith in his Son Jesus Christ, by the which she is united and joined
to him as is the body to his head. Wherefore she is also a partaker of the same
very soul which is in the head, the which gives it corporal life. For the
head lives not by one soul, and the rest of the body by an other, but do live
both by one very soul, forsomuche as the head and all the members of the body
are but one body and not sundry.


Mathevve. Seeing it is so, none may then be of that holy company and
assembly but those which have true faith in Jesus Christ, and which for
that cause are called faithful.


Peter. It is easy to understand.


M. Seeing that they have faith, they are all then also made partakers of the
gifts of the holy Ghost, the which thou have said are proper to the only
elect of God, and without the which men may not be accounted for gods
children, and be heirs of the heavenly glory.


Pe. Thou may thereof judge by that which we have already heretofore said
to this purpose: and by consequent thou may also judge what is the estate of
such, which by their incredulity are without, and shut from that holy
assembly and company.


Of the ministry of the Church, and of the gifts necessary to the same.
M ANd which is the mean to attain to that faith, by which the faithful are
received into that holy company, and be in the same incorporate into the body
of Jesus Christ, as me^bres of him? Romans 10. c. d



P. It is by the ministry of the word of God, according to the saying of
Saint Paul, that faith is given by the hearing of the same.


M. Is that the cause why the same Apostle said, that God has given to his
Church, Ephesians. 4. b
some Apostles, some Prophets, others Evangelists, and others pastors and
Doctors, for the establishment of the Saints to the work of administration
for the buylding up of the body of Christ, unto the time that we come all
into the unity of the faith and knowledge of the Son of God, to be a perfect
man, according to the measure of the full age of Christ?


P. Beside that which thou say, thou have yet to note, that S. Paul
means not by these words, that Christ gives only men to his Church, which
may have these offices, but also that he gives them gifts meet for them,
whereby they may well exercise them.


M. Seeing it is so, these guiftes of the holy Ghost which thou have said,
that God did distribute, not only to the faithful, but also oftentimes to the
unfaithful, are necessary for his Church.


Peter. There be of them that are so necessary unto it, that the Church can
not be a Church without them, and therefore they be ever in her. But there be
others without the which she may better be: And therefore god has not given
unto them her but for a certain time.


How that the gift of preaching is at all times necessary in the Church,
and of the ordinary ministry of the same.
M. DEclare to me more familiarly by examples thy meaning.


Pe. Seeing that the Church can not be a Church but by the mean of Faith in
Jesus Christ, and that the mean whereby the faithful which are the members
of the same, are called to the faith, Romans 10. c. d
is the preaching and hearing of the word of God, it follows well, that
necessarily, this word be ever there taught, and that the Church be first
assembled together, and afterward augme^ted, entertained, and conserved by ye
same.


M. I do so understand it well.


P. Now this word cannot be there set forth and entertained but only yt there be
me^ which have this gift of the holy Ghost to know how to set it forth in such
sort as it is meet, as true prophets and ministers of god as the Lord has
also promised unto it, when he said by Moses, and after by Esaias, that he would
give to his people, a prophet, in whose mouth he would put his word, and that
it should never depart from the mouth of the seed of his people, and that his
spirit also should never be separate from it.


M. I think that that prophecy which thou have now alleged of Moses ought
to be proprely understood of Jesus Christ.


P. Saint Peter and S. Steven do also apply it to his person, Act. 3. d. 7. ^
as to the head and prince of all prophets and ministers, which gives power
to the ministry of all others. But that exposition which is very certain and
very well applied, does not let at al, but that this passage of Moses may be
taken for the ordinary ministry which God has established in his Church, as
the circumsta^ce of the place does sufficiently declare it, the which
ministry has ever ben founded in Jesus Christ, which is the foundation of
the prophets and Apostles.


M. Do thou understand then by this gift whereof thou have now spoken, the
gift of prophecy?


P. We do commonly call it by that name, following the manner of speech which
S. Paul has used to that purpose in the first epistle to ye Corinths. 1. Cor.
12. b 14. a.g
For albeit that all the ministers of the word of God have not all the gifts
which the ancient Prophets had, which are specially called by that name, yet
notwithstanding they are called Prophets in all ye holy Scriptures, in as much
as they be the mouth of the holy Ghost, as were the ancient prophets, by whom
God spoke to his Church, and does set forth to her the same doctrine, which
he has heretofore declared unto her by his aunciente prophets.


M. We may then say the same of the name of Apostle and Evangelist, and of al
other such like names and offices which appertain to the ministry of the
Church.


P. It is true: For albeit that the name of apostle and Evangelist do import
more tha^ the name and office of a simple pastor and minister of the gospel,
yet for all that none may be a pastor and minister of the Gospel, unless he
be also as an Apostle and an Evangelist, in respect of the doctrine which he
bears, for the very same reason for which he may also be called prophet, as
I have even now expounded.


How that the ministry of the word of God is perpetually necessary to the
Church in this world.
M. I Do now well understand the cause not only wherefore this gift of
prophecy is necessary to the Church, but also for what cause it is necessary
that it be perpetual in it.


P. Seeing that the perpetual ministry of the word of God is necessary,
this gift of prophecy is also necessary, forsomuche as without the same this
ministry can not subsiste and stand, nor be ministry of the Church of
Christ.


M. It then follows, that even as this ministry can not be without this gift
of preaching, even so the Church can not be the Church of Christ without this
ministry, no more than it may be without faith, the which she can not
obtain but by the mean of the word of God, set forth by this ministry.


P. God may well inspire his faith to his chosen by other means if it please
him: but seeing he has ordained this, he does it not ordinarily by any other,
neither is it lawful for us to seek for any other, but must hold us to this
same whereunto God has bounds us, notwithstanding that it stands always in
his liberty, to communicate his gifts and graces as pleases him.


Of other gifts of God which are not so necessary for the Church as the gift
of preaching.
M. I Do now well understand this point, but thou haste not yet given me example
of the other guiftes of the Holy Ghost, the which be not so necessary for
the Church as is the gift of preaching: And therefore also they be not
perpetual in her.


P. Thou have among others, the gift of tongs, and the gift of miracles and
such like, the which God gave to his Church but for a certain time, and to
certain persons, as he may yet give them when it shall please him. And when
he has given them, he has yet done the same, to the end that his gifts
should serve to the ministry of his word, to the end it should be the better
received, 1. Cor. 14. g
and that the infidels should be the more mightily vanquished, and the most
weak ones ye better fortified.


M. I do well understand it so. ^. Cor. 14. g



P. And therefore Saint Paul speaking of these gifts, exhorts the faithful
to endeavor themselves, and to travail rather for the gift of prophecy,
which comprehends the true understanding of the Scriptures, as more
profitable and more necessary to the Church, than the others, whereof we have
even now spoken.


How the Lord takes the ministers of his Church of his very people, and
not of a strange people.
M. WHen thou did allege the promise which god has made to his Church of
the perpetual gift of preaching, and of the ordinary mynisterie which it
pleased him to appointe in the same, it seems to me that thou saydst that he
has promised to put his word into the mouth of the very seed of the
Church: Esaias. 59. d
by the which seed, I understand the children and the members of the same, and
of the people of God.


P. Thou take it very well, and therefore the Lord has plainly said by
Moses, Deuteronomy. 18. d
that he will raise up out of the midst of his people, those Prophets the
which he will give unto her, to teach her, to the end that they shall not go
forth of his Church to seek them. How agrees this then with that which
thou have heretofore said, that the gift of prophecy and such like, were as
well communicate to infidells and reprobates, as thou have very well proved by
testimonies and examples of the holy Scriptures?


P. That makes not at all against that which I have now said. For albeit that
God at times does bestow of his gifts upon the unfaithful, the which in
deed he does not bestow upon every faithful man, yet for all that it
follows not but that he does continually chose some in his Church, to whom
he gives this gift and this office, albeit he does it not ever after one
sort. For he sends either more or few, according as it is needful, and
according to the favor that he will show unto it, be it secretly or publicly
accordingly as he will make himself known to his.


M. But can it not well come to pass also that very those which are chosen in
his Church, may be Hypocrites and rather woolues and hierlings tha^ good
pastors?


P. That comes often times to pass, and the example which thou have in
Judas, does confirm sufficiently unto us that which thou say, if in deed
we had none other. But when the Church knows them to be such, she should
provide for: it by the means that God has given her in that behalf.


M. And if they be only mercenaries, and not apperante wolves, may she endure
them?


P. If they be wolves, she cannot endure them, for so much as they be of false
doctrine. If they be only mercenaries, and if she cannot easily know them, or
that she have not the means to rid her from them and to have better, she may
bear with the^, provided that ye doctrine which they set forth be not false,
albeit that in the rest they do not discharge the office of a pastor as they
ought to do.


The fourthtenth Dialogue is of the preaching of the Gospel.
Of the principal parts of the ministry of the Church.
MATTHEW. Now seeing that wear come unto the mynisterie of the Church,
declare unto me what it conteyneth in effect.


P. We may divide it into three principal parts.


M. Which be they?


P. The administration of the word and Sacraments, and of the ecclesiastical
discipline.


Of the administration of the word, and of the principal points that therein
are to be considered.
M. WHat have we to consider upon the administration of the word?


P. There be chiefly two points.


Math. Which is the first?


P. That it be purely set forth as God has revealed it unto us in his holy
scriptures.


Matthew. Which is the second?


P. That it be set forth in that order which the Lord has ordained that it
should be, and to the edifieng of all men.


Of the points that are required to set forth purely the word of God.
M. WHich points be they that are required in the pure setting forth of the
word of God, in such sort as thou say it ought to be set forth?


P. They may be all comprehended in two.


M. Which is the first?


P. It is that none set forth any other doctrine, than that which is contained
in the holy Scriptures, and that is fully agreeable to the same, without adding
any thing to it, or diminishing any thing from it, and without mingling with it
of any thing of the doctrines and traditions of men.


M. Which is the second?


P. It is not enough to set forth that word, accordingly as it is contained
in the holy scriptures, no in deed although men use none other words than those
very same which the holy Ghost has used in them, if the word be not
forthwith set forth according to the meaning of the spirit of God, by the
which the same has been reveled in such sort, as all the passages and
testimonies of the same do agree so well together, that there is no
co^tradiction, but that the one passage is an exposition to the other.


M. Thou touchest here two points which are well worth the noting. For there be
some that in steed of the word of God do set forth whatsoever comes in
their mind, and pleases them. There be others, that although they set forth
the very testimonies of the holy Scriptures, yet for all that they corrupt the
sense of them by their false understanding and exposition, and by the
application which they use, Matthew. 4. a. Luke. 4. b.
and co^sequences which they draw.


P. The Devil has also alleged the expressed word of God when he tempted
Jesus Christ, but that is not to allege the word of God, but it is to abuse
the language of the holy Ghost, to corrupt and peruerte it, and to cover lies
with truth, as charmers and enchaunters do make the words of holy scriptures
to serve to their sorceries and charms.


Of the principal points of Gods word, which ought to be set forth by the
preaching of the same, and what order there ought to be observed in setting of
it forth.
M. I Understand well that the word of God may not properly be called the word
of God, if it be not purely set forth as God has revealed it, and according
to the true meaning of the holy Ghost, by whom he has revealed it. But I
would gladly that thou did touch in brief the principal points which are
contained in that word, and in what order it ought to be set forth and
taught.


P. As touching the principal points of the same we have already handled the
greatest part. Summarie of the Gospel.
Thou shalt hear afterward the rest which we have yet to handle. But seeing
thou desire as it were a summarie: Jesus Christ has comprehended all the
preaching of the Gospel in two principal points, when he commanded his
Apostles to preach in his name repentance and forgiveness of sins to al
people. Luke. 24. g



M. Following then the division which Jesus Christ has made of the doctrine
which ought to be preached by the Gospel, it then should follow that we
must begin by the preaching of repentance, and the^ to come to the remission
of sins.


Peter. Seeing that Jesus Christ himself has showed that we must keep that
order there can be no better had.


Of repentance by the which the preaching of the Gospel must be begone.
M. Show me now what repentance is properly.


P. It is a very displeasure which man has in his heart of his sin, the
which engenders in him an hatred against sin, and a desire to live better
in time to come, refourming his life to the will of God.


M. Seeing it is so, man may not then have true repentance, if he know not
first his sin, and how much it displeases God, and in like sort do
change his manner of life, to wit from evil to good, and from good to
better.


P. It is easy to understand.


How that true repentance cannot be well preached without joining of the
doctrine of the law and the Gospel together.
M. ANd by what mean may a man come to this knowledge of his sin?


P. By the law of god, Romans 3. a. 4. c.
ye which does not only make them manifest to me^, but does also show unto
them the wrath of God against them.


M. There is then no minister that may well preach repentance. without
preaching the law of God.


P. It cannot otherwise be done. But it is not enough to preach the doctrine of
the law if that of the Gospel be not forthwith joined unto it.


M. For what cause?


P. For that that the law settethe forth but the wrath of God against
sinners, the should bring men rather to despair than to true repentance, if
there were no promise by the Gospel, of the grace and mercy of God which is
offered to them in Jesus Christ, to obtayn remission of their sins in him,
and by him.


M. Give me an example of that which thou say.


P. We have one very evident in Judas and S. Peter.


M. Math. 26. g. Luke. 22. g. Matthew. 27. a
It seems to me that it is written in the Gospel, not only that S. Peter did
repent, that he had denied Jesus Christ, but also Judas, that he did betray
him. And that notwithstanding the repentance of Judas let him not from
desperacion, the which thing happened not to S. Peter, but wholly the
contrary.


Peter. That happened to Judas for the cause that I have already cited, to
wit, for that he laid houlde only upon the Judgment of God set forth in
his law, without laying hold upon the grace and mercy of God set forth in
his Gospel to all repentants and faithful, as S. Peter did apprehend it, after
that he had renou^ced Jesus Christ.


How that true repentance can not be without faith.
M. IT follows then that true repentance can not be without true faith.


P. It is very certain, that if a man have not true faith in the word of God,
for the first he shall make none account of the law, ne yet of all the
threatenings of his judgment contained in the same, but shall mock at it only
as do the Atheists, and all men which are without God, without law, and
without faith, do scoff at all the holy Scriptures.


M. If they have no faith in the word of God concerning his law, there is no
appearance that they have any more concerning the Gospel, and the grace and
mercy of God promised in the same.


P. That notwithstanding, this faith in the Gospel is the principal point
that is required in true repentance. For albeit that a man have faith, in all
that which the law declares, so it is that this faith can not let him to
despair as Judas did, if he pass not further to the Gospel, but such a
faith shall cause him to despair the more.


M. How may that be?


P. For So Much as such a faith is not full, in as much as she leaves the
principal whereupon the true faith is founded, to wit, the promises of the
grace of GOD in Jesus Christ.


Of the true and false faith and repentance.
M. WHat do thou then proprely call true faith?


P. A certain assurance founded in the promises of god by the which man
holds himself assured of God in Jesus Christ and by Jesus Christ.


M. Why say thou that the faith which has not this assurance, leads the
man which regards but only the law, rather to despair than to hope of
salvation?


P. For because that so much the more man is assured, that God is author of his
law, and that that which it conteyneth, is true, even so much the more is he
afraid of the judgment of God, and can not find rest in his conscience,
because there is nothing without Jesus Christ, wherein to be assured against
the wrath of God.


M. There is then by this reckening two sorts of penitence, to wit, one true
and an other false.


P. Even as also there be two sorts of faith, for even as they have not full
faith which believe not all the word of God, and chiefly the word of the
Gospel, even so have they no true repentance, which join not together the
wrath of GOD with his mercy, nor the mercy with the wrath.


M. Eue^ as it is not enough to apprehende the wrath of God without his mercy
to have true repentance, is it also no more sufficient to apprehende his mercy
without his wrath?


P. Thou may easily understand, that none may well apprehende his mercy, if
first he do not apprehende his wrath. For he that knows not the wrath of
God against sin, cannot tell nor understand how much he needs his
mercy, and what mercy he shows him, when he receives him to mercy.


Math. Thou say well.


Peter. Moreover, even as they fall to despair which conceive only the wrath
of God without his mercy, even so those which consider only his mercy,
without having first conceived what his wrath is, do not esteem sin to be
such as they ought to esteem it: and in like case can never understand what
mercy is, nor how great the goodness of God is toward them.


M. I note well al these points, that the very wicked and reprobate, may well
attain to such a Faith and repentance as was in Judas, but they have not at
all the true faith and repentance by the which the true children of God do
obtain forgiveness of their sins.


P. Thou must also note, that there be some which account the mercy of God
but of small price, because they do not apprehend at all the wrath and
judgment of God as they ought: And therefore the repentance of such persons
is none other than a very disguysing and faynednesse.


Of the forgiveness of sins, and of the assurance of the conscience by the
same.
M. THou will then say, that true repentance beats down the sinner in
himself by the feeling of his sins and of the wrath of God against them, and
then directs him to Jesus Christ, to assure his conscience so beaten down
against the fears of the judgment of God.


Pe. It is even so. But to assure it as thou say, we must come to the other
point, the which Jesus Christ has commanded to preach in his name with
true repentance, which is the remission of sins, the which proprely
belongs to the Gospel.


M. I do well understand that the sinner which feels himself faulty before
God by mean of his sins, is as a traitor and wicked doer, which can not be
well assured of the punishment that he has merited by mean of his faults
that he has committed, if first of al he be not assured to have his grace and
pardon of his prince and of his judge.


P. That same is also the cause why that after we have made mention of the
church, which is likewise called the communion of Saints, we do also confess
that we believe that the remission of sins is in her, by mean of the
communion that it has with Jesus Christ, of the which we have heretofore
sufficiently spoken.


Of the communion of saints, and how the church enters into the same by
mean of the ministry of the Gospel.
M. I Do well remember that when we speak of that communion, thou have set
me and put me again upon this point, to declare unto me the rest, the
which thou have not yet expounded unto me.


P. According to that which we have already said, the Church does not only
obtain this remission of sins, whereof we now speak, but also the victory
against sin, death, hell, and the Devil, and likewise eternal life, the
which Jesus Christ has won for it, because that she is the spouse of him,
and that she enters into communion of all his goods with him, by mean of
this spiritual marriage, by the which she is conjoined to him as a chaste
virgin by ye virtue of faith in him.


M. Seeing it is so, ye ministry of the gospel is then a mean by the which
this holy aliance of marriage is made, that is between Jesus Christ and his
church, for the which cause there is such communion between Jesus Christ the
husband and the Church his espouse.


P. Thou concludest very well. For the Lord uses ye same means in this
spiritual marriage, yt men have accustomed to use in their ordinary marriages.


M. Which be those means?


P. Thou do first well understand yt no marriage can be made except the
husband and the wife do give the faith of marriage ye one to the other, ye which
emporteth all that which belongs to true marriage.


M It must needs be so. For the true foundation of marriage lies in ye faith
which ye husband and the wife do give one to ye other. And therefore men say
that they which have so given their faith, are assured by promise.


P. Now thou say that ye husband and the wife cannot so give their faith the
one to the other, but that there is promise on both parts, the which cannot
be done but by words by the which the husband and the wife declare their
will and consent.


Mathevve. Albeit that the promise be sufficient for ye assurance and
confirmation of the marriage, notwithstanding, the custom is yet that the
husband gives ordinarilye to his wife some gift, for more assurance and
confirmation of their marriage, and also of the mutual obligation that they
have made the one to the other.


P. Even the like is done by the ministry of the Gospel between Jesus
Christ and his Church. For there is the promise which Jesus Christ made unto
her: and then that is there also: whereby the Church accepts that promise of
her husband, and by the which she gives her self to him, even as he has
given himself to her: And then the sacraments are as rings and jewels and such
other gifts, which the husbands are accustomed to give to their wives for the
more confirmation and approving of their marriage.


M. Seeing then that it is so, the ministers of the Church are in manner like,
touching the spiritual marriage, to those which make the assurance between the
husband and the wife, and do declare unto them the promises, by the which they
ought to bynd themselves the one to the other, and giving them to drink or
some other such like token in the name of marriage.


P. Thou do not take it amiss, and therefore Saint John which was sent by
God to bring to Jesus Christ by the mean of his ministry, the Church his
espouse, is called the friend of ye bridegroom. John. 3. d. 1. Cor. 11. a.
And Saint Paul has written to the Corinthes to the same effect: I am
jealous of you, with a godly iealousye, for I have joined you to an husband, to
present you a chaste virgin to Christ.


By what mean men attain to eternal life, and of the benefits comprehended
in the communion of Saints.
M. Seeing that the communion of saints comprehends al those good things
whereof thou have even now made mention, is that also the cause why that after
the remission of sins, we confess in like sort the resurrection of the
flesh, and the life eternal?


P. It is even so. For to attain to that felicity, which is our full
consolation, God does grant us the forgiveness of our sins, without the
which we cannot attain to that happy life.


M. Seeing then that this communion of saints with Jesus Christ, ye which is
his church, brings with it so great good things, which are the greatest
that man may wish and obtain, surely they are the^ very happy which are
comprehended in the same, and they very unhappy which are shut from it.


Pet. Every man may well know that. For seeing that the Church is the
kingdom of God whereof Christ is the chief king, there is no doubt, but
that all those which are strangers and shut out of the Church, be also shut
out and banished from ye company of Jesus Christ, which is the chief and
king thereof, and so consequently of the happy and eternal life.


M. Who is the cause thereof?


P. It is for so much as if there be no man that may enter into this communion,
but by the mean of Jesus Christ, even so Jesus Christ cannot be united to any
man, which is not a member of his Church, no more than a head may be united
to another body than his own, and his members, and cannot be separated, but
all the body dies.


Of the excellency of the ministry, and of the other two parts of the same.
M. Seeing the^ that the ministry of the word of God is unto us as a way to
bring us to true repentance and to true faith, to the end that afterward we
may come even to Jesus Christ, and the communion of all his riches, me thinks
we ought to have that ministry in great reverence and in great price. Esaias.
52. b. Romans 10. e.



P. Esaias does very well set it forth, when he says that the feet of those
are fair which declare peace, and the good things which he does and will
bestow upon his Church.


M. Thou have hitherunto spoken of the administration of the word, the which is
administered by this ministry, but thou have yet said nothing of the
administration of the sacraments, nor yet of the discipline of the Church,
which are the two other parts of the ministry, whereof thou have made
mention.


P. Al these two administratio^s depend of ye first. For ye Sacraments are as
dependances of the preaching of the word of God.


M. And what is the discipline?


P. It concerns the order and gouernemente of the Church, which has
respect to the good provision for the same according to that word, to the
end that all be done in it by so good order, that the word of God and the
Sacraments be so administered, received, and honored as is meet, and that all
that which might hinder the true service of God, and the edificatio^ of the
Church, be there taken away.


The fiftenth Dialogue is of the sacraments of baptism, and of the Lords
Supper.
Of the Sacraments and of the number of them.
MATTHEW. Romans 4. b,
Seeing that we are come upon the matter of Sacraments, show me now for ye
first, what thou meanest by Sacrament.


P. A visible sign ordained of Jesus Christ as a seal, to confirm us the
better in the says of the promises, the which god has made us, of our
salvation in him.


M. How many Sacraments has he ordained?


P. There are but two which may be called properly by that name, and that may
be accoumpted for common Sacraments, generally of the whole Church, as the
true nature of the Sacraments of the same requires.


M. Which be these two sacraments?


P. That of baptism and the supper.


M. For what cause did Jesus Christ ordeyne neither more nor fewer?


P. Thou must understand that if Jesus Christ had ordained so many Sacraments
as we receive benefits and graces of him, to represente the same unto us by
them, their number should be infinite, and in that sort should he engender
confusion in men's understanding, which are rude and gross. And therefore he
was contented to ordeyne a small number, by the which it has pleased him to
represent unto us his principal benefits, under the which me^ may comprehend
and bring all the rest.


M. Seeing there is such danger in it as thou have said, could not he well
have comprehended in only Sacrament that which he has comprehended in two?


P. He could well have done it, if it had so pleased him. But as he would on
the one side provide for the rudeness of our understandings, in sparing them
in that that he would not lode them with great numbers of Sacraments, even so
would he succoure our infirmity by the small number which he has ordained
for us, to the end that we might more specially know in two Sacraments yt
which we could not so easily and so properly comprehend in one.


Of that which is general and common to all Sacraments.
M. Show me the^ which be those diverse benefits and the sacraments which
represent them.


P. For more plain understanding of that which thou demaundest, we have first
to consider that which is common and general to all the Sacraments: and then
we will come to that which is proper and special to every of them.


M. What is that then which they have common to them both?


P. There be chiefly three points.


M. Which is ye first?


P. It is that God on his part does declare and testify the good will which he
has toward his faithful, and the favor which he will show the^ in his son
Jesus Christ.


M. Which is the second?


P. It is the confession of faith and the homage which he also requires of
the faithful, by the which they confess and acknowledge him to be their God,
and Jesus Christ to be their true savior and redeemer, by this mean
declaring the faith that they have in his promises, as though they made a
solemn oath to Jesus Christ, as to their king and true Lord and savior.


M. Which is the third?


P. It is an advertisement which we have in all the sacraments of the duty of
Christians, and of the life that they should lead, following the profession
which they make when they do receive the^.


M. Declare unto me now by examples all these points, and the^ show me
forthwith what it is of every sacrame^te in his particular, and what every one
of them has proper and special.


P. For the first, seeing that all the Sacraments do send us to Jesus Christ
and to his death, they are witnesses and seals of the forgiveness of our
sins and of the agreement and communion which we have with god by Jesus Christ.


M. They serve us then as an acquittance of that whereunto we are bound at the
judgment of God, and as a letter of favor authorized, and well signed and
sealed with ye seal of ye sovereign prince.


P. It is even so. And as God on his part does assure us of his pardon and of
our salvation, we also on our part do owe unto him that honor, that we hold
him true in his promises, and that we acknowledge him for our only God, and
Jesus Christ his son for our only savior: and that we renounce all other
gods and idols, and all false religions, and that we will follow none other
but his only, such as he has set forth unto us in his word.


Of Baptism, and of the signification of it.
M. Seeing that all Sacraments have that in common, declare to me now in
special what baptism is, and what is propre unto it, and wherein it differs
from the Supper?


Peter. Baptism is a Sacrament of repentance, in the which GOD does assure
us by his promise of our regeneration, which has the sign of the water as his
seal for the confirmation of the same.


Ma. I do not here ask thee what Regeneration is, because that thou have
sufficiently declared it heretofore: but I do ask thee if the Supper be not
also a Sacrament of repentance, and of our regeneration?


Pe. Thou haste here to consider, that forsomuche as this benefit of
regeneration the which we obtain by Jesus Christ, is one of the most
excellent favors that God shows us, it has pleased Jesus Christ to
declare the same unto us by certain signs, and by a special Sacrament among
others. For he comprehends also the benefit of justification and
sanctification, of which we have sufficiently and fully heretofore spoken.


Of the agreement and difference that is between baptism and the supper.
M. ANd what say thou of the supper?


Pet. Thou canste not well understand what the Supper is, if thou do not
first know what baptism is.


M. Have thou any thing then yet to say concerning baptism?


P. For so much as regeneration emporteth renewing of life, as if we were
borne again in the house of GOD, thou know well that a man must first be
borne, and then nourished after that he is borne.


M. Will thou then say that Baptism is to us a Sacrament of our new and
spiritual birthe, by the which we are borne again children of God in his
Church, and that the Supper is to us an other Sacrament of the spiritual
nouriture, which is necessary for us, to entertayne us in this new and
spiritual life, of the which baptism is to us a sacrament?


Pet. Thou haste herein to note, that God will first assure us, that he
accompteth us for his children, begotten by the incorruptible seed of his
word, in the virtue of the holy Ghost into his Church, which is the espouse
of his son Jesus Christ: and therefore he will witness unto us by this
Sacrament of Baptism that he receives us into his house, and does aduowe us
for his lawful children, which he has adopted to him self in his son
Jesus Christ, which he will as it were enroll in the book of his household,
as his true children and enheritours.


Of the propriety of the water of Baptism to represent the graces of god
which are communicated unto us by the same.
M. FOr somuche as it is so, 1. Cor. 5. b Heb. 9. d Apocal. 1. a Esaias. 12. b
Ezech. 34. c Zach. 13. a John. 3. a. 7. f 1. Cor. 15. e Ephe. 4. c. Colloss. 3.
b Romans 6. a
what propriety has the water to represent unto us all that thou say?


P. It has great propriety.


M. Which is the first?


P. For So Much as ye nature of it is to wash and to cleanse, it is very proper
to represente how we are washed and cleansed in the blood of Jesus Christ, and
by the water of life, which is the holy ghost wherewith we are watered and
washed by the virtue of the same: and therefore the holy Ghost is often
signified in the holy Scriptures by water.


M. Are there yet any other proprieties?


P. We can not understand our regeneration into a new creature to be made new
men, except we understand also the mortificatio^ of our old nature, which is
our old Adam, and our old man: And therefore S. Paul says: That by baptism we are dead and buried, and risen again with Jesus Christ.


M. Is the water propre to signify ye death and burial of the old man, and ye
resurrection and renewing of the new?


P. The water alone does not represe^t unto us only these things, but also the
manner in the which it is administered in baptism.


M. How may that be?


P. Thou see that commonly it is poured upon him that is baptized, in token
that our old Adam is drowned and dead in Jesus Christ, Exodus 14. f. g 1. Cor.
10. a
as the old Pharao and the Egyptians were drowned in the red sea. And
therefore Saint Paul compares baptism to the passage through the red sea.


M. And what signifies this that they do but pour this water upon him that
is baptized?


P. The same signifies unto us, how that of ye death of the old man the new
rises: as if our old Adam after that he were drowned were risen again a new
man, and that all his old filthiness were drowned by the water of grace in the
which he was plunged: which is the blood of Jesus Christ, the true washer of
regeneration.


M. I do now understand all this very well: but is there any other propriety
to consider touching the water?


P. If we should make comparion of all the other properties that it has with
the holy Ghost, which it does figure in Baptism, I could give thee many
others, from which I do abstain at this present, seeing that that which I have
said, may suffice thee for the understanding of the matter of Baptism.


Of the admonition and figure that the faithful have of a Christian life in
Baptism.
M. Have thou yet any thing to say touching this Sacrament?


P. I have now to show thee what pattern and example we have there of a
Christian life, and of the duty of a Christian, and of true repentance, which
ought to be in him all the time of his life.


M. Expound all these to me.


P. Seeing that baptism is to us ye Sacrament of regeneration of penance and
of mortification, we are admonished by the same of the perpetual penance that
ought to be in us, Tite. 3. b Luke 3. c Colloss. 3. a Romans 6. d
and of the mortification where by we ought to mortify our earthly members, to
the end that we being dead to sin, may live to God in justice.


Of the Supper, and why Jesus Christ did ordain two signs for the same.
M. Matthew 26. c Mark. 14. c Luke. 22. b 1. Cor. 11. c. f.
IT seems to me now that I do sufficiently understand that matter of
Baptism, and therefore let us proceed to the Supper.


P. The Supper is a Sacrament in the which Jesus Christ represents to us by
the sign of bread and wine, how he has given his body and his blood to the
death, that having reconciled us unto God, he moughte be our spiritual
nouriture, and might confirm us in the faith of the promise which he had
made unto us.


M. For what cause has he represented his body and blood by the bread and by
the wine?


P. To signify unto us, that even as bread and wine are given to us by God
for our corporal nouriture, even so the body and blood of Jesus Christ is
given unto us for spiritual food.


M. And for what cause did Jesus Christ ordeyne two signs in the supper, and
but one in baptism? Might not the bread or the wine only have been sufficient
to represent this spiritual life, without adding both of them?


P. As he has ordained the sign of ye water which is very meet to
represente that which in Baptism he would represent unto us, even so he has
chosen for the Supper those signs that were most meet to signify that which
he would have signified in the same.


M. I doubt not at all of that.


P. And therefore albeit that by one only sign as in Baptism he could have
done all that which has pleased him to do by two, yet he would give two for
the better expressing of that which it pleased him to give.


Of that which is special in the Supper, wherein it differs from baptism,
and how that all that is very well represented in the bread and the wine.
M. DEclare unto me then the properties which the bread and wine have
agreeable to the things, the which they represent in the supper.


P. For the first, thou must note and remember that which I have already
touched, that the supper has this proper unto it, yt even as baptism is to
us a testimony of our spiritual birth and life, which we obtayn by Jesus
Christ, even so is the supper a sacrament and testimony, how that God will
continue in us that benefit whereof baptism is to us a Sacrament, and will
nourishe and entertayne us in the same spiritual life, the which he signifies
unto us therein, unto the time that we have the full enjoying in heaven with
Jesus Christ.


M. I think than that to be the cause why Jesus Christ would signify those
things to us by the eating and drinking, and by those things which are propre
to nouriture.


P. It is even so: and for somuche as man can not live by meat only or drink
only, except he have them both together, no more is Jesus Christ contented to
ordeyne only the bread, or only the wine, for signs of the spiritual
nouriture, which we have in his Supper, but would ordeine those two, to give
us to understand, that even as he which has meat and drink, has his whole
nouriture, even so the faithefull have in Jesus Christ fully all that which is
necessary for the spiritual life.


M. Is there yet none other reason why Jesus Christ did ordeyn those two signs?


M. Yes, for Jesus Christ has also by these two signs better expressed,
how that he has given his body and his life to the death for us, tha^ if he
had ordained but one only, in so much as he has given one particular sign to
signify his body and an other to signifye his blood.


M. What further signification has it?


P. To set the better before our eyes, how that he is in deed dead for us,
John. 3. b. Romans 5. a. b.
in so much as his blood was separated from his body, and consequentlye his
life, and that he has so loved us that he has not spared it for us.


How we must eat the body and flesh of Jesus Christ, and drink his blood in
the Supper.
M. But seeing that the bread represents unto us in the Supper ye flesh and
body of Jesus Christ, which is there given us for meat, and that the wine
represents the blood which is there given us for drink, must we there also
eat the body of Jesus Christ and drink his blood, in the same sort as we
eat the bread and drink the wine which represent them unto us?


P. If there were none other reason, but that which may be gathered of that
which I have eue^ now spoken, it might suffice us to discharge our heads of
all such imaginations.


M. I do not well understand yet what thou meanest herein.


P. Seeing that Jesus Christ has ordained one several sign to signify his
body, and an other several sign to signify his blood, and that it has
pleased him so to discern them the one from the other, ye better to represent
to us how his blood was separated from his body for us, in such sort as his
life and soul was separated likewise, it should also follow, that his body
must be eaten a part, as we there eat the bread, and there drink the blood a
part as we there drink ye wine.


M. If it were so, we should not have in the Supper the living body of Christ,
but dead and other tha^ he is reigning in heaven, where his blood is not
separated from his body.


P. Thou say truth. But thou have yet to note, that if the body and blood of
Jesus Christ were given us to nourish and mainteyne us in this corporal life,
as is bread and wine, we should then also eat the body and drink the blood
of Christ corporally, as we do eat and drink the corporal bread and wine.
But forsomuche as they are given us for spiritual nouriture, we must eat and
drink them spiritually.


M. What do thou call to eat and drink spiritually?


Peter. To speak properly, to eat and drink is understood of the body and
of the bodily meat and drink, but when we speak of spiritual things, we
take those words for a figure, by the which we declare the spiritual things
by the bodily things, because of the similitude and agremente that they have
together.


M. Why is that done?


P. To the end that by the similitude and comparison of corporal things, we
moughte the better understand the spiritual things.


Of the true spiritual eating and drinking.
M. DEclare this to me yet somewhat more plainly.


Peter. Thou may well understand that the soul and the Spirit do neither
eat nor drink corporally and materially as does the body.


Mathevve. I do well understand at the least, that they have neither mouth,
nor teeth, nor stomachs, nor bellies corporal whereby they may do ye same.


P. And therefore it must needs be that if the soul and the spirit do eat
and drink, they eat and drink in an other sort than does the body, the
which is proper and agreeable to their nature.


M. There is reason in that which thou say.


P. And on the other side thou may well know also, that the flesh of Jesus
Christ is neither eaten nor chawed, neither is swalowed down into the stomach
and belly, neither is it digested, as is the corporal and material meat.


M. For what cause is it then that Jesus Christ has used that manner of
speech, saying, he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, John. 6. f.
has eternal life?


P. It is to give us the better to understand the communion and conjunction
which we have with him, and how that his flesh and his blood do the very same
toward the soul, and also toward the body touching the spiritual life, being
received with a true and living faith, as do the bread and wine toward ye body
touching the bodily life, when they are bodily eaten and dronken.


The sixtenth Dialogue is of the transubsta^tiation and co^substantiation, and
of the true presence of Jesus Christ in the Supper.
Of the error of transubstantiation, and how the Supper cannot be a
Sacrament, if the bread and the wine do not there remain in their proper
substance.
MATTHEW. HOw is it that men do eat the flesh of Jesus Christ, and do drink
his blood, as thou have even now said? It is to be understood that the
bread and the wine be transubstantiate and converted into them, or else that
they be joined and united with the bread and the wine.


P. For the first, there is no reason either to think or say, that the
bread and the wine be converted or changed into the body and blood of Jesus
Christ.


M. For what cause.


P. Because that if the bread and the wine did not remain still in the supper,
bread and wine, in their proper substance, they should not be the signs of
the body and of the blood of Jesus Christ, but if they were converted into the
same, they should be the self same thing, the which they ought to signify
and represente unto us.


M. What inconueniente should there be in that?


P. There should be this inconvenient in it, that the supper should be a
Sacrament without sign, and so should it have no Sacramental sign,
without the which the Sacraments may not be Sacraments.


Of things without the which the sacraments cannot be sacraments.
M. How understand thou that?


P. Thou must note that a Sacrament, cannot be a Sacrament except it have at
the least three things, which are of the proper substance of all Sacramens.


M. Which are these three things?


P. The first is the word of God, which is the foundation of all the
Sacraments.


M. And the second?


P. The visible and material signs such as God has ordained by that very
word.


M. And the third?


P. The things signified as well by that word as by the signs.


Of things which are to be considered in the word of God in all Sacraments,
and in the signification of the same.
M. DEclare unto me that which thou say by some similitude.


P. Seeing that we be upon the matter of the Supper, thou have first the
word of Jesus Christ, in the which thou have to note two points.


M. Which be they?


P. The first is the commandment which Jesus Christ there gives, to take and
to eat the bread, and to drink the wine, which are given in the same.


M. Which is ye second?


P. The promise, whereby he declares what it is that this bread and wine do
signify, and for what cause he has ordained and commanded to receive them,
and what fruit we must look for of them.


Math. Whereupon take thou this promise? Matthew. 26. e. Mark. 14. Luke. 22.
b. 1. Cor. 11. e. f.



Pe. Upon that which is said of the bread. This same is my body which is
broken for you: and in like sort upon that which is spoken of the wine. This
cup is my blood, or the new Testamente in my blood, which is shed for
you: do this in remembrance of me.


Math. Must we understand the like of all the other Sacraments, to wit,
that they have commandment and promise from God?


Peter. There is no doubt thereof.


Ma. What is there more yet to consider concerning the word of GOD?


P. There is nothing more to be considered concerning that same exterior
word, which is pronounced by the mouth of the mynisters.


Math. What rests there yet more?


Peter. That which is signified by the word, the which does also declare the
signification of the signs, how God does accomplish by effect that which is
signified as well by the word, as by the signs.


Of things to consider in the signs, and in the signification of them, in all
Sacraments.
M. WHat have thou yet to say of the signs, and of their signification?


Peter. Thou see how that Jesus Christ was not contented with the words only
in the Supper, but he added also thereunto the signs of the bread and of the
wine, as is that of the water in baptism.


M. I demand thee nothing of their signification. For thou have already
declared it unto me.


P. Thou have only to note that these signs are not true signs without the
things signified by them.


Whether Hipocrites and Infidells do as well communicate in the Supper, of
the things signified by the signs as they do of the signs.
M. IF it be so that ye signs be not vain neither in the supper nor yet in
the other Sacraments, without having with them the things which they signify,
it the^ follows that whosoever receives the signs receives also the things
signified by them, and by that mean the infidells which are hypocrites, do no
less part take of the whole Sacrament than do the faithful.


P. Thou concludest not well. For when I say that the signs are not in the
Sacraments, without the things by them signified, thou must understand that on
God his part, for he does not set forth his word and sacraments to men,
without presenting unto them also the things whereof he does admonish them by
the same.


Ma. How comes it then to pass, that all do not communicate alyke?


Pe. Because that all they to whom the gifts of God are offered, do not
receive them.


M. What is the cause that they do not receive them?


P. Because they bring not faith with them, without the which no man can
receive them.


M. Thou will then say, that they shut themselves from it by mean of their
unbelief, and that it is not sufficient that the gifts of God be presented
unto us by his word and his sacraments, if that forthwith they be not
received, and they can not be received but by mean of Faith, which the
infidels and hypocrites have not.


P. Thou ought here to understand that Jesus Christ may not be separated
from his sprite, seeing that it is so, as none can receive him but by his
spirit, even so can he not be received, except he forthwith give his holy
spirit with him, and do make partakers of all these guiftes and graces, all
those which receive him.


Mathevve. Thou haste here yielded a great reason.


Peter. If it were not so, there should be no difference between the faithful
and the infidel in the communion of GOD his Sacraments and guyftes.


M. Yet thou confessest that notwythstandyng, they may communicate of the
outward signs as well as the other, albeit they can not communicate of the
things signified by the signs.


Peter. They may there communicate well, forsomuche as no man may let them, so
long as they offer themselves as faithful, and that they be not discovered to
the Church for such as they be, in sort that they might be vanquished of
their unworthiness, to seclude them wholly. For if the things signified by the
Sacraments do not belong to them, no more also do belong the signs which
signify them.


Math. If they were then known of men to be such as they be before GOD, they
should be excommunicate, to the end they should not approach.


Peter. It is certain. And because that they are not known, if they were well
aduysed they would of them selves forbear, for so much as they can not
communicate of the very outward Sacraments, but to their condemnation, because
they are in no respect capable thereof, wherefore they do but dishonor God and
his Church, and provoke daily more and more the wrath of God upon them.


Wherefore are the bread and wine called by the name of the body and blood of
Jesus Christ, if they be not that body and blood.
M. I Am satisfied touching that point, but I have yet some difficulty
concerning that which thou have said, that the bread and the wine are not the
body and blood of Jesus Christ in the Supper: and yet it seems that Jesus
Christ says the contrary clean. For he calls them his body and his blood
by his own words which thou have eue^ now alleged.


P. But he means not thereby that the bread and wine are his body and blood
in proper substance, in such sort as their substance is converted into the
substance of his body and blood.


M. For what cause then uses he that manner of speech, and has not rather
used some other more plain?


P. There are chiefly two reasons not only for that he used it, but also why
that manner of speech is more proper and more plain in that matter than any
other.


M. Which is the first of these reasons?


P. It is that when the holy scripture speaks of Sacraments, it does
willingly name the signs with the names of the things which are signified by
them. And therefore Jesus Christ would acco^modate himself to that speech
which the holy Ghost has always accustomed to use in the Church, because that
it is familiar and easy to understand to God his people with who^ he has to
do, and unto whom he does address his doctrine.


M. And why is it yt the holy Ghost speaks rather this language than
otherwise?


P. Because it is more agreeable to this matter than any other.


M. For what cause?


P. For so much as the Lord will give us to understand by such phrases of
speech, that albeit that the signs of the Sacraments be not the very same
things which are signified by them, yet notwithstanding they are not without
them.


Of the manner in the which the body and the blood of Jesus Christ are
present in the supper, and are communicate to the faithful as well as the
signs which represent them.
M. IN what sort then are they there, if the signs remayn still in their own
substance.


P. Albeit they be not there by a natural, corporal and material presence as
the visible signs which are there given to us: that notwithstanding they be
thereby a divine and spiritual virtue and manner, whereby God, by the virtue of
his holy spirit, does make partaker of them all such as by true and lively
faith, do receive his word and his sacraments, by which he confirms the
same in our hearts.


Of the substantial and natural conjunction of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, with the bread and with the wine of the Supper.
M. But if the bread and the wine do not change their substance, and
neither be transubstantiated, converted nor changed into the body and the
blood of Jesus Christ, may not then the body and blood of Jesus Christ be
well joined to them in their own proper substance and nature?


P. There are among those which reject the false doctrine of transubstantiation,
by the which we have been sometime taught, that the very substance of the
bread and of the wine was changed into the very substance of the body and of
the blood of Jesus Christ, which are of the opinion yt thou now set forth.


M. And why do they rather follow yt opinion than ye other?


P. Because that they know well yt opinion to be too gross. And therefore they
have recourse to that other manner of presence of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, in the Supper, whereof thou haste now made mention.


M. And what inconueniente fyndest thou in that opinion?


Peter. I find not much less therein than in that of Transubstantiation.


Math. Thou canste not say at the least but that they which follow it, do
take from the Supper the signs of the bread and of the wine, for so much as
they join them with the body and the blood of Jesus Christ, the which they
signify.


Peter. No more are they also so greatly different in other matters to them
that mayntain transubstantiation, And therefore may we lawfully call the opinion
of such men, co^substantiation.


M. What understand thou by this word of Consubstantiation?


P. As they which have forged the transubsta^tiation do understand by the same,
a changing of substance into an other, even so by the name of
consubstantiation, a man may understand the conjunction of diverse substances
together.


Of the agreement that is between this opinion and that, of transubstantiation.
M. DEclare unto me then wherein they do agree, and wherein they do differ.


Peter. For the first, if they do understand that the body and the blood of
Jesus Christ be with the bread and the wine, in their own nature and
substance, and by a natural, corporal and material manner as the bread and
the wine are there, they agree therein with the error of transubstantiation.


M. It seems to me that they draw well to one point, saving that they make
no transubstantiation nor change of the bread and of the wine, into the body
and blood of Jesus Christ.


P. Thou see it plainly, and by that which we have already said, thou
may well understand, that such a natural and corporal presence of the body
and of the blood of Jesus Christ in the Supper, should be clean contrary to
the nature of a spiritual nouriture, the which is there set forth unto us,
and likewise to the manner of eating of the body and the flesh, and the
drinking of the blood of Jesus Christ, according to the which they may be
eaten and dronke^ for spiritual meat and drink.


The seauententh Dialogue is of the communication of Jesus Christ as well in
Baptism as in the Supper.
Whereunto baptism and the signification thereof may serve to give us to
understand in what sort it behooves us to be nourished by the body and blood
of Jesus Christ.
MATTHEW. I Have well understood that thou have said that we must be
nourished with spiritual meat and nouriture into eternal life, and that by a
spiritual manner, agreeable to the spiritual birth and life, into ye which we
are regenerate by baptism, and according to the testimony of God which is set
forth unto us in ye same concerning our regeneration.


P. That which thou say may serve us very much to the understanding of the
matter which we now handle. For thou do well know that we are not regenerate
in baptism, by any corporal or material seed of the body and of the blood
of Jesus Christ, nor by any natural manner, as we are naturally begotten by
our fathers and mothers.


M. I know well also that we may not enter again into our mothers womb, John.
3. a.
as Nicodeme said to Jesus christ, to be borne a new once more, as we are
already once borne.


P. And therefore I doubt not but that thou do well understand that that
regeneration and new birth is wrought by a seed incorruptible, spiritual and
divine, by the which we are begotten into the Church by the virtue of the holy
Ghost, by whom we are regenerate into a new life.


In what sort we do communicate of the body and blood of Jesus christ in
baptism.
M. IT is not also said, that Jesus Christ does give his body and his blood in
Baptism, as he does in the supper, like wise the water is not called therein
the body and the blood of Jesus Christ, as Jesus Christ does in the Supper
call the bread and the wine by the name of them.


P. Albeit ye the water be not there called in baptism by that name, do thou
think for all that, that the body and blood of Jesus Christ be not there
distributed and communicated unto thee in the same, as well as in the Supper?


M. I do not so understand it.


P. Thou will then ordeyne a Baptism without Jesus Christ.


M. Wherefore?


P. Because thou can not have Jesus Christ, except thou have him wholly, and
very God and very man, and that thou have true communion with his body and with
his blood, not only in ye supper, but also in baptism.


M. Show me the cause thereof.


P. It is because yt the Baptism does no less send us to the death and
passion, and to the body and blood of Jesus Christ, than does the Supper, for
so much as that is proper to al sacraments.


What difference there is between the baptism and the Supper, touching the
communion of the body and of the blood of Jesus Christ.
M. IT seems to me that thou speak against that which thou have said
heretofore, touching the difference which thou have put between baptism and
the Supper, for it seems that thou speak now, as though baptism and the
supper were one very Sacrament, and that there were no difference between them.


P. Thou make an evil conclusion. For albeit that we do as well participate
of the body and of the blood of Jesus Christ in baptism as in the Supper, yet
notwithstanding, there is difference in the participation and in the manner
thereof, in respect of the benefits of Jesus Christ, which are signified and
communicated unto us as well in ye one of the sacraments as in the other.


M. I have not the^ well understood thee yet heretofore, and therefore declare
unto me more easily that which thou now speak of.


P. Although the body of Jesus Christ be not given unto us in baptism as for
spiritual food, as it is in the Supper, that notwithstanding it is there
given unto us in very deed, as a garment of innocence, of Justice and of
holiness to cover all our sins before God. And therefore S. Paul says,
that all those which are baptized, have put on them Jesus Christ.


M. And of the blood, Galath. 3.
what say thou?


P. Albeit that it be not given unto us in Baptism, as for drink as it is in
the supper, yet notwithstanding it is there given unto us for a spiritual
washing of our souls and consciences, whereby Jesus Christ does purify and
cleanse his Church in this lauer of regeneration, to the end that he may make
it pure, clean, without spotte or wrinkle and a holy and glorious Church.


M. I did never yet so well understand these two points, nor yet the
diversity and difference that thou have made between the benefits of Jesus
Christ, and the Baptism and the Supper which are Sacraments, as now I do
understand all these things.


In what sort the faithful in baptism do put on Jesus Christ, and are
vvashed with his blood.
P. WHen I tell thee that the baptism declares unto us how that Jesus
Christ is set forth unto us in baptism, for a robe of innocence, Justice,
and holiness, and that we cloth our self with him by mean of ye same, I do not
think thee to be of so gross an understanding, to think, that the faithful
do put on Jesus Christ naturally and corporally, as a man puts on a garment
or a cloak.


M. I should be very gross if I so understood it.


P. How do thou then understand it?


M. That even as a garmente or a cloak do serve to cover the body, even so do
the innocence, justice and holiness of Jesus Christ serve us to cover our
sins at the judgment of God, to the end that there appear no one spotte of
them in his sight.


P. And touching the blood of Jesus Christ, do thou think that our
souls and consciences be washed and made clean in Baptism, as one would with
water wash a body in a bath or river, or else sheets in a bucke?


Matthew. Thou make here with me goodly discourses: I think there is none so
beastly, which does not well know that the blood of Jesus Christ is called
the washing of souls, and of consciences, not as though they must be washed
and dipped in the blood of Jesus Christ, as one would wash and dippe a body,
that he would wash and make clean, or some other such like thing, but that
the holy Ghost speaks so, to give us to understand that which thou have
said, to wit, what the water of baptism signifies, concerning the washing
and purification of our souls and consciences in the blood of Jesus Christ.


What greater reason there is to communicate corporally of the body and of the
blood of Jesus Christ in the Supper, than in Baptism.
P. Thou do answer me very well, but if thou find it strange that a man
should say, that they which are baptized have put on Jesus Christ bodily as a
garmente, and are washed with his blood as with a material bath, why should
thou not find it as strange or more strange, that a man should say that the
body and the blood of Jesus Christ are naturally and bodily eaten and drunken
in the Supper, as are the bread and the wine which are the signs?


M. Thou make me to consider somewhat more deeply of this matter, than
heretofore I did.


P. It is a matter well to be thought on. For if that in Baptism we have no
carnal communication with the body and blood of Jesus Christ, but only a
spiritual, I see not what greter reason there is, to have rather in the Supper
a carnal communication with him, than in Baptism, considering that the supper
depends of baptism, and that it is as a more ample confirmation of the
possession of the benefits of Jesus Christ, into the which we begin to
enter by Baptism, and do continue by the Supper.


M. I find thy reasons very good.


P. Thou shalt find them yet better, if thou do consider how much that
gross and carnal opinion does disagree as well with the nature of the body and
of the blood of Jesus Christ, as with the faith that we ought to have in his
ascension into heaven, and of his seat at the right hand of God, and of his
spiritual and divine presence and virtue, by the which he is ever present in
his church, and does guide and govern it eternally.


How the corporal and carnal presence of the body and of the blood of
Jesus Christ in the Supper greeth not with the true nature of them.
M. Expound this same unto me somewhat more at large.


P. For the first, to what purpose is it to think, that the body of Jesus
Christ is chewed and eaten and sent into the stomach, and from thence down
into the belly, as is the bread which signifies it in the Supper: and that
his blood is also drunken as is the wine which is the sign? For be it that
thou understand that the bread and the wine be converted into the substance of
the body and blood, or else that the body be eaten with the bread, and the
blood drunken with the wine, yet is there still great absurdity, clean
contrary to the nature of the body and blood of Jesus Christ.


M. What contrariety fyndest thou therein?


P. Seeing that Jesus Christ has a very true natural body in every respect
like unto ours, as touching the corporal substance, sin except, it is
certain and true, that he is not bodily and naturally not only in the heaven,
and in the earth at one time, but also neither in infinite places. For he
has not a body which fills the heaven and the earth as does his
divinity, but has a body which can not be a true and very body, if he
be not in some certain place agreeable to his nature, to his glory and
celestial majesty.


How the glorifying of the body of Jesus Christ, does not change at all the
substantial nature and propre substance of the same.
M. THou speak of the body of Jesus Christ, as though he were in every
respect like unto ours, and that he were not glorified at all, as ours shall
be also after the Resurrection of our bodies.


P. Albeeit that the body of Jesus be glorified by his Resurrection and
Ascension into heaven, yet follows it not for all that that he has lost the
proprieties of his humane nature, and that his corporal substance is changed
in such sort that it is converted into divine nature, or that he is in such
sort transfourmed, that he is infinite, to be in every place: or that he is so
multiplied, that for one body he has many, or an infinite number, as
necessarily it must be, if the error whereof we now speak, should have
place.


Of the contrariety that is between the corporal presence of Jesus Christ in
the Supper, and his ascension into heaven.
M. But they which maynteyn thye opinion, say that these things may not be
considered naturally, but supernaturally, and that they do surpass the
capacity of all man's understanding.


P. I grant them all that. But why is it then that they forge us a corporal
and natural presence of the body and blood of Jesus Christ in the steed of
a supernatural and spiritual presence.


M. They say that the same corporal and natural presence does not at all
hinder the supernatural and spiritual.


Pet. Albeit that they say it, it does not therefore follow that it is so. And
on the other side. I see not how they will agree their opinion with the
articles of our faith, by which we do confess, not only that Jesus
Christ is gone up into heaven, but also that he is there set at the right
hand of the Father, and that from thence he shall come in Judgment by a
visyble and corporal presence, even as he went up visibly and corporally,
Acts. 1. b. 3. d.
according to the very testimony of the Angels, and also of Saint Peter, who
has said, that the Heaven must needs receive him, until the time of the
restoring of all things, whereof God has spoken by the mouth of all his
Prophets since the beginning.


The eightenth Dialogue is of the presence of Jesus Christ in heaven, and in
the supper and in his Church.
Whether the ascension of Jesus Christ be a true ascension or no, or else if
he made himself only invisible.
MATTHEW. IT seems to me that all that which thou have spoken of the
asce^tion of Jesus Christ, is nothing against the opinion of those against whom
thou have so long disputed, for they deny not that Jesus Christ is gone up
into Heaven, neither that he shall come visiblie and bodily to judge the living
and the dead, even as thou have said.


P. How do they then agree their doctrine with this confession?


M. They allege two things upon this point. The first is, that the heaven
and the right hand of God where Jesus Christ is, do stretche over all. The
other is, that the coming of Jesus Christ which is made by the sacrament, the
Supper is invisible: wherefore albeit that he be there bodily in the propre
substance of his body and blood, yet is he not there visibly, but inuisibly.


P. If they make no space between the earth and the heaven, and that they will
stretche out the heaven even to the earth in such sort that Christ has not
absented him from the earth, as touching his body, and that he did retire
himself, when he went up into heaven, it may not then be said, that he is
ascended as the Scripture witnesses, but that he has always remained upon
earth, without departing from thence, against that which he himself did
prophecy to his disciples. It must also be said, that he should then have
made him self invisible to them, and that he were still yet on earth, not
visible, but invisible.


How that the presence corporal of Jesus Christ in the Supper may have no
place except he have an infinite body, or many.
M. I Know not what to say to thee herein: For if it were so, then should
there be no true asce^tion of Jesus Christ into heaven.


P. Albeit that it were so, yet must it needs be, that he have a body infinite
to be in so many places at ones: or else that he have an infinite number of
bodies to be in so many places at once, as they would have him.


M. I understand well, that if Jesus Christ had such a body, and that his
humane nature were infinite, as is his divine, it could be no more an humane
nature, nether could there be any difference between ye one and the other.


Of the invisible coming of the body of Jesus Christ.
P. AS concerning that which thou have said of the invisible coming of Jesus
Christ, where is it in the holy Scriptures that they find such a coming,
in the which Jesus Christ comes from heaven inuisibly in the proper substance
of his body?


M. I can not tell, for as thou haste already decelard in the articles of faith,
we speak but of two corporal commings of Jesus Christ.


Of the spiritual coming of Jesus Christ.
P. I Will grant them that there is an invisible coming of Jesus Christ by the
which he comes daily inuisibly to all. But that is not in the proper and
natural substance of his natural body, but by his divine virtue, whereby
notwithstanding he makes us in deed partakers of his body and of his blood,
and does nourish us, as he does testify the same unto us in his holy Supper,
and does the same by the virtue of his holy spirit, the which joins us unto
him without being needful that Jesus Christ descend or ascend in his own
body, to make us partakers.


M. But how may this be done, forsomuche as the body of Jesus Christ is in
heaven, and that we be on the earth, and that there is so great distance
between the one and the other?


P. Seeing that this conjunction is not natural nor carnal, but supernatural
and spiritual, it is not at all hard for the holy Ghosts in such sort to ioyn
the earth and the heaven together, and to draw up our hearts into heaven, even
to Jesus Christ.


M. I know well that there is nothing hard nor impossible to God.


P. In like manner is it not hard for Jesus Christ, to make the virtue and
efficacy of his body the sacrifice of the same which he has offered for us,
to come even to us, without being needful that he descend bodily from
heaven, to come to us.


M. I grant to thee all that.


How that the corporal presence of Jesus Christ in the supper, is contrary
to the divine virtue that is in him to communicate his gifts and graces to his
Church.
P. IT must necessarily be that it be so, for if he could have no communion
with us, and communicate himself to us, without coming down from heaven
bodily, and without that he were with us corporally present, his virtue should
not be so great as it is, nor should it be so well set forth, nor in so great
effect.


M. Is that the cause why he said to his disciples, it is expedient that I go,
for if I go not, John. 16. a
the comforter which is the holy Ghost, will not come?


P. It is certain that by these words, he would give his disciples to
understand two things.


M. Which be they?


P. The first is, that his corporal presence did hold them still fixed in the
earth, and did hinder them by the mean of their infirmity and rudenes, to
comprehend and understand, that his kingdom was spiritual and not carnal, as
they thought it to be.


M. Which is yet the other point?


P. It is yt he was not come upon earth, there to reign by a corporal
presence, but to retire his body into heaven, and that he would reign by his
holy spirit and by his spiritual and divine virtue among his, according to the
promise which he made them, when he said, when you shall be gathered together
two or three in my name. I am in ye midst of you. Mat. 18. c. 28. d.
And again, I am with you even to the consummation of the world.


Of the spiritual and divine presence of Jesus Christ in his Church, and of
the virtue of the same.
M. THou understand then these passages of the spiritual and divine presence
of Jesus Christ in his Church.


P. No man may otherwise take them. And therefore Jesus Christ has said, to
show that great power which he had. Al power is given me, Mat. 28. d. Ephe. 4.
b. 1. d.
both in heaven and in earth. S. Paul in like fort has written that he is
ascended above all the heavens, to ye end he might fill al things, and that
he might fulfill all in the same.


M. Do thou understand that he does accomplish and fill all things, not by
his corporal presence, but by his spiritual and divine presence and virtue?


P. We may not otherwise understand it, if we do believe that Jesus christ has
a very natural body, and that he be in deed gone up into the heavens. For as
we have already said, as there is no reason to give him many bodies, to be in
many places at a time, eue^ so is it over strange, to give him a body which
may fill the heaven and the earth.


How that the corporal presence of the body and of the blood of Jesus
Christ is contrary to the true communion of them in the Supper.
M. I Do now remember that thou have already said that the body and the blood
of Jesus Christ could not be separated from his spirit, from whence I do
conclude that the body and blood of christ Jesus cannot be received but to the
salvation of them which do receive it.


P. None may doubt thereof.


M. It follows then further that infidells cannot receive them, for so much as
they cannot receive them except they receive their salvation, the which they
cannot obtain without faith, whereof they are void.


P. This which thou say does yet confirm more and more all that which we
have handled heretofore concerning the corporal presence of Jesus Christ in
the Supper.


M. It is also the cause why I did again set forth this matter. For if the
body and the blood of Jesus Christ be corporally in the supper, in such
sort, that whosoever receives bodily the bread and the wine therein,
receives also the body and the blood of Jesus Christ corporally: there shall
follow thereof many things, which seem to me very contrary as well to the
office of Jesus christ as to the nature of this Sacrament of the Supper.


P. Thou say very truth, and I am very glad to here of thee that which thou
think.


M. For the first we shall be constrained to confess that a man may in the
Supper receive the body and the blood of Jesus Christ without faith and
without his spirit, for the unfaithful which shall receive the bread and the
wine, shall no less receive the body and the blood of Jesus Christ, than the
faithful.


P. Behold there a very strange consequencie.


M. Moreover, if a man may receive them without faith, they which shall
receive them in such sort, shall receive the^ either to their salvation or
condemnation, if they receive the^ to their salvation, it must needs follow
that a man may obtain salvation without faith: if they do receive the^ to
their condemnation, it must then follow that the body and the blood of Jesus
Christ do bring in this Sacrament against their nature, death in steed of
life, which is also against the nature of the Sacrament, for it was not
ordained to bring death to man, but life.


Whether a man may conclude of the words of Saint Paul, that a man may
receive the body and the blood of Jesus Christ in the supper, to condemnation.
P. THou concludest very well, but they which houlde the opinion against the
which we dispute at this present, make no difference to affirm that the
infidels receive in the supper the body and the blud of Jesus Christ, and that
they receive the^ to their conde^pnation. For they build themselves upon that
which s. Paul has said. That who so eats in the supper the bread and
drincketh the wine of ye lord unworthily, 1. cor. 21. f. g
does eat and drink his condempnation.


M. I know well that those me^ affirm that which thou say. But I cannot well
agree their opinion with the matters the which we have already handled. And as
touching that which they allege of S. Paul, he says not, who so shall eat
the body and drink the blood unworthily, shall receive his condempnation, but
he says, he that shall eat of this bread and shall drink of this cup.


P. Thou have also to note beside this, that there is difference between
receiving the supper unworthily, and to receive it without faith, and as
touching the word of condempnation, it may be also taken in diverse manners, but
we will now no longer dwell upon these two points. It is sufficient for us to
know that the body and the blood of Jesus Christ cannot be truly received
but by the faithful.


Of the principal difference that may be betvveene the transsubstanciation of
the bread and of the wine into the body and the blood of Jesus christ and the
bodily conjunction of them together.
M. I Do well understand by all the reasons and testimonies which thou have
brought out of ye holy scriptures, that we may seek no corporal nor carnal
presence of Jesus christ, neither in the supper, nor yet in all this visible
world, but only a spiritual and divine presence. Wherefore when I have well
considered the whole, I find no great difference, between them that affirm,
yt the bread and the wine be converted and transubstanciated into ye body and
blud of Jesus christ in the supper, by the virtue of the sacramental words,
and those which affirm, that albeit that the bread and the wine remain still
in their own substance, yet notwithstanding, ye body and blud of Jesus christ
be there also present with the^, in their proper and natural substance, not
only spiritually, but also corporally and substancially, as are ye bread and
the wine.


P. There is no great difference but in yt that ye one sort thinking to avoid
the absurdities which follow the opinion of the others, do fall into other
absurdities which are nothing less, of the which we will no more speak here,
because the matter would be to long, whereof we have already sufficiently
spoken.


Of the union that is between Jesus Christ and his members, signified by the
bread and the wine in the Supper.
M. I Am very well contented for this time with that which thou have said, and
therefore show me now, what properties the bread and the wine have yet, which
are agreeable to this Sacrament of the Supper, beside that which thou have
already said.


P. I have already said that those signs were agreeable to this sacrament,
because they be apt to represent the spiritual nouriture by the bodily.


M. I do very well remember this point.


P. Thou have also to note upon the same, that as one lofe and one vessel of
wine are made of many grains gathered together, even so do they in the Supper
represente unto us, how that all the children of God which are dispersed, are
gathered and brought together in one, and united with Jesus Christ their head,
by his death, John. 11. g
as Saint John does witness.


M. Thou will then say, that that vnio^ which is made of many grains, in one
lofe or in one wine, does signify unto us the union that is between Jesus
Christ and his Church, to wit, between the head and the members.


P. It signifies not only the union which is between Jesus Christ and his
members, but also the union which is and ought to be between all the members of
his body, which cannot be united with their head Jesus christ, nor have him
for their head, if they be not united among themselves, the one with the other:
for Jesus Christ may not be divided. And therefore Saint Paul has said to
the same purpose, that we are all one bread, and therefore we do also every of
us part take of one very bread and one very cup.


How the supper is the sacrament of union and of charity, and of the
admonition that we have in the same.
M. Seeing it is so, it follows then that the supper is unto us a Sacrament of
the union and charity, yt all the faithful ought to have the one with the
other?


P. That is not to be douted, and therefore thou must note, yt eue^ as baptism
does admonish us of ye perpetual repentance and mortification which ought to be
among us al ye time of our life: eue^ so has ye supper this propre unto it, yt
it puts us in mind of the union and charity whereby we ought to be joined
the one with ye other, without the which we can not be christians, for so much as
Jesus Christ sets it forth unto us for a mark whereby his disciples should
be known.


M. Seeing it is so, I think assuredly also that we cannot communicate at this
holy sacrament of ye supper, but to our co^demnatio^, if we have not this
charity and union amongst us.


P. It is easy to judge.


The 19. dialogue is of the proof that every man ought to make of himself
before the supper.
Of the principal points which are required in the proof that is required of
every man before he go to the Supper.
MATTHEW. M. Seeing that we be lyghted upon the matter of things required
wherewith worthily to communicate in the supper, declare unto me now in what
sort we ought to prove our selves, according to the doctrine of S. Paul, to
the end we receive not this Sacrament unworthily and to our condemnation.


P. Thou may well know by the matters which we have already handled, what it is
to receive the Supper worthily or unworthily, and to salvation or condemnation,
and how every man may prove himself, to communicate thereat as he ought.


M. I grant that which thou say: but I shall understand and comprehend
it better, if thou do declare unto me briefly the principal points which
are chiefly required in this proof.


P. Seeing that Jesus Christ is dead for our sins, and that therefore, all
Sacraments do send us to the same death, to obtain forgiveness of the same:
it follows well, that we can not communicate worthily at the Supper, except
we acknowledge first our selves to be sinners such as we are, and do confess
that we have deserved by mean of our sins, eternal death and damnation, and
that we can not be delivered from them, but only by the death of Jesus Christ.


M. I do well understand alredie this point.


P. If thou do well understand this, thou understand well also, that that
acknowledging and confession, can not be in us without that true repentance
whereof we have already spoken, which can not be without true amendment of
life.


M. I understand well also that other point.


P. Thou haste well understood how that true faith can not be separated from
true repentance. For the knowledge of our sins should serve us to small purpose,
if it were not joined with a sure trust of forgyuenesse of the same.


M. That is plain.


P. Now seeing we can not obtain that remission, but only by the death of
Jesus Christ, and that the Supper is ordained to witness unto us, and to
assure us more fully, it is therefore easy to judge, that none may communicate
at this holy sacrament without true faith, by the which he holds himself
assured to obtain the grace which is promised and witnessed unto him in the
same.


M. Thou will then say in effect, that it is needful for those which dispose
themselves to communicate at this sacrament, to note diligentely whether they
have true repentance and true faith in Jesus Christ or no.


P. To the end that the proof may be the more full and perfect, thou shall
join also to these two points, charity, of the which we even now did speak,
by mean whereof, all the faithful are united and conjoined the one with the
other: even as they be united and conjoined by faith with Christ Jesus their
head. For even as true repentance can not be without true faith, eue^ so true
faith cannot be without true charity, as we have sufficiently already declared.


M. I understand well also, seeing the Supper is a Sacrament of union and
charity, as thou have already declared it, that he is not capable of the
same, that has not true charity.


P. Behold, they are ye three points, to wit, Three point a required in the
proof.
repentance faith, and charity, which comprehend all the rest that may be
required in the proof of any man.


Whether it be requisite that every man have perfect repentance, faith and
charity, before he go to the Supper.
M. Now I have yet one difficulty upon these three points, the which thou
say are chiefly required in the proof of those which will communicate at the
Supper.


P. Show me that difficulty.


M. Tell me first, if there be any man that in this mortal life may have
perfect repentance, perfect faith, and perfect charity.


P. If we could have those virtues so perfect, that nothing could be more
added thereunto, then were we no more mortal men, and should no more need,
neither the preaching of the Gospel, nor yet the Sacraments.


Mat. Why so? Because we should then have all the things, for the which all the
ministry of the Church was ordained of God, and should be already like to
the Angels, in such sort as we shall be after our resurrection, when we shall
be fully reformed to the image of Jesus Christ, and fully glorified with him.


M. And yet thou say that we cannot worthily communicate at the supper,
except we bring with us true repentance, a true faith, and a true charity.


Pet. That same is not at all against that which I have now said.


What difference there is between true and perfect repentance, faith, and
charity.
M. IT must needs be then, yt thou put difference between true and perfect
repe^ta^ce, and true faith and charity.


P. Eue^ so thee is difference.


M. What is it?


P. To make thee ye better to understand it, I will show thee it by exa^mple.


M. I like well ye manner of declaration.


P. Take then for example a young child, will thou say yt he is a perfect man?


M. No, till such time as he be come to ye age in which men do account the
perfection of man.


P. But will thou deny yt he is a very man before he be come to that age?


M. I am not yet well resolved how to answer thee to this demand.


P. It shall be easy for thee to resolve, if thou consider what it is to be a
man, and what is his nature: for thou canste not deny, yt who so has an
humane body and a soul participa^t of reason and understanding, is a man.


M. I grant it.


P. No more can thou deny, that a child, how young soever he be, is
compounded of such a body and such a soul, notwithstanding yt men do not
yet see in effect in him, so great a perfection of the body, and of reason
and understanding, and of other gifts, as well of the body as of the spirit,
as in a perfect man.


M. I do well understand yt thou will say, that albeit a child may grow both in
bigness, force, discretion, prudence, knowledge, and in such like virtues,
thereby to attain to greater perfection, yet notwithstanding this same lets
not at all, but that he is already a very man.


P. No, for somuche as he has in him all the parts that make a very man, and
the seeds of all things required in man's nature, notwythstanding that the
fruits as yet appear not, for albeeit that a thing begone, be not yet fully
perfected, it follows not for all that, but that the beginnings are true and
sound, and that it is true and perfect, for so much as is already of it.


M. Thou will then say in like sort, that albeit that repentance, faith and
charity, be not in us so great and so perfect, that no more may be wished
for, yet for all that they leave not to be true and whole, provided that we
have the true seeds thereof in us, and the true beginnings of all the parts
required in the same.


P. Thou have very well comprehended that which I would have said. And
forasmuch as all these things are already begone in us, by the grace of God, we
do daily continue the reading of the Gospel and the administration of the
Sacraments, to the end we may daily grow more and more, in that which is
already begone in us, and that we may be daily the better confirmed, to wit, in
true repentance and true faith and charity, Ephesians. 4. c.
and in all the other gifts of god, even until the time that from the infancy
in the which we now are concerning these gifts and graces, we do come even to
ye age of a perfect man, and that we do therein daily profit as the child
does daily grow until the time that he be a perfect man.


How greatly necessary the ministry of the Church and prayer is for all men
during this life.
M. I Am now well resolved touching this point, whereby I do conclude that
there is in the world no man so perfect, who has not always need of the
ministry of the church, and of all the parts and things the which it
comprehends.


P. I have yet forgotten to tell thee that with the diligence that we ought to
use in the study of the holy scriptures and communion of the sacraments, to
the end the graces of god may be daily increased more and more in us: we have
also the invocation of the name of God, and prayer, the which serves us
greatly to yt end: wherefore we ought therein to be very attentive and
continual.


M. Seeing yt thou art now come upon the matter of invocation and prayer, me
thinks it were good yt we did speak somewhat amply of it. For it seems to
me yt we have spoken very little of it, as in passing it over, when that thou
gave me as in brief, ye exposition of the commandments of ye law, upon the
which thou did briefly declare unto me, how that those of the first table
did comprehend faith and the invocation of the name of god, which proceeds
from the same, as ye true fruit and true witness of the Faith.


Of the discipline of the church, and of the principal parts of the same.
P. I Had determined to have spoken somewhat more fully, for so much as Jesus
Christ has given a certain form and rule. But because we have yet to speak
of the discipline of the Church, and that it is so joined with the ministry of
the same, that it cannot be well ruled nor conserved without yt discipline, we
will first speak so far as the matter that we handle now requires it, and
then afterward we will conclude the whole by the invocation of the name of
God, and by prayer.


The. 20. dialogue is of the discipline, censures and consistories of the
Church.
Of the discipline of the Church, and of the principal parts of the same.
M. Seeing we are come to the point of the discipline of the church, declare
unto me then what thou meanest by the same.


P. I understand the government and the rule, by the which God will that his
Church be governed according to the order which he has ordained in it by his
word, to entertain it in true religion and to take away slanders.


M. What is that rule and that order?


Pe. There be chiefly three points to consider.


M. Which is the first?


P. The regard that must be had to the doctrine and assemblies of the Church,
to the end that the word of God and the sacraments be administered as they
ought to be, and above al things that do appertain and are requisite to the
service of God.


M. Which is the second point?


P. The regard that must be had to the life and manners of every man.


M. Which is the third?


P. It is not altogether of so great importance, for it concerns only
certain exercises, which sometime are required in the Church, as are fastings
and other certain ceremonies the which, according to the necessities and
circumstaunces of times and of places, may serve for the better making of men
to do their duty and office to God.


Of the chief things whereupon the discipline of the Church ought to watch.
M. Seeing that thou say that the two first points be the most necessary,
declare unto me the things, the which are most to be considered in them.


P. Forsomuche as the word of God is ordained to teach, admonish, comfort,
exhort, rebuke, and to correct every man, as it shall be needful, it is
necessary that there be censures and watches in the Church, to watch and to
take heed how every man does behave himself, as well in respect of doctrine
as of life, and whereof every man has need, to provide for the same as the
word of God does require.


Of the censures and ancients of the Church, and of the manner of the policy of
the same.
M. ALL that which thou say, does it not belong to the office of the pastors
and ministers which have charge of the administration of the word of God and
of the Sacraments, and of all the Church?


P. I grant it. But there are chiefly two causes, why it is needful yt they
have helpers with them, which may be called censures or ancients of the
church, as they are called in the holy scriptures, to help them in that that I
have said.


M. Which is the first of these two causes?


P. It is that the ministers are not ordinarily so many, that they may see in
every place: and on the other part all are not so careful, so diligent, and so
perfect, to look to all things, as it were to be desired.


M. Which is the other cause?


P. It is that all be it they could do it, it is good that there be others of
the Church, which may be joined unto them, to give to understand, that the
Church, in respect of the policy and discipline ye Jesus Christ has there
appointed, and of the government which he has given to men, is not as a
Monarchy, or some other temporal lordship, in the which certain princes have
all absolute authority: but it is an holy and free communaltie, which for that
cause is called the communion of Saints, to the which Jesus Christ has given
in general and not to any one in particular, all the power and authority that
there is, to use for edification, and not to destruction.


Of the true head of the Church and of the power given to the church by Jesus
Christ to chose those which have public office in the same, and how
requisite it is that that order be there observed.
M. But in taking it so, it seems to me that there is no order at al, but
rather great confusion. For if there be no certain head, every man will there
be a master, and the one as great as ye other.


P. It does not so follow of that which I have said. For first of all, she is
not without a head, for so much as it has Jesus Christ for her head.
Afterward, al be it yt the power and authority be given to the whole
co^munaltie of the faithful, as it is in the hands of the people in a popular
estate, ye which me^ have aunciently called Dimocracie: yet for all yt it
hinders not at all, but yt the church by a common consent may chose out of the
body of this holy communaltie such certain persons, as may have ye special
charge, to exercise and administer the public offices which are ordained of
God in ye same, as they do in a free city in ye which ye choice of public
offices is made by the burgeses and citizens of ye same which are all of one
very communaltie.


M. Thy meaning is then, that all the authority and power of the rule and
government of the Church, is given in general to all the Church, and that
therefore it belongs to the same, to choose according to the word of God
those whom she knows to be most meet to exercise therein the public
offices, and to who^e God has distributed the most of his gifts, to execute
the same faithfully.


P. In all the time that the Church was well ruled according to the word of
God, and that she was not oppressed by tyranny, she ever used that order. And
therefore it is more than necessary yt she hold always her right, her power,
and authority, such as she has received of god, to the end that there be none
of the members of ye same, be they either ministers of ye same or else the
magistrates, or ye common people, yt may take in hand any thing in this
spiritual rule and government of their own authority, but that every one of
the flock content himself with the charge that shall be committed unto him by
lawful vocation.


Of the office as well of the ministers as of the other auncientes and
Censures of the Church, and of the regard that chiefly must be had unto them.
M. Seeing it is so, show me the^ what is ye office as well of ye ministers as of
other censures and ancients which may be joined unto them in this
Ecclesiastique discipline.


P. It is first of all to see carefully that the doctrine of the lord be not
only truly set forth in the Church, but also that it be received with all
honor and reverence, and practiced as it is meet.


M. It is then meet that they which have the oversight and public charge in
ye church, do watch not only over the people, but also over the ministers.


P. But it is over ye ministers chiefly, that first heed must be taken, for if
their doctrine and life be not such as their office requires, they shall be a
greater slander and a greater ruin to the whole Church than any other, and
God shall be more dishonored in them than he shall in all the rest that be
under their charge.


M. And who shall have the superintendance over them, considering that they be
the chief governors and leaders, which must lead and govern all the rest
that are committed unto them.


P. If they must in deed watch over others, and correct them, they must
chiefly look upon themselves, according to the advertisement which Saint
Paul gives them, Act. 20. f
and they must correct the faults that be among them, by the discipline which
they should have together.


M. But if they do it not, but do bear the one with the other, or if there
be such faults either in their doctrine or life, which deserve greater
censures, or in deed open rebuke, what remedy is there for that?


P. Then must the Ecclesiastique consistories which are ordained by and in
the name of the whole Church, provide for the same, whereunto the other
ancients and Censures of the Church, do assist with the ministers to remedy
all offenses, which may be either in the doctrine or life of any man, be he
minister or other.


M. Shall not the councils provide for that?


P. That is a later remedy whereunto men may have recourse when necessity
requires it, provided that they be lawful.


M. Then must the like be understood of all the rest, which are appointed in
these Consistories, as Censures and Senators, and ecclesiastical judges.


P. Thou may well understand, that if they which are appointed to correct
others, do not first correct themselves among themselves, they shall have no
great authority to correct those which they ought to correct, neither may
they do it without their great shame and confusion, and without giuyng great
occasion of murmr, slander, and scattering of all the Church.


M. And if they which have special charge in the Church, do bear the one
with the other, and be them selves the cause of slanders, and scattering of
the same, has not then the whole Church together power to correct them, and to
provide for and remedy such faults?


P. Seeing that the power whereof we speak, is given by Jesus Christ, to his
whole Church, who has power to take it from her? May they take it from her to
whom she has given it?


M. No, except they be tyrauntes.


P. Thou say truth.


The.xxj. Dialogue is of brotherly correction, of excommunication, and of
particular instructions.
Of the order that must be holden in the correction of every man's faults,
according to the nature and quality of the same.
M. Seeing that the Discipline of the Church is ordained for the correction of
every man of what estate or degree soever he be, tell me what order there must
be kept in the Ecclesiastical judgments toward all those toward whom they
are quired.


P. First of all, there must be diligente heed had to the nature and condition
of the faults and vices which deserve judgment and correction. For some there
be which require but simple admonition: others there are which require
reprehension and correction: the one the more soft, and the others more
sharp, according as men deserve, and as time and place requires, and as the
offenses may be either greater or lesser.


M. And in what sort must men there proceed? Must these censures and
corrections be done secretly or publicly?


P. Here must again be considered the condition of the faults. For if they
be small and secret, a secret censure and correction may suffice?


M. But if they be of great importance, and open?


P. It shall also be needful that the censure and the correction be the more
notable, and that they which have offended openly, be rebuked openly,
accordingly as S. Paul commands.


M. And if one have committed a great fault openly, must it be published for
the first?


Pe. If it be open, it is already published: Wherefore it is also needful, that
the correction be in public, to the end that the offense be also amended
openly, to serve to others for an example: or otherwise the fault could not be
well amended, to satisfy the church, according as the discipline thereof
requires.


Of excommunication, and of the greatest rigor of the same.
M. ANd which is the greatest correction that the Church may use, according to
that discipline which is given unto her by Jesus Christ?


P. It is excommunication.


M. What does this excommunication emport?


P. The name thereof declares sufficiently unto thee that it is an
Ecclesiastique correction, whereby it is declared that they should be at the
least shut from the communication of the Sacraments which are worthy of such
censure.


M. Emporteth it nothing else?


P. yes in deed, if it be taken in his extreme rigor.


M. What is it then that this extreme rigor imports more yet?


P. It imports acording to the express word of Jesus Christ, that they
which have deserved it are holden and esteemed among Christians, as pagans and
infidels, in such sort that they are not only not received to the communion
of the Sacraments of the Church, but that also the faithful and true
Christians do withdraw and separate themselves from all familiar conversation
with them, to the end they may learn to be ashamed of their faults, and to
acknowledge them the better, to the end they may attain true repentance, to
reconcile and agree themselves with the Church of GOD, whom they have
offended.


Of the force of laufull excommunication, and of the power of the keys given
to the church.
M. THey are not then shut forth from the communion of the Sacraments of the
Church, to the end they should always remain out of the Church.


Pe. If they continue obstinate in their sins, not showing apparaunte
testimony of repentance, nor reconciling them to God and to his Church, by
the means thereunto ordained, they do not only remain shut forth from the
Communyon of the Sacraments, and from the company of the faithful, but also
from the kingdom of heaven, and from eternal life.


Math. Excommunication is not then a matter of small censequence: but is much
more to be feared than is a corporal punishment.


Peter. It is certain, if it be lawfullye done, for so much as Jesus
Christ has given to his Church the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, with
such power, as what so ever she should loose or bynd in earth, according to
his word, should be also bound or vnbou^d in heaven.


M. But if the sinner acknowledge his fault, and yield a true sign of
repentance, and desire to be reconciled and at one with the Church: it is
granted unto him?


Pe. Even as the Church has power to bind the obstinate, so has she power to
loose the penitent, and ever according to the word of God, provided that they
accomplish that which true repentance and the true discipline of the Church
do require.


M. And when the Church has in such sort either bound or loosed any one, by
the censure of excommunication, will thou conclude that God also holds him
for bound or loose?


P. Even as the Sacraments are not plays for little Children, nor plays
fained of pleasure, but are ordinances and testimonies of God which represent
by exterior ceremonies the spiritual things which in deed are communicated to
the faithful by them. So is not excommunication a vain ceremony as a
iuggling, but a sure testimony of God, which he has ordained, to signify and
declare which they be that he auoweth for members of his Church, or else that he
holds for rotten members, cut of and cast out of the same, and consequently
from the kingdom of heaven into the which none may enter except he be in
deed first a member of the Church, and by the mean of the same.


If excommunication may extend further than to the disobedient.
M. SEeing then that excommunication belongs properly to the disobedient, may
they then excommunicate those which acknowledge their fault, how great so ever
it be, and do give testimony evident enough of their repentance before they be
excommunicated?


P. Thou must understand that all disobedience deserves excommunication, and
chiefly when a man has been admonished three times (according to the order
given by Jesus Christ concerning the same) and does not amend his faults, when
they be offensive and of evil example, and that they be not only little
infirmities and ignoraunces, the which men may not as easily correct as they
would, but are great offenses.


M. I do well grant thee that, for rebellion and contempt of admonitions and
warnings, is a very great fault, and a very evil example in the Church of God,
which ought not there to be endured.


P. Thou have also to note, that albeit a sinner do acknowledge his fault at
the first or second admonition and warning that shall be given him, yet for all
that, it may be such, that for example the sinner may deserve to be at the
least suspended from the communion of the sacraments for a time.


M. Why so, if there be no manifest rebellion?


P. In part, to prove the better the repentance of the sinner, and in time the
better to judge whether there be fayning in it or no, and apertly to give
example to others, to the end they may he the more afraid to offend, and
that al together they may learn the better to honor the Sacraments, and to
take heed how they contaminate and profane them by their slanderous vices.
For as it is to be fered that by over much ^igor the poor sinner may be cast
into desperation: even so on the other side, heed is to be taken, least that
through over much facility, and by defaulte of moderate severity, men give
not overmuch license to the vicious, and that they nourishe not nor maintain
slanders and offenses in the stead of correcting and abolishing of them.


Of the difference that ought to be had betvveene excommunication and
suspension from the Sacraments: and how that the Sacraments may not be
administered to all those to whom the doctrine of the same is set forth.
M. IT seems to me to hear thee speak, that thou put some difference
between excommunication and suspension touching the communion of the
Sacraments.


P. It is also requisite to distinguishe them. For many deserve to be
suspended for a time from the communion of the sacraments, which deserve not at
all to be excommunicated, and namely in that extreme rigor, whereof thou eue^
now spakest.


M. Give me an example of that which thou say.


P. For so much as the Sacraments are seals and confirmations of the
doctrine, thou do understand already, that they belong but only to those
which are first sufficiently instructed, at the least in the principal points
of the doctrine whereof they be Sacraments, and without understanding whereof
none may communicate but to his condemnation, in mocking of the ordinances of
Jesus Christ, and of his Church.


M. I do well understand that.


P. And therefore men may lawfully set forth the doctrine to the most ignorant
of the world, and to those in deed which never heard speak of it. For it is
ordained to teach such men. But the sacraments may not be administered but to
those which first are sufficiently instructed, in such sort, that they
understand as much as is required for their salvation, of the mysteries
contained in the same.


How necessary particular instructions are in the Church.
M. BY this reckning then, all those that can not yield an account of their
faith, must be shut out from the communion of the sacraments, if at the least
they be not able to declare by some mean that they understand that which
behooves them to understand, to be found capable of the Sacraments.


P. It is also the cause why that in the well reformed Churches there is not
only Cathechismes for the instruction of young children, but also familiar and
private instruction for such as be of age, beside the preachings and the other
public Cathechismes. There are also particular examinations, whereby they cause
all such to yield reason of the faith, which have not as yet at all yielded any
certain reason of their faith, to the end that they may the better know
which they be that ought to be admitted to the communion of the sacraments, and
which not, to the end that they be not profaned and polluted neither by the
ministers which distribute them, ne yet by them which receive them at their
hands, as well to the condemnation of the one sort as of the other.


In what sort the ministers may be faulty or no, of the pollution of the
Sacraments, if they do administer them to the unworthy.
M. IF they which receive them, receive them unworthily to their condemnation,
the ministers which distribute them unto them are they faulty also on their
part?


P. Thou may well understand that they can not profane and pollute the holy
things without yielding them selves greatly culpable of such profanation and
pollution, for so much as it is expressedly forbidden them, to give the holy
things to the dogs, Math. 7.2.
and to cast pearls and precious stones before swine.


M. And what if they know not which be the dogs and the swine, or the
sheep, and the worthy or unworthy, shall not their ignorance excuse them?


P. No, if it be through their default. For they ought as shepherds diligently
to enquire of their sheep.


M. And what if after they have diligently enquired, the hipocrites deceive
them, faining them selves to be sheep, and lambs, where they be not only
swine and dogs, but a also cruel wolves: shall they be culpable of the
pollution and profanation of the Sacraments, if they administer them to such
men, having a fair show to be christians?


P. Seeing they be not judges of the heart, of which thing God has reserved to
him self only the judgment, they are without blame on their part, in as
much as the fault proceeds not of their negligence, and that God has not as
yet discovered unto the^ the hypocrisy of hypocrites. For the Church can not
judge but of that which is apparent unto them, and not of hidden and secret
things, which God has reserved to his knowledge only.


Of the ecclesiastical judgment required before the excommunication.
M. IT follows then on the contrary, that they be without excuse, when they
receive to the communion of the Sacraments, them which they know manifestly
to be unworthy?


P. Who may doubt that, provided that they have the mean to prove to the^ their
unworthiness?


M. Is the same first required?


P. Yea, for must needs be that judgment go before sentence and condemnation,
and that this judgment be had by the Church, according to the rule and
discipline of the same, and not by the ministers only.


M. Why so?


P. Because that the ministers may not attribute to them selves alone the power
the which God has given to the whole Church, but so far forth as they be
executours in the name of the same, when that the judgment of the same has
gone before: which also can not be done but by the word of God.


M. This point is well to be noted, to the end that wrong be done to none, and
that the ministers do not set up tyranny in the Church, and that they make not
the discipline of ye same to serve their affections.


P. The same serves the^ well to discharge them of such sclau^der if they be
true ministers.


Of the means that the ministers ought to use, if they may have no discipline
in the Church, nor yet administer the Sacraments in the same without
profaning of them.
M. But if the ministers may in no wise obtain that order and that discipline
in the Church, what should they the^ do* shall they be culpable if they do
afterward administer the Sacraments indifferently to all comers? yea in deed
to those which show themselves utterly unworthy.


P. They can never have sufficient excuse, what soever they do allege, if
they do wittingly pollute and profane the holy things.


M. It must the^ come to pass that they forbear utterly the administration of
the Sacraments, or else that they divide the sheep and the lambs from dogs,
swine and wolves.


P. The one or the other must be done. For they may not lawfully account for
the true Church and the true members of the same, those which will not range
themselves under the discipline of Jesus Christ to give glory to God by the
same as is requisite: but should be accounted as mutines and rebels against
God and his word, as themselves do manifestly declare.


Of the difference that must be put betvveene the ignorant, and which they are
of them that ought to be holden for dogs and swine.
M. Seeing thou have said that the Sacraments belong but to such as are
already sufficiently instructed in the Christian doctrine, do thou the^
think that the others which are not as yet sufficiently instructed, ought to
be admitted to the communion of them, and those which have not yielded reason
of their Faith, nor yet are able to do it?


P. Thou may well understand by that which we have already said, whether
such men be capable or no, and whether they ought to be admitted thereunto, if
they be not capable.


M. They must then be excommunicated.


P. If it be requisite to suspend them and to put them from the admission,
until such time as they be more capable, it follows not therefore that they
must be excommunicated except it come to pass that they declare themselves
openly to be dogs and swine.


M. Thou do not account then for dogs and swine all such as are not yet
sufficiently instructed in the Christian doctrine as is meet.


P. If there be but simple ignorance, and good will to learn, I hold them
rather for sheep than for dogs and swine, albeit that they may not as yet be
received so far forth in the sheepefold as the others which are already
sufficiently instructed: yet may they not be utterly shut out, but may be at
the least admitted to the communion of the doctrine and prayers. For Jesus
Christ has many sheep scattered here and there which are not as yet all
gathered into the fold, but he brings them thither in time.


M. Which are they then whom thou accomptest for dogs and swyne.


P. In respect of the doctrine, I account such all those which are not only
ignorant of the same, but that which worse is, they will be ignorant of
purpose, and they scoff at it, reject it, and blaspheme it, yea and oftentimes
do persecute it, and them also which teach it unto them.


M. These men are worthy to be accounted dogs and swyne, seeing they so
tread under their feet the holy doctrine of GOD, and that they turn again
upon his servants which set it forth to them, to rent in pieces and deuowre
them.


P. Thou have touched the very marks, the which Jesus Christ has given of
dogs and swine, and therefore these men deserve not only to be cast forth
from the communion of the Sacraments, but also from the communication of the
doctrine, and to be clearly shut from the assemblies of the Church.


Of those that declare themselves swine and dogs in their lives.
M. THou haste now spoken of them which declare themselves dogs and swine
touching the doctrine: but thou have not spoken of them yet who declare
themselves such by their wicked life.


P. Thou may place in this rank, all such as lead licentious lives, and
make none account of amendment what admonition soever be given unto them, but
do contemn or rather outrage those which do admonish and blame them.


M. Give me some examples whereby I may judge of others such like. 1. Cor. 5. d
^. Thessalonians. 3. b.



P. S. Paul does not only forbid to receive to the communion of the
Sacraments, whoremasters, covetous parsons, idolaters, evil speakers,
drunkerdes, spoylers, idle parsons, and such as live disordinately, and will
not be content with their own place among others, and yet bear the name of
Christians, but forbids also to eat or drink or to use any familiar
conversation with them.


M. If these men deserve to be so rejected not only from the assemblies of the
Church, but also from all other good companies, I doubt not but the like must
be done to all those which are spotted with vices and faults, which are as
great or greater than are these.


P. That is easy to understand.


Whether the discipline ordained by Jesus Christ be necessary in the Church
or no.
M. Do thou think that this discipline is so necessary for ye Church that
it cannot in anywise be without it?


P. She may be without it if she may be without the administration and the use
of the Sacraments and of the word of God, in so much as the word and the
Sacraments ca^ not there be duly administered without the same.


M. I have notwithstanding heard many which acco^pte it among the indifferent
things, affirming that men may wholly omit it, or else use it according to
every man his liberty.


P. Albeit that these men speak openly against the expressed word of Jesus
Christ, yet are they not so unreasonable as those which condemn it and
utterly reject it.


M. This last sort do show themselves too much unworthy to be accounted
Christians. But why say thou that the first have no good foundation for that
they say?


P. Do thou think that men may account among indifferente things, those
which are expressedly commanded or forbidden of God?


M. I do not see that it is in the power of man to dispense with any thing
that God has either commanded or forbidden. But is there expressed
commandment touching this discipline?


P. Neither more nor less than to preach the Gospel and to administer the
Sacraments. For has not Jesus Christ commanded not only to admonish and
rebuke, Math. 18. b. c. 1. Timo. 5. d.
and to correct those which should sin and be offensive: but to excommunicate
them according to the rule which he has expressedly ordained for ye same, when
that naughty and vicious persons should deserve it?


M. I do not again say that.


P. I would very gladly then that these temporisers which do so scoff at the
expressed ordinance of Jesus Christ, and that declare themselves to be so
hardy to dispense with his expressed co^mandementes, would show me by what
passage of the holy Scriptures it is permitted them against the expressed
forbidding of Jesus Christ, to give the holy things to dogs, and to cast the
pearls before swyne, and to receive into the communion of the Church, and of
the Sacraments, those of whom Jesus Christ says plainly, that they must be
holden for Heathens and Infidelles, which must be delivered to Satan, 1. Cor.
5. b. 1. Tim. 2. d.
as S. Paul delivered the incestuous Corinthian, and Alexander, and Hymene,
according to the rule of Jesus Christ.


Of the Baptism of little children, and of brotherly confession and
Reconciliation. The.xxij. Dialogue.
If little children should be shut out from Baptism because they be not yet
instructed, and of the difference that is between Baptism and the Supper in
that point.
MATTHEW. I Am sufficiently resolved concerning all that which thou have said
touching the discipline of the Church: there wa^teth now but one point which
yet does concern the doctrine.


P. Which is that point?


M. Whether we ought to receive to the Communion of the Sacraments, none but
such as are already so instructed in the Christian doctrine, that they have
sufficient understanding of the things signified by the Sacraments, and are
able to yield good reason of their faith: it seems to me yt a man may gather
of thy words that not only they ought not to receive little children to the
Supper, but also they ought not to baptize them, until the time they come to
the age in the which they may yield reason of their faith, and understand what
their baptism does signify.


P. Thou have here to note, that there is difference between receiving of
children to baptism, and receiving of them to the Supper.


Mat. What difference fyndest thou in it?


P. In that that Saint Paul does require of those which would communicate at
the Supper, that they should prove them selves, to know whether they be meet
or no, and that they be disposed to receive the same, accordingly as this holy
Sacrament does require, which thing is not so required in Baptism.


Math. What will thou conclude thereby?


Peter. That if it must be that every man prove himself before he go to the
Supper, it follows then that they are not yet capable of that proof which
are not so far forth instructed, as they may prove and examine themselves,
as is meet.


Of the principal foundation of the Baptism of little children, and of the
virtue of the aliance vvhervppon it is grounded.
M. I Understand by that which thou have heretofore said, that none can well
prove and examine himself, to communicate worthily at the supper, except that
first he understand what mysteries and secrets this Sacrament conteyneth, and
for what cause it was ordained. But for so much as Baptism is also a seal of
the doctrine, the which it does confirm, is it not therefore also needful
that he which should be baptized, be first instructed in the doctrine whereof it
is a Sacrament, and that he may yield reason of it?


P. If the person be of that age, that it be capable of the doctrine, that
which thou say is required. But there is other consideration in the person
of little children, borne of faithful parents, which are already received into
ye Church.


M. But because these children are no more capable of the promise made in
baptism, than the children of infidells, what reason is there rather to
baptize the one than the others.


P. If the children of the faithful were no more capable, than those of the
infidells, there were reason in that which thou say.


M. I see not wherein the one sort are more capable tha^ the others, unless
thou show it me more plainly.


P. Thou must understand that ye promise which God has made in Baptism, This
saying is of great quantity.
conteyneth the promise of the aliance, ye which God has made with his people,
in the which he comprehe^deth not only the faithful which thorough faith are
admitted into this aliance, but also their children and the children of their
children.


M. Will thou then say, that the baptism of children which have faithful
parents, is founded upon that aliance, and upon the faith of their parents?


P. Seeing that the promis is made, not only to the faithful parents, but also
to their children, the Parents have just occasion to present their children to
Baptism, to the end they may have thereby confirmation of the promise which
is made as well to their children as to themselves, to ye end that both they
and their children may be the more assured and comforted.


M. This Baptism serves then better for them than for their children,
forsomuche as the children know not yet what it is.


P. It serves the one and the others. For albeit the children be not able as
yet to understand what Baptism is, because of their age, yet are they capable
(notwithstanding) already thorough the good pleasure of God, of the aliance
whereof it is a Sacrament, and on the other side besides that which God
works by his holy Spirit, as it pleases him, as well in little children as
in the great, there is also prayer made in Baptism for the little children
founded upon the same aliance, which is not vain, but brings forth his
fruit in his time.


If it be lavvfull to Baptize the children of infidels, and what conditions are
required in them which do present them.
M. Seeing then that Baptism of children is founded upon that aliance, it is
not lawful to baptize a child, if he be not borne of faithful Parents.


Pet. Thou have herein to consider, that there must be heed taken not only to
the Parents of the children: but also to those which present them to
Baptism. For albeit that a child be borne of faithful Parents, yet should
it not be lawful to receive him to Baptism, if he were not presented by
faithful men, which moughte be bound for them, unto that whereunto Baptism
binds the faithful, and that they should be sufficient to accomplish the
promise whereby they bind themselves to the Church concerning the children.


M. And if that faithful men should present the Children of Infidells, and
that they should bind them selves for them, taking upon them to instruct them
in the Christian religion, as if they themselves were their very Parents,
should it be lawful to baptize such children?


P. I would make no difficulty therein, provided that the Parents did agree
thereunto, chiefly for two causes.


M. Tell me the first.


P. It is that for so much as there is faithful surety, the minister who is to
administer the Baptism, has already a good foundation. For such surety is in
place of the Parents, provided that they do not mislike of it, but have given
the^ charge to do what they do.


M. Which is the other reason?


P. It is that when God made the aliance with his people, he did not only
promise to show favor and mercy to the parents and children, Exodus 20. a.
Deuteronomy. 5. a.
even to the second and third generation, but even to a thousand generations.
Wherefore, albeit that the nearest parents of the child were infidels, yet
notwithstanding their infidelity may not shut their child from his right,
that he may have in the aliance of God, by the mean of his ancient fathers
and predecessors.


M. But seeing it is so, according to the true discipline of the church, none
may the^ receive a man to present a child to Baptism, if that he himself be
not received into the company of the faithful, and be not sufficient to be
pledge for the child which he presents, and to fulfill the promise which he
makes for him.


P. It should be to mock God and his Church, who so should do otherwise. For me^
have not accustomed in matter of much less importance to receive a pledge, if
he be not of such quality as is required.


M. That is an ordinary matter.


P. What reason should there be the^ to receive in matter of so great importance,
any other pledge tha^ such an one as were meet, in ye which matter there is a very
solemn obligation, and as it were a solemn oath before god and his Church?


M. Is there ye like reason for those which be excommunicate, as there is for
those which are as yet holden for infidells, or at the least have made no
profession of the christian doctrine?


P. Yes until that they be reconciled to the church and received into the same
in such sort as we have heretofore said, and as it is behouefull to be done in
such a case.


M. I would ask thee also for what cause children are not to be as well
admitted to the supper as to Baptism, by means of the aliance made with their
parents, in the which they are comprehended? but I know that thou will
answer me in such sort as thou have hertofore done, concerning the proof
which is more specially required in the supper than in Baptism.


P. Thou see well that the reason is therein sufficiently apparent.


M. Now seeing it is so required that every one prove himself before he come to
the Supper, and not that other men prove them, may not the ministers commit
it to the conscience of every one which present themselves to them, to receive
this sacrament without making any other proof or inquisition?


P. Albeit that it be required that every one particularly do prove himself,
yet notwithstanding, that particular examination, does not let the examination
and the proof, which the ministers and pastors ought to make of their
flocks, to know not only which be sheep and which not: but also what is the
condition and estate of every one of their sheep. For if they know them not,
what accoumpt shall they yield?


M. That is a good apparent reason.


P. On the other part if there be dogs and swine which will thorough their
rashness put forth themselves, to the great contempt of God and of his church,
to thrust in their poluted and filthy snoutes upon the lords table, to infect
it with the same, shall the minister be without blame if he permit it, and do
not at the least his endeavor to shut out such dogs and swyne from the table
of the Lord?


M. There may be also many which although they do not deserve to be accoumpted
dogs and swyne, but only for poor ignorant and seely ones, which might
notwithstanding go and thrust in with the rest, either of custom, or else
thinking to do well, and yet should go to their own condemnation.


P. I would also add hereunto this point, and in such a case the ministers
should not be without blame of the fault which those should commit, and of
the perdition of them, if that they had not first done their endeavor
toward them, accordingly as they are bound.


Of confession and of brotherly reco^ciliatio^.
M. I Would gladly understand of thee, if that after that a man have proved
himself in such sort as thou have already declared, he have no need to
confess himself yet to some minister of the Church.


P. If he be confessed to God as he ought, and be reconciled to such as he may
have offendid, and with whom he may be at strife and enmity, he needs none
other confession.


M. The proof whereof thou have spoken, does it conteyne all that?


P. Thou may judge by that which thou have heard, for the true repentance,
and faith and charity cannot be without true confession and reconciliation
toward God and our neighbor.


The. 23. Dialogue is of Supplication and of Christian prayer.
Of prayer, and how it belongs to none but to the faithful, and may not be
addressed but to God.
MATTHEW. I Have no more now to propone to thee concerning the points which we
have already handled. There rests nothing now, but that thou tell me yet that
which thou have to say touching prayer.


P. For somuche as prayer is a fruit of faith, whereby the faithful do homage
to god, and make request unto him for all things which are necessary as well
for their body as for their soul, men yield thanks unto him for all the good
things which they have already received of him, it follows then well that it
is an honor which belongs not but only to God, and cannot be yielded unto
him but by the faithful.


M. It follows then of that which thou say, that it is not lawful to call
upon or pray to any other than to God.


P. No at all if we will not give the honor which belongs to him, to
creatures, Esaias 42. b 48. b.
and his glory to others against his expressed commandment.


M. Is it then Idolatry to call upon and to pray to any other than to God?


P. It is neither more nor less than to worship an other than he only.


How that our prayers cannot be agreeable unto god without a mediator, and by
what mediator it behooves us to present them.
M. But seeing we are all faulty before his majesty, may we have access unto
him without mediator or advocate?


P. In no wise.


M. Why shall it not be lawful for us then to take one among the Saints
which reign with God?


P. Forsomuche as we cannot have access unto him without a mediator and
advocate, it is not for us to chose him at our pleasure, but for him to give
such an one as he himself has chosen and appointed.


M. He may very well know better than we, what mediator and advocate we need,
and which is most agreeable to him and most meet for us.


P. And therefore it is very reasonable yt therein we be governed by him. Now
thou have already understood heretofore how he has given us his own son to
do that office, in whom only we must repose, if we will not fully deny god, and
provoke him to anger against us in stead of appeasing him, and reiecte Jesus
christ his son, the which he has given us.


How that none other advocate nor mediator may be joined to Jesus christ,
without greatly dishonoring of him.
M. But what inconvenient is it if that we take Jesus Christ for the principal
mediator and advocate by whom we are made at one with the Father, and that
then we take either man saint or woman saint, which reign already in Heaven
with him concerning their souls and spirits, to be also our mediators and
advocates with him, or else toward himself because of our unworthiness?


Pet. The same cannot be done without taking from him the office which
belongs only to him.


M. Why so?


P. For So Much as either he is sufficient for the office which the father has
appointed him, or else he is not sufficient: if he be sufficient, then needs
it not to appointe him a fellow: if he be not sufficient, he is not then the
true anointed of the Lord, and the office which is appointed unto him,
belongs not to him at all.


Mat. This were an horrible blasphemy, not only to speak such words, but
to think them.


P. And therefore if we had none other reason but that that we have not in all
the holy Scriptures neither commandment nor example, which does command and
teach us, we ought to take any other mediator and advocate than Jesus Christ
toward the father, but it is forbidden us expressedly to take any other: that
same should suffice us, seeing that there is neither invocation nor prayer that
can please god, if it be not made in faith. Now there can be no faith where
there is no certain word of God, nor commandment, nor promise of the same
to ground it upon.


Of the commandment which the faithful have to pray one for another, but
not to address them selves to any dead saint.
M. IF it be so as thou say, it shall not then be lawful to require that any
man pray for us, not in deed among the living. For so much as we take as for
advocates and mediators those same unto whom we give such charge to pray for
us.


P. Thou must in this put difference between the living saints and those that
are dead. For we have expressed commandment of God to pray in this life the
one for the others, and sure promise that our prayers shall be heard, not only
when we shall pray for our selves, but also for our brethren.


M. Have we no such commandment nor promise touching the prayers of dead
saints?


P. Not at all in all the holy scriptures which are given unto us for a rule in
all things which concern the service of God. Wherefore we may not address
us to dead men or women saints to call upon them or to pray unto them, to the
end they may be our intercessors, and that they may pray for us, as we may
address us to the living, and require their prayers for us.


What regard the faithful have the one for the others in their prayers.
M. IT follows then by thy saying, that if we may not have the dead Saints
for our advocates and intercessors, yet may we have among the living,
provided that they be faithful.


Pet. Albeit that God does bind us by the charity which we owe the one to the
others, to pray in this life the one for the others, it follows not for all
that, that we must take for our mediators and advocates in the steed of Jesus
Christ, or toward him, those same whose prayers we do require, and that do
pray for us, as the superstitiouse and Idolaters, do take for their mediators
and advocates the dead saints.


M. What difference is there then touching this point?


P. If there were non other difference, but that we have the expressed word of
God for the one, and not for the other, it were sufficient: but there is yet
this more, that when the superstitiouse and Idolatrous sort do take for their
advocates the dead saints, they put the^ in the place of Jesus Christ, as
though he alone were not sufficient, or else at the least they take them as
mistrusting that they should not be hard, neither toward the father nor yet
toward Jesus Christ, if they have none other mediators and advocates by whom
they may have better access, as well to the father as to Jesus christ.


M. And they which desire the prayers of the living, do they not the like?


P. If they do it to that end, they commit great fault, for God does not
only command us to pray one for another, to give us to understand, yt he will
not hear us at al, when we shall our selves call upon him in faith, if there be
not also other faithful ones, which may pray unto him for us, be they more
holy or more perfect than we, or no.


For what cause God has commanded us to pray one for an other.
M. IF then God do hear us when we our selves pray for us, whereunto do the
prayers of others serve us?


P. There be chiefly two points to consider in that.


M. Which is the first?


P. I have already touched it as by ye way, yt god commands us to pray one
for another as an exercise of our faith toward him, and of the charity which
we ought to practice ye one toward the others. For he is greatly pleased when
we do declare by effect yt we have care for our brethren as we have for our
selves, and yt we reco^mend the^ by these our prayers, as our selves, knowing
yt they be as well theirs as ours, and that we have this confidence in him, yt
he will hear the prayers which we make for the^, as he will do those which we
make for our selves.


M. Is not the case like concerning the Saints which are already departed?


P. Thou may well know no, for so much as they have already ended their
course, and that we have no conversation among the^ nor they with us.


M. Does that hinder that they may pray no more for us?


P. If that in deed we were well assured, that they did know our estate, and
our heart, and that they should pray for us without cease, yet should it not be
lawful for all that for us to pray unto them and to call upon the^, for so much
as we have no word of God, as we have already said, which teaches us so to
do, nor that does assure us that our prayers made to them be agreeable to God.


M. Which is yet the other point wherefore God is better pleased that the living
pray for the living, and that they do require the prayers the one of the
others, than to address them to dead Saints?


P. It is that god requires to be called on by many, and that thanckes also
be yielded to him by many, not only for the things which in particular touch
our persons, but also for all those which concern his Church.


M. It is more than reasonable.


P. Moreover he will also that we do communicate with prosperities, with
adversities, with afflictions, and with the quietnesses and with the guiftes
which god sends to his faithful, because of ye communion which they have
among the^, the which we have here to fore, called the communion of saints.


Of the form of prayer which Christ gave to the Church, and of the parts
thereof.
M. I Am as now sufficiently resolved as concerning this point. For so much
then as I know to whom we ought to make our prayers, and by what mediator and
advocate we may have access toward God, to assure us that they be heard
of him, tell me now what things we should demand of him, to the end that
our prayers may be conformable to his will, and that we do not provoke him
against us by those same, where as we should have him favorable to us.


P. We can no more fail in that respect, than in all the others, if we follow
ye rule which Jesus Christ has given us concernning that matter, in the form
of prayer which he has expressly given to his church to direct her in all her
prayers.


M. Recite me that form of prayer.


P. Our father which art in ye heavens. Thy name be hallowed. Thy kingdom
come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread. And pardon us our sins, as we pardon them which offend us. And lead us
not into temptation: but deliver us from the evil one. For unto thee belongs
ye reign, the power, and the glory eternally. So be it.


M. Show me what this prayer co^teineth in su^me.


P. It does contain first a brief preface, and then six requests, in the
which Jesus Christ has comprehended all the things which men may iustlye
demand of God, as well for his honor, as for their salvation, and all their
necessaryes as well corporal as spiritual.


Of the points of the doctrine contained in the preface of the Lords prayer.
M. WHat does he teach us in the preface?


P. Five things every one well worthy to be noted, Note these points.
and so requisite in the prayer, that without them it could not be a true
prayer.


M. Which is the first?


P. By that which he teaches us to call God father, he teaches us also that
we may have no access to him, which trust to be heard of him, if first he be
not agreed with us, in such forte as he account us for his children, and that
we also account him for our father.


M. Which is the third?


P. It follows after thereof, that we may have no access to him, nor yet
our prayers, if we take not his son Jesus Christ for our mediator and
advocate, toward him. John. 14. 1. Tim. 2. b. 1. John. 2. a. Ephe. 1. b.



M. How does it follow of that which thou have said?


P. For so much as God cannot be our Father but by the mean of Jesus Christ,
by whom he has adopted us for his children, as we have also expounded
heretofore.


M. What haste thou yet to say for the fourth point?


P. That we should not fear at all to direct our prayers to God, and not to
mistrust but that they shall be heard, for so much as he is our Father, and that
we have Jesus Christ for our advocate toward him.


M. Which is the fyfte? James. 1. a



P. That even as we should not doubt at all to be heard, on the contrary we
may be well assured that we shall not be heard, if we doubt, and that we
have not assured trust, that even as God is become our Father by Jesus Christ,
even so does he receive us for his children in all our prayers and requests
that we make unto him in the name of his Son, as he has promised unto us.


M. That preface contains great doctrine.


P. Thou may also add unto it, that Jesus Christ teaches us in the same,
that even as we should not doubt of the good will of GOD toward us, seeing
he is become our Father, no more may we doubt, that he is wise and mighty
enough to grant us all things that we shall require of him. For seeing that
he is in heaven, we are thereby assured, that as he is above all creatures,
even so be they all in his power, and knows and understands al things, both
in heaven and in the earth, and has also in his hand all the means to
provide for the same as it pleases him.


Of the content of the three first requests of the Lords prayer.
M. IT is marvelous that Jesus Christ did comprehend so many things in so
few words: let us now come to the requests contained in this form of prayer.


P. The first three of the six, do teach us to demand of God those things
which belong only to his glory and majesty, and to the honor which we owe
unto him: and do teach us forthwith not only to demand these things first,
but also to direct and frame to that end, all the others which we shall demand
for us.


M. The same seems to me to agree very well with that which Jesus Christ
has said, seek first the kingdom of God and the justice thereof, and all
the other things, Mat. 6. d.
shall be added unto you.


Of the content of the three last demau^ds, and what things we ought to demand
of God, and to what end.
P. IN the other three requests following Jesus Christ has comprehended all the
things, that we may demand of god for our selves.


M. Is it not lawful to demand him any other thing, but only that which is
contained in that form of prayer?


P. No. For albe it that it be short, yet Jesus Christ has made it with so
great wisdom, and so perfect art, yt there is no good thing which a man may
ask of god, which is not comprehended in the same.


M. It follows then on ye contrary, that no man may justly pray for any thing
which is not contained in ye same.


P. The one follows of the other, whereupon thou have yet to note, yt it is not
sufficient not to demand of god, The glory of god must be chiefly regarded in
all our prayers.
any thing that is not good of it self: but also it is required that we ask
it him, having ever regard to his glory, and that all that which we ask of
him may serve to the same.


M. Thou will then say that we may offend him in demanding those same
things, the which Jesus Christ has taught us to demand of him for our wealth,
if we have no regard but to our selves, to wit, to the end that we may
live the more at our own pleasure, and not to the end that we may the better
serve to his honor.


P. It is even that which I would have said.


Of the division of the things which we ask of God and first of things
corporal.
M. TEll me now which be the things that we should demand of him for us.


P. There be of two sorts: For the one sort are corporal and temporal, and
do belong but to the course of this life: and the others are spiritual, and
have also regard to the eternal life.


Ma. What do thou understand by these corporal and temporal things?


Pet. All those which are necessary for this poor earthly body, and for the
entertainment of this life, to accomplish in the service of God the course
which we have to run in this world, even to the time that we be come to the
estate in the which we shall see all that accomplished which we firstly
demand, to wit, the sanctification of his name, the accomplishemente of his
kingdom, and perfect obedience toward his holy will, as the heavenly Angels
do yield it unto him.


M. In which request does Jesus Christ comprehend all those things?


Pe. It is under the name of the daily bread, the which we ask of God our
Father as his children, to employ our selves in his service, for so much as it is
he that nourishes us.


Of spiritual things which we ask of God for us.
M. ANd the other requests which are for spiritual things what do they conteyn?


P. A confession of our offenses and sins, by the which as we confess our
selves to be poor and wretched sinners, even so do we daily demand and
obtain by Jesus Christ our Lord forgiveness.


M. Is there yet any thing else?


P. Finally we require the aid and assistance of God our father against the
malice of the devil, and again all the assaults which he may give unto us,
and all the tentations which may come unto us, to the end we may obtain a
full victory, to triumph once in the kingdom of God, with our true king and
captain, and our very Savior and redeemer Jesus Christ.


M. This good God and Father, give us the grace, the which I humbly desire in
the name of his son Jesus Christ, that it may please him so to imprinte in
our hearts all that doctrine by his holy Spirit, that we may well put it in
use, to the glory of his holy name: and to the edification of all men.


P. This good God give us the grace, and not to us only but also to all the
people of the earth, to the end that even as he is God only, and that there
is but one only mediator Jesus Christ, and one law and one Gospel, and one
Baptism, and one Church, even so that al may be united in him by his holy
Spirit, to serve and to honor him in truth, and in Spirit, even as to him
only all honor and glory does belong for ever and ever. Sobeit.


The end.
The Printer to the Readers, greeting.
FOr somuche as many good men desire to have the copy of the prayer, which
the Author of this book has accustomed to make at the beginning of his
sermons, so have I thought it no inconvenient to printe it here, to the end
that all such as would, might use it to the advancement of the glory of
God, to whose grace I commend you.

The Prayer.
ACknowledging our faults and imperfections, and that of our selves we can
have no good thing if it be not given us from heaven, we will humble our
selves before the high majesty of our good God and Father, full of all
goodness and mercy, beseeching him that he will not enter into Judgment
with us, to correct and punish us in his anger and wrath, having regard to
our sins and iniquities, but that he look upon the innocence, iusties, and
obedience of his son Jesus Christ, whom he has given to death for us, for
whose sake if may please him to receive us al to mercy, and by his heavenly
light to drive out of our hearts all darknesses, erroures, and ignorances,
and to fill us with his graces and ye graces of his holy spirit, which may
bring us to the full knowledge of al truth, and may open to us the true
understanding of his holy word, to the end that it be not corrupted by our
carnal sense and understanding, but that he may give us the grace, as he has
spoken by his holy Prophets and Apostles, that being governed by one very
Spirit, we may declare it to his honor and glory and to the edification of
all men: and that we do not hear it only with our carnal ears, to our
judgment and condemnation, as the Infidels and hypocrites do: but that we
may receive the same into our hearts as true children of GOD, through true and
lively Faith, the which may be effectuous and working through charity:
learning thereby to renounce our selves, all Idolatry, all wicked
superstitions and carnal affections, to put wholly all our trust in him, and
to consecrate and conform our selves wholly unto his holy will, to the end
that our life and conversation may be to his honor and his praise, and that
for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, we may be found without blame, and without
spotte before his face: the which things with all others, which this good GOD
and Father doothe know to be necessary for us, we will demand them of him,
as this great Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ his dear Son, our
Sovereign master has taught us, saying all with one heart: Our Father
which art in Heaven. etc.

The Exposition of the Preface of the Law, set forth by master Peter Viret,
Minister of Gods word.
I Am the Eternal thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt,
from the house of bondage. Questions concerning the presence of God in the
mountayn of Synai, and of his voice, and of the law given by the Angels.
TIMOTHE, DANIEL. BEfore that we enter into the Exposition of the
Commandments contained in the Law, according to our agreement, I would
gladly understand two little points of thee, which Moses makes mention of.
Iere. 23. Exodus 19. John. 4. Luke. 24.



Daniel. What are those points?


Timothy. The first is, how that God which is in all places, and does fill
both heaven and earth, and is infinite, did descend into the mountain of
Synai: for was he not there before? The other, how he spoke in proper person,
for somuche as he has neither body, mouth, nor voice like unto man's voice,
if we do consider him in his being and divinity. Act. 7. Gal. 3.
On the other side, S. Paul, and S. Stephen do plainly testify, that the
law was given by the Angels.


Of the presence of God in general, which is common to all men and creatures,
and of his special presence toward his servants.
D. THere is no great difficulty in these questions. For albeeit God does
fill both heaven and earth through his divinity, yet notwithstanding for so
much as he does not always declare his majesty, his power, his wisdom, and
goodness so manifestly and familiarly in one place as in an other, the holy
scripture, to condescend and agree to our grosnesse, does oftentimes attribute
that unto God which is proper to man, to declare unto us the more plainly and
familiarly his presence and assistance. There is no dout but that God was
already in the mount Sinai, before the time that he gave his law, as he was
throughout the whole world, and even as he is at this day: but he did not show
him self in such sort as he did then there show him self to his people,
Genes. 18.
wherefore the Scripture says, because of such a showing of his presence, that
he did there descend.


Of the voice of God which was heard by men, and of his law given by the
Angels.
T. ANd what say thou concerning the other points?


D. Albeit that God have no body as concerning his divine essence or being, nor
voice like unto the voice of man, so is it (notwithstanding) an easy matter
for him, to whom nothing is impossible, to make him self a voice, and to take
such form and likeness as pleases him, to cause him to be heard and known,
Math. 19. Luc. 18.
so far sorth as is meet for the salvation of man, and the infirmity of man
may endure. And also there is no inconvenient, to say that the law which God
gave, was given by Angels, for so much as God was served by their ministry in
the giving of it, and that his majesty was not there showed, but being
accompanied with his Angels, Hebr. 1. Psalm. 96.
which are always prepared and ready to serve him, wherefore both the one and
the other is true, to weet, that God himself did speak and give his law, and
that it was given by the ministry of his Angels.


Of the preface of God in his Law, and of the titles which he gives to
himself in the same: and of the point that is chiefly required in that Law.
T. BEfore that God did take in hand to give his commandments, he does first
use a Preface, which seems to belong only to the children or people of
Israel, as though he gave his law but to them only: the which
notwithstanding (even as it has been said heretofore) does no less belong to
us than to that people. Wherefore I would gladly understand the meaning of it,
and the causes and reasons for the which God did so set it forth, and wherein
it belongs to us.


D. You do know well that when Kings and Princes make any Laws, and do
cause any statutes or ordinances to be published in their name, they do
accustom to put some preface to it, co^tayning their name, and the titles
whereby they declare what their Majesty, Lordship, and power is. 1. Tim. 6.
Seeing then that God, which is the chief King and Prince of al creatures,
would publishe his Law, was it not then meet that he should declare that he
was the Lawmaker, and what was his majesty and power. And therefore did he
say, Prouer. 25. Genes. 21. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
I am the lord thy God which have brought thee out of the land of Egipte,
from the house of bondage. Then is it requisite before all other things, to
know in this law who is the true God, and by what means he may be known and
discerned and separated from false Gods, and that this knowledge go before
all the commandments following. For who shall call upon God, who shall fear
him, who shall love him, who shall put his trust in him, if that first he do
not know him? and not in such sort as the heathen do, who although they had a
certain opinion that there was a God upon whom it behooved them to call, to
fear, to love, and to honor: yet for all that they did not know who he was,
nor where to find him. And for so much as we can not see him, nor discern
him with eyes, nor with any other corporal sense, yet notwithstanding we must
behold him, embrase him, and speak unto him from the heart and from the
spirit.


Of the name Eternal which is Jehoua in Hebrevve, given to God.
T. WHerefore does he first call him self the Eternal?


D. He does declare in the Hebrewe tongue, in the which Moses has written
these things, Genes. 1.
by the word of Iehoua the which we do so translate, what is his being and
his nature, and that he is the Creator of al creatures, John. 1.
the first and the last, without beginning and without end, and has his being
of none other but of him self: and of him all things have their being, Act. 14.
Esaie. 44. Apoc. 1.22. Act. 17. Exodus 3.7.23.
and are come from him, and do return into him. It is he by whom we live,
move, and are. The^ may he lawfully say, I am, the which none else may justly
say. Wherefore, seeing that he is our Creator, Genesis ^. 28.35 Esaie. 47. Exodus
3.13. 1. Cor. 4. Deuteronomy. 6. Math. 22. Gene. 2.
and so by consequent our guide and gouerner, and that we have of him our
soul, body, and goods: is it not meet that we do acknowledge him to be our
King, Prince and Lord, and render to him the homage of soul, of body and
goods, and of all things else that we have received of him, to yield unto him
perfect obedience? For this cause ye holy Scripture puts us in mind
oftentimes of these things, and gives to God the title of maker of heaven and
earth. Wherefore it must needs be granted that none other be our God but only
he unto whom this name and title belongs, which is that Eternal essence that
can do all things, and is the beginning, the conservation, and the end of all
things.


In what sort God is generally called the God of all men, and chiefly the
God of his chosen people.
T. WHerefore does he also say beside that, Thy God? Apoc 10. Jonas. 1. Ezech.
18.



D. Because that this first benefit is common to all men, and to al creatures
according to their nature, in as much as he is creator of the^ all, he adds
unto it also this title, to make him more amiable and favorable unto us: to
the end that by that mean he may make his doctrine more acceptable unto us,
and that he may make us ye more willing to receive it as the doctrine of our
father, 1. Tim. 2.
who by the same procures nothing but only our commodity and salvation. And
therefore he does not only say God, but thy God: which is a manner of speech,
that according to the phrase of the holy Scripture, carries with it favor and
grace. For first, the name of God, the which Moses here does use, does
signify in Hebrewe, force, and forces, to declare unto us that he has the
power to aid and help us, and that he is not only God for him self, to
wit, that he will keep in him self the good things that in him are, and not
to bestow and distribute them: but that his very office is to bestow the^ upon
men, to show him self gracious and favorable toward the^. When he does ye
contrary, being provoked thereunto by their frowardness and wickedness, he
does by his prophets call that work, Esaie. 28.
a strange work. Wherefore when he calls him self the God of any people,
he declares thereby that he is not only their God, as he is generally ye God of
all creatures, as Creator of them: but yt he is their God, not severe and
rigorous, as a judge toward evil doers: but courteous, loving, favorable and
merciful, as a good father to his children. When then he says, Thy God, he
does then put the^ in mind of that which he spoke before, that he had chosen
this people as his own enheritance, and as a precious Jewel among all the
rest. Exodus 34. Number. 1. Psalm. 12.10 Gene. 25.
And therefore it is not without cause said by the Prophet, he has done so to
none other nation. And therefore he says by Esaie, And now says the Lord
thus, which has created thee Jacob, and who has fashioned thee Israel, fear
not, for I have bought thee, Deuteronomy. 4. Exodus 19. Psalm. 147. Esaie. 4.23.
I have named thy name, Thou art mine. When you shall pass by water, I will be
with thee, and the floudes shall not swallow thee up: When thou shall pass
through ye fire, thou shall not be burnt: For I am ye Lord thy God, the holy
one of Israel, thy Savior, etc.


T. There is a goodly declaration of that which thou have now spoken, and a
very apparent testimony.


D. It is even so. For thou see that after that he calls him self the God
and the maker and fashioner of Israel, and the Eternal, he adds unto it
immediately, Thy Savior, which have redeemed thee.


For what cause God does make express mention in the preface of his Law, of
the deliverance of Israel out of Egipte.
T. ANd why does he add yet, which have brought thee out of the land of
Egypt?


D. To put the^ in mind of the great benefit, the which not long before they
had received of him, and whereby he had plainly declared unto them, that he
was their God, Deuteronomy. 7.14. Math. 19.
and that he esteemed them for his people, in an other sort than he did the
Egiptians, wherefore they had good occasion to think that so good a God and so
loving a father would not set forth unto the^ any doctrine, but such as should
be greatly for their profit, and that they ought most willingly to receive and
embrace the same, as well for the great good will and friendship that God did
bear toward them, and had declared unto them, as for the right of Lordship
which he had double over them: of their own part, because of their creation:
on the other, because of the deliverance, which was as a new conquest, by the
which he had as it were conquered them a new, delivering them from the
subjection of a most cruel tyrant, to make them a well beloved people to him
self, and as the first borne of all people. And therefore he does plainly say,
which have brought thee out, Osce. 11. Exodus 4. Deuteronomy. 9.
and none other, by my only power and strength, and not by thine own, nor of
any creature else, and to make them yet more willing, as of right they ought,
not being content to have made mention of the country of Egypt, but he
adds unto it, from the house of bondage, Exodus 5.
to put them in mind of the great travels wherewith they were oppressed, and to
give them to understand that they had been holden as a slave in hard and
cruel bondage, living in the bitter and tyrannous subjection of an other,
without having any show or fashion of a people, in respect of yt which was
afterward given the^ by the law and policy which the Lord gave unto them.


T. That is worthy to be noted.


How that this remembrance of the going forth out of Egypt, is a mark to
separate the true God from the false Gods.
D. ON the other side, this remembrance of the going forth of the people out
of the land of Egypt, does comprehend not only the benefits which this
nation did at that time receive at the hand of God, when they were brought out
of Egypt by his power and virtue: but also all the other works and wonders
which he did among them, and by the which he did declare and show him self
not only to be the true God, but also to be the guide and governor of this
people. And therefore, for so much as he can not be seen nor understood by
any bodily sense, it pleased him to give these visible witnesses and
testimonies of him self, whereby he may be certainly seen in spirit and faith,
and discerned from false Gods: and chiefly in Jesus Christ our Lord, in who^ he
has yet more familiarly and plainly showed him self. Wherefore we are
assured, that when we direct our selves to this God, which brought the people
of Israel out of Egypt, which is also the very same which has showed him
self in Christ, Number. 14.23. Psalm. 78.106.
we do not direct our selves to any Idol, nor yet to a false God, but to the
true God, who has so declared him self by his works. For what people is it
that may say of the Gods which they worship, that which we may say in deed
of our God, the true God of Israel, and father of our Lord Jesus Christ?
And for so much as men be so unkind toward God, and that there is nothing
more ready and common among them, than to forgette his graces and benefits, as
the spirit of God does oftentimes lay to the charge of this people, The
paschall lamb, the s^pper, all one in effect.
he gave unto Israel the sacrament of the Paschall Lamb, and unto us that of
his supper, to make us mindful.


Of the sundry tytles which have been given to God in the holy scriptures, as
well before the going forth out of Egypt, as after, and chiefly sith the
coming of Christ in the flesh, and for what causes they have been given.
T. THis point that makes mention of the going forth out of Egypt, is even
the most hard of all the Preface. Wherefore I would gladly understand for what
cause God did so expressly take to him self this title, and that he did not
rather take some other which was more common to all nations, Galath. 3.
seeing that that law should serve unto all.


D. God might well have taken greater and more redoubted titles, but it pleased
him rather to use those that were more favorable and less fearful, Mark. 13.
which do set him forth to us more gracious and merciful, than sharp and
rigorous: to the end that he would not make us to flee from him, fearing us
with the greatness of his majesty, but rather that he would draw us unto him
by the sweetness of his mercy. Exodus 19. Deuteronomy. 32.
On the other side, he has also taken the names and titles, according to the
time, the places, and people, unto whom he showed him self, and according to
the manners and fashio^s that he used: and because that he would declare him
self more familiarly, he did take those titles that were most special, to
make him self the better known unto us, to the end we should not be overmuch
discouraged, if he had left us in an ouer-large contemplation of him self,
without giving any term or end to our spirit, to cause him self to be
known to it by some benefit more particular, and more worthy of his loving
kindness. Exodus 3.
Before that departure Jacob, because of the promise and aliance the God of
Abraham, of Isahac, and of out of Egypt, he was oftentimes called made with
them: whereas before he was commonly called the maker of heaven and earth. And
from the departure out of Egypt, he has taken this title, even to the coming
of Christ, of whom it was said by the Prophets, that he should no more be
called, the God which has brought us out of Egypt, but, the Lord which has
drawn us out from al parts and countries wherein we were dispersed, Ephe. 1.
even from the time that he was called God, Father of Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us with all spiritual blessing and heavenly things in Christ, and has
redeemed and delivered us from all evil: which thing was not done without good
and just cause. And also we must beside all this consider that which has been
already spoken, to wit, that that co^memoration of the delivery out of Egypt,
is taken for a rememberaunce of all the benefits of God toward his people,
because that it was the beginning, whereby he did more excellently and more
apparently declare what care he had for his people, and does help them in a
more authorized and authentike manner than he did before, and afterward he has
always continued his mercy upon them, and upon all those which by Christ have been won and joined to this people. Wherein Moses did use a manner of speech
which was very common to him, which was to signify and co^prehe^d ye whole by
a part thereof.


Of the true knowledge and manifestatio^ of God, and to what end the titles
serve which are given to him to guide and lead us to the same.
T. DEclare this to me more plainly.


D. Thou must know that it is not sufficient for a man to have a certain
general conceit or imagination, or opinion and knowledge of God in his
understanding, but it is meet that he do know him to be such a one as he has
declared him self by his word, and chiefly in Jesus christ his son: or else
he shall wander in the vanity of his imaginations, and shall be without God. For
seeing that God can not be known nor comprehended in his divine essence, nor
in his majesty, if we will have such knowledge as is necessary to our
salvation, it is requisite that we go and seek him, and behold him there
where it has pleased him to declare and reveal him self unto us, and that by
those means which he has given us. For if we do otherwise, we do then forge
him to be such a one as the vanity of our understanding may imagine him and
from thence it shall come to pass, that in the stead of him we shall make
unto our selves strange gods, which shall be no gods, but thinking to serve
God, we shall serve ye devil. Wherefore it is not enough that we believe that
there are gods, but that there is one only god. And yet for all that this is not
enough so to do, but yt also we do believe yt this god, which is the only true
god, is maker of heaven and of earth, and of all creatures visible and
invisible: which thing all those that do believe that there are Gods, do not
believe at all. Moreover, for so much as man is fallen through sin, and that
he has need to be restored, it behooves us to know also how that same God
which has created us, is also the very same God that has restored and saved
us, and by what mean he has done the same, to the end that we should
acknowledge him to be our only maker and leader, father, savior, and
redeemer, and none else: and that we should acknowledge in him the benefit of
our creation, which signifies also his providence, and our restoring and
redemption. It is then the very cause why he has chosen to him self a certain
people, unto whom he would declare him self in the shape of man, in his son
Jesus Christ, to open his knowledge throughout all the world. Wherefore
whosoever does know the God of Abraham, of Isahac and of Jacob, and the God
which has brought the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt, he knows
God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and is a true Israelite, Romans 4.
and the very son of Abraham the father of all beleuers, put in and joined to
the true people of God.


How the deliverance of the people of Israel out of Egypt, was a shadow and
figure of the deliverance which is made by christ Jesus, and how the Christian
people are comprehended in the people of Israel, and their deliverance also in
the deliverance of that people.
T. BY this mean the Christians shall then be one people with the people of
Israel.


D. There is no doubt thereof, for seeing that people was chosen of God to be
as the keeper and treasurer of his word and of his promises, to the end that
by that same mean they should come eue^ to us, and be fulfilled in us, and that
it was the shadow and figure of true things which were brought unto us by Jesus
Christ, there is no doubt but that we are comprehended in the same. And seeing
that this delyueraunce from the tyranny of Egypt was a figure of this other
and great deliverance which we have through Jesus Christ our Lord: there can
be no mention made of the first, but that we ought to have the second in
remembrance, and to give us to understand, that if the people of Israel had
great occasion to embrace the law which was given to them by God, and to
endeavor them to obey him according to the same, for the causes heretofore
alleged: for one occasion that they had so to do, we have a thousand, for so
much as GOD has showed himself by this delyuerance, which he has wrought for
us by his Son Jesus Christ our God, much more favorable without comparison,
than ever he did show himself to the Israelites. For albeit that both they
and we have but one Christ Jesus, and one very mean of salvation through
him, yet for all that, this saluatyon has been much more plainly declared
unto us, and much more excellentlye without shadows and fygures, and much
more familiarly and in far greater power of the spirit of GOD than ever it
was to them. Wherefore seeing the spiritual Israelites, and the true
Chrystians are but one people, we must know that that which has regard and
pertayneth unto the one, has regard and does pertain to the other, in that
which does concern the true spiritual service of GOD, the which God
requires, as well of the one as of the other.


Of the order and mean that God did keep in gyuing of his law, and of the
great doctrine contained therein: and what agreement it has with the form of
prayer which was given by Jesus Christ.
T. I Am well satisfied in this point, and of all that which is contained in
this preface. Wherefore let us now come to the declaration of the
commandments given in the law.


D. Before we do proceed any further, it shall be well done that we do
consider what manner and order GOD did use in giving of these commandments,
for he has done nothing without good and just cause, the which being known,
shall greatly help us toward ye understanding of the matters that we have to
entreat.


T. I would gladly understand it.


D. God has in this done in manner the very like, in giuyng of this law by
his servant Moses, that he did by his son Jesus Christ, when he gave unto
us the form and order of prayer.


T. How so?


D. The form and order of prayer the which we have received of our Lord
Jesus Christ, does it not seem to thee very short?


T. In deed it is not very long.


D. Yet notwithstanding in this briefness of words, our Lord Jesus Christ
has comprehended all the vows, all the wyshes and desires, and all the
demaundes and just and reasonable requests that man may make to God, the
which do belong as well to his glory, as to the profit and salvation of man:
and forthwith does teach us of who^ we ought to demand them, and how and to
what end, and by what means we may obtain them.


T. There is very good doctrine and in few words.


D. So much the greater and more marvelous is the wisdom of our savior
Jesus Christ declared. And beside that, in setting forth these things, he
has divided this whole form of prayer, into two parts, which do every of
them contain three demaundes or peticions, which are six in the whole, the
two parts being put together: of the which the three that are contained in the
first part, are as it were the foundation and rule of the other three
following, and do show to what end they ought to tend. For in the first
place he has set those which have regard directlye to the glory of God,
without any special consyderation of our selves, or of any other creature:
and afterward he adds unto them, those which do concern more specially
our persons: the which he will also that we do direct to God for the
obtaynyng of the things that are contained in them, so far forth as shall be
requisite to make them to serve to that which is contained in the first: god
has done eue^ the like, when he gave that law which is called by ye Hebrews,
the ten words, Deu. 4.10.
following the Phrase of the speech of Moses, which did so name it, because
that it did contain in sum ten commandments, which ought to serve us in
this respect, as ye ten predicaments do serve ye Logiciens, for their part.
Wherefore it is not so requisite that the scholars which study Logique, should
know at the fingers ends their predicaments, as it is requisite that all
those which will be accounted of the number of the people of God, do know
this law, and the commandments contained in the same. For that same very
cause is it also called by the Greeks the Decalogue, and by us ye ten
commandments of the law. For first, it does contain in few words all that
ever man is able to do, say, or think either of good or evil, and all that
does please or displease him, and that he does allow or disalow in all ye
thoughts, affections, words and works of men: and also all that, which not
only all the laws of man and all the volumes of ye philosophers, Poets and
Orators do contain, concerning the manner how to live well: but also all
that is contained as well in the books of the prophets as of the Evangelists
and Apostles, concerning ye service of God, and the good manners, and the order
how to rule and lead his life according to his will. Wherefore, the books of
all the Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles, are in a manner as commentaries
and expositions of that law, as well to declare unto us the doctrine contained
in the same, as to make us to know him to whom this law will direct us through
the knowledge of our own infirmity, to find in him the fulfilling of the
same.


T. That law is then unto us an eternal and unchangeable rule, to know the
difference that is between good and evil, and between that which ought to
be done, or left undone, in all things.


Of the testimonies that God in his law gives unto us of himself, and of his
nature, and of the nature of man, and of the redemption of him.
D. BEside all that, thou ought to note that God in the same does give us a
certain testimony, that he is one true God, and that he is wise, good, just,
true, sound and perfect. For it is manifest, that the order which he has set
forth unto us in that law, and that the difference yt is set forth thereby
between the good and the evil, the virtues and the vices, are not done at
adventure, but by a certain counsel and providence of God. Afterward, he
declares unto us also that he is a just Judge, which will not suffer the just
to be overthrown, nor the wicked to be vnpunnished, and that he will no
iniquity. Moreover, in declaring unto us by his law what an one he is, he does
also show unto us what man's nature ought to be, and to what end it was created,
and how much it is fallen away from that perfection wherein it was first
created, and how far of it is from the will of God, to the which it ought to
be agreeable, and to answer and serve to that end for ye which it was created
of GOD. On the other side, he does plainly give us to understand by that
same mean, of the salvation which he has prepared for us in Jesus Christ by
the mean of the Gospel. For as he has not created mankind, to dampne them
all in general: no more has he given that law in vain, but only to condemn
man, as in deed it should have come to pass, if he had not ordained an
other mean for their salvation.


How that the law of God conteyneth much more in substance than the words
seem to signify at the first sight, and how they ought to be understood
according to the nature of the Law maker
T. IT must needs be then, that the words contained therein, do import and
declare much more than they seem to show at the first.


D. They do conteyne as much as I have said.


T. There are then many which do not know nor understand them so well as they
think that they do.


D. But I think for my part that there be none other but such as thou
speak of: For they that might well understand and know them, moughte also
understand and know all the writings of the prophets and Apostles. The matter
that is spoken of in the law, may not be measured, according to the shortenesse
of the words, by the which it is set forth and declared, but according to
the substance that is therein contained, and the nature and majesty of him that
speaks and sets forth the thing. For seeing that it is God, we may well
know that his speech and phrase is framed in a marvelous high knowledge and
wisdom, and that there is no word nor syllable, but that it is of great
weight and effect, and does importe very much. And further, seeing that God
is a spirit, and a spiritual and eternal essence, without beginning and
ending, and will be served in spirit and in verity, with such service as is
agreeable with his nature and majesty, we may then well know, that there is
great difference between the nature of his law, which is divine, and that of
man's laws: and that he is not contented to have it in such sort observed, as
men are contented to have theyrs observed.


Of the difference that is betvveene the law of God and the laws of man, and
the things required in these same and of the judgment of God, and the
judgment of men concerning the same.
T. Show me then what is the difference.


D. Men are contented, if that by outward works their commandments be
observed, and that there appear unto them nothing to be done against them: but
they can not deal with the judgment of the hearts, of the affections and
thoughts, because they are unknown to them, saving in as much as they be
declared outewardely. On the other side, albeeit that they are declared
outwardely, yet notwithstanding, they do not condemn them and punish them
continually, nor many outward works also, although they be very wicked.


T. How may that be?


D. As well because that men for the most part, are contented to entertayne
the society of man in a certain worldly peace and tranquillity, as also that
they think not oftentimes that to be evil which is evil: or if they esteem
it to be evil, they think it not to be so great as it is: or if they thynk it
to be great, they do mainteyn it.


T. And from whence comes this fault?


Daniell. It does partly proceed of Ignorance and blyndenesse that sin
has engendered in the understanding of man, which is the cause that he cannot
so well discern the good from the evil, nor judge of the one and the other,
as he should have done, if he had continued in the state of innocence and
grace, in the which he was created: beside that, there is this other great
mischief, that man does willingly supporte that wherein he would himself be
supported, and that he never has so great care for that which concerns the
honor of God, as for that which concerns his own body: It is the cause
why men do rather punish, yea and that more greeuousely, those faults which
touch their honor or dishonor, or their profit or hindrance, than they do
those which make wars directly against the honor and majesty of God: but
it is not so with God: for he is not contented with the only work that
appears outwardly, but he requires the heart, and beholds the fountain
from whence the woork springs: which can not please him, how fair a show
so ever it have, but only so far forth as it proceeds from the heart, and
that the heart do please him: the which in deed can in no wise please him,
but so farforth as he does draw near to his nature, and that he is reformed
and made new like to his image, and regenerate by his holy spirit: For there
is no work good nor pleasant to God, but that which proceeds from him, and
that he himself does: Matthew. 1^. James. 4. John. 4.
for even as there is none good but only he, so is there no good thing but that
which proceeds from him alone therefore ye work which proceeds from us, can
not please him, but so far as he works in us by his holy spirit, and that
our spirit is governed by his: For he which is a spirit, is then served by
his like.


In what sort the words of the law of God ought to be understood: and
how that God does not only behold the outvvarde works, but the
origiginal of them also, and what be the things that God does allow or
condemn in man.
T. SO far forth as I may understand by thy words, that law does well
deserve to be otherwise weyed and considered of, than it is,


D. It is even so. For when God does require of us a thing that seems to
belong to the outewarde work, we ought to understand the whole by a part:
and the cause by the effect: and the root, and the whole herb by the fruict:
and the woorkeman by the work: and all the circumstaunces and dependances of
the one and the other. Note.
And when he forbids a thing, we must also know that he commands his
contrary: and likewise when he commands, he forbids the contrary of
that which he commands. For he beholds man thoroughly, both endlong and
ouerthwarte, and does sound the heart and all the thoughts and affections of
him, and allows nothing in him, but that which he fyndeth to be his, and
has himself commanded: and disalloweth nothing but that which man has
received of others than of him, and that which he has forbidden him: Wherefore
he does not only condemn that work which seems outwardly to be evil, but
also the spring from whence the same proceeds: and does not only condemn it
when his fruit is come to light, but he does alwais condemn it, albeit that it
do continually lie hid in secret in the dark bottomless pittes of
ignorance of the heart of man, Psalm. 13^.
unsearchable to man, but known and open to GOD. Therefore David says, thou
haste proved and known me: thou haste known me sitting and standing, going
and coming, within and without. For how may it be that the workman which
made man should not know him, which did know him before he was begotten and
made? Shall not the workman know his work?


T. Who should then know him, if he should not?


Of the consideration of those things which in deed displease God in man, and
first of all in his work: and in what sort it ought to be considered, as
commanded or forbidden by God.
D. SEeing then that he which is the workman, and has framed and made the
substance it self whereof he is fashioned, and that he him self is the giver
of the fashion, it is not to be doubted but that he doothe very well know
all that ever is in him, and that which he has of his own put into him, and
what man has of others to destroy his work. We must therefore note here that
there are in us four things that can not please God, and every of them does
in his behalf deserve death and eternal damnation. Now if any one of them
being taken aparte (if it were possible to separate them the one from the
other) be so abominable of his own nature, and worthy of so grievous
punyshemente, what may it then be when they are all joined together?


T. There must needs be much filthiness: but which be these things? Four
horrible things in man.



D. First there is concupiscence: for the second, the affection begotten of
him: for the third, the consent of the will to this affection: for the fourth,
the execution of the same by deed. But I will begin my declaration by this
last, which is to say, by the work that apeareth outwardly, to the end that by
the same we may have the better understanding of the other things that do
go before, which are more hidden and more secret. In this point I will begin
by the most apparaunt and open fruit, whereby we easily judge of the nature
of all trees.

For in setting forth first the work, the workman shall not only be known
thereby, but also the forge and shop wherein that work has bin wrought. As
concerning the work, we ought to consider it first two wais. The one as
commanded of God: the other as forbidden by him. That which is commanded by
God, can never be evil, being understood in that sense and meaning that he
has commanded it, and being applied to that end that it ought to be. On the
other side, that which he has forbidden, being weyed in the same sort, may
never in any wise be good.


By what rule the works of men ought to be examined, and how dangerous a
thing it is to follow the judgment of man's reason.
T. WE ought then to be well advised and to take good heed how we do establish
judgment upon man's reason, and upon the opinions of men in such matters.


D. It is very true. For it is often times seen that men judge that good which
is evil, and do disalowe that which God aloweth, and allow that which he
disaloweth, for the causes before mentioned. For in the judgment of god the
sentence shall not be given according to the judgment of man's reason, and of
the opinions of men: but according to the pronuntiation which God has already
pronounced by his word and by his law, which shall be the weights, the
ballaunce and the rule, wherein and whereby all the thoughts, words and works of
men shall be weyed and measured,


How that the law of god is transgressed not only in doing that which is
forbidden by it, but also in leuing that undone which is therein commanded,
and how that those good works which we do, are not able to satisfy for them
which we ought to do, and do not, ne yet for those which we do against the
will of God.
T. THen does it follow that whosoever shall do that which shall be forbidden
of God, or shall leave undone that which he does command him, the same
deserves condemnation. On the other side, he that shall absteyne from that
which he has forbidden, and shall do that which he has commanded, the same
shall receive the praise and commendation of a good and faithful servant. Two
points of great effect.



D. These two points that thou touchest, are right well worthy to be noted.
For there be some that think that they have sufficiently fulfilled the law of
God, if that they have refrayned from those things which are therein forbidden,
yea and if it have bin don but only in outward appearance, without laying of
hands with a prompte courage to those things which are commanded them. On
the other side, there be others which think that they may ye more lawfully
dispense with themselves to do many things that be forbidden in the law, when
they have don some little portion of those which are commanded, and think
these to be a reco^pe^ce for the others. But we must needs walk in all other
manner of simplicity before god, and must put in use yt which Jesus christ
has said: it behooves to do this, and not to leave the other undone, Matthew.
23. Note this place.
for here it ought to have better place, than in any where else. It behooves to
do that which is commanded, and to refrain from that which is forbidden. For
he that commands and he that forbids, is always one Lord, who will not
suffer his majesty to be more dishonored of the one part than of the other.
Therefore, when thou do some part of that which is commanded thee, think
not by that little well doing which thou have done on the one side, to have
recompensed the great evil which thou have committed on the other side. For
if thou have don any thing well, thou have done thy duty, and have done nothing
else, yea and that which more is, thou have not done all that: how may thou
the^ recompense the evil which thou have committed, in doing that which was
forbidden thee, by this little good which thou have done, when that same it
self is not sufficient to satisfy for the faults which thou haste
committed, in the leaving of that undone which thou ought to have done?


T. I do know that very well.


How that it is not sufficient to do outwardly the works which God
commands, if that they be not done to the intent and to the very same
purpose for the which God does command them, and how greatly hypocrisy
displeases God.
D. ON the other part, Note this counsel thorough out.
when thou do the work which god commands, thou must take good heed to
what end thou do it, and with what mind. For if thou do it more for thine
own glory and profit, and for thine own behoof, than thou do for the
honor of God, and for the love thou bear to him, or to thy neighbor for
his sake: thou make of a good work an evil work, and do greatly offend
him thorough thy hypocrisy, abusing his name, and making a mask of his law,
to serve thee and thy wicked affections. And therefore such a work is no more
a work of the spirit of God: for so much as it is not done in truth, but in
lies. For all hypocrisy is lies, for so much as it is nothing else but falshod,
fayning, and dissimulation, which has an other show outwardly, than the
troth of the thing has inwardly. Now al lies proceed from the devil. The
work then which is done in lies, is of the devil, and not of God. Wherefore
it cannot much better please God, than does the troth which the devil
speaks to cover his lies with, and to transfigure himself into an Angel of
light: and that all the works do that ever he does, how fair a show so ever
they have, although God do make them serve to his glory. For his intent is
always wicked, for so much as he never does thing but for himself, and has
regard neither to the honor of God nor to the profit of any creature,
wherefore he is never more perilous, than when he has the greatest show of well
doing, for then it is that he does most dishonor god, and does greatest hurt
to men, because he is more covered and disguised, and more hard to be known
and to be taken upon the sudden: wherefore those which call this devil that is
so disguised, a white devil, are not void of reason. Therefore the false
Prophets are never more dangerous, than when they have the greatest show of
holiness, and do most counterfaite the true servants of God: the like is of
al hypocrites. The good work which he seems to do, Math. 23.^ Luke. 10.
is often times worse than though it were set forth plainly such as it is. It
is the very cause why Christ did condemn the alms, prayers and fastings of
the Scribes and Pharisees, and all their other works, for so much as they did
them only to be seen of men.


What good or hurt the work does that is outwardly done, and not with a
good heart, and what it may bring to the worker of the same, and also to
others, and whether it be better that it be done or undone.
T. IF the matter be such that the work it self which God commands cannot
please him, if it do not proceed from such a heart as he requires, but does
rather displease him, it follows then, that if a man have not such an heart,
he does not only leese his time in doing of such a work, but he does also
purchase to himself a more greater judgment.


D. There are also two points to be considered in this matter: if that the man
that does this work, does it thoroughly of a very malice and to such end as
the Devil does his, to wit, to dishonor God, and to deceive me^, and to hurt
his neyghbor, it were much better that he did nothing at all, for his work can
do but hurt, and more to himself than to any other: if he do it not in deed
for so evil a purpose, but only to have some worldly honor or profit, the
work is then yet somewhat more profitable in sundry sorts, as well to
himself as to others, according to the circumstaunces of the same, than if it
had not bin done at all, or else if he had done those works which God has
forbidden. For first of al, those that see such a work, are edified, in so much
as they see it to be good of his own nature, and do think, that it
proceeds from such an heart as it shows for outwardly: on the other side,
if it be a work whereby thy neighbor receives any comfort or help in his
person, it is then so much the more profitable. Wherefore, albeit that the
work be not such as God requires: yet for so much as it serves somewhat to the
glory of God, and to the edification of our neyboure, God is so good that he
will not suffer it to be unrecompensed.


T. What recompense will he then give him?


D. That which the worker requires: he desires glory among men, and his
particular commodity, which things he does often times receive for his hire,
which extend no further than his life: for he has no further regard at all.
Matthew. 6.



T. By this accoumpte then thou would conclude that it were better yet that
a man should assist the word of god and his Church, and also the poor, and
that he should do such like works, although that his heart were not thoroughly
such as it ought to be, rather tha^ to do nothing at all, or to the contrary,
so that he do it not in any wise to the intent to dishonor God, and of a
determinate purpose, or else rather to hurt his neyghbor, than to profit him.


D. It is true, for we have in the holy Scriptures many examples, which
declare that God has often times in this world done great good to many that
have not had such hearts as they ought to have had, because that their works
did serve somewhat to his glory, and to the relief of his people.


In what sort the heart of man may fulfill the law of God or no, and may
be condemned, or absolved by the same, without the works which god requires
of him in the same.
T. Seeing that the work which seems to be good, cannot please God, but so
far forth as the heart from whence they do proceed does please him, and that
the heart does make the work to be accepted or refused at his hand: Four
demands.
I do first ask thee, if GOD can content him self without the work with
the heart alone? The other is, if the work which of him self is evil, may
please him, or else may be suffered by him, when he that does it, does it not
for any evil purpose, but does it of force against his heart, or else because
he thinks it not to be evil? The third, to know in deed if GOD do condemn
the wicked thought, although it be not put in execution, and whether it do as
much displease him as if the effect were joined with it.


D. As touching the first, it is sure that if God have the heart of man, he
has the whole, therefore it cannot be but that the heart does offer and
present unto him the work that he requires of him, wherefore the work may
not be separated from the heart, no more than the fruit from the tree: Psalm.
1. Matthew. 12.
for eue^ so as the good tree never fails, to bring forth his fruit in his
due time and season, so does the good heart at all times and in all seasons
that GOD requires it, if he do it not, the cause is for that he wants mean
to do it, and also power, or else that he has not a will to do it, if he have
a will, and have no power and means to do it, that will being good, God does
accept, and esteems it as well as if the fact were done. The like does he
also, if the will be wicked, albeit that it have not ye power to put his wicked
thought in execution. Wherefore the wicked work does not only displease God,
but also the wicked will and affection, in sort that if it do proceed so
far that it is not long of her that she does not execute her evil purpose,
and that there is nothing does hinder it, but want of power, there is no doubt
but that God accompteth the wickedness done. For that cause our Lord Jesus
Christ, and Saint John following his doctrine, 1. John. 3. Matthew. 5.
does compare to a murderer him that hates his brother, and esteems him an
adulterer that behouldeth an other man's wife, coveting her. We must understand
the like of all other vices, according to the interpretation that our Lord
Jesus Christ himself, and after him his Apostles, gave us of the law of God:
but if the heart had the mean and the power to do that which was commanded
him to do, and has not only left it undone, but has also not employed him
self by all means possible to use those occasions whereby he might do them, it
is a certain testimony and an assured sign that it is not good, and that
there is no good will in it: for if it were good, and that the will were such
as it ought to be, it should not be more desirous of any thing, than to yield
unto God that obedience, honor and service, which is due unto him, and that
he requires of him, wherefore God cannot be pleased with such an heart, for it
is feigned and untrue.


How that men do glory in vain of their good heart and of their faith, if
their works bear not witness of it, and for what cause the judgment shall
be given by God according to their works, and why the Prophets do so ernestly
require them, exhorting the people of God to repentance.
T. WE do then in vain glory of the heart, if the work bear not good witness
of the same. James. 2. Here must be great judgment used.



D. Yea as well as of the faith. Wherefore we may well here say with Saint
James: show me thy heart and thy faith, by thy works, for as the faith that
is without works is not a true faith, but only a vain and feigned faith, and
dead, and a false show of faith, having nothing of true faith saving only the
name without the effect: no more does the heart live to God, nor is dedicated
unto him, that does not declare himself by good works. For the fire, how little
soever it be, cannot be without light and without heat, and at the least
without some little smoke, for this cause, in the manner of Gods judgment,
which is set forth to us by our Lord Jesus Christ, there is in manner no
mention made, but only of works by the which every man is judged for so much as
they shall bear witness of the heart and faith of every man. Likewise when
the Prophets exhort men to true repentance, they do ever praise works, and
namely such as do concern our neighbor, forsomuche as hypocrisy may least
be therein cloked, and that man does declare by that which he does concerning
the commandments of the second table, and toward his neighbor, what heart
he bears toward God, and in what reverence he has the commandments of the
first table, for it is an easy matter for a man to boast himself to have a
sound and perfect heart toward God, and to make a show by the observation of
the outward ceremonies, but when he must in deed lay hand to the work, which
is to say, to the true charity, which is the end and fulfilling of the law,
Timo. 1.
and to the works of the same, which are the chief that god requires: 1.
Ioh. 3.4
the^ is the hypocrisy of the heart seen. For that very cause S. John says, yt
man which has the goods of this world, and shall see his brother in need and
shall shut up the bowels of his compassion from him, how dwells the love of
god in him? And again, if any say, I love God, and yet does hate his brother,
the the same is a lier: for he yt loves not his brother whom he has seen, how
may he love god whom he has not seen? And we have this comma^deme^t of him yt
he which loves god do love also his brother. S. John does declare plainly by
these words, that a man may in no wise better know of what affection the heart
of man is toward god, tha^ by ye which he shows toward his neybor and
brother, which is ye child of god and bears his image as he does, and that
there is not a mean more meet to discover the hypocrisy and dissimulation of
man's heart, than it. For a man may by the good will that is borne to the
father, judge what good will there is borne to the son. And therefore, the
Prophets do often times use these arguments, to vanquish the wicked hipocrits:
and also our Lord Jesus Christ, in that form of judgment, whereof we have
already spoken, declares that he esteems all that to be done to himself,
that has bin don to his, be it good, or be it evil. And by this manner of
proceeding, he does right well declare that whereof we have already spoken, for
when he does rebuke and reprove the hypocrites and the reprobates, Matthew. 25.
that he has bin forsaken and evil handled by them, they answer forthwith,
and ask when that was done, as though they did not know of it: Wherein they do
plainly declare that they would have the name to bear a great good will to
Jesus Christ, and to do their duty toward him: but he does vanquish them of the
contrary, by the tokens which they have showed toward his poor members, in
whose person he complayneth to have been forsaken and evil handled: as he does
complain that he was persecuted by Saul, Acts. 9.
in the persecution which he used against the Christians.


How that the dissimulation and fayning of man's heart is declared by the
transgression of the Law of God: and how there is neither ignorance, nor
constraint, nor any reason, what so ever it be, No^.
that can excuse him.
T. I Think also that this be one of the principal causes why God does set
forth rather the work than any other thing in that law, to the end that we
should not be deceived under the cloak of our heart.


D. The matter is plain. For as the heart can not be boasted of to be good,
except the mouth confess it, and that he do declare by works the faith and
charity whereof he will so glory, it can not be execused, but that it is
wicked and by consequent displeases God, when he does a wicked work that is
forbidden by God, for either he does it through ignorance, or else of a certain
knowledge: if he do it through ignorance, it is an assured sign that the
heart of his own nature is wicked: For if it were not wicked, it could not
bear such fruit by any means, nor also could it by by any means ignorant
of the will of God, for the ignorance is a witness of the darkness which
sin has engendered in the understanding of man, and of the contempt of god,
and what negligence there is in man in searching to know the will of God, as it
has been already more largely touched in an other place. If he have done it of
knowledge, what can he allege? May he allege that he was enforced to do it,
and that he did it by compulsion? But by what compulsion? If this reason were
sufficient to excuse the sin of man, there should be no sin but should
seem worthy of excuse: for so much as it seems that there is none but it is
committed by constrainte, considering that man is so corrupted by the means of
sin, and so made subject to the devil through the same, that of his nature
he can do nothing but sin. Wherefore saint Paul does say, Romans 7.
that he can not do the good which he would do, but he does the evil which
he would not do, because he is a sinner, and slave to sin, and sold under
the same, which does enge^der in his members a law, repugnant to the law of
god. For the like also says our Lord Jesus Christ, he that sins, John. 8.
is servant to sin.


How sin can not be but voluntary, and how difference must be put in this
matter, betvveene constraint and necessity, and in what signification they
ought to be taken in this case.
T. BY this account sin should then be no sin, for it should not then be
voluntary. And it is commonly said, that every sin is voluntary, or
otherwise it seems that it should deserve no punishmente.


D. There are many things to be considered in this matter. The first is, that
it behooves to put difference between necessity and constraint. For by
wanting this distinction, many do very filthily err in the matter of free
will, and of predestination, and in the consideration of the nature of sin. For
to speak properly, we may say that we do all sin of necessity and not by
constraynt.


T. What difference put thou then between necessity and constraynt? for
they seem to me to be both one.


D. Yea, but there is notwithstanding great difference, but it is requisite for
the better understanding of it, that we do first well consider in what
meaning and in what signification these words ought to be taken. First of al,
this word of necessity, is commonly for want of some thing whereof we have
need, in such sort that we do oftentimes take it for lack, poverty and
misery, but we do not properly take it in that sense, when we do speak of the
necessity whereby man is brought to sin by mean of the natural corruption
that is in him: but so far forth as we may say that he sins by necessity,
that is to say through defaulte and lack of goodness, justice, innocence,
holiness, and other virtues and gifts and graces of God, whereof he has been
spoiled through sin, unto whom he was made subject.


T. In what signification doste thou then take this word in this matter?


D. I do take it for a necessary consequent which follows of causes that are
joined together with their effects, which can not be others, but such as are
agreeable to the nature of the causes and things which are so joined together,
and do depend the one of the other.


T. Give me an example of this that thou speak of.


D. Behold the Sun, his nature is to shine, and by his light to make the day
for us, I say then, the sun shines, it is therefore day of necessity, that
is to say, it must needs be day, and it can not be otherwise, for such is his
nature, and therefore of necessity he must bring forth such an effect of
his own nature, without any constraynt or violence at all, because that he
has that cause natural in him self. But there where constraynt is, there is
some force and vnolence that comes from else where, than from the thing that
is enforced and constrained: as if a woman be violated by force, she ought not
to be accounted a whore, in such sort as we do accounte her, who willingly
consents to the whore master: we do then sin all necessarily and of
necessity, in so much as it is not possible that of our nature it should do
otherwise, it being corrupted as it is, and being not regenerate by the
spirit of God: and that by mean of the natural corruption which sin has
engendered in all mankind. And yet for all that, none constrains us but only
our own malice and wicked will, which being wicked, can apply it self to
nothing but to evil. Therefore it is not without cause said: Osee. 13.
thy perdition is of thy self, O Israel, but thy salvation is only by me. It
does then follow that our wicked will does evil of necessity, for so much
as it is of a wicked nature, that can do none otherwise, as we say, that an
evil tree does necessarily bring forth evil fruit, because that his nature
is such. Matt. 7.12.
For as it is written: that which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that
which is borne of the spirit, is spirit. But now the will should not be a
will, if it did not willingly, John. 3.
and not by constraynt, for will and constraint are contraries, wherefore will
cease where constraint has place: yea and it is not possible that will may
be constrained: it may in deed be corrupted and changed from good into evil,
or else from evil to good. Wherefore even as a good will does necessarily
that which is good, because it can not otherwise do, being good, as the good
tree of necessity brings forth good fruit, and yet does she it not by
constrainte, but voluntarily: even so does the wicked will, for so much as it
is wicked, necessarily the evil, because that his nature is such as can not
otherwise do, and yet does it not at all by constraynt, but voluntarily, for
there is no force nor violence from any where else that does constrayne her
against her own disposition or inclination, but only in so much as she has
in her the spring and the cause from the which the evil which she does,
proceeds.


Examples and similitudes for declaration of the difference that is put
between Necessity and Constraint.
T. I Can not yet thoroughly well understand that difference.


D. I will make the matter more plain unto thee by examples and comparisons.
The fire does necessarily warm and give light, because that it can not
otherwise do, in so much as the nature of it is such: and yet is it not
constrained so to do. The water on the contrary, abiding in his natural, does
refresh and make moist. By the like reason, a living body has breathing and
respiration, moving and feeling, and can not otherwise be. On the contrary, a
dead body is deprived from all these things, and may necessarily engender
nothing but corruption: and yet for all that is there no constraint, neither in
the one nor in the other, unless we do call the nature of any thing constraint.


T. For so much as in manner all these similitudes are given of things that have
no will, show me some others more meet for our purpose.


D. I will so do. We may not doubt but that God is necessarily good, just,
wise, holy, almighty and perfect, for he can be none other, nor do any thing
but that which is godly, justly, wisely and holily done, and yet can he in
nowise be constrained. In like sort the Angels, for so much as they be Angels,
and do continue still in that nature, wherein they were created of God, they
can not necessarily do any other thing, but praise God, and serve to his
glory: for if they did the contrary, they should be no more Angels, such as
they were created by God, but they should be Devils, like unto their fellows,
which are fallen from their first state: And further, if they did that which
they do by constraint and not willingly, the^ should they have no praise with
God, nor should be any more accepted, than is the Devil, for the good which he
is constrained to do, for so much as God does turn will he nill he, his
wicked will, and also his wicked works, making them to serve to his glory: on
the other side, the Devil being such as he is now at this present, fallen
from the Angelical state, wherein he was created of God, can necessarily do
nothing but evil, and dishonor God, for if he should do otherwise, he should
be no more a Devil, and yet surely he does not that which he does of
co^straint, but volu^tarily: For who should constrain him to do evil? should
God so do, who has forbidden and condemned it, and can do nothing but that
which is good? it is very true that there is none other co^straint, but only of
his own wicked will, which has as great delight in doing evil, as that of
the Angels of heaven has in doing well: But the like is not in the doing of
the good that he does: for in that he does nothing but by co^straint, and that
which is always evil, in so much as it proceeds from him: and ca^ not be
good, but so far forth as God through his power and infinite goodness, will
he or will he not, does draw out goodness of it, and makes it to serve to an
other end, tha^ to that whereunto the Devil did pretend.


T. I do now begin already to discern more perfectly in this matter, than I
did before.


Of the free necessity to do well, that was in man before sin: and of the
necessity to do evil, vnconstrayned notvvithstanding, into the which he is
fallen through the same, and in what meaning this word of necessity ought to
be taken, when it has regard to good things.
D. WE may easily understand by these examples, what we may judge of man,
concerning this matter whereof we do now entreat. For after yt man was created
by God, in so much as he was created of God, good, just, and holy, he did
necessarily and willingly all yt wherefore God had created him: For seeing yt God
had created him good, as he did all his other creatures, it was natural for
him to do well, and continuing in the same, being joined to God: and hearing
his voice, he could none otherwise do. For in as much as his will was good, he
could not will, nor yet do, following that good will, but yt which was good: but
when he once gave ear to the counsel of ye devil, and chau^ging both his will
and nature, by following of him is fallen into an other necessity wholly
contrary to ye first: For in the stead yt before he did necessarily good, and
was wholly given to God, for that of his nature he could not then will nor do
otherwise, through constraint, having changed both nature and will, he can not
but follow his nature: wherefore this necessity of well doing, did not proceed
of any want yt was in him, as it seems unto us that the word does signify,
for when we speak of good things, we do not in that behalf take necessity,
for need or lacks, but for a disposition of things which ca^ not be other but
such as she is her self, according to the declaration that has been already
made: if we speak of evil, we may well then say that the necessity whereof
we speak, is joined with lack of goodness, contrary to this evil. For the
evil which man does, is not done but for want of goodness which ought to be
in him in the stead of the evil into the which the good was changed: the
which evil of his nature enge^dreth evil, where as the good engenders good:
We see the like again of this in some other thing, as in the darkenesses
which the night does bring unto us, and in that which follows: for what is
the cause of the night, but only the shadow of the earth which takes from us
the light of the sun, and brings unto us darknesses, contrary to that
light? by means whereof we have the day turned into night, and then when we
are covered all over with the night, we can not do that which we do in the
day, nor go forth right but clean contrary: and that, because that we have
darkness in the stead of light, without the which we can not walk directly,
and yet all this while, is the necessity without constraint: For albeit that
the lack which may be in a man (the which we call necessity) be by chance an
occasion to make him to steal, yet notwithstanding he cannot justly say that
he was constrained to steal, for if he had been an honest man, and not a
thief, he would rather have endured all kind of miseries and necessities,
than to have stolen: but for so much as he had rather live at his ease, than he
would endure pain and misery according to the will of God, he had rather
steal than to obey God.


How that the necessity that is here spoken of, is free and commendable in
good things: and how it ought to be otherwise considered in God than in
Creatures.
T. THen by as much as I can understand of such matters, if this necessity be
sound in a good thing, it is commendable and joined with great liberty.


D. We do see it in the nature of God, as it has been already touched. For yt
which God can not be necessarily but all mighty, all wise, all just, all good,
and al perfect, infinite, eternal and immortal, does not carry with it a
necessity of lack, nor constraint, nor yet does in any respect diminish ye
power, the glory, and majesty of him, but on the contrary it does magnify and
declare the great excellency and perfection of his nature. For it is not a
true liberty and commendation to be able to sin and to do evil: but it is
a token of an excellent nature to be so perfect in goodness, that it does
hold in it continually that goodness which it naturally has, in such sort
that it ca^ not by any accident whatsoever it be, be changed, diminished or
abolished, it is as if we should say, that it is impossible that God should not
be God, and good, and just. Who would not conclude the^ by that same, that God
is not all mighty, and that there is something impossible to him. Are we more
strong than he, because we may be wicked, untrue, unjust, and liers, ye which
he ca^ not be? For goodness is in him a thing which has subject and substance,
and the accide^ts agreeable to the same, as we do see in the sun and in his
light, which does light all the world: for the evil is nothing else, but a
priuatio^, lack and want of ye good which ought to be, even as the darkenesses
are nothing else than privation and lack of light. Or if thou had rather to
have it spoken in other terms: it is nothing but a corrupted quality and a
vicious accident, which are come upon a good substance and creature of God, and
have corrupted it: the fault whereof may not be sought in God, albeit that
nothing ca^ come to pass without his providence and his eternal counsel: but
it must be sought in causes more near unto us, leaving a part the secret
counselles and judgments of God, which is in such sort the cause of causes, yt
no fault may be imputed unto him, or that he ca^ do any thing other than
justly. For he has in such sort disposed ye second causes, that when ye evil
is a doing, the wicked will either of the Devil or man, comes between, in
such sort that that fault rests in the^, albeit that God does cause their
wicked work and will to serve him, and make the worker good, in so much as God
is served therewith. As touching the rest, thou ought to note, that there
is none which of his own nature is of such an unchangeable and infinite
goodness, but God only, which is only unchangeable, and the most free of all
others, and does give a law to al creatures, and is above all laws, himself
being a law to all creatures. For the same cause our Lord Jesus Christ has
said that none is good, Matthew. 19.
but the only God: because that goodness is to him natural, essential and
substantial, and it is inseparable with him, and not accidental and
separable, which may be joined unto him, or taken away from him by any manner
of means: But the like is not of creatures how excellent so ever they be: as
we may see first in the Angels, and afterward in man.


T. I shall also very gladly understand this point.


Of the creation and fall of the Angels, and how that God in the same has
declared the difference that is betvveene the Creator and the Creature, and
how it is only he that is perfect and unchangeable.
D. WHen he did create the Angels he created them all good: for he could make
them none other, for so much as he is in such sort good, that he can do
nothing but well: otherwise he should not be God. Wherefore we may not imagine
two Gods, with the Manichees, the one good, and the author and Creator of good
things, and the other evil, and the author and creator of evil: For the evil
can not be God, nor any other than the devil himself, which is a creature,
and not a Creator, although he be the author of all evil: who notwithstanding
was not created such an one of God, but is become such of his own malice,
when he turned away from God, and renounced the goodness that he received of
him. Wherein he has showed the difference that is between the creator and the
creature, and between the nature and goodness of the one and the other. For
if God had created the Angels of such perfection as he is, and of a goodness
so unchangeable of his nature, that it could never have been changed into
malice, no more tha^ his own nature and goodness might, what difference
should there be between God and his angels? The creature by this mean should be
no more a creature, if his nature were such as is ye nature of his creator, but
he should be very God, which it can not be. For there is nothing yt may be both
maker and creature, unless we will attribute ye same to our lord Jesus Christ,
who being very God and very man in one only person is both maker and creature
together: John. 1. Luke. 1.2. Matthew. 1.
Maker, inasmuch as he is God eternal: and creature, in that yt he is man,
which was conceived in ye womb of the virgin, and born in his time ordained by
god: but this belongs unto him by sundry respects, by mean of the two diverse
natures yt ar joined together in one person in him. Wherefore, although he be
both the one and the other in one very person, yet is he not so in one nature,
but creator, by reason of the one: and creature by mean of the other: but ye
like is not of angels: for as they have but only one nature, so may they be
therein but very creatures, greatly different from their creator, as the fall
of those yt are fallen, has plainly declared: For in falling from the state
wherein they were, they have showed in deed that they were not such of
themselves, nor Gods unchangeable of their own nature, and that they could
not so continue of their own power.


Of the marvelous counsel of God which was declared in the fall of the angels,
which are fallen from their first estate: and in the preservation of those
which did continue firm and steadfast, and how he has declared the justice of
his judgment toward the one sort, and the riches of his grace toward the
others.
T. IF the men which are so troubled with the doctrine of Predestination, did
well consider that which thou say, they should not have, in my opinion,
occasion so to trouble themselves* for these things whereof thou speak, did
not come to pass without the knowledge, counsel, foresyghte, and ordinance
of GOD. What will man's reason say then thereof, will it say, that God has done
wrong to those that are fallen, because that he did not sustain and confirm the^
as he did the others? but if that had bin done, this whereof thou speak, had
not ben so manifestly declared, nor yet the nature and the majesty and the
excellency that he has over all creatures, yea the most noble and most
excellent that are, should not have been so well set forth.


D. It is very true: On the other side, if they had all fallen indifferently,
the excellency of the nature wherein god had created them, nor yet the power
whereby god did make them, should not have been so well known, nor yet his grace
toward them, as it is known. For in considering the difference that is between
the devils and the Angels of heaven, we see how excellent the nature of Angels
is, and also that which they have received of God in his creation: we see on
the other side in the devils what it is that the creature can do of himself,
how excellent soever it be, except it be preserved by god, who has created it:
on the contrary, we see in the other angels, the double grace that God has
bestowed upon them. The first in their creation which they had common with the
rest that are fallen, before they did fall. The second is, in the conservation
of the nature which was first given unto them, and in the confirmation in the
same through his grace, which the others wanted: which is the very cause of the
diversity that now is between them: which diversity does not let
notwithstanding but that the devils do continue still angels in the same
substance that they were created in: but the difference is great in the
quality, that is to say, in that that the one sort are not only angels, but
are good angels, perseuering in the first goodness that they received of God
in the beginning, in their creation: from which notwithstanding, they might as
well have fallen as ye others, if yt God by his special grace had not sustained
them, and had not otherwise disposed and ordained: Wherefore it is not written
without cause, Ephe. 3. Colloss. 1.
yt all is restored by Jesus Christ, as well in heaven as in earth, and that all
consist by him and in him. The other on ye other side are called not only
angels, but wicked angels and devils, because that they did not persevere in ye
first goodness, wherein they were created, but turning from him from whence ye
same proceeded, they were put from it: and in the stead of the same, malice and
wickedness is come in place, which is nothing else but lack and privation of
goodness, which is changed into an evil quality, which does corrupt the
creature yt was created good, and makes the natures contrary, which were before
like. John. 8.
For ye same cause Jesus christ has said, that the devil is a lier from the
beginning: that is to say, eue^ from the time that he was first a devil, and
not fom the time yt he was first made an angel, and that when he does speak
lies, he speaks that which is his own. And therefore he adds unto it, that
he did not abide still in the truth: for he has nothing of God which is truth,
but that which he now has of evil, is of himself.


How that the devil may not impute the fault and fall of his damnation but to
him self, and how it is manifest by that fall that there is no unchangeable
verity nor constancy but in the nature of God.
T. THen is there no fault that proceeds from God in the fall of the angels,
nor any thing thereof which is apparent to men, out of his eternal counsel: but
that when the devil would turn from him of his own proper motion, God who had
not created him unchangeable, did suffer him to change and to follow his will,
and permitted him to fall, and did not let him, hold him, nor pluck him back:
which thing not withstanding he could well have done, if his good will and
pleasure had been such, and that he had not otherwise determined in his
eternal counsel, for good and just causes, for the which he is not bound to
give us an account, the which he does know better than we do: But he has
not thrust him forward, nor constrained him of force so to do, albeeit that it
is not done without his providence and eternal ordinance. Wherefore he may not
attribute the fault of his evil act to any other than to himself, which
thing we must seek (as thou haste already said) in the second and nearest
causes, leaving the judgment and consideration of the first to the secret
counsel of God, which is to us unknown.


Dan. It is true. And to come again to our purpose, the Devil bi^ing
deprived from this goodness, the which he has lost, can be none other tha^ he
is, nor have any other will tha^ wicked: But yet notwithstanding, it is still a
will: and that which he does, is done voluntarily. There is no difference in this
matter, but in stead that before his will was good, and did willingly that which
was good, by the same: now is it evil, and does willingly that which is evil,
and that which he can not otherwise do, proceeds not but only of that that
he can have of himself none other will but that which is wicked: ye fault
whereof may be imputed to none other but to him: For if he have bin unthankful
toward God, and has through his unkindness and pride contemned that which he
has received of him, God is not bound to give him that which he thorough his
own fault and unkindness has lost: neither does he him any wrong to leave him
in yt state, into the which he has brought himself: for if he were not bound
neither to create the Angels, nor yet to preserve and to confirm the^ in their
estate, but has done what he has don, of his mere goodness and liberality,
what duty owes he else to repair and restore those yt are fallen, unless it
please him, and except he think and know it to be agreeable to his glory and
majesty, which he declares in showing himself a just judge, in punnishing so
grievously such a pride, and such an arrogancy and ingratitude: and likewise
he does show his great glory and power, declaring in a creature so
excellently by him created, what difference there is between him that is the
Creator, and the creature: and between dwelling in him and abandoning or
leaving of him. And by the same mean he does also give us the better to know
the great grace that he has bestowed upon the other Angels the which he
conserueth in their first estate. For they may understand by that which
happened to their fellows, that which might also have happened to the^, if
that God of special grace had not holden them up and conserved them:
considering that they were created of one very nature, which is now of an
unchangeable goodness, through his grace, without the which it might be
chaungeable, as well as that of the others. And therefore it is not without
cause written in the book of Job, that God has found no praise nor
perfection in his very Angels. For if we should compare God, and ye perfection
of him with yt of his Angels, it should fare as it does with the stars, which
loose their light in the presence of the sun: or as it does with a candle
that is lighted at a fair noone tide. On the other side, we may not properly
call true, firm and constant any: but only he that has his being of himself,
Exodus 3.
and may say, I am: to wit God unto whom this same belongs.


Of the comparison and agreement of the first estate, and of the fall of man,
with that of the Angels, and their first estate: and in to what necessity man
has brought himself through his sin.
T. J Understand well by that which thou have said, what the nature and will of
man should have been, if he had continued in the first estate in which God did
create him. For as concerning his will, it should necessarily have been ruled by
the will of god, as that of the Angels which have remained steadfast, is at this
pesent: in such sort that he should have been no more able to sin than they:
and so should not at al have lost the liberty of his will, nor done any
thing by constrainte. And even so should he have been in a good necessitye,
which should have proceeded from the riches of the goodness and grace
wherewith GOD had endued him and made him a part taker of it. But when he
turned from this way, it came to pass with him as it did with the Angels, when
they turned from GOD, and has declared thereby, that he was in such sort
created of GOD, good and just, and of a good and holy will, and yet was he
notwythstandyng not so created that he should or might be unchangeable of
his own nature and force, for the causes which have been already alleged, which
in their behalf do as much pertayne to man as to the Angels. Wherefore seeing
that manne through the intycing and counsel of the Devil, which was the
first trangessor, is turned away from the will and obedyence of GOD his
Creator, and did make an aliance with the first offender, who made himself
enemy to God through his pride and ingratitude, he has been part taker of his
iniquity, with whom he made an aliance. From whence it follows, that his
good and holy nature and will has been corrupted and perverted, and made like
to the same, of him to who^ he has joined himself, and that he has taken him
not only for his fellow, but for his guide, his leader, his master, and his
Lord. Wherefore, even as before, abiding united and joined to God, and having
God in him, and being governed by his holy spirit, he could do nothing but
good, and yt without enforceme^t or constraint: eue^ so by ye contrary being
separated from god, and joined with the devil, being lead and governed by him,
he can do nothing but evil, and does it of his own will, without
conconstraint of any but only of him self, only because his nature is such,
by reason whereof he takes as great pleasure in doing of evil, as he did in
well doing, when he was in his first state of innocence. Now this necessity is
greatly different from the first. For in stead that the first did proceed
from the abundant riches of the grace of god, this other proceeds from the
lack and fault of the same. Wherefore that is as wicked, as ye first is
blessed. It seems to me that I have touched the very same thing yt thou
would have concluded upon.


D. Yet shall thou more plainly understand it by the comparison of a whole
man, and a sick man. Note well a man that is whole of body and mind, because
that he has his appetite sound, and not corrupted by any naughty humors, he
does covet nor desire to eat and drink any thing but that which is good, and
agreeable to his nature and health, and in such quality and quantity as his
nature and health does require, because he is so disposed. Consider again the
same being sick, he will do al things contrary to that which he did being
hole, because he is wholly otherwise disposed: That will he most covet and
desire which is most contrary to him, and can not refrain from the use of it,
and the more the thing shall be contrary and hurtful for him, and the more
straightly that he shall be forbidden it, the more earnestly shall he desire it.
And yet may he not complain and say that he was constrained so to do, either
by the physician, or others which have forbidden him the same, and that his
will was enforced by any other than by himself which perishes willinglye, for
that he is so delicate, that he cannot vanquishe his affections, and his
corrupted nature.


T. The matter is plain.


Of the marvelous counsel of God which is declared in the fall and the
restoring of man: and wherein it is different, or like to that which he has
declared in the fall of the evil Angels, and in the conservation of the good.
D. THat which thou say is true: and there is no doubt but yt man should have
been even like unto the devil, unto whom he did join himself, if God had
clean left him and forsaken him in that estate, whereunto through his
ingratitude and rebellion he had brought himself, as he did leave and forsake
the deuell. But GOD has again in this used a marvelous counsel and mean,
he did not suffer in the nature of Angels that he had created, that al should
fall, but did preserve a part, in such sort that they did not part take of
the transgression and corruption of the others. And as he does so conserve
those which do continue in their first estate, that they can not fall: even
so has he in such sort left the others which are fallen, that never after
they were able to rise again, nor never shall. 1. Peter. 2. Mat. 26. Romans 5.
2. cor. 15.
On the other side, he has suffered all mankind to fall and be corrupted,
and all the nature of man in the first man that he made, which is to say in
the spring of the same. But on the other side, he has used such moderation,
that he has not willed not withstanding that all those which were
comprehended in this fall, should perish eternallye as shall he that was the
first cause thereof, to wit the Devil, who did draw the first manne into
such perdition with him. But as soon as the fault was committed, through
the Deuylles intycing, God forth with did find remedy for this great
mischief, and a mean to repare his work and his creature, which his
adversary had destroyed The which remedy he had already prepared through the
eternal counsel and firm purpose of his election, through the which he did
chose and prepare in his son Jesus Christ the vessels of mercy, not only
before ye wound was given to the whole body and person of all mankind, but
also before the creation of the world: wherein he sits forth the justice
of his judgment, and his grace and mercy together, and how that he is the
author of all goodness, even as his adversary is author of al evil. For if God
should have restored the nature of the Angels which was fallen, as he did
repare the nature of man, it might have been thought yt the Angels which were
fallen, had raised up themselves again: or else that their fall had not ben so
great and horrible as it is, nor the offense so odiouse and so detestable
before God. Also his justice, his grace and his mercy had not been so well
declared. For it was requisite that the Angels which did offend, should carry
upon them a perpetual testimony, of their transgression and rebellion, and
that they should know how good a thing it was to dwell united with God, and
how evil to be separated from him. Afterward man may judge what force and
power he may have of himself to raise up himself, and to save himself,
considering what the burden of the wrath of God is, that the Devils bear.
For if these creatures which were created so excellent, cannot bear such a
burden, nor of themselves discharge them of it, but that they must be
swallowed up even into hell, how shall man then bear it that is but a worm of
the earth, 2. Peter. 3.
and how shall he deliver himself? Further if that God have not spared that
Angelical nature, and those heavenly creatures, how does he think to escape
his judgment, if it be not only through his grace and mercy? On the contrary,
if he had as well suffered the one sort as the other to fall, and had left
them all in like damnation, his grace, his power, and his mercy should not
have bin so known as it is, and if he should have restored the one sort and
left the other, it moughte have seemed that he had wanted power to conserve
his creatures in that estate wherein he had created them: or else that he had
not had so great a care for them, that he would so do, if he should have done
the like in man: it should have seemed on the other side, that it had not bin in
his power, or else that he had not had the care and the will to repare the
creature that should have offended, but only to have co^serued and mainteyned
him in his first estate so long as he should persevere in the same. But he has
declared by the mean that he has observed, all these things together. The
first, that there is no creature whatsoever he be that can of himself be
mainteyned, how excellent so ever he be. Further, that he has always power to
preserve them al in their estate, if it please him, and to restore them although
they had offended and transgressed, the which can be done by none other mean,
but by his only power and grace. Then, even as man may be recovered and
restored to his first estate, through his grace and mercy, even so on the
contrary, abiding still in his nature, such as it is at this present, he may
by mean of his wicked will do nothing else but evil without any constrainte,
other than of his own malice.


How that all that which has bin don as well in the fall and conservation of
the Angels, as in the fall and restoring of man, tends to the glory of God,
and how that same only reason ought to content us in the doctrine of
predestination.
T. BY that which I may understand, all that which was done in all these
things, tends still to the glory of God, to the which we must refer all
the ordinances of his providence, as to ye principal end, whereunto he has
chief regard above al, in all his works, and whereunto it behooves to frame
all other purposes.


D. Thou have well understood it and well concluded. Therefore it is written, yt
the Lord has made all thing for himself, yea ye wicked for the evil day: and
S. Paul speaking of ye eternal election of God, says, Prove. 16 Ephe. 1.
who has before ordained us for to be adopted unto himself through Jesus
Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will, to ye praise of the glory
of his grace, wherewith he has made us accepted in the beloved. Seeing it is
so, what just occasion may men have of offense in the doctrine of
predestination, for ought not the glory of God to be preferred to all
creatures? And if that all the creatures should perish, wherefore should we
think it strange, if god were glorified in their perdition, and that it did
so please him?


T. No man ought to find that strange, except he do more esteem the
creature than the Creator.


D. Therefore it is plain that this offense which many give unto themselves
in the matter of reprobation of the reprobates, proceeds not but from a
marvelous great pride and arrogancy of the flesh, which estemeth itself
more than it ought to do, for if it had so small an estimation of it self as
the worthynesse thereof requires, and did esteem God and his glory so much as
it ought to do, he should not only not find it strange to know that god
has ordained to be glorified in the damnation of some: no, although it should
be done with his own person, he should glorify God in his just judgment, he
would not murmr against him to wage the law with him, and to play the
lawyer, and to plead against him, to mainteyne the cause of the reprobates,
accusing him as though he should do them wrong: but rather, he would desire
himself to be damned, as Saint Paul desired for his brethren the
Israelites, if it were possible, Romans 9.
that it moughte be done, and that God might be the more magnified and
glorified therein. From whence then come these contrary thoughts, but only of
the horrible pride that is in our corrupted nature? for what are we? from
whence came we? what wrong may God do unto us? wherein are we able to accuse
him, or attribute unto him the fault of our offenses, and of our damnation,
and to set him in the place of the Devil author of sin, considering that
what determination so ever he have made of us, we cannot complain that we have
any other force, violence, and constrainte to do evil, but only of our own
wicked concupiscence, unless that happily we would complain in that that he
has not made us such as could not sin, or else having sinned, that he
does not bestow upon all like grace, and that he does not save all,
forsomuche as he moughte if that he would, otherwise he should not be God,
nor almighty: but it has pleased him, and that not without good and just
cause, the which is continually such, albeit that we cannot understand it.
Therefore we must continually say with the Prophet, that our damnation is of
our selves, Os^e 13. Romans 9.
and our salvation of God only, and say with S. Paul. But o thou man what art
thou that pleadest against god, shall the thing that is fashioned say unto him
that fashioned it, why have thou shaped and made me thus? The potter has he
not power of the clay to make of one very lump, one vessel to honor, and an
other to dishonor? And what if God would to show his wrath, and to make his
power known, suffer with great patience the vessels of wrath prepared to
perdition? and to show the riches of his glory upon the vessels of his
mercy, Romans ^1.
which he has prepared to glory? and again. O ye deepenesse of the riches of
the wisdom and knowledge of God: his judgments are not to be searched out,
and his ways are impossible to be found. Esaias. 40.
For who is he that has known the Lords intent? or who has bin his
counselor? or who is he that gave to him first, and he shall be recompensed.


How that the will of man cannot by any means be constrained, no, not by
the devil himself, but only of his own wickedness.
T. FOr my part I grant to all that which thou have said, but yet can
thou not deny, but that man is yet oftentimes constrained to sin by mean of
ye temptacion and soliciting of the devil.


D. This constraint whereof thou speak, is co^straint without co^straint, for
it is not in the power of all the devils nor of al ye creatures that are, to
constrain the will of one man. Wherefore, what temptation or solicitatio^ so
ever happen unto him, if he did not willingly consent thereunto, he could not
be induced to do any kind of thing against his will. But it fares with him as
it does with a harlot: for if she be solicited by bawdes and whoremasters, she
will give over her self unto them, which thing an honest woman will not do,
but will resist all such temptations and procurements, and will overcome them.
Therefore albeit that the harlot may impute some part of the cause of the
offense that she has committed, to those that did entise her and procure her
thereunto, yet notwithstanding she may not say that she has bin constrained so
to do, nor may by that mean excuse her self, for if she had not agreed
thereunto of her own will, she had not at all playde the harlot, but because
that she was already naturally thereunto enclyned, these procureme^ts did serve
her as it were matches, oil and wood thrown into the fire, which would kindle
nor slame never the sooner nor the more, if it were not naturally enclyned and
prompte thereunto. In like sort is man brought to evil thorough his own
concupiscence, the which being wakened and sturred up by the devil, James. 1.
does the more declare it self, and shows more plainly what his nature is:
wherefore thou see here how that man does continually sin of his own
will, and if he will say that he has bin constrained to do any kind of work
the which he knows manifestly to be against the will of God, it must be
considered wherein he has bin enforced and constrained, if he have in any wise
bin enforced by ye force of others, so that he could not be in any wise master
of his members, although he did resist it by all the means that he could, and
did declare by his words and acts that his heart and will did in no wise
consent thereunto, he may be excused as an honest woman may that has bin taken
of force, the which notwithstanding has cried and resisted by all means
possible against the whoremaster, and has bin as willing to lose her life as
her chastity: but if thou do an evil work, either to please men, or else
for fear that thou should fall into their displeasure or indignation, and
receive any dishonor or wordly hindrance, thou may in such a case allege
none other constrainte but only that of thy wicked will: no more than Pilate
might when he condemned Jesus Christ, Matthew. 27. John. 29.
enforced by the constrainte of the Jews. For if thou did love God with all
thy heart, and better than thy self, and did more esteem his glory than
thine own, and thy soul, than thy body, and the heaven more than thou do
the earth, thou moughtest be free from losing, that which thou fear to
lose, Matthew. 10. John. 13.
and should not lose it at all, but should gain it double. For as Jesus
Christ says, he that shall loose his life for my sake, the same shall find
it, and he that fears to loose it, the same shall loose it, and therefore thou
would not leave God for any creature, nor would change the inheritance
which is prepared for thee in heaven, for no earthly inheritance, nor the
blessing of God thy father, for a mess of potage, Genes. 2.25 Hebr. 11.
as did Esau, but would rather loose thy life which ought not to be so dear
unto thee as the honor of God, and the salvation of thy soul.


Of the contrariety which seems sometime to be among the commandments of
God, and what consideration is required in the same, and of the division of
the whole law into two tables, and of the order of the matters that are
disposed and contained in the^.
T. I Do know right well now by that which thou say, that all such
clokings cannot excuse us before God: but from whence comes it, that God
sometimes does allow works, which he seems to have forbidden? he
commands to honor father and mother, and to obey the magistrates, and yet
notwithstanding he does often times greatly commend those which do not obey
the^ at all. He forbids murder, and yet sometime he commends those that
do commit it.


D. That diversity comes of the nature of the commandementes of God, and of
the order whereby he has disposed them in his Law, for he has brought and
divided the whole into two Tables, in which he has written and disposed his
commandments, according to the order and worthynesse of the thing that every
one of them co^teyneth.


T. Declare that order unto me.


D. In the first he has written four, which do properly and directly concern
his glory without special consideration of any other than of him, as the three
first requests which are written in the prayer of our Lord Jesus Christ. The
second conteyneth six, which do concern those things that do belong to our
neighbor, which must be measured by the first four, of which they do
depend, and to whose end they ought always to have regard: as the three last
requests of ye prayer of our Lord Jesus Christ, A lesson of great weght
ought always to be referred to that end whereunto the three first do pretend,
wherefore, if any thing do happen, for the which any commandment of the
first table must be broken, to accomplish any of the second, it behooves them
in such a case that the second give place to the first, and that it have
recourse unto the same, to have the true understanding and the true usage of
that which it does conteyne.


Of the manner how to accord and agree the passages and sentences of the law
and of the holy Scriptures, which seem to disagree, set forth upon the
commandment given to honor father and mother, and what love or hatred he
would that we should bear them.
T HOw may this be? has God given a law which is contrary to it self and
does conteyne commandments which cannot be observed without transgression of
others?


D. No, if the law be well understood in that meaning and sense, for the
which it was given by God, and for the better understanding of all this
difficulty. I will declare it unto thee by certain examples which are very
familiar: God commands me to honor my father: to what end is this
commanded me? To the end that God moughte be honored, in the honor that we
give to our fathers, acknowledging the goodness that we have received of him
by them, who have bin the instruments and ministers of his loving kindness
toward us.


D. Thou have well answered: thou do then see here how that this
commandment has his foundation in the first table, in such sort that if
thou dishonor thy father, thou do not only dishonor that man which is thy
carnal father, but in him do thou dishonor God thy eternal father, of
whom the carnal father is nothing else but an Image or instrumente, toward
whom thou declarest of what affection thou art toward him whom he
represents, and the more near that this image is to thee, and the more near
thou drawest to the nature of it, and that God does more familiarly and more
plenteously communicate unto thee his loving kindness by this instrument, and
the more that he makes his image to shine in him, so much the more is thy
wickedness and iniquity the greater, but if it should so come to pass that
thy father should be untrue toward god, and should require of thee a thing,
wherein thou could not obey him, unless thou should disobey God, thou
art not at all in any thing bound unto him in such a case, for in such a case
thou art dispensed with in the first table, and by the interpretation and true
meaning of the same. For seeing that the honor which thou owe to thy father,
does comprehend the honor of god, and is grounded upon the same, it is
certain that if god be dishonored in that which thy father requires of thee,
thou do not honor him at al in such sort as thou art commanded by god to
honor him, if thou do it in such sort as thy father requires thee to do, for
thy father cannot be truly honored, in yt wherein god is dishonored, but is
dishonored in that wherein god is dishonored, although that men cannot always
understand and know it. Therefore when thy father does command thee any thing,
thou ought to have good regard to ye nature of the thing which he
commands thee to do, if it be a thing that thou may do without offense
toward God and thine own conscience, seek by all means possible to please
him, for the honor of him that does so command thee, how hard soever it
be to do: if it be otherwise, in such a case acknowledge him not at all for
thy father, because that the devil does require by him that thou should
yield him in thy father that honor which thou owe to thy only God, and that
he will make thy father his instrumente, but leave that Satan transfigured
into the likeness of thy father, and say unto him that thou have no father for
whom thou may refuse and leave God thy heavenly and eternal father. For if
a father should require his daughter to give over her self unto him, that he
might make her a harlot, or else that he himself moughte abuse her, or
otherwise that he should deliver her to any whoremaster, ought she to
acknowledge such a father for her father? and were she bound to obey him in
such a matter?


T. There is no man if he have so much as one spark of good judgment, but
would judge her worthy of great blame if she should do it: and worthy of great
praise, if she did rather choose to die than to please her father in such
wickedness, for by such means she should not obey to her father, but to a
bawd, a whoremaster and an horrible incest, and to a very Devil.


D. Thou have said well. Then if it be not lawful for a daughter to give over
her body to her own father, to abuse it in any kind of villainy, how much
less lawful is it then for the soul, which is much more precious than the
body, to give over it self to any creature whatsoever he be, whereby it may be
joined to the Devil? Then if thy father will be an idolater, and will have
thee to be such an one with him, and will have thee to leave Jesus Christ to
please him, thou ought than to have recourse to the interpretation that
Jesus Christ does make of this commandment, of the honor which is due to
father and mother, founded in the first Table: as it shall be more amply declared
when we shall come to the exposition of the fifte commandment.


T. Of what interpretation meanest thou?


D. Of that where he says: Luc. 14. Matthew. 10.
Whosoever does not hate his father and his mother for my sake: which is to
say (as he does expound it by an other Evangelist) he that shall love them
better than me, is not worthy of me, nor may be my disciple: behold this
interpretation is very plain, which declares unto us that it is a great
virtue, and worthy of commendation, to contemn father and mother in time and
place, which is to say, in such like cases as we have already spoken of: for
such a contempt of them, is not a contempt, to speak properly, but only in
the judgment of man, no more than the hatered which Jesus Christ wills us
to bear them for his sake, is a hatered, but a very true love, founded in the
love of GOD. For we must rather judge of things according to their effects,
than according to the affections of men, in whom we do consider them, as in
diverse other like passages of the Scripture: It is written in the Proverbs, in
the which Solomon speaks in the person of wisdom: Proverb. 8.
All those that hate me, love death. There is none but he hates and abhors
death: and yet for all that, seeing that he which despises and hates
wisdom, does purchase his own death, and ruin, does it not then seem that
he loves it, and that he desires it? and what could he more do if that he
desired it? It is also written, Prou. 29.
he that does take part with the thief hates his soul: Moreover, Proverb.
13.
he that spares the rod hates his child, yet notwithstanding there is no
man that both this for any hatered that he bears either to his soul* and his
life, or to his child, but rather for love, if we do consider the affection
of the person: yet notwithstanding the truth is even such as the spirit of
GOD has spoken in deed, as the effect does right well declare. Then, as he
hates in deed, which does folishly love, and otherwise than he ought to
do: even so does he truly love, which hates as he ought to hate, and that
same which he ought to hate. The like is of the honor and dishonor: but it
is not needful here to speak any more of this matter, considering that it
shall have more apt place in the exposition of the Commandment of the which
we have now spoken. Therefore I have spoken this but only for an example.


An example to the like purpose, upon the commandment given of the obedience
due to Princes, and upon the commandment given against murder.
T. WE also may in mine opinion, say the like of Princes and Lords.


D. S. Peter and S. John do teach us by their example what we ought to think
therein: For did they transgress the commandment which commands to yield
obedience unto Princes and Magistrates, Acts. 3.4.5.
when they did contemn the forbidding of the counsel of Jerusalem, which was
contrary to the commandment of God: and did answer them, that it was better
to obey God than man?


T. No, but did much better fulfill it than if they had otherwise done, and did
truly declare it.


D. Numbr. 25.
Phinees in like sort was greatly co^me^ded by God, for the whore and the whore
master which he did slay, and was not rebuked as a murderer, for so much as he
did it not of hatred, nor of any blouddie affection, but only for the duty
and obedience which he ought to God, who had been greatly dishonored, if that
such a villainy had not been punished and revenged by him with such a zeal.
Thou may the^ know by all these examples, how that the work which may seem
unto men to have some show of wickedness, and to be contrary to the
commandments of God, is not at all wicked in ye sight of God, nor in the
judgment of those which take ye law of God in his true meaning, and do know
how to rule the second Table by the first, but is pleasant and agreeable to his
will.


Of the hidden sins that are in the conscience and wicked vvil of man and
how that concupiscence is a sin worthy of damnation in the sight of God,
and how greatly it does displease him, and for what cause.
T. IT seems to me that this matter of works has been sufficiently, fully,
and familiarly entreated of: wherefore let us proceed to the rest.


D. If that which has been said of works be well understood, the rest
shall be easy enough unto us: for we may by the very same mean, judge of the
will, and of the affections, according to which God does judge of the work. If
then thou be stirred up to evil, by any wicked affection, and thy will does
consent and agree thereunto, in such sort that there wants nothing but the
only mean to execute it: Behold the wickedness is already accomplished
before God, thou know by that which has been already spoken, how God will
judge. If on the contrary; there be any resistance in thee, and that thy
spirit and thy will in no case will agree to that concupiscence which
continually does procure thee, but dee resist and repulse it as far from them
as they may, it is certain that the iniquity is not so great: albeit that
such a concupisce^ce, what resistance soever there be, can not be without
sin, by reason of the corrupted and wicked spring from whence it proceeds.
For that is a sure testimony, that there is much poison and corruption there,
where such fruit does budde forth: although that it find hindrances which
will not permit and suffer their buddes and fruits to come to their
ripeness. Now such a corruption can not be but very displeasant to God,
considering that it does proceed from his adversary, and that it is contrary
to his holy majesty: as we see it proved and evident in little children: yea
even in those which are not only not in age to put any evil act in
execution, but also have not discretion to judge neither of good nor evil,
Romans 5.
we see how death has power over them, and takes them out of the world:
which he could not do except that there were sin in them. For seeing that
sin did begette death, and that it is a fruit of his curse, it is a thing
certain, that there where sin does not reign, death also can have no power,
as S. Paul does very well conclude.


How that by reason of that concupiscence we are justly worthy of death and
damnation, even from our mothers womb.
T. WHat sin is that then in little children, that does so displease God,
that it does not make the^ only subject to bodily death, but also to eternal
death, and makes them the children of wrath and of the curse, even before they
have the use of reason: to know and discern either good or evil.


D. It is that natural corruption whereof David speaks, saying: Psalm. 51.
I was conceived in sin, and my mother did bear me in sin: now if we
would have the meaning of the words of David expressed according to the
signification that they have in the Hebrew, we must the^ say: And my mother
has warmed me in sin, or with sin, whereby he gives to understand that he
has been begotten, conceived, and nourished, in his mothers womb, with the
sin, even as if he and sin were brothers, twins, begotten, conceived and
nourished together in the womb of one very mother: it is then easy to
understand how natural sin is now to man, being in this corrupted nature,
whereunto he is fallen by mean of his transgression: for that which David
speaks of himself, does appertain to the whole race of man. Wherefore that
conception whereof he speaks in this passage, is common to us all. Then even
so as a little Serpent does offend us, not only as soon as he is brought or
hatched, but being in his egg, or in the belly of his dame: even so do we in
deed displease God from our very mothers womb. And what is the cause that this
little serpent does so much offend us? by means of the venomous nature that
is in him. For all be it that he have not yet showed it, yet notwithstanding it
is still abiding in him, and does not let to show it, but only because it
wants the mean: but it shall be sufficiently showed in his time.


T. Is it the like of man?


D. There is no doubt of it, for experience does so plainly declare it: for
since the time that our first father was poisoned with the venime of the old
serpent, he could beget no children but such like as he him self was, and
little serpe^ts of the same nature that he was, and infected with the same
venime, the which albeit that it does abide hidden for a certain time in us,
does not let for all that to show it self forthwith at the first occasion
that it may find. This is the first spring, the first foundation, and the
first cause, as much as does pertayne to man, of all the sins that he may
commit. Now if that wicked spring, how secret or covert soever it be, does so
much displease God, that it has already deserved eternal damnation, before
that it has so much as once budded forth: how much more shall it
displease him with his buddes, his branches, and the whole tree and his fruit?


T. That is very easy to judge.


D. So easy as nothing is more easy.


Of diverse degrees of sin, and of the root and fruits, and of their begetting
and consummation.
T. IT seems to me that we may easily discern and extinguishe by the
deductio^ which thou make, all the degrees of sin.


D. It is easy to do. This same first spring and natural corruption, with that
inclination and nature which is always given to evil, is the same which we do
properly call original sin, which of it self is wholly damnable, and can
not be overcome by man, but only in that that he is delivered, and that he is
regenerate by the only grace and spirit of God. Afterward, that same
concupiscence which watches continually in man, and procures him to evil, is
as it were, the budde of that rotten root, and of that cursed spring, which is
never without casting forth some such bud, how generate soever a man be,
during the time that he is in this world wrapped in this body of sin, and in
his outward man, and in his old Adam. Therefore it follows that there is no
man living, how holy so ever he be, 1. John. 2.
but that he is a great sinner before God, yea although he had no more fault
but this same, and has good occasion to say continually with the whole
Church: And forgive us our offenses. But if this budde come once to
determination, Math. ^. Luke. 1^.
and to bring forth the consent of the will, then does the rebellion
continually declare it self to be the more great, and the sin does grow
one degree more, and is more increased than before. Now when manne is come to
this degree of wickedness, and does acknowledge his fault, and before he
proceed any further, he refrayneth from it, and asks pardon of God, he does
less offend, than he that proceeds to the putting of his wicked purpose in
execution, or both persevere in the same, although he have not mean to
accomplish it, being sorry that he can not put it in execution. And he that
does find ready resistance in his conscience, against the evil that does
continually provoke him, and notwithstanding despises the admonitio^s which
God gives him in his own conscience, and of a set purpose does follow his
wicked affection, the same is much more faulty, than he that has been taken
suddenly, either through ignorance or weakness.


Of the names of sins, according to their degrees and proper kinds, with
their generation.
T. WHat names may we give to these sorts and sundry degrees of sins, to
distinguish them from the same first spring which thou have called original
sin?


D. Albeit that we do commonly call those actual, which come to the act and
outward execution, yet notwithstanding we may well call by the same name the
other degrees, for so much as all the fault that proceeds from that wicked
original spring, proceeds forth to the act and effect, although not in the
sight of men, yet in the sight of God. There is no difference but only of
more or of less, which does either aggrauate or diminishe the sin, or the
heinousness thereof, according to the degrees whereby it proceeds, from
whence it comes to pass that the one sort are accounted venial, and the
others mortal, according to the disposition of the persons toward God,
concerning their faith or unfaithfulness.


Of deadly and venial sins, and of the difference of them: and in what
meaning we ought to understand the sins to be venial or mortal.
T. THou have now touched one point the which I would gladly understand:
which is to say, what sins they be that be venial, and which they be that be
mortal: and what is the cause of that difference. If thou will consider sin
in his own nature, there is no sin but it is deadly, to wit, it brings
with it death, not only corporal, but also eternal, and does right well
deserve it. For if this natural corruption whereof we have already spoken, be
in the fight of God worthy of such punishment, if there were no other thing in
man, we may well think what it is that the other sorts do deserve, which do
daily aggrauate ye evil and increase it more continually. Wherefore this
original sin ought not to be esteemed a small sin, no more ought these buddes
of concupiscence, and the wicked affections, as many do account them, and
chiefly the Papists. For the majesty of God is so great, that there is no
rebellion what soever it be, nor root of rebellion and wickedness, but it is
a crime of treason against the majesty of God. For God has not only forbidden
the act and consent to evil, but also the very concupiscence it self, although
that it do not proceed so far as to the consent: as it appears by that which
he said, thou shall not covet, which shall be more plainly declared in his
place. Now it is meet that ye punishment be given according to the nature of
ye sin, wherefore seeing yt God, against whose majesty the fault is committed,
is eternal, it is certain that there is no pain whatsoever it be that is
sufficient for the punishment of an offense committed against the majesty of
such a prince, nor may satisfy for ye dishonoring of the same: for the case
stands not with god, as it does with man, for so much as man is mortal, how
great a prince soever he be, he may stretch and extend his authority no further
tha^ upon the earthly goods, or body of the offender: and according to ye
fault by him committed, he takes either his goods or his body: and if the
worst fall, he can take from him but his body and temporal life, for so much
as his power extends no further but to this life, and that ye fault touching
either his person or his office, is but temporal as he is: but God has a
reign and power which stretches further, for it is eternal as he is. And
therefore the faults which are committed against him, are worthy of eternal
punishment. And therefore our savior Jesus Christ says, that God has not only
power to sley the body, as men have: but he is able also to sley both body and
soul, and then to cast both the one and the other into everlasting fire,
which is ordained for eternal punishments.


Of the opinion of those which say, that none shall be damned: and of the abuse
of the mercy of god, and of the greatness of sin, and of the pain due to
the same, and of the wrath of God against it, declared in the death of Jesus
Christ, and of the mean whereby to be deiluered from it, and in what meaning
we ought to understand that God has made no man to destroy or damn him.
T. THat which thou say is far off from the opinion of such as say that
none shall be damned, and that in very deed the devils shall once be saved.


D. The word of God shall then be false, which speaks the clean contrary.


T. They do ground them selves upon the mercies of God, saying that God has
created no man to destruction, and that it shall be a great cruelty in him,
and contrary to his merciful nature, to punish so grievously a temporal
sin, to wit, with everlasting pain.


D. Such men do greatly abuse them selves, and do declare plainly that they
know neither the nature of sin, nor yet the majesty of him against whom it
is committed. For do they think the contempt of such a majesty to be nothing,
according to ye which the greatness of the sin must be measured, and not
only according to the thing wherein it has bin committed: wherefore if that god
should punish with eternal death all the men that ever were, are, and shall be,
he should do them no wrong, but should do them justice and right. Therefore in
yt that he saves those which have recourse to his mercy, ye same comes of
his mere grace, wherein in deed he declares unto us what punishment we have
deserved. For seeing that it was expedient that his own son should bear the
pain which was due to the sins of them unto whom he would show mercy in
him and by him, he has right well declared by the same, that there was no pain
whatsoever it was, that was able to satisfy his judgment, but that of his
son, who by reason of his great innocence and perfect obedience, was only
sufficient for such a satisfaction. For if man could suffer any pain, whereby
he might satisfy the eternal justice of God, there should then be no hell,
nor eternal damnation, for the pains should once have end. But forsomuche as
they do never end, they do declare thereby that they are not sufficient for
such satisfaction: and on the other side, that it must needs be, because that
they may in no wise be sufficient, that they be eternal, saving only to such
as have rereyued Jesus Christ by faith, who has borne the wrath of God, and
the pains due to their sins, to deliver them, as it is written: John. 3.
he that beloueth in the son of God, the same has eternal life: He that
believes not in the Son of God, the wrath of God abides still upon him.
And as concerning that which thou have said, that God has made no man to be
damned, I do confess it, if it be well understood, but not in that sense that
they do take it which aledge that text or passage of the scripture to abuse
the grace and goodness of God. Prouer. 16.
It is very true that God has made no creature to that only end that he
should be damned, for he has created all things for his glory, and has mind
all for him self, yea the wicked for the evil day. That is the principal
end of all his works, notwithstanding he leaves not to punish and to damn
with eternal death those which contemn his law, and his holy word, for so much
as their damnation does serve to his glory, for the which they were created.
For his glory does not only consist in that that he shows mercy to his, but
also in that that he executes judgment, and does declare his justice upon his
enemies. Let us therefore take heed that we mock not with him, nor seduce
our selves: for albeit that by his great power and wisdom he can draw
goodness out of the evil which the wicked commit, and can turn it and make
it to serve to his honor and glory, and to the health of his chosen people,
whereas the wicked ones do turn his good creatures and his good works into
evil, he leaves not for all that to hate still that which is evil, in somuche
as it is evil, and the abuse of his creatures and of his gifts and graces,
and to condemn and punish those which commit such offenses, if they have
not forgiveness by his grace and mercy in Jesus Christ.


How that every sin is of his own nature damnable, and how that
notvvithstanding, it is not able to damn the faithful.
T. SO far forth as I may judge by thy words, it seems to me that thou
concludest that every sin is mortal, which is to say damnable, t^ al ye
unfaithful and reprobates, and that they are venial, to wit pardonable, to
the chosen and faithful people of god


D. If thou do understand by damnable, sufficient to damn, and by venial,
worthy of pardon: it is certain that there is no sin of his own nature
worthy of pardon, but is able to damn. But if thou understand by damnable, the
sin that damneth, and by venial, that which receives pardon, it is very
certain yt in this meaning there is no sin that may damn the elect and
faithful, but it is pardoned unto them by reason of the merit and satisfaction
of Jesus Christ, Rom ^.
for the which cause S. Paul says, that there is no condemnation to those
that be in Jesus Christ, which do not walk after the flesh, but after the
spirit.


T. Then are they happy which believe in Jesus Christ.


D. There are none else blessed but they only. Therefore David says: Psalm.
32. Romans 4.
Blessed are they whose offenses are pardoned, and whose sins are covered,
Blessed is the man to whom god imputes not his sin: he does not say blessed
is the man that is or shall be found without sin, for there is none such, nor
never was, nor never shall be, but only Jesus Christ very god and very man. But
he calls that man blessed, who notwithstanding that he be a sinner, he has
yet found grace and pardon for his sins in the sight of God. In the mean
while, we must take good heed, if we will be partakers of this blessedness,
that we do not abuse that grace of God which is given us in Jesus Christ,
least that where our sins should be but venial, we cause the^ to be twice
mortal.


What mean it behooves to keep to fight against sin and to resist it, and
to be delivered from it, and how every man ought to fear least he should be
hardened therein, and should fight against his own conscience, to the end that
sin be not to death.
T. Show me the^ what remedy we may find to avoid this great mischief.


D. If we do walk acording to the spirit, and not according to the flesh,
immediately as soon as our concupiscence does prick us, we must resist it by
the spirit of God, if we do not resist it, it is a token that the spirit of
God dwells not in us, which is a sure token of the unfaithful who follow
their concupiscence without any let, without any fear of God at all, if we
do resist it, and that our concupiscence and infirmity does overcome us, the
next remedy is not to suffer the wicked will to proceed any further: if that
the violence of the wicked will and our infirmity be so great, that it break
forth to the outward work, the other nearest remedy is, not to ^ake an
occupation of it, nor to return any more to it, nor to continue any longer
therein, but by true repentance, to correct all such faults, as well inward
as outward, and to lead a good life. If it happen us to fall again into any at
any time, let us take heed that we sleep not in it, nor yet persevere in it,
least that God do leave us, and do harden our hearts, and cast us off into a
reprobat sense, to punish our unkindness and frowardness in such sort, that
in the end we come to resist the spirit of God, Romans 1.9. Matthew. 12. 1. John.
5. 1. Cor. 12. Romans 8. Genes. 3.9 Exodus 88. Romans 9. 1. Sam. 15. Matthew. 26.
Psalm. 51. Luke 7. Acts. 9. 1. Timo. 1
and being vanquished by him in our own hearts, we come to blaspheme him, as it
does often times happen to those which do contemn the admonitions that are
given unto them, and the remorse of their consciences, and do assure them in
their wickedness, for such a sin is without remission, and is called by S.
John, the sin unto death. For so much as he yt sins against the holy
Ghost, does cast of him without whom he can neither ask nor obtain pardon,
nor be partaker of Jesus christ, which only is our way and our health. Let us
then take heed yt we follow not the example of Caine, of Pharao, of Saul, of
Judas, of the Scribes, of the Pharisees, who abode still hardened and obstinate
in their sins, but let us follow the example of David, of the woman sinner, of
S. Peter, of S. Paul, and such like servants of God, who have acknowledged and
forsaken their faults, and returned to God with all their whole heart.


T. This declaration and admonition is very well worthy to be noted. Now I am
very well contented and satisfied in all those matters that have bin handled
between us, whereby I do know the differences of sins, and how God does
judge, and how we ought to understand his law, and that by our free will we may
be well lost and damned, and that there is none but God only which can save us
through his grace and mercy.


FINIS.

