ACTS of conference in Religion, Holden at PARIS, between two Papist Doctors
of SORBONE, and two godly Ministers of the Church.

Drawn out of French into English, by Geffraie Fenton.

Mon heur viendra. Imprinted at London by H. Bynneman, for William Norton and
Humfrie Toye.

TO THE RIGHT Virtuous Lady, the Lady Hobbie, Geffrey Fenton wishes long
life in Gods holy fear.
ONe chief fruit of reading (Madame) is a confirmation of judgment, and
therefore necessary we read good things, to the end, that with a virtuous
exercise in conversation, our conscience may also settle, and our selves rest
supplied with wholesome instructions conducible to a happy state and direction
of life. And albeit (with the Philosophers) all knowledge of it self is good
(as by Histories to discern the policies of times and seasons, and out of
other Arts and Sciences to draw the nature of elements, and property of
natural things) yet (with S. Paul) by the knowledge of the Scriptures the
(...) of God is made perfect, 2. Tim. 3.
and redily prepared for all good works, the same being a dignity far above
the value of the earth, and a Philosophy which shines (as S. Peter says) like
a Candle in a dark place: yea it bringes us into hope, 2 Pet. Romans 15. James 1.
and has power even to save our souls. So that if our travel in other Arts
and Sciences yield us benefit in Civil and Politic respects, the study of
the Scripture implies a heavenly fruit, as by the which our sins are
qualefied, our souls relieved, our faith assured, and lastly our whole life
led (as it were by an Angel of purpose) to the visible society of
sovereign felicity. Wherein by how much this fruit is preciouse and
certain, by so much are we drawn in a necessary consideration to
Christianity, so to travel in the use of it, Luke. 16.
as we stand not guilty with the ignorant man in the Gospel, to whom it was
said, had thou not Moses and the Prophets? as aduising us thereby not to
disguyse our incredulity with want of knowledge least Moses, the Prophets,
and the Scriptures also judge against us.

Hear (Madame) if my sufficiency were as equal to watch with the nature and
majesty of this high cause, as all Christians live under a condition of
necessary duty, to know and set forth the Scriptures, I could add many
authorities to my present purpose, not to undertake thereby to prepare your
conscience, which I doubt not is infallibly settled in a perfect Method of
Gods true Religion, and much less to induce your zeal, which J know is
infinite in the best degree secundum scientiam, as the Ap^^tle advises: not to
instruct your conversation, to which is ^^lly fu^^^lled a full example of all
virtues, nor yet to lead your mind to be more spiritually edified, seeing
your society with public Lectures and Sermons this last winter in London,
stands to witness ^^ur holy desire, the same also stretching (with the
Psalm) to such a vehement thirste after Gods word, that even your boarde
(which J did often assist) was seldom without the fellowship of deep Deuines
and Preachers, to the end that as your example drew others to seek God in
Sermons abroad, so also your self by private conference might be thoroughly
resolved in every doubt touching your Christian opinion, and so be no less
perfect toward God, that happy in the voice of the world touching your
honorable direction of life, which carries such general integrity in all
your dealings, that J have heard it often doubted, whether your Reverend father
has had at any time more comfort in all his transitory felicities, than in
the success of such a daughter, by whose virtues his house is raised into
dignity, and his aged years exercised in consolation.

I could further enlarge in the particular effects of your deep discretion,
as your wise behavior amongst the French to discharge the high trust of your
husband, when God had called him from you, your dear care to convey his dead
body with honor from that forreyne place, your unfeigned duty of a wife in his
honorable Funerals, your honest conscience to defray his debtes, and indue such
his servants as depended upon him with competent consideration, your rare
policy of a mother to establish your children like the sons of such
parents, your continual (...) yelding charity to the poor: and lastely your
great cha^g^ to entertayne men of Arts and learned Faculties, by which your
house seems an University of learning. All which, albeit J rather touch
slightely, than bring forth with their due commendation, (as eschewing the
note of flattery, although no truth can be disguysed) yet if I should be
silent, and all others unthankful to the memory of those do^^g^, time
hirselfe would norish them, as being public monumentes which can not be
defaced.

Only it may please your Ladyshippe to lay before you these first fruits of my
duty and honest affection, under this little argument of Religion, which
albeit is not worthy your view by any indeuer of mine, yet waying with the
quality of the matter, your disposition to holy things, I hope it will not
prove altogether implausible with you, as containing a familiar sense in Gods
deep mysteries, with express difference between the rude sophistry of the
Papists, and mild simplicity of the reformed side: Which J beseech you so
favor with your authority and name, that by how much our Christian
countrymen (by your good means) may frutefully communicate in so necessary a
benefit, even by so much also they may be drawn too glorify God, and pray
communi voce to give you society with that holy widow which S. Luke commendes
so much in his Gospel. Luke. 2.
At London.iiij. July. 1571.

Your Ladyships readily to command GEFFREY FENTON.

A Preface containing the occasions of the Conference.
Because many desire to be directly satisfied touching a common brute spredde
of the conference appointed at the Duke of Montpensiers, between two Doctors
of Sorbone, Sorbonae a College of Papists in Paris.
and two Ministers of the Church: whereof some settle and yield to ordinary
reports, and some believe and judge according to their proper fancies, I have
thought good (as well to satisfy the one, as to take from the others all
occasions of hasty incredulity,) to draw into writing the whole discourse, as
it passed, together with the cause and first motion of the disputation.

The Duke of Montpensier, who (as the world knows) is zelouse in his
Religion, and of great love to his children, seeing the Duchess of Buyllon his
daughter happily withdrawn from the Romish opinion, to be henceforwarde a
blessed member of Jesus Christ, and that with such constancy and
confirmation in the knowledge and fear of God, zeal, holiness, with all
other wholesome virtues, that neither by private persuasions, nor other public
means, he could stop the course of Gods grace working in her, determined at
last to apply a last remedy, as thinking to allure her with the learning and
eloquence of doctor Vigor, a man of dear reckening with him: wherein for the
better satisfaction of the Lady, after he had imparted his intent with the
Duke her husband, it was agreed that the persuasions should be ministered to
her in the presence of certain Ministers, as Spina, with other such as he
would call unto him: with liberty to allege what they could against the
doctrine of Vigor, under this condition, that if after the Conference they were
not consuted and wholly vanquished by him, his daughter should remain quiet
in her opinion, without further attempts to draw her from it. Hereunto the Duke
of Buyllon did not unwillingly condiscende, and for a better proof of his
readiness in the cause, he imparted the whole business with the Admiral, by
whose advise with others (assisting the proceeding) Spina was immediately sent
for, who at his coming told the Lords that (the quality and humor of his
adversary considred) he hoped for no great fruit in this conference, as being
far more parciall for the Pope and his traditions, than of any zeal at all to
the word and truth of Jesus Christ: which albeit was affirmed by all the
assistants, yet it was agreed that he should undertake the conference, and that
for two considerations, the one to instruct and strengthen the good duchess
against the sophistries and cauillations of Vigor: the other to take from him
al occasions to brag (as he is wont to do) that the Ministers durst not
appear before him. Here the order and method to proceed in this business,
was agreed upon, with license to Spyna to require the authority and sufferance
of the King, that (to avoid confusion) it might pass in a small presence:
that a certain Theme and subject might be proponed to confer upon: And
lastely, that there might be established two Moderators for all the Acts, and
two others deputed to gather faithfully all the Reasons and arguments of either
part.

All which orders being orderly communicated to the Duke of Buyllon, by the
L. Admiral and Spina, he judged them of such reason as not to be denied,
warning Spina to prepare him self against the first of July, when the
conference should begin in the after noone. Spina entreated Monsieur Barbasta,
minister to the queen of Nauar to accompany him in this disputation, who at
the day and hour aforesaid, conducted by three Gentlemen appointed by the
duke of Buyllon, went to the L. of Montpensiers house, where the duke of
Buyllon (advertised belike of their coming) met the^ in the hal: and there
(induced as it seemed by the doctors who were in the chamber from whence he
came) asked Spina if (before ye beginning of the conference) he were determined
to make his prayers, according to the custom of the reformed churches: He
answered yea, and that neither he nor his companion, either might, or ought to
set upon a matter of such importance, as to treat upon the mysteries of
Christian religion, before they prepared them selves thereunto by invocation to
the name of God. With which answer he returned eftsoon into the Chamber of
the Doctors, who after some private counsel amongst them selves, appointed
Doctor Ruze to tell them, that for their parts they would not assiste their
prayers, and that there was no more reason for them to be present when they
prayed, than for the ministers to forbear their Mass. The ministers answered,
that in good conscience they could not begin to dispute, before they had
prayed to God, and for the Doctors they had liberty, either to assiste or be
absent from their prayers at their pleasure: but touching them selves, they
were content to make their prayers in the place where the assembly and
conference should be, only they said there was great difference between
their prayers (which have conformity with the pure word of God, as they them
selves confess,) and the matter of their Mass, which conteynes many things
quite contrary, as is easily seen and judged by such as will examine it by
the rule of the Scripture, and therefore (by reason of the impiety and
idolatry in their Mass) as they can not any way communicate therewith without
offense to God, and bring them selves guyltie before him: so yet, neither he nor
the other Doctors his companions, stood barde from the society of their
prayers by that difficulty, because there was neither point nor article, which
(by their own confession) was not holly and consonant to God. Doctor Ruze
replied, that they rested upon a small matter: but they answered him, that as
the principal exercise of Christian religion stood upon prayer, so it was
also the most necessary mean to obtain Gods grace, without the which
mortal men could not attain to any success in their doings, and therefore
very dangerous to omit it: they told him also, that they marueled on his
behalf, that professing the name of a Doctor and a Divine, he made such a
negligent estimation of prayer, which is the true practice, fruit, and use of
all the knowledge touching God and his word, like as by this the world might
discern, what was the nature of their judgments, who measured divinity by
idle and vain speculations. He answered that the Duke of Montpensier would
never suffer such a bravery in his house, and much less that it should be
said, that it was a place for the Ministers to make their prayers in. The
ministers protested to be far from their profession to brave it, and that
much less they would use any bravery toward Princes (whom they honored with
all fear and obedience) but that they would condemn themselves if they used
it to any man, of what mean condition soever he were: wherewith they assured
him, that as well he as others, which laid such slanders upon them before
Princes, to kindle and inflame them against them, should one day give reason
of their doings before the majesty of God. Here Doctor Ruze asked them why they
stood so resolutely upon this point of prayer: they answered, that the purpose
of the Conference, was to reveal the true sense of the Scripture, and deliver
it to the understanding of the Bearers, which could not be done without the
spirit of God, who clears the understanding of men to comprehend it, and
opens their mouths to pronounce it, in which respect they are to implore
and obtain Gods grace by prayers: besides, God has commanded all such as
have need of wisdom, to demand it of him, to search what they would
find, and to knock at the gate if they would have it opened to them: all
which being not otherwise to be obtained than by prayers, they concluded, that
for that occasion their invocation was necessary. They alleged moreover, that
all things ought to be referred to the glory of god, and therefore prayer to be
requisite in the beginning, and thanksgiving in the end, and consummation of
all our endeavors, even as when we begin and end the ordinary refection of our
bodies, we bless and glorify the name of God.

Here Doctor Ruze told them that they should not have any let to pray, so that
they prayed in their hearts: but they answered, that that suffised not, but
that they must as well exercise their mouth, as S. Paul commaundes. Then
withdraw you apart (says he) and make your prayers al alone: they told him
that was also inconvenient in such a presence, as being commanded by God to
make their light shine before men, to the end, that seeing their good works,
they might have mean to glorify God, and be edified therewith: besides, by
this they might procure cause of slander to their neighbors, as to confirm
the lewd opinion raised by their adversaries touching their doctrine and
exercises, which is, that in respect of the errors and blasphemies, they
dursie not publish it: and therefore the better to purge this reproach, they
thought it most convenient, that as they were to speak publicly, so also
their prayers might not be kept from the hearers. Lastly they said, in reason
and duty they ought not to be denied there the authority which the king had
agreed unto them in the conference at Poyssy, where in all the several
assemblies it was lawefull for them to make public prayer to God, before they
entered any speech of disputation. They added for their last reason, that it
was needful to comprehend within their prayers, both they and al such as
should assiste the conference, to the end that by the help of Gods grace,
as well they as others might be made clean from all passions, as being hindered
with nothing to judge rightly of such matters as shall fall in question of the
one and other side, leaving by that means a facility to the hearers the
better to make their profit. I am ashamed to recite in this place a word
which escaped from doctor Ruze in this talk, who in a disdain to God and his
service, said, that if the ministers would go pray, he would go piss the while:
the same seeming so impudente to the ministers, that they cried, what
resolution, what counsel, yea what one good word to be hoped for in a heart
filled with such apparent, disdain of God?

The Duke of Buyllon, and the said Doctor Ruze, seeing the constancy of the
Ministers not to enter Conference, unless they prayed publicly in the
presence of the assembly, after they had imparted the same with the lord of
Montpensier, and the other doctors that were with him, they determined to send
them away, as not meaning to dispute with-them under such condition.

Whereupon the Ministers departed, and being called back again before they
were at our Ladies bridge, they returned with expectation of consent to their
request, wherein notwithding they were deceived. For Doctor Ruze meeting them at
the gate, told them for a final Resolution, that if they would pray, they
should have a house appointed for that purpose: only the Lord of Montpensier
would not suffer them to make his house their place of Prayer, nor that any of
his household partake with their Prayers: whereunto the Ministers Answered, that
in this, their request was rather restrained than satisfied, and therefore they
could Answer them no otherwise than before.

Here Doctor Ruze ministered particular speech to Spyna, to whom in scoffing
manner, he told, that he saw two causes why he was of so hard a desire to be
drawn into disputation, and that heretofore he had been of their sect and
company, but now he was cut of. Spyna Answered, that if he had meant to eschew
the conference, he would not have taken the travail of.viij. leagues in so
great distemper of heat, and much less left his Church, more dear to him
than any other thing, to come to them in their own houses. Touching his
departing from their society, he esteemed it one of the greatest benefits that
ever happened to him, for the which he had cause to yield continual thanks to
God. And because neither he nor his fellowship should dout indirectly of his
readiness to dispute, he laid before him a mean by which both parties might
be satisfied, as to trauerse the disputation by writing, the same being most
convenient, to intercepte all contentions: that the Arguments and Answers may
be the better handled and understand: that the people should be the better
edified: And lastly, that in this manner there was no danger of alterations,
either by additions or detractions: Ruze Answered that nothing could be
written, which has not erst been written: even so says Spyna we can
pronounce nothing, which heretofore has not been spoken.

This was the Resolute end of all their speeches, by which may be gathered the
will and disposition of the doctors to enter the conference with the Ministers:
to whom even in the beginning, to prevent their further proceeding, they
offered a condition which they knew would not be accepted, as to enter into a
public conference of the scripture, and yet barde to pray publicly in the
place and assistance where they should dispute. Besides, their intent is easily
judged by the order they established touching the conference: For in place to
provide conveniently for the ease and quiette of the Ministers, come with no
small pains to them, they had procured at least a hundred persons of all
qualities to enuiron the said Ministers, and so to amaze them, either with
inreuerente scoffs, violent injuries, or inciuile threats, that had not the
three Gentlemen of the Duke of Buyllon, kept a precise care over them, they had
been in danger of violent hurt. By their dealings also may be discerned their
regard of duty to God and holy Prayer, seeing they could not admit Prayer in
their presence. And lastly, what understanding can they have of the scripture,
with what Faith can they handle Gods Mysteries, yea with what integrity and
faculty can they preach and pronounce, seeing they disdain in their presence
Prayer to God to obtain all things, as though their sufficiency were in aid
of them selves, and not to proceed from God the Author of all light?

The first disputation of Tuesday, the ninth of July. 1566.
IT did not suffice the Doctors, by their inciuill means remembered in the
Preface, to offer to reuerse the conference appointed between them and the
two Ministers: but also, (the rather to intercept the just persuasion of the
world) in the matter of their intowardnesse, to enter so holy an exercise, they
suborned a brute against the Ministers: that being no less privy to the
weakness of their cause, than their doctrine evil assured, they refuse to
dispute. The same spreading to the ears of the king and Queen, and also the
Lord Admiral, who foreseing the dangerous slander that might discende to the
reformed Churches, if the cause were not wisely and speedily governed, and
construing withal, this corrupt imputation to be laid upon the Ministers, the
rather to deface their innocence: stood in their excuse before their
Majesty's, whom he assured of a prompt readynesse in the Ministers, to common
with the Doctors in the defense of their Church and confession, and that by
infallible Scripture, where and before what reverend testimony they should be
brought, so that their liberty to pray to God in their beginning (as they had
desired) were not taken away, and means for good order established, the
better to bridle the confusion of popular showtes and voices, as happen
ordinarily in the Schools of Sophisters, and people inclyned to cauell.

This speech of the Lord Admiral kindled such a sense of reason in the Lord
of Neuers, that, induced chiefly by the spirit of God, and partly by an
heroycall instinct of heart, laboring in desire to aspire to the direct truth
of things: he became a suitor to their Majesty's, that by their authority and
suffraunce, the said disputation might proceed, and be eftsoons restored:
wherein as he prevailed to the full effect of his request and purpose: so,
after he had ymparted with the Lord Admiral the disposition of the King and
Queen, they joined in devise touching the order to be observed in the said
conference, naming the said Lord of Neuers, and the Duke of Buyllon, as
Presidents of the place, with certain numbers of Gentlemen mutual
assistauntes to record and witness the manner of their proceedings, prouyding
lastly two Notaries of Paris, for either side to subsigne and set down in
writing the true discourse of either several parties.

These conditions thus determined by the Lords, were also received of the
Doctors Vigor and De saints for the Papists, and De spina and Sureau
Ministers: Assembling, according to the appointment the ninth of July, at the
Lord of Neuers house, where, in his presence and hearing of the reast of the
assistants, after the Ministers had prayed, which the Doctors did shonne, (as
retyring elsewhere till they had done) Doctor Vigor undertook the first
speech, with protestation that neither he nor his companion came thither to
enter argument with the Ministers in any need or meaning to be instructed in
points of religion, and much less to impugn in any sort the counsels, and
specially that of Trent, by which they were forbidden to dispute with
Heretics: Assuring resolutely for themselves, to abide constantly in the faith
of the Church of Rome: only such was the request of the Lord of Montpensier
(who to reclaim his daughter the Lady of Buyllon, had procured that
conference) as they were the rather drawn thither, as well to satisfy him, as
also to declare their holy zeal to seek and bring again to their flock, such
as were gone astray.

The Ministers for their parts protested likewise, not to be enforced to
conference by any doubt they made in any article of their confession, as
knowing the same to consent simply and fully with the perfect word of God,
but rather to strengthen and defend it against the Sophistries of such as
seek to impugn it, pretending also to keep and establish the said virtuous
Lady of Buyllon, in that state and holy institution, which Gods grace had
happily instilled into her.

These protestations thus mutually alleged, the Ministers looked that the
Doctors (according to the meaning of the Lord of Montpensier, and desire of
his daughter) would begin their disputation, with the matter of the supper,
and the Mass: albeit, using the example and policy of such, as pretending the
siege and battery of a town, begin to raise their Trenches a far off: so
they, the better to prepare themselves to decyde and consult in the said two
points, began to lay their foundation by the authority of the church, upon
the which they sought to establishe the certainty of the articles of faith,
and generally of all the holy scripture: And so the demaundes and objections
passing from the Doctors, and aunswers returned by the Ministers: De saints
began, and Despina, answered as follows.

Question.

Upon what do you establishe your religion?

Answer.

Upon Gods word.

Question.

What understand or mean you by Gods word?

Answer.

The wrytings of the Prophets and Apostles.

Question.

Do ye receive by their wrytinges all the books of the Bible, as well of the
old as new Testament, gyuing to them all an equal authority?

Answer.

No, but according to the instruction of antiquity, we use distinction
between the Canonical and Apocryphal books, calling such canonical, upon
whose doctrine, both faith and all christian religion is founded, and the other
we name apocryphal, as upon whose authority we cannot establishe any article
of faith: only they are proper (in respect of their notable sentences) to
instruct the state of life and manners of christians.

Question.

How know you that the one are canonical, and the other apocryphal?

Answer.

By the spirit of God, which is a spirit of discretion, gyuing light to all
such to whom it is communicated, to make them capable of power to judge and
discern spiritual things, and comprehend the truth (when it is propounded to
them) by the testimony and assurance which he kindles in their hearts:
wherein, as we discern the light and darkness by the faculty of the sight
that is in our eye, even so being furnished with Gods spirit, and guyded by
the light which he kindles in our hearts, may we easily deuyde and know the
truth from deceyt, and generally all other things, which may contain
falshoode, absurdity, doubt, or difference.

Question.

But some may vaunt to have the spirit of God, which have him not, like as we
find by the hystories, that all the heretics thought assuredly to have the
truth on their sides, studying to authorize their doctrine by the inward
revelations, which they feigned to receive of Gods spirit: by which may appear
what danger it were to reappose or commyt the censure of a book or doctrine
to the testimony of Gods spirit, which a private man persuades or faynes to
have received in his heart.

Answer.

This peril is easily avoided by ye advise of the Evangelist John in his first
Catholic, as not to settle an indifferent belief to al spirits, but rather
to prove and examine them diligently before we admit them, and then allow what
they propownde: wherein the examination which we ought to make in this case, is
to consider, first the end of the doctrine that shall be pronounced, and
purpose of any book presented to us. For if it tend to raise and establishe
the glory of God, it is true, according to the words of Jesus Christ in
John, Cap. 7.18.
he that searches Gods glory is true, and there is no injustice in him: in
this view and examination, we have also to consider, that if it consent with
the proportion and analogy of faith (as Paul says) it agrees fully with the
chief grounds of religion. Romans 12.6


Question.

All men say, and may say as much, but for this reason it is an argument
insufficient, till I be warranted by effect and other proofs, how I may rest
and stay my self upon it: Besides, this answer exceedes the lymites of the
proposition, as presupposing the scripture to be known to be the ground of
religion: and the proposition was laid to give the reason to assure me that
the scripture was of God: and that we must put a distinction between the
books of the same.

Answer.

It is easy to judge, whether the end of the doctrine which is propownded,
stretch to establishe and exalt the honor and glory of God, as if the same
move exhortations to men, to withdraw wholly their trust from creatures, and
reappose and lay it altogyther upon God, to have recourse to him in their
necessities, to depend upon his providence in all their transitory affairs,
and lastly to praise him with thankesgyuing for all the benefits they have:
which being presupposed, there is no doubt that the doctrine including this
purpose and end, is not good and to be received: touching the objection, that
our former answer fell from the bounds of the first proposition, it seems
not so, because the first matter propownded, tended to know what was the
ground of our religion, to the which it was answered, that it was the
wrytings of the Prophets and Apostles.

Question.

This answer is common to the Lutherans and Anabaptists, yea and to the
Deistes, who above the reast profess to search the glory of God, and what
else the answer conteynes: and generally all men, using this speech, could
not but err in all the articles of the Creed, except the first: But to cut of
this circumstance of speech, and return to the point, we think it not
lawful to use a foundation of the scripture, before it be known and assured
that it is the holy scripture, and that there is difference between the
books of the same: and also before it be manifest, that I have a particular
inspiration of the holy spirit, and that such a private breathing of the holy
ghost be a sufficient ground of religion.

Answer.

The Deistes, or other heretics, can not serve their turn with the said
answer, for the confirmation of their errors, because the Deistes, denying
Jesus Christ, can not glorify God, seeing that to glorify the father, it is
needful first to know and glorify the son: and even so the other
heretics, who notknowing the truth, nor by consequent, Jesus Christ (whichis
the way, the life, and the truth) must needs be ignorant of God, and how
to glorify him. And where our answer is noted superfluous, or to wander
indecently, we lay our selves to be measured and judged by the conference of
the demand and answer: And touching the last point of the objection, that
the revelation which a private man says he has of the spirit of God, is to
him as a ground of religion: that is without the sense and words of our
answer, which stretched only to lay the foundation of true religion upon
the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles: of whose truth all the church
generally, and every particular member of the same, are assured by the
testimony and inward revelation of the spirit of God.

Question.

All that is here spoken, must be added to the other answer before it be good:
and it seems that the answer contaynes but matter of mockery: For it is
most certain, that when all truth is in the doctrine of one man, he is no more
wicked or an heretic: But we search still the beginning of truth, and what it
ought to be: And touching the replye, denying that the particular revelation is
the ground of religion, there is no great difference: For if the particular
revelation be a sufficient ground for every one to know that which is of the
Apostles and Prophets, it is by consequent the foundation of religion, as being
the ground to know upon what every particular man knows and says his
religion is founded.

Answer.

We framed our aunsweres according to the nature and manner of the demands, by
which appears no likelihoode of disposition to scoff or jest: seeing that in
such a conference as this is, where is question to search the honor and glory
of God, mockery could not be without impiety: But touching revelation to be
like to the scripture (which is the ground of religion) we deny it, and
affirm them to be things different, notwithstanding their conjunction, as
following one an other, according as it is written in Esaias: Behold my alliance
with them, says the Lord, Cap 59. and. 21.
my spirit which is in thee, and the words which I have breathed into thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy lips, nor from the mouth of thy seed, and
so as follows: by which may be judged the distinction that the Prophet uses
between the revelation of the holy spirit, and the word.

Question.

I leave (for conclusion of this conference) every one to judge of the
conueniencie or agreement of the aunsweres and objections. And touching the
words alleged out of Esaias, of the unity of the word and holy spirit, they
be but speeches without purpose, and new matter: neither ought we to compare
the revelation of every particular man (which was the question) with that of
the Prophet Esaias, who had the other proofs that the holy ghost spoke by him,
and made demonstration thereof many times. Lastly, what soever is alleged, I
leave to the judgment of every christian.

Answer.

Even so also we refer to judgment what has been inferred mutuallie of the
one and other part: And touching the place of Esaias, which we produced, there is
no question at all of the revelation of the Prophet, nor the spirit that was
communicated to him, but only of the spirit and words which God promised to
all his people, with whom he entered his alliance. For the other proofs
pretended, that the Prophet had of his vocation, we make no doubt at all of
them, only we protest that to be principal and most assured which he had by
the testimony of Gods spirit, as appears in the sixth Chapter of his
prophecy.

Question.

Be it that he spoke to his people by the person of Esaias, yet it follows not,
but that he spoke first to Esaias, neither do I deny that he promised not his
spirit to his people, meaning to his universal Church, not that he would that
every one, yea being in this church might usurp or vaunt to have this spirit
promised particulerly: And touching the particular inspiration of Esaias, it was
not founded only on his fancy and presumption, but in the assurance which
God gave him in supernatural works, as is witnessed in his sixth chapter:
Besides, it was not sufficiently grounded to be believed, as to have an
inspiration, if he had not declared it by other effects and prophesies which
happened, as belonges to every Prophet to do before he believed. Deuteronomy. 28.
But referring all these things as matters fetched from far, and out of the
first proposition, I leave the judgment as before.

Answer.

There is not one of the church, if he be a true member of the same, to whom
the spirit of God is not communicated according to the testimony of the
Apostle Paul, and also the Evangelist John in his first Catholic. Romans 8.9.
Chap. 2.20.27.
For the presumption pretended, there is great difference between presumption
and the imaginations of the spirit of man (which is but darkness, and of
himself knows nothing in the things of God) and the Reuelatio^s of the holy
spirit, which are most certain, and of no less assurance. And so lastly
touching our Answers to be out of the first matter or speech. If they be so,
so also are the Demaundes.

Objection.

The Conclusion is, whether every one ought to be believed, saying he has a
particulare Revelation of the holy spirit, without Declaration otherwise,
that there be holy Scriptures, and that there is difference between the same:
Let every one be judge whether the Demaundes and Aunsweres be pertinent to this
difficulty or not, like as also whether the one importe more credit and
belief than the other, as the one being a new Doctrine, shows not any
proof more than the other, of their particular inspiration.

Answer.

In our former Answers we have declared how the Revelations supposed by
particulare persons, ought to be examined by such means, as they may be
discerned whether they be of Gods spirit or not. Here Doctor Vigor
intercepted his further speech, saying: that in the discourse aforesaid, he
understood much matter in the mynisters Aunswers, to be against the word of
God, as where it is said, that first the Son must be honored before the
father: which Spyna maintained to be undoubtedly true, alleging that
proposition to have his ground and authority on the holy scriptures, as in the
gospel and first Catholic of S John: Whereunto Vigor Replies, that in the said
places is not found this word first, albeit, in respect not to incident
the matters alleged in the beginning of the conference, he will forbear for
the present, to enter into Confutation, reserving that charge, til the end of
all the conference.

Answer.

Spyna requires Doctor Vigor to coat the places of scripture, which he
pretendes to be contrary to the contents of his Answer: And to justify his
opinion, to glorify first the Son before the Father, (according to the
testimony of the textes before noted) he preferres this reason grounded and
drawn out of the Scriptures: we can not know the Father, unless we have
known the Son: we can not glorify the Father, unless we have known him:
by which the consequence follows, that the knowledge and glory of the Son,
is a degree to come to the knowledge and glory of the Father: which being
referred by Vigor to be more amply debated in the conclusion of the whole
conference, Spina was also content.

Objection.

Vigor Obiectes, without entering further into this disputation, that by the
self same reason inferred by Spina, it follows that we must honor the
Father before the Son: for by the Father we come to the knowledge of the
Son, as appears by the words of our Lord to S. Peter, Caro and sanguis
no^ reuelauit tibi: sed pater meus qui in coelis est: The same aduouching
manifestly that the heavenly Father revealed to S Peter, that our Lord was the
Son of the living God: Whereupon Vigor argues in this sort, whether the
reason of Spina be vaileable: by the Father we know the Son, therefore must
we first honor the Father before the Son.

Aunsvvere.

To follow the order of the knowledge which we ought to have of Jesus Christ
and his Father propouned to us in S John, we must begin by the Son, and from
the Son to the Father. For S. Philip desiring him once to show to him and his
companions his Father: He answered, Philip, who has seen me, has also seen
my Father, the same teaching that the mean to come to the knowledge of the
Father, is a former knoweledge of the Son: which may be also approved by the
Authorities of other places, where Jesus Christ says, that none knows the
Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him: And to
aunsweare the Authority of S Mathewe alleged by Vigor, Spina says, that the
place by him produced, contained no mention of the knowledge of the Father, nor
the mean to come thereunto, but only of the Revelation which was made by the
grace of God and his holy spirit to S. Peter and his other companions to know
Jesus Christ, and in him, his Father.

Whereupon Vigor calls upon the judgment of the Auditorie, whether this be
an Answer to his Objection, reserving notwithstanding till an other
conference, to handle this point more largely (if he will maintain it) as not
now to incident that which has been proponed, whereunto Spina consentes: Vigor
adds further upon an Answer made by Spina, where he used a difference
between the Revelation certain by the Lord to a particulare man, and the
holy Scripture, in which Answer he seems to put a marvel, the rather for
that there is no Faith given to holy Scripture, but only that the Lord is
the Author thereof, who can not lie: even so if a particular man be assured
that a Revelation is made to him by the Lord, or that a person be assured of
the Revelation made to an other, be bound as much to give faith to the
Revelation, as to the scripture, the which matter also he will not (as he may)
amply handle and deduce, but falls eftsoons upon the first Question, which
as yet has not been resolved, to the which he prays Spina to advance and
prepare himself.

Answer.

The cause of Vigors marvel touching the Revelation of the Lord, and the
word, to be things differing, produced in one of Spinas Answers, moves, in
that he conceiues not the sense and meaning of the speech: For Spina will not
put a difference touching the certainty between the true Revelations of the
Lord, and the word, which proceeding from him, is no less true than the
Revelation, and the Revelation of Reciprocal: Faith with the word, and yet
it follows not for all that, that the word and Revelations of Gods
spirit, (by which we may be led to the understanding of the word) be not
things differente, and that the one goes not before the other. And touching
Vigors request to prepare to the point, he Answers that he can not frame or
draw his Answers from other ground, than the Demaundes that are made him.

To this Vigor Replied, that touching the sense, he lays him self upon the
contents of Spinas Answer: And where he says that the word goes before
the Revelation, that deserves not to set a difference upon the question
propouned. And touching the matter of the point, Vigor Demaundes, if a person
may be assured that he has the Revelation of the Lord, or that a Book be a
Book of holy scripture, and when he may judge assuredly of his inward
inspiration: And lastly how he may assertaine any of this inspiration which he
has of the Lord.

Answer.

The first Article of the last demand, is not a thing impertinent to
distinguishe the scripture from the interpretation of the same: seeing they are
matters diverse, and sundry gifts of the Lord. And to answer that part of the
demand, how a particulare man, having in his heart the Revelation and inward
witness of Gods spirit, may know that it is Canonical, the spirit of God is
not different of him self, and abiding in a particular man, he shall always
acknowledge the Scripture that comes of him, and which bears his marks: And
touching the second demand, we say also that the same spirit being in a third
man, shall acknowledge that as well the word, as the Revelation are of him by
the reasons alleged, that is, that Gods spirit in diverse persons, is always
equal and like to himself.

Objection.

This does not satisfy the first Question proponed, which contained a
demand how any man can judge in him self that he has the holy spirit, to
discern and judge a book to be of the holy Scripture, and an other not to be
but Apocryphal, and lastly how he can make demonstration to an other, that he
is possessed with this inspiration of God.

Answer.

The spirit of God is called a seal in the Scripture, for that the first
effect he bringes forth in the heart of him to whom he is communicated, is,
to assure him of his presence: And to assure a second of the Revelation, which
we have received of Gods spirit, it is also easy, for that the spirit of
God, which opens the mouth of one to speak, opens also the ears of an
other to hear his word, the heart to believe him, and himself to persuade
it, so that between the master and disciple, the Doctor and the hearer, being
both furnished and lightened by Gods spirit, there is also a mutual concord
to know one an other.

Objection.

Such a certainty is a great incertaintie, neither is there any, of what
sect so ever he be, who does not assure him self to have the holy spirit and
truth of his side, which is a fond presumption: how may a man distinguishe a
presumption from a true inspiration.

Answer.

S. John Chrysostom says, that in vain does a man vau^te himself to have
the spirit without the word, which is a mean to repress sects and
heresies, and to judge all matters that the heretics and others would
propounde under the authority and title of Gods spirit: For as by this
spirit we know the true sense of the word, even so do we discern mutually
by the word, who they be that have the spirit of God, and who not.

Objection.

This is no Answer to the Demand, for there is no Question to examine the
doctrine by the word, but to know that it be the word of God, by which we
will examine the doctrine, and approve it: and how a man shall judge assuredly
that he has a Revelation of the Lord, and that it be Gods word.

Aunsvvere.

If he be one of the faithful, he may judge by Gods spirit that is in him, as
in him that tells it him. And if he be of the unfaithful, it is as impossible
that he judge, as a blind man to discern colors laid before him, because (as
S Paul says) it is by the spirit of God, by whom we know and judge the
things that are of God.

Objection.

This Answer is yet insufficient to the Question produced, whereof let the
judgment rest among the hearers and Readers: But now we put forth an other
demand, whether we are certain by Gods word, that the Lord assistes his
Church, and will assiste it until the consummation of the world. And whether
there be not more assurance to stay upon the consentes, and judgment of the
Church touching the determination of the Canonical Books of the holy
Scripture, and the distinction of the same from the Apocryphal, than to rest
upon singular judgment, esteeming it to be an inward inspiration, of the
which there can be no proof made, but only by opinion yt we have the holy
sprite.

Answer.

The Doctors confuse the opinions of the fantastical sort, with the
testimonies, and Revelations of the Holy Sprite, notwithstanding there is
as much distinction between them two, as from heaven to earth: And touching the
consent of the Church, supposed to proceed of the Sprite of God, it is
infallible, and of no less certainty, than the particulare Revelations of
Esaias, and other Prophets: And because both the one and the other proceed of
one Author (which is the Sprite of Truth) the certeintie of the Revelations
of Gods Sprite, made to all the Church in general, and to every particular
member of the same, contain one self poyse, and weight.

Objection.

The Ministers cannot conceal from the Catholics, or others, but that they
are fantastike, as making no proof of the Revelation of the Holy Sprite made
to them, no more than other sects do: And touching that point, supposed that
it proceeds of Gods sprit, they seem to dout of the assistance of the Holy
sprite in Gods Church: which (as S Paul says) Est columna, 1. Tim 3 15
and firmamentum Veritatis: Wherein is to be well considered, that they hold
them more certain of the assistaunce of the Lord in particulare, than in the
universal Church, by which the conclusion may follow, that as well the
particular faithful can never straie, as also that he is a pillar of truth no
less than the universal Church: besides, in laying the particular Revelations
in equal ballaunce and weight with the judgment of the Church, they do openly
impugn their confession of faith, in the fourth Article, where it is thus
written, We know these Books to be Canonical, and a most certain rule of our
faith, not so much by the common accord and consent of the Church, as the
testimonies and inward persuasion of the holy sprite, who makes us discern
them from the other ecclesiastical Books: By the said Article it is seen how
much they do attribute to them selves, more than to the whole universal
Church, which Article, they do now resist, giving as much to the one, as to the
other: yea, in the confession of faith lastly printed, the said Article was
taken away, as appears by that which this day Spyna has brought hither
printed at Geneua, 1564. by which may be seen, that they retracte them
selves, as confessing that it behooues more te stay upon the common consents
of ye church, than upon particulare: the same being reasonable, seeing the holy
sprite is promised to the universal Church, and not to every particulars man.

Answer.

If the Ministers may be thought fantastic, notwithstanding they have Gods
word, with better proof the Doctors may be holden such, in matters which
they maintain and defend both without and against Gods word: touching the
second point, reproving the Ministers that they dout of the assistaunce of
the sprite of God to the Church, your answer is, that the dout is not there,
but to know which is the true Church: For the third point, where the Doctors
allege that it may be inferred, that particular men cannot err, the
consequence is nothing woorthe, because the Sprite of God may sommetime
depart from men, in which case they may fail and err, as David
confesses, Psalm. 30.
did happen to him. To the fourth point the Ministers answer, that they
impugn not in any sort the Article alleged of their confession, because the
Answer contained comparison of two Revelations of the spirit, the one made
to the body, and the other to the members, which they maintain to be of equal
value touching the certainty: and in the confession is mention made of the
Revelation of Gods spirit, which causes the consent of the Church, which
follows thereof, as the effect. And if it be so, that the cause being
preferred before his effect, there is great reason that the Revelation of the
spirit of God, compared with the consent of the Church, should be preferred
before it, as the cause to the effect which it produces. And touching the
co^trarietie which they pretend in Confessions Printed in diverse seasons, and
by sundry Printers, they shall be Answered, when their pleasure is to debate
the Articles particularly.

Question.

Where they made a doubt of the true Church, even ye like may be said of ye
Revelations pretended of Gods spirit to particular men, whom also we may dout
whether they be members of the Church or not: Touching the other point, where
they deny to impugn the fourth Article of their Confession, there seems no
small contradiction, as comparing the particular Revelation with the consent of
the church, as appears by their Answer: it seems also to serve to small
purpose, where they allege the Revelation to be the cause of the consent,
preferring it before the same, as the cause before the effect, the same seeming
as who should say, the Revelation is to be preferred before the word of God and
holy scripture, for it is most certain that the Revelation goes before the
word and scripture. And as it appears in the text of the Confession (which
may be easily judged) the Authors of the same speak of the certainty and
infallibility of two Revelations, as holding themselves more assured of that
they have in their spirit, than that which is of the judgment of the church:
Touching the other point, that particulare men may sometimes fail, when Gods
spirit leaves them, we may conclude by that we ought not to rest infallibly
upon the inspirations pretended of particulare men, because it may be douted
whether they be forsaken of Gods spirit or not, which we can not do of the
Church, therefore it is more assured to stay upon the Church infallibly
governed by the holy spirit, than upon the private pretended inspirations,
which the Catholics do, not following their private judgment, and therefore can
not be esteemed fantastike: but rather such are guilty of that name, who
prefer their proper judgment, which they cover with the title of particulare
inspiration: The Doctors require a text of the Scripture, by the which the
holy spirit is promised to every particulare person, as to the universal
church, thereby to know how to judge and discern what be the scriptures.

Aunsvvere.

Touching the first point, as in deed we do not approve all churches to be
true, which are so said, even so we allow not for faithful, such as vaunt
them selves to be so: For the second, the comparison of the Doctoures is
improper in this point, as who should say the Revelation is to be preferred
before the word of God. etc. Because Gods word and all the writings as well of
the Prophets as Apostles, are as so many Revelations of Gods spirit, and that
between the one and the other, there is no more difference, than between
genus and species: Touching the Article, that the Revelation goes before the
scripture, we must distinguishe between the Revelations made to the Prophets
before they committed them to writing, and those which are made to them, that
read their writings to understand them: For the first, we confess they go
before the scripture, and for the second we say they follow it: Touching the
third Article, the ministers Answer, that it is easy to judge whether Gods
spirit assist a particulare man, or whether he be drawn from him, by the
matters he propoundes, when they be conferred with Gods word, and censured by
the rules of the same, as is said.

Touching their demand, it were a long and weary encomber, to allege all the
places where it is written, that Gods spirit is communicated to the chosen,
the better to know and discern the things that are of God: in Esaias. 5^. the
Lord promises to pour his spirit upon the faithful, as water upon the
earth: Likewise in Joel. 2 Jeremy. 34. in the first Catholic of S. John. 2.
under the name of unction, and many other places.

Objection.

These places make no proof at all, that the spirit was promised to all to
judge of the Doctrine: Other ways, even women, and all artificers that were
faithful, might judge of the Doctrine, as the Prophets and Apostles: of the
contrary S. Paul says: Numquid omnes Propheta. etc. He says expressly,
that discretion of Spirits is to have understanding of the scriptures, and be
gifts not common to all the faithful, but particulare to some.

Answer.

The consequence which the Doctors make, is nothing woorthe, because Gods
spirit oftentimes is communicated more abundantly to some, than to others,
and that also some be better exercised in the scriptures than others. Touching
the place of S. Paul. 1. Corinthians. 12. the ministers say, it makes nothing
against them, because the spirit of Prophecy, and the spirit of discretion
be gifts differing, as appears by the discourse of the Apostle in the same
Chapter.

The second day of disputation, being Wednesday the tenth of July.
THe Doctors required that their Protestation made the day before, might be
Inregistred, which was this, that they would not enter into disputation of
things received into the universal Church, since the Apostles till our time,
decided and already determined by the holy Councels Ecumenike and general,
holding them most certain and undoubted, and that all Doctrine to the contrary
was false: Only they were ready, according to the holy desire of the Lord
Montpensier, and the Lady of Buillon his daughter, to make known by the
express word of God, interpreted by the said universal Church and
Councels, that their Doctrine is holy and conducible to salvation, in which
Doctrine as the said Lady had been first instructed, so all instruction
ministered to her in the contrary, is hurtful and damnable: And lastly, that
this conference might be in manner of instruction, and not a Disputation.

In like sort the Ministers protested, that they did not join in assembly
with the Doctoures, for any doubt they had, that all that was centained in
their Confession of faith, was not certain and true, and grounded upon Gods
word, as appears by the places of Scripture noted in the Margent of the
said Confession, believing that what so ever is contrary, is damnable and to
be rejected, though even an Angel of heaven would propone it. And touching
themselves, they came not thither to be instructed in other Doctrine than that
which they follow, and which they have learned of Jesus Christ, whom they
acknowledge as the only master and teacher of the church.

Here the Lord of Neuers made request, that after their Objections and
Aunsweres, they would proceed to Resolution on both sides, touching the
conference the day before. According to which motion, the Doctors say, that to
judge of a Book, whether it be written of the holy scripture or not, and
likewise to discern a Canonical Book, from an Apocriphal or Ecclesiastical,
we must not rest upon a private, or particulare inspiration, because a
singular person can not have any ordinary certainty, that it is a true
Revelation of the holy spirit: but stay upon the common consent and accord of
the universal church. And also that God notwithstanding he might have revealed
to every one ye true knowledge necessary to salvation, yet he has ordained a
certain mean to attain to faith, which is a truth revealed, meaning by the
hearing of Gods word, preached by lawful ministers sent by the pastors of the
true church, as appears by the ^exte of S. Paul to the Romans.10. and
Ephesians. 4. So that, if they mean to have faith and inward Revelation of the
knowledge of salvation, come by the hearing of Gods word lawfully preached by
the ministers of the same, according to the ordinary mean of assurance, that
we have the inward Revelation: it must necessarily be assured, that the word
by which faith is gotten, has been preached by the lawful ministers of the
true church, and so by consequence be assured of the church, before the inward
Revelation, observing the mean which Jesus Christ followed: They say further,
that the true and certain mark of a true inward Revelation, is, when it is
referred to the common consent of the church. And that of the contrary every
pretended inward inspiration particulare or private, is a false persuasion, if
it differ from the common accord of the church: for Gods spirit is not
particulare, but common. They say also, that to take a false Doctrine, we must
examine it to know whether it be private or common, like as our Lord in S.
John. 8. has given a true mark, saying: Qui de se loquitur, mendatium
loquitur, he that says any thing of himself, and his proper inspiration, is a
lier. In like sort, it is written in Ezechiel, Son of man, Chap. 13.
Prophecy against the Prophets of Israel which Prophecy, and say to such as
Prophecy in their heart, hear the word of the Lord: So says the Lord,
curse be upon the false Prophets, who follow their spirit, and have seen
nothing. And a little after, they see vain things, and a Divination full of
dreams, saying: the Lord says, and the Lord sent them not, and yet they have
given assurance to confirm the word of their Prophecy: which false
Prophets, said they, had (...) inward Revelation, and the word of God.

They would also, that it be well wayed and considered, that the stay of
religion grounded and assured upon an inward inspiration, is the foundation
of many sects of our time, as Anabaptists and Swinfeldiens, who lay their
Doctrines upon private ^^^elations, alleging proper places to serve them as a
ground of their Doctrine, which the ministers inferred yesterday, as Jeremy
in the.3. Chap. Joel. 2. and S. Paul. 1. Cor. 2. The which being considered by
Brentius and Bucer, they have confessed that by the only tradition of the
church, we were ascertained of the Books of the holy scripture, according to
the Doctrine of the auncientes, as S. Jerome, who confesses to have received
by tradition of the church, and by the same to have known that there be four
gospels: Origin also says as much, who, reciting the Canonical Books of the
new Testament, says: I have learned by tradition, that there be four
gospels, neither is there found any ancient catholic that has stayed his
faith to discern and judge of Books,) upon his only private and particulare
inspiration. And S. August. lib. confess. ca. 25. ^seth these words, Veritas
tua Domine, non mea, nec illius, aut illius, sed omnium nostrum quos ad
communionem aduocas: terribiliter admouensne priuatam veritatem habeamus, ne
priuemur ca.

And touching the Books of the old Testament, which the Ministers will not
receive as Canonical, by the judgment of their inward Revelation, the Doctors
auouche, that before S. Augustines time (or at the least) in his time, in the
universal church, all the Books contained in the holy Bible without
distinction, were holden and received as Canonical, according to the
testimony of the Council of Carthage, where S Augustine was present, and also
the Council Laodicene: the Doctors also say, that if by inward inspiration
we must judge of Books, the Fathers that assisted those Councels, had it, or
at least might persuade them selves to have it with more assurance than many
others: But where the Ministers say, that by their inward Revelation, they
judge that they are not Canonical, (...) Doctors refer to judgment, who
ought soonest to b^^^^eued, either the inspiration of the Auncientes received
by the Church by so many hundred years until this time, or the private, and
particulare inspiration of the new Ministers.

They say further, that they offer to prove that the Aunciente Fathers, even
such as w^^e near the Apostles time, as Irenaeus, S. Cyprian, Origin, S.
Jerome, S. Augustine, and others, use testimonies of Books rejected by the
Ministers, even in the proof of the Doctrine against Heretics: yea S.
Augustine him self, in the second Book of Christian Doctrine, Chap. 2.
puttes all those Books amongeste the Canonicalles, as also Damascene in the
fourth Book De Orthodoxa Fide, Chap. 18. So that to know if a man have the
spirit of God, to discern and judge of the Books of the Scripture, it
behooues to rest upon the common consent, and accord of the Church, as
being the ordinary mean of God left for that effect: experience also which
may be made, is a sufficient Argument to convince, that the Faithful by the
inward inspiration cannot discern the Canonical Books, from the pretended
Apocryphal, which might be easily verefied, if there were here at this
present even sum of the Religion pretended reformed, to whom (not having
been as yet instructed in the division of Books) if those Books were
presented, which the Ministers hold for Apocryphal, they would not
distinguish them in any sort from the other Books of the holy Bible. And upon
all they conclude, that if a man have Gods sprite etc. vt supra.

Answer.

Touching the first Article, the Ministers were never of opinion (as appears
in their former aunsweres) that their Religion was grounded upon their
particulare Revelations, but upon the word of God, according as it is set
forth in the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, the truth of which
they said, was most principally assured by the testimony, and Revelation of
the holy Sprite.

They say also, that Faith is not the Truth in proper speech, but the
persuasion of the Truth, which is taught us in the Scripture: Like as also
this Faith is not of our own getting, but a pure gift of God.

They say further, that the lawful Ministers ought to he sent, not of
Pastors pretended, and which have nothing of Pastors, but the Title and name
only, but of God, as appears in Jeremy, where this mark is set forth to
know and mark a false Pastor, when he insinuates him self, or is sent of
other than of God.

Touching the Article following, they say, that the true mark by which we may
judge certainly of a Revelation, is rather the word of God, than the
consent of many, because it happens many times that the multitude in the
Church declining from the word, doothe wholly swarne and go astraie, as in
the time of Micheas, Jesus Christ, and since, in the time of Constance the
Emperor.

Touching those Prophets, who follow and are led by their sprite (as they
that leaving Gods word, rest upon the commandments and traditions of
men, or the vanity of their brain) it is not to be douted that such are not
false Prophets, and to be eschewed and rejected: only we must use great
difference between the Revelations and testimonies of Gods sprite, and the
vain imaginations of the mind of men.

To that the Doctors alleged, that Heretics (as Anabaptists and others)
serve their turn, to confirm their errors, with those places of scripture,
which the Ministers have produced: they deny not but it may be so, for that
the Scripture being common, may be alleged of every one: Neither ought we
to stay upon that which is produced, but to weighe and examine how, and to
what end and purpose it is alleged, by which will appear the difference
that is between the Ministers and heretics.

Touching that which was inferred of Brentius and Bucers opinion, that by the
only tradition of the Church, the Canonical Books may be discerned from the
Apocryphal, the Doctoures seem to mi^^erue their purpose with that, seeing they
maintain that all the Books of the Bible are Canonical, and yet, by their
report of Brentius and Bucer, it appears that both the one and the other,
according to the Tradition (as they say) do put a distinction, calling the one
Canonical, and the other Apocryphal.

To the Article following, wherein the Doctors allege certain places of the
ancients to take away the difference between the Canonical and Apocriphal
Books the Ministers answer, that as they have alleged certain to prove it,
so also they are able to produce of ye same for the disproofe, as S. Jerome in
his Prologue named Chaleatus, and in an other which begins prater Ambrosiu^
to whom writing the sum of every Book of the Bible, he makes no mention but
of those, which the ministers call Canonical: They are able also to allege
two or three Cataloges recited in Eusebius, who receive not for Canonical
Books, but such as the ministers them selves approve. The Council of
Laodicen alleged by the Doctors, speaks for the ministers, as not
comprehending that, whereof there is question: and touching experience, they
Answer that it is a question de facto, as being better to be alleged
against the Doctors, than the ministers.

Lastly, to the end no more time be spente in so often repetition of one self
thing, and that we prepare to confer the points of the Confession which the
Doctors will debate, the ministers declare, that the.xxiiij. Books of the old
Testament, which are in the Canon of the Hebrews, with all the Books of the
new Testament, be approved Canonical of the one and other part, and they are
sufficient to decide wholly all the points of their Confession, and generally
all that belonges to true religion, neither have they occasion, by the means
of that, to delay any more the conference in respect of difference between
the two parties touching the distinction of the Canonical and Apocriphal Books.

Objection.

Notwithstanding the Ministers say, their religion is founded upon the word
of God, yet they ground Gods word upon inward Revelation, so that,
Revelation is the ground of the word, and consequently of their religion: for
they receive for the word, but that which they think to be particularely
revealed unto them.

Touching the other Article, where they resist the opinion of the Doctoures,
that Faith is gotten by the hearing of Gods word, it seems they offer to
^^umble upon small blocks, as not to enter into the principal. And where
they allege that faith is a gift of God, and therefore not gotten, it is
most manifest by many ordinary textes of Scripture, that it does not differ,
one thing to be given and gotten: as the kingdom of heaven which is given to
the blessed, and yet we do get it having true Faith woorking by charity, the
scripture also calls it the reward and recompense of good works, and S.
Paul says, that by liberality and alms men gain the grace of God: Yea
there can be none other understanding of S. Paul's speech, Fides ex auditu,
Hebrews. 13.
but that Faith comes by hearing Gods word, which is the obteining of the
same, by the mean of hearing it preached, albeit it be a gift of God. They
use the like subteltie in going about to rebuke the opinion, that Faith is the
truth revealed, as putting a great difference between the truth revealed,
and the Revelation of truth, which subtlety should be of force against S.
Paul, who says: Panis quem frangimus, nonne communicatio corporis. Domini
est, which is as much, as, panis fractio nonne: etc. And therefore, to speak
properly, the text of S. Paul must needs lie subject to such rebukes. So
that touching this Article, to the end not to incidente notwithstanding the
Reply of the Ministers, the Doctors will dispute no more of it, as being a
matter too much impertinent, seeing that in the end, it would procure speech
of merito, and so from one to another.

It greeues them to enter upon the vocation of the lawful Ministers of the
church, and therefore to avoid that question, they will not allege (which
they might without any superfluous discourse) that before their Doctrine be
received, they must be examined whether they were lawful ministers sent of
the true church to preach Gods word, and to be heard of the people in their
sermones, according to S. Paul's place alleged here before, which if they of
the new Religion had well considered, they might have a most sufficient
argument not to receive their Doctrine, because it is no less clear than the
day, that they are no Ministers sent by the Pastoures of the Church: but have
foisted in themselves to Preach, and are not able to show any sign of their
vocation, either from men, and much less from GOD: And if it were lawefull to
every one that says he is sent, to Preach the word, it were to raise
infinite Sects, as we see happens in this time, and so they cease further
speech in this Argument, least they give a greater heat to the matter.

Touching the Article declaring how we may know a Revelation to be of God,
which the ministers hold, is rather discerned by the word, then by the
consent of many, it resembles nothing the purpose of the Doctors: For the
question is, how a man may judge a Book to contain Gods word, and not to
judge the Doctrine by the word already received, to which the Doctoures
desire, and the Ministers make request, that directly to the point, they
might dress their Aunsweres.

Touching where they said, of the consent of many, the Doctoures phrase was
not so, but spoke of the consent of the Church, which is as infallible as Gods
word: for as it is certain that the holy Spirit is author of the word, so
is it no less sure, that he is the soul of the Church, by whose guide, she
can never err, according to the witness of S. Paul, who calls it Columnam
and firmamentum veritatis: they will not enter into this Question, whether the
multitude of the Church may err or not, and yet, it can not be found since
the Church was planted after the death of Christ, that she has been in
less number, than the sects of Heretics: neither does it serve to this
purpose that has been alleged of Constance, and of the time of the old
Testament, for there is great difference between the Sinagoge of the Jews,
and the Church, which as it is a congregation of all nations believing in
Jesus Christ: so it can not but stand and consiste in most great multitude,
for otherwise the promises made to the Church of the Gentiles should be
vain: For it is said to Abraham, that his seed (we must not mean of the
flesh) should be multiplied as the Stars of heaven, or sand of the Sea.

To the Article that begins, touching the Prophets. etc. the Doctoures say
and confess that there is great difference between fantastical imaginations,
and Revelation of the holy Spirit. But the Ministers Answer not, how they
would prove their particulare persuasions to be rather Revelations, then vain
and fond imaginations of Prophets, whereof Ezechiel speaks: which
notwithstanding they called inspirations, as also what they said and preached,
they called it the word of God.

To the Article which begins, touching Anabaptists. etc the Doctoures
Answer, that to one end the Ministers and Anabaptists produce self places,
whereof mention is made, as the better to assure their Doctrine to be of God,
because they have a particulare Revelation, as God has promised them by his
Prophets: For which self cause the Ministers have brought in the said
Testimonies of scripture, to prove that every Faithful man, may judge by his
particulare inspiration, if a Book contain the word of God, with
Distinction of the Canonical from the Apocriphall, and so discern the true
Doctrine from the false, which is the very ground of the Anabaptists and
other Heretics.

To the Article beginning, touching that which is produced of Brentius, etc,
the Doctors allege that the ministers have not understand their intent: For
they bring not in the saying of Brentius and Bucer, otherwise than in a
speech and meaning, that they know the Canonical Books of the holy scripture
by the tradition of the Church, and not by particulare inspiration, as the
Ministers do.

Touching the Article following, the Doctoures say, that certain times there
were, that some men doubted of certain Books of Scripture, as the Apocalips
and Canonical Epistles of S. John, with others: Albeit which time, and of
common consent, the Church (led and guided by the holy Ghost) has received
indifferently for Canonical, all the Books that be in the Bible, which
consent continued by so many hundred years, had more authority than the
saying of one or two, who notwithstanding spoke not but of their own time.
Besides, there is no comparison at all, between the saying of one or two
particulare men, and the determinations of Councels, and consent of the Church,
as is said: it will be found also, that S. Jerome has approved those Books
as Canonical, as appears in the Prologue he made of the Book of the
Machabees, where he says: As for the Hebrews, they are not Canonical, but,
sunt canonicae Historiae Ecclesia, or such like words. Touching the Council
of Laodicen, they take it as it is, albeit it may be they are deceived, naming
one Council for an other. And for the Article beginning, touching the
experience, etc, albeit it be a Question de facto yet it can not be but of
special value, which if it be found as the Doctoures have propouned (whereof
they doubt not) the ground of their particulare Revelation is plucked down and
confounded.

Touching the conclusion of the Ministers, the Doctoures declare that many
times they have complained, that matters were incidented: laying themselves
upon the judgment of every one, that their last Resolution was drawn in one
direct line, handling one self matter, without varying, in which
notwithstanding, if there had been found any matter of difficulty, and that ye
ministers had desired to proceed to the conference of the principal points,
they could easily have cleared the said difficulty, the Doctors would have
enlarged further matter, of these Articles, saving that to enforce and hasten
the business for the which they are called, they forbear to multiply
speech.

Where the Ministers allege that they receive the xxiiij. Books of the Old
Testamente, with all those of the New, the Doctors say, that is small respect
of matter: For all the conference which hitherunto they have made, as by what
Rules a man might discern one Book from an other, with judgment whether
they were of Scripture or not, was to bring them to this point, that they
received them by the tradition of the Church, who as she is the judge of the
number of Books: And that by the same mean, when was question of the
understanding of Gods word (yea in the collation of the places of the same
Scripture) the Ministers and Doctors might have such reverence to the universal
church, that she might be accessed on both parts, as judge of the
understanding of Scripture, which they would acknowledge to have received of
her, and whereof she is infallible, and more certain judge than either the
one or other: Al which notwithstanding the Doctors offer to the Ministers, not
to infer for that time other Books than such as they receive for Canonical:
only when they shall fall into difficulty of the interpretation of any text, or
the conference of many, the doctors account it more reasonable to have
recourse to the universal Church and Ancient Fathers, than to their proper
judgments, or fancies of the Ministers.

Aunsvvere.

For conclusion, the Ministers consent to the offer of the Doctors, to decide
the points and Articles of their confession by the Books Canonical agreed
upon between them, as the xxiiij. Books of the Hebrews, and all those of the
New Testamente, protesting notwithstanding that in the last writing proponed
by the Doctors, there be many things which they approve not in any sort, and
which they hope to reuerse by Confutation when the occasion shall move, which
they had presently done, were not their intent to show (contrary to the
imputation of the Doctors) that they will not straie, nor wander, nor vary any
way from the conference of the points of their confession.

Reply.

The Doctors Reciprocally agree with the Ministers to the offer aforesaid with
modification to add (for their parts) the authority of the universal Church
and ancient Doctors for the interpretation and understanding of the holy
Scriptures, when they differ or cannot agree.

The third day of disputation, being Thursdaye the tenth of July.
THe Ministers have showed what be the protestations of the Doctors, as not to
come to conference for other end, than to satisfy the Lady of Buillon, and not
to be instructed, or informed in the points of the Religion they hold: And
likewise how the Ministers protested for their parts not to confer with
them, in respect they stood doutful tn any point of their confession,
wherein they rested absolutely resolved: By reason of which protestations,
they required that the first point of their conference might be that, which
the Lady Buillon has publicly prayed to be decided: which is the Supper and
the Mass, to the end also they might be cleared of the charge of imputation
laid upon them by the Doctors, that they varied, and would not come to the
principal point, which is the matter of the Mass, but of the contrary, did
eschew and shun the conference thereof.

Finally, to the end it be known which of them flittes from the decision of
it, they offer (after that point be confuted) to enter conference with them,
(if it so like them touching all the other points which remain in controversy
as leisure and time shall be allowed them: They required also (to cut of all
confusion, and such as happened the day before in the conference) that the
Doctors would propound particularely their arguments apart, and that aunsweres
might succeed accordingly in like order by the Ministers: or else if they will
propounde their arguments and reasons together, there should be granted unto
them a whole day of purpose, wherein they might well do it without any
interruption, with this condition, that the next day should distende to the
Ministers to answer by order to all their arguments.

The Doctors say, that by that which is written heretofore of the Ministers,
it may be easily known that they have always drawn back, as at this
present they do refuse to enter conference of things which they have committed
to controversy, maruelling greatly that this day they will not suffer the
Articles of their confession to be examined by order, as in the first day of
conference they did require in the presence of the Lord de Neuers, the Lord
and Lady of Buillon, with other Lords and Gentlemenne presenting their said
confession contained in a little guilte Book, with offer to the Doctoures to
examine them by order, if they thought so good, which they accoumpted very
reasonable: Whereupon yesterday they departed with this Covenant, that from
this day they would begin to examine the Articles of the Creed, the
Ministers them selves having demanded of the Doctors, whereupon the^ would
entreat.

And touching their speech of the Protestation yt the assembly was erected for
the instruction of the Lady, whose desire stretches (as they say in her
absence) to be first iustructed touching ye Mass: the said Doctors say, yt the
Ministers have taught the said Lady with maine voice, not only error
concerning their supper, but also in many other points, as they will make
manifest when the Articles of the confession by them examined, shall be handled.
So that, they desiring to instruct by order the said Lady in the catholic
Religion, did determine to observe the order holden of all the Fathers of the
Church, that is, to reveal to her, how many errors are contained in the
Catechism of their Church against the Articles of Faith, notwithstanding
that they persuade to those of their Religion, that touching those Articles,
they differ nothing from the Catholics: wherein because, to instruct a
personage, it is necessary we begin at the fundations, and that of certain
Articles of the Creed (wherein the Ministers and their like do err) dependes
a beginning of the proof of the Real Presence of the Body of Christ in the
Sacrament of the Alter, they stand to follow the order of all good
Scholemaisters and Teachers in discipline, and which the Ministers them selves
observe according to the method in their Catechism: And with good right,
might the world smile at the Doctors (who are taken for instructers) if at
the pleasure of the Ministers them selves, they would begin to teach a
personage by the point wherein they ought to end, like as the Catechism of
the Ministers doothe end of the matter of the Supper: Besides, seeing the
Ministers (by their own motion) are content that all the Articles of their
confession be examined, they have no interest at all to make us begin at the
first, seeing, besides it is the consent of al order, yet, it is always at
the choice of the proponer to put forth by such order as he thinks best,
the questions of disputations if any be: wherein, seeing they are bound to
yield reason of their Faith as often as they are required, it cannot be
inexpedient, as well for the benefit of the Lady, as instruction of such as
shall read the conference, to follow this method: which offer of the Doctors,
if they refuse, they cannot shifte of the general judgment of the world,
that distrusting their doctrine (which they dare not maintain) they confuse
the conference.

Touching their request, that in the conference, the Doctors should exhibit
but one reason at once, to the end they may answer without confusion: or
else, that in one day the Doctors may propone al their reasons, and in an
other day the Ministers answer them: The first offer seems reasonable to
the Doctors, and they accept it, for fear to enter into long speeches: But
for the second, they never heard that any such was practiced, neither is it
needeful to assemble in one place for that purpose, but send their writings
mutually one to an other.

Answer.

Touching, to exhibit their confession, and their offers, which the Doctors
suppose the Ministers have made, they refer them to the Registers, alleging
further that it appears by the last proposition of the Doctors, that it is
not upon the confession which the Doctors say was exhibited to them, but
upon the Catechism, that they will ground their disputation: For end, the
Ministers protest again as before, to the end it may be known to the
multitude, who they be that refuse the lystes: requiring that the order to
argue and answer may run from henceforwarde enterchangeably between them
and the Doctors, seeing it is meet things be equal and necessary, that the
Doctoures yield reason of their Faith, as well as the Ministers.

Reply.

The Doctors refer them selves to that which has been set down in
writing in the two first conferences, where was continual speech to examine
the Articles of their confession, without making mention of the Mass.

And where they pretend a seeming and meaning in the Doctors to examine the
Catechism, and not the Articles of the Confession, the Doctors are content
to proceed in the said Articles, conferring them with the Catechism, seeing
they two ought to accord together: And so they call all the assistantes to
witness and judge, by whom it stands that the conference is not begone.

Touching the change of order which the ministers demand this day, it is a
late fashion, and a new trouble, seeing hitherunto they have kept the place of
respondentes, and delivered the Articles of their confession to be examined,
where ye Doctors were always arguers, and of their side not proponed any thing
to examination, and yet are they content (after the said confession be
examined) that ye Ministers propound such difficulties as they have against
the Catholic Doctrine, whereunto, the doctors (with Gods grace) will make
answer.

Demand.

Whether the Ministers believe that the creed, called the Symbol of the
Apostles, was made by the Apostles, and whether they believe all that is
contained therein.

Answer.

It is a thing different, whether the Apostles them selves being together, have
written it, every one bringing to it his sentence (as sum hold) whether it
has been gathered of diverse places of holy writings: yet in the reformed
Church, we believe every point to be drawn out of the pure doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles contained in their writings, as if we should say (by the
importance and contents) that it is a sum of the doctrine which the
Apostles preached.

Demand.

Leaving a part (to avoid tediusnes) whether it be a thing indifferente to a
christian to believe that a doctrine has been written by the Apostles or not,
so that it keep a conformity with ye matter of the holy writings, the demand
is, if al doctrine conformed to ye said holy writings, may take indifferently
the title of the Apostles, or other authors of the scripture.

Answer.

We cannot fail in calling it Apostolic doctrine, but naming it the writing
of the Apostles, seems to give a sense yt it was either written with their
hands, or spoken of them: But be it what may be, wheresoever we acknowledge
any doctrine taste and sauer of the sprite, wherewith the holy men of God have
been moved, we will call it Prophetical and Apopostolical doctrine.

Objection.

The Demand stretches not whether the doctrine be Apostolical in respect
of such conformity, but whether, by that reason it might be attributed to
the Apostles, and of equal authority with the writings wherewith it is
conformed, because it proceeds of a self same sprite, as the answer says.

Aunsvvere.

The answer is already made, which is that such writing conteines
Apostolical doctrine, and in what sense it may be termed to be of the Apostles.

Objection.

The answer (under correction) apperteines nothing at al to the demand: for
the question is not, whether (for the conformity) it may be accounted
Apostolical: But whether (in regard of this conformity) it may be attributed
to the Apostles, and bear the title and name of the Apostles with equal
authority to the proper writings of the Apostles.

Answer.

The first demand was, if the creed was made of the Apostles, whereunto a
sufficient answer was made: After which it is lawful to fashion a second
demand which differs from that.

Objection.

The second dependes upon the first which also is made: and whether it be
satisfied in answer or not, let the Readers discern and judge.

Answer.

To depend upon it, is not therefore the same.

Demand.

Whether they approve the said Creed only, because they know it to be
conformable to the writings of the Apostles, or whether there be any other
thing that induces them to believe it.

Answer.

That not only it is conformable, but even the doctrine it self: for which
cause they believe and approve it.

Demand.

Whether a man be not bound to receive it, but in respect he knows it to be
the self writing, or have conformity with the writings of the Apostles, as is
said.

Answer.

The chief cause yt may move him yt beleues it to believe it in deed, is the
knowledge which we have spoken of.

Demand.

Notwithstanding this be the principal cause, yet we require to be absolutely
answered, whether there be no other sufficient reason to induce belief, so
that this first may be necessary.

Answer.

As Well for the matter of the Creed, as every other thing which we believe, the
principal cause is the knowledge we have, that the same has been left us
written or gathered out of the writings of ye Prophets and Apostles: And for
our parts we search no other reason than that, of our Faith.

Objection.

Yet (under correction) the Demand is not fully answered: Which is, to
know whether to receive the creed of the Apostles, this cause be necessary,
to understand the writings of the Apostles, and that without the same, no man
either can or ought receive it: The Doctors pray to be absolutely answered,
either in the one or the other, without circuit of words: And the more
simplye to unfold and explicate the Demand, thus it is, whether a person
ought not receive the Creed of the Apostles, but under knowledge that it is
conformed to the writings of the Apostles.

Aunsvvere.

Romans 10. Hebr. 11.
Seeing (with the doctrine of S. Paul) there is no true faith without
knowledge, and assurance of the word, to believe, it is necessary we know that
it is the word of God.

Demand.

To know, whether they understand this word to be written or not written.

Answer.

The word written and revealed by the Prophets and Apostles, which is the
fundation of Christian Faith.

Objection.

The ministers then maintain, that after the creed be believed, or proponed to
believe, it is needful to be taught, or to teach an other the wrytings of
the Apostles and Prophets, the same being against all order ever holden in the
Church, and against the contents in the form to administer the Sacraments
in the Church at Geneua made by Calvin, and brought in amongst his works.
The words are these: Go to them that have charge of the child that is
Baptized, seeing there is Question to receive this child into the company of
the Christian church, you promise, when he comes to age of discretion, to
instruct him in the Doctrine received and approved of the people of God: And
after these words, they bring in the Creed, according to the which, they
are willed to proceed in the instruction of the child, in all the Doctrine
contained in the holy Scripture of the old and new Testament, so that before
they propone to believe the Creed, they persuade not to believe that there is
any word of God written, nor what it is, nor what is there contained, as to
know the conformity of the Creed with the same: They lay not also the
foundation of the belief of the Creed, upon the knowledge and conformity of
scriptures, but upon the doctrine received and approved of the people of God:
as the Ancient church, yea before the wrytings of the new Testament were
written, had a custom to propone to great and small the belief of the Creed,
before they would commend to them the holy scriptures, as appears by
christian Antiquities. And therefore the belief of a Christian, dependes not of
the word written by the Creed, but of the word revealed to the people and
church of God.

Answer.

Touching the first Article, it is most necessary in teaching the Apostles
Creed to a child or other ignorante person, that therewith also, he be
instructed in the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, seeing the Creed
contains none other matter, than this self same Doctrine, and that they are
things not only conjoined, but also like, if not in terms, at least in sense
and substance.

For the second Article, they deny that that which is alleged before, is any
way contrary to the order established in the church of Geneua, or other church
well directed: wherein touching the reason taken of the form of Baptism used
in the said churches, it follows not by the words and speeches which have
been alleged, that Calvin would shut out the Creed, and separate it from
the writings and Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles (a thing impossible) but
shows evidently that he meant to comprehend it therein, when he added this
word, and generally (which the Doctoures have put in their Allegation) to
comprehend what might be over and above the holy Scriptures, after the
deduction which he made of the points of the Doctrine comprehended
particularely in the said Creed. Touching the other reason that before there
were any Book of the new Testament written, ye Creed was proponed to such as
were Catechized: it is agreed unto: But it folowes not for all that, that it is
not founded upon the word and Doctrine which the Apostles preached (albeit
at that time it was not set down in writing) and likewise upon the wrytings
of the Prophets, upon which the Doctrine of the Apostles is grounded: For
Conclusion, the Ministers put no difference between Gods word preached
and written, touching the sense.

Objection.

It seems the Ministers have not well understand the meaning of the
Doctoures: For there is no Question, to know whether the Creed carry
conformity of himself with the Apostolic writings, but whether first we
must understand and believe that the Apostles and Prophets, have set down
by writing, a Doctrine, wherewith the said Creed does conform: and that
other ways a man can not believe the said Creed: But to unfold it more
easily, the Question is, if it be not possible that a child, being come to the
age of discretion, or any other, may by instructions of the Parents, or
others, believe the Articles contained in the Creed, and be not first
instructed by them, that there be certain Apostolic writings, whereunto the
Articles of the Creed may be conformed. And if it be necessary, to move him to
believe it, to know this conformity: And to these let the Ministers Answer
absolutely.

Aunsvvere.

Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, according to the
consent of Jesus Christ, Romans 10.
who putting the hearing of the word before the Faith of the same, says:
Who hears my word, and believes him that has sent me. John. 24.
etc. Like as also he commanded the Apostles to preach first the Gospel, to
the end the hearers, by the preaching, might be disposed and led to Faith. By
these reasones, to know whether the Doctrine that is taught, be the word of
God, it is necessary to believe, without the which also it is impossible, that
a man may either have Faith, or believe in God, unless he be assured that
that which is taught him, is Gods word: And for the Question, touching the
instruction of children at the age of discretion, or others, whether it be
necessary they know the word, before they believe, the Answer is that it is
needful: And Thomas says, that the Faith of the Articles of the Creed
ought to be explicated, that is, declared, which can not be done without
knowledge of the word.

Objection.

This Answer contains frothe of speech without any touch of the point
proponed: For there is no doubt that children and others must not be
Catechized, and the Articles of the Faith unfolded to them, by the word of
God: But the Question is, to know, if it be necessary they understand that
this Word be written in the Books of the Prophets and Apostles, so as,
without the knowledge of the said wrytings, they can not know nor believe
the Articles of Faith contained in the said Creed.

Whereunto the Doctoures pray the Ministers to Answer directly either yea or
no. And after the answer, to add such reason as they will: which if they
will not do, the Doctoures are of mind to proceed to an Article, after they
have told them, notwithstanding for conclusion of all, that if this knowledge
of the scriptures were necessary to the understanding of the Articles of the
Creed, examining them according to the conformity of the same Scriptures,
that it behooves (seeing the foundation is so necessary) amongst the Articles
of the Creed to put this: I believe there be holy scriptures: and it is to
note, that in the said Simbole there is no mention made, that there is holy
Scripture, so that a man may be a true christian, before he understand there is
any christian Doctrine or word of God written, and therefore not necessary
(for the belief and understanding of the Creed) to know the word of God to
be written, in which respect the Doctors protest to speak no more of this
Article.

Aunsvvere.

By collation and view of the Demaundes and Answers, it is easy to judge, who
offend most in circumstaunce of words, either the proponentes or
respondentes: Touching the second Article, the Answer is as before, that the
knowledge of Gods word is necessary to believe, and to be a christian, whether
it be written or revealed. Touching the declaration that was made, the
Ministers Answer in their own respect, not to approve in any sort, that any
thing be added to the pure word of God: And they believe the Simbol of the
Apostles, to be no other thing, than the pure word of God, which is proposed
to us by his spirit, and therefore it should be a contrauention against his
commandment, to add new Articles to it, mainteining also, that if there had
been others necessary to salvation, the spirit of God had not been forgetful.
For conclusion, albeit there is no express mention of holy Scripture made in
the Creed, yet covertly, it is understand therein, because the church (which
can not subsist, that it is not founded and builded upon the grounds of the
Prophets and Apostles) is proponed there as an Article to believe.

Reply.

This Answer the Doctors say, is impertinent, and no more to purpose than the
former: And albeit the Prophets and Apostles had not written at al, the church
notwithstanding had been grounded upon their foundation, as it was in the time
of Abraham, and before there were any Scripture, which if it had been necessary
to salvation, it had been put among the Articles of Faith.

Aunsvvere.

The Ministers hold this Reply much more impertinent: and touching the
reason that is added, that Faith was in the time of Abraham, albeit there was
no word written, they accord to it: But this is evil inferred, there is no
word written, then there is no word at all: And it is a fallax in argument,
which the Dialecticians name a Dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter: from
a saying modified, to that is simply said.

The fourth day of disputation, being Friday the twelfth of Julie.
THe Ministers aduouche to clean always to their former request, observing
the Protestations aforesaid made by the Doctoures, who have twice declared,
that they assembled not but to satisfy the Lord of Montpensier, and the Lady
Buillon, according also to whose request, publicly made in the company, to be
instructed upon the point of the Supper, and not in other matters, wherein she
accounts her self sufficiently taught, and has no need of more ample
instruction: and therefore, the said Ministers require as before, that the
first point which they should confer upon, might be the supper and the
mass, the rather for that they understood by people worthy of faith and
credit, that the Doctoures meant nothing less, than to enter disputation upon
that ground.

Hereupon the Doctoures say they are ashamed to hear so often Protestacions,
and that the Ministers seem to feed with such fashions, of purpose to eschew
conference in the Articles of their Confession, which (notwithstanding) they
have oftentimes offered to be examined.

And where they allege that the Lady of Buillon, (for whose instruction the
company is assembled) has openly required to be instructed upon the Article
of the Mass, and not otherwise: They Answer, that she put out a motion to
procure conference of the Mass, but they never heard that she held her self
sufficiently instructed touching the other Articles. If the Duchess will
confess yt she believes all the other Articles proponed by the Ministers and
their likes against the doctrine of the Catholic church, to be erroneous, they
are ready from the present, to enter into conference of the Mass: But of the
contrary, if she be imbrued with the erroures impugning the doctrine of the
Catholic church (in respect to use order appertaining to instructoures, and to
lay the foundations of the Mass) the Doctors are determined, according to the
good and holy desire of the Lord of Montpensier, to Catechize and teach the
Lady his Daughter every Article, and by order: They say further, that the
Ministers are infected with the custom of those of their Church, which is that
to eschew always conference with the Catholics, before the decision of the
point proponed, they thrust an other into disputation according to the example
of Beza and other ministers that were with him at Poyssi, who, seeing the
matter of the Supper was argued against them in the Priours chamber at Poissi,
in the presence of the Queen, Princes of the blood, and other Lords of the
Council, made Request many times to let fall that point indecided, and enter
upon others more evident and manifest against the Catholics, as of Images
and other like: And of the contrary, the Ministers this day, to avoid the
great erroures in their interpretation of the Creed, will foiste in the point
of the Supper: only the Doctoures beseech as before, that (confusion avoided)
Religion may be examined by order: And least it be thought, that the Doctoures
refuse to enter conference of the Mass and Supper, according to their
constante meaning as in deed (under general correction) they never denied to
dispute of them: the better to instruct the Duchess and with more speed,
they are ready to dispute with open voice, and evident Declaration by the
express word of God, that Jesus Christ has instituted and said the Mass,
and his Apostles also: They offer also, that what so ever shall be delivered by
voice and speech touching this matter, to be set down in writing the next
days after, and put in order, as the instruction of the Duchess requires it:
Referring themselves for the day, to the opportunity of the Lady: Here the
Ministers made Answer, that all these offers were superfluous and
unprofitable, because such conferences, are but debates and alterations,
offending and slaundering more than they edify.

Resolution of the Doctoures.
THe Doctors, according to the order already begone, and their charge, which is
to confer with the Ministers, and then yield Resolution for the instruction
of the Duchess of Buillon, Touching the two points proponed yesterday
(whether the Apostles be Authoures of the Creed, and why we ought to give
Faith thereunto) say it ought not to be esteemed a thing indifferent, to know
if the Apostles made and erected the Creed, no more than to know if the
Apostles be the Authors of their wrytings: For as their Authority is far
greater in the assurance that they proceed certainly from the Apostles, even
so of the contrary, it should be less by many degrees* if we either doubted of
it, or used it as indifferent: They say further it is no sufficient reason, to
call this Creed Apostolical, and to Christen it by the name of the Apostles,
in respect of the conformity it has with their writings, seeing that by the
same reason, other Simbols (as that of Niceus, Athanasius and such other like
writings, may bear also the name of the apostles Creed, as containing a
doctrine agreeing with the writings of ye Apostles: and therefore the Doctors say
we must believe yt the Apostles have made and delivered to Christians this
Creed, and apply faith to it, as being a writing composed by the Apostles,
for proof whereof, they have the authority of all times, since the Apostles
till now, that this Creed has been proponed in Baptism and Catechism, as
appears by the Authors which have been from the Apostles til our time:
neither can we name or note any Author or Council which has made this
Creed, that before the same Author or Council (even until we come immediately
to the Apostles) this Simboll has not been proponed in Baptism and
Catechism, and called amongste Christians the rule of Faith: which our such
argument, S Augustine in many places against the Donatistes, esteems
invincible, to prove that something there is of the Apostles: Omitting
willingly (for weariness sake) other Auncientes who acknowledged this Creed
to be made and received namely of the said Apostles, as S. Ambrose, S. Jerome
and others.

Touching the second point, the Doctoures say that the bond and necessity to
believe this Simboll, dependes not of the knowledge of the Apostolical or
Prophetical wrytings, nor of the knowledge of their conformity with them, for
it was made and contained amongst Christians in Baptism, before there were any
Apostolical writing, and in Baptism, it was proposed to believe the said
Creed, before there was entry into the wrytings or speech thereof: in the
primitive Church, wrytings were examined, whether they were to be received or
not, and the understanding of the same, together if a Doctrine were true or
false, by this Simboll and rule of Faith, and to imitate or confront it with
it, as Irenaeus, Tertullian and others affirm.

And though it should happen, that a man never heard but the Simboll, without
knowing whether there were holy Scriptures or not, yet he might believe the
said Creed, and be a true Christian, so that he were not infected with other
particulare false opinions. And of the contrary, if the belief of the Creed
depended upon the knoweledge of the Prophetical or Apostolical wrytings, as
to understand and be assured of the conformity that therein is, before we
believe it: only wise men, and such as were well studied in writings (who
would assure them selves of the said conformity) should be bound to believe
the Symboll, or at the least, assured of the truth of the same, and so there
should be few Christians: Therefore the belief of the Creed dependes not
upon the knowledge of the Scriptures.

By mean whereof the Doctoures hold by tradition of the Church governed by
the holy sprite, that the Creed is of the Apostles, and that there is no
doubt thereof. In like sort by the same tradition we must give Faith to it,
as a Doctrine of the Apostles not written, and yet of equal authority with
that which is in their writings, notwithstanding we had no knowledge of other
Scriptures. The Doctoures are very sorry, that the other part has so much
declined to answer pertinently and absolutely to these two points, why they
proponed only to show what Faith and authority men ought to attribute to
this Symbol, and all other Doctrine received by Tradition of the Apostles
(without Canonical writing) which might have been left by them by the same
mean and reason, that is showed that the Symboll was given to the Christians
by the said Apostles, without that they put it in writing.

For end, the Doctors persuade such as shall read this conference, not to
amaze or marvel at so many perplexities, declining from the true end of the
said two points proponed, with request to remember the conferences of S.
Augustine with the Donatistes, and Pelagians, whose fashion resembles the
present manner of the Ministers with whom they confer, laying them selves
notwithstanding upon the judgment of such as shall read the matter of this
disputation.

Resolution of the Ministers.
WHo affirm, according to ye former propositions always mentioned by them,
and also ye better to confirm the faith of the Duches, that (as S. Cyprian
writes) it is incertaine whether the Symbol which bears the name of the
Apostles was made and composed such one by them, or else drawn and gathered of
their Doctrine: and also why it is called Symbolum, whether it be by reason
that every one of them brought his part and portion to it, or that it is a
mark or certain sign of Christian Religion: as touching which Regardes, it
is a thing indifferente for Salvation, as having always one equal weighte and
authority, whether the Apostles write it, or whether it was faithfully
gathered of their writings, as were also the Symbols as well of Niceus, as of
Athanasius, of whom the Church never doubted, that they contained not a pure
Apostolical Doctrine, as she has well and evidently declared, in ordeining
that the said Symboll of Nyceus should be openly published to the people
when they assembled for the Communion, the same being in observation at this
day in the Church of Rome, where this Symboll is readde and sunge every Sunday
in the Temples, which if it contained not Apostolical Doctrine, it should
impugn the 59. Articles of the Council of Laodicene, by which it is
forbidden to read in the Church, any thing of Private invention, but only
the Doctrine comprehended in the Canonical Books of the Old and New
Testament whose number is there made.

The Ministers do further affirm, that the reason and principal cause of the
Faith, which Christians add to this Creed, is the knowledge they have, that
it is ye pure word of God, and he that teaches it, mainteines also that it is
Gods word, the same appearing by the testimony and writing of S. Paul, who,
after he has proponed to the Corinthians the Death, Burial, and Resurrection
of Jesus Christ, which be the principal Articles of the Creed, as upon
which also our justification is chiefly founded: Adds this speech, that he
has given them that which he has received, which is, that Christ is
dead for our sins according to the Scriptures: and after that he was buried,
and is risen again the third day, according to the Scriptures.

Christ him self also, proposing in like sort his Death, Luke 24.
and Resurrection to his two Disciples, alleges to them the Scriptures for
their more assurance, saying: Oh fond and weak of heart to believe all things
that the Prophets have pronounced: was it not meet ye Christ suffered these
things, and that he entered into his glory: then beginning at Moses and the
other Prophets, he declared to them in all the scriptures the things that were
of him self. In the same chapter, appearing to them after his Resurrection,
yea before the creed was made, speaking to them of his death and resurrection,
for their better assurance, he lays unto them the scriptures, saying, It is
so written, and it was meet that Christ suffered and rise from death the third
day, by which we may infer, that for the ground of Faith, and assurance
of the Articles of the same, there is no better mean than to propone the
Scriptures.

And albeit in the time of the Nativity of the Church, the Creed was
proponed to such as were Catechized, before the Apostles or Evangelists had
set down any thing in writing, yet it follows not for all that, that there
were not other scriptures upon which might be founded every Article of
Faith: Which to decypher by peecemeale, the Article of Creation has his
fundation upon the beginning of Genesis: The Article of the Almightinesse of
God has his ground upon the 40. of Esaie, and many other places of
scripture.

The Article of the Conception of Jesus Christ, upon the vij. of Esaias: For
the place of his Nativity, upon the v. of Micheas, and for the Regard of the
Time, upon the xlix. of Genesis, and ix. of Daniel: The Article of his death
and the Cross, upon the xxij. Psalm: xxxv. of Esaias, and ix. of Daniel: The
Article of Resurrection, upon the xvj. Psalm: the Article of Ascension, upon
the xcviij. Psalm: the Article of the Judgment, in Daniel xij. the Article
of his sending the holy ghost, in Joel ij. the Article of ye Church in Esaias 2.
and Micheas 4. the Article of Remission of sins in the Psalm 32. and 37. of
Ezechiel, and the Article of the Resurrection of the flesh, and eternal life
in Daniel 12.

It may appear to every one by the places here inferred, that there were
clear and euidente Scriptures, to ground all the Articles of Faith, before
the Creed was bestowed in writing, which might and ought to be exhibited to
such as were Catechized, for their assurance in that which was proposed them
to believe: Neither is it possible that a man may believe, if first he have not
understand and heard the word, and that he assure hime self of it, and hold
it as certain (and more if it were possible) than the matters conceived, and
comprehended by Mathematical demonstrations, as appears by the definition of
the Faith, when the Apostles calls it Hypostasin and Eleuchon, Hebr 12.
which is, subsistence of things which we see not. The Ministers also say,
that to call the Creed a Doctrine not written, and in the mean while affirm
that the Apostles wrote it, is to implie contradiction: Neither can it be
showed how long it has been a doctrine not written, nor since when it has
begone to be written: And greatly do the Ministers grieve, that they who
confer with them, do not more labor in the edifying as well of such as
assiste the conference, as others to whose view and reading the acts may
come. For where they might handle and decide points tending to edify the
ignorante, they stay upon the question of others wherein is no doubt at al:
The same being no more than to prove a thing already confessed and resolved,
and light a Candle at noone days. They assure them selves, that such as
shall read the acts of this conference, will not marvel to see them decline
from the point wherein they have been so much required, because (as Christ
says) He that doothe evil, flees the light.

For conclusion, the Ministers proteste to confess and believe, that the Symbol
of the Apostles in every Article is the pure word of God, and that in the
faith of the same it behooves every faithefull man to stand and persevere
until the end: So that for their parts, they will in no sort receive or
approve in their Churches any that denies, or is doubtful of the said
Articles.

Reply.

The Doctors will prove, that the Doctrine of the Ministers contains points,
contrary to the principal Articles of the Creed: As first, against the
Article of Gods Omnipotency, when they say and teach that God cannot make
that one Body be in two places: The second against the Article of Creation,
wherein they say, that not only God suffers that evil and sin be
committed, but also does it him self: The third, sometimes they deny, and
erst confess for an Article of Faith, that the Virgyn Mary should remain a
Virgyn after her delivery: The fourth, that Jesus Christ is not descended
into Hell but by imagination, and not Really: Yea moreover, against the said
Article they say, that Jesus Christ dispaired of his salvation (upon the tree
of the Cross) as being troubled in his conscience with fear to be damned:
with many other errors contained in this Article. Upon which objections they
advertise the Ministers that they stand ready to answer them.

The fifthe day of disputation, being the fiuetenth of July, and Monday.
THe Ministers have required their request before made, and now eftsoons
reiterated, for the speedy entry of the Doctoures into conference touching the
points of the Mass) to be inregistred: to the end the occasion may be known
why the Doctors delaie and refuse the said conference.

The Doctors not willing to leese time, and mindful withal to follow the
accord made in the last day of disputation, according to the which, the
Ministers ought to answer touching the errors contained in ye doctrine
preached by them, against the Articles of the creed, as the Doctors have
noted and proposed them, and to enter immediately into the matter, they
affirm, that the Ministers have evil alleged S. Cyprian, as to deny that
the Creed was of the Apostles: For S. Cyprian doubts not at all, neither
puttes in doubt, as indifferente, whether it be of the Apostles or not, but
says expressly that before they departed from together, they made the said
Creed, as appears in the Preface of his Exposition. Further the Doctoures
demand upon the Article of the Omnipotency (which is the fundation of the
Supper and the Sacrament) why in a confession proponed at Poissie before the
King by Beza, and after him other Ministers, and bestowed in diverse Books, is
not contained the article of the Omnipotency, which is the first and
principal Article of Faith, and why they have made so many different
confessions of Faith, taking away that they have put in the one, and (of
the contrary) adding what they have omitted in the others: And how this
Article of the Trinity is not expressly in the first confession, 1564. which
they confess, albeit most darkely.

Aunsvvere.

It appears by the acts of the last days conference, that the demand of
the Ministers was in nature the self Request they presently make, which is,
that the point of the Mass might be first decided, as being the chief
occasion of the conference.

And for that they propone touching the Symboll, the Ministers never doubted,
nor yet suspecte, but that it is a pure Apostolical Doctrine, which lies to
all men's view in reading the acts of the said days Disputation, where, in
half a dosen places at the least, they have always confessed and repeated
the same: The only thing, they maintained to be in dout, is, whether the Creed
was written by the Apostles or not, wherein they can nothing be verefied, nor
appear by the Doctors: and S. Cyprian him self whom the doctors produce,
gives aduertismente to the Readers in his Preface, of the great variety that
is in the said Creed, because diverse Churches have added thereunto sundry
Articles. He aduertiseth besides, that in his Explication he follows the order
of the Church of Aquila, and expounding also the Article of Descension into
Hell (whereof the doctors make so great brute) he says expressly that it is
not in the Symboll of the Roman Church, nor of the Churches of the East,
whereof may be gathered the incertaintie of that which is touched before, and
that there is no Article wherein we may reasonably doubt, if it be of those
which the Apostles have written, or added by sum Churches, or else we must
say the Apostles have written diverse Creedes.

Touching the differences which the Doctors pretend to be in the confessions
of the reformed Churches, imprinted and published in diverse Temples, the
Ministers deny to differ one from an other in respect of the sense, albeit
perhaps some terms may be changed for a more large declaration: and where
they allege that in some of them the article of Gods almightinesse has been
omitted, the Ministers deny it, requiring the Doctors to produce the
exemplarye of the confession, wherein they say it is omitted, seeing if it
should be so it might be falsified and corrupted: They say that in their
confession there is nothing either ambiguous or dark, which some of ye said
Doctors have well showed, when they have dressed a form of confession upon the
Patron of those of the reformed Churches, using proper terms and sentences:
whereunto they have added nothing to make it diverse, but that which they have
in difference with the Ministers and that they could hardly ground upon the
scripture.

Objection.

The Doctors say, the Ministers conceal no whit their boldness to deny
things that are manifest, as the opinion of S. Cyprian that the Apostles were
the Authoures, yea, and made and composed the Symboll, referring them selves
altogether to the present hearers, and others by whom this writing shall be
readde: wherein for their better ground of this denial, they rest upon a very
small reason, which is upon the Article of descending into Hell, whether it
was brought in by ye Apostles, or added by others, as from thence to call
again into doubt, whether they be Authors of all the other Articles: The
same resembling as if it were said, that it is incertaine, whether S. John made
his Gospel, because some men doubt whether the History of the adulterer be
of him: John. 8.
But leaving that aparte, the Doctoures demand if they confess not in their
Doctrine, that God of his Omnipotency cannot bring to pass that one body be
in two places: two bodies in one place: Thirdly, that God cannot bring to pass
that one body be invisible: and fourthly, that a body may be in one place,
without holding place equal to his greatenesse.

Answer.

All these questions are impertinent, and estranged from the confession of the
churches, and yet the doctors have chosen it for the fundation of all the
conference, in which respect, the Ministers require pertinent disputation, and
that they choose one Article or more of the said confession, upon which they
pretend to pitche the ground of the said Confession.

Objection.

These questions are very pertinent to impugn the Articles of the Ministers
confession: for there is no question of the proper words contained in the
same confession, which is no other thing than a sum of the Faith: But the
Doctors seem to impugn the sense of the articles which they know by their
proper writings, by which they make open the testimony, that touching the
Article of the Omnipotency God cannot bring to pass the things aforesaid:
The Doctoures also show, that it is directely to impugn the Doctrine of
Heretics, and the true mean to prove against them, that they receive not the
holy Scripture when it is proved, they comprehend not the true sense of it:
They also say that even the Ministers themselves be the causes of such
Questions, having desired to confer of the Mass, by which mean the
Doctoures would make them come to it: For the Article of the omnipotency, is
the principal ground to prove and sustain Gods word, and the Real presence
of the body of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament of the Aultare, maruelling much
of much declining, considering that when there is speech of their Confession
they demand the Mass, and when the Mass is offered, they require their
Confession.

Answer.

The ministers marvel much of so much superfluous matter proponed by the
Doctoures: And where they say that albeit they impugn not the terms of the
said Confession, yet they resist the sense, the ministers Answer that the
sense can not be known but by the terms, by which reason they wrap themselves
in a contradiction, when in leaving the terms, they say they will confute the
sense: Touching the Conclusion, affirming that one body at one self instante
may be in diverse places, the Ministers deny in good consequence, that that can
not be inferred of the omnipotency of God.

Objection.

The Doctoures say that it follows, that God can not bring to pass that at
one time one body occupy two places, God then is not almighty.

Answer.

The Ministers deny the consequence aforesaid, and allege the reason, as
that it appears by the holy Scripture, that God can not deny him self, 1.
Timo. 2 Hebr. 6.
as also it is impossible that he can lie, and yet it were blasphemy to
infer thereupon, that he is not omnipotent: For the almightinesse of God
ought to be measured according to his will, and things which are convenient to
his nature, as the Master of sentences teaches, saying: that God is almighty
in that, that his ability is of power and not of infirmity, which, S. Jerome
writing to Eustachius, confirms by this that follows: I will say hardly,
albeit God can do all things, yet can he not raise or reestablishe a Virgin
after her fall. S Augustine in like sort in the fifthe Book of the City of
God. Chap 10. vset^ these words: Gods power is in nothing lessened, when it
is said he can not die, nor be deceived. And a little after, God is almighty,
because there be things which he can not do: The same Author in the.26. of the
same work. Chap. 8. uses this speech, he that says, if God be almighty,
let him bring to pass that things which are made, be not made, does nor mean,
that it is as much as if he should say, if he be omnipotent, let him bring to
pass that the things that are true (in as much as they are already true) be
false: Theodoretus also in his third Dialogue conformablie to this, says:
we must not without Determination say generally, that all things are possible
to God, because he that says so absolutely, comprehendes things that are good,
and wicked matters also, which be their contraries.

And a little after, he affirms that God can not sin, as being a thing far
from his nature: And so concludes, that albeit there be many things which he
can not do (seeing there be many sins) that yet for all that he forbeares
not to be omnipotent.

Objection.

The Doctors find in the reasons aforesaid a Confession of the antecede^t,
which should seem to be only supposed, God could not bring to pass that one
body at one season should be in two places, no more than he is able to do the
things by them alleged: for they allege them to this end, to show that
there be somethings which God can not do, which they can not apply to the
present Question (that one body can not use two places) without Declaration yt
it is impossible to God. And touching the reasons recited of the holy
Scripture, that God can not lie nor deny himself, those places (under
correction) serve nothing to purpose: For as they have alleged out of the
Master of sentences, to lie, and to be able to sin, is not power, but
empower, so of the contrary, if God could sin, he should be impuissant and
weak, neither could God do so, for then he should resist and destroy
himself.

And touching the Examples drawn out of S. Jerome and S. Augustine. that God
could not bring to pass, that a corrupt Virgin should remain a Virgin,
and that a thing done, should not be done, that being understand as the
Theologians say, ^u c^^posito, (which is, the things being such and so done)
it is true: and the reason is, that otherwise it would implie contradiction.
But in the Question proposed, there is nothing like, which only Demaundes, if
God by his power can alter and change the Nature and quality of things
created: as if he could bring to pass, that a heavy thing abiding in his
quality of heaviness and waighte (which naturally weighes downewarde) should
remain by the only virtue of God, hanging on high, as we read in the holy
Scripture, that the fire which naturally ascendes and stretches on heigthe,
discendes downewarde by the virtue of God, and also that fire of his proper
nature ardente and burning, makes cold (his own quality that is the heat)
reasting in the substance: as also that two bodies may be in one place, as
appears when our Lord entered where the Apostles were, the doors being shut:
or that a great and large body remaining in his grosenesse and bigness,
passes through a place inequall to his greatness and largeness as the Camel
through the eye of a needell. All which Examples, as they are taken of the
scripture, so if it must be that God can not bring to pass that one body be
in two places, he can no more do the things aforesaid, by the reasons which
shall be deduced hereafter to that end. And as it will never be found to enter
into the brain of an interpreter to deny such power, so the first that has
denied it openly, was Peter Martyr, and after him Beza.

The Doctoures say further, that the form of arguing which the Ministers use,
impugnes and reuerseth yt which God observes in the holy scripture, and the
Angel speaking to the virgin: for God ordinarily when he assures any thing
impossible to nature, and that men cannot comprehend, alleges generally his
power: like as also ye Angel laying a foundation of the Incarnation of our
Lord, says generally there is nothing impossible to God, as touching his
creatures: But is it so that the generality of an argument is deserved, by
particular exceptions, and made unprofitable and without force by that mean:
When God then alleges generally, that his power can do it, it may be doubted
of, and thought that ye things proponed of God, may be of those that are
impossible to him: as well as the exceptions alleged of the ministers: And that
also should be false which the Angel says, that there is nothing impossible
to god, by that, that many things are alleged and proponed to the contrary:
So that to the end God and his Aungelles, be maintained true in their words,
we must not doubt that he can not change and transform his creatures and al
their qualities much more easily, than a potter is able to work his clay, and
form at his pleasure any vessel thereof.

Further, if we limite the power of God toward his creatures, there is
danger, that we fall not to deny him his Empire and dominion over them: for to
be Lord over a creature, is no other thing than to have power to change and
alter him, and give him such a nature and quality, as he thinks good, as
having him altogether in his power: And therefore God in Jeremy, to show that
he had power to reuerse and destroy Jerusalem (according to his pleasure)
begins to say, I am Lord over all flesh, is there any thing impossible to me:
and therefore the Doctoures conclude, that there is danger if this question be
maintained as impossible to God, that every one will do as much: alleging
the self examples that the ministers do, to exempt from Gods power al things
that displease him. And when such matter shall be produced out of Scripture,
he may interpret the Scripture in other sense, saying: that such a thing
shall be impossible to God in the natural sense of the words of the Scripture,
even as the ministers change the Scripture, which says that the body of
Jesus Christ is in two places, that is, the word of the Supper compared with
the word of the Ascension, and they say, that that speech of the Supper
ought not to be understood literally, because it is impossible to God that
one Body be in two places: And so the Doctors say, that every one would
corrupt the Literal sense of the Scripture, holding that the thing is
impossible to God, and therefore the Scripture must be otherwise understand:
and yet it may so happen, that it is only because it does displease him,
producing notwithstanding the same reasons and allegations which the Ministers
do to declare that all things are not impossible to God.

The Doctors conclude eftsoons, that it is better to maintain the Scripture
in his truth, albeit she propose things incomprehensible and impossible to
our judgment, than to give way to every one to deprave Gods word, applying
it to his own will and fancy, under shadow to say, that it is impossible to
God, and so to allege other examples.

Lastely they will not omit, that the Ministers, who have so deeply
protested to rest and stay upon the pure word of God, allege not against Gods
power but the ancient doctors, aiding themselves with their authorities
against the express word of God, which bears, that nothing is impossible to
him generally without some exception.

Aunsvvere.

The Ministers answer that the Doctoures prove not their consequence, but
leave it as in a distruste not to be able to confirm it, as is most likely:
They make no mention but of the Antecedent of their consequence, to the
confession of which it will never be possible to them to bring the Ministers
by the reasons and authorities by them alleged so strengthen their said
consequence, because of a Particulare they infer a General, which is
against the Rules of Dialectice: where they say, that the authorities
alleged by the Ministers, apperteine nothing to reprove their consequence, and
to show that God forbeares not to be almighty, notwithstanding that he cannot
do any thing which derogates his nature: They refer themselves for that, to
the ancient authors aforesaid, who for the same and and reason of the
ministers allege the said exceptions.

Where they pretend that the Authorities and Sentences alleged of the
Auncientes, do nothing apperteine to the present question, as denying that
they ought to be understand of other things, except such as contain in
themselves contradiction. The Ministers answer, that even so doothe that
which they propone of a Body that in one instante he may he in diverse
places: the same being as much as if they had said, that a Body is, and is not
at one time, and that a Body is one, and not one.

And lastely that a Creature may be incircumscript, and not enclosed in
certain limittes: which if it were so, he should be no more a Creature, but
a God, as may be gathered of the saying of S. Basile in his Book of the Holy
Ghost, Chapter 22. whose opinion is, that the Angel which appeared to
Cornelius was not in the self place where Philip was, and he which of the
Aultare spoke to Zachary, did not furnishe at the same time he spoke to him,
his Seat and place in Heaven: But the Holy Ghost is in Abacuc, and Daniell in
Babylon, and in Ezechiell upon the Floudde of Chobar, for the Sprite of God
replenisheth the Earth: wherein the Prophet crying, says, Whither shall I
go to hide me from thy Sprite? where shall I flee to decline from thy face?

And Dydimus confirming this in his Book which he has written of the Holy
Ghost, makes this question, If, says he, the Sprite of God were a Creature,
he should have his substance circumscripte and limited, as have all other
Creatures which are made and created: So that, as it is that Gods Sprite
replenishes the world, and is not circumscripte in any place, nor lymited, so
it follows thereupon that he is God.

Vigilius in his Disputation which he wrote between Sabellius, Photius,
Arius, and Athanasius, under the person of Athanasius, writes in this sort:
By this it may chiefly appear, that the Sprite of God, is God, that he is
every where, and not contained in any place, as the Prophet writes, whither
may I withdraw my self to hide me from thy Sprite?

By these places we may conclude, that if a Body be not circumscripte,
termined, and closed within certain lymittes, he could not be a Creature,
which ought not only to be understand by other Bodies, but also even by
Jesus Christ: as appears by Theodorete in his second Dialogue, saying, then
the Body of the Lord is risen again, exempte from all corruption, impassible
and immortal, decked with Divine glory, adored and woorshipped with the
Celestial powers. And yet albeit he be in this sort qualified, he leaves not
for all that to be circumscript, as he was before he was glorified, whereof it
follows, that being true Body and Creature, he cannot at one instante be in
sundry places.

Touching their allegations, that the examples aforesaid apperteine nothing to
the question proponed, because it stretches not but to know if God may change
the qualities into a Substance, the substance remaining: The Ministers deny it,
because in the Question there is mention of a Body, which cannot be without
his Measures: And the measures and Dimensions be not as Qualities and
Accidents, which may come to a Body and depart from it, without that it be
corrupted (which is the nature and condition of Accidents) but they are of
their proper Essence, so that it is impossible that a Body be a Body, but that
he be measured and circumscripte.

The first example they produce to confirm their saying, is, that it may
happen, that a weighty thing, which naturally in respect of his heaviness
enclines downward, may be raised on high, whereunto the Ministers answer, that
the same may be in deed by a violent moving: but this example is nothing
pertinent to reuerse that which they have said, because such things contain no
contradiction in themselves, neither are they contrary to the essence of the
thing where they happen: for a stone which a man throws on high, leaves not
for all that to be a stone, like as also by the same moving it is not deprived
of his weightinesse.

Touching the Example of the Fire, they answer, that there is one self
reason both of light and heavy things, and that without any corruption of
their Essence, their natural mouings may be changed by force and violence
done to them. Touching their allegation of the fire, which contrary to his
nature that is to skorche and burn) refreshed the three Jews in the Furnace
of Babylon, they answer, that the fire, for all that was in nothing altered,
neither touching his Essence, nor in respect of his qualities: Whereof the
proof fell out, in that it sparing the said three Children, burnte and
consumed the Tormentoures, or such as had office to dress it.

By which may be well alleged, that why it did not offend them, proceeded
not for that his nature or quality were in any thing changed, but only
because his action was suspended.

And where they allege that two Bodies may be at once in one place, proving
the same by that which is written in S. John, that Christ entered where his
Disciples were, the doors being shut: The Ministers answer, that it is not
so in the Text, but that the Disciples being assembled in one place, Jesus
Christ stood, and appeared in the midst of them: By which it cannot be
inferred that he entered the place where they were without opening the doors,
nor that he did pearce or penetrate them to make his entry.

And it is no less likely true, that they were open and shut again, than
the doors which the Angel opened and shut again, Actor. 12. Actor. 5.
when he was sent to deliver S. Peter out of Prison, and when he was likewise
sent for the delivery of the Apostles.

And where they bring in a gross Body passing through a strait place,
alleging the example of a Cable through the hole of a Needle, the Ministers
find it alleged to evil purpose, as an argument founded upon a thing
impossible, and say further, that the Doctors have evil understand the
term of Camelos, which is usurped in the Scripture not for a Cable, but for
a Camel: As is manifest inoughe to those that are but slenderly exercised in
the antiquities of the Hebrews, and as appears by the opinion of Angelius
Caninius, upon the end of his Chaldey Grammar: Touching the conclusion,
which the Doctors draw of the former examples it is to evil purpose, and
grounded upon the Antecedentes and premises which they bring in presupposed,
and neither as yet confessed by us, nor will not be in the sense wherein they
allege them, for the reasons here before declared.

Touching that which they say against the opinion of the Ministers, that one
body at one instante can not be in two places, yea were it the body of Jesus
Christ, and that it was never written by any the Auncientes, nor proponed before
the coming of Peter Martyr, and Theodore de Beza, the Ministers maintain it
was aduouched before their time, as S. Augustine in his Epistle written to
Dardanus, using these terms: According to this form, says he, (meaning the
corporal form of Jesus Christ) we must not think that it is every where, as
also we must use good heed, that in establishing to him his Divinity, we take
not from him the truth of his body: And in an other place he says, that by
reason of the nature and measure of his body, he is in one place of heaven:
Theodoretus using the self same speech or Phrase in his second Dialogue, as
has been alleged here before: Like as also Vigilius in his fourth Book
against Eutiches, uses this Question, if it be but a Nature of the Word and
the Flesh, how comes it that the Flesh is not in every place, as the Word
is every where (of which Word the Flesh was taken to constitute a person and
Hypost^se.) For when it was upon the earth, it was not in heaven, and now that
it is in heaven, sure it can not be upon earth: And much less that it is
there, seeing we exspect that Jesus Christ come according to the Flesh, whom
notwithstanding we believe is with us on earth, according as he is the word:
By these Authorities and such like which are often found in the writings of the
Ancients, the world may perceive that Peter Martyr and Theodore de Beza, be
not the first Authoures of this Doctrine, but that it is falsely laid upon
them, because they have but drawn, and as it were written it word for word
out of the Books of the Ancients.

Where the Doctoures pretend, that the form of Argument which ye Ministers
use, affirming that to say any thing is impossible to God, does not derogate
his omnipotency: destroys the form of argument used by the Angel speaking
to the virgin, for the confirmation of his message, that nothing was
impossible to God: the ministers Answer, that that is nothing to purpose,
because the question does neither importe a thing containing in it self any
contradiction, nor that is contrary to the truth of God. Touching the opinion
of the Doctors, that God can change the nature and quality of things, there
is none that doubts thereof: But when that is done, it must also be aduowed
that things being changed, remain no more in their first nature: and the
Ministers say that it is not all one touching the thing here proponed, because
the Doctoures would have a thing dwell in his essence and nature,
notwithstanding his essential parts be changed, yea and wholly extincte and
abolished: Touching the limitation of the power of God on the behalf of his
creatures, there is no man so senseless, as to enterprise to limite in all
respects, that which he will, and that confesses not, that he may ordeine and
dispose of all his Creatures in general as it pleseth him, and as a potter does
of his mould, wherein their opinion runs that the authority of Jeremy ought
to be referred thither, as appears clearly by these Hebrew words, lo
gippale mimiuecha col-dauar, which is, Lord, nothing shall be hard to thee.

Touching the peril which the Doctoures pretend, may rise of the Ministers
said Aunsweres, they say, that people of good and sound judgment, can not
frame any evil consequence of it, considering that all this Doctrine is true,
and contains no obscurity: but if perhaps any cull out an evil profit of
it, it is to be imputed to themselves and their evil understanding, by which,
not only any Doctrine, but also the word of God it self may sometimes be
perverted and corrupted: To be short, all things (as says the Apostle) are
clean to those that be clean, and filthy to such as are so, and have a
wicked Conscience. Where the Doctoures allege, that there may be occasion
taken by the Doctrine aforesaid, to interpreate the Scriptures according to a
self sense and fancy, the Ministers deny it, and say: That if the world
enterprise it, it is casie enough to reiecte his interpretation as not
correspondente to the Rules and Analogy of Faith, wherewith the said
Doctrine and interpretation of the Ministers does agree and consent.

And where they say that the Ministers change and alter the Scripture, they
Answer that it is a reproach and slander not to be verified against them,
neither touching their writings, their words, nor any thing by them
delivered, either by speech or thought.

Where they say that the Scripture is of opinion that the body of Jesus
Christ is in two places, the Ministers deny it, and say, that (on the
contrary) the Scripture establishes him in heaven and not elsewhere: And
Heaven must contain him, until the time of restoration of all that has
been forespoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets, from the beginning of the
world.

And where they allege that the Scripture ought not to be interpreted
according to the sense and fancy of every one. The Ministers confess it with
this Addition, that all interpretations ought to be examined as S. Paul
says, and that such examination be made by the collation and conference of
the Scriptures.

And lastly, where the Doctoures accuse the Ministers, to have alleged no
place of the Scripture, before they produced the Auncientes to confirm their
said Doctrine, the Ministers say, they are falsely imposed, for that, if they
well remember, they alleged to the same end in the beginning of their
discourse, the opinion of S. Paul, written in the second Epistle to Timothe,
and the second Chapter, where it is said that God can not deny himself, and
also that is written in the sixthe Chapter to the Hebrews, that it is
impossible for God to lie:

Which places together with the opinions of the Ancients, were not alleged as
to diminishe the omnipotency of God, but rather to establishe it, and cut of
the way to many impieties and blasphemies, which they would falsely exhibit,
and cover them under the color of Gods almightinesse, without having regard to
the will declared, to which we must refer the power.

The sixth day of disputation, being Tewsday the sixtenth of Julie.
THe Doctoures Obiecte, that they have made this Argument: God can not bring
to pass that one body be in two places: then God is not Almighty: which
consequence how necessary it is, is fully manifest without other proof, by the
law of contradiction: for according to the rule holden in all Schools of
Philosophers, two contradictions can not be true: To be able to do all things,
and not able to do certain particulare things, be contradictions, seeing this
particulare thing is one part of the whole: So that it must needs be, that if
the antecedent be true, the consequent must be false, according to the law of
contradiction, for both can not be true together, as things of contradiction:
And albeit by the knowledge of the very terms, the consequence may be judged
to be good, yet it may easily be known by the handling of the Objection
against the Answer of the Ministers, that the Doctors have proved the
consequence: This was the reason of the Ministers, God can not lie nor sin,
and can not bring to pass that things done, should not be done, because that
either it impugnes his nature, or there is repugnancie of the part of the
creatures, because there is contradiction entangled. But the Doctors affirmed
in their Objection, that there is no such thing in the Question proponed,
which is, if one body may be in two places: whereof they make this kind of
Arguing taken of their Objection: God can do all things that impugn not his
nature, either when there is no resistance of the part of the creatures, and
that there is implied no contradiction: to affirm that a body may be in two
places at one instant, is a thing not repugnant to the nature of God, and of
the part of the body does implie no contradiction. Then God can do it, or else
so, God cannot do it: then it follows that God is not almighty: in this sort
is proponed the reason and deduction of the antecedent and consequent, and also
the proof of the assumption or second preposition: for it is proved that
there is no contradiction in saying that one body may be in two places, and
that it does not impugn the nature of God, whereof the proof has been made
by the Example of like things, as God may bring to pass that two bodies may be
in one place, with other like reasons, which are deduced in the Objection.

And where they say the Doctoures do argue evil from a particulare to an
universal, it seems (under correction) they have forgotten the rules of
Dialectice, as being most certain that this rule has place in the
affirmative, and not in the negative: But (of the contrary) when there is any
thing affirmed generally, and the default is proved in particular (as say the
Dialecticians) Ad negationem perticularis sequitur negatio eius quod
vniuersaliter affirmatum est. In like sort when any thing is affirmed of the
whole which has many parts, and the default be proved in one part, the
destruction of the whole follows: As if one would say, all the body is whole,
who would prove one part of that body diseased, should prove this proposition
false, all the body is whole: such is the manner of arguing which the Doctors
have made, that is, that if God can not do a particulare thing (as to bring to
pass that one body be in two places) then he can not do all things, or if he
can do all things, he can also do that.

They are sorry to be referred to their Dialecticke, as consisidering none other
end, than to make the antecedent granted, which is, that God can not bring to
pass that one body be in two places: wherein for their parts they are glad to
understand the Resolution of the Ministers upon this Article, which is, that
God can not bring to pass, nor ca^ not will, that one body be in two places,
because it implies co^tradiction. And where the Ministers say, that the Doctors
by their reasons, can not infer the truth of the antecedent, the Doctors
confess it, by which the ministers also perceive that the reasons which they
have brought forth, are nothing worth to ye confirmation of the Antecedent,
which is their resolution. But the Doctoures say, that those reasons, albeit
they were not vailable, yet were they brought forth by the ministers, to this
end, to prove ye impossibility of God to bring to pass that one body should
be in two places.

For the Article beginning touching the authorities, etc, the Doctoures
Obiecte, that the Auncientes never thoughts to make any exception of any thing
which is not subject to the power of God: for (as it is manifest) he that
says all, excepteth nothing, so, when the scripture says that God is
almighty, her meaning is clear, that there is no exception: and to give
exception in this, should be no less to gainesay many places of Gods word,
than to blaspheme his power. But the Doctoures say, that the Auncientes have
interpreted the omnipotency of God not to comprehend that which touches the
perfection of his nature, but only that which concerns creatures: So that
there be not to manifest contradiction and repugnancie of their part. The
present Question importes not that there is not contradiction, that one body be
a body, and that at one instant it be in diverse places: For of the essence of
bodies, speaking of one body having his dimensions, according to the phrase of
the Philosophers de predicamenio quantitatis, it is certain, that the
Dimensions be of the essence of a body: but to be circumscript and enclosed in
a place, is accidental: The same being declared by Philosophy: for the most
high heaven according to his whole, is a body, and yet it is not in place
according to his whole. And therefore it is not a thing essential to a body,
to be enclosed in one place.

Wherein to speak of the present matter, the Ministers should be much
encombred to prove that the body of Jesus Christ is in one place in Heaven,
seeing it is written in the fourth of the Ephesians, he is mounted above all
the Heavens, out of the which there is no place, as they speak of places in
regard of bodies according to nature: And if it were so, that it were
essential to one body, to be in one place (according to the rule which the
Ministers give) there would follow an other blasphemy against the
omnipotency of God, that God could not make one body, and bestow it, above all
the Heavens, and (to speak more universally) that God could not make a body
without place equal to his greatness.

Touching the Allegations proponed by the Ministers of certain Ancient
authoures, the Doctoures Obiecte that those Allegations make against
themselves, because, to be enclosed in one place, depends not of the essence of
the body, nor his dimensions, as appears by the Authorities produced, making
mention of the Angels who have no bodies: it it is not then an essential
reason, that the dimension of one body be contained in one place: Neither does
all this blonderment of Authorities make any thing to purpose, seeing they tend
not but to show that the natural property of creatures, is different from the
nature Divine, as says S. Basile expressly in the place alleged by the
Ministers, as S. Ambrose in the first Book of the holy Ghost. Chap. 7. where
the said Authoures declare that God of his nature may be euerywhere, as his
creatures by their natures, not: neither do the said Authors pretend that God
by his omnipotency can not make one body to be in diverse places, seeing even
very they (or their like) when they come to speak of the power of God in the
holy sacrament, affirm that Christ's body is in heaven, and in the holy
Sacrament, inueighing also by the same power, that the Angels and souls of
the blessed, may be in many places, and the Doctors will recite in their
Resolution.

Where the Ministers say that a Body must be circumscripte of the place
according to his essential property: that has been declared false here
before: And the Ministers confound the name of a body, which signifies
sometimes substance, sometimes quantity, having his dimensions, largeness,
length, and profou^dnesse: which dimensions are essential in a body, taking
body for form of quantity, and not in a substantial body, for then it is
accidental: It is most certain that God may separate the accidents of a body,
and make a substance without accidents, otherwise would follow an other
blasphemy, that God could not separate the accident from a subject and
substance: And where the Ministers say, that by a violent moving, a stone may
be thrown on high, it is not Answered to the Question: For the Doctors
demand, seeing it is essential and natural to a body earthly and heavy in
respect of his weight and heaviness to tend downward, to know, if God by
his only virtue against the natural property of a body heavy and weighty, can
not hold and suspend it on high.

And touching the evasion which the Ministers make of a most strong and mighty
argument against their Doctrine, that two bodies may be in one place according
to the proof taken of the scripture (not only to justify that God can bring
to pass that two bodies may be in one place, but also that he has done it)
serves for nothing to cover their error, as to say, that in S. John it is not
written that our Lord did not enter by the gates shut, but that he was in the
midst of them and stood: where the said Ministers held their peace, and
omitted this Verb venit, reasting only upon this Verb stetit: For the
express Text of S. John, Chapter.21. verse.19. says, that the doors being
shut, Jesus came into the place where the Disciples were assembled, and was
there in the midst of them: And therefore we now ask them, seeing the
Scripture says he came thither the Doors being shut, and was in the
midst of them: Whether he was in the midst of them, and in the said place,
without entering: Or if he did enter, seeing the Text bears that the Doors
were shut when he came, how will they prove by the Scripture that he entered
there, but by the shut doors: the same seeming a greater miracle to be in
the midst of his Disciples, without entering into the place where they were.
This refuge is too light to say, it is not written, that he entered: For S.
Augustine in his Book de Agone Christiano Chap. 24. uses these words: Nec
nos moueat quod clausis ostijs subito eu^n apparnisse Discipulis scriptum est:
vt propterea negemus illud fuisse humanu^, quia contra naturam huius Corporis
videmus illud per clausa ostia intrare: omnia enim possibilia sunt Deo. Nam and
ambulare super aquas contra naturam huius Corporis esse manifestum est: and
tamen non solum ipse Dominus ante Passionem ambulauit, sed etiam Petrum
ambulare fecit: Wherein appears that S. Augustine holds openly that our Lord
entered by the shut doors: referring the whole to the almightinesse of God.

Besides, the Text of S. Luke, Luke, 24,
joined with the authority of S. John, declares that he entered through the
doors: for the Apostles had not had reasonable occasion to think it was a
Sprite, and not a Body, seeing him in the semblance of a man before them, but
that he entered otherwise, than a true Body and a true man can do, meaning
that he entered by the shut doors, which a true man and true body could no
way do. Neither could it serve to any purpose to say, that the doors were
open, and then shut by miracle or otherwise: For so might a true body and a
true man enter, the same taking away al occasion to think that it was a Sprite
or Vision.

Moreover the Doctors say, that all the Ancient Heretics and Christians
were of this common accord, that Jesus Christ passed through: but their
difference was such, as at this day is between the Doctors and the
Ministers: The Aunciente Heretics held, that Christ, after his Resurrection
had not a true body, because he did works contrary to the nature of a body,
the same implying contradictio^ in the natural body, that in one instante he
was in one self place with an other body, as when he had passed through the
doors: The Ancient Christian Catholics answered, that truly the nature of
the Body bare, that he could not pass through the doors, issue out of the
body of the Virgyn in his birth without breaking it, nor come through the
stone of the Sepulcher in his Resurrection, but yet that it did not imply
contradiction that two bodies should be together by the Omnipotency of God,
because it was so happened in the three cases done and recited.

The first that speaks of it, is Justinius Martyr, in the 117. Question
against the Gentiles, wherein he makes this Demand, If a body gross or
thick (says he) be let to be able to pass through the doors, how did
our Lord enter the doors being shut, after his Resurrection? And if it be
so, why was the stone rolled by the Angel from ye mouth of the grave, to the
end his body might rise again? he aunsweres, even as our Lord without
changing his Body into a Sprite, walked upon the sea, making in deed by his
Divine power the sea hard to walk upon it, and not only to bear his body,
but S. Peter's also: even so by his divine power came he out of his grave, the
stone lying upon it, and entered to his Disciples the doors being shut, by
which as we have to understand, that things proceeding of diverse virtues,
ought to have a like Faith, even so we ought to know that such things as
pass nature, when they are done in ye same by power divine, ought not be
measured according to the reason and property of nature: in which respect
our Lord seeing his Disciples troubled with his entry, offered them to touch
the parts of his body, and the marks and skarres of his wounds, to the end
they might see he did not enter by changing his body into a sprite, but in his
proper body composed of his convenient dimensions and thickness, and that by
his Divine almightinesse, which did al things exceeding the force of nature. S.
Hilarie in his third Book of the Trinity, even of thee (says he) which wilt
search things iuscrutable, and be judge of Gods secrets and his power, I ask
counsel, that thou give me reason and solution only of this deed, yea to me
that am ignorant and believe simply in God touching al things as he has said
and pronounced them: I mean, that as the Lord has oftentimes presented
himself after his Resurrection to be seen and known of those who believed it
not: So the same Lord applying him self to the imbecilitie of our
understanding, and to satisfy the doubts of the vnfaithefull, shows a
secret, and an act of his Omnipotency. Therefore expound to me, who ever
thou art, that will be a searcher of the Omnipotency of God, the reason of
this fact: The Disciples were enclosed together, and drawn into a secret
place: the Lord revealed him self to Thomas, to confirm his Faith according
to the condition he desired, that is, to touch his body, and prove his
wounds: For which reason and cause, it must needs be, that he bare even
that true body wherein he had received those wounds. I ask then, seeing he
was Corporal, by what part of the house did he thruste or intrude him self
within? For I see the Evangelists opnion is plain, that Jesus came the doors
being shut, and was amidde his Disciples: Did he penetrate the gross walls,
or great bar of wood that was between both? It is most true, he entered
without fiction or deceit. Let thy reason follow and consider his Entry,
and thy understanding enter into the shut house with him: Thou see that all
is sound and fast at the Lock, and yet he was in the midst of his
Disciples, but that is, because all things are open to him by his Omnipotency.
Thou blamest things invisible, I ask thee again the reason of that thing
visible. From the Walls or Gates firm nothing recules or gives place: And yet
I see of the contrary the wood and stones by their nature cannot receive
such entry. The Lords Body was not unmade, to be made again of nothing:
then from whence comes it, that he was in the midst without opening the
door? The sense and the word fail in this, and the truth of the act is
above man's reason, so that as we are abused of the birth of the Son of
God, so do we also lie of that Entry: we say, the fact is false, and that
it did not so happen, because we are not able to understand the reason, and
because our sense and judgment fail, we say, there was no such fact: but
the Faith and belief of the fact conuinceth our dream: the Lord was amidde
his Apostles the house being shut, and the Son of God was borne of his
Father: do not deny that he entered thus, because by the infirmity of the
spirit thou art not able to comprehend this manner of entry. I could
amplify like factes in all his creatures, but the Lord has well forseene in
him self, to have us contained in necessity and modesty by the nature of our
bodies: we declare sufficiently that we would be an other God, if we had the
power, and because we cannot by the audacitie of our wicked will, reuerse the
nature of truth, at the least we gainesaie it, and raise war with the
words of God.

S. Ambrose in his second Book upon S Luke the 24. Chapter, says, Through
the doors. S Chrysostom upon S. John proves by such entry, that Jesus
Christ was so borne of the Virgyn, that she remained a Virgyn in her delivery
and after, without any breaking: concluding that both the one and the other
fact proceed of the omnipotency of God. The same Chrysostom in his second
Homily upon the Symbol of the Apostles, uses these words, how is it that
Christ entered, the gates being shut etc. because such things are above us,
and we cannot yield a reason of this miracle, we hold it by Faith.

S Jerome in his first Book against Iouinian, and in his Epistle to
Pammachius, against the errors of John Ierosolymitan, who said that Jesus had
not a true Body after his resurrection, because it was impossible a true body
should pass through the doors, and that he was in the same place with an
other body, answers, that the same let not that the nature of the body did
not remain, because the act proceeded of the almightinesse of God: He uses
also these speeches, tell me thou subtle disputer, which is the greatest,
either to hang all the weighte and greatness of the earth upon nothing,
ballaunce it above the freighte of the waters, or that God pass by a door
shut, and the Creature obey his Creator: That which is the greatest, thou will agree unto easily, and which is the least, thou reprochest: S. Augustie
in his thirteenth Epistle for an example of Gods Omnipotency, recites also
this fact, as in declaration as well that our Lord was borne by the Virgyn
without any breaking of her Body, as also that Gods Almightinesse is
greater than we can comprehend.

S. Augustine also recites the same Fact in his Book de Agone Christiano
against the Valentinians, and others that denied the true Substance of the
Body of Jesus Christ, because, contrary to the nature of Bodies, he did so
pass and enter.

Amphilochius and Theodoret in the second Dialogue disputing of this deed
against Eutyches, who held also that after the Resurrection Christ's
Humanity was transnatured into his Divinity, because that against the nature
of bodies he passed in that order through the doors being shut, answer
with the others, that such an effect importes not contradiction to the nature
of the body, as proceeding of the Omnipotency of God, and not of the nature
of the body. Cyri^ in the 12. Book upon S. John rebukes also such as seek
to compass the miracles and doings of God according to their judgments and
property of creatures, against whom he uses sharp speech.

S. Augustine recites in his first Book against Julian Chap. 2. that
Iouinian was an Heretic, in that he said, the Virgyns womb was disclosed in
her delivery, which he said so, for fear to fall into the Heresy of the
Manicheans, whose opinion was that Jesus had not a true body, because he was
borne without breaking of his mother, so that to eschew this Heresy, he did
rather deny that the Virgyn remained a Virgyn: This kind of Heresy was also
laid upon Origin, like as also some allege that the Ancientes (as
Tertullian) was of this opinion.

By these testimonies the Doctoures conclude, that two bodies to be penetrated
and be in one self place by the Divine virtue, implies no contradiction,
which places if they were well considered, men would receive no new
interpretation against the express word of God, seeing the text bears
simply, that Christ came to his Disciples the doors being shut.

It may be seen easily, how Calvin in his Institution has depraved the
sense of this place of S. John, with other like, Lib. 4. Cap. 17. Sect. 29.
saying, what so ever the world alleges again, that Christ issued out of
the Grave, and not opened it, and entered to his disciples, ye Chamber door
being shut, is nothing worth any more to maintain their error: For as the
water served to Jesus Christ as a firm pauemente to walk upon the Lake, so
we ought not think it strange, if the hardenesse of the stone became soft, to
give him place.

Beza also in his second Dialogue against Hesshusius, says: The Stone
became nothing, to the end the Lord might pass to his Resurrection, and
then after God refashioned it.

It follows also in the text of Calvin, that to enter into a Chamber the
doors being shut, is not to say he pierced the wood, but only he made
opening by his Divine virtue, in sort that in a wonderful manner, he was in
the midst of his Disciples, notwithstanding the doors were shut.

He says further, which they bring in of S. Luke, that he vanished
suddenly from his Disciples which went to Emaus: it serves them for
nothing, and applies to our advauntage. For to take away the sight of his
Body, he is not made invisible, but only is vanished, as also the said
Euangeliste does witness: when he walked he was not transfigured nor
disguised, as to be invisible, but he governed and held their eyes. These
frivolous and vain expositions be brought in by Calvin and his like, to
eschew confession that God is able to bring to pass that one body be in
diverse places, and yet the proper text of the Scripture witnesses that two
bodies may be by the power of God in one self place, as also that one body
having color, and before visible, by Gods power is made invisible, without
any let to the eyes of such as may see: the same being confirmed by S. Luke,
saying, Aphantos egeneto apanton, I nuisibilis factus est ab ipsis,
notwithstanding there were no more le^te of the part of the Disciples: For it
is said before, that their eyes were opened to know him: Whereunto all
antiquity consentes. The Doctors add to confirm the penetration of the
dimensions, an other act: that our Lord mounted to the Heavens, which he did
neither divide nor rent, and therefore it must needs be, that he penetrated
them, as the Scripture bears in proper terms.

The Doctoures signify to the said Ministers, that they cannot produce one
only Anciente of sound renown, Hebr. 4.14.
having expounded these places, of whom they may learn their so many diverse
interpretations, neither does it serve to color their exposition, the text
alleged of the Acts of the Apostles where S. Peter went out of prison, in
which place is no speech at al of opening the doors of ye said prison: neither
is it said (as in S. John) that the doors of the prison being shut, S Peter
came forth: but that the Angel arrived there, Johan. 12.
when the Guard before the door watched the prison: where they say, the
doors were open to S. Peter, it agrees not with the opinion of S. John, that
the doors were shut when our Lord entered.

The like reason alleged by the said Ministers of the fifth of the Acts is
unprofitable to this purpose, as well as the first, and for the same cause.

And to show clearly and euidentely, that against the natural property of
Bodies God can make, that a great and gross Body may pass into a space and
place inequall to his greatenesse, largeness, and thickenesse: The Doctoures
have recited that which our Lord says in S. Mathewe 19. It is more easy
that a Cable enter the eye of a Needle, than a Rich man into the Kingdom of
Heaven, whereunto the Ministers have answered two things: The one, that in the
inuolution we must not turn Cable, but rather Camel: notwithstanding their own
french Bible of the impression of Antony Kebul, which they have brought,
contains the versio^ of this word Cable: like as also Calvin in his Harmony
of the four Evangelists says, it is the better.

Wherein may be seen and found true that which Tertullian inueigheth against
the Valentinians, and Irenaeus against him in the first Book Chap. 14. that
such as are separated from us, to put themselves in an other school, devise
always some new thing, to the end the Disciples may be found more able than
the Masters: But be it that the word of Camel is granted to them (which the
Doctoures doubt not has been expounded by S. Hilarie, S. Jerome, and others)
the reason is yet stronger: For it is more unlikely and repugnante, that a
crooked Camel gross and great, enter the hole of a Needle, than a Cable. The
other reason given by the Ministers is, that God may bring to pass that a
Camel or Cable enter the eye of a Needle, which is notwithstanding against
the pure word of Jesus Christ, which says, It is not impossible to God to
do it, but rather easy, and by comparison, more easy to God than to make a
Rich man enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, which our Lord says
notwithstanding to be possible, not to men, but to God, to whom nothing is
impossible: whereupon the doctors say, that if God can do that which is
most hard, he may do that which is most easy: The text of the Scripture
importes that God may bring to pass that a rich man enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, which is most hard, then he may bring to pass, that a Camel (or
Cable) enter the eye of a Needle, which is more easy.

The aunsweres of the Ministers here before confuted, tend to these absurdities
and blasphemies, that Jesus Christ by his Omnipotency could not enter through
the doors being shut: that he could not issue out of the womb of his
Mother, through her body, without breaking: that he could nor bring to pass
that a body visible should be invisible: that a body great and gross could
be in a place inequal to himself: that he could by his Divine power make
penetration of the Dimensions, and that he may bring to pass by the same
power Divine, that one body be in two places (for it is al one reason of this
last Article and the others) albeit such things are declared in the Scripture
not only possible, but that the most part have been done.

And the Doctoures do much marvel how the Ministers dare deny this, seeing
themselves must necessarily confess, (if the Doctrine of the Supper which they
give be true) that the body of Jesus Christ is in diverse places, which they
prove thus: The faithful receive in their souls Really, the substance of the
body and blood of Jesus Christ, by the operation of the holy Ghost, and not
only the bread and wine, or the effect and virtue of the same Sacrament, as
Calume says in his institutions, lib. 4. cap. 17. sect. 11. The Doctoures
conclude thus: it is impossible that a person receive the substance of the body
of Jesus Christ in himself, but that the body of Jesus Christ must be in him:
All the Faithful which be at the Supper, receive him in their souls, so that
it must needs be that the body of Jesus Christ be in them, and by
consequence in diverse places, as every where, where their Supper is made, and
likewise in Heaven. They say further, that Calvin in his Institutions, lib. 4.
cap. 17. sect. 24. mainteines that in the Supper, the power of God is
requisite, to the end the Flesh of Jesus Christ penetrate into us, and that
human nature can not comprehend that, but needs must Gods power work in
it: By which mean Calvin puttes, by the power of God, the Flesh of Jesus
Christ in many places, as both in heaven, and us, into whom he must penetrate
by the power of God: And in the.10. number, he says, that the truth
signified and represented by signs, must be represented and exhibited in the
very place where the signs be, which he proves by reason in many places, that
is, that the signs must not be void, no more than the pilloure was void of
the holy spirit: But even as the essence and substance of the holy Ghost was
conjoined and present with the pilloure, even so that the Flesh and Blood of
our Lord, before there was true Sacrament, must needs be knitte and united with
the signs: The places be against Heshusius, and in his Book of the Supper, 1.
Cor. Cap. 11. Whereunto how so ever the Ministers Answer, the Doctoures
desire that the text of Calvin together with the reasons which he brings of
the holy spirit, may be well weighed and considered.

They Object further, that the Ministers in their Supper, attribute more to the
human virtue, than to the omnipotency of God, yea they do more than God
could do, as in that they vaunt to do a thing by their Faith, which implies
contradiction, saying in their Confession of Faith exhibited at Poissi, to the
Bishops which were in the congregation, that Faith makes things absent,
present at one instant, and in one place, yt is in the souls of the Faithful
when they make the supper: the same being as much as if they had said, that
faith makes things not present, present in one time and place: so as, to every
Faithful man in the Supper coming woorthily, the Body of Jesus Christ is
there present in virtue of Faith: And yet is he not there present, as
themselves hold, saying, He is but in Heaven: wherein may be seen
implication of contradiction that is present, and not present Really: neither
can it serve to any purpose a little stippe or escape, which they said to us,
that the body of Christ is on high corporally, but in the hearts of the
Faithful in the supper spiritually: For the spiritualitie can not take away
the substance of the thing, and their Faith can not bring to pass that a body
is not a body, and that a body has not his dimensions, as they have said
here before.

Therefore in what sort so ever, they confess that the Faithful in the
Supper receive the substance of the body of Jesus Christ into their souls,
they must necessarily and willingly confess, that either their Faith is more
mighty than the virtue and infinite power of God, or else that God can bring
to pass, that his body shall be locally in Heaven, and Sacramentally (Really
notwithstanding and substancially) in the Sacrament of the Aultare, in which
point the Doctoures desire to hear the Ministers, and after to set down
their Answer by writing: The Ministers can never show by the word of God,
that their Faith can bring to pass, that in one instant and in one place, a
thing shall be present and not present: And it is as much to say, a thing
present and not present by Faith, as to say the body of Jesus Christ is in a
Faithful man, and is not: Neither need there to be put any channel of the
power of the holy Spirit, to make the Flesh of Jesus Christ slide from
Heaven hither, if the said Flesh were not but in Heaven, and yet come to us.

And touching the points which the Doctoures have objected that Peter Martyr,
and Theodore de Beza, were the first that said that God could not bring to
pass that one body might be in two places, which new Doctrine the Ministers
would confirm by antiquity, and we not name it otherwise than blasphemy.
The Doctors say, that many times, they have prayed the ministers not to lose
time, and to the end things might be better cleared, to say nothing that were
not to purpose: which notwithstanding, they allege forthwith ye testimonies of
the fathers, to show yt a body by nature is circumscript, and naturally can not
be in many places: but ye same authors speak nothing, that God is able to do
it: And yet S. Augustine and others in their places recited by the Doctors,
touching the Article of the doors being shut, witness, that by ye power of
God two bodies may occupy one place, which contains the like difficulty: and
when it comes to the proof of the real presence of the body and blood of
Christ, they are to show evidently, that all the ancients wholly which have
spoken of the Sacrament, have not only confessed his ability to bring to
pass that his body was on high in heaven, and here below in the Sacrament,
but also they with one accord have aduouched to believe according to the
word of Jesus Christ, that he is in Heaven, and here in the Sacrament. The
Doctoures demand of the Ministers, if any before Peter Martyr, and Theodore de
Beza, have denied this power of God, whom they marvel not if they so much
magnify, seeing of them they have taken all the places alleged.

For the Article that begins, where the Doctors pretend that the form, etc,
the Doctoures say this form is common as often as the power of God is debated
upon, neither can she proof be better guided, than to follow the word of
the Angel, that there is nothing impossible to God: From which, when any
thing is exempted, there is alleged the self same that the Ministers infer,
that there is a repugnancie of things, whereof folowes an implication of
contradiction: as did the ancient Heretics against the Flesh of Jesus
Christ, alleging always some impossibility according to nature: doing the
like against the Article of Resurrection and Incarnation, as if there had been
contradiction that God was man, and man was God: As shall be easy to a wicked
mind, to forge always some contradiction in his spirit, according to ye
propreties of nature: for the Article beginning, where the Doctors allege that
God can change, etc, The Doctoures say they have not well conceived their
meaning: For they take for a thing absurd, that a substance resting affected
of his qualities, may by Gods power, have effects contrary to his qualities:
As if God could not bring to pass by his omnipotency, that the fire
possessing his natural heat, in place to burn, do refreshe and qualify, which
no man of sound judgment, and a Christian would not deny: For the Article,
touching the limitation of the power, etc, the Doctoures say, it seems by the
Answer of the Ministers, that Gods power is limited according to his will:
which is as much to say, as God can not but that which he wills, which is
manifestly false.

Touching the Hebrew alleged, it seems the Ministers have desire to show
their skill therein: For such recital is nothing to purpose, resting
principally upon the word danar, which is as much to say as a thing, but it
means not that we ought to understand it as a thing done: the sense of the
place is such by the word, shall any thing be hid from me? And because hard
things be hid, and things impossible also more hid, they have therefore turned,
is there any thing hard (or impossible) to me: which Pagninus and other
interpreters of the Hebrew tongue, show well that the verb Pala, signifies to
hide. The Doctoures had not made Answer to this, but to make it known that
they are not astonished at one word of Hebrew.

For the Article beginning, touching the danger, etc, the Doctors say they
are but words superfluous, and what so ever the Ministers were able to
produce, others might use against them. And where they say it is a reproach
in that they are objected to corrupt the scripture, the Doctors say, ye the
Ministers can not deny, that they change not the sense, and gloss the matter
of the Supper, this is my body, this is my blood: By which and such like
Authorities under pretext of obscure reasons, every one may pretend to corrupt
the other Scriptures, and allege certain impossibilities of nature, and
contradictions.

For the Article beginning, touching the opinion of the scripture, that the
body, etc, the Doctors say, that in time and place they will declare their
Objections, and make a more large discourse of the Sacrament of the Altar.

Touching the Objection of the Doctoures, that the contrary part do not
ground their affirmation (which is that God can not bring to pass that one
body be in two places) upon the express testimony of the Scripture, or that
they can deduce it thereof: the Ministers have alleged for all their places,
but that God can not lie, God can not deny him self. But the Doctoures say
this consequence is nothing woorthe: God can not lie: God then can not bring to
pass that one body be in two places, which notwithstanding it had behooved the
Ministers to have made so, if the places brought in, had served to the purpose,
like as also when it is said that God can not lie, as the Ministers have
recited: to be able to lie, is not power but infirmity. So that it behooved to
say thus, according to the true sense: God is not infirm or weak, as to be
able to lie, than God cannot bring to pass that one body be in two places:
which consequence would be ridiculare.

And where the Ministers have brought in certain authorities of the
Auncientes, to prove that there is diversity between the Creatures and the
Creator, and that the Creator by Nature is every where, and the Creatures are
not in diverse places naturally: The Doctoures receive with reverence the
Authorities of the holy Fathers, but there was no need of their travail to
produce the said places for the confirmation of a thing so manifest, and which
was not in difficulty: But the Doctors are yet to understand one only place of
the Scripture, or one only Testimony of the Auncientes, which says, that
God could not bring to pass that one body were in diverse places: The
Doctoures desire the Ministers to receive with like reverence the Ancients
specially touching the interpretation of the holy Scripture, whose Exposition
shall be the judge between them and the Ministers.

Upon a request made to the Lord of Neuers by the Ministers to assign a day
for Answer particularely to every Article and reproach heaped before by the
Doctoures in their Objections: The said Lord provided that the Ministers
should take away with them at night, one of the Copies of the Objections, to
the end to come readely prepared the next day by noone to Answer them:
whereunto the doctoures agreed, who for their parts made like request, for
sufferaunce, to Reply to the Ministers Aunsweres, if they saw it were so
good, with the which they will give Resolution touching this Article of Gods
omnipotency, to the end to pass further, and examine the Real verity of
the body of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar, like as also the
Ministers for their parts do agree to yield a full Resolution to what so ever
shall be deduced by them.

The morrow following, being Wedensday the seuentens of Iulie, the company
being assembled, the Lord of Neuers considering that the day before, the
Doctoures had furnished all the time, so that the Ministers had no opportunity
to answer presently, thought there was no less leisure due to them to
Answer, and therefore with other necessary respects, which would have been
a long and weary season, he ordained from thence forth the conference to
pass by writing, and that the Ministers should bring again the Copy that
was given them to Answer, and send it unto him, signed by them and two
Notaries, whereof he would cause his secretorie to draw out an other copy,
to send to the Doctoures, reserving with him self the Original, and in like
case would send the Ministers, the copy of such as the Doctoures should send
to him. Whereunto the one and other part submitted them selves, and disputed
afterward by writing as follows.

The Answer of the Ministers to the Doctoures Objections, given upon Tuesday
the sixtienth of Julie.
THey deny that the Doctoures consequence is necessary, (which is, God can not
bring to pass that one body be in two places at one instant, and that therefore
God is not almighty) because Gods omnipotency ought not be measured, but by
the things only conformable to his will, and do not derogate either his nature,
his wisdom, his truth, or the order he has established in the world:
Whereunto that which the Doctoures prefer, does directly resist, that one
self body at one self instante may be in diverse places, by which it should
follow that a body may be a body, and not be limited, and so by consequence,
that he may be and may not be, all together: For the measures (as to be long,
large, and thick, and to be bounded and limited within certain ends) are so
essential to the body, that without them he is no more a body: in which
speech, the Ministers do in nothing diminishe Gods omnipotency, but of the
contrary, establishe it, not attributing to him any mutabilitie or change in
his Council, nor contradiction in his will, for fear to make him lie, a thing
impossible to him by the Scripture.

And touching that which the Doctoures allege of the ancientes, that they have
not denied the almightinesse of God, the Ministers have declared here before
that they have, and in what cases it may happen: yea Fertullian in his Book
which he wrote against Praxeas speaking of this matter, uses this speech:
Certainly nothing is hard to God. But if without judgment, we use this
sentence, and interpret it according to our fond fancy, we may feign al
things of God, and say he has made them, because he could make them: wherein
we must not believe, that because he might, and may do all things, that
therefore he has made that, which he has not made: but rather to enquire if
he have made it: and so the conclusion folowes, that the power of God is his
will, and his not power likewise his not will. It rested then to the doctors to
show that God would make a body, which in one instant should be in diverse
places, as to show that he could do it: And it is a marvelous matter, that
they impute against the ministers, to derogate the almightinesse of God, as to
except from the same, that which is contrary to his will: seeing they themselves
confess it and except the same things as standing between them and the
Doctors no other difference, than that they say, that God brings to pass that
one body be in diverse places in one instante, because he can do it, and the
Ministers affirm, that he does it not, and can not do it, because he will
not, for that (according to Tertullian) the power of God is his will.

Touching the Doctoures reason of Philosophy to prove that a body, in respect
it is a body, forbeares not to be in diverse places, the Ministers say, that
they suppose a false: which is, that the quantity is accidental, and not
essential to the body. For (that a body is measured, limited, and
circumscript) is so of his essence, that without it, it is no more a body,
according to S. Augustines opinyon, speaking even of the body of Jesus Christ
glorified, that if they take from a body his space, he has no more place
where he can be, and by Consequence, being no where, he is no more.

The reason of their Philosophy touching the first Heaven, not to be in any
place, the Ministers deny it, seeing to use the speech of the Scripture, we
must confess that even above the Heavens there is place: As Christ said to
his Disciples, I go to prepare you a place, and in the very place in the house
of my Father be many dwellings. And in an other place, There where I am (taking
the Present for the Future) there shall be my servant: in which sentence we
must observe that there be Aduerbes of Place. S. Augustine writing to
Dardanus, holds express opinion that the Body of Jesus Christ must
necessarily be in some place in Heaven because it is a true Body. Besides in
the number of the erroures heretofore condemned by the faculty of Paris, it is
said expressly, that the Heaven called by them, Empyreum, is the place of
Angels, of happy Souls, and Human bodies glorified.

Touching that which the Doctors pretend that by the Ministers Doctrine
(mainteining that a Body cannot be without place, nor in many places at one
instante) may be inferred that they blaspheme the power of God. The Ministers
of the contrary say, that the Doctoures blaspheme his Majesty, which they
diminishe, as giving to the Creature, yt which belongs to him alone, that is,
to be incircumscript: as appears by Dydimus in his Book of the Holy Ghost,
where he proves that the Holy Sprite is God, and not a Creature, because it is
circumscripte, and all creatures necessarily are circumscripte and lymited: The
same resembling also the opinions of S. Basile, Vigilius, and the Master of
Sentences in the first Book.

Where they confess that the Ancientes and happy Sprites are circumscript,
albeit they are not corporal Bodies, they reason directely against themselves,
and properly to prove our opinion heretofore of Bodies, which is, that it
cannot be but in what place so ever they are, they are circumscripte. For by an
argument of the Less to the More, if the Aungelles which have no Dimension
nor measure, be (by their confession) necessarily circumscripte, as being
creatures, by greater reason, the bodies of men which be Creatures and
measured, must be so.

And where they allege, that the Auncientes have not said, that a Body, by
the power of God cannot be in diverse places: that impugnes S. Augustine in his
30. Treatise upon S. John, which is recited de Consec. Distinct. a. C. Prima
quidem: where speaking of the body of Christ, he says precisely, that the
Body of our Lord, wherewith he rose again, must be in one place: teaching
thereby that at one time it cannot be in diverse places. And touching their
reason taken of the Sacrament, to enforce and prove their saying, the
Ministers answer, that the Angels never understood nor said, that the body
of Jesus Christ was in Heaven and in the Sacrament, in one self sort and
manner, nor that he was in the Sacrament, otherwise than sacramentally.

And where they pretend to prove in their resolution, that the Angels may in
one instant be in diverse places, when we understand their reasons, they
shall be answered.

Their speech delivers absurdity, to say, that a Body being dispoiled of
his Dimensions, forbeares not for all that to be a Body: For if it happened
that a substance Corporal were wholly dispoiled of his dime^sions, it should be
no more a Body, but a substance not Corporal, and of like nature to the
Aungelles and Sprites. And albeit God by his power may separate the Dimensions
of a substance, without corrupting it, yet it cannot be, but they must be
separated from a Body, without corrupting the same: because the Quality and
Dimensions be Accidents of the Substance, but not of the Body, which cannot
subsiste without them, because they are of his proper Essence.

And where the Doctors infer after in their objection, that the weight in a
body is a thing essential: the Ministers deny it, and by this reason, if it
were of the Essence of the Body the Body failing, it must also cease to be.
And yet we see, that the Body of Jesus Christ glorified (to the which the
bodies of all the Elect shall be conformed after the Resurrection) does not
forbear to be and subsiste, albeit at this day it be exempt from al
weightinesse.

Touching their most strong and mighty Argument, that if two Bodies may be
together in one place, one body may also be in diverse places at one instant,
the Ministers, without granting their Antecedente, say, their Consequence
(under correction) is not good, as the Argument it self is most weak.
Adding this further that the Doctoures, neither have proved, nor ever can prove
by Scripture, nor any Authority of the Auncientes, no nor any sufficient
Reason, that either the matter of their Antecedente, or the Consequence they
infer upon it, are true.

Where the Doctoures, to prove that two bodies may be together in one place,
allege scripture, that Christ entered the house where his disciples were, the
doors being shut, the Ministers answer, that it is not written that he
entered by the doors shut, but only the doors being shut, which the
Aunciente Interpreter has given well to understand, expounding in one of the
places of S. John (where stands mention of the matter before recited) Cum Fores
essent clausae, When the doors were shut came Jesus etc. Yet the Ministers
say, they believe and are assured of the clear opinion of the Scripture, that
the doors being shut he came, and stood in the midst of his Disciples:
But that it cannot be defined nor determined which way he entered, whether
through the Walls, or by the Gates of Wood: which S. Hilarie him self
puttes in doubt in his place alleged by the Doctors: what soever it be, the
Ministers say, that in entering he made his way myraculously, and ye one body
(whether it were the wood or the wall) made place to the body of Jesus Christ
entering: or that an opening was made to him by the Aungel, who opened and shut
the doors again in a moment, as has been said before. But in what fashion so
ever it was done, two bodies were never found together in one self place.

Touching that they allege of S. Augustine in his Book de Agone Christiano,
that Christ entered by the doors, we deny not but that he entered not by the
doors, but only that two bodies have been ever together in one self place:
that if Jesus Christ entered by the doors, the doors at his entry gave him
place, as is said.

Where the Doctors allege touching the suspision of the Apostles, that it was
a Vision, it apperteines nothing to the present matter, nor also that they
marvelled of the manner of his entry, which was myraculous, as has been
always confessed to them.

And where they add after in the opinion that the ancient Heretics had of the
Body of Jesus Christ, that it was not true, and that he did things above
nature: the Ministers tell them, that they somewhat suppose what occasion and
ground of their error the ancient Fathers had presented to them, if they had
confessed that which the Doctors do prefer and defend obstinately of the
Body of Jesus Christ: that he does things not only above nature, but also
against nature, and against the will and ordinance of God. And there is no
doubt, but such an opinion was a great proof to Marcion and other Heretics
that have denied the true Humanity of Jesus Christ, if by the examples of the
Doctors it were confessed, that the Body of Jesus Christ (against the truth,
nature, and essence of a Body) may be at one time in diverse places, or in one
place together with an other body.

To that which they allege of Justinius Martyr, the Ministers answer, that
the Book they have alleged is falsely attributed to him: for it handles a
mention of Origin (82. Question) and yet Origin was more than an hundred years
after him.

And touching the opinion of the Grave, mentioned in the place they have
produced, it is answered, that the Evangelist does clearly express, that
there was great trembling of the earth when he rose again, and that the
Angel rolled away the stone that closed the Grave, with the which consents Leo
the first Bishop of Rome, writing to the Bishops of Palestina, where he says,
that Jesus rose, the stone that covered the Sepulcher being rolled away.

Touching the place of S. Hilarie alleged by the Doctors, there is one word
which may suffice for their answer, and expressly spoken by the said holy
Doctor, that Jesus Christ, to whom all things are open (as the Doctors have
expounded the said sentence) or (according to the exposition of the Ministers)
who makes way through al, by his Divine virtue entered the doors being shut, by
which he gives sufficiently to understand, that to enter into the house where
his disciples were, he made himself way and opening, neither can we conclude
otherways by that which he has written, but that his entry was myraculous.

Touching S. Ambrose upon S Luke alleged by the Doctors, there can be no more
inferred than S. Hilary has said: neither can there be other conclusion either
of the one or other, but that Jesus entered into the House by a Divine and
woonderful virtue.

Where they allege of S. John Chrysostom touching the Virgyn, ye Christ came
out of her womb, and yet her virginity and integrity was no way corrupted or
defiled, yea and she remained a Virgyn before and after her delivery, the
Ministers believe it, confess it, and teach it, yielding their reason by the
scripture, because she never knew man.

But if thereupon they will infer that in the birth of Jesus Christ, Nulla
intercesserit apertio vteri, the Ministers say, that such conclusion should be
against the express text of the scripture, and also the opinion of S. Luke in
such behalf, Omne masculinu^ adaperiens vuluam etc. besides the authority of
many ancient Authors approving no less, as Origin upon S. Luke, Tertullian de
Carne Christi, S. Jerome in his first tome ad Eustochium, whose express speech
is, that Christ came out of ye womb of the Virgyn Cruentus, by which appears
that the Virgyn was a true Virgyn, and also a true mother.

To the authority which they allege of S Jerome, the Ministers for answer
return only his own saying, that when Jesus came where his Disciples were,
the Creature obeyed his Creator.

The allegation which the Doctoures draw out of Cyrill, serves nothing to
confirm their matter.

Touching the Heresy, which S. Augustine justly comprehendes in Iouinian,
who to eschew the error of the Manicheans, fell into an other, as saying the
Virgyn remained not a Virgyn in the delivery. The Ministers answer, it was
not necessary, that Iouinian, to escape the error of the Manicheans, should
call to doubt the Virginity of Mary: because the ground of that stands upon
this, that she was never known of man.

Touching the Conclusion which the Doctors would draw of the said
Authorities, and accommodate them to their purpose (that one body may be in
two places at one instante, or that two bodies may be together in one place)
the Ministers say, that is altogether impertinente, and that they cannot any
ways infer it of the place which they have alleged, nor others which they
can gather, neither that it can be found in any good Author. By mean whereof
they conclude against the Doctors, that as their ground is nothing, so they
go about falsely to authorize their error by the name and titles of the
Ancients, as not understanding and taking rightly ye phrase to penetrate, which
certain authors have used: which signifies not a confusion or meddling of
diverse bodies occupying one self place, but only the yielding ye one makes to
an other to give him place as we see and prove in experience, that the air
gives place to a man that walks, and to birds that fly. For conclusion the
Ministes say, that, that which they propose and maintain for their answer
does not derogate or diminish in any thing the greatness, glory, and power of
God, but establishes and aduanceth it much more than such prodigious
absurdities as the Doctors prefer, and seek to persuade without any reason or
mean probable: for they confess, that all that happened, both in Christ's
entry into the house where his disciples were, and the going out of the same,
as also the womb of his mother, and the grave, was a wonderful and Divine
virtue of God. But they deny for all that, that any thing happened which was
impossible, and contained any contradiction. The matters which they allege of
Calvin and Beza are things frivolous, and proponed rather to reproach and
impugn, than to search and clear the truth.

And where they say, that all Antiquity in one accord has understand by
the term Aphantos apanton, that Jesus Christ made himself invisible to his
disciples remaining in their presence, the Ministers, to answer them, allege
one authority of S. Ambrose upon S. Luke, who preferring these words,
says, he withdrewe himself from them, and an other of Nicholas de Lyra,
whose opinion upon this place is, that it was done by the agilitie of his
glorious body, which might suddenly vanishe.

Touching that which they allege of the penetration of heavens, when Christ
mounted thither, the Ministers answer, that it is likely they did divide and
were open, as at ye baptism of our Savior Christ, the pillar descended upon
him, and also when S. Stephen was stoned.

Touching that they reprehend in the first answer of the Ministers, that in
the 12. chap. of the Acts, there is no mention made of the opening of the
prison: the Ministers refer them to read the text of the said place
diligently, where they find, that after he had passed the first and second
watch, the last gate of the prison which was of iron, opened of it self to the
Angel and S. Peter, to make them place.

Where the doctors reply upon the Ministers answer, to the argument of the
Camel, inferred in their first answer: the Ministers avouch the integrity of
their said answer, as to contain nothing against Gods word: but say, that
they are beguiled, as referring that to ye Camel, which ought not to be
understand but of the salvation and conversion of Rich men only whereof was
mention made before: for our Lord Jesus Christ in saying that, that which is
impossible to men, is possible to God, pretends no other thing, tha^ to answer
to the question proposed by his disciples, which is, who might be saved:
whereunto he answered, that, that truly was impossible to men, who of them
selves are inclined to trust in their Riches, but it was possible to God, as
to be able to draw their hearts from that vain confidence.

Touching the argument which they would ground upon the presence of Jesus
Christ in the Supper (which they would infer to be in diverse places) the
Ministers confess the Antecedent, and deny the Consequence. For they have no
doubt but by faith our Lord Jesus Christ is spiritually present in the
Supper to all the Faithful, by which we must not infer that he is there
Locally, Diffinitiuely, or Corporally: which where they say, it is not
imaginable, the Ministers auowe it, as in regard of such as are not taught
and lightened by the Sprite of God, and have no other imagination, than that
which their natural faculty gives them. But to such as being lighted by Gods
grace, have a true and lively faith in their hearts, it is no more impossible
to represent unto them Jesus Christ crucified in the Supper, than it was to
the Galatheans to represent and repose him unto them as present and visible in
the preaching of S. Paul: and to those likewise of whom S. Cyprian makes
mention in his Sermon of the Supper, that in celebrating it, they embrace the
Cross of Jesus Christ, suck his Blood, and fix their tongue within his
wounds: all which things are done by lively contemplation and apprehension of
Faith, which is no other thing than a subsistaunce of things hoped for, and a
demonstration of such as are invisible, as S. Paul defines it.

Touching the truth of the thing conioined with his signs and Sacraments, the
Ministers confess, that outward signs are never without their effect on
the behalf of the Faithful, who cannot participate with the Bread and Wine
distributed in the Supper, but forthwith they participate with the Flesh of
Jesus Christ crucified for their sins, and with his Blood shed, to ratify
the new Allyaunce which God has made with his people. But if the Doctors
would infer thereupon a Corporal Presence in the Supper, the Ministers would
deny it, and that by this reason, that such presence was not required of the
ancient Fathers: who notwithstanding did not forbear to eat one self same
food with all the faithful of this day, as (with the help of God) shall be
more amply declared, when it pleases the Lord of Neuers to command
conference of that matter.

Where the Doctors, reproching the Ministers, say that they attribute to
themselves human power, more than to the power of God, as saying that by
Faith they make present, things that are absent: seeing God (according to the
doctrine of the ministers) can not bring to pass that one body be in diverse
places at one instant. The said Ministers Answer that such Antithesis are
foolish and not to purpose, and that there is far greater likelihoode, that
the Doctors presume more of their power, and the other Bishops of the Romish
church, than of the power of God: For God has not created by his word, but
heaven, earth, and the other creatures contained therein, and they in their
creation attribute to themselves the power to Create their Creator, as
appears in their Breuiarie, where the Priest says, qui creauit me, creatur
mediante me. The Ministers also do greatly marvel, that the Doctors call the
virtue of Faith, human power, seeing the great and wonderful effects of the
same, revealed to us in so many Examples of the Scriptures, specially in the
eleventh to the Hebrews, where S. Paul says, that the holy ones by Faith
have vanquished kingdoms. etc. All which things do not surmount the virtue
only, but also the capacity of human understanding.

The Doctors reply that follows this Article, contains but numbers of
unprofitable and superfluous words, and but little or nothing of necessary
matter: And that the ministers have more particularely Answered to every
point which they repeat, they send them eftsoons to the former aunsweres,
with this request, not to serve them hence forewarde with one mess twice.

Touching the sacrament of the Altar, as they call it, the ministers neither
receive nor approve in any sort that their Mass which they pretend to be a
sacrament, is a sacrament, and much less a sacrifice, by the which remission
of sins may be any way obtained: yea they say, that both the sacrificature,
and sacrifice by them pretended, with all things depending theruppon, be
blasphemies and impieties, by which God is dishonored, all the benefits of
Jesus Christ buried, and Christ's church seduced and abused, as shall clearly
appear by the pursuit of the conference. Neither do the Ministers corrupt in
any sort either the sense or words, which Jesus Christ used in the Institution
of the holy supper.

The Reply or Objection of the Doctoures, against the Aunsvvere of the
Ministers, touching the Article of Gods omnipotency: being on Saturday the xx.
of Julie.
THe Doctoures say, that this consequence, God can not bring to pass of his
omnipotency, that one body be in two places at one instante, and therefore he
is not almighty, is so good and strong, that the Ministers can not any way
deny it, without falling more and more into execrable blasphemies, to the
great grief and horroure of the said Doctoures: wherein besides the two
blasphemies which they maintain in their former Answers (that it is
impossible to God to make a body be in two places, as also impossible to him to
will to do it:) in this first Article of their last Answer, they bring forth
four or five other blasphemies, whereon do hang also diverse others, bisides the
absurdities, falshoodes, and imputations which they have heaped upon the
Doctors: in the first place they allege that God can not do a thing to
derogate ye order which he has established in the world: in the second that
it were to establishe mutabilitie and change in Gods councels to confess that
he is able to do any thing contrary to the said order established in the
world: in the third, that if it were so, there should be contradiction in his
will, whereof should follow that he were a lier: And for the fourth blasphemy,
that the power of God is his will, and likewise his not power his not will: And
for the fifth they pretend that God would have a body, which in one instant
might have been in many places, before they believe that God could have made it:
otherwise they mean to infer that he neither has, could, nor can make it: by
which the Ministers will acknowledge nothing of Gods power, but so much as he
shows by effect, for which matter they allege Tertullian. All these
blasphemies are drawn out of the propre words of the first Article of the
Ministers.

Touching the first, that God can not do a thing to derogate the order he
has established in the world, it is proved an apparent blasphemy by the
Scripture, who in infinite places makes mention of Gods works above nature,
which the Ministers call order established in the world: the Scripture teaches
in proper terms ye God can do infinite things above the order established in
the world: As the wife of Lot which was converted into a pillar of Salt: that
a barraine woman in her last age, having an old husband, had a child: That a
Vine all dry, has flourished: A she Ass has spoken: that the Sun stayed
and went back again, with other innumerable Examples contained in the old
Testament. And for the new Testament, yt a virgin brought forth a child: That
a body has walked upon the Sea, and mounted to heaven: and generally all the
miracles done by Christ and his Apostles above nature, the same being contrary
to the order established in the world. From this blasphemy grows an other,
that God seeing he has established his order in the world, has not done, nor
could, nor can do any miracle.

But to prove by the Authority of the scripture, that God can do against the
order established in the world: it is written in Esaias. 50. My hand (which is my
power) is it abridged yt I can not redeem and buy again: is there no more
power in me to deliver: Behold by threats I will make dry the sea, and will put
the fluddes into the deserte, so that the fishes shall perish for want of
water, and shall die of thirste: I apparel the heavens with darkness, and
put a sack for their cover. But more expressly in the new Testamente,
where it is said by S. John, that God can raise children to Abraham of the
stones: Which place albeit may be expounded Allegorically, yet by the literal
sense S. John declares it was possible to God: the Devil knew and has
confessed, that if Christ were the true son of God, he might transeforme
stones into bread: The same notwithstanding contrary to the order established
in the world. And we have to note yt there is no less impossibility that
bread be turned into Flesh by Gods omnipotency, than a stone transnatured into
bread: Wherein for such as deny this last, done by the power of God, they
declare that they believe less of the almightinesse, than Deuilles.

The confuting of the second blasphemy, dependes upon the disproofe of the
first: for albeit, God, contrary to the order established in the world, has
done many miracles (as has been recited here before) yet there is no
mutabilitie or change in his Council.

Touching the third blasphemy, that if God did any thing contrary to the order
established in the world, there should be contradiction in his will, and
therefore he should be a lier: The Doctoures Obiecte that it would follow, that
such should be the will of God, never to do any thing against the order
established in the world, and that he would have stayed, and declared yt to be
his will, by his word: For otherwise it could not have been known what was
Gods will. And as the ministers neither have, nor can make appear by Gods
word, that such is Gods will, as not to do any thing against the order
established in the world, so they must first teach and instruct that such
is Gods will before they conclude that if God made one body to be in two places
(or other thing) against the order of Nature established in the world, he
should be a lier.

Touching the fourth blasphemy, that Gods power is his will, and that his
empower is his vnwill: According to the sense which the ministers give it (if
God can not do but what he will) to be an Heresy of the Heretics called
Monarchians in the primitive Church: against whom Tertullian writes in his
Book aduersus praxeam, and since renewed by one Petrus Abaillardus, and
continued by one VVickleffe: they in deed measured Gods power according to his
will, the same contrary to the express word of God, which oftentimes declars
many things to be possible to God, which notwithstanding he will not do, as
appears in Sap. 2 where it is recited that God could send many sorts of
afflictions to the children of Israel to chastise them, but he would not do
it, having disposed all things by measure, number, and balance, and that he
might destroy such as had offended him, but he would not, but used mercy to
them: In the gospel, our Lord said to S. Peter: Think not thou that I can
pray to my Father, and he will send me more than twelve legions of Angels,
and yet as he would not pray to him: so his Father did not send them, although
he was able to have done it in the person of his son: Christ might have let
his enemies to have taken away his life, but he would not: And the Father might
have saved him from corporal Death (says S. Paul) by his power, but
neither the one nor other would do it: which albeit the ministers might say
was foreordained, yet the Scripture holds expressly that he might have done
it, notwithstanding it was foreordained.

And touching the authority of Tertullian, the Doctoures are glad they produce
it, as making altogether for the truth against their blasphemies, and yet
they have omitted many of his words and sentences to confute their error,
as the text it self here witnesses. Nihil Deo difficile, Quis hoc nesciat?
and in possibilia apud seculum, possibilia apud deum, q^is ignorant? Et stulta
mundi elegit Deus vt confundat sapientia. Ergo inquiunt heretici (monarchiani
scilicet) difficile non fuit Deo ipsum se and patrem and filium facere,
aduersus traditam formam rebus humanis. Nam and sterilem parere contra naturam,
difficile Deo non fuit, sicut nec virginem: plane nihil Deo difficile: sed si
tam abrupte in presumptionibus nostris hac sententia vtamur, quiduis de Deo
confingere poterimus: quasi fecerit quia facere potuerit: Non autem quia ^amia
potest facere, ideoque credendum est illum fecisse etiam quod non fecerit: sed
an fecerit requirendum. Potuit (ita saluus sum) Deus pennis hominem ad volandum
instruxisse (quod and melius) prestitit, non tame^ quia potuit, statim and
fecit: potuit and praxeam and omnes pariter hereticos statim extinxisse non
tamen quia potuit, extinxit: oportebat enim miluos esse and hereticos:
oportebat and patrem crucifigi. Hac ratione erit aliquid and Deo difficile, id
scilicet quod non fecerit, non quia non potuerit, sed quia noluerit: etenim
posse, velle est, and non posse, nolle.

By which text may easily be seen according to Tertullian, that God can do
many things which he will not do, as to make a man to fly, but does it not,
he can destroy the heritikes, and yet spares them, because he will not do all he
ca^ do.

And touching their conclusion of the said place of Tertullian (that the power
of God is his will, and his empower likewise his vnwill) they well declare their
slight examination of the meaning of that place: for Tertullian says it not
of his own sentence (considering he should conclude against that he had said
before) but he inferres it against the Monarchian heretics: who held, that what
God might do, he would do, and it was done: By which reason Tertullian
concludes against them, that what God had not done, must needs be hard and
impossible to him: so that according to those Heretics, it was all one to be
done, and might be done: and not to be done, as much as to be impossible to
God: And of that (as Tertullian infers) would follow, that the power, the
will, and the deed of God, should be all one, and of the contrary, a thing not
to be done, and to be impossible to God to do it, should also be all one: And
even so also would be al one, the power of God and his will, and his empower
and his vnwill: which Tertullian concludes for an absurd thing proceeding of
the opinion of the said Monarchian Heretics, and not of his sentence, which
was altogether contrary: wherein as we see the ministers consent in opinion with
the said Monarchian Heretics, which Tertullian refutes, so the most evident
proof stands in the fifthe blasphemy. And for conclusion against the said
blasphemies, the Doctoures declars, that God can do much more than he will do,
and more than he has established in the world: for otherwise would follow
yet other blasphemies, as this, that the power of God should not be infinite,
but limited: An other, that for necessity, all things should be done in the
world, because God could not otherwise do, than entertain the order
established in the world: which Calvin himself detestes, saying: that God of
his omnipotency changes and alters the order established, as it seems
good to him, and to think otherwise, were to limite his power and providence.

Where the ministers say in their said first Article, yt the ancient Doctors
of the church denied the omnipotency of God: it is a most manifest falshoode
and great wrong: for they deny it not, but interpret the scripture which
seems to deny it, and so give to understand how it ought to be taken: that
much less by the same scripture well understood, there is any exception at
al suffered against the almightinesse of God, seeing that in the contrary, it is
confirmed as S. Augustine says in his fifth Book de Ciuitate Dei. Cap. 10.
Gods power (says he) is in nothing diminished, when it is said, he can not
die, nor be deceived: For he can not such things, because if he could them,
his power should be lessened: concluding that he can not do things which are
of infirmity, because he is almighty.

Upon the end of the first Article, the ministers challenge us, as saying
their difference is that we maintain a body to be in many places, because God
can do it: and that of the contrary, the ministers hold that it is not in Gods
power to do so, because he will not: The doctors declare that for their part,
they never concluded to be true, that a true body was in two places, because
God could do it.

But the Question was only to know if God could do it, to come afterward by
order to prove by Scripture, that he would do it: they have already heretofore
recited the scripture of the supper and the Ascension, adding withal the
Doctrine of Calvin touching the said supper, to show that Gods will is to
bring to pass, that a body be in two places (as in deed it is) according to
the express word of God.

Besides, we have produced to the same end the scriptures of the doors being
^^t, of the birth of our Lord, and of the Resurrection through the ^^one, which
be like deeds and of the self reason to one body in many places: Of the
contrary, the ministers to deny the will of God, and deprave holy Scripture
(which shows that such is Gods will, that a body be in diverse places)
allege not any thing more instantly, than the impossibility of God to do it.
But to the end that all the world understand the difference between us, we
presently declare, that there has been no other difference touching this
Article until now, but to know whether it be in Gods power to bring to pass
that a body be in two places at one instant or not.

And for the second Article, the Doctors say, the Ministers Answer not to the
matter: For the Objection was not, if quantity were accidente of a
Mathematical body, aut de predicamento quantitatis, (as the philosophers hold)
but to know if it were of the essence and necessity to the quantity of a body
to be circumscript and enclosed in place. And touching S. Augustine alleged by
the Ministers, he speaks expressly according to the propretie of the divine
nature and corporal nature, saying: that the Divine nature is every where, but
not the corporal, as of his natural propretie requiring a certain place:
whereof the Doctoures make no difficulty, arcording to the said natural
property. But the Question is, if above nature by Gods omnipotency, it may
not be that a body be without place equal to his greatness, the same being
openly confessed by S. Augustine when he speaks De clansis lanuis, having no
longer regard to the nature of things, but to the power of God: And we could
wish, that the ministers would allege this Epistle of S. Augustine against
the Doctrine of Calvin and his Ministers, as often as they allege the text
of the place of bodies against the power of God, touching the body of Jesus
Christ in the Sacrament.

Touching the third Article, the ministers are abused: for according to the
Philosophers and natural reason of bodies, (which the Ministers follow) Lo^us
est superficies Corporis continentis, by which if the high and last Heaven
were circumscript of place, there must needs be an other body above the high
and first Heaven, a quo primum Coel^m contineretur. and sic in infinitum. For
the rest, the Ministers give no answer to the other objections made upon this
Article.

Touching the places of Scripture which they allege to prove that there are
places above the Heavens, they do paraphrase and abuse the ambiguitie of the
name of a Place. For in all their speech of the dimension of Bodies (which
they say does necessarily require a place equal to their greatness) they must
mean Corporal places, as the dimension of bodies demand.

And now when they speak of places above Heaven, they must understand and
mean the^ other than Corporal, as not being such places, or like to those
wherein our bodies be heard, but places incomprehensible and imaginable, where
bodies and Sprites are indifferent, without distinction of certain spaces and
places Corporal, for their greatness: in which places the Rule of ye
Ministers is false, by which they maintain that one body cannot be in one
place, if it contain not roumth according to the greatness of the body: for
the rest we say, the manner of Heretics is, to interpret the Scriptures
spiritually, when they should take them according to the Letter: and of the
contrary to expound by the Letter, that which ought to be understood
spiritually and by figures: as the Ministers expound the house of God in the
other world Literally and Corporally, as to contain spaces and Corporal
habitations, diverse, and separated one from an other, albeit it ought to be
understood spiritually, for the diversity of degrees of beatitude: neither
can the Doctors here omit one manifest contradiction of the Ministers in
this Article, wherein they pretend that the Bodies and Souls of the blessed,
are lodged above all the Heavens, and yet they lodge the Body of Jesus Christ
within Heaven.

And touching the Article condemned by the Faculty of the Divines of Paris, we
answer, that it is an ordinary use with the Ministers to allege Authorities,
either corrupt or improper. For the Article says, that the Bishop of Paris
having assembled the Faculty, condemned all such as would maintain two
several Heavens, the one for Aungelles, and the other for the souls of men,
which apperteines nothing to the present question.

In the fourth Article the Ministers impose upon the Doctoures, who never
attribute the property of God to any creature, and have said many times
before, that to be euerywhere, and incircumscript, was not natural to any
creature, but only to God. Wherein the Authoures alleged by the Ministers (as
S. Basil, Dydimus, and Vigilius) speak not otherwise than of the property of
Nature, to be euerywhere or not, and yet deny not that it is in Gods power, to
bring to pass that a creature or body be in two or many places above his
nature, but (as has been said) when they come to the power of God, many of
those ancient authors confess it to be possible to God, and that he has done
so in the Sacrament, and therefore the Ministers answer is out of the matter,
seeing all the contention is but of Gods power, and not of natural properties.

In this fifth Article the Ministers have not rightly comprehended the reason
of the Doctors, who have not alleged that Aungelles are circumscripte
naturally as well as bodies: by which they would infer, that the
circumscription of place simply depended not as of the only and essential cause
of the dimensions of a body, as by all their said reasons, the Ministers
pretend: notwithstanding the Doctors are not ignorant, that, to put
difference between corporal and spiritual creatures, there is a custom in the
schole to distinguish ye Angels sunt diffinitiue in loco, and bodies
circu^scriptiue.

In the sixth Article to satisfy the Doctors request to produce one only
place or testimony of the Ancients to prove it not in Gods power to make one
body in two places. The Ministers for all the authorities they can have,
allege falsely one place of S. Augustine where it is said (as is recited upon
Gratian de Consecratione Distinct. 2. C. Prima quidem) that S Augustine wrote
that it must be that Christ's body be in one place: whereunto the Doctors
answer, that it is not so set down in the proper text of S. Augustine, which
is in the 30. Treatise upon S John: the tenure being thus in all the ancient
exemplaries of S. Augustine, Corpus Domini in quo resurrexit vno loco esse
potest, Veritas eius vbique diffusa est: Here is no Oportet, as the Ministers
recite, having it of Gratian. And to the end it be known that there ought no
great trust to be had in the fragmentes of Gratian, without having recourse to
the exemplaries of S. Augustine. In the title of the Canon, there be these
words drawn out of the Exposition of S. Augustine upon the 54. Psalm, from
whence he draws the only beginning of his Canon, and yet he brings it not in
as for truth: the residue of which Canon is taken of diverse places of the
said S Augustine.

And albeit there were Oportet, yet S. Augustine using his custom, speaks
according to the property of the Body, opposing the Divinity to the
Humanity, and touches not the operation of Gods Omnipotency: whereof when
he doothe make mention, and that he speaks of the Sacrament, he affirms
expressly the Body of Jesus Christ to be in diverse places by the
Almightinesse of God, as we hope to deduce as well of him, as other Auncientes,
in our resolution.

The eighth Article conteines many Erroures against Philosophy and Truth: as
first, in that they make no Distinction between a body called Mathematical
(which is) having dimension of largeness, length, and height, and a body
Physical or natural, that is, composed of a form substantial, and matter, by
the unity of which, it is made a body natural and substantial. In the second
place, if the body should be without quantity, yet would it differ from our
souls separated, which be no substance material, and consequently it would
differ also from Angels and Sprites.

In the third place, for conclusion of this Article, the Ministers declare
plainly not to acknowledge any substantial Body. And where they say, that if
God could separate the dimensions of a substance, and not corrupt it, that
that substance should remain spiritual, as the Angels, they are abused: for
that substance should not remain immateriall, as our Souls and Angels do,
which be not capable of dimensions, and therefore should be still differente
from Angels and our Souls.

To the ninth Article, the Ministers answer nothing to purpose: for the
Doctors hold not, that gravity and weight are essentialles in a body, but to
incline downewarde is essential to the heaviness and weight of a body: they
demanded also in their objection, if an Earthely body and weighty, remaining
in his substance and natural heaviness, could not by Gods almightinesse, be
suspended on high, but that it must incline downwaede, notwithstanding it were
against his nature and inclination.

For the rest, touching the answer to many Articles concerning two bodies to
be in one place, and the places of Holy Scripture and Anciente Authoures
produced by the Doctors (to prove that it was in Gods power to make two
bodies to be in one only place) and by the like reason, that it was also in
the same power to bring to pass, that one body (of the contrary) be in two
places, we say, for the first, that the Ministers do wrong to deny this
Consequence, two bodies may be in one place by Gods power, then of the
contrary, one body by the same power may be in two places: for there is
as much repugnancie of Gods order established in the one as in the other, and
no less contradiction in nature grounded upon one cause and reason, which is,
in the lymitation and circumscription of a body: to the which as it is
natural to be in place, so is it natural to him to be in place proportioned,
and corespondent to his dimensions. And if for the number of diverse places
where one body were, it might be inferred, that it were no more a body (as
implying contradiction) even by the same reason according to one only place,
where were many bodies, it could not be inferred that they were no more
bodies, than many bodies were one, which would implie like contradiction to
the first.

And where the Ministers deny the Antecedent, which is, that two bodies may
be in one place, we have produced to prove it, the text of the doors being
shut, the birth of the body of our Lord of the Virgyn, the coming out of ye
Sepulcher, the passage of a Camel through the creuis of a Needle, and the
penetration of the heavens, which Jesus made at his Ascension: and because they
deny these doings contained expressly in the holy scripture, interpreted by
the ancient Christians, and deprave it at their pleasure, the Doctoures avouch
again upon the textes of those Scripture, as follows.

First touching the doors shut, S. John says, that Jesus is come: He
means to the place where his Disciples were: neither came he thither without
entering, for that were a more great miracle to be in the midst of them
without entering, than to enter there simply. In the second place it is said,
^um f^res essent clausa, or tanuis clausis, which is to say, He entered the
doors being shut: neither does it appear, that the Scripture makes mention
rather of ye doors than of an other place, but to show on what part he
entered. Thirdly the Scripture adds not in vain, that the doors were shut,
without saying that any opening was made myraculously, for it is always said,
^^od venit tanuis clausis. And if it were true that the doors had been opened
by Divine virtue it should be false, that our Lord entered, tanu^s, ^^rsis^,
for then should he have entered tanuis apertis, by what means so ever they had
been opened.

And to declare that the common consent of all the Auncientes has been, that
Jesus entered by the doors shut, the Doctoures prefer four fundations
drawn cute of the Auncientes: In the first they all confess expressly, that
the miracle of the entering was made in the Body of Jesus Christ. The second,
that such miracle was done above the nature of the Body, by the virtue of
God. The third is, that expressly the Auncientes judge, that in that did
consiste the miracle, that the body passed through the doors shut, and was
so with an other body.

And for the fourth fundation they add, that in regard of such an entering,
the Apostles taught, that the body of Jesus was no true body, but a Sprite or
Vision, which the Ministers pass lightely without answer. But if it be so,
that by Gods power (as the Ministers hold) there was made an opening either
by the doors, or other part of the house, to give entering to the body of
Jesus Christ, then the miracle should not consiste in the said Body, but in
the doors or other part of the house which were opened, and yet there was
nothing contrary to the nature of the Body of our Lord, for it resistes not
any Body what so ever it be to enter by an opening made by miracle or
otherwise.

Be it that Iustine is not the Author of the Questions against the Gentiles:
yet it cannot be denied that they were not of some Aunciente Christians of the
Primitive Church: And the Doctoures have attributed them to him, on whose name
they be entitled: only the said Iustine in the place alleged makes the
miracle to have passed in the Body of Jesus Christ, which being gross and
thick, entered through the shut doors, against the nature of a Body by
the power of God: and therefore the Apostles esteemed it to be a Vision by
reason of an entry made without opening, as Sprites are woonte to enter. See
the Text.

S. Hilary does not only say, that he entered by the Omnipotency of God, in
what sort so ever it be (as the Ministers seek to turn and wrest his
authority) but as one that had even now to do with the Ministers, he
repulseth and scoffs at al their euasions and subtilties, which they contriue
of this doing. He says, that nothing gave place to make opening to such a
body, neither lost he any thing of his substance, nor, to enter, was in
nothing diminished. He adds that the doors, and all other openings were
closed and fast barred, and yet in this lies the miracle, that the true
natural body of Jesus Christ, against his nature, by the Omnipotency of
God, entered a house fast closed and covered, without any opening, by which he
shows apparently that the miracle consisted in the Body of Jesus Christ.
Herein we refer to the text, which we desire to be well examined by the
Ministers. S. Ambrose in the place recited says, that S. Thomas was abashed
when he saw the Body of Jesus Christ enter. Per inuia septa corporibus: and
quod natura corporea per impenitrabile Corpus sese infuderit inuisibili aditu.
S. Chrysostom in the Homily of S. John Baptiste, and in his Commentaries
upon the Gospel of S. John says expressly, Qui intrauit per ostia clausa
non erat Phantasma, non erat Spiritus, vere corpus erat. Quid enim dicitis
respicite and videte, quia Spiritus carnem and ossa non habet, quae me habere
videtis? Habebat carne^, habebat and ossa, and clausa era^t omnia. Quomodo
clausis ostijs intrauerunt ossa and caro? clausa sunt omnia, and intrat, quem
intrantem non vidimus. Nescis quomodo factum sit, and das hoc potentiae Dei:
Where without difficulty S. Chrysostom as also S. Ambrose confess the
miracle to be done in the Body of Jesus Christ, in that he passed through the
shut doors by the Omnipotency of God.

S. Jerome in the place noted by the Doctors, writes manifestly that the body
pierced the shut doors, even as the Poets persuade that ye sight of Lynceus
pierced the walls without opening, to see through. The said S. Jerome at that
time did argue upon the nature of ye body, which the Bishop of Jerusalem
(infected with the Heresy of Origin) held was not true in Jesus Christ after
his Resurrection, because he had passed through the shut doors contrary to ye
nature of a body: to who^ S. Jerome (as also other ancients) persuades that
that act^ nothing derogates ye nature of the body, as proceeding of a
supernatural virtue, affirming no less in his first Book against Iouinian:
in this phrase Jesus entered the doors being shut: quod humanoru^ corporum
natura non patitur. And so with others he puttes the miracle in the body of
Jesus Christ.

It is most true that S. Augustine in three Books at the least uses
express opinion that this body passed through the shut doors, and that as
the same was wrought by Gods power above the nature of Bodies, so the Heretics
for all that ought not to deny the true Body of Jesus Christ: this he speaks
in his Book de C^uitate Dei, besides his place de Agone Christiano, and the
Epistle ad Volusianum already alleged.

Epiphanius in his first Book in the Heresy 20. and in the second Book 64.
against the Origenistes, declares that it is but a spiritual body: meaning
that he loses nothing of his corporal substance, but changes and draws to
him new qualities and spiritual perfections convenient to Sprites, as to pass
through the walls without opening, giving example of the body of Jesus
Christ after his Resurrection, who pierced and passed through the doors
being shut: And so judges (with others) that the miracle was done in the
body of Jesus Christ, as pearcing the shut doors, as a Sprite, albeit he
was a true Body.

Cyrillus Alexandrinus determines also (with others) that this miracle happened
in the body of our Lord, who by the same wonder marched above the waters,
contrary to the nature of a body by the power of God, reprehending al such as
stood in any ielous suspicion that Christ's body was not Natural.

By all these authorities, the four fundations before proponed are true, and
therefore it is too great an impudency to seek to corrupt the intent and
faith of so many Aunciente and Learned Christians, to introduce a confusion of
new interpretations. For besides the diversity of Calvin and Beza, the
Ministers auouche two others, as first that the Angel opened the door, as
if Jesus had not had the power to open it himself, or had needed other
opening. The other is, that he made his opening where he would: by which
diversities the Ministers give open declaration, that they know not whereupon
to rest: And (which worse is) they could not allege one only Aunciente,
as Authoure of their fiction, or that is contrary to all the other, since the
Primitive Church, it serves them to nothing, to allege that the iron door in
the Acts of the Apostles opened to S. Peter of himself, for the Doctors did
never deny it: only we said that the Scripture spoke not of the door of the
prisone: And if at the entry of Jesus Christ, the doors had been so opened,
the Evangelist had as easily granted it, as he said they were shut, and as
S. Luke said, that this door of iron opened of himself.

There is no difficulty, that the first that doubted of the body of Jesus
Christ in this world, did not agree of the place touching the doors with the
other Christians. And all be it they thought to serve and aid themselves with
it, in the mainteining of their heristes (as with all the other miracles happened
in the body of Christ above nature) yet the Ancients never denied this fact,
nor the other like to it, for fear to give occasion of error to the
Heretics, but they declared and distinguished what was the nature of the said
body, and that which happened to him by the omnipotency of God: The Christians
for any herisie, did never abandon truth: albeit the Heritikes have sometimes
abused it: But now seeing Christ's body passed through the doors without
opening, it is certain that two bodies have been in one place, and that they
may be so: by which we have well proved our proposition which without either
scripture or ancient testimony, the Ministers deny.

Touching the birth of Jesus Christ without breaking of the Virgin: we say
that a great part of the Auncientes produced for the place of the doors, hold
that this miracle also was done in the body of our Lord, and not in the body of
the Virgin, saving in that she remained in her integrity, without breaking
or opening. And for their reason, the Ancients have alleged the scripture,
Ecce virgo concipiet and pariet, and Ezechiel, porta haec clausa erit as also
S. Ambrose recites in his Epistle.80. wherein is contained a council which S.
Ambrose did assist, determining against Iouinian and other heritikes, that
virginity and integrity remained in the mother of God in her delivery, S.
Augustine repeating the same in the place alleged by the Doctoures in his
first Book against Julian, Chap. 2. And where the ministers say, that the
virgin should not have lost her virginity, though our Lord had issued out as
other men do, in this they are condemned of heresy by the Ancients, who note
Iouinian to derogate the virginity, as holding opinion with the ministers: to
whom the Doctors make this question, what miracle they would acknowledge in the
birthe of our Lord as touching his body, and the virginity of his mother, if
he came from her as other men do from their mothers, as the Ministers write.
And touching that which they allege of Tertullian, Origin, S. Ambrose, and S.
Jerome, the Doctors say that Tertullian and Origin, held such heresy and many
others, which were reproved before Iouinian, and of this they have bin condemned
with him and his consorts. But for the respect of S. Ambrose, it is apparent,
that he believed the contrary, as well by the Council which he assisted, as by
that which he writes in his Book de institutione Virginis: wherein we have to
interpret his words, that Christus vuluam aperuerit, not that it was by
breaking, but by effect of generation and production of his true body out of
the belly of his mother by miracle and virtue supernatural: in such sort,
that even as his Conception was miraculous, so also was his birthe. And aperire
vuluam is a phrase and manner of speech in the Scripture, as to say and name
the first borne, in what sort he might have been borne. And touching S. Jerome
he says nothing of the breaking, but only that the body came out bloody as
he was in the womb of his mother, and to be bloody is not required breaking of
the mother. For conclusion of this Article, we would willingly ask the
Ministers, if they hold as an Article of Faith the virginity of the mother
after her delivery: and if they can prove it by express and inreprocheable
word of God written, because Beza calls in doubt these two points at his
pleasure, and the Religion pretended reformed, amongste other Articles of Faith
of their diverse confessions imprinted, recites sometime the Virginity of the
mother of God after her delivery, and sometimes it is omitted. And in some
Confessions is brought in no more but that Jesus was borne of the virgin
Marie, and only issued of the seed of David.

The Doctoures apply for the Resurrection and issuing of Christ's body
through the stone of the Sepulcher, the most part of the Authorities alleged
by them upon the doors shut, as the absolute reading of the said Authorities
(will make Faith) together with Gregorius Nazianzene in his tragedy of the
Passion of our Lord, who ioynes (as many other Ancients) these three miracles
happened in the body of our Lord above nature, the birth without breaking the
virgin, the resurrection through the stone, and his entry through the doors
shut. We say also that Calvin and Beza make conscience to join with the
Ministers that our Lord rose not again, the Sepulcher being closed and shut,
yea they had rather fall into the frivolous absurdities, and vain Expositions
here before alleged, than discende into the opinion of the Ministers, because
there is more Testimony in the text of the Gospel, that Jesus was risen
before the stone was rolled away by the Angel, as the most part of the
Aunciente Christians do consent: which mean also gives occasion to believe
more easily the Resurrection of our Savior, than if the stone had been taken
away before his Resurrection, for so it might have been more easily said,
that the body was transported, and not raised or risen: neither doothe the
Text bear that the Angel rolled away the stone before the Resurrection, or
when Jesus did rise or rather after, as is great likelihoode in Scripture, in
reason, and all Antiquity. Pope Leo is evil alleged by the Ministers, as
concealing that is written in his Epistle touching the shut doors, as also
producing evil the matter of the Resurrection: for it is not said, that our
Lord did rise after the stone of the monumente was rolled away: But it is
said against the fantastike sort, that the substance put on the Cross,
and that which rested in the Sepulcher, and likewise that which rose again
the third day, the stone of the Monumente being rolled away, is the true
Flesh of Jesus Christ: By which speeches the Pope means not to say that
our Lord did not rise before the stone was reuersed, but only declares, that
the body of Jesus Christ risen, was a true body, and not fantastical, whose
Resurrection appeared by the opening of the monument: And this is the common
interpretation of the Ancient authors, touching the reuersement of the stone.
For end of these Ancient testimonies, we marvel that the ministers seeing
them so manifest and as convinced, not only that God can bring to pass that
two bodies be in one place, but also that he has done it: dare reprochefully
deprave the understanding of the same, and yet they say that the reasons taken
of such and so euidente testimonies, are impertinent, Like as, by like license
(common with the Heritikes) they fear not, without any text of the scripture,
nor any place of the Ancients, to enterprete two bodies penetrating to be no
other thing than one body to give place to an other: of which false and
licentious interpretacion, even the common use of speech amongste the
Philosophers, does condemn them: Like as also their fine example touching
such as walk through the air which moves them, and the birds when they fly,
is far to subtle: And where they vaunt in the said Article, that in denying
two bodies to be able to be in one place by the omnipotency of God, or one
body in two places, they yet advance and magnify the power of God, the same
is as true, as when in all other their erroures by which they oppugn Gods
truth, and blaspheeme it, yet they brag always to advance Gods glory:
seeming hereby that they have need to cover their filthiness and deformity
with some cloak of speech, the better to blind the simple and ignorant.

The ministers have also good reason, not to seek to excuse the
interpretacions of Calvin and Beza, as too frivolous, and yet they prefer
their own much more vain before their Masters: by which may be seen the
agreement between the Masters and Disciples, using all, the foundation of
their religion, which is to believe and prefer before all others their
particulare and private interpretacion and inspiration: where the Ministers say
that the body of our Lord was not invisible to the disciples, of whom is
spoken in S. Luke. 24. but only ye having a swift body, was suddenly
withdrawn, we Object that the sudden departing which S. Ambrose and de Lyra
speaks of, makes not that the body was invisible, according to the Greek
word aphantos, not signifying sudden departure, but incapacitie to be seen
and known: and so the text of the Scripture is apparently for the Doctoures,
as also, that as often as both the ancient and present Divines give example
that Christ made himself invisible, they allege ordinarily this place.

The ministers, who vaunte to rest only upon the pure word of God, for the
exposition of the scripture, bring forth their dreams grounded upon their
own persuasion, as has been seen touching the doors being shut: using
the like license to expound the text of S. Paul, which mainetaines
expressly that our Lord pierced the Heavens: and they say that it is a likely
truth that the Heavens divided and were open: And if they be asked from whence
they fetch this interpretacion, their Answer is from Gods word grounded
of their inward inspiration, by the which they accommodate the saying of S.
Mathevve, that the Heavens were open when the Pillar descended upon our
Lord, as though all the Heavens were divided, and that the spirit could not
descend without the same were opened, being not advised that the scripture in
many places takes the Heaven for the air. And where they allege that S.
Stephen saw the Heavens open when he was stoned, it were more convenient to
the ministers to interpret such visions to be done in spirit, as there is
great likelihoode. Otherwise two miracles must be confessed, the one in the
Division of the Heavens, and the other, in that the sight of S. Stephen pierced
not only into the Heavens, but also even above: where the ministers confess
the body of Jesus Christ is upon the right hand of his Father, which S.
Stephen saw: the same being against the order of God established in the world,
by which it is necessary that there be a certain difference between the eye
seeing, and the thing which is seen: Neither is it less hard, that such a
thing be done, than that two bodies be penetrate: We must not forgette that
oftentimes the scripture in the appearings and spiritual visions, uses this
language, that the Heavens were open, and yet in such cases there was but
spiritual vision, and likewise, but spiritual appearing: And as the Ministers
seek to take the rigor of the word opening of the Heavens, even so they
must not note it strange, if we wrest in like rigor the penetration of the
Heavens, specially in the Article of the Ascension, where is Question of the
body of Jesus Christ, which had already pierced bodies more impenetrable than
the Heaven, which point of penetration of the Heaven, we refer to be more
amply handled an other time, as now to avoid tediousness.

Touching the eight and twentieth Article, where the ministers against
express scripture, defend obstinately, that God of his power can not bring to
pass, that a Camel or Cable enter the eye of a needle, we can not a little
marvel both at their blindness, seeming to see nothing in the midde day, and
at their froward obstinacy: By which, as we can not judge, that they
understand not well their fault, but sin even against their conscience,
oppugning the truth by them well known, so it seems God suffers this to
happen to them in this text and place of the scripture so manifest, to the end
that by this Article the world may understand how far more hardy they are
to give false understandings of scriptures more obscure than this, yea in the
matter of the Ancient Christians which are against them.

But to the end the world understand their great wrong, to deny that our
Lord can bring to pass, that a Camel (or cable) pass through the hole of a
needle, we obiecte, that it were impossible to God to save a rich man, using
this Argument taken of the texts of the Gospel, it is more impossible or hard
that God save a rich man than to bring to pass that a Camel (or cable) pass
through the hole of an Needle: God can not bring to pass (of his omnipotency
(as the Ministers say) that a Camel enter the hole of a needle, then he can
not of his almightinesse make that a rich man be saved and enter into the
kingdom of Heaven.

The Mayor is of the Scripture, the Minor is confessed by the Ministers: and
the consequence is necessary, and according to all Philosophy, he that can not
do the most easiest can not do the most hardest.

The Auncientes also have expounded without gain saying, the present
Scripture, as Origin in his Homily upon this place, saying: it is possible
that a Camel enter the eye of a needle, not for all that, that it be possible
as in respect of men, but to God, like as the manner by which such things may
be done, is known to God, and his Son Jesus Christ, and to him to whom it
is revealed: S. Augustine likewise in his Book de spiritu and littera, Cap. 1.
and 5. writes in this sort to Marcellinus, it seems to thee an absurd thing,
when I tell thee that a man may be without sin, albeit there is none such
found except Jesus Christ thought it to seem absurd to thee, that a thing
may be done, whereof no Example can be showed, seeing (as I believe) thou
doubtest not at all that it was never done that a Camel entered the eye of a
needle, and yet it is said that such a thing is possible to God.

By their Answer to the nine and twenty Article, it may easily be known,
that they beguile and abuse their Disiples, making them believe by fair
words and writings, that Really in the Supper they receive the body of Jesus
Christ, even he that issued out of the womb of the virgin, and was put
upon the Cross for the restoration of mankind.

And they seek to make to understand, that these which put not to the
Sacrament (which they call of the Supper) with the Bread and Wine but some
Spiritual effect only, (as redemption, justice, sanctification, eternal
life, and other gifts and benefits which Jesus Christ brings to his chosen)
diminish the excellency and dignity of the same Sacrament, and that they be
Zuinglians, yea and that over and above such spiritual effects, it must be
believed that the body of Jesus Christ is truly received in the Supper, and
yet they feed an other opinion in their brain.

For when they are pressed to Argue, not being able to sustain that
fantastical presence confessed in their writings, they make themselves
Zuinglians, and return to the spiritual presence of Jesus Christ in the
Supper, the same being as much to say, that bisides the Bread and Wine, they
receive some spiritual effect, and not Really the body, as the Ministers
hold in the present Answer, which as they make manifest by that they recite
of the Apostle S. Paul: so by the same may be gathered what is their opinion
touching the supper, which is, that the body of our Lord Jesus Christ is not
Really, but only by spiritual effect in the hearts of the Faithful. For
the Galathians by the hearing of the preaching of S. Paul, did not receive
Really the body of Jesus Christ crucified, but only had an imagination of the
Cross and Passion of Jesus Christ, and received only the fruit of their
Faith: That is, by that means they were justified and sanctified before God.

The Allegation also which the Ministers make of S. Cyprian, tendes to this
end, to show that in the Supper is received only certain effects
spiritual, which notwithstanding Allegorically are signified by these words
to embrace the Cross of Jesus Christ, to suck his blood. etc. wherein they
deny (albeit against the intent of S. Cyprian in his Sermon of the Supper)
the Real presence of the body of Jesus Christ.

The Doctoures confess that the Argument which they have made, tendes to the
Caluinistes, and not to the Zuinglians, neither did they think that the
ministers would otherwise judge of this Sacrament, than Calvin, Beza and the
other ministers, who vaunte them selves to be ministers of the church of the
Caluinistes, which they call reformed. But those which exhibited to ye Bishops
being at Poissi the Confession touching this Sacrament, used an other manner of
speech.

They without difficulty confessed Really the Body of Jesus Christ to be
present in the Supper, which at this day the Ministers deny with the
Doctoures conferentes. And as far as the Doctoures can judge, the Ministers
be come of Caluinistes, Allemanistes: which such will not well digest, as
maintain the Doctrine of the Church, which they call Reformed, seeing their
principal supposts fail them at need, as unable to answer one Argument
objected by the Doctors, as affirming in their answer to be so far
illumined with the Holy Sprite, which makes them understand and know al
things.

Touching the Article following, they reveal openly their present opinion
touching the presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, because they say,
that the faitheful receive no more in the time of the Gospel, than the
Ancientes before the Law, and under the Law. And it is certain the Ancients
received not Really the body of Jesus Christ, which was not then formed, so
that we must conclude that under the Gospel is not received Really the Body
of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, which the Ministers call the Sacrament of the
Supper.

To the 31. Article, they answer not as in deed they could never answer.
And necessarily they must confess, that in virtue of their Faith they do
that which implies contradiction: for they maintain a thing in one instant
and one place to be present, and not present: neither does their spiritual, or
rather fantastical presence any thing, seeing (according to their Doctrine)
the body cannot be present, but with his dimensions, Locally, Diffinitiuely,
and Corporally, otherwise it were to take clean away, or corrupt the body.
And the manner to be there spiritually, cannot make that the body be not there:
otherwise they say falsely, that it is present in the Supper, and abuse the
world: wherefore it is necessary, that if the body be there (yea spiritually)
if their Doctrine be true of the nature of a body, that the body of Jesus
Christ be Corporally, Diffinitiuely, and Locally in the Supper. Besides,
seeing he is absent, according to their confession, it folowes, that he is not
there present. And as to conclude, the Ministers say, he is there, and that he
is not there: so for an absolute solution, without entering into the principal
of the argument, they think to escape, with obiecting to us certain words
of brief, which we have not yet seen: which we think they have found in
certain Breuiaries of Monks, as that they remember when they were in the
Covent they used so to chaunt and say. But albeit such things were found in the
Breuiaries used in the Romish Church, yet such manner of speech might be
defended in the sense which the Ancients have given, when they said the
Apostles Conficiunt Corpus Christi: Like as also the scripture says, that they
baptize, they forgive sins, and save those whom they convert, which is
understand, as Ministers of God, who of his authority, and as Master,
baptiseth, forgiueth sins, and justifies the faithful persons.

Where the Ministers marvel that the Doctors call faith, human virtue,
considering the great and wonderful effects it woorketh: the Doctors reply,
that they have no great occasion of wonder, seeing that all work, so long as
it is in man, and that it works there with God, is reputed human: as also
ye scripture calls the Faith of man, the work of man. The Doctors delare to
the Ministers, that according to their custom, resting always upon small
things, they follow not that which is the principal in the matter, not
understanding (or faining not to understand) where lies the difficulty of that
which is handled: as they do in their answer upon the Argument proponed by
the Doctors, by which they object that the Ministers by their faith (whether
it may be called Divine or Human) may do more than God can: to which
Objection the Ministers, without entering to the point, answer with songs.

In the 32 Article they pass over very lightly many objections made by ye
doctors: wherein whether there be superfluity or repetition, or whether they be
impertine^t, ye judgment remains to the Reader: notwithstanding al ye, the
doctors will not forbear once again, to require the^ to bring forth some
place of scripture to ground that God cannot bring to pass that one body be in
two places, seeing this consequence is too foolish and vain, God cannot lie:
he cannot then bring to pass, that a body be in two places, for so must they
subsume. Well, God has said and ordained that one body cannot be in two places,
then he cannot make yt it be so: but they shall never teach the truth of the
assumption, or M^nor proposition, the contrary whereof has been verified
sufficiently by many testimonies of the Scripture. We demand also that the
Ministers produce some Ancient, yea a man ever reputed Catholic, that durst
pronounce that God could not bring to pass, that one body be in two places.
But in all their answers they could not bring forth any of that opinion,
except S. Augustine, albeit falsely alleged both in respect of the Letter,
and for the sense of the Letter: neither will we cease to urge as well the
Ministers, as al others, that there is found neither place of Scripture, nor
Book of any Ancient, that God cannot bring to pass, that one body be in two
places.

Touching the last Article, we are fully determined to show by the pure and
express Word of God, interpreted by the common consent of all Antiquity,
that our Lord has instituted the Sacrament and Sacrifice of the Aultare. And
we will teach the effect and virtue of the Mass, according to the
Institution and Ordinance of Jesus Christ, making also to understand that
the Ministers have polluted and defiled the Sacraments instituted by Jesus
Christ.

And lastely that the Supper maintained by the Ministers, is no Sacrament in
any sort, but a profanation of Holy things, containing execrable Blasphemies,
which all the world ought to abhor.

Sunday the xxij. of July, the year aforesaid.
The Answer of the Ministers to the writing of the Doctors sent to them by
the Duke de Neuers xxij. of July about five of the clock in the Evening. 1566.
THe Ministers, before they enter into particulare Answer to the Objections and
Reproaches of the Doctors, seeing in all their speeches without any occasion,
they lay upon them imputation of blasphemy, think good, in their beginning,
to tell them that albeit they have heaped injuries upon them, yet they hold
themselves never the more wronged, and much less to be guilty in blasphemy,
because they repute them for such, no more than our Lord Jesus Christ in the
judgment and opinion of Caiphas the sovereign Sacrificator, and S. Stephen,
upon whom the said crime was urged by the enemies of truth, Act. 7. King.
1.11.
and also Naboth notwithstanding he was innocent: for it is a custom common to
such as hate the truth and the light, to blaspheme that which they
understand not, and so yield to their proper and natural fury (as S. Peter
and Jude write) that impudently they deny things most apparante, and without
shame confess others that are strange and obscure: the same being offered of
the Doctoures to the Ministers, of whom they will hear nothing with
judgment, nor judge their Doctrine uprightly, but seem in all the course of
this Disputation, either to confront them generally without respect, or at
least to give sentence without examination, that what so ever they produce, is
either lies, or matter of blasphemy.

And albeit the Ministers handling the Omnipotency of God according as they
have learned by the consent and contents of the Scriptures, agree always that
he is God Almighty, as being able (without exception) to do what so ever he
will, and that there is no power neither in Heaven nor Earth, which may
hinder, change, or delay in any sort the effect and perfect execution of his
eternal and immovable councelles: yet his Omnipotency ought not to be
stretched without discretion or distinction to all things generally, that men
may conceive and imagine in their fond fancies, but to those only which
neither are nor can be, contrary to his justice, bounty, and wisdom, nor by
consequence against his holy and eternal will, wisdom and truth, which is
and shall be for ever to do al things well and wisely with number, weight, and
measure without any iniquity, disorder, or contradiction in any thing he
doothe. All which things being well understand and considered, are able to
clear the Ministers to all indifferent people of the slanderous imposition of
the Doctors, raised and falsely pronounced by them, to make us hateful to the
world. And to prove it by degrees, and set a truth of their slanders, they
change and alter almost all the speeches of the Ministers, either by additions
or retractions, as knowing, that without that policy, they were without mean
both to ground their said reproaches, and give them any color of likelyhoode:
which shall now appear by the deduction and particulare confutation of their
pretended blasphemies against us.

First they accuse us as to have said, that Gods Omnipotency ought not to
be measured, but by the only things which are conformable to his will, and not
to derogate his wisdom, his truth, his nature, or the order which he has
established in the world. Wherein to verify their accusation and slander,
they choppe and hacke this sentence, taking the last part of it only, which
they have separated from the rest, and which the Ministers had limit to the
whole for a more express and clear declaration how Gods Almightinesse
ought to be known, believed, and woorshipped of all the world: neither have
they understand the term of order according to the sense and meaning of the
Ministers, who signify thereby the estate and disposition which God has
established, conserues, and enterteines in all things by his eternal
providence and immovable will, only to intercept that no confusion happen in
his works, according to ye Diffinition of S. Augustine in his Books de
Ordine, and himself has used in the fifth Book of his Confessions: the
which being not understand by the Doctors, they have translated the opinion
of the Ministers to the ordinary and accustomed course of Nature, and to the
moving of the creatures which be in this world. Wherein, to procure a more
exception to the Doctrine aforesaid, they obiecte the miracles that God did
above nature, inferring thereby that God doothe and may do against his Order
established.

To the which the Ministers answer, that albeit the miracles be done over
and above the ordinary course of nature, yet they are not done contrary to the
Order aforesaid, because al things referred to the providence and ordinance of
God, be well done and rightely disposed, notwithstanding their reason and
Order be many times unknown to men, according to the opinion of Solomon, God
doothe all things in their time: to the which may be appropriate a testimony
out of the Sentences of S. Augustine, 283. and 284. God, who is the Creator
and Conseruer of Natures, doothe nothing in his miracles contrary to nature.

Neither doothe it follow, that that which is new in custom, is contrary to
reason etc. whereof if the Doctors will know further, let them read the
second Book made by the said Holy Personage of the Order, and likewise what
he writes of the miracles in the fifth and sixth Chapter of the third Book of
the Trinity. This answer may suffice to confute the two other pretended
blasphemies which follow in the objection of the Doctors.

And touching the fourth we answer, that the will of God may be considered
in two sorts, as the Divines teach: which is, as it is declared to men by
words, signs, and effects, and according as it is retained and hid in
himself: the one is called, Will known by signs, and the other the Will of
the good pleasure of God. For the regard of the first consideration, the
Ministers confess, (as heretofore they have said to the doctors) that God can
do many things which he will not. But to the other we say, his will is equal
with his power as also his power (in that regard) is equal to his will:
According to which consideration ought to be understood and interpreted the
sentence of Tertullian, alleged by us, and evil applied by the Doctors to
the Monarchians, as best may judge all such as heedefully read that place
produced by us, who to answer an other reproach of the said Doctoures,
accusing us of wrong to the Auncientes, as to accept some matter of the
Omnipotency of God, are here enforced to reiterate Theodorete in his third
Dialogue, who writes as follows: We must not say, without some
determination, that all things are possible to God: for who so holds such
absolute opinion, comprehendes all things as well good as evil, which ought
not in any sort be attributed to God.

By which may appear, that neither this good Author, nor the others before
alleged by us, would not submit all things indifferently to Gods power.
But do except what so ever is contrary to his will and essence.

To be short, to qualify the difference between the Ministers, who hold it
impossible one body to be in diverse places at one instant, and the Doctors
which affirm the contrary: there is but one mean, which is, that the
Doctors, without entering into so long a circuit, and wasting of speech in
alleging so many superfluous matters, do prove summarily by one only place
of the Scripture, that God will do it.

To know whether the Ministers have well or evil alleged S. Augustine, as to
prove that a body cannot be without place and measures, and also whether they
have well or evil defended, that the Quantity is essential in a body, and not
accidental (as the Doctors hold) they lay themselves upon the upright
judgment of the Readers of the Acts of this conference.

Touching that which follows in the writing of the Doctors, that there is no
place above the Heavens, wherein Jesus Christ is not comprehended and
contained: that the Bodies and Sprites are therein differently without any
distinction and distaunce of place.

The Ministers say, that touching all those points, they rather believe the
Scripture and express word of God (which they have alleged) than all the
suttleties and Sophistries which the Doctoures or others are able to bring
forth, of their vain Philosophy. Besides the same is expressly contained
and taught in one of the Articles of our faith, in this phrase, From thence
shall he come to judge both the quick and the dead. By which must be noted,
that there is Vnde, which is an Aduerbe, signifying place.

Touching the fourth and fifth Articles to know whether the Ministers have
imposed any untruth upon the Doctors, they send the Readers to the acts of the
former conference, as also to learn in what sense, and to what end the
Ministers have alleged the Ancients, which they may more easily perceive by
the reading and diligent observation of their places and sentences there
inferred.

Touching the sixth Article, wherein the Doctors had rather confess their
Canons to be false, than in deferring the authority of the same, to auowe the
body of Jesus Christ to be true, and being true, that it is necessary that it
be in one certain place: the Ministers answer, that by the observation of S.
Augustines place (from whence is taken the said Canon) it is easy to judge
that the term Oportet is much more convenient there, than this word Potest.

To the eighth Article the Ministers answer, that a substance without
quantity, neither is, or can be any way a body, whilst it is and remains so
and the reason is, because they are two diverse predicaments, that of the
substance and yt of the quantity, under the which one self thing for one
self respect cannot be in any sort comprehended.

Besides, Christ alleges no other reason, to declare his body was not a
sprite, but that he had members and parts, which because of their measures,
might be handled and touched: Whereupon it follows, that without that, a
substance can not be a body. And touching the difference that should rest
according to the opinion of the Doctors, between our souls and bodies, exempt
from quantity (if the same were possible) we say, that albeit they were
substaunces different both in number and species, yet they should be like
touching genus, and that both the one and other should be contained under the
kind of substance not corpored.

The ministers pass over the ninthe Article, as a matter but of repeticion of
words, and sufficiently answered already.

Touching the tenth Article, we say in the first place, that the consequence
whereof there is Question, can not otherwise be defended by the Doctoures,
than by the rule that says, of one absurdity may be inferred all things: we
complain bisides of the time which the Doctoures make us lose in the reading
of so many matters already answered, and which seem so often repeated by
them, for none other end than to fill paper, and persuade the world that they
do something. For in the first place, the Evangelist says not (as the
Doctoures pretend) that Christ entered not by the shut doors, but only that
he came the doors being shut, so that he speaks not there in any sort of
the manner of his entry, nor how the doors were opened, nor yet of any other
part of the house by the which he entered. And as all the sayings of ye doctors
cannot be founded neither on the scripture, nor any authority of the Ancients
by them alleged, who stand rather against, than with them: So, for
conclusion, they have no other ground of their opinion, than their singular
conjectures and imaginations, with sinister interpreting the wrytings of the
Ancients, to whose Faith they would constrain and assubiect the Church, to
the end that having laid this foundation, they may build afterward
thereupon, all their absurdities and erroures which they mean to deduce. And
where they presupposed, that when Jesus entered the doors shut, when he walked
upon the waters, and came out of his grave, those miracles were done rather in
his person, than in other things: Iustine wrytes the contrary, that without any
mutation happening in his body, nor in the body of S. Peter, he brought to
pass by his divine virtue, that the Sea against his nature, served him as a
way: As also S. Hillarie says to the same respect, that by his power he did
all things passible, with whom S. John Chrysostom consents, as attributing all
that to a power Divine, and confessing frankely that he was ignorant of the
manner and fashion thereof. By mean whereof the Ministers marvel much of the
presumption of the Doctors, to offer to determine a thing left indecided by the
scripture and the Ancients, and touching the which (according to the wise
opinion of S. Hillarie) both the sense and the word do fail, and the truth
of the fact exceedes the capacity of human reason. How then dare the
Doctors say so impudently, that Christ's body passed through the doors, that
there was penetration of Dimensions, and that two bodies were in one place,
seeing that of all this, there is not one only syllable either in the
scripture, or witnessed by the Auncientes, who confess (as is said) that
their understanding and senses were to weak to comprehend or declare the
reason of such a Mystery.

Touching the birthe of Jesus Christ, the ministers stand upon the scripture,
whose clear opinion is, yt the virgin was big bellied, she brought forth
and was delivered, she gave suck, and that in the delivery, aperta est vulua:
And yet does none of all this derogate or prejudice the state of her
Virginity or integrity, the same consisting in this one point, that she
neither knew, nor was known of any man.

We say moreover, that in believing this, we follow the scripture, and by
consequence can not err, nor be Heretics, neither likewise any other that
assubiecte their sense to Gods word, as the Auncientes by us alleged, have
done in this.

In the Article following, proponed by the Doctoures touching the manner of
Christ's Resurrection, it contains nothing but conjectures and reproaches, with
superfluous and weary repeticions, which we have already satisfied at the full
by our former Aunsweres.

And what so ever folowes after in the writings of the Doctoures, are but
wrongs and injuries in place of reasons and arguments, the same being the
last shifte of contencious wits, who being destitute of reason, and not able
to yield to truth, defend themselves with clamoures and sinister impositions.

The Doctoures had some reason in their interpretation of the word Aphantos,
if there followed autois, but the Euangeliste says apantoin, showing clearly
that the interpretation of the said place and understanding of S. Ambrose (in
which the ministers do settle) is better than the exposition of the Doctoures.

Touching the opening of the Heavens, we Answer that they could not fail,
using the phrase of the Scripture, who says clearly, that at the Baptism of
Jesus Christ, the Heavens were divided, and open when S. Stephen was stoned.
And as we take it for an imagination of man, to apply to the air, the
signification of the Heaven: So we think it should be to diminishe the
majesty of God, and Jesus Christ raised above all the Heavens, to establishe
the throne of his Majesty so low as in the air. Neither is there any
resemblaunce or likelihoode in the saying of the Doctoures touching the being
of two bodies in one place, and the persuasion of the Ministers of the sight
of S. Stephen, which stretched even to the Heavens, because the one is a
miracle of Gods power in nature, and the other a wonder against nature, and
contrary to Gods will.

In the Article following, the Doctoures do falsely impose upon us an opinion,
that it was a thing impossible to God, that a Camel pass through the eye of an
needle, seeing in our former Aunsweres, we never touched that point, but only
that part of the sentence, speaking of rich men. But now to Answer the
Objection and fully resolve it, we say, ye even as God may save a rich man, by
changing him, and purging his heart of all vain trust and presumption,
wherewith being infected, he is incapable to enter into the kingdom of heaven:
even so it is no less easy for him to make a Camel pass by the creuise of a
needle, having circonsised and dug the greatness of the same, with other
things which might let him to pass.

In the first place, that the Supper which is celebrated in the reformed
Church, is the true institution and ordinance of the true Son of God.

And after, that the end for the which it was instituted, is, to assure the
Faithful of the true participation which they have in the flesh of Jesus
Christ crucified for their salvation, and in the blood shed for remission of
their sins, and lastly for the confirmation of the new aliance which God
has contracted with his people.

Thirdly, we say it is necessary that the bread and wine, remain in their
propre substance, yea after the Consecration, and that other ways they could
not be sacraments of the body and blood of Jesus Christ.

Finally we say, that ye unfaithful presenting themselves to the supper, can
not (by mean of their infidelity) receive other thing than the outward signs
of bread and wine, and that to their judgment and condemnation.







We say moreover, that the sacrifice of the Romish priests

We say, the separation of the priest in the Mass from the

It is an intolerable Idolatry to worship bread and wine:

There rest yet two points in the wrytings of the Doctoures, whereof we
admonish them: the one is, that we never found in the scripture, that faith
was a human work, John. 6. Ephe. 2.
but that it is a work of God, and a gift which he gives to his chosen: The
other is, that we confess not to be able to produce any Ancient author which
has said in plain terms, that one body cannot be in one instant in diverse
places, because the contrary seems so absurd and strange, and so contrary to
reason and faith, which all faithful men ought to have: that we thought such
opinion could never find place in the heart of any professing to be a Christian.

To end this Answer, we could with greater delight entreat upon the
questions aforesaid, than dispute upon the opening of the doors, the
sepulcher and the heavens: as, (to our grief) we have done those days passed:
and that for two reasons. The one, because the decision and resolution of such
questions can not be drawn and gathered of the scripture. And the second,
because it can not much serve either to the advancement of the honor and
glory of God, or to the relief and instruction of his Church.

Thursday. 25. of Iulie the year aforesaid.
The Reply of the Doctors to the vvriting of the Ministers, sent unto them by
the Duke of Neuers, the.25 of Julie 1566. about.8. of the clock in the Evening.
WHere the ministers complain of their wrong to be called blasphemers, as
making themselves innocent with Jesus Christ, S. Stephen and Naboth, upon
whom such crime was falsely imposed: the Doctoures say, that in this, they
follow the good Donatistes, who stood always upon complaint of the great
wrongs and injuries which they said they endured of the Catholics: And yet
the Histories stand as witnesses of their conformity with Jesus Christ, S.
Stephen, and Naboth, and also how nearly these ministers resemble those holy
examples. The Anabaptists might have said no less to them of the reformed
church, when they call them Heretics: And so much also might have said and
did say, Seruet, who for his blasphemies was burned at Geneua, esteeming
himself happy to be judged by Calvin, a blasphemer for his Doctrine, and to
endure the sentence and pain of death. Therefore we must not believe the
Minysters to be other than the blasphemers, though they shake of that name no
less impudently than any other heretic. But it behoues to examine whether
their Doctrine import blasphemy or not: we say, there is no blasphemy more
worthy of greater curse, than to deny the almightinesse of God, which is no
less than to deny simply that God is not, which denial contains a Theme.
For to take from God, that which is proper to him according to his nature, is
as much to say, he is not God: according to S. Basile in an Homely of his
entitled, God is not author of evil: He writes, that it is no less blasphemy
to say God is Author of evil, than to say that God is not God, because that to
take from God his bounty, which is natural to him, is wholely to spoil him
of his Divinity, wherein the like may be said of his omnipotency, which who
so denies or diminishes, denies also his Divinity.

The question then is to know, if the ministers will abolishe the omnipotency
of God, not in propre terms (for they seem to confess it) but in affirming
that his almightinesse is measured according to his will: so that he cannot do
but that he will, with other such like propositions contained in their former
Answers: which whether we have proved or not, to contain blasphemies, we lay
us upon every sound judgment, which has any way serched the holy scriptures,
or the books of the Ancient Christians: which as they may also be known by
the frivolous Aunswers of the ministers to our last Objections, so, for our
parts, we marvel not much, if they be deceived in the nature of the
almightinesse, seeing they err in the ground, as not knowing wherein it
consists, and why God is called almighty: For they say, they have learned of
the Scripture that God is omnipotent, because he can do all that he will, and
nothing can resist him: the same being as a sign of the power of God, but
(under correction,) it is not the matter wherein it consistes, and therefore to
know it, it must be considered according to his Object, that is, according to
things possible to do, so yt there is nothing possible, which God can not do:
All thing (without exception) is esteemed possible, where is not found
contradiction to be, and not to be: and that comes not by the fault of the
power of God (who can do al things) but by the repugna^cie of the thing that
can not be: which the Ministers in the beginning had perhaps put in some
Answer, were it not, that because upon certain interrogatories, they Answered
that Gods almightinesse must be measured according to his will, and thinking to
save this error, they are slipped into diverse others, which they can not shift
of, without falling into an infinite absurdity, as not to confess to have
failed: Wherein their offense is more, in yt they go about to limite and bound
ye power of God, and not suffer it to stretch to al things generally, yt the
sprite of man may conceive and imagine, seeing (of the contrary) it is not to
be douted, that Gods power is great above the conceit and imaginations of
man's spirit, yea it is infinite and incomprehensible, as S Paul says, God
can do more, than we eisher demand or understand. And where the ministers
say, that God can do only all things which are not contrary to his justice,
his wisdom, his bounty and truth, and therefore he can not do all things
generally: it has been already told them, that to be able to do things
contrary to the justice, bounty, wisdom, and truth of God, was not power but
empower. And by that also as ( S Augustine says) in a place alleged by us in
our former Objection, that he can not do such things, it is an argument of
his almightinesse, and no restraint of the same.

And where the ministers infer, that because God cannot do such things, by
consequence, he cannot do any thing which is contrary to his wisdom and
eternal will, which is, and shall be for ever to do all things well and wisely,
with number, poise, and measure, yea without that there be or shall be any
iniquity and contradiction in all that he does: it may here be seen how the
ministers disguise that which is in controversy, concealing the matter of
their former writing touching the order established in the world, against the
which they said God could do nothing, with other matters of blasphemy, which
as we did argue, so they durst not revive them in their last answer, as in
respect their conscience urged them, and kindled a knowledge, that as such
affirmatio^s could not be sustained: so they could not avoid them, but in
denying to have written them, and so accuse us of slander, as to have altered
and changed their matters by additions or retractions: for our purgation
wherein we send them to our last objection, where, as the words are produced in
the first Article, so the said blasphemies are drawn out of ye propre words of
the first article of the ministers. And we refer our selves to ye collation of
our said last writing, with yt of ye ministers: only it is, as also most
certainly it will be found, ye we have faithfully recited the propre words
of the ministers, which as they would not aduow in themselves, so it will be
known at the last, that til now they have maintained propositions of
blasphemy, and that therein we have done them no wrong, as pardoning their
persons, and being content to speak our simple advise of their Doctrine.

The Ministers, to show their just cause to accuse us of slander, say in the
first place, that we have cut of their proposition, which was such, that the
almightinesse of God ought not to be measured but by the things which only are
conformable to his will, and do not derogate his wisdom, his truth, his
nature, nor the order which he has established in the world: and that of
this, the last part only is taken by the Doctors, who for their purgation
say, that they have always considered what was put in co^trouersi, which is,
if God can bring to pass, that one body be in two places. And to examine the
truth of this Question, before they committed it to writing, they laid the whole
with every part of the Ministers proposition: and have thus argued, that God
can do al things which are conformable to his will, the same neing known when
there is nothing that derogates either his wisdom, his truth, his nature, or
the order which he has established in the world: as the Ministers hold, one
body to be in two places, derogates not the wisdom of God, seeing for all
that, God cannot be but wise, it does not derogate his truth, for he has
never said, that he could not do it, neither yet his nature, for if he
should, he should forbear to be God: th if there be any repugnancy, it
should be in this, that it would derogate the order which God has established
in ye world, the same being the cause that they rest not but upon the last
Article. And we think sure, the Ministers would not say, that to be able to
make a body to be in diverse places, were a thing repugnant either to the
wisdom, truth, or nature of God, saving in that they judge it repugnes the
order which God has established in ye world. Besides, the Ministers having
laid the said proposition as a Rule to know what God can do, when they would
accomodate this Rule to the matter in contention, they ought afterward to
say so, to what things repugne that which the Doctors prefer that one Body
in one instant may be in diverse places: but they say and write only what
thing, that is to say, Order etc. which Relative cannot accord but with his
former Antecedent, by which may clearly appear, that the Ministers incur the
crime of slander, which falsely they obiecte to us.

And where they say, we take not the term of the Order established in the
world, in the sense they mean it, we answer, that we have construed the
term according to the understanding which the Ministers have given of it,
according to our judgment of their speeches, and phrases thereof.

For when was question to bring in any miracle done by Jesus Christ contrary
or above the nature of things created, the Ministers had always their recourse
to the common order of nature, as when speech was uttered of the doors
shut, the coming forth of the Grave, the Virgyns womb, and of one Body to
be in diverse places, the Ministers used no other reason to withstand it, than
that all this was contrary to the Order established in the world touching the
nature of the Body, which as it cannot be understand but of the common order
we see in nature, so the Doctoures have therefore brought in against them,
that God cannot do a miracle contrary to the order established in the world,
taking it as the Ministers have declared in their former answers, against the
order of nature, as knowing (for our parts) that the Ancients observed not
this difference above nature, or contrary to nature: which appears by
Tertullian heretofore alleged, where is said, that God can bring to pass
contrary to nature, that a man flee as well as a bird. But we will not stay
upon rigor of words, but apply to the Ministers with whom we confer: who
call a work against the order established in the world, a body to be in diverse
places, because it impugnes the common disposition and property of bodies: by
which reason the Doctors hold, that al other miracles ought also to be
accounted contrary to the order established in the world, because they are
against the common disposition and property of nature.

And following still the understanding which the Ministers now give of the order
established in the world, for the estate and disposition which God has
appointed, conserues and enterteines al things by his eternal providence and
immovable will: to guide al things directly, and provide that no confusion
happen in his works. Here the Ministers commit eftsoons a new blasphemy
against Gods Omnipotency: for he may wholly change, alter, and destroy such
order as he has established in the world (albeit he will never do it) and
raise a new world more perfect than this. And if it were so that he could do
nothing contrary to this order, his power were terminable and limited: for he
could not do but certain effects according to the order which he had
established in the world, which should happen not by the repugnancy of the
Creatures, but because God should bind even his own hands: And so (contrary
to the Scripture) his hand should be shortened, and his power restrained and
lymited: from which blasphemy flow infinite others, as shall be well declared by
us, upon occasion and due opportunity.

Touching the second and third Blasphemies noted by the Doctors, the
Ministers say, they have satisfied in one word by a new interpretation of
the order of the world, which falls out nothing to purpose, to dissolve the
Arguments produced by the Doctors.

And the Ministers pass over the places of Scripture alleged, which open the
Blasphemy, and dissemble the contradiction of the Doctrine, with Caluines
opnion touching Gods providence in the order established in the world: like as
also they spare to answer our objection that from ye third Blasphemy many
others do flow, fearing least in confessing them they heap not blasphemy
upon blasphemy, and by that mean make their Doctrine hateful to all the world.

To answer the fourth Blasphemy, the Ministers use a distinction of the Will
of God, which may be considered in two sorts, the first is called, Will
known by signs, and the other a will of his good pleasure. According to the
first they confess, that God can do more than he will, and not according to
the second, which is (as they say) equal with the power of God, and hid and
unknown to men: which distinction, if it ought to have place, we say, that the
fundation upon which they fix the truth pretended of this proposition, God
cannot bring to pass, that one body be in diverse places, is wholly reuersed:
For they will have Gods power measured according to his will: not according to
the second, which is hid from men, so that it must needs be according to the
first, by which they confess, that God can do more than he will. By which it
follows, that their Rule which they have given to measure the power of God, is
false: for it cannot be measured by his will, seeing he can do more than he
will.

The Doctors say further, that the Ministers ought not require them to prove,
that God would that one body were in two places, to show that he could do
it: for the Doctors would obiecte to them, that, to teach that God can do
any thing, we must not prove that before he would do it: seeing that
(according to their confession) God can do more than he will.

We say further, that seeing the will of God appears not to us but by signs,
words, and effects, and that the order established of God in the world,
according to his providence, (which the Ministers agree withal) is hid to men,
that the Ministers cannot affirm, and show that God has established such an
order in the world, that one body cannot be in diverse places: for it behooved
them to teach and instruct of such ordinance of God, and declaration of his
will. Many times they have been required to prefer only one place of
Scripture, where such will of God is manifest, or where it is said, that he
cannot bring to pass, that one body be in diverse places.

Touching the place of Tertullian, we leave to every direct judgment the
understanding of the same. And as for Theodorete, we find him evil alleged by
the Ministers, as woorking more against them, than he aides them. For where he
writes that we must not say indeterminately, that God can do al things,
comprehending therein both good and evil: in this he makes no restraint of
Gods Almightinesse, but (of the contrary) he amplyfieth it, because that not
to be able to do evil things, is a virtue and power, as has been heretofore
amply recited.

Where the Ministers require us to show that God would that one Body be in
diverse places, we answer, that they are two different questions, if God
can do it, and if he would do it.

And seeing it may be confessed of all Christians (as in deed it ought to be)
that the power is in God, it may be easy to prove the Will by the word of
the Supper, and the Ascension which they of the Religion pretended reformed,
have in custom to deprave and wreste by the impossibility which they feign to
be in God, to put one body in two places.

The Doctors leave also to the judgment of the Readers, whether the ministers
have alleged S. Augustine to purpose or not, like as concerning the
quantity, whether it is essential to be a body or not, we never called it
in doubt, that it was not essential, speaking of a body as the Philosophers
do, In predicamento quantitati^ (...) is to know if it be (...) certain
place (...) it is not (...) ^dy, w^ (...) d^ (...) as that which they allege
to confirm that our Lord is in a place above the Heavens, is too frivolous,
seeing that by the same reason they might conclude, that the Divinity should
be circumscripte. And there be Aduerbes signifying place, when in the scripture
it is spoken of the Divinity, as well as when there is speech of the Humanity
of Jesus Christ.

Where the Ministers say, we confess our Canons to be false, it is a
manifest slander: For we acknowledge no Canons, if they derive not from the
Councelles, and other Authentike Books, and not as they are gathered by any
particulare man, as is the Compilation of Gratian, to whom there is no further
faith given, than he deserves that is recited by him. For Resolution of the
eighth Article, we send the Ministers to the Phisophers Schole to learn that
there is in the Predicament of substance a Body which is Species of
Substance, and in the predicament of Quantity an other body, which is Species
of quantity: and also to learn that the body which is of quantity, is
Accidental (and not essential) to the body of the predicament of substance.

Besides the Ministers err against all Philosophy, to call a Substance
material, incorpored. But the Doctors will not stand upon those things, and
are sorry they have not to do with men better principled in Philosophy, who
would (...) ^son than the Ministers do.

(...) Consequence of two Bo^ (...) be in two pla^ (...) and like in^ (...)
^e if the (...) the (...) passion) they would examine the testimonies of the
Auncientes, and reasons drawn from the same. But by this we prove, that when
there is any thing that presses the Ministers, it is then they set a good
countenance, and make show to have good right. Besides, the Doctoures
marvel much how the Ministers dare affirm that Iustine, and all the
Auncientes have not put the miracle of the doors in the body of Jesus Christ,
seeing Iustine makes this express question, how it is possible, that a body
gross be not let to pass through the doors shut: in the answer of which
question, they conclude it, that because that miracle was done in the nature of
the Body of Jesus Christ, the Apostles judged it was not a true Body, but a
Sprite. As if the Body had been transnatured into a sprite, which Iustine
says, did not happen, but that without any change of nature, such operation
to pass through the doors shut, was given to the Body of Jesus Christ's by
the Omnipotency of God: as also Iustine says, not that any miracle was done
in the Sea, when Jesus walked thereuppon, but that by the Almightinesse that
was in him, he made it portable, without change of the nature of his Body, or
of the Sea, notwithstanding the miracle was in his Body, which contrary to
his nature did so walk.

It is not inoughe to allege S. Hylarie, that the power of God made place to
the Body of our Lord, for he doothe not only auouche that, but adds the
manner of the fact: which is, that the Body passed without change, or
diminishing his nature, or without any opening.

And yet notwithstanding he passed by the operation of the Omnipotency which
wroughte in his Body piercing the close and shut places, Nihil (inquit)
cessit ex solido Parictum, with other like speech which he uses, by which
cannot be understand any other thing, than a penetration of many Bodies.

S. Chrysostom disputes expressly, that contrary to his nature, he passed
through the doors shut, as well as out of the belly of the Virgyn without
breaking: neither does he say simply, that he is ignorante wherein consisted
the facts (seeing he discribes it) but he amplifieth the virtue of ye fact,
and says, that the reason and greatness cannot be comprehended, because it
proceeded of the power of God incomprehensible.

Touching al which points, the Doctors refer themselves to the reading of
the Books, without any further debate against the Ministers, who think
always to abuse the ignorance of such as believe them, to deny or affirm
what they think good. And as we grieve and are weary to reiterate the reasons
herebefore so familiarely and clearly deduced, so by the euasions of the
Ministers so often repeted, we are enforced eftsoons to intrude that, which by
common consent of the Ancients, they ought to believe, touching the Articles.

We much marvel of the manner of Answers of the ministers, who without regard
to the matter objected to them, say what they think good of the points
proponed, and not answer to the Arguments: as in the Article that touches
the birth of Jesus Christ: in the deduction whereof, we have brought forth
many testimonies of the Ancients, holding that our Lord came myraculously from
the belly of his mother, as he was also conceived. Wherein as the said Ancientes
affirm, that that Nativity was done without any breaking to the body of the
Virgyn, so they condemned in Heresy al such as held the contrary: which the
Ministers seek yet to maintain, and for all their answer affirm it staying
(as they say) upon the Scripture, and dare not openly say, that they reject
the judgments of the Aunciente and Primitive Church, to repose upon their
own sense, which notwithstanding appears clearly enough in their Answer
upon this Article, wherein they falsely apply the Scripture, as though it
contained that in the Birth of our Lord, A perta fuerit vulua Virginis.

And where they say, that that disclesing impugnes not her Corporal Virginity
(by which the question is mente) they belly the Resolution of the Auncientes,
who have determined upon this matter.

In the Article of the resurrection, whether there be other matters than
conjectures, the reading of the Objection of the Doctors shall witness, the
same being to be seen of such as desire to know the truth. And where, upon
the end of the Article of the Resurrection, the ministers complain that we
lay wrongs and scoffs upon them, we doubt not but they take in displeasure,
that their suttleties and manners of doing are discovered: which, if they were
well known, the world would not be so simply beguiled, as heretofore they
have been.

The Resolution pretended by the ministers, as being not written aphantos
autois, but apauton, is not pertinent. For be it in what sort so ever, our Lord
was invisible to his Disciples, whether it was by sudden vanishing away or
otherwise, the which vanishing in a body present at the eye not troubled, can
not be done but that the body is made invisible to them. And how so ever it be,
the Greek text bears invisible and unseen.

Touching the Article for the opening of the heavens, the ministers (according
to their custom) answer not directly. For it is not said that the Heavens
were divided or open, when he mounted thither, as in the baptism of Jesus
Christ and the vision of S. Stephen: but the scripture says expressly, that
Christ pierced the heavens, and not that the heavens disclosed to him: Neither
can the ministers forbear to reproach us, in deprauing the understanding of
our writings, the same being witnessed in this present Answer, wherein they
feign to understand that in that text of the scripture importing that Christ
pierced the heavens, we would signify the air under the name of the heavens,
which never entered into our thought: only we said, that the scripture many
times speaking of the opening of the Heavens, by the Heavens, means the air:
which ought not to be applied to the opinion that our Lord pierced the
heavens. By this manner of Answer, the ministers think to make forgotten the
force of the reasons of the Doctoures, whose speech was thus: if when it is
spoken in the Scripture, that the Heavens were open, we must wrest the words
with rigor, and understand that truly the Heavens did divide: we must in like
sort, when the Scripture says that Jesus pierced the Heavens, take this
word pierced in his propre signification, and with rigor, which impugnes
directly the division or opening, as things contrary one to an other: To which
reason it gives none other Answer, than ordinarily to the other arguments of
the said Doctors.

Touching the difference which they put between ye sight of S. Stephen, which
stretched even to the high heaven, and the being of two bodies in one place,
and that the one is a miracle of nature, and the other a wonder against nature
and the will of God: They should do much (as being good secretaries of the
council and will of God) if they could teach the Doctoures, that God would
the one, and could not will the other, and so there would be reason in their
saying, as to show what difference they assign between both.

The inconstancy of the Ministers is known in the Article of the Camel,
which is, whether God can make him pass through the eye of a needle: For in
their first Answer upon our Objection, they said without any distinction,
that it was a thing impossible to God to bring to pass, that a Camel (or
cable) entered the hole of a Needle.

And in their second Answer, they allege, that Christ, saying what was
impossible to men, is possible to God, pretendes no other thing than to Answer
to the Question proponed by his Disciples, who may be saved: whereunto he
answered that that was impossible to men: And that also that sentence of Jesus
Christ ought not to be understood but of the salvation and conversion of the
rich men only: The which speech exclusive (when the ministers affirm that
our Lord, saying: what is impossible to men, is possible to God, ought not to
be understand but of the salvation of rich men) shows clearly inoughe that
the Ministers meant to say by their Answer, that our Lord did not mean to
comprehend (under this proposition what is impossible to men, is possible to
God) the possibility that a Camel may pass through the eye of a needle: as
if this proposition were not to understand universally, of which our Lord
inferres this particulare, it is possible to God to save a rich man: yea, he
speaks universally by express words, omnia apud Deum possibilia sunt: we
desire such as shall read this present writing to consider the escapes of the
Ministers, whose good custom is to disauowe and deny the errors which they
maintain, when by the truth they are convinced.

Now the ministers, giving over the defense that God can not bring to pass
that a Camel pass through the eye of a Needle, have invented a most
frivolous interpretation, in confessing that God can do it, but the mean should
be, in that God might cut of, and diminishe the greatness of a Camel, and all
other things that might let him to pass: But the text can not brook such a
gloss, seeing our Lord speaks of a thing altogether impossible to men: which
should not be: For albeit it were impossible for a man to make and produce a
Camel of so little thickenesse and greatness, as he might pass through the
eye of a Needle, yet if God produced such one, or if he did proportion or
fashion so far the greatness and thickness of a Camel, and that a man
held him, he might make him pass.

But there is no Question to produce a Camel, or to make him great or little,
but only to make him pass, which should be no miracle in respect of the
passage, if he were so little, but only in regard of the production of such
a Beast, or change of his quantity. And in taking this name of Camelus for a
Cable (which Calvin finds the better) the absurdity of this new exposition
will appear the better: For a man may so much extenuate a cable, by drawing out
his matter whereof he is made, that in the end he might make it pass through the
creuise of a Needle. Besides, it might be easy for a man to make a Needle,
whose hole might be so large, that a cable (yea a Camel) might pass therein:
But the scripture speaks of things impossible to a man, and according as they
be in their nature: Therefore as we must take the hole of a needle in his
little and strait quantity, so must we take a Camel (or cable) in his
natural greatness, neither were the Auncientes ever so subtle, as to invent
such politic interpretations, which can not be red without laughing.

But they can not so cunningly escape with this fine exposition, that the world
sees not clearly enough how they deny that Gods power can stretche so far,
as to make, that a Camel remaining in his crokednesse and thickenesse may
pass through the hole of a needle, but only, when, by the power of God he is
brought in quantity proportionable to the hole of the needle: the same being
against the express text of the scripture, and far from the exposition of
the Aunciente interpreters. Notwithstanding that, bisides the literal sense,
they conster the Camel sometimes Allegoricallie, which Allegorical exposition
takes not away the truth of the literal sense, no more than the Acts of
Jesus Christ forbear to be true, albeit the interpreters expound them
Allegoricallie, wherein the ministers are abused, as thinking, because they
have read some interpretation other than literal in S. Jerome, that the
comparison which our Lord uses in this behalf, is also a Parable: which is
false: For it is a true argument that our Lord uses to declare his power to
save a rich man, as being a matter of more difficulty, than to make a Camel
pass through the eye of a needle.

To conclude this Article, we tell them once again, that of the denial of the
scope of Gods omnipotency, do follow many other absurdities, which we ca^ not
otherwise term than blasphemies: as, that by Gods almightinesse two bodies
can not be in one self place: that God can not make a body without
circumscription of place: That Christ did not enter, nor could enter by the
doors shut: That he did not, nor could rise again, but that the stone of
the Monumente was taken away: that he is not, nor could issue out of the
virgins womb without disclosing the body of his mother: that he did not, nor
could penetrate the heavens without opening of the same: That he did not, nor
could make a body, (yea even his own) invisible: And that he could not bring
to pass that a Camel (or cable) keeping his grosenesse, might pass through the
hole of a Needle: From these is derived the denial of his almightinesse, a
blasphemy most execrable, and very atheism: These be the disordered
absurdities which such are enforced to confess that deny the Real presence
of the body of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament of the Aultare: which the Doctors
pray may be well considered by the Readers of this present cautele.

Where the ministers in the last Article of their Answer, challenge us for
calling Faith an human work, seeing it is of God, that is not to be
marvelled in them no more than a number of other truths which seem strange
to them: because their Doctrine is grounded upon the foundation of error,
amongst the which, this is not least in degree, that man has not a free will,
and that for a man to think well, to will well, and to do well, does not work
with God, contrary to many places of the Scripture, which settes a man woorking
with God, both for his Faith and works, and receives recompense for the
same: which shall be more aptly handled in an other place without varying from
the matter. We are very glad the Ministers confess that the Auncientes never
said that a body was in two places which is true, but the reason they give,
why they have not said it, is of the forge and invention of the Ministers:
they might tell us as much out of the testimony of scripture, wherein is no
more found than in the writings of the Ancients, whereof we have sundry times
warned the said ministers, who challenge to ground all their Doctrine upon Gods
word.

If the ministers at the beginning had confessed the truth of the
omnipotency, or that they would have acknowledged that Christ might bring to
pass that his body might be on high, and near below in the Sacrament really
and truly, if he would, we had no need to handle the questions passed: which
notwithstanding contain no small consequence, as the ministers esteem, the
same appearing by the wrytings of the Ancients who have handled those places
with great diligence, and with them, have aided themselves against the
heretics: But because the ministers will not agree that God may bring to pass
that one body be in diverse places at one instante. And that if they had begone
to show his will to be such, as to ordain that the body of Jesus Christ
might be in heaven and in the sacrament, they might have said (as is the
opinion of these of their sect) that God would it not, because he could it
not: And albeit we had rather treat first of the omnipotency than of the will,
so, seeing the first has been sufficiently handled, we are now in mind to
prove that Jesus Christ would and did ordain his body to be in diverse
places, in the proof whereof, we will enter into the first conference after we
understand the fancy of the Ministers what they held in their Church
touching this matter, to the end we travail not in vain, as judging that
they follow not the opinion of Calvin and Beza, for which cause we say they,
much abused the people, faining to teach according to the Custom and
Direction of the Reformed Church, and yet in their Aunsweres, they declare
the contrary.

Where they hold themselves right happy to endure such reproaches, as to be
esteemed seducers by us, Let them remember that all sects may say as much as
they, but whether it be right or wrong, we shall make seen by the examination
of their Doctrine.

The Resolution of the Doctoures touching the Article of Gods omnipotency, as
for the regard of the four Questions proponed by them to the Ministers, the
same serving to the understanding of the Real presence of the Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ in the holy Sacrament.
ALl men disposed with patience to run through the scriptures, and beginning
from Abraham the Father of the Faithful, even until the last writing of the
Apostles: shall find that the very root and fountain of all infidelity
ordinarily was, in having regard to the propretie of creatures and common
order of nature, as to gainesay and enter into doubt and distrust of the word
of God.

In respect of which reason, Tertullian and other first Christians said well
that the Philosophers and such as depended upon natural things, were the
Fathers of Heretics: because the contemplation of nature engendered almost al
heresies: of the contrary, men may perceive that the omnipotency of God is
proponed by the scriptures, as a knife cutting in sunder all arguments which
might come of natural reasons: as to take a certain and last resolution to
believe all that is written and imported by the said word of God, albeit it
seem impossible and incomprehensible to all creatures, and that our Faith
might rest upon the same power, in all doutes what so ever.

All the difficulties that Abraham made upon the promises which God made to
him, proceeded of certain impossibilities of nature which he saw in himself
and in his wife: wherein it seems that his consideration stretched no further,
til God used his authority and said to him, I am God almighty: since warning
of God, Abraham forgate all regardes to the propreties of his nature, and took
hold of this buckler of faith, which is to know and fully persuade himself,
that God is almighty, to whom nothing is hard or impossible: And after this,
when there was question to slay his only son, notwithstanding he had great
appearance of contradiction in nature, and in the word of God given to him
(which was, that from the seed of that son should issue one that should
bliss all nations, and yet he must kill him before he had any lineage discending
of his body) yet he did not contest, as opposing this contradiction of nature,
and of the word of God, to maintain, that which had been said and promised
him, was impossible: but he had recourse to the pilloure of the Faith of the
Faithful (as S. Paul to the Hebrews) which is, to the omnipotency, with this
persuasion, that God had the mean to make the one and the other true, as to
make his Son die, and raise him up again, to the end to draw out of him
afterward, lineage and posterity: (albeit as then there had been no example of
the Resurrection.)

Likewise the consideration of creatures, and the order of nature which Moises
saw before him, made him fall into infidelity: but God showed him his fault,
when he denied that he was able to nourish the people long with flesh: seeing
the nature of the deserte did not bear it, warning him to raise up his spirit
to the almightinesse against nature, and there to settle and assure his Faith.

Moses said: Here be six hundred thousand people, in the midst of whom I
am, and thou have said, I will give them flesh, to the end they eat a whole
month, shall we kill them Muttons or Beeffes which may suffice them? Or shall we
gather all the Fishes of the sea to content them? God answered to Moses: the
hand of the Lord is it shortened? thou shall see now whether my word will come
to pass or not.

In like manner, as often as we read in the Scriptures, that the multitude or
other particular sort fell into infidelity or distrust of the aid and succors
of God, we shall find that ordinarily it moved in respect they rested upon
the nature and disposition of human things, and did not comprehend
sufficiently the power of God: and of the contrary, to confirm them, we find
that this power was put before their eyes, whereof we have here before produced
certain Examples of Esaias and Jerome.

In the new Testamente, the Virgin seemed to make some doubt of the mean of
her Conception, as having regard to the natural manner of conceiving: For
she said, how may this be, seeing I know no man? But the Angel Answered,
nothing is impossible to God, drawing her by that from the imagination of
natural propreties, which is the root of infidelity, and exhorted her to
aspire to the almightinesse of God, as being the first stone and rock whereupon
is builded true religion.

This being considered, and so to resolve with the Ministers for this conference,
we say, yt by good right, gods almightines obteines expressly the first place
amongst the Articles of the Apostles Creed, as being the same, by the which
the other Articles of Faith and doings of God above nature, are believed and
maintained against all contradiction and repugnancie of nature, or reason that
may be pretended or alleged, and without the which, neither Article of the
Faith, or any doings of God surpassing nature, and contained in the
Scripture, can be defended against the malice and deprauation of human
Sprite, which tendes always to infidelity and disobedience to God, and is
prompt and subtle, from his birth, to deprave and reproach the word and
commandment of the same, by mean whereof we say, that so much the more
every good Christian ought to enforce himself to hold and preserve this
Article whole, without either suffering any exception, or to restrain it to
our single pleasure or purpose, under color of incertaine pretended
repugnances of Creatures moving in the Sprites of men, for want of direct
understanding, and comprehending the greatness of God: for as the Scripture
gives to us always this Omnipotency in general, without any restrainte in
regard of creatures and doings of God, so it teaches us, that creatures are
under his obedience, as the Clay in the hands of the Potter to receive such
change and form as he thinks best, without that they can say, why do you
this to me, or why change you me? such similitude of speech use the Prophet
Esaias, Jerome, and S. Paul.

We say further, that so much less ought it to be licenced to men to limit
and bound the said power according to the contradictions which they imagyn in
their fancies, of the nature, wisdom, or eternal will of God: seeing the
express sentence of the Scripture is, that as God can do more than we
understand, so he smiles at such as will meddle with his nature, wisdom, and
eternal will: as if they were his Counselors, and knew further of his
judgments and ordinances, than his own word does pronounce: and in the
end, all sprites created are constrained with S. Paul, to cry out, confessing
their ignorance of the power and wisdom of God, and of his doings: Oh depth
of Riches of the knowledge and wisdom of God? Oh that his judgments are
incomprehensible, and his ways impossible to find. For who is he, that has
known the intent of the Lord? or who has been his Counselor? Wherewith we
may also note upon this point a godly sentence of S. Augustine in an Epistle
of his to Volusianus: We confess that God can do something, which in
searching we cannot find, meaning that as God can do something, so albeit in
our natural judgment we think it impossible, yet let us hold it possible:
only the capacity of our sprite is not able to comprehend it.

We say further, that by such license and mean to exempt from Gods power
at our pleasure, under color of certain impossibilities of nature, or
repugnancy supposed by our own judgment in the nature, wisdom, or will of
God, every one may study to feign the like in all matters of Faith, wherein
such things may be easily invented or disguised.

And that it be so, if all the Heresies be observed that have withstand it in
every time from the first Article of the Creed even to the last, it will
appear, that they al have kept this way and method, to shake every Article of
the Faith, as impossible to God, considering the impossibility of the fact
according to nature, and certain pretended inconveniences against nature,
wisdom, will, and glory of God. To this effect also we apply the two
first Books of Tertullian, whereof the one is of the Incarnation of Jesus
Christ, and the other of the Resurrection of his Flesh, against the
Marcionistes: wherein the Christian Reader shall read like Arguments of the
said Marcionistes, laboring to exempt the Incarnation of our Savior, and
Resurrection of his Flesh, from the Omnipotency of God.

Now to conclude this point, we speak it to all good Christians, that to
the end to add nothing to the Scriptures, whose speech is always of the
power of God to his Creatures, without any lymitation, and to the end to
glorify the infinite power, wisdom, and eternal will of our Creator and
Redeemer: and also not to open the vessel of the secrets of God to every
impudent, who of his own folly will set Laws to men, but to the power,
wisdom, and eternal will of God.

And lastely to the end not to bring into the world all Heresies only, but
also an Atheism, who (according to his sense and fancy,) may and will oppose
and gainesay the infinite power of the true, living, and eternal God.

We affirm eftsoons that it is necessary to believe, confess, and maintain,
that our God is the Almighty Lord without end, to whom as nothing is
impossible, so even the least of his works standing daily before our eyes,
cannot be comprehended. And in plain speech, he is no more a Christian, nor a
faithful man, who restraines or draws into any lymit the power of God: for
thereby he reuerseth the maintenance of the Faith, which ought to be
general, as to the which no exception can be given.

But as the Omnipotency ought to be kept in his generality and perfection, so
our opinion is, that it is not enough to say, that God is almighty, and has
the virtue to do any thing, as to infer that it is done: for all that our
Lord can do, he has not yet done, nor never will do, because his power is
infinite. But the knowledge of this omnipotency serves to confess and magnify
the greatness of our God, and to maintein his works incredible by nature
which are comprehended in his word, and in our Faith: and also to confute all
such as would deny any of them as impossible to be done by any manner what so
ever.

And because Calvin and Beza with their Ministers, raise them selves against
the power and greatness of our Lord, and openly deny him to be able to commit
the body and blood of Jesus Christ under the forms of Bread and Wine: and
because also that in the Religion pretended reformed, (to resist the efficacy
of the word, This is my Body, this is my Blood) they teach not a more great
reason, nor more familiare to al those that are out of the way, than the
impossibility of God, to be able to make a body to be in two or many places,
that is to say, in the Sacrament, and in Heaven: we obiecte with good right
to the Ministers, that in their Doctrine they derogate the first Article of
Faith, which is, of the Almightinesse of God. And also we know that the
anciente manner of the Christians, disputing against the adversaries of Faith,
was oftentimes to begin to ask, whether that whereon they doubted were
possible to God or not, or whether only he would not do it: in which sort
and order Tertullian and others propone the points wherein they enter into
contention against the Heretics.

In like sort, before we pass further into the matter of the holy Sacrament, we
would (in preamble wise) feel of the Ministers, whether they judged it to be in
Gods power to make a body occupy many places, or whether only he would not
etc. wherein we are enforced to advertise al Christians of one manner of
dealing common to all the Ministers of the pretended reformed Religion, which
is, when they are asked, if God can establish the body of Jesus Christ in the
Sacrament or not: they answer, that there is no question of the power of God,
but of his Will only. And when we produce matter which declares the will of
God, then (of the contrary) they deny that his will is such, because it is
impossible to him. Alleging here, their contradictions according to the nature
of the body. And because they think this to be impossible in action, they
deprave and interpret the word of the Supper otherwise than either it
bears, or is written.

Here is also to be noted that, wherein an Almaine called Heshusius, reprocheth
Calvin, that he and his fellow Ministers are goodly and noble amplifiers of the
power of God, but when it comes to the deed and pushe (as the saying runs)
they neither give or grant him any more, than they think meet, to introduce
their errors and fancies, resembling (as the said Almaine compares them) a
good Traitor, who most does cherishe and magnify a man, when he is most ready
to betray him, as Judas did our Lord: wherein we are constrained to say of the
Ministers touching Gods Almightinesse, as Tertullian says of the Heretics,
Credendo non credunt, which is, in believing the Omnipotency, they believe it
not: for when they have said, that there must be no exception, they hold
again an other way, that it must not stretch to every thing that man's sprite
can conceive, and so they will not apply it but to what they think good,
covering themselves with the nature, wisdom, and eternal will of God, which
are no less unknown and incomprehensible to them, than his Omnipotency: in
which respect we advise every one not to be abused with the speech of Calvin
nor his ministers, but to consider the works which they deny to be in the
power of God. We have produced to them these four questions: Whether God may
make a body to be in two places, and (of the contrary) two bodies in one
place: Whether he can lodge one body in one space, less than his greatness,
and whether he can make it invisible, which have been specially culled and
chosen, for that upon them are founded the principal arguments of the pretended
reformed Religion against the true presence of the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ in the Holy Sacrament.

We believe simply (as al other things) that the four questions are possible
to God, and have proved it by the infinity of his power, both by the
scriptures, who give unto him al virtue over creatures without any exception,
and also by Examples and strange miracles don upon bodies against their
natures, which are written, as Tertullian holds in his Book of the
Resurrection, to the end we believe that our God is more mighty than al Law
and nature of al bodies, whereunto he adds, that such know God very evil,
who think that he has not in his power, things which they cannot comprehend
in their fancy. From whence it comes (as S. Cyril says) that such wicked
sprites reiecte and condemn al things as impossible, because they understand
them not.

Besides, we think we have sufficiently showed no less by express
scripture, than by the Exposition of the same, taken of the Ancient Christians,
that it was not only in Gods power to make two bodies to be in one place, and
one body without place equal to his greatenesse, but also that he had already
truly done it in the birth of the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the
Resurrection of the same, ^^is entry through the doors shut, and in his
Ascension above all the Heavens: like as also we have deduced, that there was
equal and like repugnancy in those deeds, as in the other of one body in two
places, which by the scripture is no more excepted from the power nor will of
God than the others, as to judge it impossible to be done: neither has there
been any Christian before our time which durst affirm the same to be impossible
and out of the power of God, notwithstanding the occasion was often offered, if
they had any way esteemed it impossible, as the Ministers of the supposed
reformed Religion pretend.

Of the contrary, the most part of the ancient Authors of the Primitive
Church have holden expressly, that it was in Gods power to bestow a
creature in many places, according to S. Ieromes opinion against the Heretic
Vigilantius, that the souls of the Saints may assiste in many places, with
the immaculate Lamb our Savior Jesus Christ. Yea there was question, Whether
the said souls and sprites of the Holy ones, did assiste at any time the
Churches, where their Graves and Monumentes were: the same resembling with S.
Augustine in his Book which he wrote of the care to be had of the Dead,
Chapter 16. where he says, that by the power of their nature, the souls
cannot be here below, and in Heaven, or in many places, but that the same may
be done by the power of God, and he will not resolve, whether they understand
our affairs by such assistaunce in many places, or by revelation of the
Angels, or other mean of the power and grace of God.

Morouer it is most certain, that the Ancient Fathers of the Church, in the
matter of the Holy Sacrament, have acknowledged and maintained that the Body
of Jesus Christ by Omnipotency was in many places, as S. Ambrose upon the
tenth of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and S. Chrysostom in his seuententh
Homily upon the same Epistle, where they both almost in one phrase and
words, write, that albeit in many places there be many actions and oblations
of the Body of Jesus Christ, yet having regard to the thing which is offered,
(that is, to the true Lamb and body of Jesus Christ) that Sacrifice offered
in many places, is but one, because it is but one self thing, the true Lamb
and true body of Jesus Christ, which is but one, and remains whole in all
places where he is offered.

And they add further, that the Oblation of the same in diverse places, is not
an iteratio^ of the sacrifice of the Cross, but in commendation of the same:
so that in the sacrifice of the Mass, they acknowledge and distinguishe two
points, the one, concerning the Realty of the thing that is offered, which
they say is the true Lamb, and true Body of Jesus Christ, who as then
remaining one and in his entyer, is notwithstanding in many places. And the
other concerns the action of such a thing by the Priest, which is no
iteration, nor like action, or oblation to that of the Cross, but diverse in
commemoratio^ notwithstanding of that which was made on the Cross. S.
Chrysostom in his third Book of Priestehoode, cries out, and says, Oh
miracle and power of God: He that uts on the Right hand of the Father above,
is holden between the hands of every one in this sacrament. S. Augustine upon
the 33. Psalm declares, that the body of Jesus Christ in the supper, was in
two places, that is, in his visible place amongeste his Apostles, and yet
between his proper hands, in such sort as he carried him self. But before
he concluded upon this, S. Augustine debates with him self how it was
possible, that a person should bear his Body between his hands: And after
he has examined it to be impossible to David and al other creatures, he
discends at last to the Divine power which was in Jesus Christ, by the which,
to him alone amongst other men that miracle was possible.

But leas^e we depraud or wrest the intent of S. Augustine, because he was
carried in a certain manner (as though that diminished the truth) let us
consider that the end and meaning of S. Augustine is, to show that Jesus by
his Omnipotency carried himself, which was impossible to any Creature. But if
he had only carried in the Supper between his hands, the Figure, Sacrament,
and Sign of his Body, and not the Real Truth, he had done no more than the
least man might have done, seeing every one may bear the Figure, Image,
Sign, or Sacrament of his body between his hands, or fastened as a Brooche
to his Cappe, without miracle or power supernatural: so that the certain
manner which S. Augustine uses, diminishes nothing of the Truth: which is,
that he was visible between his hands, and in one manner supernatural, albeit
Real and true.

S. Basil, with others in his Liturgy, auowes the body of Jesus Christ to be
in Heaven, and yet present in the Sacrament by Omnipotency. And yet the
Ministers are grounded principally upon the said S. Basil, to prove the
impossibility that one body or an other creature may be in many places. But
he protestes expressly in the very place alleged by the Ministers, not to
speak but according to the natural property.

And in his Liturgy he declares, that it is not only in Gods power to bring to
pass, that the body of Jesus Christ be in Heaven, and in the Aultare, but
also that it be truly done so.

To end this question of one body in many places, we say that it is not only in
the power of God, but also we must believe that it is so done in the Sacrament,
to the end God be not found a liar or a deceiuer in his word, by which Jesus
affirmed to his Apostles that that which he gave with his hands was his true
Body delivered for us. Which Argument Tertullian makes in his Book of the
Resurrection after he had disputed against such as denied it to be possible to
God: wherein it seems that they said (as the Ministers said first) there was
something impossible to God by Scripture, which is, that he could not lie nor
deceive: of which they took occasion to pass further, and dispute that the
Resurrection was also impossible to him: like as also the Ministers, of the
point that could not lie, have labored to infer, that to put one body in two
places, was impossible to him, as well as to lie and deceive: in the end,
Tertullian accordes with the Martianistes that he had rather confess that God
could not deceive, and that he is only weak and impotent in deceit, to the
end that thereby it might be seen, that he has not otherwise taught or
spoken, nor otherwise disposed the fact, than is contained in his word.
Then, if he can not (as Tertullian concludes) deceive and abuse, we must
believe the resurrection, as his word bears it, and not otherwise, to the
end there be no deceit in the said word and in God: Even so we say, and
willingly confess that God can not lie nor deceive, in regard whereof we must
believe, that he has so willed and ordained the truth of the supper, as the
word pronounces, and not otherwise. And if it be so yt the word bear
Verbatim, and expressly, that he affirms that that which he gave with his
hands to his Apostles to eat, was his body delivered for us, we must the^
believe that his word speaks not otherwise then his will is, least he be
esteemed a lier: And that as he has said, this is my Body, this is my blood,
that truly it is so, which (God willing) we mean to handle in the next
conference for declaration that not only he might establishe his body in the
holy Sacrament, but also that he would, and did so.

Articles proponed by the Doctors, for the next conference and others following
according to the order of the said Articles.
ALbeit, (according to the order of the conference) touching the Creed of the
Apostles, we ought secondly to entreat of an other Article: (like as even the
ministers themselves in the first days of conference did not only consent, but
made request, offering the Articles of their Confession Imprinted under
Date.1564. to be examined by us from the first to the last) yet we, seeing it
can not be much from the matter, after we have handled the omnipotency of God,
(which stretches so far as to make him able to bring to pass that the body
of Jesus Christ be in heaven and in the sacrament) continuing still this matter,
to enter into the proof of his will are content to show that not only he could
do it, but also he would do it, and so consequently are determined to refute
all the blasphemies and heresies of the supposed reformed side, which are
contained in the supper, to the end also we be not thought to eschew the
combat of the supper and the Mass, as ye ministers have reproched to us:
protesting notwithstanding to keep in meaning, that after we have concluded
and resolved upon this matter, to return to the examination of the monstrous
errors of the ministers, which contain great numbers against the other
Articles of the Creed: which the ministers fear, by all likelihoode, in that
they are not willing we pursue the order begone, as foreseeing, yt in the next
conference, we would open unto them an other blasphemy maintained by the
reformed church against the bounty of God, according to Caluines doctrine,
which is, that God works in the reprobate the evil and sin which they
commit, which is an execrable atheism, and no less than the denial of gods
omnipote^cie: and in like sort, as such as shall read these co^ferences if they
continue to the end and discussing of the ministers errors and their religion
against all the articles of the Creed) shall marvel to understand the
absurdities and blasphemies discending from them: so yet there is an other
point ye draws the ministers to demand the disputation of the supper, which
is, yt they have al their matter redily prepared by many of their sect which
have written thereof: as especially they will not want the great Book of Peter
Martyr by which they are furnished with sundry infamous objections, and
certain texts of the Ancients either cut of and depraved, or evil applied, to
impugn (in show) the truth of the body in the sacrament: but to the defense of
all their other errors, they are very slenderly provided: wherein their
conscience is a sufficient witness, yt by the scripture, judgment of general
councels, and common consent of ye authorities of ye ancients, they are
co^uinced and condemned of their errors against ye said Creed.

But to enter into the supper of the ministers, we say it is a profane eating
and drinking, not differing from the common eating and drinking, saving that it
is so much the worse, as they abuse the holy institution of the supper of
Jesus, and pollute and defile such their banquet withal impiety and blasphemy:
we maintain also that they do great wrong to the sacrament of Jesus Christ,
to attribute falsely to such their banker so profane and defiled, the name of
sacrament: And to the end to prove it more clear, we ask them, if they
receive a common doctrine, allowed not only in the catholic church, but also
of all the sects which are separated from it: the same is, that in the
confection of sacraments, there be two things essential and necessary, the
matter (or the element) and the word.

Secondly, what word is necessary with the element to co^stitute a sacrament, and
namely yt which they call the sacrament of the supper, and whether they must use
certain words or not.

Thirdly, if the word have any virtue or efficacy in this sacrament, and
what: And if it work any thing in the matter of bread and wine.

Fourthly, whether by the same word the consecration be made of the matter of
the sacrament or not.

In the fifth place, if by the word, there be not made consecration of the
matter: that is, how the same consecration is made, and by what virtue the
sacrament is made.

For the sixth, if bisides the bread and wine, and the spiritual graces and
benefits of Jesus Christ, is received in ye supper really the true body and
blood of Jesus Christ in his propre substance, and not only in spiritual
effect: upon this Article we require of the ministers, an open confession of
faith.

We ask further, if in receiving ye bread before they take the wine, they
receive by ye eating of ye bred, the body and blu^ of Jesus Christ, or only ye
body: to be^^^rt, if they admit yt which ye divines call a concomitance of ye
body and blood of Jesus Christ.

We ask also, if the supper, bisides the assurance it gives them of
participation in the flesh of Jesus Christ in their redemption, do work in
them re^ission of sin.

We ask lastly, if by ye supper, there is received any thing which can not be
received out of the Supper, or, if without taking of bread to go to the
Supper, or to assist it, may be received as much of the body and graces of
Jesus Christ, as if they did assist the supper.

We will debate afterward the other Articles contained in the last pamphelet
of the ministers, because the former demaundes are to be first examined as
grounds of the other Articles proponed by the ministers.

For the rest, after the supper of the ministers is confuted, and the Real
presence of the body and blood of Jesus Christ in the sacrament, confirmed: we
will proceed by order and without confusion, to teach clearly by the pure
and most express word of God, that the Mass was instituted and said by
Jesus Christ, and that also he commanded his Apostles to say it, which they
did according to the ordinance of their Master.

That the Mass is a true sacrifice of the Euangelical law.

That such as reiecte the Mass, and admit no outward sacrifice in the
Church, nor priesthood, are without true law and without true Religion, and
therefore worse than Idolatrers.

That the Mass is of value to obtain remission of sins, favor and grace
of God, and that it is of value both for the quick and the dead.

That it is no abuse in the Church, if the Priest communicate alone in the
Mass, when the assistantes will not communicate with him.

That such commit horrible blasphemy, which call the woorshipping of the body
of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, the worshipping of bread and wine, and
falsely do they call such veneration of the body of Jesus Christ, idolatry.

To be short, there is nothing in the mass as it is celebrated in the Church
at this day, which is not good and holy in it self, and conformable to the
word of God.

We require the ministers to Answer to the demands here before written,
pertinently, clearly, and by order.

Sunday.28. of Iulie, the years aforesaid.
The Answer of the Ministers to the writing of the Doctors, sent to them by
the Duke of Nyuernois the.28. of Julie.1566. about.7. of the clock in the
Evening.
THe Doctors in the beginning of their writing reproach us, as that in our
complainte against them, we imitate the Donatistes: wherein they justify our
former judgment and opinion of them, that the most part of their wrytings
swarmed more with matters of repeticion, injuries, scoffs and inuectiues than
with arguments and good reasons: like as also the example of the Donatistes,
becomes them far better than us: because the Donatistes sought to restrain
the name of the Church, who comprehendes universally all the chosen and
Faithful, that either are, or ever were: and attribute it to the only
company of those that followed their customs and erroures, as at this day the
Doctoures allow not to be of the Catholic and universal Church, other than
such as follow the traditions and abuses of the Romish Church.

Bisides, as the Donatistes persecuted such as stood against their Doctrine,
using every violence and cruelty they could imagine according to S.
Augustines testimony in many places, so the whole world stands to judge of
the rage and fury, as well of the Doctoures, as their accomplices, priests and
hipocrite Monks, against the poor Christians in times past, like as also for
the present, there is none that knows not, both by their Sermones, wrytings
and conferences, what hateful and grudging minds they bear against the
servants and children of God, and how much they would delight to root them
up, if their power were equal with their desire: By which may be judged,
whether they or we resemble nearest the example of the Donatistes.

And where they say, we are nevertheless blasphemers, because we shake of and
detest the name, we Answer that they are also nevertheless reprochers and
backebiters, notwithstanding they deny it and disauow the title: Like as the
mutual effects on both parts stand as Arbitrators, to which of us these
crimes and names may appertain or be attributed.

And where the Doctors in the same Article say, that it is a blasphemy against
the bounty of God, to charge him with imputacion to be Authoure of vice and
sin, we confess it: with this addition, that it is also a blasphemy
against his truth, to say that in him is yea and no: as they do, who under a
color and false pretense to establishe the omnipotency of God, affirm, that
in one instant, he may bring to pass that one body be in diverse places, which
is to say, that he is, and is not.

Touching that which they say after, that we err in the grounds of the
omnipotency of God: as saying that he was almighty, for that he does what he
list, and that nothing can hinder or let the execution of his Councelles: we
Aunswers that in that we followed the Definition of S. Augustine in the
Enchiridion, cap. 96. whose words be these, verbatim: truly he is not called
Omnipotente by any other reason than that he does all that he will, and that
the effect of the will of the almighty, is not hindered by the will and effect
of any creature.

Touching an other their matter of imputation against us, in that we should
say that the almightinesse of God, ought not to be stretched generally to all
things that men's wit^ can conceive and imagine, we Answer, and (under
correction of the Doctors) say, we said not so, but that Gods omnipotency
ought not to be stretched without some discretion or distinction, to all
things generally, that men may forge and imagine in their foolish fancies,
wherein it may eftsoons appear to every one, how they cut of and falsify
our speeches and sentences, as to have mean and color, to slander us.

Against that they say after, that it is a blasphemy to hold that God can do
nothing against order, we say, in the contrary, that to think and speak that
he can do any thing which is not well ordained, is to blaspheme his wisdom
and eternal providence.

In the Article following, the Doctoures pretend that for one body at one
instante to be in diverse places, is not a thing that derogates the truth of
God: we maintain the contratrary, that it would derogate both his truth,
because there should be in him (as is said) yea and no, and also his wisdom,
for that in his works there should be disorder and confusion: and by
consequent, it would derogate his omnipotency, seeing that in his doings
there would be imperfection: And we say further, that it would not only be
against the disposition and ordinary course of nature (as the Doctors feign to
think and understand) but also against the eternal and immovable will of our
God.

And where, the Doctoures, to prove that God may do any thing against order,
affirm that he may change and alter the order he has established in the
world, we confess it but deny that in doing so, he should do any thing that
was disordained, as (for Example) all the Faithful and Christians, believe
that God, in the end, will renew the state of all the world, and yet in this
time, notwithstanding, there shall be nothing which is not well ordained,
perfect and accomplished in all his parts.

In the Article following, the Doctors confound the distinction proponed by us
in our Answer, between the will of God manifested, and that which he holds
hid in himself, and is equal to his power, as we have heretofore amply
declared: wherein the Doctors propone a false touching the will of God
manifested, as taking generally, yt which we agreed unto the^ only, in certain
particulare cases, which is, that God can do more in certain things, than he
has declared he will, which no man doubts: as S. Augustine says in his book
of perfect justice, that he ca^ not well bring to pass, that a man be perfect
in this world, and so sanctify him, that there rest no more infirmity or
imperfection in him, and yet he never declared to us by his word, that he
would do it.

But of the contrary that the flesh will always resist the spirit in all
those that are regenerate, in such sort that all the time of their lives,
they shall be imperfect in many parts: But be it that in this case, and any
other like to it, God can do more than his will bears that is manifest to us
in his word: yet, it is not to say for all that, but that there be other
cases, wherein God has revealed to us his will, against the which he can not
do or order any thing: as (for example) he has told us that he is one, that
he is immovable, incomprehensible, altogether good, wholly just, no way
imperfecte, and every way true: against all which things (which are disclosed
to us, and plainly pronounced in his word) it is impossible to him ever to
think, say, do, or order any thing: it is not so then that the matter proponed
and debated by the Doctoures touching a body to be in diverse places at one
instant is comprehended within this, being (as is said) contrary to the truth
of God, which shall serve to answer their flanders, and to al else which they
have proponed in this Article: as also in an other Article following, where they
say, ye God can not only, but that he will also bring to pass that one body
occupy diverse places in one instant, which shall be more impossible to them to
prove the power aforesaid, by the which they have made so much labor
hithertofore in vain.

In the definition which they use of a body in the Article following, they say
against themselves, in holding yt the dimensions are essential to him, and yet
notwithstanding he may be incircumscript: For if it be necessary, that the
dimensions whereof he is composed, be terminable, it folowes then necessarily
that he is termined, limited, and circumscript.

Afterward where they say, that our reasons taken of the Creed, and alleged
to prove that the body of Jesus Christ is in heaven in place certain, are
frivolous: we Answer, that therein they show, the reverence they bear to the
word of God and his holy spirit which has revealed it unto us, and to his
Apostles who have pronounced it to us.

To justify Gratian and the Canon which we allege of S. Augustine, as proving
thereby that the body of Jesus Christ must necessarilye be in a certain
place: We allege again for more ample confirmation, the Master of
sentences, Lib. 4. Distinct. 10. who reciting the self same text of S.
Augustine, uses this verb Oportet, and not Potest.

Where the Doctors allege Iustine to prove that the miracles which were done
when Christ appeared in the midst of his Disciples the doors being shut,
and when he walked upon the waters, were done in his person. We marvel
much, that the Doctors do yet repeat that, seeing the same Iustine (as
has been already answered them) says in express terms, that at the time
when the said miracles were done, there happened no change in the body of
Jesus Christ, which as it had bin necessary, if the miracles had bin done in
his person: so we confess still (as many times we have done) that the cause
of the said miracles, and the Divine virtue of which they proceeded, rested in
Jesus Christ, as when he healed the sick that touched him, with other miracles
recited in the Histories of the Gospelles, which were done by him, but not in
him, but in the person of those that were healed. There is great difference
between those miracles, and them of his Transfiguration and Resurrection,
which were done by his only virtue, and in his proper person.

Upon the importunate repetition which the Doctoures make, as well touching the
mean of ye birth of our Lord Jesus Christ, as of the term Aphantos: The
Ministers no less to avoid the loss of time, than to grieve or trouble the
Readers, send them to their former aunsweres.

We marvel also that the Doctoures to prove their penetration pretended of
two bodies, and their dimensions, will ground their proof and principell
Argument upon the proper signification of the word to Penetrate. For be it
that by the French term they would interpret the Greek word P^e^cliestai,
or the Latin word Penetrare, yet it should be always impossible to them to
prove that which they pretend. And to show it is so, in the Acts of the
Apostles, chapter 1^. 10. it is said of the Aungel, and S. Peter, that they
passed the first and second ward. And in S. Luke, 4.3^. but he passed
through the mids of them, and went his way. And in S. John 4.4. He must
pass by Samaria: in all which places the Doctoures cannot find that the term
Diercherstai (alleged in the said places) may be any ways applied to their
penetration of dimensions, neither can they prove any more that the term
Penetrare, which the Ancient Translatour has used in 2. Timoth. 3. may be
referred to their said penetration.

We say further, that the Doctoures ought not to find it more strange, that
Jesus Christ mounting into heaven with a body termined and limited, made
himself opening to enter therein, than when he discendes between the hands of
Priests, singing their masses: for then as S. Gregory says, the heavens are
opened to make him passage: albeit that according to their imagination his body
be then separated from his measures and dimensions. The Doctors ought to have
contented themselves with the answer which we made them upon the similitude and
parable of the Camel. For first they could no way prove that the saying of
Jesus Christ upon the end of the speech ought to be referred otherways than to
the next member of the same, where is spoken of the conversion and saving of
the Rich: seeing the Pronoune Demonstratiue Hoc shows it clearly. After,
notwithstanding the proposition general which is upon the end and conclusion
of ye said speech (that al things are possible to God) stretches as well to the
Camel, as to the rich men (as ye doctors hold) yet, to accomodate the two parts
of the comparison, they must confess, that as changing is necessary to ye rich
man to be saved, so is it also to the body of the Camel, to make him pass
through the hole of a needle: but what so ever it be, and in what manner so
ever that may be done, the doctors shall never prove or conclude by that, that
two bodies may penetrate one an other. Because the doctors by their most mighty
and strong Arguments could not conclude any their said absurdities, nor
enforce us by force of their reasons to confess them, they do nothing but
cry blasphemy, blasphemy, the same being the last shift of al men that
despite and whet their teeth against the Truth, and mainteiners thereof, when
they can not overcome them.

If we would subscribe to their errors and abuses, we should be good and
Catholic men: but because we resist and reprove them, we are (in their
opinion) Heretics, Seducers, Blasphemours, and Atheistes. Yea, they have in us
such horror, that it is marvel they rent not (as did Caiphas) their hoodes and
hattes in spite of Gods word proponed and defended by us, and condemned by
them as Blasphemy.

The doctors have dissembled our place of scripture alleged to prove that
faith is a work of God, that it produces in the heart of ye faithful, when he
will regenerate him, speaking by change of Free will, and Merit of Works:
wherein we are determined to answer, and maintain the truth of these two
points, with Gods grace, against the enemies of his glory, when they shall be
proponed to be debated upon. And touching the joy that they say they have
received for that we have confessed to have read in no ancient Author, or
express terms, that God cannot bring to pass, that one body in one instant
be in diverse places: they have no great cause to rejoice at it, seeing that
albeit the said ancients have not spoken it in express speech, yet have they
both said and written it in terms equivalent, and that in infinite places.

A short resolution of all the discourse and aunsweres which the Ministers
have made upon the matter of Gods Omnipotency, in the conference which they
have had with the Doctoures.
THe craft and art of Satan has been always from the beginning of the world,
to tra^sfigure him self into an Angel of light, and search some fine pretense
to color and distinguish him self, as under such color to insinuate into the
church of God, and there to set abroach his Lies and trumperies: like as we
see that under the color to honor God, he has established all the Idolatry
which ever has bin in ye world: laying the worshipping of Images, the
invocation and intercession to Saints, ye veneration of relikes, and other
like impieties, to ye honor of God, persuading the ignorante, that al ye was
done to advance him.

Under pretense likewise of his service, he has brought in all the
contradictions and inventions of men, and changed with the time, the true and
lawful service of God, (which consistes in the obedience of his Holy will, as
he has declared it to us in his Law and his word) into observation of
their commandments and ceremonies by them invented: under pretense and
color of the Sacraments ordained by God for confirmation, exercise and
nourtour of the Faith of his Church, there is crepte in the Mass: which is
not the ruin and absolute subversion of the supper, but also an abolishment of
all the benefits of Jesus Christ, and by consequent, of the Faith of all true
Religion: under color and shadow of Holiness, and under shadow of chaste,
shamefast, and honest conversation, which is principally required in the
Ministers and Pastors of the Church, he has established serilitie or
singleness, and has taken from them al liberty of Marriage, which has been
the occasion of much Filthiness, Infamies, stinking and execrable
Whooredomes, and Lechery, which are amongst ye Papists seen: under color of
Prayers, which we are commanded to make one for an other, and Charity, by
the which we are bound to succor the poor and needy, he has brought in
Suffrages, which have been sung for the Dead, Merits and Works of
Supererogation, and other like Abominations: under color of the day of Rest,
which God has chosen and assigned to the sanctifying of his Holy name, to the
contemplation of his Works, to the recording and preaching of his benefits
and favors, he has brought forth infinite profane Holy days, in which
Gods name is blasphemed, his Ordinances corrupted, and his Alliance
violated. Yea, who can number the wicked abominations which were committed in
those days? under the pretense of the Keys and Discipline of the Church,
whereof the Administration and use was given to the Ministers of lawful
vocation, as to have a mean to preserve the Doctrine pure, to enterteine a
good order in the Church, and to withstand the slanders which might happen
by the insolency of others, he has established a tyranny, whereof is
happened an entyre dissipation of the Church of God, a corruption of all
estates, and the diminishing of the lawful authority which God has given to
Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, of whom some have been wholly spoiled as well
touching their goods, as dignities by the Pope and his Bishops: and others
so weakened, that they are constrained in many places to bow their necks, and
lay it under their yoke and power. To be short, this may be noted and observed
in all the enterprises and actions of the Devil, that as he is a Serpent, so
has he always ramped, creeping as it were covertly under leaves and
likelyhoodes of godliness into the house of God, to sow there the disorder,
confusion, and destruction which he pretended: wherein we see at this day,
that continuing and following (as it were) his earnest, he bringes in the
almightinesse of God (a title peaceable and favorable to all the world) to the
end that under the honor and light of such an occasion, he may dim the eyes
of the ignorant, and nussel them still in the opinion and persuasion of their
errors, which have no ground in Gods word. We beseech the Readers, as all
others also in whom remains a fear to God and zeal to his honor, that with
great wisdom they consider of the said artificial practices of the Devil,
believing not all sprites before they have well sounded and examined them: neither
let them approve all things yt may be proponed to the^ under the name of God,
which at the first may seem to resemble and appertain to his honor and glory,
but let them remember the advice of the Apostle, to try and prove the sprites,
with diligente regard to the end, and mark of such as propone them such
doctrines. And if on any behalf and part we have to stand upon our guard
against such suttleties and deceites, which are snares cast out to entrappe
the simple, we have special need of singular regard in this matter of Gods
Omnipotency, whereof the question lies at this present: for we confess, that
it ought to be known, believed, and woorshipped of al creatures universally
that are in Heaven and earth: and that the faithful cannot have a better
ground, nor better bulworke to defend them as well against the force of the
Devil and the World, as their other enemies, together with all other
temptations wherewith they may be assaulted. We say, this Omnipotency is as
the point of the Shield, upon the which the world and al his parts is turned
and holden up. We confess also, that this Almightinesse is not only to be
reverenced of the Angels and happy Souls in Heaven, and of the chosen and
holy ones that are in earth, but also to be redoubted of the reprobate, and
Deuilles that are in Hell: whereof, the one sort of free will do follow it,
and submit to it, and the other are constrained to stoop under it, and obey.
Lastely we confess that it is infinite, and of a greatenesse incomprehensible
to all creatures, as the wisdom, bounty, justice, truth, and other virtues
and properties of our God.

This is it that which we confess and believe of the Omnipotency of God, as
also that which we think al Christians ought to hold and believe. And now to
use rightly this Omnipotency, and apply it as apperteineth, we must judge of
it according to his Will, and of his Will, according to his Word: so that we
ought not to attribute indifferently to the power of God al things good and
evil, ordered and disordered, convenient and contrary to his nature, false and
true things: But, the better to rule and lead the thoughts and cogitations
rising in our minds of the Almightinesse of God, we must measure them (for
our regard) according to his holy Will, believing that it can not be limited,
staid or hindered by any other will or power, which would or can be set against
it: which S. Augustine teaches at large in many places, as in the fifth Book
of the City of God, Chapter 10. where speaking of God, he says, that he
calls him self Almighty, because he does all that he will, and suffers
nothing unless he will it.

Also in his 21. Book, Chapter 17. he calls him self Almighty for none other
reason, than that only he can do all that he will. Also in the Book of the
Symboll and Catec. Chapter 1. our God doothe all that he will, and that is his
Omnipotency.

Lastely in his Sermon 119. De Tempore, he is almighty, as doing all things
which he will, and ordeines them to be done. These sentences with many other
like found in the writings of this good Father and other Auncientes, teach us
clearly the manner how to make our profit of the Faith we have in the
Omnipotency of God, which is, in referring it to his Will, and judging his
Will by his Word, and not by false imaginations, which either our sprites
may conceive, or others would propone to us: as Satan did to Jesus Christ,
whom he went about to induce to throw him self headlong, under a vain
trust to be succored by the Omnipotency of God.

And likewise the Monarchians, who under the color and pretense of Gods
almightinesse, which they gathered of other miracles, would prove and establish
their Heresies, and take away the personal distinction which is between the
Father and the Son: saying, that God being almighty, might by that reason
make him self Father and Son altogether. There be also Anabaptists in these
later times, who under a vain assurance they repose in Gods almightinesse,
which hope that he can nourish them as he did the birds, will not incline to
travel. Many other such like or greater inconveniences may happen to al those,
who having such wandering and dispersed thoughts of the omnipotency of God,
would not restrain nor refer them to his will: which we see is also happened to
the Doctors, who seeking to measure Gods almightinesse rather by their
imaginations, tha^ by his will and word, are (as S. Paul says) become vain
in their discourse, and their hearts (forsaken of understanding) are fillrd with
darkness.

And as in seeking to behold the majesty of God without ye limits and bounds
which he has appointed in his word, they are become overwhelmed and engulphed
in his glory: so they are also fallen into ye which they touched in their own
resolution, that because they have not taken Gods Word for their guide,
nor followed the Paths and footesteppes of his Holy Spirit, they are swarued
from Faith, which (contrary to the opinion of the Doctors) is not defaced
nor reuersed by the consideration of creatures and works of God (which are as
mirrours of his glory and Divinity) if not, that by the same we might be
turned from the promises of God, by the which we are assured of his will, and
his Omnipotency, which doothe warrante and assure to us the effects and
accomplishmentes of this his Holy will: which may be clearly seen and
observed in those that were sent by Moses to epsy and know the Land of the
Chananites: two of the which ( Joshua and Caleb) could never be drawn from the
trust they had put in their God, because that turning their minds from the
consideration of all such things as might kindle doubt in them (as from the
strength and munition of Towns, the numbers, force, weapons, and experience of
the Country men) they fixed their minds upon the only remembrance and
contemplation of the promises which God had made them: where, (of the
contrary others forgetting the said promises, and considering nothing but
what they saw before their eyes, fell, and made to fall all the people with them
into this cursed and damnable infidelity, for the which they were so
graeeuously punished in the Deserte, and shut out of the entry and joy promised
by God to their Ancestors.

And in the example of Abraham, whose Faith remained firm and stable, chiefly
by the consideration of the promise and will of God, as S. Paul says, so that
the consideration of Gods Omnipotency comes after, to sustain and accompany
that which he had of the promise.

By these examples we may see what danger there is to depart and fall from
(never so little) the word of God, by which we are guided to the knowledge of
his Will, and by the knowledge of his Will we are drawn to the consideration
and judgment we ought to have of his Omnipotency.

For want whereof, the Doctoures are fallen into the errors and mad fancies
proponed to us in their last resolution, that the Body of Jesus Christ at one
instant may be in diverse places: which as it is contrary to the faith we ought
to have and hold constantly of the wisdom, providence, and eternal truth of
God: So likewise it is against the faith we ought to have of ye humanity of
our Lord. Neither does that serve any thing to prove and confirm their error,
which they allege chiefly of S. Jerome against Vigilantius, where his speech
importes no other matter, than that the souls of the holy ones, are enclosed
in a certain prisone (as Vigilantius dreamed) but do accompany the Lamb
where so ever he goes: neither that which they allege of S. Augustine in his
Book of the care we ought to have of the dead, seeing in the same Book he
himself confesses, that he stands doubtful of that which the Doctoures
assure: and much less the three authorities alleged of S. John Chrysostom,
S. Ambrose and S. Augustine, whose sentences ought to be understand of the
sacrament, and not of the thing signified by the sacrament, as we hope to
unfold at large in the next conference.

We marvel much that the Doctors draw back thus, and will not enter but
unwillingly into the conference of their Mass, to defend it, as also of the
supper celebrated in the reformed Churches, to impugn it. For, seeing they
hold it as the principal ground of their Religion, and propone it as a mean
to salvation to all the world, therefore in respect not to be found seducers
or light to believe or teach a thing which is not certain nor well assured,
they ought to stand continually furnished with reasons, both to prove and
defend readily that which they believe and teach, and also to convince such
as would deny it.

But here the world may discern what is a wicked conscience, who being
fearful, esch^es always the light and combat: it is long since we have urged
them with importunities to enter into conference of these two points, and the
rather to induce them to it, we have alleged, that it was the end and purpose
why the assembly was erected, and that the Duchess of Buyllon (in whose
respect the company met) had required it publicly once or twice, like as
also (for our parts) we had often pro^essed not to come thither in other
regard than to satisfy the Duchess in that point, and not to be examined by
the Doctors, as they falsely pretend: For we delight not to go to such Doctors
to be examined to be priests: as also, to be taught in points of religion, and
to know the truth, we would not choose such masters, nor haunte their
schools to such end: Notwithstanding all which declarations repeated so
often by us, yet the Doctoures have always hitherto deferred to confer of
the said points, exspecting (as is most likely) some occasion to dissolve and
end the said conference, before there be any beginning to speak of it: albeit,
if they were led with any zeal to Gods honor, and the edifying of his
church, they ought to enforce by all their means, that these two points
might be wholly revealed and resolved, whether in fortifying and confirming the
faith on their parts, or to draw us and our side from our error as they
pretend: for there is no great need as now to dispute of Saints, of
Purgatory, of Pilgrimages, and other like points, in regard of the which,
the most part of the worlds at this day is setteled and cleared: so that as
well the Doctoures as we, ought principally to insist upon the two points,
and to labor with them to make them clear and intelligible to every one, and
not to use sophistries and cauillations to darken them, and so entertain the
simple in their ignorance: which is the whole endeavor of ye doctors: who having
set speech and matter, lay aside our Articles proponed to them in their last
Aunswers in order and good Method, and put out confusedly certain questions
gathered of their schole divinity, as to wrappe us more and more in that
matter: resisting herein (as they have always hitherto) that which they have
so many times protested, which is, to examine the confession of the reformed
Churches, of the which notwithstanding they have not handled one only point in
all the conference, whereby as they have, so still they do declare evidently,
their distrust to be able to fight against a truth so clear and apparent, as
is that which is proponed in the said Confession.

An Answer to the Preface of the Doctoures Questions.
THe Doctoures in their Preface, and before they propone their Questions, call
the Supper which is celebrated in the reformed Churches, a banquet profane and
polluted: wherein, without either shame or fear, they first blaspheme Jesus
Christ, which has instituted it, and is the Original Author, and then
condemn the Apostles of impiety which have celebrate and taught it, with all
the Ancient Church following and observing (whilst she dwelte in pureness)
the form and manner which the Evangelists and Apostles had taught and left by
their writings. But we would gladly require those our masters, to note
particularely, wherein we may violate the institution and ordinance of Jesus
Christ, and leave his example and the Apostles, in the celebration of the
supper. For when we go about to celebrate it, we assemble first all the
church, as Christ did his Apostles and disciples, where, after confession of
sins made publicly, and to be understand in the name of all, we pronounce a
Sermon to the people: wherein, according to the grace and faculty which God
has given us, we declare the causes, occasions, purpose, use, points, and
effects of the holy supper, the rather to raise up ye hearts of the people to
consider the incomprehensible charity which the father has showed to his
Church, seeing in her favor, and to save her, he spared not his propre son,
but committed him to a cruel death, accompanied with a curse: to the end that
every one reuoluing in his mind so great a grace and mercy, might not only be
warmed and kindled in Gods love, but also, abhorring the unthankfulness,
rebellions, faults and sins which he has committed against his majesty,
might with grudge and displeasure against them, go through himself between the
arms of his son stretched upon the cross, to the end to abolish them wholly
and generally, and so with faith and penance to prepare himself worthily to come
to ye table of ye Lord, and receive ye benefits which are there administered:
this sermon being don, ye minister directing his face to the people, recites with
a loud voice, ye institution and ordinance of ye supper, with a brief and
distinct declaration of the same, he then denounces to all such, as be not
sufficiently instructed and catechized, that that is no place to present
themselves to, and likewise to such as be Excommunicate or attainted of any
sins and slanderous crimes for the which they have not satisfied to the
Church, to abstain, as not to pollute the Lords table: After all which, he
goes to the table, where having taken bread, he gives thanks to God, breaks
and distributes it to the people that are assembled: and so after, presents
the cup to all such as communicate, the which being done, he yeldes thanks
to God, and geues leave to the people.

And thus, following in all respects the Example and rule given by Jesus
Christ, we can not imagine whereupon the Doctoures can ground their saying
and sentence of the supper, as to call it a feast profane and polluted: nether
can we gather, what it is that they either could or would reprehend in all our
action, unless peradventure they would challenge and tax us because we have
no Albes, stoles, fannes, crosses, holy water, banners, iackets, lights,
incense, belles, and singing in an unknown tongue, music, organes, holy
linen, altares and clerks to answer and cum spiritu tuo: or peradventure
because we have no direct words to the bread and wine (which are without
ears) as the inchanters have, nor cross and signs, nor leuation of the
bread and wine, to the end to make them be worshipped, and lastly because we
use not such like toys, invented by men, and drawn partly from the Iewishe,
and partly from the Pagane order in the observation of which things we should
make great conscience, as being but Idolatries and superstitions, by the which
the pureness and integrity of christian religion is wholly spoiled and
corrupt.

An Answer to the questions proponed by the Doctoures touching the Supper.
TO Answer the first question we say, that the sacrament considered in his
perfection, consistes in three things: whereof the one is the Elemente, which
Ireneus calls an earthly thing: an other the thing signified, named by the
same Author a celestial thing: the third is the word, by the which the
earthly thing is deputed or assigned to signify the heavenly thing, and to
assure such of the exhibition of the same, as with faith present themselves to
receive it.

To Answer the second Question, we say, that the ordinance of God, contained
in his word, and declared by his minister according to his commandment, is
the word necessary with the Element to constitute the Sacrament, and not only
the secret and base pronunciation of certain words not understood
addressed to the Elements, nor any virtue that lies hid in them.

For Answer to the third Article, we say, that by the word aforesaid the
signs are changed, not touching the nature, or in respect of the substance,
but only in regard of the use, and that only during the Action in the which
they serve.

Touching the.iiij. question, we Answer, that the bread and wine which were
common before the Action of the supper, be consecrated in the supper, that is,
deputed by the word aforesaid and ordinance of God declared by the minister to
a holy and sacred use: which is to represent and exhibit the things signified
by them.

This Answer to the fourth, satisfies also the fifth question.

To the sixth question, we Answer, that in the supper, the faithful do not
onley receive the gifts and graces of Jesus Christ (as his justice, life, and
other fruits of his sacrifice,) but also they receive and possess even
himself, and are made one with him, no less truly and stricktly then the
members be conjoined to one head: we say further, that this conjunction is the
fountain and mean, of all the benefits, which discende unto us by him
through Gods grace: But we say with all, that this receiving ought to be
attributed in all and by all, to the free woorking of the holy Ghost: who
makes us fit and capable to know our Lord Jesus Christ, with all his
virtues and propreties, and in knowing him, to put our trust in him, and in
reapposing our trust in him, to possess and enjoy him wholly.

To Answer the.vij. question, we say, that we reiecte and reprove the term
of concomitance, together with the thing it signifies: as being the occasion
that the common people have been barde and secluded from one of the essential
parts of the sacrament: which is the participation of the cup: and we say, it
is an attempt against the divine majesty, to seek to separate that which the
son of God has conjoined, and deny to any of his members yt which he has
willed and commanded to be common to all: Like as also the reason of the
sacrament requires it, the same being instituted for our spiritual nouriture,
the which (as does the corporal) consists in eating and drinking. To the end
therefore yt there be a certain correspondencie between both, it must be yt as
we are filled with the crucified flesh of Jesus Christ, yt even so also we be
licoured with his blood shed for the remission of sins: To be short, seeing ye
supper was principally instituted, to declare ye death of our Lord, and that
in his death, his blood was divided from his body: it is very convenient the
bread and wine be there administered, to represent both the one and other, and
more clearly to propound to us the whole mystery of ye death of Christ.

To the.viij. Question, we acknowledge no other cause or mean for remission of
sins, than the grace of God, ye blood of Jesus Christ, and faith, by the
which the effect of gods grace, and the fruit of the death of Jesus Christ, are
applied unto us.

Our Answer to the.ix. question is, that the faithful coming to the Supper,
come not to receive there a new Jesus Christ: with whom they have not been
conjoined before, nether a new justice, which has not been communicate to
them: But we say, yt if any man present him self there, without faith, by want
whereof he was not united, incorpored, and knit in Jesus Christ to participate
with his justice, his life, and other his gifts and blessings, in this case ye
holy supper is unprofitable to him, as meat to a dead man: But, if living by
the means aforesaid (by gods grace, the blood of Jesus Christ, and faith) he
present himself there in such estate, that then gods graces are multiplied,
confirmed, and increased in him more and more: as the Circumcision brought not
to Abraham a new justice, but sealed and ratified that which had been
communicate to him before by the promise, the which being known to the
faithful, in what degree of virtue so ever they be, ought not to mistake the
holy supper, nor in any sort abstain from it, when they have the occasion and
means to assist it, considering that they cannot be so far advanced in the
knowledge and fear of God, and in the faith of his promises, but that they
may further profit and increase therein (in what estate so ever they be) by the
means which God has left and ordained for this effect in his Church:
neither is it possible that a man, having a true faith, in his heart, do
otherwise, having the commodity of it: Because, the nature of faith, is not
to comprehend only the promises of God, but also to engender and bring forth
in the hearts of the Faithful, a will to obey him, with observation of his
commandments and ordinances.

To Answer the first Articles proponed by the Doctors touching their Mass,
we say they blaspheme openly Jesus Christ, as to authorize under his name, and
by his example, such an abomination: and that also they make a scoff of the
church and the world, to preach and write such impieties.

To the second Article of the Mass, we Answer, yt there is no other
sacrifice in the church, by which men are reconciled to God, and which makes
him merciful and favorable to them (in appeasing his wrath) than only that
which Jesus Christ has once offered to his father upon the cross: the
virtue of the which being eternal, to sa^ctifie all the believing and obtain
remission of their sins for ever, there is no need of any others, nor that
that which he has once offered, be ever repeated.

For Answer to the third Article, we say, that such as approve the Mass, and
other sacrificature, than that of Jesus Christ, and seek to establish for
remission of sins, an other Sacrifice than that which he himself offered in
his body of the Cross, are Antichrists, and deface (in so much as in them
is) all the virtue and fruit of the death and sacrifice of the Son of God.

To Answer the fourth, we allege that which S. Paul writes, that where is
remission, there is no more Oblation for the sin: And if it be so, that by
the death of Jesus Christ, remission has been obtained for us, it follows
that there is no more Oblation for sin, neither in the Mass nor out of the
Mass: And if there be none for the living, there is less for them that be
dead.

For Answer to the fifthe, we maintain that the Communion is of the essence
of the supper according to S. Paul in the first to the Corinthians. Chap. 10.
and.11. and as the Canon and other parts of the Mass importes.

For Answer to the sixthe, we allege three things: First that the Mass of
the Papists is no Sacrament, and then, that the body of Jesus Christ is not
there, and conclude thereupon, that there can not be worshipped therein but the
bread and wine, which rest there: which being creatures can not be
woorshipped, but that such as do woorship them, are Idolatrers.

To Answer the seventh and last Article, we say contrary to the Doctors, that
there is nothing in the Mass, which either directly or indirectly, is not
contrary to Gods word.

And for Conclusion, we advise and pray the Doctoures, not to exceed or
forsake the limits of the matter proponed this day to dispute upon, as they
have done heretofore, to the end that these two points, which stand at this
day in debate between them, may be perfectly and wholly decided, to the
contentment and edifying of such as shall read the Acts of this conference.

Tuesday the.30. of Iulie, the year aforesaid.
A summary Reply of the Doctors against the last Answer of the Ministers,
sent to them by the Duke Nyuernois the first of Auguste at seven or eight of
the clock in the Evening. 1566.
AFter we had given our Resolution upon the Article of Gods Omnipotency,
we meant not eftsoons to return upon that Argument, as having already
sufficiently handled it: but such is the horror of the new Blasphemies
contained in the last pamphelet of the Ministers, that (against our said
meaning) we are forced, if not to reply, at the least to admonish them,
together with the Readers of this present conference, in the matter of the
said most execrable blasphemies, with such are urged to confess, who will
not acknowledge the Real presence of the Body of Jesus Christ in the
Sacrament of the Aultare, are not ashamed to deny also even the power of God
him self.

The consideration whereof (as we hope) will not only confirm the Catholics
in the faith of the said Article, but also (with Gods aid) bring home
again many that are strayed and separated from the Catholic Church, upon the
understanding of the detestable erroures and blasphemies succeeding with the
contradiction to the Real presence of the Body of our Lord in the said
Sacrament: which might also serve the Ministers for their conversion, if
without passion they would examine and sincerely judge of the reasons and
acts proponed touching the power of God: where, as resisting the Holy Sprite,
in place to confess their errors, they are turned into all sorts of wrongs
and injuries against such as of good will revealed them, misconstruing our
purpose, as not to tend but to deface and root them out: wherein as we were
never moved so much as in thought, so of the contrary, we desired nothing
more than the salvation of the Ministers, together with all such as were
fallen from the true Catholic Church: whereof, what better witness can we
prefer, than that in our ordinary preaching we persuade the people to pray to
God for them: only we seek to root up the reign and kingdom of Satan, and
to abolish all heresies and perverse Doctrine, rather by the preaching of Gods
word, than any other mean: And much do we marvel, that the Ministers seem so
hotly netled against us in their last Aunsweres, seeing it is without occasion
on our side, as only chalenging many of our propositions to contain matter of
blasphemy, which they might have suffised either to deny, or disprove, leaving
the Readers to judge, without entering into so warm choler, seeing that as they
make profession of patience and modesty, so though they were urged in injury,
yet they should not enforce revenge. They ought to remember the goodly titles
wherewith they honor the Catholic doctrine, as with the name of superstition,
idolatry, impiety, abomination and many other like, yea not sparing the
persons, calling the Popes, Bishops and Priests, Antichrists, and ministers
of Satan: Against which checkes we are content, when occasion moves, to prove
by Gods word, that such titles are inconvenient no less to the persons, than
to the Doctrine preached by them: And so albeit, the ministers and their fury,
deserve a sharp reply, yet to qualify their Waspishe stomakes, we will
forbear to Answer the injuries that touch our persons and estates, and
leaving all to the judgment of the Readers without passion, we will only
proceed to the points that concerns the Doctrine.

In the first place, the ministers do great wrong to us and ours, to resemble
us with the Donatistes, as imputing falsely to us to draw the Church into a
certain place as did the Donatistes, who placed her only in Afrike: For it is
most manifest, that we neither know nor confess other Church then the
Catholic, who (as the name bears) has been visibly since the Apostles, and
stretches through all the world, in what Region, Country, or place so ever the
faithful believing in Jesus Christ, be: albeit we reverence the Romish church,
as, amongst others, the first and principal, as Ireneus Tertullian, S. Cyprian,
S. Augustine, with other Auncientes, gave her this honor, to confess her
principally, and as mother of all the other Churches: And therefore with far
more just reason, that objection might be applied against the ministers, who
can not say that their Church is Catholic, as having taken her original in
our time, seen and known at Geneua, and founded upon the private opinion of
one man, without that, in any time before, it can be showed that any such
opion has been holden in any nation what so ever, which shall be handled in
his order, when we discende to examine the errors maintained by the Ministers
against the Article, I believe the holy Catholic Church.

For the rest, the Ministers ought not to have alleged the violence,
cruelty, and fury of the Donatistes against the Catholics: seeing such
example condemns them and their like.

But because it does but kindle a memory of the hurts passed, which France
has suffered by the setting on of the Ministers, and for fear to stir up
eftsoons to new wrongs, we will stay no longer upon this speech, showing
notwithstanding to the Ministers, that the Donatistes reproched the Catholics
to endure persecution by them, and that to root them up, they solicited
Emperoures and Magistrates, as the Ministers do evil apply to us: who
confess to desire first of all the Conversion of all Sects, and if they will
not come to amendment, that then by good and holy laws, the Magistrates to lay
such punishment upon them, as God be not blasphemed, nor the people
tormented, according to the Doctrine of S. Augustine in an Epistle sent ad
Vincentium contra Denatistas, where he Confesses that the Catholics
persecuted the Donatistes, as, of the contrary, the Donatistes afflicted also
the Catholics: Only their persecutions differed, for the Catholykes did not
execute but by the Magistrates, and that proceeded of Charity, to root up the
evil which hindered the public peace and tranquillity; where, of the contrary
the Donatistes persecuted without authority of the Magistrate, and proceeded
of malice, pretending nothing but ruin and subversion: S. Augustine allows
the first to be good, and according to God, and the second he makes to be
wicked, and of the inspiration of Satan: wherein he brings many examples of the
scripture: we have stand somewhat long upon this point, the rather to purge
the slander which the Ministers have laid upon us, as that in our preachings,
wrytings, and conference, we have not searched but their destruction, and
always to persecute them: construing it as a matter of particulare hate
against them, and not of charity and zeal to the truth, to convert as well
the ministers, as such as are seduced and abused by them: wherein we call God
to witness, and protest all the contrary, with request to the ministers to
believe us, attending Gods judgment upon it, who is the only searcher of
the hearts and affections of men.

Touching the Article, where the Ministers say that God is almighty, because
he can do all that he will: if they would have red the wrytings of S. Thomas
(whose Doctrine they disdain) they should well know that this reason is
nothing: because the Angels and such as are blessed, being always conformed
to the will of God, may do all that they will do, and there is no creature
that ca^ hinder the effect of their will, and yet they are not omnipotent:
touching the saying of S. Augustine (taking it as the ministers do) the reason
of Gods almightinesse is too weak and false.

But to have a true understanding of this sentence, we must consider, that
there is difference between the will of God actual, and the power of the will,
for God may will many things, which he will not, nor never would: and therefore,
he can will more then he will not actually, wherein we ought rather to measure
his omnipotency, then according to his actual will.

In this sort must we interpret the text of S. Augustine, that Gods
omnipotency stretches to all things, which he can will, and not according as
he actually wills: S. Augustine also is recited by the ministers, being
destitute of testimony of the scripture, albeit in their former Answer they
vaunt to have taken that reason of the scriptures.

In the Article following, the ministers charge us falsely, to have curtalled
some words of their last writing, which shall not be found true: For our text
bears these words: it is undoubted that above all conceit and imagination of
man's spirit, Gods power is great, infinite, and incomprehensible: by which
may be clearly seen, that we speak universally of all conceit and
imagination, without exception of any, whether it be of wisdom or of folly:
therefore it was without need to express the words of the ministers, seeing
the Doctors spoke generally: the which that which goes before, does show, as
the ministers have recited it, where it is said that we reprehended them, in
that they gave some restraint and limitation of the omnipotency of God: as not
suffering it to stretch generally to all things that man's wit might imagine
or conceive: where, in these words, generally, and all things, they declare
that we would comprehend according to human judgment, even the foolish
fancies and imaginations, which men may comprehend: And that we would not cut
of anything of the writing of the ministers, who perhaps were of opinion that
we would not say that God can do all that a fond brain can imagine, as
fearing that we would infer against them, that God could do any folly:
which should not follow: for albeit in the judgment of men, certain things
are esteemed fond, yet seeing they are possible in themselves, they may be
done of God, but wisely, notwithstanding the wit of man judge the contrary:
Like as in many judgments, man beguiles himself, esteeming that for folly,
which is wisdom with God, as S. Paul says. So that we say, that all things
which are to be imagined by man, are to be done with God, without excepting any
thing saving such things as implie contradiction to be and not to be, which
can not be done in respect of repugnancie proceeding of their part, and not
by fault of the power of God: wherein we pray such, to whom these
conferences shall come, to note that the ministers are always found
slaunderers, when they lay that crime upon us, like as in the former writing
they stand as convinced therein.

The Ministers will also be found slaunderers in the Article following, where
they clippe our sayings, and falsely lay upon us to have written that God ca^ do
any thing against order: in deed we said, that to hold that God could do
nothing against the order which he has established in the world, is to
blaspheme God: in which may be discerned the slander of the ministers, who
mangling the speech, have taken away these words, established in the world:
where they infer that it is a blasphemy to say, that God may do a thing
which is not well ordered, it is out of doubt: but to do any thing contrary
to the order established in the world, importes not any thing disordered, but
only mutation and change of order, without any disorder, which the Ministers
confess in their Article following.

We greatly abhor the blasphemies contained in the next Article, whereof the
first is, that one body be in diverse places, is a thing derogante to the truth
of God, because in God there should be yea and not: so that the Ministers hold
that God should not be true, if he brought to pass one body to be in diverse
places, and yet they neither teach, nor can teach, that God has ever said
that one body could not be in diverse places: it impugnes the wisdom of God,
because in his works, there should be disorder and confusion, wherein
likewise they confess that God should not be wise, if he made one body at one
instante to be in diverse places.

The third is, that such thing resistes the omnipotency of God, seeing in
such act, there should be such imperfection, that much less (according to
the opinion of the Ministers) that God in doing this, should be omnipotent,
but of the contrary, he should be imperfect and impuissant.

The fourth is, that if such a thing were done, it should be against the
eternal and immovable will of God, and therefore God should be mutable: Out
of which blasphemies is necessarily vomited a manifest Atheism, that God
should not be God, if he made one body in one instant to be in diverse places:
For God can not be but true, wise, almighty, and immovable: which blasphemies
we are content to coat and mark only, with admonishment how many miseries
spring of their Doctrine that deny the Real presence of the body of Jesus
Christ in the holy Sacrament: and not to stay any more to confute them, as
being too manifest, and having regard with all, to the saying of Ireneus, that
there be heresies, whom to discover, is to refute them.

In the Article following, they resist that with so many times they have said,
that God could not bring to pass that one body be in two places at one
instante, because it impugned the order which he has established in the
world, as though God could do no other ways, than according to the order
which he has already established: and in this present Article they confess
that God can change and alter the said order, out of which Confession we draw
this argument: God can change and alter the order, which he has established
in the world, and that without any prejudice to his truth, his wisdom,
power, and immovable will: then he can change the order by the which he has
established (as the Ministers seem to hold) that one body should not be but
in one place, and to bring to pass (in the contrary, the order being changed)
that one body shall be in diverse places, and yet in that, there is no
derogation to his truth, wisdom, power and will: and by consequent that God
of his omnipotency may bring to pass that one body be in diverse places.

Touching the Article of the distinction of the wills of God, the ministers
mumble all together, understanding nothing in the said distinction, no more
than where they say, that a body to be in two places, is of ye society of
those things which God has declared by his word, that he can do nothing
against them.

First there is question of gods omnipotency, which is referred to that which
he can, and not to his essence, and that which is in himself: as is to be all
one, wise, and good: which things belong not to the omnipotency, but of the
essence in him self.

Secondly, what reason is there to confer the being of one body in one place,
or to know whether God can make it to be in two or more places: with the
essence of God which is one, incomprehensible. etc. seeing that such things
being numbered, appertain to the essence of God: And to be able to make a body
in many places belonges not proprely to him, nor is referred to the same.

Thirdly, the ministers say that God by his word has declared his will
concerning that he was one, which serves nothing to the present matter: But
pardoning them those follies, how dare they compare with the essence of God,
that which is in contention, of the being of one body in one or diverse places:
seeing God has never said, that he could not do it, as he has pronounced
manifestly all the other perfections which appertain to the divine essence: by
which may be espied, that it suffiseth the ministers to fill the paper,
without grounding their opinion upon any substantial reason.

Seeing they take for reproach, when they have any word cut of,
notwithstanding the sense remain whole, we marvel they feared not to receive
the like Objections from us: as in the Article where is mention made of the
definition of a body, they conceal that which gives solution to their
difficulty: we defined a body to be a kind of quantity constant of three
dimensions, length, largeness, and depth, which definition comprehendes all
the essence of a body, which is of the predicament of quantity: neither is
there mention made of the circumscription of place in any sort: the ministers
say, that by our definition, we limite the body, and therefore it is
circumscripte: but they have left out this little word, place, maliciously,
as is to be supposed.

For the question is not whether a body be limited or not, seeing no man
says it is infinite: But the Question lies, whether it be circumscript of
place essentiallie, so that it cannot be a body, if it be not in place: wherein
because they could not Answer to the argument, they have cut of that which
was against them.

The four next Articles, are worthy of no new Reply, and therefore we send
the Readers to that which has been said before: only, it is a great matter
that the ministers hold that a miracle can not be done in the body of Jesus
Christ, without change of his nature, imposing that opinion upon Iustine,
who (as well as other Auncientes) has said and maintained, that the body of
Jesus Christ, without change of nature, did pass through the doors,
although the operation of the miracle was done in the nature of the body,
without changing it, but in giving it a quality and spiritual perfection,
above the natural qualities of a body, that is suttelty.

With like boldness, the ministers call the Scripture for the place of the
Camel to pass through the eye of a needle, a parable and similitude: as they
do that of the supper, and al others which resist their errors: and to escape,
they say, that God saues not the rich man, if he be not changed and
converted: And so they say, he can not bring to pass that a Camel pass
through the eye of a needle without diminution and change of his greatness:
But the ministers do not admonish, that when our Lord spoke of the entry of
a Rich man into the kingdom of Heaven, he put not the difficulty proprely in
the entry to the kingdom, but in the conversion of the Rich man, whereby he
may obtain the entry and possession of Heaven: wherefore when our Lord says
that it is more easy to God, to make a Camel (or Cable) enter by the eye of a
Needle, than a Rich man into the kingdom of heaven: he means to compare the
conversion of a rich man (which is impossible to men) to the passage of a
Camel being in his grosenesse: otherwise as there should be no likelihoode of
difficulty, so our Lord would not say, that such a thing was impossible to
men: We say further, that we have not produced this place, as to prove the
penetration of dimensions proprely, but to show that God may bring to pass
that a body occupy a place, which shall not be proportioned to his greatness:
which is as much against the nature of gross and thick bodies, as that one
body be in diverse places.

Where the ministers glory, in that they are not constrained to confess any
thing of the doings of God alleged out of the scripture by the Doctors: it
follows not that the said Doctors have brought forth vain reasons to
enforce and convince them, referring themselves to the Acts of the conference:
And touching to know if God could do such miracles alleged above the nature of
a body, the ministers can not escape, what evasion so ever they pretend, that
they are not co^uinced to have denied as well the power as the fact: though not
openly, yet at the least covertly: For affirming that God can not bring to
pass that one body be in diverse places, because it does impugn the order he
has established in the world, his wisdom also and his will, which dispose
all by good order, and that it was against the nature of the body: if there
may be as much said, as truly there may, of all the other things mentioned
touching a body, with like reasons: in confessing the one, they must
necessarily confess all the other, as containing like reason, whereunto the
ministers have secretly accorded, being not able to give any difference, nor
show why God can not do the one, and be able to do the others: And albeit
they will never confess the debt, nor yield as overcome, as they vaunt, yet
there is no marvel, seeing it is the nature of Heretics to become obstinate,
and resist the truth, what reasons so ever are proponed: The Scribes and
Pharisees never confessed to be overcome of the Lord, notwtstanding his
arguments were irreprocheable: Likewise, albeit, such as contended against S.
Steven, had no more to Answer, yet they forbear not to resist the holy spirit
yt spoke in him: even as the ministers resist the self same holy spirit
speaking by the scripture, and the mouth of the Ancient fathers of miracles
done in the body of Jesus Christ above nature, which the ministers impugn I
know not by what vain and friuoious escapes: Touching this matter, S Jerome
says, heretici conuin^^ possunt, non persuaderi: As also Tertullian. Duritia
haeretica vincenda est non suadenda: And touching the injuries which the
ministers multiply in this behalf against us, in that they follow all the
adversaries to the truth, and give good testimony, what disquiet of mind
such kind of people suffer, when their errors are laid before them, of whom
such is our pity, yt we pray God to restore them to their good mind, as
knowing that the Conversion of an heretic, is one of the things reserved to
the omnipotency of God.

The ministers labor in vain to produce much Greek, to show that penetrare
coelos, signifies not to pass the Heavens without opening, because this
verb, Dierchestai is found to pass where is opening: But we never said that
penetrare, or Dierchestai can not be applied to places opened, or that in
opening them, they were pierced through: For we know in all Authors that does
encounter: We said, that as the ministers would infer the Real opening of
the heaven by the rigor and propretie of the verb aperire, so might they
allege that the heavens were shut in the Ascension of Jesus Christ by the
verbes Dierchestai, and penetrare, signifying with rigor, to pierce or pass
through, without that of it self, it importe opening, notwithstanding it may
be used, where is a place open: But by the rigor of their signification,
opening can not be necessarily inferred, if, by some word, from else where,
or evident condition of the thing that is pierced, the opening be not showed:
as it is in the textes alleged by the ministers: In the Ascension these Verbes
Dierchestai and penetrare be used, as to pierce, neither is any word added,
which imports division of the heavens: whose condition, nor the estate of the
glorified body of Jesus Christ, do not enforce any necessary understanding
of opening to be made, to suffer the said body of Christ to enter.

Therefore we argued of the rigor of penetrare, as the ministers did of the
wresting of aperwe, which is found in the scripture, and not to signify a
Real opening of the heavens, more often than penetrare is red in the Scripture
to signify division or actual separation of the heavens: for eperire coelos,
is found very often for spiritual and imaginatiue opening: and penetrare
coelos, is scarcely ever taken for actual division of the Heavens.

And therefore better was our reason to conclude by the rigor of the verb
Dierchestai, or penetrare (to pass without actual division of ye heavens) than
ye ministers to infer ye opening of the same, by wresting the Verb aperire.

In the last Article, the ministers obiecte to us to have passed over certain
places of scripture, by which appears that Faith is a work of God:
whereunto we say, that in some of our wrytings we have expressly confessed that
Faith, in that it is a gift of God, is a work of God. But in that he that
believes, works with God in believing, (for Nemo credit nisi volens) it is a
human work: and it is not repugnant, one self work, for diverse
considerations, to be a work of God, and a work of man. And where they
bring the Auncientes to have said (if not in propretermes, yet in like) that
God can not bring to pass that a body be in diverse places: that is false: for
they never either could or can show it, as also they gainesay their last
writing: for, bringing the reason why the Auncientes said it not in express
terms, they alleged it was because they never thought such absurdity
could fall into the brain of man: which reason ought to take place, as well
to speak it in terms like, as in express terms, seeing it is one self
thing signified as well by the one as by the other.

For the rest: the ministers never Answer to the principal, whereof they
have been often warned, and eftsoons we do admonish them, although they
term a thousand times our speech, matter of repetition: it is, that we
require them to bring scripture to prove that it impugnes the order established
in the world, the truth, wisdom, omnipotency, and immovable will of God, one
body to be in two places: which they can not do, but Answer according to
their custom, nothing: wherein may be discerned, that their Doctrine is not
founded upon Gods word, but upon their propre opinion; or particulare
inspiration, which can not be but of Satan: for being contrary to the common
consent of the universal Church, it can not be of the holy Ghost. And upon
the same are founded also the other Articles of their Religion, albeit they
disguise and promise at every word, the word of God.

A short advertisement of the Doctors upon the resolution of the Ministers
touching the omnipotency of God.
WE marvel of the manner of speech and writing used by the Ministers, who
since the beginning of the conference, could never endure to pursue and
conclude one only point, without entermedling of others which belonged
nothing to the matter of the question as may appear by the reading of their
Acts: Wherein before they set down their resolution of Gods omnipotency, they
heaped together as many Articles as they could remember, and thrust them one
upon an other, without occasion and reason. Notwithstanding (upon their own
request) we had set before them articles of the Supper: yea to the intent that
after we had disputed of the almightynesse of God (to make present the body and
blood of Jesus Christ in the holy Sacrament) we might discende by order into
the declaration and proof, that such was Gods will, and also that he is
there: But we are not ignorant of the good customs of those of the religion
pretended reformed, to blow in the eyes of the Christians, all the articles of
their religion, together with the polutions they invent thereupon all upon one
line, to the end nothing be determined, but all rest in confusion, and that
the Serpent run away when he has vomited his poison.

Besides by the observation of their aunswers, it is to be discerned, that
they never rested upon any certain and self answer: But to every question
they have returned aunswers no less diverse than impertinent, and sometimes not
to be suffered: of the which we give warning to all such as shall read the
conferences, and laying our selves upon their judgment, beseech them to have
good regard to the doings of the Ministers side.

Moreover, we tell the Ministers, that either they may or ought to know, that
all the sects of our time bleare the eyes of such as they mean to blind with
the self same train of articles which they have gathered together in their
resolution, and that to obtain audience in the catholic Church, and to bring
in their errors and heresies under the name of Gods glory. Of the which they
vaunt them selves to be protectors no less than the Ministers: wherein, like
as notwithstanding all these, they are not to be received or allowed in their
opinions and conclusions, so the Ministers ca^ not pretend any right to exalt
the power and glory of God by such a confusion and hotchpotche of all matters
together.

Moreover we let the Ministers understand that with better reason we could
return upon them the conclusion they pretend to infer of the subtiltye and
art of Satan, the same being (as they write) that under a godly pretense of
piety, Satan (in the manner of a Serpent) slides into the Church of God, to
the end to plant their disorder, and at last to set upon even God himself.
Let every one see and consider in himself, if this be not the true enterprise
of the Ministers, both by their deductions, and generallye the principal
points of their doctrine. For under a farie pretense to root up certain
abuses and errors, which falsely they seek to persuade the world to be in
the catholic Church, against Gods word, and under color of preaching, that
they search to exalt the name of the Lord, they go about to dispoyle God of
his properties and perfections, notwithstanding they declare it not, no more
than Satan opened his intent to the first man.

The Ministers besides deface the merit and efficacye of the blood of Jesus
Christ, and by their doctrine open the gate to all vices and sin. For proof
whereof, albeit we should spare to repeat what they have holden of the power of
God, yet their writings stand as their accusers: only in good resolution
(although they utter fair speech) God can do no more, as they hold, than it
pleases them to receive of his wisdom and will, which they disguise after
their sense, when it is found declared in the scripture. Against the bountye
of God they hold, that he is author and worker of evil and sin. Against his
mercy they teach that he neither does nor will pardon a man that has impugned
by malice the knowledge of the truth, or resisted it. Against the merit of the
blood of Jesus Christ, and passion of the cross, they have written in proper
terms, that if Jesus Christ had dyed only by the anguishes of corporal
death, and the effusion of all his blood, he had done nor profited nothing for
our redemption: If being upon the cross, and before his death, he had not
endured the pain of the damned in his soul, with other horrible blasphemies
contained in the article of his discention in to hell.

They instruct also their adherentes, that manslaughter, adultery, robbery,
theft, sacrilege and all other crime what soever, are but venial sins to
the predestinate, whom they say are never out of Gods grace, whatsoever they
do. Assuring their faithful, and such as stand in their Church, to believe
constantly that they be in grace, and predestinate, which in plain speech
(though they would otherwise excuse it) is to give full license to do all
evil: With sundry other articles which we intend to verify, as the matter
requires. But if they deny these points to be written and published in their
sect, the places in Calums books, which we have noted in the Margent, are to
give witness. In effect that is the glory of God, and his Son Jesus Christ
whereunto the Ministers incline and tend, by the extirping of the pretended
impieties mentioned in many articles of their last resolution.

To answer the which in short speech, we say, that some are spitefullye and
falselye laid upon the catholyke Church by the Ministers, others be
expresselye written in holy Scripture, and others drawn out of the same, and
confirmed by the tradition of the Apostles, and universal consent of the first
Christian church: except the slanderous impositions which in every article
the Ministers do add. And so in time and place we will declare and prove by
peecemeale, if the patience of the Ministers will consent to handle every
difficulty in his place. But if they continue to cauell withal to put
confusion in the doctrine, we protest to answer them with scoffs.

For the rest, they babble much of Gods power in general, alleging that we
ought to take certain knowledge of it by the Scriptures, which we have
always aduowed unto them. They say also that it is infinite and
incomprehensible, but when we offer particularities, to know wherein
omnipotency consistes, then they forget the holy scriptures, and without them
measure it according to the wisdom and eternal will of God, and the order
established in the world: yea and as if they were without all remembrance,
that that almightynesse were infinite, they wrest it to a condition, property,
and natural order of creatures: as if to do any thing against or above the
order, condition and natural propertye of the said creatures, were a thing
repugnaunt to the wisdom, nature, and will of God. This is the short
resolution which we may gather of their opinion touching the omnipotency of
God, the same appearing in their papers and answers given to us, wherein,
touching S. Augustine produced by them, we have sufficiently answered before.

Where the Ministers lay upon us to hold as a sufficient argument, that a case
being done of God, declares that he could do it, we refer our selves to our
writings, whereof our resolution and objections contain all the contrary.

We are also slaundered by the Ministers, to affirm that faith contrarieth
nature every way: only we said, that ordinarily the contradiction done to
faith, founded upon the word, proceeds of the consideration of things
natural against the power of God.

Touching Abraham, the scripture of Genesis witnesses always, that he and
his wise made a certain difficultye touching the promise of God: and
considered corpus suum emortuum, et mortuam vuluam Sar^ae until he heard the
assurance of the omnipotency, as also S. Paul speaks enough of Abraham,
since his first vocation, till after that assurance, without putting
distinction in the historye of that which was before or after such assurance,
according to the saying of the Apostle, that he did not consider corpus suum
emortuum, resting upon the assurance of the power and promise which had been
made to him.

We say, we have better concluded touching the faith we ought to have of the
power of God (to make one body in diverse places) than the Ministers, who have
no word of God to assure their faith and belief that God cannot do it, or
that it impugnes his wisdom, providence, and eternal virtue, or the
humanity of Jesus Christ, yea only the nature of a simple body: But touching
all this, the Ministers trust in their presumption and particular revelation,
without one only place of the scripture, whereupon they may settle or rest
their opinion: Where, of the contrary we have grounded our faith (not only
touching the power of God, to bring to pass that a body be in diverse places,
but also to believe the fact, and that God would it so) upon the holy
Scripture, as appears in our resolution, together with the places of the
auncientes alleged for that purpose, the same being so manifest, that as the
Ministers are not able to gainsay them, so touching their escapes, they are to
be convinced by the simple reading of the books.

Touching the residue of the Ministers resolution (containing many injuries,
slanders, and wrongs against us) we answer nothing, having regard to the
manner of their doings. Like as also we consider, it should be but pain lost
to teach the Ministers, who for their instruction, esteem more their
particular revelation, than all the doctrine of the universal church, and all
the Christians together. And lastly we pardon them with all our hearts, at the
wrongs they have done us, as being people estraunged from their full sense, and
without judgment, which they well declare by the manner of their doing.

The Doctors objection touching the Supper against the Answer of the Ministers.
IT appears sufficiently in the acts of the first days arguing, why in the
beginning of the conferences, we touched not the articles of the supper:
wherein the Ministers do maliciously slander us, in saying we refused to enter
into the matter of the same: as is truly proved, as well by our sundry offers
made to them to confer thereof verbally, to the end to advance it with more
speed, and so at leisure to set it down in writing (which the Ministers
refused) as also by our former objections touching the article of the
almightynesse. By these we touched the grounds, whereupon are builded the
errors of the religion pretended reformed, against the real presence of the
body and blood of Jesus Christ in the holy Sacrament. The same being to be
justified further, in that we object to them certain arguments against their
Supper, the rather to make them enter into it: To the which either they have
answered nothing at all, or at least so impertinentlye, that even the words
of their answer discover their disposition to flee the combat. As yet they
continue by their last writings, hiding, so far as they can, that which they
think of the supper: notwithstanding they have been required to answer both
to purpose and truth. But whether they or we refused, the effect stands to
judge. For though they will not answer, yet we will not forbear to advise
them, and reveal to the whole world the intolerable errors, as well in the
Supper, as in all the doctrine of the Ministers: Who being asked, yet dare not
confess and justify what has been written by the inuenters of their supper.

But now to begin to speak of the supper, the Ministers mayntaine it
celebrated, according to the ordinance of Jesus Christ and manner with the
Apostels, used in all the primitive Church, when she floorished, and whylest
she remained in her pureness.

Whereunto we answer with this question, how many worlds they think that
the doctrine has remained in her pureness touching the Supper, and whether as
then the Church stood not as pure in the doctrine of all the other Articles, as
in this? Besides, whether since that time there was not found any place through
the whole world, where the true doctrine of the supper, and the other
Articles, was retained and preserved? As also in what place, and by whom, from
world to world, it was preached and advanced? In these we desire to be
satisfied by the Ministers, as importing much, because that before Calvin
preferred his Catechism, there was no memory in any Region of such doctrine
as he taught, neither was the supper celebrated in the manner it is now in the
reformed Church.

And we would gladlye relieve the Ministers, who in their writings seem
straungelye passioned, that we have said that their Supper differs not from a
common Banquet, saving that it is worse, as being profane and polluted.

But to encounter this, they make a great speak of all the action of their
said Supper, and by goodlye accessories, carrying a form of all piety, they
labor to make it highlye commended: covering a goodly nothing between two
platters. And of the contrary to tread down and deface the most precious
sacrifice of the body and blood of Jesus Christ in the Mass, by tearing in
pieces some accessorye of the same, as though we used it without reason and
signification, which the Ministers either understand not, or dissemble not to
understand.

But as things ought not to be taken and esteemed by their accessories, but
according to their value, nature, and truth: so the Ministers have to foresee,
that all the sects standing at this day in all the world against the
catholic Church, for the matter of the Sacrament, use at least this bravery
that they do. Who if they were asked, there is not one of them which would not
enforce to prove, that their sect approaches nearer Jesus Christ, his Apostels,
and the primitive Church, than the Religion pretended reformed. Touching all
which, we refer our selves to the writings of the Lutherians, Zwinglians,
Anabaptists, Trinitaries, Master Alasco, with other like.

Therefore it is not reasonable by these fair voices and speeches, to prefer
the supper of the Ministers before other sects, with judgment that it is good,
holy, impoluted, and according to gods word: but rather to repute it infected
and defiled with impiety, as covering a dream in place of truth, and gives
the accessaries of piety, to impietye and falshoode. Neither have we
dispraysed their Supper, for the thanks they give to God, or in respect of
their confession of sins, or their preaching (if it contain matter of truth)
or for any other preparatiue: But in this have we named it to be detestable, as
not containing but common bread and wine, contrary to the ordinance of Jesus
Christ: and yet they attribute unto it some spiritual effect, with other
goodly accessaries of piety: the same being a matter of more abominatio^, and
invented by Satan, who seeks by such manner of supper, to quench and abolish
the true supper according to the institution of Jesus Christ, and rob the
faithful of the fruit and truth of the said true supper, in making them give
only common bread, in place of the body and blood of our savior Jesus Christ.

Here we could recite the wicked accessories, as well as they speak of the
goodly, which are in their supper, as the secret and new enterprises which
are practiced under color and shaddowe of the assemblies drawn together at
their said supper: but least the Ministers reproach us, that the Clerk speak
of weapons, of contributions. etc. we will altogether hold our peace, and
refer our selves to that which is: contenting our selves to deduce certain
causes, by the which we maintain that there is no truth in the said Supper,
according to the institution of Jesus Christ.

First, that in the supper of the Ministers and their lykes, there cannot be
made any consecration of the matter of the bread and wine, which are there
proposed: and therefore there is not made in the said matter any mutation
either before the use, or in the use, or after, and by consequence, that the
bread and wine in that Supper cannot be but common.

That there is no consecration made in their Supper, it appears first by this,
that it belongs not to al persons to consecrate the bread and the wine in the
supper: but only to such as are lawfully ordained by the imposition of the
hands of the Pastors and Bishops, according to the succession since the
Apostles till our time. And it is most certain that the most part of the
ministers of the supposed reformed church, are not ordained by the authority
of the hands of the Pastors, who have power by succession of one to an other,
since the Apostles: So that we must conclude, that such ministers usurping the
office that pertaines not to them, can not make any consecration, and by
consequence, they give but common bread and wine: of which Article shall be
spoken, when we handle the sacrifice, and priesthood.

Secondly, to make consecration of bread and wine, it suffiseth not that the
person be fit to consecrate the matter, but it is also necessary, that by a
certain mean the lawful minister make the consecration, which is, by
Benediction and pronuntiation of certain words upon the matters proposed, as
Jesus Christ did first observe, wherein, because the ministers, albeit they
were lawfully ordained, and had authority and power to consecrate, do not use
Benediction and pronuntiation of certain words upon the Bread and Wine,
(impugning first that which Jesus Christ did, and after left it to the
Apostles and their successoures to do so) they can not pretend any
consecration of the Bread and Wine, nor that in them do come any mutation:
whereof it follows, that as they differ not from other Bread and Wine, so
that banquet and feast is but common, and that it is blasphemy to attribute to
it the name of Christian Supper: And this is a party cause, why we said the
ministers supper was a banquet profane and polluted.

We have required the ministers to Answer pertinently and fully, to our
Demaundes, which because they have not done, to the end to intercept all vain
travail, we think it not good for the present to impugn their Aunsweres:
only we summon them eftsoons to Answer that which is proponed to them,
without shifting of the conference which they pretend to hold in so dear
regard.

The first Demand was general for all the Sacraments to weete, if the
ministers believed that two things were essential and necessary to the
confection of the Sacrament: which are: the matter or element, and the word:
the Ministers Answer, that the Sacrament considered in his perfection,
consists in three things. etc. they speak in determinately, so that it can not
be judged, if their speech understand the Sacrament only, which they call of
the Supper, or generally of all, as they were asked: albeit in respect they
allege Ireneus, it may be easily gessed that they mean not but the Sacrament
of the Supper: we have also to note the words of their Addition, considered
in his perfection, as always to have a hole to creep out when we speak of
the essence of the Sacrament.

We demand that they Answer to the Question proponed in general of all the
Sacraments, seeing there is like reason touching the essence of the Sacraments
in general: and that also they declare openly, what things are essential and
necessary in the Sacrament, to be made a Sacrament, without speaking for the
present of the perfection of one Sacrament, containing the essence and
spiritual fruits, which are not of the essence of the Sacrament.

Touching the second Demand, the Ministers Answer no more pertinently, than
to the first: And specially, where we made a Demand that certain words
must be used for the confection of the Sacrament, and what was necessary for
the Sacrament of the Supper: the ministers have said, that the base and
secret speech of certain words addressed to the Elements, was not a
necessary speech to the confection of the sacrament: We did not Demand
whether that speech should be pronounced high or low.

But the Question was, if there be any necessary speeches to make the
sacrament, which ought to be pronounced upon the matter, or in administering the
matter: and what might be those words for the supper: wherein it is not
inoughe to say, that the word by the which the ordinance of Jesus Christ is
declared, is the word of the sacrament, But they must Answer in what
words that speech consistes, and when it ought to be pronounced.

Touching the sixthe Demand which is the principal, the ministers care not
to Answer pertinently and clearly: only they exhibit a captious Answer, by
which it can not be perceived what is their opinion of the presence and
participation of the body of Jesus Christ in the supper: And so do they
temper their speech, that there is neither Zuinglian, nor Almanist, which
confesses not as much or more than they, that is to say, that they are
conjoined to our Lord Jesus Christ, and that they possess him ii. virtue of
their Faith, and by the operation of the holy Ghost, as to be made flesh of
his flesh, and bones of his bones. etc.

But it is far from the question, which was, if in the sacrament of the
supper, the Faithful receive in their souls, besides all the spiritual
graces (amongst the which is communication with our Lord Jesus Christ) the
true body and the true blood of him, Really, truly, and touching the
substance: And if in the supper, the Ministers make not distinction of the
substance contained and perceived in the Sacrament, from the fruits and effects
which proceed thereof: And to be short, we ask, if the Ministers receive and
allow, that which Calvin in his Catechism, Institution and other Books has
written of the Supper, and that which is received therein.

Touching the seventh Demand, the Ministers have not understand what was
proponed to them, touching the concomitance: for they have taken it as if the
Demand ran, whether it was lawful to receive the sacrament, under one kind or
not: which was not meant nor put in question: only this was the difficulty
that was proponed to them, whether in their supper, when the bread is received,
and before the wine be received, they participate really with the true body of
Jesus Christ, and not participate with his blood, till they have taken the
wine, or, whether, in eating the bread, the body be received, before the cup
be taken.

To which Demaundes, to the end Paper be not spente and moiled for nothing, we
admonish the ministers to Answer without swaruing or variety, and yield open
Confession of their Faith: And that we may know what Doctrine we may impugn
or approve.

Touching the Articles of the Mass, we reserve them to their propre places,
which is of the Sacrifice of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, after it be
known and proved that they are present in the supper, and holy sacrament.

Sunday the fourth of August, the year aforesaid.
An Answer of the Ministers, to the writing of the Doctors, sent unto them
by the Duke of Nyuernois, the Wedensday morning, the seventh of August. 1566.
THe Ministers forbearing all that is superfluous and immateriall, in the
writing of the doctors, as their repetitions: and dissembling withal, their
wrongs and accustomed scoffs, (by which they prove much better the spite they
bear to the truth, and us, then the questions proponed) we will rest only
upon the points which seem to require Answer.

In the first place, we deny to have imposed upon the Doctors, that they have
drawn and restrained the Church into a certain place, but rather to a
certain company, and to the traditions given, followed, and approved by the
same: wherein we praise God, that the said Doctoures are come now to
acknowledge that the Catholic Church stretches through out all the world,
and that it is not enclosed within bounds and limits of the authority and
traditions of the Romish Church: which as we confess was highly esteemed of
the Ancients, when errors, abuses, and vices did not abound in it, (as is
happened since.) So now, being so corrupted as well in manners as in Doctrine,
as nothing is more hateful than the word of God, the light, the truth, and
virtue: we say, that as the estate of the said Church has been changed, so
also ought the value and reputation, wherein it has dwelt: And yet in what
degree of honor so ever it has been raised in times passed, the Ancients
never esteemed it an universal Church nor her Bishop, an universal Bishop:
as appears by that which S. Jerome wrytes to Euagrius, and the resolution of
one of the Councels of Carthage: And touching the reformed Church in France,
we say not that it is the Catholic and universal Church, but only a member of
the same, and that she has her foundation, not upon the opinion or
Authority of men, but upon the Doctrine and wrytings of the Prophets and
Apostles.

For the rest, touching the protestations of charity and zeal by the which
the Doctors fear to be driven forward into the inuectiues and pursutes which
they raise against us and other the Faithful, by the example (as they say) of
S. Augustine and other Bishops, who not long since solicited the Magistrates
against the Donatists: Their proceedings which they have and do use against
us, and other the Faithful, reveal plainly inoughe, that with false shadows
they cover themselves with those examples: Because even the Catholics, which
they allege, persuaded the Magistrates to use moderation and softness to the
Donatistes and other Heretics, proving all means to reduce them, before they
ministered the rigor of pains and judgments, enforcing themselves furthermore
to bridle and repress the fury of the people, that they should not be put to
the spoil, and ouerrunne: Where they (of the contrary) sharpen against us
both the people and Magistrates, and that by slanders and false imputations,
with all other means they can suborne to that end.

Touching the omnipotency of God, and the Diffinition we have laid of ye
same, drawn out of S. Augustines books: the Doctors in their last writing
infer no new thing, to drive us from it: For, that which they allege of the
Angels, to be able to do what they will, and therefore to be almighty as well
as God (if the diffinition aforesaid of Gods almightinesse had place) is no
Example either to the present purpose, or to prove that there is in Angels, a
power equal with God: seeing it is most certain that their will and power
depend elsewhere, and that God rules over them, to change, suspende, and stay
them, as it pleases him, and as he can do to all other creatures: which can
not be said of God without blasphemy. But, be it in what sort so ever, if
they will reprehende the diffinition of Gods almightinesse proponed by us, it
is not with us, but with S. Augustine that they have to do: for the said
diffinition was taken word by word out of his wrytings.

We much marvel, that, having so amply aduouched to them our opinion of the
omnipotency of God, with declaration, that it stretched indifferently to all
things which men's fond fancies could conceive or imagine, that yet they will
eftsoons regrate upon that point, alleging that God can do wisely that,
which the foolish imagine fondly.

For it is most manifest that Fools may imagine many things which are
impossible to God: As, (for example) that God is not, as is written in the
Psalm.14. and.53. that he is corporal as the Anthropomorphites did deem:
that the world is eternal as the Peripaticiens did teach that there be two
Princes, as the Manicheans held: All which things can not be attributed to the
omnipotency of God without blasphemy: But in this are we best contented,
that touching this Article, our masters after long and sharp debate, with so
many blasphemies even when we stood in the truth of it, are yet constrained
in the end to consent with us, and follow the interpretation and restriction
which we gave touching Gods omnipotency, as appears by one speech of
their last writing, whose words be these: All things (say they) that are to
be imagined of man, are to be done of God, without excepting any thing, but
such as implie contradiction to be and not to be.

Then what reason is there, that for such things wherein they consent to us
which be excepted from Gods almightinesse, that we for excepting them should
be guilty in blasphemy and not the Doctoures, who say and confess the self
same thing: This proposition, that a natural body (even that of Jesus
Christ) is in diverse places at one instante, is of the number of those things
which implie contradiction, as has been already sufficiently proved: therefore
we conclude that the omnipotency of God ought not to be referred and
stretched so far.

The Doctoures charge us afterward with four horrible blasphemies as they
term them: grounding them upon our opinion, defending that one body can not
be in diverse places at one instante, as to resist the truth, wisdom and
omnipotency of God: this the Doctoures find so strange and far from reason
that they disdain to refute it, thinking it is unworthy of Answer, and that
only it suffiseth to recite it: whereunto we Answer that to say it is a
blasphemy unworthy of Answer, is an easy and most ready mean to shake of all
difficulties wherewith they may be entangled.

The Doctoures are also importunate with us, to bring forth by Gods word
that one body can not be in diverse places at one instante, whereunto we Answer
once again, that it belongs to the Doctors to prove the contrary by one text
of the scripture: that one body may be in one instante in diverse places, seeing
they are proponantes, and we respondents in this conference.

And yet we have declared here before, by lively reasons drawn out of the
scripture, and essential propreties of God, the nature of bodies, and the
Authority of the fathers, that the matter of the question is altogether
impossible: and touching their argument containing this nature and form, God
ca^ change the order which he has established in nature, then he ca^ also
bring to pass that one body, at one time, be in many places: we deny the
consequence, and by this reason: such a case would not only change the order,
but also would entangle contradiction, which, even by the Confession of the
Doctors, is out of the omnipotency of God.

In the Article following, they do the same which they reproach in us, as
darkening that, which we clearly proponed in our last writing: by mean
whereof, if they will that we Answer them at large, let them unfold it better.

Where the Doctors accuse us to have maliciously concealed this word, place,
in the matter of circumscription of a body measured, we say it was not needeful
to use that word expressly there, because there is no man so ignorant, who
understanding that a body is circumscripte, infers not immediately that then
he is comprehended in a certain place.

Touching the Camel, if they suffice not with that has been already said,
let him read again S. Ieromes opinion in his first Book against the
Pelagians, who expounding the words of Jesus Christ, says as follows: in
this the Lord has not said that which might be done, but has compared one
impossibility with an other: for as a Camel ca^ not enter the hole of a
needle. so a rich man shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven: or if thou
show me that a rich man enters there, it shall follow also that a Camel may
pass through the hole of a needle: do not allege to me Abraham and others
whom we read in the old Testament to be rich, and being such, did enter
into the kingdom of heaven: because, they using their riches well, and
employing them to good works, did cease by that mean to be rich: thus it is
written in S Jerome: So that, as it is necessary (by his opinion) that for the
salvation of the rich man, there be a change in his heart, and that he
forbear to be rich, to the end to enter into the kingdom of heaven, so
there must be mutation in the Camel, and he to change his proportion to make
him pass through the eye of a needle.

Touching the Article following, we say, yt with gods grace we can discern the
light from darkness, and dreams from matter of truth, the same being the
occasion that we cannot approve either the arguments or the conclusions of the
Doctors, touching one body to be in many places at one instant: being most
assured by good and certain testimonies of the Scripture, that all that they
go about to prove, proceeds not from other where, than of the spirit of
error and lies: Who by this means labors to retain the impiety and
idolatrye, which heretofore he has established in the world, to the
destruction almost of all Christendom.

Touching the Verb Di^rchesta^ the Doctors find them selves somewhat troubled
to save their penetracion, which they cannot any way ground upon the proper
signification of that term, neither yet upon any authority of the scripture,
as has been to them by the places heretofore produced.

To prove that faith comes partly of our selves, and not wholly of God, the
Doctors allege that no man beleues nisi volens (which is that no man beleues
but willingly) we answer that (under correction of our Masters) that is to
evil purpose, because such will and consent are of God, who works in the
faithful the will and well doing, the same being very well taught by S.
Augustine in one of his Epistels, where he says, that when God calls the
faithful to salvation, he finds in them no good will at al, but that he makes
and creates it in their hearts, if he mean to find it there. That which the
Doctors allege of S. Paul that we work with God, serves no way to their
purpose: For the Apostle speaks thereof the Minister, not meaning there other
thing than that which he writes more clearly to the Cor^^^^^^s, in these
words: we are Ambassadors of Christ, as if God exhorted by us. And that which
they add, that none of the ancient Doctors have taught that a body cannot be
in diverse places at one time, we say they have: As our former writings have
proved, as being alleged in the textes of S. Augustine ad Dardanum, and in
the.30. treatise of S. John.

We answer only to two points of the advertisement of the Doctors. The first
is, that our sermons, our writings, the discipline observed in our Churches,
the censures we make of the slanders there committed, the care we have to
discover, reprehende, and correct them: the pain we take to reform what is
there disordered, the public prayers we make in all places to that end,
defend us toward all honest men, and justify us against the slanders of
the Doctors. The second is, that the Doctors abuse their advertisement, in
saying that Abraham doubted of the promise, the same being all together
contrary to the opinion of the Apostle in the fourth to the Romans, where he
says in proper terms, he made no doubt of the promise of God by distrust,
but was strengthened by faith, giving glory to God.

To answer the last objection of the Doctors made (as they say) against our
answer given to their former question upon the matter of the supper: how
soever they feign not to have delayed the conference and disputation of the
Supper and the Mass, yet they are not able to persuade any, of any judgment,
that hetherunto they have not always, and yet do not shift off to enter into
it. For what requests so ever came from the Lady of Buyllon, or at any time
made by us, yea, notwithstanding the desire, will, and many means made by the
Duke of Nyuernois to draw them to it, yet they have stand always vnwylling,
yea (and as it were) impossible to enter upon these two points.

The which when we well perceived, containing notwithstanding our desire, not
to depart from them, till we had first conferred therein. We often protested
not to dispute further with them, if those two articles were not first decided
and resolved. To which end we proponed certain arguments, as well of the one
as the other, by order and good Method: to the end they might advise what they
would oppugn and gaynsay in the said arguments. But the doctors dissimuling
herein, in place to pursue the^, propone other frivolous and unprofitable
questions, drawn out of their school divinity. And notwithstanding our just
occasion of grief in that our arguments were omitted by the Doctors, yet to
cut of all further pretense or color to defer, we have answered their last
questions. And now in place to follow our answers and reuerse them, if they
had mean, they propone eftsoons other new questions, no less frivolous than
the first, the same revealing sufficiently their fancies and dissimulation with
discovery to every man, that they disguise their will to confer upon the said
points, seeing they do what they can to alter the conference, to the end it
dissolve before this matter be cleared. In which respect to conclude and resolve
in all the conference, we are determined with Gods grace, to set down in
writing no less briefly, than as clearly as we can, all that which God has
taught us, and we learned by his word, of these matters, as well to satisfy our
duty to God and his honor, and our obedience to the Lord of Neuers, and the
Lady of Buyllon, as also to content in the end, and edifye the church.

A conclusion and resolution of the points as well of the supper, as of the
Mass, containing that which the Ministers believe and teach thereof in their
churches by the word of God.
THe end and sovereign felicity of men is to be knit with God, and dwell in
him, Psalm. 7.5.2.8.
for yt it is the only mean by which their desires may be contented and
satisfied, and their hearts and minds fully delivered from the hard and cruel
servitude of sin, and al other passions, lusts, fears and distrusts, which
oppress the^, 1. Cor. 15.
the same being the occasion that S. Paul placed perfect blessedness and
everlasting rest of the happy, in that ye God is in them all things. But
because me^ are naturally corrupt and vicious, and of the contrary, God is pure
and holy in all perfection, 2. Cor. 6.
the difficulty is how to choose the mean, by which they may approach unto him,
seeing there is no society between light and darkness, nor any communion between
justice and iniquity. This mean cannot be found in them, because that of them
selves they are altogether enable and incapable to be raised from the misery
and malediction, whereunto they are fallen headlong, in such sort, as being
blind of understanding, they cannot know what is good for them, and much
less seek for it, being froward and of hardened hearts.

And therefore it is necessary to forsake and come out of themselves, and
search the mean aforesaid in Jesus Christ, who was given unto them of the
father, to be their justice, wisdom, 1. Cor. 1. John 14 Ephe. 3.
sanctification, redemption, way, life and truth. Only there restes now to
know, how they may be united and conjoined with him. The Apostle teaches us it
is done by faith, by which Jesus Christ dwells in our hearts, and restes in
us, John. 17.
so that he and we are made all one, as he is one with his father. There be two
principal causes of this faith, the one is outward, 1. Cor. 4.13
and the other inward. The inward is the holy spirit, which is called a
spirit of faith, because he is the author thereof, and has created and
produced it in the hearts of men, inclining and disposing them to receive in
all obedience the word and promise of God, preached unto them by the faithful
Executors and Ministers of the same, Romans 10.
which word is the external cause of faith. And as this faith increases and
rises by degrees, so does also the unity we have with Jesus Christ, and (by
this mean) with God: until as S. Paul says, that we concur and meet all
together in the unity of the faith and knowledge of the son of God in
perfect man, in the manner of a perfect stature of Christ.

This increase of faith comes by the operation and virtue of the holy spirit,
which was the original and first author of it. And then after by the
continuance of the word purely preached and pronounced. And lastly by the
lawful use of the Sacraments, provided as seals for the certaintye and
confirmation of the faith, and assurance which we have of the said conjunction
with God by Jesus Christ, together with participation of all the benefits,
grauntes, gifts, graces, and blessings, which are purchased for us by his
favor, as remission of sins, our regeneration, and mortification of the
flesh with his concupiscence. For the better signification of which things,
and to assure us of the exhibition and use of the same, Baptism was ordained
of God, to the end that in the water sprinkled upon our bodies, and in the
promise of God added therewith, we may behold (as with our eyes) the invisible
grace which God does to us, to wash us, and make us clean of our spiritual
ordures, and so to sanctify us and make us new creatures: as also to assure us
continuallye of the eternal life, and make us increase in the hope we have by
our participatio^ of the flesh of Jesus Christ crucified for our redemption,
and of his blood shed for the remission of our sins: The bread and wine are
distributed to us in the supper, by the ordinance of Jesus Christ.

But as we acknowledge an unity and sacramental conjunction between the
exterior sign, and the thing signified by it: so we say of the other side,
that between them both there is such a distinction, that the one ought not to
be confused with the other: neither the spiritual thing so tied to the
corporal (which representes it) that either the one without the other cannot
be received, or by necessity they both be always indeuidablye knyt together:
Whereof it follows that such are in error who hold that in the supper the
bread is transnatured into the substance of the body of Jesus Christ. And
likewise those that say, it is there knit and united corporally, so that who
soever receives and takes those signs, be he faithful or infidel, takes and
receives immediately the thing signified by them. Which error, with the most
part of others crept in upon this matter, has proceeded, in that men have not
well comprehended what it is to eat the body, and drink the blood of Jesus
Christ: which ought not to be understand as a manner that corporal meats are
taken and eaten, but only of a spiritual fashion, as is declared in the sixth
of S. John which consistes in that that Jesus Christ dwelles in us, and we in
him, the same being done by the faith we have in him. As S. Augustine teaches
in his.25. treatise upon S. John, saying, why do thou prepare thy belly and
thy teeth? believe, and thou have eaten it. Likewise in his third book of
Christian doctrine, chap. 16. as follows: when Jesus Christ says, if you
eat not the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not
have life in you. It seems he commaundes to commit a great crime: so that it
is a figure, by the which we ought not understand other thing, but that we must
communicate with the passion of the Lord, and keep in memory that his flesh
was crucified and wounded for us.

Then the eating of the flesh and body of Jesus Christ is no other thing than a
straight conjunction and unity we have with him: which is wrought by the
faith we repose in his promises, even as by the mutual promises made and
received between a man and his wife, the marriage concludes and is established
between them, wherein albeit being so knit, they happen by any occasion to be
separate and far of one from the other touching their bodies, yet are they
for all that one flesh and one body by mean of the society and matrimonial
acquaintance between them. In like sort, be it that Jesus Christ (with whom we
are knyt and united by faith and trust we have in him and in his promises) be,
as in respect of his body, resident in heaven, and we remain here on earth, so
that there is a great distance between him and us touching his body: yet that
does not hinder us to be flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones, and that
he is not our head, and we his members, he our husband, and we his spouse, that
we are not of one self body tied with him, that we are not clothed of him, and
that we dwell not in him, as the branches in the vine. Neither is there
distance of time or place what soever it be, nor difference of seasons, which
may hinder that conjunction, and that the faithful eat truly his flesh and
blood. For as the ancient Fathers, notwithstanding they were two or three
thousand years before Christ dyed, yet forbear not to communicate in his flesh
crucified, and eat the same meat spirituallye which we eat, and drink the
same drink spiritually which we drink: so the faithful also which are comen
twelve or fiftene hundredth years after, forbear not, in what place soever
they be, to participate, as the Fathers, with the same meat and drink which
they did.

Neither is there any other difference between the eating of the Fathers that
were before the coming of Jesus Christ, and such as have followed him, but
the reason of the more or of the less, which is, that in the one there is
more ample and express declaration of Gods good will toward us, than in the
other. By which we ought to conclude, that from the beginning of the world,
until the end, there was never, nor ever shall be, other conjunction between
our Lord Jesus Christ and his Church, than spiritual, that is, purchased by
the spirit of God. For even as there is but one faith in the Fathers, and in
us, which considers always on the one and other side our Lord Jesus
Christ: even so are not we conjoined with him in other sort than they were.
So that as the Fathers had no other society or communication then spiritual,
even so it follows also that we neither are nor can be otherwise united with
him, than spiritually.

And yet do we not say that we and the Fathers are not flesh of his flesh, and
bones of his bones, and that altogether we participate not as well with his
humanity, as with his divinity. But all our saying and opinion stretches to
this, that this participation which we have there, is by the operation and
virtue of the holy spirit. Which Jesus Christ in S. John, speaking of this
conjunction, John. 6. 1. Cor. 10.
teaches clearelye in these few words: the things whereof I speak to you,
are the spirit and life: as also S. Paul, our Fathers (says he) have eaten
the same spiritual meat, and drunk the same spiritual drink.

Wherein when we speak of this spiritual eating both in us and in our
Fathers, it must not be thought therefore that we would reject the holy Supper
of the Lord, or once think, that in the same the use of bread and wine is
superfluous: no more then the use of the water in the Baptism.

For our Lord, knowing the hardness of our understanding, together with the
infirmity and weakness of our hearts, and by a pity and compassion he has
of us, seeking to remedy the same, was not only content to leave unto us the
ministry of his word, to assure us of the participation which we have in his
flesh and blood, and all the benefits likewise depending thereupon:

But he has also added thereunto the signs of bread and wine, which he has
annexed to his word as seals to seal in our hearts, by the use of the same,
the faith which we have of the said conjunction by his word. Like as it did
not suffice him to have contracted the alliance with Abraham by the word and
promise he made him, but he added further the sign of Circumcision, as a seal
to confirm and assure more amply the said alliance.

To the end then that every one understand what is the supper of the Lord,
and also what we believe and teach of it, there must be considered and
acknowledged in the same three things. First, the ordinance of the Lord
contained in his word, and declared by his Minister, according to his
commandment. By the which word this holy ceremony was ordained and
established in the Church, to edify and entertayne the members of the same:
which must be diligently observed, as to have it in such honor and reverence
as appertains, and not to put it on the beadroll or sort of other
ceremonies, who have no other ground or reason of authority, than the only
will and traditions of men: yet there must be heed taken, that by the
institution and ordinance, whereof we speak, there is understood a certain
pronunciation of words, or any virtue which is hid in them, as do the prests of
the Romish church, who by ignorance, and their superstitious opinion think to
have consecrated and transubstanciated the bread and wine which is in their
Mass, by the virtue of five words, Hoc est enim corpus meum, breathed and
pronounced upon the elements. Wherein they are no less deceived than abused,
because the word which is the formal cause of the sacrament is not a word
said and spoken simply, but a declaration of the institution and ordinance of
God, don by the Minister, according to his commandment, and a predication of
the death of Jesus Christ, with the fruit of the same: by the which the
hearts of the hearers are raised into contemplation and meditation of his
benefits, and their faith kyndled and enflamed in his love. And where this is
not done, as is said, we must not think that the elements are sacraments, as
S. Augustine teaches upon S. John. 80. Treatise, in these terms: from whence
comes this virtue to the water, that in touching the body, it washes the
heart, but that it is done by the word, not because it is pronounced, but by
reason it is believed: this word is the word of faith which we preach
says the Apostle: which is, if we confess with our mouth that Christ is
the Lord, and believe in our heart, that God has raised him from the dead, we
shall be saved: wherein continuing his matter, he adds in the end these words:
this word of faith which we preach, is the same (without doubt) by which
baptism is consecrated, to the end it may cleanse and wash.

The ministers infer here before two things, the one, that the word of
Consecration is not (as is said) a simple pronunciation but a public and
manifest declaration of the institution and ordinance with all the mystery of
the death of Jesus Christ. The other, that the signs and Elements
consecrated, are not changed in respect of their nature and substance, but
only touching the use and signification, and that only during the Action in
which they serve: For, to consecrate the signs (as the water in Baptism, and
the bread and wine in the supper) is no other thing, than to assign and make
them serve to a holy and sacred use by the public declaration of the ordinance
of God, made to that end, and not to change them touching their nature and
substance: the which vanishing, and being made nothing, there should be no
more sign nor (by consequence) any sacrament: So that even as the water in the
Baptism, after the Consecration, remains water, without that his nature or
substance, be in any thing changed or altered: so the bread and wine in the
supper, touching their substance, remain, after the consecration, such as
they were before, for there should be no Analogy nor correspondencie between
the sign and the thing signified. For what comparison and conformity is there
between the accidents of the bread, and the truth of the body of Jesus
Christ: seeing that the accidents of the bread, as the whiteness and
roundnesse, destitute of their substance (as the Sophisters do falsely imagine)
could not nourishe or sustain the body, and by that mean should not be
proper to signify that the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ nourishe and
sustain our souls.

So that we must hold this for resolute, that the bread and wine remain in
their substance: the same being clearly verified by Jesus Christ, who
speaking of that which he gave to his Disciples to drink in the Supper, calls
it specially the fruit of the Vine: Math. 26.
Which can not be referred to the accidents, but is necessarily to be
understood of the wine in his proper substance: 1. Cor. 11.
As also by that which S. Paul says calling the Elements of the Supper
Bread and Wine, three several times, yea after they were Consecrated: Like as
also he wrytes elsewher, we that are many, are one bread and one body, because
we participate all of one lofe: wherein he teaches us there by his comparison
of the lofe, that even as it is made of many grains, so wrought and mingled
togsther, that they can not be distinguished or separated one from an other,
eue^ so also ought the faithful in the Church, to be so knit and united
together in one self body, as they may seem to be members one of another.
This comparison would be altogether foolish and out of purpose, if the bread
which we eat in the supper, were not true bread: Gelasius Bishop of Rome
writing against Eutichus, says, that the sacrament which we take is a thing
Divine, and yet forbeares not to be a substance and nature of bread and wine:
Theodoret also in his first Dialogue, uses these propre terms, the Lord has
honored with the name of his body and of his blood the visible signs which
represente them: without changing their nature but adding only grace to the
nature. The same Author in his second Dialogue, speaking also of the bread and
wine distributed in the supper, says, that after the sanctification, these
mystical signs forsake not their nature, for they remain in their proper
substance, kind and figure: by mean whereof, they are seen and handled after
the Consecration, neither more or less then before. S. John Chrysostom writing
to the Monk Cesarius, says: in the Supper we call bread that which is there
present, before it be sanctified: And after the sanctification, by Gods grace
and mean of the minister, it has no more the name of bread, but of the body
of our Lord, yet the nature of bread remains there.

By the places aforesaid, as well of the holy scripture, as Ancient Doctors,
and others which might be yet alleged for this matter, it appears that the
bread and wine in the supper remain always (as has been said) in their
proper nature and substance after the Consecration as well as before: wherein
it need not to be doubted that the Faith of the ancient Church has not
always been so, and that Transubstantitiaon was neither established nor holde^
for an Article of Faith in the Romish Church until the time of Innocent the
third.

To withstand and reiecte all that has been said touching the nature and
substance of the signs which remain after the Consecration, such as be
adversaries to this Doctrine, allege ordinarily the words of Jesus Christ,
speaking of the bread, in the institution of his supper, take, eat, this is
my body: And staying upon the proper and natural signification of the terms,
they defend obstinately, that the substance of bread is vanished in the
Consecration, and that there remains no other substance, except that of the
body of Jesus Christ.

The reason of this, is, that they observe not the Figures and manner of
speeches, which are ordinarily used in the holy Scripture, when and as often as
there is Question of the matter of the sacraments: For then the name of the
things signified is ordinarily attributed to the signs which represent and
signify them: as the name of the alliance is attributed to the Circumcision,
Gene. 17. Exodus 12. Tit. 3.
because it was assigned to signify and ratify it. The Lamb, by like reason
is called the passage: and Baptism, washing of regeneration, and that not
because they be things like to the signs and mysteries signified by them: But
for the conformity that is between them: Epist. ^3.
The signs (as S. Augustine him self does say) take oftentimes the name of
the things which they represent: So that the error proceeds in that they take
and understand the manners of speeches figured, as if they were propre and
natural.

That this speech, take and eat, this my body, is figurative: it appears by
that which our Lord Jesus Christ adds after of the cup, saying: this cup
is the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you: Here he calls the
cup Testament, and new aliance in his blood: wherein we must necessarily
confess that there is figure, and that with out it the said place could not
be well understand, nor aptly interpreted. For it is a thing manifest, that an
aliance (which is a contrary covenant between parties made and conceived under
a certain promise and word:) is not the wine, and yet it is so called by
figure: because the wine which is distributed in the supper, is as the seal,
by the which the said aliance is sealed, and the faith of the same confirmed:
By such or like manner, must we also understand and expound this sentence:
this is my body: the same being as much to say, as, this is the new Testament
in my body, which is delivered for you: For, as by the effusion of his blud,
the new Testament was ratified, so was it also by the death of his body: we
need not search better interpretation of the words of Jesus Christ, than
Jesus Christ himself. For it is certain, that that which he said of the
cup, is as a gloss, and clear and familiare exposition of that which he said
of the bread more briefly and darkely, ^. Corrin.
which is also proved by S. Paul: The bread which we break (says he) is
not the Communion of the body of Christ, which is a manner of figurative
speech, because that to speak and understand properly, the bread which is a
corporal and material thing, is not the Communion which we have in the body
of Jesus Christ, which is a thing spiritual and invisible, and yet it is so
called, as being a sign thereof, to represent it to us, and assure us of it:
even as we call commonly the letter signed and sealed, which contains the
declaration of the last will of a man, his Testament, albeit it is not his
testament, which is properly the declaration which he has made verbally of
his said will, but it is so called because it is the instrument and testimony
thereof.

And even as the Scripture and the Ancients, as well to recommende and raise
the dignity of the signs, and cut of by that mean the mistaking of them,
as also for the conformity and likeness that is between the signs and the
things signified, have attributed sometimes, the names of the same things
signified to the signs which they represent, and speaking of the signs, have
used figurative speech: So they have spoken of them sundry other times
properly, to take away all occasion of abuse, and prevent, that in taking
without distinction the signs of the thing signified by them, there should be
attributed to them the effects which appertain not but to the matters only
which they signify: of these two sundry reasons and manner of speech, there
be examples as well in the scriptures, as in the Ancient fathers. Of the
first, we have an example in the Circumcision, when it is called by figure,
aliance, Gene. 17. verse. 13. And of the second, there is also an example in
the same Chapter, verse. 11. where the Circumcision is properly called sign of
the aliance, in Exo. 12. ver. 11. there is also an other example of the first
manner of figurative speech, where the Lamb is called the Passover of the
Lord: and touching the second man, which is propre, an example also in the
same place, verse. 3. where the blood of the Lamb is called a sign. In like
manner and order, when is mention in the scripture of the supper, the words
run sometimes of the bread by figure, as when it is called the body of Jesus
Christ, or the Communion of the body, as has been said before: and sometimes
also it is spoken of properly: as when it is said, who so ever shall eat of
this bread: 1. Cor. 1.
also every one then proves himself, and eats so of this bread: Like
diversity in both the manners of speech is found oftentimes in the Ancient
fathers touching the matter of the supper: For sometimes they speak of the
bread by figure, calling it the body of Jesus Christ: In a Sermon of the
supper.
as S. Cyprian when he says, the body of the Lord is taken with foul
hands, and his blood drunk with a profane and defiled mouth: and in an
other place, that we suck his blood, and fasten our tongs in the wounds of
our Redeemer. Likewise S. Jerome when he says that Exuperius Bishop of
Tholoze carried the body of our Lord in a little pannier of Willowes, and his
blood in a glass. S. Chrysostom also, when he wrytes, that Jesus suffers
himself not only to be seen, but also to be touched and eaten, and that
teethe are fixed in his flesh, and touched with tongue. Lastly S. Augustine:
With what care do we take heed, when the body of Jesus Christ is administered
to us, that nothing of the same fall from our hands to the earth.

All which sentences, with their likes, are figurative wherein is no doubt, that
in the right and direct interpretation of them, ought not to be taught to the
readers, but that in them the name of the thing signified, is applied to the
signs which signify it: which may be easily gathered of other sentences and
textes of the said Ancients: where speaking properly of the bread and wine
which are distributed in the supper, they call them signs and figures. As
Tertullian, Jesus Christ (says he) took bread and distributed it to his
Disciples, and makes it his body, when he says, this is my body, which is to
say, a figure of my body: And Cyprian, by the wine shows the blood of
Christ: Also in a Sermon which he made of the supper of our Lord: As often
as we do this, we whette not our teethe to bite, but break and distribute the
holy bread in true Faith, by the which we distinguishe the matter divine and
human: Also in a Sermon he made De C^^^ ^^le, the Lord gave with his proper
hands, bread and wine in the Table, wherein he performed his last repaste
with his Disciples: but on the Cross, he delivered into the hands of the armed
men his body to be wounded, to the end he might imprin^e so much the more
deeply the truth into his disciples, and they to declare to the people how
the bread and wine were his body and blood, and how the sacrament agreed with
the thing for the which it was instituted: and also how one sacrament is made
of two things, and therefore is named with two names, and one self name is
given to that which signifies, and to that which is signified. S. ^asile
propones to us figures and patrones of the sacred body and blood of Jesus
Christ: And likewise S. Augustine, the Lord had no horror to say, this is my
body, when he gave the sign of his body.

The Lord received Judas to his supper, wherein he recommended and gave to his
Disciples the figure of his body: S. Jerome, After he had eaten the Pascall
Lamb with his disciples, he took bread to strengthen the heart of man, and
past to the true sacrament of the passage, to the end that as A^lchisedech had
done before in his figure, he might also there represent his true body: S.
Ambrose, this sacrifice is a figure of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ: Chrysostom, he has dressed this Table, to the end he may show us
daily the bread and wine in mystery and similitude of the body and blood of
Christ. And it happens sometimes, that a Doctor in this matter expoundes the
other: as may be perceived in the conference of the two places, the one of S.
Augustine already alleged, and the other of Tertullian in the Book of the
crowning of a Knighte: where he says, we hardly suffer, that any thing of our
bread and wine fall on the earth. In place of that which S. Augustine to the
same matter says, (as has been recited here before) we take diligent heed
that nothing of the body of our Lord fail on the earth.

And even as in diverse places, the Auncientes (as has been declared) have
used the two manners of speech aforesaid, speaking of the supper sometimes by
figure, sometimes simple and properly: so it is oftentimes found, that in one
self place, the two manners of speech have been usurped in their wrytings: as
in a Canon of the Council of Nace, where is said, it has been thus concluded
of the Table of the Lord, and of the mystery upon the same, meaning of the
worthy body and blood of Jesus Christ. At the Table of the Lord, we ought
not to re^^ fixed basely upon the bread and wine there se^te out, but to
raise our hearts on high by Faith, with persuasion, that upon the holy Table
is exhibited the Lamb of God which takes upon him the sins of the world,
which is sacrificed of the Priests, and not killed: And communicating truly
with his body and precious blood, we ought to believe that those things are
signs of our Resurrection. By which may be seen how in one place, the
fathers have spoken properly, calling bread and wine the signs and elements
which are presented in the supper, and by figure also naming the same signs
the Lamb of God which takes upon him the sins of the world.

Such therefore as read the scriptures and Aunciente Fathers, are warned by
the discourse of the two manners of speech aforesaid, to use diligent heed,
that for not distinguishing the places where the said speeches are usurped,
they confound them not, taking that which ought to be understand by figure,
as if it were properly spoken, and proper speech, as if it were understand by
Figure: wherein must be always remembered in the reading of the scripture, as
also the Auncientes, the opinion of S. Augustine in his Book of Christian
Doctrine: we must beware (says he) that we take not a Figurative speech for
the letter: whereunto may be referred the saying of the Apostle, the letter
kills and the spirit reuiues: So that to understand that which is said by
figure, as if it were spoken properly, is a fleshly wisdom.

Upon the end of the Chapter, he remembers one worthy sentence, that it is a
miserable servitude of the soul to take the signs for the thing signified,
and not to be able to raise the eye of the spirit above the corporal
creature, to draw the eternal light.

To come to the third part of the supper, being the spiritual and celestial
thing which is there represented and exhibited unto us, as well in the
elements, as in the action, we say, that it is Jesus Christ crucified and
offered on the Cross to God his father, for the expiation and perfect
satisfaction of all ye sins of the world: And to make us enjoy the fruit of
this sacrifice, and to apply to us justice, remission of sins, life, grace
of God, with all the other favors and blissings, which by the same sacrifice
have been purchased and obtained for us: The word and the Sacraments have been
left and ordained for us, and specially that of the Supper, wherein as upon a
table we behold Jesus Christ sufferyng for us all the dollours and anguishes of
death, paying our debts, and cancelling the bond that was against us, carrying
upon him self our malediction, to discharge us of it, and by his obedience
reconciling us to God his father, and appeasing his wrath toward us. All
which things are represented and assured to us in the Supper, when with a true
faith we come thither to celebrate it. Then the Supper was not ordained to be a
sacrifice propiciatorie (as the Doctors teach, and the Romish church falsely
believes) but to be a Sacrament, to keep fresh, and preserve always the
memory which we ought to hold constantlye of the death and sacrifice of Jesus
Christ. There is great difference between sacrament and sacrifice, because in
sacrifice we present to God our oblatio^s, and in the sacrament, God (of the
contrary) does offer and communicate with us his graces and gifts. Also in
the sacrifice for sin, there is death and effusion of blood of the host and
oblation, and not in the sacrament, but only the application of the fruits
and effects of the sacrifice. So that in the Supper Jesus Christ is not
eftsoons sacrificed, but the fruits of his obedience, and of the merit of
his sacrifice are there distributed and received by the faithful.

By the reasons aforesaid we conclude, that it is a blasphemy and sacrilege,
to call the bread of the Mass of a romish Priest, an host saluatorie. And if
to prove it the auncientes be alleged, in whose writings it is found, that
sometime the Supper was called oblation and sacrifice: we answer, that first,
that belonges nothing to the Mass of the Priests, between the which and the
Supper there is no affinity. And then, that which the auncientes have said,
that they never understood it a Sacrifice propiciatorie, by the which
remission of sins is gotten and obtained. Neither have they believed or
thought, that there was an other sacrifice to appease Gods wrath, and purchase
a reconcilement between him and men, than the only sacrifice of Jesus Christ
made by him, only once upon the cross. We say then in effect three things:
first that there neither is nor can be other sacrificator of the new Testament
than Jesus Christ. The reasons are, because there is none but he of whom it
has been said, thou art priest eternally, according to the order of
Melchisedeck. Also there is none but he to whom may be applied the conditions
and essential qualities of the sacrificator, and of the sacrificature: which
be that the sacrificator be holy, innocent, without spot, separated from
sinners, exalted above the heavens, who has not need every day to offer
sacrifices, first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people. Also
there is none but he, which either is, or may be mediator between God and men,
that is able to satisfy the divine justice, capable to bear and endure the
wrath of God, that can tame and overcome death, that by his death and proper
blood is able to procure the ratification of the new testament, and who lastly
is able in favor and contemplation of his merits and dignities, to obtain of
God the remission of sin, with other graces which are necessary to such as
seek him and trust in him.

Secondly, we say there is no other sacrifice for sin, but that of Jesus
Christ, who is the only Lamb that bears the sin of the world, that there
is but his blood, by the which our abominations are washed and made clean. To
be short, that God takes no pleasure in other sacrifice or oblation, and that
he requires no other Holocaustes nor offering for sin, and that for this
reason, Jesus Christ (as is written of him in the roll of the law) is come to
do and accomplish the will of God his father.

Thirdly we say of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, that it is only, and once
offered by himself, without need ever after to repeat or reitterate it,
considering his perfection and virtue, by the which sin is abolished, and
perfect and eternal sanctification obtained to all the chose^, as appears in
the. 9 and. 10. to the Hebrews. By mean whereof it is no less blasphemy, and
matter contrary to the doctrine and meaning of the Apostle, to approve the
repeticion and reitteration of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, than the
plurality of sacrifices for sin. And if the Doctors would (as has been their
custom) to disguise and color such an abuse, prefer their distinction
between the sacrifice propiciatory, and applicatorie, as to say the Priests
pretend not in their Masses to sacrifice Jesus Christ for other end than to
apply the merit of his death to those by whom they celebrate them: We answer,
that in doing thus, they would attribute more than they do to Jesus Christ,
because all the fruit of his sacrifice comes to us by the application of the
same, even as the healing our cure comes not so much of the confection and
preparation of the medecin, as by applying the same. Besides we make this
question to our Masters, by what means the benefit of the death of Jesus
Christ was applied to the fathers before his coming, seeing at that time there
was no Mass soong. All men of any spirit and judgment may perceive that those
distinctions are frivolous, and suborned only to darken the truth, and bleare
the eyes of the simple and ignorant. For Jesus Christ who has offered the
sacrifice, is the self same which he applies to us by his spirit, his word,
and his sacraments.

And now to return to the matter of our beginning, and to declare to what end
the ancients have called the Supper and all the action of the same sacrifice:
there is to be noted that in the supper there be many sorts of sacrifices, as
the sacrifice of a contcite heart, which is offered by publik confession of sins
done there. After, the sacrifice of our bodies, which is there offered by open
prayer following the said confession: thirdly, the sacrifice of praise and
thanks giving, there offered, when after the confession and prayers they sing
Psalms. The preaching of the gospel (which is called a sacrifice Romans 15.)
comes after, as when the confession and prayers being done, the Minister
presents himself to the people, to reveal the word of God. Alms (which is
an other kind of sacrifice) were in times past laid to the supper by the
faithful: who by this mean would testify not only the memory they had of
the graces and benefits of God, but also their charity and des^re they had to
relieve the necessities of their poor neighbors.

Over and besides all these kinds of sacrifices, there be two particular in
the Supper, whereof is mention made in the writings of the auncientes, the
bread and wine which were chosen and taken of the alms brought thither for
the poor: and were consecrated, that is to say, assigned and deputed to the
holy and sacred use of the supper. The other kind is the memory of the death
and sacrifice of Jesus Christ celebrated and repeated in all the action of the
Supper, which for this reason is called sacrifice by S. John Chrysostom upon
the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 16. Hom. 17.
his words be these: We do every day no other sacrifice, than that of Jesus
Christ, no rather says he (in correcting him self) we make the memory of the
same sacrifice. S. Ambrose calls it the memory of our redemption, to the end
that we remembering our Redeemer, may obtain of him to multiply his graces upon
us. S. Augustine propones it also more clear, Epist. 29.
under a comparison of the days of the passion and resurrection of Jesus
Christ, which he applies in this manner: Often times when the feast of Easter
approaches, we use this manner of speaking, to morrow, or within two days we
have the passion or the resurrection of Jesus Christ. It cannot be properly
understand of the day that Christ suffered death, (which is past long since)
but only of the memory of his death, the which is solemnised and celebrated as
upon that day, every year. A little after he adds to apropriate his
comparison, has not Jesus Christ been offered in himself one only time: and
yet in the Sacrament of the Supper, not only the day of Easter, but every day
he is offered to the people.

In an other place: the flesh and blood of this sacrifice before the coming of
Jesus Christ were promised by the figures of sacrifices: Against Faustine.
in the passion of Jesus Christ they were delivered up and offered in truth.
And since Jesus Christ ascended into heaven, they are celebrated by the
sacrament of memory. By these places and many other like, we may deduce that
the fathers have often called the supper sacrifice, because in it the memory of
the sacrifice of Jesus Christ is restored and celebrated.

The name of sacrifice is also often times applied by the auncientes to the
alms brought by the faithful in the supper, as by Iustine Martyr in the
second Apology, by S. Augustine in his.20. book, chap. 20. against Faustus, by
S. Ciprian in his book of the alms, by S. Chrysostom, hom. 46. upon S.
Matthew which may also be verified even by the canon of the Mass, where it is
said, we offer to thy majesty part of thy gifts and benefits, the same to be
referred to the alms of the faithful, offered by the Minister to God, in the
name of all the church. Sometimes the prayers which were made there, were
called sacrifices, as Cyprian upon the dominicall prayer, and Eusebius in
the.vij. of the Ecclesiastical history, Tertullian in the third book against
Marcion, where alleging the place of Malachie of the clean offering which
ought to be made to God from the sun rising, till the setting of the same,
says, it ought to be understand of the Hymns and praises to God, which S.
Jerome also confirms in his exposition upon the said place.

For conclusion of this matter, we say, that all the places of the books of
the auncientes, wherein touching the matter of the supper, is mention made of
the sacrifice, ought to be referred to one of the said kinds: neither can it
be found, that either they have said, written, or thought, that there was other
sacrifice propiciatorie, than only that which Jesus Christ has once offered
on the cross in his proper body for our redemption: by which mean it is sure
that he ought to be acknowledged in the Christian church sacrificator of the
new testament. And touching the other sacrifices, as that of a contrite heart,
mortification of the flesh, of thanks geuyng and alms, and the pronouncement
and memory of the death of Jesus Christ: we say that generallye it belonges to
the church to offer them, and that there is neither faithful, nor any member
in all the body of the Church, who for this respect is not sacrificature: as S.
Peter says in his first Epistle, chap. 2. and S. John in the Apocalips, chap.
1. and that for that reason we ought to offer in the Supper such sacrifices
unto God, as appears even by the canon of their Mass, by them evil
understood and applied to the sacrifice which they pretend of the body and
blood of Jesus Christ, where it is said, for the which we offer thee, or who
offer thee. etc.

That which we say of the sacrificature, that it is common to all the church to
offer to God sacrifice of thanks giuyng, ought not to be slau^derously
interpreted, as though we would confuse the ecclesiastical ministry, with the
said sacrificature, and by that mean reuerse and trouble the order of the
church, giving to every one an authority and power to govern it. For we know
well enough that vocations are different amongst the people of God, and that it
is necessary, that in the church there be Pastors and Doctors, with other
Ministers (as Deacons and Ancients) to guide it well and edify, as well by
continual preaching of the word, as careful execution of other things
concerning their charges: only we must distinguish those vocations which are
particular, from the sacrificature aforesaid, which ought to be general and
common (as is said) to all the Church.

Such now, as with diligence will observe the matters here before discoursed
and proved by Gods word, may easily see and judge, that the Mass as it is
celebrate at this day in the Romish church, is ye whole corruption and
reuersement of the institution of the supper which Jesus Christ has
established and left in his church, so that at this day it is impossible to
find or discern one only mark of his first ordinance. For of a sacrament
which Jesus Christ left in his church to ed^y and entertain it in a present
memory of his death, they have made a sacrifice, by the which the remembrance
of the same Jesus Christ is altogether buried and defaced. Wherein there is this
thing specially marvelous, and no less worthy to be well noted, that ye which
appertained not but to the son of God, and impossible to any to do but to
himself, as to sacrifice for sin, to reconcile men unto God, to appease his
wrath toward them, and to intercesse for favor and help of them, the Prests
attribute to themselves. And yt which is lawful and commanded, yea and
possible for them to do, as to solemnise the memory of Jesus Christ, and in
taking, breaking, distributing and eating the bread, and drinking the wine, to
declare his death, they have altogether left. So that as we may say that
whatsoever Christ did in the supper, and commanded to do, the Priests do
nothing at all, even so, what he did on the cross, and commanded man never to
do it, the Priests undertake and seek to do it.

The errors and abuses as well of transubstanciation, as of sacrificature, and
sacrifice expiatory, and the repeticion of the same, which be the principal
parts, and (as it were) the grounds of the Mass, have been heretofore
confuted, and sufficiently ouerthrown, as well by Gods word, as other reasons
here alleged in the declaration of the parts of yt supper. And now there restes
no more to batter wholly this Idol, but to show that the residue of the Mass is
no better stuff, nor better grounded in Gods word. For the adoration which is
there done to the bread and wine is an idolatry condemned and cursed of God.
And it is not likely to be true, that Jesus Christ instituting the supper, had
not ordained it, and S. Paul reciting this as he had received it of the Lord,
had not taught it, and that the ancient church had omitted it, if it had been
a thing wherein God might have been any way honored.

Besides, the separation of the Priest from the people, is directly contrary to
the article of faith of the Communion of the church, and contrary to the
purpose and end for the which the supper was ordained: the same tending to
confirm and entertain the society that ought to be between the faithful,
and bind them always more strayghtly one to another. So that as it cannot be
more rightly termed than a presumption intolerable, and a manifest disdain
of the rest of Gods people: So that which the Doctors have alleged to excuse
and cover such a sacrilege, is no less vain and frivolous, which is, that
the Mass of the Priests does not forbear to be good, not withstanding the
assistants will not communicate there. For first, they are forbidden to eat
alone in the supper, and there is no supper where is no communion, as S. Paul
teaches, rebuking the Corinthians, for departing one from an other in the
celebration of their supper. When (says he) you assemble your selves together,
it is not to eat the supper of the Lord, seeing when ye come to eating, every
one aduaunceth to take it particularlye. 1. Cor. 11.
Therefore, upon the end of the chapter, teaching them what form to use
therein, he says: therefore (my brethren) when you assemble to eat, tarry one
for an other. Besides, it happens often times that in their Mass, there is
none but the Priest, and a little Clarke to answer him, whom they will not take
to communicate with them.

Also, how can they excuse the Masses which are soong in Monasteries, where the
people are defended to communicate with the Moonkes that celebrate them? yea,
it is ordinarelye seen in great parishes, in Paris and elsewhere, that when the
people communicate, they are separate from the Prests, who doing their
business a part, disdain to eat and communicate at one table with them. And
what communion is there between the Priests and the people, seeing that in
place to break in the assemblye, one self loaf (to the end that all
participating therein, should by that mean be the more straightly conjoined
and knyt in one self body) every one has his own a part: the Priest a
greater, and the people one somewhat less: Seeing also the Chalice is in no
sort distributed. Furthermore, what endeavor is used by the prests to inuit and
exhort the people to comunicate with them, yea even the Bishops, who at this
day hold it as a matter of shame to communicate with Artisans, and other people
of mean condition.

For conclusion, if the Doctors had well considered the customs of the
ancients, who caused to go out of ye place, where the Communion was done, the
Catachumeni, and others not prepared to communicate: And likewise if they had
remembered the doctrine of S. John Chrysostom, shame would have forbid them to
defend such an abuse and impiety, Sermo. 3. ad Ephesi.
as is that of their Mass. Wherein to the end the people shall not rest
ignorant in the opinion of that holy Doctor, we will here divide it word by
word: It is in vain that the daily oblatio^ is done, it is in vain that we
remain at the altar, there is no body that Communicates there: I say not this
to the end you Communicate in any fashion, but to the end you make your
selves worthy of it. Art thou not worthy to Communicate? no more art thou to
pray. A little after he says further: if any were called to a banquet, and
washed his hands, and being set at the table, did not eat nor taste any thing
of the meats there served, should he not do dishonor and wrong to him that
invited him: had it not been better for him not to have come thither, even thus
is it of thee: For thou art come, thou have song Psalms with the rest of the
people, thou have confessed thy self to be of the number of the worthy, and
not departing from those that are unworthy: how then do thou tarry, and not
participate at the table of the Lord: thou say, I am unworthy, I answer
thee, that even so art thou also, touching the Communion of Prayers.

Thirdly, the gobbins and tronshons of the Gospels and Pistles, the Creed,
Prayer, and other pieces referred to the scripture, altogether confused and
shaken of, pronounced to the people in a tongue not understand (contrary to the
express commandment of God, and without any edifying of the multitude) is
no other thing than a vain usurpation of the name of God, against the express
defense made by the same: which ornaments are too narow and short to cover the
shame and horror of the Mass.

Fourthly, what execrable abuse is it to say, that the Mass serves not only to
the living, but also for the dead, to obtain remission of their sins: wherein
the priests forgetting neither shame nor blasphemy, divide their often into
three parts, with this visor upon it, that one is for them that be in heaven,
an other for such as live on earth, and the third serves for the souls that
abide in purgatory. But the Sacrament, which is not ordained but to confirm
the faith of the word, stretches no further then the ministry, and the
ministry no longer than this life: so that if it be so that those that are in
heaven, and such likewise as are fained to be in purgatory be dead and departed
this world: we must necessarily conclude that as Gods word can not be
preached unto them, so also they cannot partake in the administration of the
sacraments, and if they be not administered to them, they can nothing profit
them.

The end of the Resolution.
An Answer to the last Objections proponed by the Doctoures touching the Supper.
WE say, that there be many things in the said Objections, impertinente to the
matter of the Question, as where they demand, how many worlds the Doctrine
has remained pure, both touching the supper, and other articles of religion:
whereunto we Answer, that even in the time of the Apostles, there were
heretics and Antichrists, as Ebion Cerinthus, Simon Magicien, the Samaritanes
and others, who, by their errors and heresies went about to shake even the
Apostolical Churches, and corrupt the pure Doctrine of the same, whom the
Apostles resisted valiantly in all possible sort, reuoking and referring
always all things to their former institution, and fou^dations of the pure
word of God: as we see S. Paul did on the behalf of the Corinthians and
Galathians, whose Churches albeit he had most well planted and licoured, yet
they were corrupted in his life time both in manners and doctrine: And where
the Doctors ask, how long time, the purity of the doctrine and Religion has
perseuered in the Church of God after the decease of the Apostles, as well
touching the Article of the supper, as for others: we Answer that the
continuance has been, even so long time, as Gods word has been followed and
preached.

Touching the Objection of the Doctors following, blasing the supper celebrated
in the Reformed churches, as that we should abuse the Communicantes, by giving
them no other thing than a nothing between two platters: we Answer, that
that blase does more aptly become them than us, because they offer to such as
they summone to their Masses, but the Accidents, indiuidible waves, and only
the sight of forms of bread and wine, to feed them withal.

A little after, they call the sacrifice of their Mass, most precious: wherein
we co^discend with them, and say, they have reason so to exalt it with a noble
and most precious title, because of the great revenues and riches which this
precious sacrifice brings them: which we may say has been to them a fleece or
mine of Gold more rich and plentiful, than ever was that of Jason, or all
the mines of the East: as having brought the world to believe, (and spetially
the founders of Abbaies, Priories, and other benefices) that their sacrifices
were available, for the redemption, remedy and relief of their souls.

Afterward, the Doctors, without all shame call the supper of the Lord,
detestable, because (as they say) we offer nothing there but common bread and
wine: whereunto we Answer, that in our supper, we offer in deed bread and wine
to the people, which after the consecration remain in their substance, as
before: but we deny, that, for all that, the said bread and wine are common,
because (as has been heertofore amply declared to the Doctors) that both the
one and the other by the preaching and pronou^cing of the ordinance of God is
changed, as is said in respect of the use, but not touching the nature: where
ye doctors offer to charge us with monopolides, contributions, conspiracies and
secret practices against ye state of our Prince, under color and pretense of
our supper: we Answer, that that is not to impugn our doctrine, but impudently
to despite and slander us, for such has been the faith of the reformed
religion, as bisides yt it has been proved, with ye loss of their blood and
life, yet the king in his council and by his edict, has declared us his most
faithful and well affected subjects: but it is not to be marvelled, if the
doctors heap these slanders upon the reformed churches, seeing in all times,
the Christians have been accused of such crimes by the enemies to the truth: As
appears by the Apologetike of Tertullian and S. Augustines Books of the
City of God: By the Treatise of S. Cyprian against Demetrius, and by the
Book of Arnobius, which he wrote against the Gentiles. Only we marvel how
the Doctoures are so evil advised, as to allege the Suppers in the Reformed
Churches, to verify their accusatio^s, seeing that as they are at this day
publicly done every where, in the view and presence of so many as will behold
them, so there is nothing hid, nor so hard, as every one (if he will) may not
easily be informed: only it is the zeal and great charity of our masters the
Doctors, (wherein heretofore they have protested even by the Invocation of the
name of God) that caries them without shame or likelihoode, thus to slander
us, whose justice in this case is to Answer for us both before God and men.

And to prove and confirm their points before recited, the Doctors add, that
it appertains not to all men indifferently to Consecrate the matter of the
sacraments, but to such only as are ordained by imposition of the Romish
Bishops hands: whereunto we Answer, and confess the first point, as having
said in other places, that the vocation is necessary to such effect: But not
that this vocation is the imposition which they pretend, assuring our selves,
that our vocation is more lawful and better grounded, than that of the Doctors.

Where the Doctors, in the Article following, allege that we have not Answered
them to their sufficient liking, touching the parts of the sacrament, and the
word required for the consecration of the matter in the same: we Answer, that
in our wrytings, is no ambiguitie, no dark sense, nor any inuolution, but
such as the Doctors list to find there: wherein as we lay our selves upon the
judgment of the upright hearers. So, also it becomes no more strange to us
that the doctors challenge us of dark writing, than it was to S. Paul, that his
gospel was hid and covered to those that perished, and whose understandings
the God of this world had blinded.

Touching the presence of Jesus Christ in the supper, wherein they would urge
us to declare more amply, than in our former Answer, we say, we have
Answered sufficient clearly: notwithstanding the doctors rest not satisfied,
whereof we make no great marvel, as knowing that they have seldom in custom
to be contented, unless we consent both to their demaundes and desires, which
we are not now settled to do, and much less that our Answer exceed the
limits and bounds of the scripture, neither in this Article of the supper, nor
in others: but only to follow the phrases and manners of speech of the same as
near as we can possibly: By mean whereof, for a full and resolute Answer, we
acknowledge no other eating of the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ, whether in
or out of the supper, than that which Jesus Christ declares in the sixth
Chapter of S. John, who eats my flesh and drinks my blood, he has life
everlasting: also, he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, he dwelles
in me and I in him: as the living Father has sent me, so I go thither because
of my father, and he that shall eat me, shall live also because of me.

Upon the last Article which is of the concomitance, we Answer that the
Doctors demand was not so hard, that we conceived it not: only we dissembled
it, as not to lose time to speak and write of such dreams: wherein also we
judged the Doctors of sufficient suttletie to understand, that in denying them
Transubstantiation, was not to approve their concomitance. And now to satisfy
them we make this addition, not to seek to know more, than that which Jesus
Christ teaches in his word, that in the supper, to participate in his flesh
crucified, and blud shed for remission of sins, we must take and eat the
bread, and drink the wine which are administered, and not divide or separate
them in any sort, the same being also defended by the Canons, De confecr. did.
2. Cum omne crimen.

Wedensday the fourtenth of August the year aforesaid.

This writing being dispatched and sent away, the Ministers not long after,
went to the Lord of Neuers, with declaration that for their parts, they had at
large handled this conference, as finding the doctors by their impertinent and
vain questions hitherto to seek only to win time, without any advancement
at al of the solution of the supper and the Mass: And albeit they disguised
their demaundes as necessarily to tend to a prepratiue for this disputation,
yet they contained no other purpose, than not at all to enter the conference,
but rather to keep things in suspense until they grew weary, by which means
this holy purpose might altogether dissolve and break: in the ends, they
besoughte him humbly to advise the Doctors (without vain variety or change of
matter) to avoid the difference, and refute that which the Ministers had
maintained of the supper, and defend that which they had condemned of the
Mass: wherein they obtained his promise which gave them a hope of profitable
matter hereafter, and such as might serve to edify the readers, and purge the
greatest abuse and error that then occupied the Romish Church.

All this notwithstanding, there ran immediately a brute through ye town that
Vigor was fallen into a dangerous sickness, without likelihoode of speedy
recovery, the same giving a fear to the Ministers to be intercepted in their
last hope: which they doubted so much the more, as at the instant they were
told that Doctor Saints, was also gone out of Paris to the Cardinal of
Loraine by which they could not otherwise presume, than that they should be
enforced to a long abode in Paris without any set exercise to occupy the
time, as being come thither but by chance: for Spyna but made it in his way to
pass into Aufon, and for the other, being Minister to the Church of Orleans it
was not long since he was taken out of prison, whether he was led in June
before, upon a false imputation by the enemies of Gods Church; charging him to
be Author of a most pernicious and wicked Book written against the obedience to
Kings and Princes, by which he found it very inconvenient for him to tarry so
long in the Town, whether he came not at the first willingly.

For these respects they resolved eftsoon to return to the Lord of Neuers,
and also to tell him that seeing doctor Saints (who might have tarried and
drawn to him in Vigors place some other at his pleasure) was departed without
any advertisement of his return: there was also no reason of their abode still,
as well in respect of ye incertaintie of their business, as also yt their
Churches had need of them for the exercise of their charge as they desired:
notwithstanding, in the end, they yielded to their propre incommoditie, as to
remain there until the Lord of Neuers parted from Paris, which should be upon
the end of August, being minded then to go to a Lordship of his called
Conlomiers, for then, having neither the presence of the Lord of Neuers, nor
the company of the Doctors, the Ministers were at a gaze, as having nothing to
do, nor any man to dispute withal.

Upon these declarations, the Lord of Neuers delivered them their pasport in
writing, signed, Lodouico de Gonzague with promise to send unto them the
Answer of the Doctors, and that by the mean of the Lord de Buci S. Georg, who
undertook the charge of ye business: The Ministers for their parts promised
also to be ready to return to Paris, either else to Answer from the place where
they should remain, as often as the Doctors would write.

This business being thus settled, the Ministers departed immediately, with
expectation of some speedy news from the Doctors: from whom as yet they have
hard neither argument nor effect: only they have hard that through the city of
Paris there has been public sale of certain wrytings, within whose titles
is included this word of conference, as to make seem to the world that they
contained matter touching the former disputations: this policy was not without
great profit to the Printers, so vehemente was the desire of men to know the
truth: for whose satisfying and contentment, we thought good to spread abroad
the matter as it passed in deed, reserving till an other time to publish that
which the doctors would write against it, if they will write at all, and also
the Ministers Answers, which shall never fail.

In the mean while let every one make his profit of the present Contents,
with prayer to the Father of all light to pour more and more the clear
light of his spirit upon his Church in the true understanding of his holy
word, for the restoring and advancement of the spiritual kingdom of Jesus
Christ his Son our Lord.

FINIS.

