VIRGILS ECLOGVES TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH: By W. L. Gent.

Quis non Virgili^ Ingenium admiratur acutum?
Quae ^e suos censura potest reprehendere versus?
(Delitias Animi, (miscentes utile dulci:)
Pagina non lasciva sua est: non turpi^^ lectu
Caermina (ficta licet, non sunt mendacia: gryphis
Mirus inestque lepor, ^iciorum maximus usus:)
P^umbeue est, Callumque sibi non molte palarum,
Qui veneres, nequeatque sales gustare Maroms:
Vno (Sylla ait) Marij sunt Casare mill
Vno in Virgilio, sunt centum mill Poetoe:
Talia; tantae Deum fictorum, qualia quanta
Qui cecinit cecinisse queat? (si nosset Iesum;)
(Heu quam me miseret, Christum nescisse Maronem.
LONDON, Printed by William Jones, dwelling in Red-crosse-street, 1628.

To the worthy Reader.
AMongst other things, wherewith the learned Satyr taxes the times wherein
he lived, this was one, that they were desperately far spent with a sickness
which he calls the Scribendi Cacoethes, or the scribbling disease: The
Infection whereof (as may seem) was then so strong, that the contagion of it,
has runn all along in a vein, (like the knotty Farcye in a horses side) from
Age to Age, to this very Age wherein we breath; seeing (as then) so now,
tenet insanabile multos, Scribendi Cacoethes; many Crow-Poets, and
Pye-Poetesses, Rhimers, and poor versers, ( quales ego, vel Cluvienus,) such as
I, and bauld Cluvienus, as well as those true wits indeed, who can deserve
that of Virgil to Varus, (Sola Sophocleo tua Carmina digna Cothurno,) even all
sorts, learned and unlearned, (like the clean, and unclean Beasts, posting to
the Ark, and (with the Ape) doting on the whelps of their own Brayn, and
breeding, do, (even to the oppressing thereof,) daily throng to the Press,
(every one gasping greedily after the sweet air of popular praise: whereof
some are so ambitious, that (rather then lose it) (with the Duchess of
Burgundy in Hen. 7. time,) having no children of their own, to serve their
turn) they will set forth a Child of an others begetting: and (with the Cuckoe,
sucking up the Eggs of an other Birds laying,) set themselves down in the Nest,
and there lay their own name, (in steed of an Egg) at the foot of the
dedication; which being thus hatched, and flying abroad, gulls the credulous
world, as if the whole Nest had been of their own stuff, and building; and in
steed of being an honest Steward to the right Author, (against all true
practice of piety,) (with Ziba,) make themselves Heirs to an other man's pains
and praise: Others also the world has heard of, who (being no less ambitious
of this vulgar applause, though quite bankerupt of all ability, to deserve it,)
are also so envious, that (with Richard the third,) they will smother the
Royal and learned labors of other men.

In this scribbling itching Age, wherein for a Man to do, as the most do, is
to be least noted, (with him in the Lottery,) content to be a Fool for
Company, En ego Musarum rudis, et pauperculus hospes, I, that am not worthy
(gentle Reader) to hold a Trencher to the Muses, have (with bouldness enough)
thrust my hand into the dish amongst them, and do here present thee with some
of the dainties which I found at their Table: Take them as the pastime of my
pastimes, and the Recreations and Interims, which in my younger time, I
reserved from sports and pleasure, (especially that bewitching Inticement of
Hawks, and hawking, which have flowne away with so much of my most precious
time; and wherein the greatest and the best part of the young Nobility and
Gentry of this Land, (by an ill received, and worse continued custom) do
ravl'e out a great part of their goulden days, as if the terminus ad quem, the
end of all their careful and chargeable education. at home and abroad, were
only to make them ripe and fit for the slavish service of Hawks and Hounds,
and other poorer sports and pleasures, (whose rare and seldom use is indeed
their greatest commendation.) Long have these trifles of my pains line
imprisoned by me, and some of them, above treble the time that Horace
injoynes, ( ut nonu^ premantur in Annum:) yet now at last I have granted them
an exeatis into the world: I will not deny, that they had long since adventured
abroad, but that I still looked, and as much desired, that some good able Poet
would have taken this task in hand, much wondering, that many of the other
Latin Authors, both in prose and poetry, had found so much courtesy amongst
sundry of our ingenious Countrymen, to be taught to express their mynds very
happily in our English tongue, and that this Author, (so much honored in all
times, as the Prince and parragon of all Latin poesy, should yet stand still
as a noli me tangere, whom no man, either durst or would undertake: only
Master Spencer long since translated the Gnat, (a little fragment of Virgils
excellence,) giving the world peradventure to conceive, that he would at one
time or other have gone through the rest of this Poets works: and it is not
improbable, that this very cause was it, that made every man else very nice to
meddle with any part of the Building which he had begun, for fear to come
short with disgrace, of the pattern which he had set before them: as none
would adventure (for the same reason,) to finish the pourtraict of Venus, which
Apelles left behind him unperfect, at his death: Wherefore I make no doubt, but
this which I do, wilbee addomed against me for a bold, and a daring deed:
but Epistola non erubescit: and now they are out of my hands, I hope they will
quickly learn so much Impudence of the world, into which they are crowding,
that a little blushing will serve their turn: some Readers I make no doubt they
will meet with in these dainty mouthed times, that will tax them, for not
coming resolved word for word, and line for line with the Author: To whom (if
any such chance to be) I only say: That this small Endeavor of mine being
at first undertaken only for my own private delight, my homely Muse dressed the
whole feast, according as she knew it would best please my own taste and diet,
( Coquus enim Domini debet habere gulam:) and I used the freedom of a
Translator, not tying my self to the tyranny of a Grammatical Construction,
but breaking the shell into many pieces, was only careful to preserve the
kernel safe and whole, from the violence of a wrong, or wrested
Interpretation; for as we cannot chide him for an ill tasker, that beats the
Corn clean out of the straw, though yet he thresh it not Ear by Ear, or
sheafe by sheafe, in the same order, as it first grevv in the Field. neither
are we wont to disco^mend those Hounds, who spending their mouths merrily
together, trayl the Hare home to her form, though they hunt not all the while
so close within the compass of a sheet, nor hitt every head, or every double in
the very direct track, that the Hare pricked it out before them: and as we do
not condemn that Greyhound to run foul, that (with good footmanship courseth
the Deer straight without coasting, though his strayns be more or fewer,
shorter or longer then the Deeres, and his turns not all so nimble and round,
in the same narrovv compass together with the Hare: Nor do we hold that
Falcon any bad Hawk, who (working her self into a good Kill-ducks place, and
flying jump and round) stoops frankly, strikes sure, and comes home close to
the very blank water, though yet she come not so close, as to ineau, or go to
plunge together with the Foul: no more do I conceive herein my course to be
faulty, though I do not affect to follow my Author so close, as to tread upon
his heels; if yet I can keep at a nearer distance unto him, then Creusa to her
husband, in their going out of Troy, so as neither to loose my self, nor my
Guide, in so difficult and dark a journey; houlding my self for a passable
Travayler, to have held my Author all the way by the hand (as Ascanius did
Aeneas, in the dark night of their trudging out of the massacre) howsoever my
short-legd Muse, (not able to take so long strydes) have walked with him (as
that young stripling with his Father) non passibus aequis. Every line of this
Poet, in his own language, deserves the acceptance of the very best Reader: but
the language which I have taught him; (not daring to stand upon justification
by merit, and therefore needing rather pardon then acceptance,) appeals unto
your courtesies with that limitation vvherevvith the good Theodosius bespake the
Romans, on his deathbed, in the behalf of his two young sonns ( si
promerebuntur:) or (if I should use any other insinuation) it should be that
which Shemi, as bad a Man, as I can be a Poet,) used to K. David, because I am
the first, that have met my Countrymen with these dainty Aeclogues, in our
English tongue: which (being like Riddles, wrapped up in a Mask, and under a
clowd of reserved sense, and a double Meaning,) I have sent abroad with a Gloss
borrowed from diverse learned Authors, as strangers with a guide to direct them
in an unknown way: not doubting, but some can be very well content to delight
their tastes with the pleasant juice, as their eye with the outvvard rhind of
these goulden Pastoralls.

To tender either the Text or the Gloss, the Garment, or the Imbroydery, (as
they are mine,) to the learned sort, were to offer to light up a Taper before
the Sunn, or to bring Farthings (though a current Coin) in payment unto the
exchequer: but amongst those of my own growth, and last, of knowledge and
understanding, perhaps (formy Authors sake) the one may be acceptable, and the
other welcome, (as a hand to draw aside the Curtaynes from delicate Pictures)
that so they may discover the face at least, though not the whole body of the
Poets meaning. But least I may draw an imputation of having my wings broader
then my nest, or my porch larger then my house, with equal respect to all
according to the rank and quality of every several Reader. I rest.

W. L.

Quod meus Idortus habet, sum^s impune lic^bit,
Si dederis nobis, quod ^uus Hortus habet.

Aegloga prima.
ARGUMENT.
TITYRVS, is a feigned name, and in the Laconian language signifies, a
greatgrowne-Ramme, which is wont to lead the Flock: Under this name, VIRGIL
co^cheth himself, and describes his own fortune; and (by the way) sets forth
the Bounty of CAESAR unto him; and testifies his own Thankfulness to
OCTAVIAN, by making a commemoration of his happiness, which by his favor he
did enjoy: (herein performing the two duties of true Gratitude at once: the
first part whereof is to acknowledge the good turn; but the sum of all, is
to confess the person, that is the Author of the benefit.

MELIBE, is also a feigned name, so called of the Greek, (...), because he
has the care and looking to the Oxen committed unto him; Under this Person
VIRGIL describes an unfortunate miserable man, exiled and forced out of his
own Country; but more pertinently and directly, the woeful state of the poor
People of Mantua, VIRGILS native Country, where he was bred and borne.

TITYRVS.
The Bucolickes of PVBLIVS VIRGILIVS MARO.
Aegloga prima.
Melibeus. THou, in cool Covert of this broad Beech-tree,
(Tityrus) at case, do meditating lie
On small Oate Pipe, thy silvan Muse; But we
Leave our fair Fields, and our dear Country fly:
Whilst thou lye'st shaded in security,
Teaching the hollow woods, loud to proclaim,
And echo, with the sound of Amaryllis name.

Tityrus. Ah (gentle Melibe) Providence divine,
And God himself, has blessed me with this ^ase,
Of his mere grace, without desert of mine:
It Is he; who (as thou see) in franker Leaze
Let Us my Herds rove, at pleasure, where they please;
He gives me leave, upon my homely Quill,
And rusticke Rheed, to pipe, what songs, and tunes I will.
For-thy; him as my God I will behold,
And I his Altar often will imbrew
With my young Kids, the fattest of my fold.

Me. (Shepherd) the happiness which thou do show
I not envy; and yet (to tell thee true)
Thy goodly Fortune I admire more
In this tempestuous stound, all full of foul uproar.
See here my Kids, whom I am forced to drive
Sick as I am; and this young Tenderling
(With much ado, to save it e'ne alive)
A little lack of dead (poor weakly thing)
All way, I in my arms, am feign to bring:
For'mongst the Trees ere while, on bare flint steane
This Goat, two Twins, (the hope of all my Heard) did eane.
The Oaks I saw, parched with heavens blast,
This mischief often did prognosticate,
(Had I had wit, or any small forecast:)
On hollow Ilex, (as she croaking sat)
The luckie Crow, did often this intimate.
But, thilke same God, whom yet ye herry thus,
Of court'sie do me, t'understand (good Tityrus.)

Tityrus. Sicker, ye me to thing doo'n timely tempt,
Which erst, I bet, than ye did never ken:
Ah fon, (friend Melibe) I whilome dempt,
That famous City, which I now and then
In common chat, amongst our Countrymen,
Have heard ycleeped, by the name of Rome,
Certes for all the world, sibb, to our homely home.
Where we poor shepherds, wont attend our Lamms,
And tender younglings weane. So did I dare
Kids, liken, to their Goats, Whelps to their Damms,
And Mowle-hills, wont, to Mountains, to compare,
"But sooth, to it all other Cities are
"As to huge Firre-trees, the young tender plants;
"(So high her haughty head she above them does enhance.)

Melibe. But what so great cause had thou Rome to see?
Tityrus. My Liberty; which (late though) yet when all
Selfe-helpe, and hope, both faild, respected me:
After my gray Beard did to the Barber fall,
It came at last, and pitied me (poor thrall:)
When once me Awaryllis did receive,
Poor Galatea left me, and I did her leave.
Whom till I left, I fairly must confess
I neither hope had, nor intendement
Of liberty, ne care, ne mindfulnesse,
Of Flock, or Heard: though from them often went
Many a sweet Sacrifice, and fat Cheese sent
To that ungrateful Town; which nathemore
Not once, fulfilled my fist, with any golden ore.

Melibe. (Sad Amaryllis) I did wonder much,
Why thou in this man's favor did prepare,
And all the Gods invoke; suffering none touch
The fruit upon his Trees: yea, with such care,
That if once Tityrus, hence absent were
Fountains, and Shrubbs, the lofty Pines, and all
Soon Tityrus, can miss, and eachwhere him recall.

Tityrus. What should I there do? spending my fruitles days
Hopeless, of any opportunity,
From my blind bondage, my poor self to raise
Ne means have had to know the clemency
Of such, so bounteous Gods; here, first mine Eye
That young Prince Paragon, (good Melibe)
(To whom twelve days, each year, mine Altars smoke) did see.
He, (first v^ask'd) did my Petition grant,
And thus himself, did answer my request:
Feed (Ladd) thine Oxen, (as wont, paravant)
And to the yoke, break the Bulls stubborn crest.
Melibe. Happy old man, and fortunately blessed
Under so mighty Patronage; for-thy,
Thy fields, henceforth to thee, in safety shall abye.
And spacious, they shall be, and large enough
Albe each pasture, fenced be around,
Mounded with stone, and rushie slimy stuff:
Ne shall unwonted feed in Neighbors ground,
Tempt thy bigg-bellied Crones, out of their bound:
Ne shall the murrin, or ought like disease
(Amongst thy Neighbors Cattle) on thy Cattle seize.
"Happy old Man, and more than fairly blessed,
"Who amongst these well known streams, and sacred springs,
"May suck the sweet, cool air, into thy breast:
"Here, from the hedge, of thy next Neighbourlings,
The buzzing Bees, confused murmurings
(About the sallow bloomes) shall often invade
Thy lulled sense, and to sweet slumber thee persuade.
Here, may thou hear, under these hollow Rocks
Unto the air, the Lopper, lowdly chant,
And sing wild descant, to his Axes knockes.
Here, the hoarse stockdove (thy delight) will haunt;
Ne, shall the mourning Turtle, cease to pant
In the Elmes thick tops, (aspiring to the skies;)
And groan her doleful notes, and earnfull Elegies.

Tityrus. The light-heel'd Hindes, in the air shall feed therefore,
And in the Ocean, all the fishes dye
For want of water, on the naked Shore:
The wandering Parthian, first shall drinken dry
Huge Araris; and guzzling Germany,
Suck down their thirsty throats, swift Tygris-tyde;
Ere, his dear lovely face, shall from my bosom slide.

Melibe. But we, like Pilgrims must forsake this Rea'me,
Wandering amongst the scorched Africans:
Some to Oaxes, (Creta's rapid stream)
And some amongst the frozen Scythians:
And some, far hence, amongst the unknown Bryteans,
(A people of another world, and quite
From all the world beside, divided in their site.)
God knows, if ever I, my Country dear,
And my poor Cot of turse, again shall see;
Or (after many a long and tedious year)
Admire my Fields of Corn, as now they be.
"Shall the rude godless Soldier have (aye me)
"These well-plow'd Tilthes? or shall some barbarous slave,
"Of these rich goodly crops, the bounteous harvests have.
Lo, here by our own discord and debate,
How huge a Sea, of endless misery
(Distressed Citizens) does us awaite:
Lo, now, for whom, we all so carefully
Have sown our grounds. Plant now (poor Melibe)
Thy Pears, and done, in order dress thy Vine,
And to some thanklesse stranger, leave them trim and fine
Go now (my once, dear happy heard:) and ye
My tender Kids, farewell: never more, I
You (hanging on the mossy Rocks) shall see
Far off, whilst I in some green Cave do lie;
Ne songs, will I more sing, as formerly,
Ne, henceforth (Kiddies) whilst I feed, shall you
Brouze on the flourie shrubs, and sour sallowes chew.

Tityrus. Here yet with me, a sorry simple Bed
Accept, and welcome, on this homely Floor,
Such as thou see with fresh green Boughs o'respred:
Some mellow apples, yet we have in store,
With Chessnutts smoothe: ilk, we have curds galore:
And now (far off) the village-Chimnies tall,
Smoke high; and larger shadows, from the Mountains fall.

The Preface of LODOVICVS VIVES to his Gloss upon VIRGILS Aeglogues.
THE Greek Poets that lived in former time, were held in more honor, and
estimation amongst the favorers of learning in that Nation, than the Latin
Poets were amongst the Latins, insomuch that the most exquisite wits of the
Greeks did write diverse Comments upon Homer, as likewise sundry Philosophers
amongst them; and namely Aristotle, (in my mind, the Prince, and instar omnium,
of them all) wherein our Countrymen the Latins (I speak not of those, who
lived in the age, wherein Poetry had not yet begnn to have any the least
acceptance, (men which never had leisure to lay the plough, or the lance out of
their hands) but I mean those in these latter ages, who have applied
themselves to Philosophy, and the more graver studies) have so opposed
themselves amongst the gentle Muses, as that they thought it a disparagement
once to touch, or come near them: as if but glancing upon these milder kinds
of studies, had been the ready way to have flung them headlong from that
height of wisdom to which they did aspire: certainly hereby they did defraud
themselves of no mean delight unto their wits, and a great refreshing and
rejoicing of their minds and spirits, in shutting wilfully their ears,
against that delectable sweet harmony of the Poets. The blame hereof partly
the perverse obstinate natures of those times, and partly the times themselves,
and ill received opinions, must bear. As for me, (having so warrantable an
Author for so weighty a matter, as Aristotle) I will never make nice to
intermixe these so pleasing and sweet remissions, and vnbending of the mind,
with the severity of my more serious studies, and to comment upon the merry
Muses, as now of late I have done upon Virgils Bucolickes, out of which I have
picked a deeper sense in many places, than the vulgar common Grammarians can
conceive. For, did these Aeglogues contain in them no farther hidden matter,
than the very bare bark of the words makes show of, I cannot think that the
Author had needed to have taken three years time to have brought them to
perfection, especially borrowing the greatest part of the whole subject out of
Theocritus the Sicilian Poet; Add hereunto, that he undertook this task to
present the greatest wits of Rome withal, namely Cornelius Gallus, Asinius
Pollio, Varus, Tucca, yea the Prince himself Augustus; all which (excellently
learned men themselves, and much conversant and accustomed in the best and
chiefest writers, both in Greek and Latin) would doubtless never have been
so taken, and infinitely delighted, with such kinds of light matter as
Pastoralls, had they not affoorded some hidden meaning and sense of a higher
nature. Again, when he once set himself to insinuate into their favor and
grace by this work, it is to be thought that Virgil, under these sporting
passages of pastoral verse, did finely and neatly as it were, inlay, and couch
many things tending to their praise and commendation, and sundry other matters,
befitting them to take notice of; which being understood rightly, might affect
the Readers minds, like the elegant and artificial Pictures, which lay
secretly hidden under the statue of the Sileni. Hereunto may likewise farther
be added, that the matter itself and subject of this work does plainly
witness in sundry places, that it is not simply, but figuratively spoken,
under a shadow: which makes me admire the more at Servius Honoratus, who will
in this book admit of no Allegories, but only in that passage of Virgils
grounds, which were lost: when as many other matters are therein manifestly and
merely allegorical and dark: wherefore I have thought good, to signify to
the world, that I have trimmed up these Allegories for their use, and behoof,
who are delighted with the reading of Virgil, (as who is it that it not?) to
the end that the finest wits might have a certain repast, and delicate food
fitting their taste, and might be drawn to mount higher than the simple sense
of the very bare letter. Moreover I shall hereby restore the Poet to the true
scope and aim of his meaning, and show, that his purpose was not to consume so
much precious time, and exquisite verses in trivial light matters of no
moment; and that those things which Theocritus in a ruder barbarous age, did
sing in a Pastoral plain sense, Virgil here does apply to the Romans, making
them his own, under a mystical understanding, worthy the cares of the most
learned: notwithstanding I make no doubt but I have fitted some of his verses
with such an allegory and explication, as the Author himself never dreamed
of; as likewise many other, I have as aptly applied, according to his scope and
meaning in the writing: wherein yet I know I have done a thing, neither
unacceptable, nor unprofitable to the Reader: Greek writers have done the like
before my time, in expounding of Homer; and Donatus in our language, has
attempted and performed as much in his comment upon Terence and this Poet,
where he undertakes by his Glosses, to bewray their sense and meaning, etc.

TITYRVS.
The GLOSS.
BY Amaryllis, he means Rome, or else, Octavian: whose praise he set forth in
his pastoral verse, which is meant by his slender oaten pipe.

And God himself, etc. Octavian was not yet accepted nor worshipped for a God,
when Virgil composed these Aeglogues: and therefore he uses this word Mihi:
for had he been so generally reputed as a God, this emphaticall pronounce
(which the Poet inserts upon especial consideration) had been superfluous.
For he intimates thus much, that howsoever he had behaved himself as an enemy
to others, yet he had approved himself to him, in stead of a God. For as Pliny
says, he by whom a man receives help and comfort, is a God to him; and
therefore antiquity Him as my God has feigned very brute beasts, (by whose
service they received profit) for Gods: So the Cat, the Dog, the Ox, and the
Ibis were honored as gods amongst the Egyptians. And so the Gracians set them
up for gods, who had found out the first use of things profitable and necessary
for man's life; as namely Minerva, for the invention of oil: Bacchus, for
finding the making of wine: and Aesculapius, for the use of medicine and
surgery.

But thou lie shaded in security. Thou art secure and free from the
scortching hear of the Sun; that is, safe from the fury and violence of the
conquering soldier, that harries our Country all over at Mantua.

The Oaks I saw blasted with etc. When I saw the Oaks blasted with lightning;
that is, the Bruts, and Cassius, and others the murderers of Caesar, when I
saw them banished, and overthrown, and all that took their part, (amongst
whom they of Cremona were) I might have escaped that calamity, if I had
departed; and avoided the contagion of my neighbors, (that is, their treason
and conspiracy) and had by some means made my peace with the Conqueror, and
procured him to be my friend.

The luckie Crow etc. In the Latin, it is Sinistra Cornix: this word Sinistrum,
(howsoever in humane affairs it signify unlucky,) yet in those kind of
fites and ceremonies, used in divination, among the heathen, Sinistrum is taken
in the contrary sense, as Avis sinistra, is as much to say, as good luck:
intonuit Laevum, it thundered on the left hand, that is, it thundered luckely,
or we shall have good success: and this word sinistrum, is so named a sinendo,
from sufferig and permitting, because the gods do suffer us to proceed in our
purposed projects: and therefore Cicero, in lib. 1. de Divinatione, says, A
sinistra Cornice, ratum, and firmum Augurium fieri: The prophecy of the Augurs
was ratified, and confirmed, from the Crow, which they beheld on their left
hand: and in the law of the twelve Tables, it is said, Ave finistra, populi
magister esto; that is, By the bird on the left hand, it is certain, that thou
art the man who must rule the people. And from hence (in the judgment of
Lipsius, in his Lib. 2. Cap. 2. Elect.) the Graecians have named the left hand,
(...), from (...), signifying the best. Now the reason, why those things that
did appear to the Augurs, in the time of their diving, on the left hand, were
commonly held to be tokens of good luck, was for that in the giving of a
benefit, the givers right hand is opposite, and just against the left hand of
the receiver: so that in this Eglogue, and in the ninth, Sinistra Cornix, is to
be taken for luckie, or fortunate; because appearing on the left hand, it
forewarned of danger, before it happened.

But thilk same God, etc. Here demanding him of Caesar, (befitting the
rudeness and ignorance of a Shepherd) with a long circumstance, and yet
wittily and cunningly he tells That famous City, etc. him a tale of Rome. For
in describing Rome, he magnifies the greatness of Caesar, who ruled Rome, and
subdued it to his government: and here the Poet (as in all other passages)
observes an excellent decoru^, suitable to Country plain men) as if they had no
more knowledge of Rome, than by a light flying heresay; (a thing natural and
usual to Shepherds, to know no ne^es of any thing, though of importance and
weighty) if it be but a Furlong beyond their fould; (as not being inquisitive
and curious of foreign marters.)

Siker: an old Saxon word; as much as verily, or surely.

Bett: a word contracted from better, and used in this sense by Chancer, and
Mr. Spencer.

Sibb to our homely home, etc. Shepherds, as they be rude and ignorant, so
they esteem and measure all things according to their own means. So Tityrus
says, he deemed that pompous goodly City (so full of Nobility, Lords, and
Gentry, and the seat of the Empire) to be like their poor Shepherds Town,
or rather Sheepe-cote; that is, He thought, that the wit, understanding,
eloquence, humanity, civil behavior, and education of the people of Rome, was
like their homely stuff, and clownish manners at Mantua.

Fon: a contraction from fondling: Spencer.

Dempt: for deemed, or imagined: Spencer.

Ycleeped: named or called: Chaucer.

Sibb an old Saxon word, as much as of kindred or alliance: from hence coms our
word Gossip; corruptly so written and spoken; it being indeed, God-sib: that
is, a kindred in God: all such as are Godfathers and Godmothers together at the
christning of a child, by the Popes Canons, become Sib to each other, and of a
spiritual kindred, so near allied, that such Godsibs may not marry together,
without special dispensation from his Holiness.

But what so great cause dandled thy desire, etc. A rusticall speech, and a
question well suiting the silliness of the Country; for shepherds, and home
bred people, are wont to stand at gaze, and admire at any thing the cause
whereof, and the reason, they know not.

My freedom etc. A specious tittle, and a very reasonable pretext, and such as
might easily pierse the simple mind of a Shepherd; it being even imprinted in
the disposition of all creatures as well reasonable, as others, naturally to
affect freedom: which principle is found most true by daily experience, in
such birds, and beasts, as by man's art are reclaimed, how loath they are to
yield unto bondage; and being subdued, if never so little left to themselves,
how soon they apprehend their first estate and freedom, and how warily they
preserve themselves from being enthralled again. Again Virgil could not have
devised to have flattered more artificially, than by confessing to have gained
liberty by his means, who was suspected to have aimed at the destruction and
usurpation of the general liberty and immunities of Rome: moreover in
acknowledging Caesar's favor, for restoring him to his estate, and liberty: he
yet mentions his liberty in the first place, as the most excellent benefit
worthy to be preferred before all other blessings whatsoever, as the most
excellent benefit, worthy to be preferred before all other blessings
whatsoever, as a Jewel of most incomparable value; which caused another Poet
to cry out, (as being rapt with admiration thereof:) O bona libertas, pretio,
pretiosior omni: Dear Liberty, a gemm beyond all price.

After my beard grew white, etc. VIRGIL was but young, when he wrote his
Bucolickes about thirty years old; for he was borne in that year, when
Pompey and Crassus were Consuls; from which time to the Triumvirate, were
twenty four years: again, the Triumvirate lasted ten years. Therefore this
speech of Virgil is hyperbolicall and used by him, with great affection;
intimating thereby that he had lived so long without true liberty, and
preferment, in mean estate, and poverty, that he seemed in his own mind to
have grown old in living all this while in this kind of mean condition.

I fairly must confess, etc. At Mantua, I could neither enjoy liberty nor
wealth; howsoever I did there give as much testimony of my wit, and learning,
no less worthy the acceptance, than I did at Rome: but virtue had there no
respect, nor learning any estimation amongst those Mantuan Blockheads; who as
their minds were not capable of arts, and true knowledge, so likewise they did
as little regard them.

Sad Amaryllis, etc. By Amaryllis, he means Rome; and he calls it sad,
(though it were the Emperesse of the world) in respect of the favor and
esteem, which Virgill was in, as being sad, and all the whole City out of
quiet, if he did but stir a little from thence; so gracious was he to all
sorts.

And all the gods invoke, etc. I did wonder much, why Rome should invoke and
entreat all the gods (that is, Caesar, and all the Nobles) to show thee
savor, and to be good to thee, and to suffer thy apples to hang safe on the
tree, untouched of any: that is, to give charge that none should meddle with
any of the goods of Virgil.

Fountains and Shrubs, etc. Thou had such an interest, in the minds of all
sorts, the highest, the middle sort, and the meanest of the commons, as that
thou could not be mist, but all men did seek thy love, and acquaintance.

Here first mine Eye, etc. This was cause enough (if there were no other
reason) to have enticed me to go to Rome; for there I first saw that goodly
young Prince Octavian, for whose prosperity I do dedicate twelve days every
year, to sacrificing and prayer. He names him That young man, by an
excellence, as being (as in degree above all other) so in all virtuous
qualities, and behavior, the non parcille of all the youth of his age; he
being very young at that time, not exceeding five and twenty years.

He, first vnask'd, etc. He, (namely Caesar Octavian) without any second means
of his Lords, or any entreaty of my own, of his own clemency and princely
disposition, did prevent me in my request, and granted it unto me, before I
could ask him.

Feed (Ladd) thine Oxen as wont, etc. Go forward in thy studies, which thou
have begun, and under my Patronage and protection, increase, and finish them.

Under so mighty Patronage, etc. Under so great a Patron and defender, the
monuments of thy wit shall remain for ever; or else it may be simply
understood of his grounds, being spoken in the praise of Caesar's bounty and
mercy to him.

Although each Pasture, etc. This is simply, and without any figure to be
taken, as meaning that Virgils grounds were bounded in, on the one side with
mountains, on the other with marsh, and fenn; nevertheless it should be
sufficient for him, and his stock, so that neither he nor they should need
to seek abroad for more to maintain himself or them: intimating further, the
great commodity which he receives by the strong fencing, and mounding of his
grounds, whereby his Cattle shall be safe from the injury of neighbors, which
those beasts which are apt to stray and rome abroad, (such as are bullockes and
Bees) do often fall into.

Ne shall unwonted feed, etc. Being backed with these so mighty Patrons,
though others lands be taken from them, yet thine shall be saf^; neither
(having these so gracious pill^rs of learning to countenance thee) shall thou
fear, that the esteem of thy wit, and thy M^se, shall ever suffer loss.

Amongst these well known streams, etc. This is none of the least happiness
of a man's life, for a man to live all his whole time in his own Country, and
to spend his age, where he began his youth, and has long continued: according
to that saying of Claudian, Foelix, qui Patrijs aevum transegit in arvis.

Amongst the Brytans, etc. Antiquity called only that the world, which was
the continent all along the maine Ocean: but as for the Islands of the Ocean,
they counted to be out of the world; esteeming no Islands to be part of the
world, but those of the Mediterra^ean; as Sicilia, Sardinia, the Cyclades, and
the rest. Therefore the calamity was wondrous grievous, which could not be
repaired by any near journey at home; but the Citizens of Mantua, were
enforced to seek habitation out of the Roman protection, as it were in another
world, which compared with the Roman, was all barbaros, and senseless of
civility.

God knows, etc. A natural affection and sympathy in outlawes, and banished
persons, which makes them apt to snatch at every little accident, which may
suggest the least hope to see once again the delights, which they were forced
to leave behind them: at sight whereof they both wonder and rejoice: the like
passion usually affects travailours, after their long and tedious
peregrintation, especially in Countries of courser condition, and for all
things fit for pleasure, and true comfort, every way short and inferior to
their own, (...) Shall the rude, etc. This is expressed with great indignation
and disdain, that some ^ude barbarous Rascal should enjoy that, which the
poor owner has sweat for, and gotten hardly together.

Lo, here (distressed Citizens) by your own: Civil wars, not only in Rome,
the head of the Empire, but also intestine broils in every hamlet and
tributary town; And this is a sentence, full of weight, and grave indignation:
describing herein the maine reason and ground of the subversion, and alienation
of all Kingdoms, to proceed from mutinous and envious distractions, amongst
the people of the same Nation, which makes them fit and easy to be over-runne.

Lo, now for whom, etc. So it happens in most worldly matters, that such enjoy
our labors, whom we least desire, and hold most unworthy thereof: of which
unhappiness Solomon so much complains in his book of the Preacher.

Plant now, poor Melibe, etc. All these are most passionate, and pathetical
speeches full of commiseration: for the ill which afflicts us, and the good
which we have lost, do equally affect us in the remembrance: he here shows
the vicissitude, and counterchange of all worldly matters, and withal, man's
dullness, and ignorance, in the apprehension of future things.

Go now, my once, etc. The departing from such delights, as either the eye or
the ear were wont to take pleasure in, proves very woeful, and almost
intolerable.

Citysus, is a shrubbie Plant; and it is called shrubb Trefoyle, or Tetrafolye:
some call it milke-trefoyle: because it increases milk in the Cattle, which
eat thereof: but we have no proper word for it in England, (as being a shrub,
whole kind grows not amongst us.)

Here yet with me, etc. Here the Poet describes true courtesy, which offers
all which is in her power to perform; observing a handsome decorum, in the
Shepherds bounty, and rusticke hospitality, inviting his poor Friend to Bed
and Board, and to such dainties, as the Country of it self affoords, and is
within his mean power, and ability to bestow; which indeed is right
liberality, and the office of true Friendship. Moreover, as he shows his
honest mind toward his afflicted needy friend, so he invites Octavian by this
his example under a feigned Person, likewise to show mercy. And whereas he
persuades Melibe to stay with him, and take his rest, because it was night,
hereby he intimates that the end of all these miseries was not far off, and
therefore wishes him with hope quietly to expect it. Galore: An Irish word,
and signifies plenty, and abundance.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE SECOND EGLOGVE.
Cornelius Gallus was in his time an excellent Poet, and advanced by Augustus
Caesar to chief place in government of the Commonweal, as also in his wars:
This man's favor and near acquaintance above all other, Virgil entirely
affected, (as may appear by the verses in his tenth Eglogue:) but (by his
continual employments, and the especial grace wherein he stood with Augustus,
who carried him ever with him, wheresoever he went) Virgil was still
disappointed: An other Rub in his way, may seem to be, the small esteem
which Gallus at first did make of Virgil, (which the Poet in some passages does
seem to intimate,) himself considered, as the great General of the Emperors
Provinces and Armies, and Virgil, a homely Country fellow, and a Poet: (which
Art, being in former Ages of no great account,) in Augustus days began to be
accepted, like as versisying in the native Tongue, began under John the second,
King of Castile, to be esteemed. Concerning this his love and desire, (which
he could by no means enjoy) he composed this plaintive Eglogue.

ALEXIS.
Aegloga secunda.
THE POET.
THe Shepherd Corydon er'st dearly loved.
His Masters darling, young Alexis fair:
But in pursuit thereof he still improov'd,
Not having what he hoped; but reaped despair,
Though every day alone he did repair,
And amongst the cacuminous thick Beeches shade,
In vain, this idle stuff, to hills, and woods bewrayed.
CORYDONS Complaint.
(Cruel Alexis) thou have no regard
Of my sad songs, no pity of my pain,
Yea, thou do do me dye with usage hard:
For now the Herds, for shadow leave the plain,
And Lizzards green close hid in moss remain,
And Thestilis, Be^ony, and Garlic beats,
(Rank herbs) for Harvesters, all faint with scorching heates.
Whilst I (sore Sunburned, in sad quest of thee,
Together with the Grasshoppers hoarce cry,)
The very shrubbs make mourn: (far bet for me
Proud Amaryllis 'sdainfull surquedry,
And peevish angry humor to abye;)
Yea, much'il better were, Menalcas scorn,
(Albe, he not so fair as ye) to have borne.
Ah my fair Boy, trust not thy hew too much:
Hurtles, though black, by every handsome hand
Are plucked; whilst Dazies, none vouchsafe to touch;
Albe they white, yet shed they as they stand.
My Love thou scorn'st, ne dainest to demand
Once after me, or of my state to know,
How rich in milk, and Cattle white as snow.
My Lambs by thousands in the Mountains stray,
Ne want I milk in Winter, ne in Prime,
And with his droves, in Aracynthia,
When self Amphyon called, at any time
Did I forbear to sing my woonted Rhyme.
Nor am I so deformed; selfe-saw I, as I stood,
On shore right now, when wind-free was the Flood.
Ne, but my shadow me deceive, I wis,
Needs me, (though thou be Judge) self Daphnis fear,
Oh, mote it please thee, grant me only this,
With me, in my poor simple Cottage here,
Living a Country life, to strike the Dear,
And chase the Stagg, and my bigg-bellied Goats,
With mallows green, to gather to their cotes,
Amongst these woods, together here with me,
To Pan thou may in singing thee adapt:
Pan first deviz'd, with skillful symmetry,
Of tempered wax, a composition apt
Of many Rheedes, each one in other lopt;
Yea, Pan, with tender care, regards the sheep,
Ilke, as he does, the Shepherds, who them keep.
Ne, e're repent, thy lip to wear away
Upon a Pipe: Herein his skill to breed,
What pains took not Amyntas night and day?
Selfe-have I a Pipe, of seaven-fold joynted Rheede,
Which once Damaetas, left me by his deed,
This Pipe (quoth he) as he his last did breathe,
To thee, (the second owner) I bequeathe.
Heereat, the Fool Menalcas, much repined:
Besides two milke-white spotted Kids I have,
Which in a perilous dale, I chanced to find
Two duggs they daily suck, whilst they can crave,
And these I purposely for thee do save:
Though Thestilis full feign would have them both,
And so she shall, since thou my gifts do loath.
Come hither (my fair Boy) with Bolles brim-full
Of silver Lillyes. See where the Nymphs do come;
And lovely Nais, violets pale, does pull,
And Poppy tops, and pretiouse Cynnamum,
Sweete-savoury Dyll, and Daffodillyes some;
With Hurtles soft, decking the Marigould,
And other sweet flowers mingled manifould.
And I Will thee pluck the downe-soft hoarie Quince,
Chessnutts, (which my' Amaryllis did affect)
And mellow Plums, (a present for a Prince:)
Ye Laurells also, (still with verdure decked)
And next (ye Myrtles) I will you collect,
And by your leave your bonny Berries take,
For precious perfume, ye together make.
But ( Corydon) thou's but a sorry swain,
Nor does thy gifts, Alexis ought regard:
Ne, thou Iola's free consent can gain,
Albee thou should him tempt with rich reward:
(Ah) how have I mine own fair market mard!
My flowers keeper, I the South have made,
And to the Bore my Crystal streams betrayde*
(Ah foolish Fon) whom do thou seek to shun?
Why; Dardan Paeris, (that same Shepherd Knight)
Yea, e'ne, the gods themselves, the woods did won:
Let Pallas praise her Towers goodly hight,
And in her pompous Palaces delight,
Which she has builded; but of all the rest,
(In my conceit) the Forrest-life is best.
The crewell-grim-fac'd Lioness pursues
The bloody Woolfe: the Woolfe, the Kid so free:
The wanton capring Kidd, does chiefly c^use
Amongst the flowring Cithysus to be:
And Corydon ( Alexis) follows thee:
So each thing as it likes; and all affect
According as their nature does direct.
But now from plough the yoaked Oxen creep,
And Sol, his eeking shades does double kest:
Yet, Love burns me; (for Love no mean can keep:)
(Ah Corydon, Corydon) what chance unblessed,
Or madness, has (at mischief) thee possessed?
Vnfinisht, thus to leave thy halfe-prun'd Vine,
Which on these leavie Elmes, does here incline.
Whilst, thou do rather choose some other way*
Of lesser pains, to set on work thy wit;
(At least, which may thy present need defray)
Some homely Haske, of Osyers, woven, fit,
With Rushes round, and soft: how ever yet,
If still Alexis do disdain thy love,
Thou shall some other find will kinder prove.
ALEXIS.
The GLOSS.
AND Thestilis does garlic beat, etc. This Thestilis was the name of a
Country wench, who (according to the fashion of hot Countries) did pound
leekes, garlic, and other strong herbs together, for the workmen to allay
their heat, in extreme whote weather: for, as Pliny says in his Natural
History, Omnis medicina aut a contrario, aut a simili quaeritur: All remedies
are fetched either from contraries, or from things of like quality: whence it
comes, that extreme heat is abated, either by cold, which is his direct
opposite, or by another heat. According to which Principle the Poet in the
last Aeglogue brings in the Lover, resolving to find remedy to his vehement
heat of Love, either by travailing into Scythia, or into Egypt, two Countries
quite different in disposition; the one extreme cold, the other extreme whote.

Far bet for me, etc. It had been much better for me, to have made choice
of some friend of meaner condition, with whom I might have conversed and
discoursed, and delighted my mind with his acquaintance, unto my own hearts
desire: there being in this life nothing more sweet, than a paritie in
friendship.

Ah my fair Boy, etc: Trust not too much to the gifts of Fortune, whereof the
greatest often fall away, and the meanest are preserved. As also, amongst great
persons often friendship is dissolved, when amongst mean folk it is charily
maintained. For who would willingly affect his acquaintance, which by reason of
his greatness he can never conveniently enjoy? In friendship there must be
every way an equality, that so friends may enjoy each other so much the more
freely.

Did I forbear to sing my woonted Rhyme, etc. I do not only understand, and
am skilled in the human arts, but I make verses like the ancient Poets, and so
near imitate them, that there is hardly any difference to be found between
them: for amongst the later writers, it is held a great honor to be compared
to these of former ages; when yet ofttimes the later far exceed the former.

Self as I stood; on shore, etc. For I have conversed with Octavian himself,
with Mecaenas, with Tuccas, and Varus: so that I learn to set a true value
upon my self, by their judgment of me.

When even was the Flood, etc. In the time of the last peace, when in the
cessation of wars, every man betook him to his own home, laying by their
Arms, and all tumults remooved, that so it may appear, that they were at
leisure, to make a true estimate of me; For as a quiet still water, does
receive the resemblance of the face, and so presents it back again; so when
the mind is quiet, it gives right judgment, which being troubled, and full of
agitation, it is not able to perform* the Poet here very fitly names Italy the
Sea, and the Winds the troubles of wars.

The Hurtle is a wild berry, black as Iet.

Pan first deviz'd, etc. This Pan by the Poets feigned to be the Country god;
his shape they have made, as it were the counterfeit of Nature, from whence he
has his denomination of Pan; which signifies All, as resembling every part and
member of nature: For he has horns, in resemblance of the beams of the
Sun, and the horns of the Moone^ his complexion and face is ruddie, in
resemblance of the sky; he has in his breast the spotted skin of a fallow
Dear, representing the Stars; his inferior members are rough, and shagged,
resembling thereby the Trees, Shrubbs, and wild Beasts; he has Goats feet,
signifying thereby the solidity and fast compacture of the earth; he has a
pipe of seven joints, intimating thereby the Harmony of the heaven; in which
there are seven several sounds, seven distinct airs, or kinds of voices:
lastly, he has his sheepe-hooke, or staff with a crook at one end,
resembling the year, which runs his course, till it return into it self
where it began: now because he is the general god of all nature, the Poets
have feigned that on a time he and Love contended together, and that Pan was
overcome, according to that principle which the Poet holds: Omnia vincit Amor.

Ne, e're repent, etc. Hereby he plainly shows, that Cornelius Gallus was
the first composer of Pastoral verses; having indeed made trial of rusticke
Rimes, but not of the rusticke life. Cicuta: is properly the space that is
between every joint in the cane. Herein his skill to breed, etc.
What pains took not Amyntas?
Some Poet as it should seem, both famous and witty, who did greatly affect
this kind of pastoral vein, but could never attain any facility therein.

Which once Damaetas, etc. Theocritus is this Damaetas; (or whosoever else,
most skillful in this kind of verse) was Mr. to Virgil.

Heereat the fool Menalc as, etc. Amyntas did envy this succession of skill,
and excellence in Virgil, worthy therefore to be taxed with the opprobrious
term of fool, in affecting that, which nature had denied him, or his own
negligence; and envying those, to whom nature had been more bountiful
therein,; or who by their own industry had attained thereunto.

Besides two milk white, etc. Two Poems, his Bucolickes, and his Georgickes,
which with great study, and hard labor, he had composed; both which he was
minded to dedicate to Cornelius Gallus: with which gift when he perceived him
not much delighted, he intends to translate the dedication thereof, to Pollio,
or Mecaenas, who entreated this courtesy of him.

Two Duggs they daily suck, etc. Hereby he signifies the elaborate pains of
the works; as if they did even suck from their parent, a double study both
of night and day.

And lovely Nais, Violets pale, etc. The delight is in the color and sweet
smell of the flowers; but the fruit is in apples, chessnuts, Plums, and the
like: The flowers have relation to his Pastoral Poem, and the fruit to his
Georgickes. Servins Hono. Nuces, generaliter dicuntur omnia tecta corio
duriore; vt Avellanae, Amygdalae, Iuglandes, Castaneae: sicut contra, Poma
dicuntur omnia molliora, vt Malorum omne genus, Pyra, Cerasa, Pruna; et his
similia.

Albee thou should him tempt, etc. What can thou with all thy best
endeavor, bring to entice Alexis to thy love? which he cannot more
plentifully, and of better stuff furnish himself withal at Rome, yea e'ne in
Caesar's self; yea though thou should set thy self to sing of wars, and
of the mighty deeds of worthy men: for Augustus wrote diverse Poems; amongst
the rest, the Tragedy of Ajax.

Ah, how have I mine own market mard! etc. I labor in vain, I rehearse my
verses, where is no ear open to entertain them. I strew my flowers before the
southern wind, which scatters them all abroad: I loose my time unprofitably,
and whilst I adapt my self to win him, I omit many fair occasions and
opportunities of other acquaintances.

Why Dardan Paris, etc. A great Prince, in a manner equal to the gods, being
the son, (yea and the most lovely) of so great a King; to whose judgment,
three goddesses did once submit their trial: if you cannot imitate the example
of the gods, yet let the example of men moove you.

The cruel grim-fac't Lioness, etc. This is a general sentence, drawn from
examples; (which the Logicians term, Induction:) and by addition of a
gradation, is made so much the more, fitting to the purpose. The meaning is; (
Cornelius Gallus) deal with me as you think good; avoid my company,
disdaigne me; nevertheless I know not by what propensitie of inclination, I
am (will I, nill I) haled on to affect your Love: neither will I alter my
desire herein, howsoever you demean your self toward me: For I must
confess, I am led by the instinct of my nature thereunto, as pronely, as the
Woolfe is to the Kid, or the Kid to the bushy shrubs; and as every thing in the
kind, is drawn by sense, to follow that which they find to be agreeing, and
most fitting to their natures.

So each thing as it likes, etc. Pleasure, in every thing being propounded,
(as the end, aimed at,) does persuade the mind. For the end, is the impulsive
instrument to each action; and is first in the intent, though last in
execution; for there it rests.

But now from Plough, etc. All things have their time of rest, both things
living, and without life, yea even the heaven it self; speaking after the
capacity of Shepherds, who think, that (like as all other mortal creatures)
so it at night betakes it also to a quiet ease: only the desire in Love knows
no rest, until the full enjoying of the thing desired. Such is man's life, till
such time as it be conjoined, and made one with God.

Ab Corydon, Corydon, etc. He calls the greatness of his Love by the name
of madness, forasmuch as he did forget, and neglect himself, and was as it
were out of his own power, which kind of posture, is of the Philosophers,
termed fury.

Vnfinisht thus to leave thy, etc. Turn thee to thy first begun works; and
out of these fetch comfort, and ease to thy desire: that is, finish thy
Georgickes, and thy Aeneiads; which works thou have commenced, and left
unperfected.

Whilst thou do rather choose, etc. Thou do take in hand, some subject of
less moment, or such matters, as thou know, are more acceptable, or
gainefull, unto the present time.

If still Alexis. etc. You will still persist in your love to Cornelius Gallus,
according as your affection unto him does persuade you; but by finishing those
two more serious works, they will draw the love and respect of some other
worthy, able friend, though Gallus do neglect you.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE THIRD EGLOGVE.
VIRGIL having gained the good will and favor of Augustus, Pollio, Mecaenas,
and Gallus, and other the Lords; was envied by many learned men of Rome for the
same. This Eglogue is a contention and bitter brawle, between Virgil, under
the person of Damaetas) and some other Poet, (who envied him) under the person
of Menalcas, who endeavored to extenuate Virgils authority and acceptance,
amongst the Roman Princes, and advance his own.

PALEMON.
Aegloga tertia.
Men. TEll me ( Damaetas) been these Beasts Meli^e'st.

Dam. Nay: but Aegons: Aegon late left them me.

Men (Poor Sheep) (of all (ah) still most fortuneles:)
Whilst he Neoera courts; and fears lest Thee
Should me before his worthless self prefer;
This Hyreling milkes the sheep, twice every hour,
So they, of nourishment are reaved; ilk,
The sucking Lambs quite cousend of their milk.

Dan. Yet, ill does thee beseem, (take heed) to jeere,
And tax men thus: I know, who once saw you,
When all the Goats (ascance) did at thee leere:
And I could tell thee in what Chapel too,
But the mild Nymphs, (thee scorning) did repine.

Men. Yea, so I thought; 'twas when they saw me shred
Old Mycons Orchards, and new-planted Vine,
With pruning hook, as blunt as any sledd,

Dam. Rather, amongst these dotard-Beeches, here
When Daphnis Bow and Shafts, thou brak'st in twain:
Which (peevish Ass) seeing they given were
Unto the Ladd,) thy heart groand with disdain,
And had not hurt, or done him some mischief,
Thou mot'st need dye, for very spite, and grief.

Men. What will selfe-masters, dare to done, and say?
When such lewd Lozells been so boasting bold?
Saw I not thee (base Buffon) the other day
Filch a Goat slily, from out Damons fould?
(Though loud the Mungrill barkt:) and when I cride,
Whither runs he so fast, and called, hold, hold,
( Tityru^) look to thy heard; then thou beside
The long green saggs, thy self did (sculking) hide.

Dam Why should not he, (first conquered by my song*
My Pipe, and verses meede) that Goat resign?
For, know: that Goat does unto me belong,
And Damons self, confessed him to be mine,
Though (as he said) he durst him not deliver.

Men. Was he by thee in singing e're outwent?
Or, had thou Pipe, with wax compacted ever?
Were not thou wont, thy rascal Rhymes to vent?
In each high way, to every Travailer,
With poor endeavor on thy squeaking Rheede?

Dam. Wilt then by turns, we hand to hand do try,
What either can, and prove each by our deed?
I Will pawn this Heiffer: (which lest thou deny,)
She twice has come, already to the paile,
And two Twins suckells at this time Now say,
What pawn thou wilt gage, with her to countervaile?

Men. Naught dare I of my flock with thee to lay,
For I, a Sire have, and cursed Stepmother,
Both who my Goats, done number twice a day,
And one of them still counts my Kiddies over:
But (which thou will confess much better be,
(Since, thou will needs be mad) I Will pawn thee down
A merry Mazer, framed of Beechen tree,
Carved work, by hand of divine Alcim'edon:
It Is round impaled, with a scattering traile
Of tender Vine, and over all between
A pale green Ivy, wherewith (as a veil)
The thick diffused chusters shaded been.
Just in the midst* Conon is pourtrayd,
And (whosoever he been) an other by,
Who with his rodd unto the world bewrayd
The whole worlds compass by Geographye;
And seasons fit prescribed for Reapers trade:
And for the corbed Ploughmans husbandry.
Ne, to my lips, have I once lift this Cup,
But charily till now have laid it up*

Dam. Why, self Alcimedon, me likewise made
Two carved cups: (their handles trayling trim
With soft Acanthus; in the midst pourtrayd,
Orpheus, and all the Forests following him)
Ne, I these cups, once moved to my lips,
But laid them up, and keep them fresh and fair;
Yet, can thou count these cups, no bet than chips,
If with my Heiffer, thou do them compare.

Men. Never, shall thou escape, i will meet thee where thou date,
If so Palaemon, us to hear, do daigne;
See, where he comes: I Will make thee well aware
For my sake, how to challenge man again.

Dam. Then leave thy bragging, and at once begin
Thou shall not find me slack, I warrant thee;
I Will shun no Judge* ne, fear I him a pin:
Only, (of fellowship) Palaemon be
Intentive as thou may; (the cause is great.)

Palae. Say then; as here we sitten all around
The tender grass: the fields with kindly heat
Now flourish fair: the woods with leaves abound:
And now the yeare's in his chief sovereignty.
Begin Damaetas; and ( Menalcas) thou
Follow, by turns each other to revie,
The Muses, these alternates, best allow.

Dam. Their first commence from Jove, the Muses take,
Jove all fulfills: he fertile makes the land,
And graciously respects the songs I make.

Men. And Phabus favors me: I still at hand
(The sacred things to Phoebus consecrate)
Sweet purple, Hyacynth, and Laurel have.

Daem. Me, with an Apple, that same delicate
Wanton ( Galatea) hitt; and (self to save)
Fled to the Sallowes; (but would first be seen.)

Men. But my sweet heart Amyntas, of his own
Accord, does come to me; that, Delia' I ween
Not half so well unto our dogs is known.

Dam. I for my Venus, have a Present found,
For I espide, a stock-dove, the other day,
Building her neast, not far above the ground.

Men. And (all I could) I plucked, to send my Boy
Fro'a wildling tree, ten goulden Apples round,
And more to send, to morrow done I mind.

Daem. How often to me, and in what gracious sort
Has Galatea spoke? I would the wind
Some part would to the gods own ears report.

Men. What good is me ( Amyntas) though in heart
Thou scorn me not; if while the Bore thou chase,
I, at the Nets, am left behind apart?

Daem. Send me my Phillis, ( Iolae)' of thy grace,
Against my birthday: and when for my corn
I sacrifice a Calfe, come thou among.

Men. Phillis I love, of all that e're were borne,
For she at parting wept, and cried, long
(My fair Io^a)' adieu, adieu, to thee.

Daem. Showers to ripe fruit; the Woolfe unto the fould,
Wynds to young trees: Amaryllis wrath to me,
Disastrous is, and direful to behold.

Men. Budds; new-wean'd Kids; deaw, corn (but lately sown;)
Beasts; (great with young,) soft sallowes, manifould
Delights; and dear Amyntas, me alone.

Dam. Pollio, loves mine, (allbee't a homely Muse.)
( Pyerian Ladies) feed ye every' each one
Far Calfe for him; (your learned Readers use.)

Men. Why; Pollio's self new kind of verse does make,
Feed him a Bull, whose butting horns can strike,
And feet, the sands, abroad already rake.

Dam. Who loves thee ( Pollio) wheresoever thou like,
Let come: to him let luscious honny flow,
And sweet Amomus, from the brambles grow.

Men. Who Bavius hates not, M^^vius songs let love*
And let sike Lorrell, Foxes yoke together,
And to draw milk from Ram-Goates, let him prove.

Dam. Ye bonny Boys, who flowers wont to gather,
And sculking Strawberries, hence soon remove:
A cold snake, lurking in the grass does hide.

Men. Drive not your Flocks, too near the waters side*
The bank is dangerous; the Ra^^me, right now
Since he fell in, his heavy Fleece has dryde.

Dam. Thy feeding Kids, als' ( Tityrus) done thou
Force from the brook; for when I see fit tide,
All in the flood, I Will wash them white as snow.

Men. (Ye Shepherd swains) now homeward draw your flock,
If heat, (as erst it did) their milk forestowe,
In vain, we shall their empty vdders strocke.

Dam. Ah, for my Bull, (albee he daily fedd
With vetches fat) how megre lean is he?
Flock, and Flocks-master both, has love misled.

Men. But love's not cause, that these so evil be,
And poor in plight: I wot not what ill Eye
My tender Lambs bewitch vnluckely.

Dam. Tell in what Coast, (and I will herry thee
For great Apollo's self) the Welkin large
Just three else broad, and no more seems to be.

Men. Tell in what Coast, the Flowers have their marge,
With Kings names in their leaves, inscribed plain,
And to thy self have Phillis for thy pain.

Palemon. So great debate lies not in my poor power,
Betwixt ye to compose: Both thou and he
Deserve the Heifer; and who ere the sower
Shall happ to try, or fearful chance to be
Of sweetest Love: (Boys) shut the Rivers out;
Enough, the Meades have drunk, and quenched their drought.

PALEMON.
The GLOSS.
TELL me Damaetas, etc. Herein the Poet imitates Theocritus so near, that
he uses e'ne the very same words. The beginning, is an envious obrayding, and
uttered (as it were) with a contempt of the Person; as if Menalcas would show,
and prove Dametas, not to be Master of the Flock, but a mere by hyreling, for
wages. Whose is this Pastoral verse? (quoth he) is it Melibe's? some base
infamous Rhymester, such as Maevius, or Bavius; or the like? No, (says he) it
is Aegons: by whom he means some rare excellent Poet, namely Gallus, or Cynna.

( Poor Sheep.) (Unfortunate Pastoralls,) to come into unworthy hands: for
whilst Cynna, Pollio, Gallus, and others, (famous and exquisite in that kind
of verse, excellently able, and (as it were) the Masters of that art,) do
contend with me for grace, and admiration of the Peers, and the People;) a
stragler, and a stranger, has here, shuffled into place, and thrust into the
study of the Muses, singing Pastoralls, barren, and dry, without any grace at
all; and (like a Thief) has stolen the true beauty, and comeliness from this
a^t; venting his own ex-tempore stuff, void of wit and invention.

To tax men thus. The word Vir, in the Latin, is often used, as a word of
honor, and is referred to virtue, and strength of the Mind, or Body. As
Cicero in his 2 Philippickes. That cause (says he) requires a Man, that is, a
person of wisdom, and understanding: and therefore Dametas terms himself by
the title of Man: as though that other were so base, and vilde a Rakeshame,
that he did not deserve to be reckoned amongst the number of reasonable
Creatures, in respect of himself.

I know who once saw you, etc. We have seen your foolish ridiculous Poems;
which the scorned and unworthy vulgars do read; but the gentle crew of
Nobles, and true heroic spirits do deride. And here he has most
artificially expressed the manner of seeing, and looking at him in contempt,
and with disdaigne: namely with the corners of his Eye, or askew, (as we say:)
So as Pliny reports, the Lion cannot abide to be looked on.

The Goats did at thee leere, etc. Pliny says) that the Goat, (being a most
salacious Beast, if he see any other Creature ingendring together, he is so
enraged with lust, at the very sight, that he runs at them with all his
force; and from hence the Poet (expressing herein (under the nature of the
Goat) Damons disposition) may seem to allude to the disdaign, which the
learned sort held his verses in; (that manner of looking askance, being a
posture, betokening contempt and scorn.)

In what Chapel, etc. The Nymphs had sundry Chappells in the fields,
dedicated to them; where they used to frequent.

Saw I not thee? etc. He accuses him of filching from the Greek and Latin,
so palpably, that other Poets did take him with the manner, and obrayded, and
made (as it were) hue and cry after him for his theft.

Whither runs he so fast, etc. He well has expressed the rustic manner of
speech in this: and this word (he) carries with it the force of scorn, and
disdain.

For know, that Goat does unto me belong, etc. The commendation of this Poem
which thou do obraid me to have stolen, I would have you well know, is due
to me, purchased by my Ingeny, and Invention. Neither would other Poets deny
it me, were they not hindered by authority of Antiquity; which bears so much
sway in the opinion of the vulgar, that they attribute smally to new writers,
(though never so worthy) esteeming skill and excellency, by years, and age,
(as Horace says.)

I Will pawn this Heifer, etc. I, whom thou obraidest as an hireling to another,
will pawn this Heifer: to let thee know that I have a stock of mine own.

Naught dare I of my Flock, etc. Virgil says he will pawn down of his
Cattle; This has relation to the excellency of the argument, and subject of
his song: Menalcas says, he may not gage his Flock; out he will lay
willingly, two Cups, curiously turned and wrought. This has relation to the
neat artificial handling of the matter, and the newness of the fashion.

Self Alcimedon, etc. I want not elegance, and delicate fine delivery of my
mind: and I can express my self in the newest manner of phrase, and ornament,
which is now of any other affected: and refuse not to set up my rest, and
venture my wager, upon that bett: but this is not worth the speaking of
compared with true, profitable solid matter. For the count, neat elegancy of
words, is but the flowers; but the sense, is the fruit.

Say then, as here, etc. He setts down here, that the fittest time for
singing or composing verses, is the Spring, and the mind being not only
quiet, but merry.

If so Palemon, etc. Remnius Palemon, was a most excellent Grammarian, and
Tutor to Fabius Quintilianus: Such was his pride and arrogance, that he would
usually vaunt, that Learning had her first being at his birth; and at his
death all learning would likewise dye. He was wont likewise out of pride and
scorn, to term Marcus Varro, (that great learned Roman) Porcum literatum,
the learned Hog. He was likewise wont to brag, that it was prophetically (as
it might seem) done by Virgil, to use his name here in his Bucolickes;
foreseeing that Palemon, in poetry should prove so exquisite, that all Poets
and Rhetoricians shall honor and admire him, as their Judge, and umpire of
their learned contentions. He further gloryed much to recount how a sort of
thieves did once spare him, and dismissed him untouched and unrifled, when they
once heard his name. He was so luxurious, as he bathed often in a day: at
last he became so poor, that he was enforced his living to become a
vine-dresser.

Jove all fulfills, etc. This sentence is taken from the Poet Aratus: that is,
Jove fills all things with his bounty and blessings, otherwise it were
impossible for them to abide and continue in their being; and therefore with
whom can they more proper^y begin, than with his honor, from whom all things
have their beginning.

And Phabus favors me, etc. Herein he alludes to Augustus, who being yet
very young, having performed great services, was thought to be the son of
Apollo; but afterward in process of time he was called himself by that name
of Apollo.

And all I could, etc. Menalcas says that he had sent also Country gifts, (to
wit, a Co^ntry song, and meant to send another.) By the ten orenges, or golden
apples, some interpret Virgils ten Eglogues: but I leave that indifferent.

Send me my Phillis, etc. I pray thee, ( Augustus) suffer me to invite Pollio
to this banquet, which I make for my birthday; that is, my Country feast:
suffer me to dedicate this work of my Pastoralls unto him: as for thee (
Augustus) I will invite thee, when I sacrifice a Calfe for my Corn: that is, I
will sing thy name in a verse of a higher strain.

Pollio loves mine, etc. Here without any figure he names Pollio plainly:
and that his Country verses and Pastoralls were well liked of him.

Pierian Ladies, etc. Ye Muses, feed a fat Calfe for Pollio; who so willingly
reads your works, and is therewith delighted: that is, furnish him with
delicate invention, and infuse into him elegance of style, whether it be in
verse, or prose.

Why, Pollio's self, etc. New kind of verse does make, etc. He is not only
delighted with Pastoralls, but he makes verses of a new kind, and of an
extraordinary argument and subject, by which he will be able to overthrow all
his adversaries; and with his horn, that is, with the sharpness of his verse,
he will gore the envious: And he will scrape the sand with his feet; that
is, (to the terror of his envious foe^) he will raise such a dust, that the
unlearned sort shall be afraid of his so great fierceness and fury.

This Pollio was a great learned man, and of an excellent and acute judgment,
but harsh of conversation, and in condition unpleasing and dogged. He was
Tullies Aemulus; and did aff^ct old kind of elegance (in his time quite laid
aside:) he writ many Orations and Tragedies.

Who loves thee Pollio, etc. Damaetas, (to show how strongly he stood affected
to Pollio*) he prays for all his friends, that God would bless them with all
felicity of the goulden age, which should bring plenty of happiness in all
places.

Amom^m: Of some said to be the Rose of Jerusalem, or our Ladies Rose; some
call it Garden Pepper: They say, it is a little shrub growing in clusters like
Grapes, bearing a flower like a white Violet, and a leaf like the white Vine.
It grows in Armenia, in Media, Pontus, and Assyria* from whence other
Countries fetch it.

Ye bonny Boys, etc. You who apply your selves to the study of the fair
arts, avoid this venomous tongued Poet.

Drive not your flocks, etc. Arrius the Centurion had Virgils grounds bestowed
on him; but when Virgil returned from Rome to Mantuae, with a warrant from
Caesar, to command Arrius to render up his land again: the Centu^ion, (like a
Bedlem soldier) drew his sword, and (...) at Virgil, to have killed him: who
flying, and having no other way to avoid the mischief, skipt into the
Mincius, and so swimming cross the River, escaped. Under the name of the Ram,
Virgil may seem to mean himself, and his own danger of drowning.

Thy feeding flocks als' Tityrus, etc. He admonishes either his own hired
servant, or all those of Mantua, to carry themselves warily, and to avoid
danger as well as they may: he would take a fit opportunity, to procure of
Caesar, an effectual restitution of all their grounds, which should be good
against all men: neither to the effecting hereof should he need to make his
means by the Tribunes, or Ambassadors, but he would go to the wellhead,
that is, to Caesar himself.

Ye Shepherd swains, etc. Do not promise to your selves great matters, and
hope after things which will never be gained: your safer way will be to keep
your sheep together, and to hold a careful eye over them, and to preserve that
which you have left; lest if some mutiny or troublesome storm of wars should
arise again (as of late it fell out) the whole profit of your Cattle would
utterly be lost.

Tell in what Coast, etc. Here they make an end of their brawling, and fall to
puzzle each other with Riddles: that so they may get the victory this way.

The Firmament, etc. This Riddle is thus unfoulded: in the bottom of a deep
pit, whosoever stands there, shall see no more of the heaven, than the very
breadth of the mouth of the pit. This question seemed so unreasonable, that
writers report, that Virgil (being asked the meaning of both these Riddles)
answered, that he had made that gallows of purpose for the Grammarians to
rack themselves upon. Macrob. Sat. lib. 6.

Some think also, that hereby is meant the silver Mines; out of whose bottom
if a man look, he shall perceive the Sky to be but three else broad, or no
broader than the Mouth of the Mine, at the most.

Tell etc. the flowers have the print. On these Mines grow these flowers; that
is, Could and Silver, which being beaten into Coigne, the names of Kings are
stamped into them: and indeed, there is nothing in the world more sweet and
delightful unto mankind in general, than these flowers, and roses: namely
the goulden rose-nobles.

And I for great Apollo's self, etc. Either are very bitter against other:
Menalcas affected nothing more, than glory, and admiration of his wit:
therefore, says Dametas, you shall attain the scope of your ambition, you
shall be Apollo himself to me. But Virgil was popular in his desire, and
gaped at the favor and good will of the people of Rome: Therefore Menalcas
says to him, Enjoy Phillis to thy self; (whom elsewhere he names Amaryllis) I
will yield her to thee without any contradiction. By Phillis, and Amaryllis,
he means Rome.

To herry, is to worship, or to honor: an old Saxon word.

Who e're the sour, etc. He deserves great reward, and commendation,
whosoever does wisely fear the favor of Princes, and the praise of the common
people; or can stoutly and valiantly bear the scorn, or hatred of either,
with an undaunted resolution and neglect.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE FOVRTH EGLOGVE.
A Sinius Pollio, warred upon the Illyrians, and took from them their City
Salona: during which time he had a son born, whom (after this Cities name)
he called Saloninus. Virgil having read in the Sybils verses of a rare Child
to be borne, about those times, who should restore the world, applied this
Prophecy of the Sybil, to this young son of Pollio, making no doubt, that it
could not be appliable to any other nation, but needs it must happen within
the Roman Empire, in respect of the huge extent thereof: But this Child dyed
very young; and Asinius had another son, which was his heir, named Asinius
Gallus. In honor of Pollio, Virgil intitles this Eglogue by his name: but
Lodovicus Vives affirms in his Gloss upon this Eglogue, that all herein
must of necessity be spoken of Christ, to whom (says he) I will apply the
interpretation, and restore the possession to the right owner, to whom of right
it does belong. Let profane men therefore herein be silent, for even in the
very simple and natural sense of the words, without any need of Gloss or
Allegory, it cannot be understood, whatsoever is here spoken, but only of
Christ.

POLLIO.
OR THE PROPHECY OF A SECOND GOVLDEN AGE.
Aegloga quarta.
( SIcelian Muses) yet a little higher
Let Us sing a while: since all delight not in
Short shrubbs; ne all low Tamariske admire:
(Our ^ong, al^bee't of woods,) woods worthy been,
A Consul them, his best acceptance daigne.
Now is fulfilled the period, and last time
Of Cuma's Prophecy; and now again
All former Ages, in their precious prime,
With blessed order are anew begun.
The Virgin, toward us again is bent,
And Saturnes reign does back unto us run:
And a new Progeny from heaven sent.
Thou, only, to this Child, (by whose dear birth,
The Iron Age, especially shall end.
And Age of Gould, begin through all the Earth,)
( Lucina chaste) with thy best help befriend.
Now thine Apollo, houlds the Diadem,
And Pollio (thou being Consul) shall come in
This the words glorious ornament and gem,
And the grand Months shall their increase begin.
If any print or monument remain
Of our inherent sins; thy wondrous grace
From endless fear, of punishment and pain
Shall us redeem, and all misdeedes deface.
A God-like life he shall receive, and see
The heavenly Hero'es, the Gods among;
And he, of them ylike, shall viewed be.
Als', shall he, by his Fathers virtue strong
The world, with peaceful governance maintain.
But yet (fair Child) the Earth, shall bring to thee
Her first fruits, without labor, and hard pain,
Selfe-growne, without all help of husbandry,
Wilde-climbing Ivy, with her Berries black,
And Brank; with cheerful Hares-foote; yea the Goats,
With full^blowne udders, (even like to crak)
With creamy Milk, shall come home to their Cotes:
Ne, shall the Herds, the ramping Lion fear.
The Cradles-selves, to thee sweet flowers shall yield,
Dye shall the Serpent, and all herbs which bear
Enchanting venom, wither in the field.
The Assyrian Rose, in each high way shall grow;
And herewithall, the praises thou may reed
Of princely Woorthies, and shall learn to know
Thy Fathers virtues, and each doubty deed:
The Fields, shall by degrees, full goodly show
Their tender Ears, all yellow as the gould;
The rugged Oak, shall sweat with honny deaw,
And the wild Thorns, (as full as they can hold,)
With ruddie Grapes shall hang: yet some small track,
Of ancient fraud, and lewdness shall remain,
Which shall tempt men, at Sea, to venture wrack;
And wall in Towns, and plough the Champian-plaine*
Then second Typhis; and new Argosye
Of select Lords, shall bear a princely train,
And Garboyles, and fresh wars abroad shall fly:
And great Achilles, sent to Troy again;
Now, when firm age, to man's state once thee brings,
Seamen, in ships shall trucke no more for ware,
For every Land, shall yield all manner things.
No Furrows in the Land, the Plough shall are:
Ne, Vines, shall pruning need; the Ploughman shall
For ever quit his Oxen from the yoke:
Ne, shall the snow-white wool, in several
Di^couloured waters, more be taught to soake:
But in the meadows, (dainty diapred
With purple flowers, with red spotts sweetly staind,
And saffron Lands, like scarlet colored)
The Ram shall change his fleece, al deep ingraynd;
The feeding Lambs, with Ceruse naturally
Shall clothed been.
Th'agreeing Parcae, to their spindles said,
(By fatal power of stable destiny)
Run out at length, and let such age be made.
Decre Child of God, Jove's infinite increase,
Oh once begin; the time now nigheth near,
Great honors, and much glory to possess,
Come see the world, decrepit, now, and seere,
E'ne nodding-ripe, with it own pondrous heap:
The Seas, and Earth, and highest heavens view;
How, all things, in them all, done even leap
For joy of this same age now to ensue.
Oh, mote I live but long enough to tell
Thy worthy acts; not Lynus-selfe should me;
Ne, yet the Thracian Bard, my songs excel,
(Allbee Calliope, Orpheus Mother be,
And Sire to Lynus, bright Apollo, come:)
Yea, should self Pan, (Arcadia being Judge)
Contend with me, yet by Arcadia's doom
Self Pan, to me, the conquest would not grudg.
Begin (young Babe) with cheerful smile to know
Thy Mother, for her ten months tedious pain,
(Infant) begin; whose Parents wept for woe
For thee, at bed, nor board, Goddess, nor God did daign.
POLLIO.
The GLOSS.
SIcelian Muses, etc. Herein he has resp^ct to Theocritus the Sicelian; whom
in this kind of verse, he does especially imitate: and therefore he terms
the Pastoral verse, by the title of the Muses of Sicely.

Yet a little higher, etc. For all men delight not in this low strain of
Pastoralls.

Of woods albee I sing, etc. Let none wonder, that I sing of great matters, in
a homely kind of verse: For even the woods are oftentimes a fit subject for a
Consul; that is, worthy they are of a Roman Consuls gravity: as Suetonius
writes; that the hills, and woods, were apportioned to Julius Caesar, in his
Consulship, for his Province.

The Period and last time, etc. Concerning the Sybils, Ludovicus Vives has
spoken largely, upon Austin. The coming of our Lord was a thing of such weight
and moment, that it was necessary to have it foretold both to Jews, and
Gentiles, that thereby, who were before his coming, might expect him: these in
his time might receive him, and those which came after him might believe him:
and therefore, as there were Prophets among the Jews, so were there amongst
the Gentiles, Sybils; that is to say, such as were privy, and conscious of
heavenly counsel. Now Virgil did conjecture, that the time of this Prophecy
was near to accomplishment, because diverse of the Sybils verses were so
composed, as that the first or last letters of the verses, did even point out
the very time, or the person: as Cicero teaches in his Divination: and in
Eusebius there is a Sybils Prophecy of the last judgment of Christ set forth in
the same manner: which S. Austin cites in his 18 book of the City of God.

Cuma, is a Town in Ionia the less, where one of the Sybils did abide; of
which place she was called Sybilla Cumaea.

The Virgin now returns, etc. Peradventure the Sybils spoke something about
the blessed Virgin Mary: which the Poet here applies to Astraea, the
Mayden-Lady Justice; or perhaps she means it of the wondrous Justice of
Christ, and of the goulden age: which also the Prophet Esaias describes, Chap. 9.
And there shall be in the last times, etc.

And Saturnes reign, etc. In his time men lived in great tranquillity and
quiet, with great equality amongst all sorts, without pride, wrath, or envy;
such as the people of God (who are to adapt themselves to his commandments)
ought to be indeed.

Now a new Progeny, etc. The descent of the Son of God from heaven amongst
us, could not by a Christian man, be expressed more exactly, or in more
absolute terms.

Now thine Apollo, etc. Diana is termed Lucina, of bringing those that are
borne into the light: Apollo is her Brother; he prays Diana to be propitious
and favorable to the child in his birth, namely in the Kingdom of her
Brother, Apollo: Augustus was thought to be Apollo's son, and in a manner
was also called by the name of Apollo.

And Pollio, thou being Consul, etc. Pollio Asinius was fellow Consul with
Cneius Domitius, Calvinus in the Triumvitate: in the year of the Cities
building, 714 and before our Savior Christ's birth, 37. years.

Grand Months: the Months of this Great year.

Thy wondrous grace, etc. Original sin shall be blotted out by the virtue
of Christ; as in Baptism is performed by a true faith in him: he has with
great reason called it the monument or print of sin; for original sin is a
print or Stigma, derived to us from our first parents.

From endless fear, etc. For Faith in him, who is God, shall exclude all
fear of punishment for sin, whether our own by actual commission, or
hereditary, from our first parents. And here most fitly, the Poet calls our
fear endless, because it never cease to vex and torment us: And in this
sort and sense Saint Austin in his City of God, interprets these verses.

The world with peaceful governance, etc. All things are given by the Father
unto the Son: a speech frequent in the book of the Psalms, and other
mystical books; and again, The Father has subdued all things unto the Son.

But yet dear Child, etc. Here is described the course of Christ's Church,
that is, his Kingdom here on earth. For in the Gospel, the Kingdom of God,
amongst other meanings signfies the Church. In the infancy of the Church,
without ordinary means, or labor, but by the immediate work of Gods Spirit,
there sprung up, Presents yielding most fragrant sweet smell, and acceptable
savor unto the nostrills of God, (namely so many Apostles, Disciples, and
Martyrs, in every place.)

The Goats, etc. Peradventure by Goats may be meant the Gentiles, who should
become in many places (as afterward it appeared) very fruitful in good works,
and repentance: moreover it may be hereby meant, that the Disciples and
Teachers of the Gospel, did never go forth, to teach and preach, but they
returned with great advantage, in winning of souls unto their Master.

Ne shall the Herds, etc. The Flock of Christ shall not stand in fear of the
Monarchs and Tyrants of the world, notwithstanding all their rage and fury:
yea amongst the Princes of the earth, there shall be incredible Concord, and
Peace, without venom of Pride or Envy.

The Cradles-selves, etc. Young children, (as it were new-weaned) shall be
inspired by the Spirit of God, to proclaim the praises of God, as the young
children did, when they went singing Hosanna, and cast the branches of trees in
the way before our Savior Christ, riding to Jerusalem.

And herewithall the praises, etc. In the succeeding ages, by the doctrine of
God once settled; by Christ's example, and instruction of the Apostles; Piety
shall extend it self every where, in all parts of the world, not to the
bringing in of small gifts, or mean matters, but even to the gathering in of a
large harvest, of corn, wine, and honny. The Jews shall enter in to the
society of the Church, and multitudes of Gentiles: The green tender stalk of
the Gentiles shall by degrees grow yellow and ripe, and from the thorns of
humane obstinacy shall be gathered a sweet, and pleasing Grape; and from
stubborn, hard and wilful Ignorance, shall spring the sweet honny, and
delicate taste of knowledge and understanding.

Yet some small track, etc. Christianity could not so be imprinted in the
minds of men, but still some dreggs of old errors, infidelity, avarice,
envy, cruelty, wares, ambition, and arrogance, would remain unremooved; and
from hence would afterward arise desire to traffic by Sea to foreign
nations, for gain: from hence it grew, that men, (not trusting one another,
and from mutual hatred and grudges,) did devise the walling in of Towns, and
Cities: From hence greedy minds bethought themselves of ploughing and digging
the Earth: All which endeavors of men, and all these things (howsoever in
themselves they be not simply evil) yet man's depraved affection, in the
inordinate desire and use of them, is bad.

Then second Typhis, and new Argosie. The old discommodities and mischiefs,
received at Sea by shipping, shall again return, and wars, (from whence
such infinite calamity has overwhelmed all mankind.) And here these things may
seem to be spoken by a kind of revolubilitie of all things, proceeding from
the order, and influence of the stars; and has relation to the old story
of the Sea-voyage, which Pelias made to Colchos for the goulden Fleece, which
the Ram bore, that carried Phrixus through the Sea. The Ship wherein Pelias
made his voyage, was called Argo, and bare his name, (as here the Poet calls
it:) and the Master of the ship was named Typhis: In all which several
passages, the Sybil prophecies of the troubles, (which should creep up) by way
of allusion: For by Navigation, she intimates that men's minds should tempt
them to venture to Sea, to get wealth and riches. By walling in of Towns, she
intimates wars: by Ploughing she foretells the fear of famine: And the
better to express her meaning, she reckens up some special particulars, in
stead of the generals: As by Typhis, we must understand any shipp-master: by
Argo, any Navy of ships: by Achilles, any General, or great Commander: and by
Troy, any other City whatsoever, that might by Enemies be distressed.

Now when firm age, etc. The Sybil here speaks, either of the blessed estate
in heaven, or of the perfection of Christians, in whose minds is settled
unspeakable quiet, and tranquill^ty, and the true goulden age: For their
desires shall not be conversant about worldly matters, neither shall they use
the things of this life, for pleasure or delight of their vain lusts, but
merely for necessities sake: as we read of Saint Paul, that he did weave
Tents; and our Forefathers in Egypt did plough the ground, and applied
themselves to husbandry. Neither shall their affections be upon these base
earthly matters, but their conversation shall be in heaven, content with any
thing, (how mean and homely soever,) that may serve their present need:
whereby it shall come to pass, that there shall be plenty of all things in
every place, every ones mind being so temperately inclined, as to affect
nothing out of curiosity, but only for use and necessity.

The accordant Parcae, etc. It may perhaps seem somewhat too curious, to say,
that by these Parcae, (equal in number to the three persons of the Godhead,
(which Christians believe) agreeing in power, and will of desteny) the Sybil
would understand the three Persons in Divinity.

Run out at length, and let such Age be made. Either the Destenies said this,
answrable to what every man wished might be; or else they appointed it so to
be: For Christ's Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom without end. Moreoever,
Fate, is nothing else, but the absolute will and com^andement of God, and his
express word; according to the Etymology which Palingenius gives thereof,
Fatum, quasi Deus sic fatus, or Deus ita fatur.

Dear Child of God, Jove's infinite increase, etc. Nothing can be more
plainly spoken of Christ, then to say, he is the begotten of God, and the
increase of his Father. For of what mortal man or created creature can it be
said that he is the increase of Jove; who can add any increase to God? But
Christ, being God, the Son of God, is the Glory of his Father, inasmuch as
he is wisdom and power.

Come see, the world, etc. It is now high time to bring remedy into the world,
when as now all things were at the last gasp, and at the worst, and all
mankind in a poor afflicted state.

Come view the Seas, Earth, etc. All things, not only men, but even the
Angels, yea, even things without sense, did show their wonderful joy at the
coming of Christ. For as Saint Paul says, the whole frame of the world shall
be thereby freed from the bondage of corruption.

Oh mote I live, etc. The works of Christ are wonderful, and unspeakable, and
the longest life will be too little to recount them: I would I might but live
half so long as to sing thy praises: Or the Sybil desires long life, that
she might have the opportunity to write of that worthy subject.

Albee Caliope, etc. Though Caliope one of the Muses, help her son Orpheus,
and Phoebus (the god of Poets, and songs) inspire his son Lynus with skill.

Yea should self Pan, etc. Herein Virgil forgets not the decorum fitting
Shepherds, who think more highly of Pan the Shepherds God, then of Caliope,
and Phoebus. And here he ends his comparisons, and goes no farther, (as
thinking nothing could be more added, having once vouched the Shepherds God,
for authority of his vaunt.

Begin young Babe, etc. I make no doubt but these things shall one day
infallibly happen, and come to pass: Now yet begin to bring comfort to thy
mother with thy comfortable laugh: do not be sad or solitary, do not by thy
sadness bring sorrow unto her, who has endured sorrow and pain enough during
the ten Months, which she bare thee in her womb. But these Months must be
taken to be Me^ses Luxares, not civiles

Nor God, nor Gods, him at Bed nor Board, etc. The Grammarians make much adoo
about these two verses. Vives upon St. Austin, has spoken somewhat hereof: But
shortly, his opinion is, that (by God) here in this place must be meant Genius,
to whom a Table was dedicate: from whence this Proverb did arise, Genio
indulgere; when a man was a dainty affecter of curious meats, and made it as it
were his whole exercise to eat, he was said to cocker or flatter his Genius,
that is his appetite. MoreMoreover, by goddess is meant Juno, for whom a Bed
was prepared ready, on which the Child newborn was suckled. Hereby is
intimated, that it is a dangerous sign of death when young Infants are sad, and
not apt to laugh, showing thereby that the tutelares Dij, (the Gods who have
the charge of young children) do not favor them: (which so fell out,) for
this young Child of Pollio's died soon after it was borne; God himself (as
it may seem) not suffering him to live, to whom the Poet of so great authority
in those times, did apply those precious praises which the Prophetess, (this
Sybil) had foretold of the blessed Son of God. And Vives is further of the
mind, that Virgil did add these two last verses of his own making, after the
Childs death: (a conceit full of probability.)

THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIFTH EGLOGVE.
IN the former Eglogue, Virgil (borrowing his matter out of the Sybils verses,
prophesying of the birth of our Savior) does apply the prophecy very unworthily
to Saloninus. In this Eglogue, out of other of the Sybils verses, he sings of
the death and ascension of the same our blessed Lord; which as unfitly and
unproperly he attributes to Caius Julius Caesar. The Poet here mingleth some
things of his own, out of Ignorance of the true sense and meaning of the
Prophecy, not knowing how to make it fall fit with the right application,
There be some who hold, that under the name of Daphnis the Poet does deplore
the death of his own Brother; but without ground of truth: for from those
verses, The Nymphs did Daphnis, etc. And after, Now lovely Daphnis does
admiring sit, etc. They are the very Prophecy of the Sybil, by Virgil
translated.

DAPHNIS.
Aegloga quinta.
Menal. MOPSVS, what lets (both skilld in music) met,)
Thee blow thy Pipes, whilst I some ditty sing
Amongst these Elmes, and mixed hazels set?

Mop. To thee ( Menaleas) as mine Elderling,
Befits me yield: whether us list incline
Under the waving West's uncertain shade,
Or to this Cave: see, how this wild grown Vine
Has over this Cave, her tender Impes displayed.

Men. In all our mountains, (but Amyntas) none
May strive with thee Mop. but what if he should prove
Great Phaebus-selfe, in singing to outgone?

Men. Mopsus, begin: if any of Phillis love,
Or Alcons praise, or Codrus brawles thou have:
Begin: Tityru^ shall keep our feeding flock:

Mop. I Will try those verses, which I erst did grave
In the green tender bark of Beechen stock,
And scor'd them out in parts by turns to clay,
Then set Amyntas to contend with me:

Men. Much as soft sallow yields to th Olive gray,
Or homely spike, unto the red-rose-tree,
(If I can judge) Amyntas yields to thee.

Mop. But (Boy) now peace: whilst in this Cave we sit:
The Nymphs, did Daphnis dreey death bemone,
(Ye Hazells, and ye Floods, can witness it)
When the sad mournful mother, (woe begone)
Embracing in her Arms full tenderly
The lamentable corpse of her dear Son,
Both Gods, and stars appeacht of cruelty:
In all the fields, where Herds, and Flocks, did wo^n,
Of none, (as tho) the fedd Ox driven was
To the cool Rivers: ne, foure-footed Beast
Sipt any water, or once touched the grass:
The Lybian Lions, e'ne their grief expressed:
The woods, and savage mountains testifyde
Their sorrow for thy death: why Daphnis taught
Armenian Tygres, (in meek manner tide)
Them fair submit unto the Chariots draught.
Daphnis to Bacchus, Guarlands did devise,
And slender spears to wreathe with Ivie-twine:
Look how the Vine, is honor of all Trees,
And as the Grape imbellisheth the Vine:
Look how the Bull is honor of the Heard,
And Corn the glory of the fertile Field;
Ilk, thine: by thee, been graced and preferred:
Soon, as to death, thy fate thee forced to yield
Self Pales, and Apollo, left the Earth,
The Furrows, where bigg Barley we did sow
Unlucky Lollium, now there has his birth,
And the wild Oate, does domineering grow.
Steed of the soft-napt, velvet Violet,
And Daffodillies sweet, (in purple did,)
Th'ungracious ^histle, now there grows, (unset)
And the base Bramble, with his prickly side,
Bestrew the ground, with leaves (ye Shepherds all)
And silver Fountains hide, with shadie gloome,
Such, Daphnis wills should be his funeral,
And fix this pitaph upon his toome.

I Daphnis in the woods, known to the stars so high Shepherd of a Flock so
fair, but fairer far am I
(Poet divine.)
Men. So me thy song, as sleep on grass does queame
The Travailer, (his weary limbs to drench,)
Or as cool water of the gliding stream,
In Summers heat, (his eagre thirst to quench.)
Ne, do thou only in piping parallel
Thy Master; but in singing may compare:
(Oh bonny Boy) next him thou'st bear the Bell;
And though my songs unkempt and rugged are,
Yet, as they been I Will them by turns rehearse,
And mount thy Daphnis to the skies above,
I, to the stars, will Daphnis by my verse
Enhance: (for me did Daphnis allgates love.)

Mop. What Gift to me but half so pleasing may?
Leefe Ladd was he, best worthy to be sung;
Yea, Stimacon to me, upon a day
These verse praised, with his praiseworthy tongue.

Men. Now lovely Daphnis does admiring sit,
Th'unwoonted Portall of Olympus high,
And sees the Clouds, and Stars, beneath his feet,
The joyous Groves, and pleasant Plains for-thy.
And jolly Pan, each Shepherd, and his Boy,
And mayden-crew, of dainty Dryades,
Sweet pleasance, and dear joyance shall enjoy,
And shall securely live in endless ease.
The Woolfe, from ravin, on the Flock shall cease,
No toiles shall been, th'unwary Stagg to kill:
(For Daphnis joys, in sweet accordant peace;)
The rough-hew'd mountains all the air fulfill
With accents of their joy; the Rocks likewise
Sing rusticke Rhimes, in honor of his name:
The very shrubs ( Menalcas) with loud cries,
A God, a God, he is, do still proclaim.
Oh, be propitious, and thy servants bless,
Behold four Altars; whereof two to thou,
And two to Phoebus I will here address,
And with new milk, fresh strocked from the Cow
Two Flagons every year, I unto thee,
And twain with juice of Olives, will pour forth:
Ne, store of Bacchus fruit shall wanting be,
To cheer the feast; (which else is nothing worth.)
And wine at Aruse (second Nectar) made:
By the fires side, if it in winter chance;
Or if in summer, in the friendly shade,
Whilst Alphasibeus, tripp the Satyrs dance.
And Lictius AEgon, and Damatas sing:
These duties I to thee will always pay,
Both when my vows I to the Nymphs do bring,
And when in harvest I my fields survay.
Whilst Bores the Mountains, or Fish love to haunt
The Floods, and Bees on Thyme delight to taste,
Or Grasshoppers on deaw make their provaunt,
Thy name, thine honor, and thy praise shall last.
And as the Husbandman wont year by year
Their vows to Bacchus, and to Ceres pay,
Ilk, they with offerings, before thee shall appear,
Yea, thou their vows shall bind them to defray.

Mops. (Ah my leefe Ladd) what guerdon peregall,
For sike a long as this, can I bestow?
Since not the bibling streams, which gently fall
At ween the gritty valleys here below,
Does add such pleasure to my lulled mind:
Nor working of the waves against the shore,
Ne, cool, fresh breathing of the Western wind,
(Me featly fanning) does delight me more.

Men. This simple Pipe, I Will give thee (if thou please;)
On it I learnt the song, how Corydon,
The fair Alexis loved: on it likewise
I learnt the Roundelay, which thus begun,
Whose Beasts been these? or been they Melibes?

Mop. Mean time, (mine own Menalcas) of my hand
Accept this Sheepe-hooke, which Antigines
Full earnestly of me did often demand.
Nathless this boon I did to him deny,
(Though of my love, and it, he worthy was,)
Which as thou see, is scrude in daintily,
With two neat joints, and bound about with brass.

DAPHNIS.
The GLOSS.
But what if he, etc. Mopsus was somewhat moved at the naming of a Rival: but
he answers mildely to him, as to his elder; as if he should say: It is no
great commendation to contend, but to overcome, is all the glory: any man may
cope with Hercules, but not conquer him.

Mopsus begin: if any, etc. Now the senior speaks in good sooth, and shows
unto him, what subject is fittest for his song: either of the impatiency of
Love, or of the excellency of art; or of the zeal to his Country.

Phillis love, etc. Phillis was daughter of Siton, (the Queen of Thrace;) who
falling in love with Demophoon, King of Athens, the son of Theseus, at his
return from the Trojan war, desired to have him to her husband: he told
her, that he would first return home into his own Kingdom, and settle all
things there, and then he would come back and marry her: But staying somewhat
longer then she had patience to expect, what through love and grief,
(conceiving that he h^d cast her off,) she hanged her self; and was turned
into an Almond tree, without leaves: But afterward, Demophoon returned, and
understanding what had happened, he embraced the tree, for love of his sweet
heart; which (being affected as it were with joy for the coming of her
husband,) instantly flourished, and became full of leaves.

Or Alcons praise, etc. This Alcon was Hercules companion, a famous Archer, and
so exquisitely skilled in shooting, that he never mist the mark: one trial
of his skill, was, that he would set a Ring on a man's head, and shoot through
it, never hurting the party: he could cleave a Hare when he list with his
shaft; and setting up a sword, or a spear end-wayes, right against him, he
would shoot a headless arrow, and hit the point with the end of his shaft,
and cleave it just in the midst. Upon a time, a serpent fastened upon his young
son, at whom Alcon drew so steady a draught, that he struck the serpent
through, and never hurt his son.

Or Codrus brawles, etc. Codrus was General of the Athenian Army, who in the
beginning of the war between the Athenians, and the Laconians,
(understanding from the Oracle, that that side should win the day, whose
General was first slain,) and finding that the enemy did purposely forbear
to assault him, he put himself into poor clothes, and so went disguised to
the enemies Camp, where he fell to quarrelling and brawling with one, and an
other, who (judgeing him by his homely habit) slew him; (by this means he
making way to that Oracle:) for in that battle the Laconians were discomfited,
and lost the field.

The Nymphs did Daphnis, etc. He brings in the name of Daphnis, either for
that he was some delicate young youth, son of Mercury; or else for that he
was some man of esteem in Sicily, for his wealth in Land and Cattle: to whom
some Authors attribute the first invention of Pastoral verse. Therefore he
says, that nature it self generally in all things, did condole the death of
our Savior Christ: first, the Nymphs, (that is) the heavenly spirits and
powers themselves.

Ye Hazells, and ye Woods, etc. The heaven, and the inferior creatures did
testify by their motion, and perturbation, the great sympathy of the superior
powers, wherewith they were affected.

When the sad mournful Mother, etc. After mention of the Gods, he presently
adds Rome, which is their Mother next to the Gods.

Both Gods and stars, etc. This is spoken after the manner of the Heathen: a
course with them usual; but of Christians to be abhorred: for when Jupiter
their god did not answer them in their desires, to their content; they would
obraid him of cruelty, and savage disposition. But our Jupiter, (the true Jove
indeed) does with great resolution, both begin, and end all things at his
pleasure, and of them does most sweetly dispose in his best time and season.

Wonn: keep or abide.

As tho, of none the fed Ox, etc. Herein he intimates the great
consternation and dismay of the Shepherds, that is, of the Apostles of Christ,
and the cessation of the doctrine of the Gospel, by the death of Christ: so
that, there neither were any to teach; nor the auditors that were, would harken
to what was taught; the minds of all were so perversely alienate from the
means of savation.

As tho: then, or at that time.

The Lybian Lions, etc. Even Lions, that is, most fierce and salvage Beasts,
and farthest from all sense of humanity, did lament the death of Christ: Many
(to weet) of the Jews, and Gentiles; as the Centurion, and Pilate: and others,
who returning to Jerusalem, testified their grief, by smi^ing their breasts.

The Woods and Mountains, etc. Perchance herein the Prophecy of the Sybil
has allusion to the renting of the stones, the opening of the graves, and the
earthquake, at the time of our Saviors giving up the Ghost.

Armenian Tygres, etc. Christ was the author of a new, and everlasting
Religion, and thereby did bend the stubborn and untamed necks of the most
fierce Tygres, enforcing them meekely to submit unto the yoke of his laws and
commandments. By Tygres here is meant, such worldly Tyrants, as live
altogether like these brute creatures, rather then men: and yet, Jesus Christ,
by the inward working of his grace, can bring this impossible-seeming work to
pass.

Daphnis to Bacchus, etc. Servius says, that these words have relation to the
history of Caesar; because he first did institute the sacrifice, and feasts to
Liber, that is, to Father Bacchus But (says Vives) I do not remember to have
read this in any other author, neither is it likely, or probable; forasmuch as
there were in Rome feasts to Bacchus, before Caesar's time: But I will hold my
order in glossing, which I have propounded to my self: he seems therefore
especially to mention the sacrifices to Bacchus, for that antiquity did believe
that they were available, for the purging of souls; and for that reason, gave
him that title of Liber, which signifies free, because he does free the mind
from cares and molestations.

As the Vine is honor, etc. Christ is the head and glory of all spiritual
creatures.

Bestrew the ground, etc. After Christ's resurrection, did follow a renewing and
repair of all things, and new joy was declared to the Shepherds, namely to
the Apostles, whom God appointed as Shepherds of his Flock.

Such Daphnis wills, etc. The tomb of Christ is the perpetual remembrance of
his death, which the Church has evermore in sight: for what is a tomb, but a
monument of death?

And fix this Epitaph, etc. This shall be the superscription of the death of
Christ.

Epicedion, is a mournful song made before the body be interred.

And

Epitaphion, a funeral song, after burial.

I Daphnis in the woods, etc. Write not upon him as on other dead men's tombs:
Here he lies interred: For Christ now lives not in earth only, but is
acknowledged above the stars, and dearly loved of men, and Angels.

Well known unto the stars, etc. The Son of God descended from heaven to
become man; after he being man, ascended from earth to heaven: Therefore
Christ as he was man, began first to be known upon earth, and so from thence
the knowledge of him reached up into heaven.

Of a Flock so fair, etc. Christ being most fair, pure, and good, nay
beauty, purity, and goodness it self, does admit none into his Kingdom, and
unto his pasture, but those who are fair, and pure, and good. Iddio fa suoi al
suo essempio: God frames his to his own sample and pattern. And he makes
only them such, who do with all readiness commit themselves unto him to be by
him reformed and refined. Christ has chosen out Angels, and holy men: These
are the Cattle of the Shepherd, who is incomparably more fair, and
beautiful, then any the best creatures, (in whose lips grace is diffused.)

Poet divine, etc. If a song upon Caesar's death, (being otherwise bitter to
the friends of Octavian, and hurtful to many, to none profitable) was so
acceptable to a Shepherd, how precious ought the remembrance of Christ's death
to be to us, from whence redoundeth everlasting salvation to all mankind?

Queme: please: a Saxon word: Spencer.

For me did Daphnis allgates love, etc. This cannot be meant of Virgil; who
(I verily think) says Vives) was never known to Julius Caesar, nor scarce
ever seen. For Virgil was but a Child at the time of Caesar's murder: neither
did Cicero ever see or hear any of Virgils works, seeing Cicero outlived
Caesar, not above two years: and therefore it is a mere fiction, which I know
not who writes in the life of Virgil; as likewise many other things are taken
upon report from the hearesay of others, that Cicero protested of him, in these
words,, Magnae spes altera Romae. Therefore they are spoken in the person of
Menalcas, who was elder then Virgil.

Allgates: also.

Now lovely Daphnis, etc. The Sybil hitherto sung the death of Christ, here
she prophecies of his ascension, and of the eternity of his kingdom in
heaven. Christ in his humanity being received up into heaven, does rejoice to
behold all things subdued unto him: according to that which herein we are
taught in the holy Scriptures.

And sees the clouds, and stars, etc. All things both in heaven and earth.

The joyous Groves, and pleasant, etc. By Christ's ascension into heaven,
abundant great joy has flowed down, upon the Apostles first, (by the sending
of the holy Ghost;) then after, upon all men in general: for by his ascension,
he has ledd our captivity captive, and given gifts unto men.

The Woolfe from ravin, etc. The peace of Christ is hereby meant, which subdues
all Tense and motion of the superior over the inferior; of the wild beast,
against the tame; of the crafty against the simple; charity making an equality
every where, and causing all things to be safe and secure.

For Daphnis joys in sweet, etc. Charity is the special commandment of
Christ; and Peace his Inheritance.

The Mountains, etc. The holy Ghost, says Saint Paul, is diffused in our
hearts by Jesus Christ; and being fullfilled with this joy, we come truly to
understand Jesus Christ, who he is, and acknowledge him to be God. For no man
says, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, and the Gospel. Blessed
art thou Simon Bar-tona, because flesh and blood has not revealed this unto
thee, but my Father, which is in heaven. By the Mountains, is meant the
Bishops, and chief learned men of the Church, and other where; by Rocks, is
meant, the inferior sort; by shrubbs is meant the common people: All do
openly profess and adore the divinity of Christ.

A God, a God, he is, etc. To the afflicted mind, for the sad and lamentable
death of Christ, it is said: Why do thou weepe^ Be of good comfort, for
he is a God: why do thou seek the living amongst the dead^ He is God that
lives for evermore. From hence comes joy into our hearts, and great hope of
blessedness. All which in the next verse is prayed for; namely that he would
confirm his happiness, and ratify that which by his express commandment,
we^ promise to our selves concerning him.

Oh be propitious, and thy servants, etc. Who trust in thee, who with all
their endeavor do cleave and adhere unto thee, and do fly to thy patronage,
as to a safe Asylum; and make them absolutely thine, whosoever call upon thee
for help.

Behold four Altars, etc. Perhaps Virgil adds this after the custom observed
of the heathen: and he very often mentions Apollo, either in respect of the
Pastoral verse, or for that he is the God of all Poets, or else having respect
to Augustus Caesar. But if he took these verses out of the Sybil, hereby is
meant worship due to the humanity of Christ under the person of Daphnis; and to
his divinity under the person of Apollo. Therefore it is that he uses this
word Arae to Daphnis, and Altaria, to Apollo: forasmuch as Arae, are used, to
those who of mortal men were made Gods: Altaria, dedicate to those who were
the supreme and chief of the heavenly Gods. Moreover Christ is the true
Phoebus, that is, the Sun of Justice and Righteousness.

Ne, store of Bacchus, etc. Christ's feasts are not after the manner of such as
are dead, solemnized with grief, in silence, and mourning, but with joy and
rejoicing, as of one living and reigning, and mediator of our everlasting
peace, and grace with his Father.

These duties I will, etc. The remembrance of Christ, and his holy worship in
the Church shall never end, so long as man kind and nature have any being.
This is, says St. Paul, the Cup of my new and eternal testament, so often as
ye shall eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup, ye shall show the Lords
death, till he come.

Their vows to Bacchus, and to Ceres, etc. As to the most useful Gods for the
sustaining of this mortal life; (without which man cannot propagate, and
preserve their kind,) so they shall offer their vows, and other duties of
devotion to thee: and thy power to grant or deny suites made to thee, shall be
no less then theirs.

Nathlesse: nevertheless, or notwithstanding.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE SIXTH EGLOGVE.
THis Eglogue entreats of sundry secrets, namely, of the first beginning of
all things; and of the divinity of the Heathen. Herein the power and virtue of
the Muses is deciphered, whose Knowledge reaches to all things, They celebrate
the Gods, and preserve the memory of the Heroes, and noble Personages, as
Gallus, and Varus, etc. They also pierce into the ne^rest secrets and mysteries
of nature, (whereof they have their denomination) (...), which signifies to
search, or (by searching) to know: for as much as they have the knowledge of all
things. Therefore the opinion of some, (unskilful and unlearned) is
ridiculous, who imagine, that only the skill of songs and verse belongs to the
Muses, seeing that a Muse properly is the knowledge and skill of all things,
both humane and divine, (as Virgil declares, lib. 2. Georgie.)

SILENVS.
Egloga sexta.
FIrst my Thalia daign'd in Siracusian verse
To play: ne, amongst the woods blushed to converse:
(When Kings, and Arms I sung,) Cynthius mine ear
Twicht: and this Item whispered, do thou hear?
( Tityrus) a shepherd, his flock fat must feed,
And homely Hornpipes, carroll on his Rheede:
Now (since great Varus) many may be found,
That can thy praises, and dread wars resound;
My Muse in tune to my small Pipe I Will set:
Ne, I (unbidden) sing: if any yet
These songs delight to read, my Tamarisk,
And every wood shall Varus sing of thee;
Ne, any lines to Pha^bus grateful be,
As which bear title of brave Varus name.
( Ph^rian Muses) now begin the same:
The Ladd Muasilus, and young Chromis spyde
All in a Cave, Silenus (gaping wide)
His veins all swelled, (as wont) and fast asleep,
With wine which yesterday he gusled deep:
(Slipped from his head) his Guarland off did lie,
And his great tankard (handle-worn) hung by:
Now (for the dotard, had with hope of song,
Them often deceivd) they seize him all among,
And with his own-selfe Guarlands, sast him brayld:
(They fearful standing) Aegle him assayld;
( Aegle, among all the Naya^des most fair)
And all his front, and temples does besmayre
With Mulberry-bloody-Iuice: with this he wakes:
And scorning their abuse, why Sirs, what makes
You bynd me thus (quoth he?) Lads, set me free,
And think you blessed, that me you might but see:
Call for what songs ye please: songs, your reward
And other guerdon I Will this Nymph award.
Eftsoons, he to his songs himself addreast:
Then mote ye see the Faunes the measures tripp,
The Beasts do leap the rigid Oaks do skipp,
Their curled branches, capr'e in the air:
For, of Parnassus mountain, the sole heir
Phoebus is not; nor Orpheus the only he;
Whom Ismarus, and Rhodope admire:
And first he sings, how seeds of air, and fire,
Water and earth, from that vast Chaos, were
United first: then from these Elements
How the infant world, and all things did commense:
How The Earth woxe firm: and Naereus confined
Within the Seas: how all things in their kind
Received form, successive by degrees.
Then how amazed the earth stands, when it sees
The new-Suns radiant Beams: and clowdy tovvres
(Exhaled high) now melting into shovvres:
And when the vvoods in green, were first arayd,
And when strange Beasts, the uncooth mountains strayd
The story then of Pyrrha's stones, again,
He does recount: and of Saturnus reign:
The Fowls of Ca^casus: Prometheus theaft,
Of Hyl^^; and the fatal stream; (where leaft)
The woeful Mariners, him loud deplore;
That Hylas, Hylas, ecchoed all the shore:
Then fortunate, (if herds had never be)
He comforts in his song, Pa^iphae,
For loving of the snow-white-Bull, (alack)
(Ah hapless Dame) what fury did thee rack?
The Pratides, the fields, and forests streawd
With false-forc'd lowings; yet were not so leaw'd
With lust of Beasts, unkindly to be caught;
(Though on their necks they feared the yoke, and sought
And fealt for horns, in their smooth foreheads often:
(Poor soul) now roming'mongst the Hills aloft;)
Whilst, all among the Daffod: Ilies soft,
(Streaking his white lithe-limbes, under some tall
Black Holm-tree) he, or upward does recall
Into his tender Cudd, the pallid herbs,
Or wooes some sweete-heart in the goodly herds.
( Dict^ean Nymphs) ye Lady Nymphs of woods)
Shut up the Groves; fense round the Forrest-bracks,
Enaunter I epsy his straggling tracks:
The pleasant Grass, (I muchil am afeard)
Or some, or other Heyfer of the heard,
May to Cortinia this Bull persuade,
Then he pursues the story of the Maid,
(Erst of th'Hesperian fruit inamoured)
Then Phaetons sisters he invelloped,
With bitter Alders-hoary-barke-around,
And tall straight Trees, them planted in the ground,
Then did he sing, how Gallus, (wandering by
Permessus streams,) one of the Sisters nine,
Ledd him to those Ao^ian hills divine;
How, Phoebus train, (all rising up) did bow,
And lowly-lowted to the Man: and how
Good Liuus, (with his hair embrav'd so trim
With flowers, and bitter Appium) to him,
In divine verse, these lines did dedicate,
Hold here: these Pipes the Muses thee present,
Which whilome they to old Aseraeus lent:
Whose charming music (from the Hills above)
Tall Ashes from their stations wontremove.
These shall deriye the first original
Of the Crynaan wood to thee; that so
Then it, no wood, may please Apollo mo:
What should I speak of Scylla, Nysus-Chyld?
Who, in the Gulf, the Gracian ships turmoyld,
Whilst round about her Belly (white as snow)
Foul monsters, ever howling, (as some show)
The Amazed Mariners (alack for fear)
With Sea-dogs (merciless) in pieces tear:
Or how he told of Tereus changed shape,
The feast which Philomela for him makes,
The course which in the wilderness he takes,
And (loath to part) (poor man) how he did sore
And long, his own dear dwelling hoverd over:
And all what ever Phoebus erst did preach
In blessed Eurota's hearing, and did teach
The Laurels for their Lessons, he did sing:
Which did affect the valleys in such sort,
That they his songs unto the stars report;
So long till Evening- Vesper warning gave,
The sheep to number, and them drive to fould,
And (maugre Olympus) from the Earth, his course did hold.
SILENVS.
The GLOSS.
THALIA: One of the three graces, whom the Poets supposed to be Iupiers
daughter, and inspired men with delectable speech, and sweet pronuntiation.

In Siracusian verse, etc. The sense of these verses I take to be this. My
Thalia, (that is the Muse which has pre-eminence over the fields) did first
daign to sport in Theocritus his verse, applying it self first to sing of
Country matters.

Cynthius mine ear, etc. That is, Apollo put him in mind of his duty, and
very fitly does the Poet here mention the Ear to be touched by Apollo;
because as the forehead is consecrate to Genius, the fingers to Minerva, the
knees to Misericordia, so the Ear was consecrate to Apollo.

Cynthus: was a Hill, where Apollo and Diana were borne: and thereof he was
named Cynthius, and she Cynthia.

Great Varus, etc. Quintilius Varo, (General of the Roman Army,) having often
overthrown the mighty Armies of the Germans, at last lost a famous Battle,
against Arminius the German: whereat he conceived so hearty a grief, and
indignation, that he slew himself, not abiding to outlive so great a
disgrace, as he conceived for this overthrow: (but this happened after Virgil
was dead.

My Tamarisk, etc. Thou shall be remembered, so long as these my Bucolicks
shall be read in the world.

Pyerian: Pieris is a Hill in Thessaly, dedicate to the Muses, of which they
are called Pyerides.

Mna^lysus, and young Cromis, etc. By these twain, the Poet means himself,
and Varu^; to whose honor he did compile this Eglogue. They were two Satyrs,
so named; to whom he also joyneth a young Lass: describing thereby the sect of
the Epicures, at the full; which sect teaches, that perfection consists in
pleasure, without which nothing can be absolute, and pleasing. And in this
Eglogue Virgil does purposely treat of the Epicurean sect, and doctrine, which
both himself and Varus had learned of Syron, and so brings in his Master
Syron, speaking under the person of Silenus unto them: and it is said, that
Virgil did not devise this of Silenus, as a fiction of his own, but did only
translate it out of Theopompus; who reports, that King Mydas his shepherds
sound this Silenus on a time lying drunk, and fast asleep; in which case they
bound him: Afterward (his bands loosing themselves without help) he resolved
diverse questions propounded unto him by the King, in natural Philosophy, and
Antiquities: some say he was the son of Mercury, some of Pan, upon a certain
Nymph, others affirm him to be born of drops of blood, issuing from heaven.

Silenus fast asleep, etc. Stories make mention of two famous men, and of
great antiquity of this name: one was schoolmasters and tutor to Bacchus: the
other long after him, and a great wise man, in the time of Cyrus; whose sage
saw, that was to Craesus the Lydian King, Optimum non nasci; proximum cito
mori. Bacchus is the Poets god, as well as Apollo: and Parnassus, the Hill of
the Muses, has two tops, one sacred to Apollo, the other to Bacchus. Now Poets
are crowned with Guarlands of Laurel leaves, (which is Phoebus tree,) and with
Ivy leaves, (which is Bacchus tree.) Therefore by Silenus, ( Bacchus his
Master,) we must understand the Muse it self, of whom Bacchus (the Poets
god,) is secretly instructed. And for this it is, that they say, that this
Eglogue does exceed the matter of a Pastoral.

His Guarlands, etc. That is, in that age all care and regard of humanity, and
honor, and praise by Poetry, was laid aside; since no man did esteem it, or
cared to be crowned with the commendation thereof.

With hope of songs, etc. We must never cease our pains, in attaining of
skill and knowledge; if our first Endeavors succeed not, we must not give
over, but set on again, and again, knowing that diligent labor at last
brings all to good effect: according to that, si ter pulsanti nemo respondet,
abire non licet: urgendum est.

With his own self Guarlands, etc. The beauty and delight of learning did so
inamour the truly generous minds, that they did even by violence force the
Muses to abide with them, giving them no rest, but even waking them out of
their quiet sleep, to teach and instruct them: some out of an egre desire of
glory; some other more noble, out of an endless and covetous longing to
attain knowledge: For Guarlands have relation to the honor due to Learning;
whether it be the beauty of knowledge, or the desire of excellence.

Aegle came to help, etc. Soft and effeminate desires do intermixe themselves
with all manly and worthy minds; which desires do seek for learning,
knowledge, and good quality, not for their own sakes, or for the beauties of
their excellent virtues, but for gain, or some other sinister respect.

Nayades, feigned by the Poets to be the Nymphs of the waters.

With Mulberry bloody juice, etc. The young Ladds bind and hold down Silenus,
but the Lass scoffs him, and endeavors to make him ridiculous to others: Noble
and generous minds, by care, and their best industry, do adorn the Muses,
and detain them with them; when as base people, and abject minds do
dishonor and abuse them, aiming at nothing so much, as how to expose them, to
the scorn of the vulgar. And whereas the Ladds waken him to hear his melodious
voice, the Lass laughs him to scorn; it teaches the contrary entertainment,
which Learning finds in the world: as being received with all manner of grace,
and solemnity, amongst the true and ingenious spirits, whereas base, and vile
degenerate persons, accept them only for gain and pleasure.

Bloody juice, etc. This kind of tree bare a white fruit at first, and
likewise the fruit yielded a white juice; but Pyramus and Thisbe, having
appointed to meet at this tree, and afterward killing themselves under it,
they say, that the Tree, (being tainted with the blood which sprinkled from
their wounds,) has ever since retained the color of blood, both in her
fruit, and the juice.

The like mutation is reported of the Rose, which was also at first white; but
so it happened, that ( Venus running by the Rose bush, and accidently scratching
her tender foot, it bled;) for which the Rose has ever since been redd; (as
blushing for shame of such her rudeness.)

Enough is ye, etc. It is enough that ye have found the Muses: They shall not
henceforth fly from you any more, but willingly and gently they shall apply
themselves to teach you whatsoever you desire.

Call for what songs ye list, etc. You men of understanding shall receive
knowledge of what kind soever you shall make choice to bestow your time in.
This shall be the reward of your labors. But the effeminate minds, shall
have money, and sordid gain, as the recompense of all they seek after.

The Beasts did play, etc. Learning does tame, and mollify rude and brutish
minds, making them plyant and subject to order and reason.

Fau^es and Satyrs were the gods of the woods: a kind of Monsters, with heads
like Men, and bodies like Goats.

Ismarus, and Rhodope, etc. Two Mountains in Thrace, (the Country where
Orpheus was borne.

The rigid Oaks, etc. Here he seems to allude to those things which are
reported of Orpheus. Cicero in defense of the Poet Archia, says, the woods and
wilderness do answer to the voice, and oftentimes the savage beasts are
persuaded, and stand at gaze, at the sweetness and delight of Music.

For Phoebus is not, etc. Indeed Phoebus and Orpheus sing sweeter; but there is
more learning, and knowledge of matters worthy a man's understanding in Silenus
his song, and therefore more delight therein.

For why he sung, etc. He taught and opened the causes, and first principles
and original of things; (a matter most pleasing and delightful,) out of the
most abstruse and hidden points of Philosophy; here needs no Allegory. Only
it teaches that such kind of subject, (containing learning and knowledge, and
wise Philosophy,) ought truly and of right to be the matter of a right Poets
pen.

The story of Pyrrha, etc. Servius here moves the question, why the Poet,
(leaving the learned and wise discourse of the worlds original, and such like
things,) suddenly passes to the narration of fables. To which he answers,
that either it is, because herein he houlds himself to the Epicurean manner,
(which sect does evermore purposely farse the most serious matters,) with some
pretty pleasant passage, or other; or for that he did apply himself to the
nature and disposition of youth, whose mynds are wonderfully inclined and apt
to be made bend, and relent with fables, which afford matter of admiration:
for Fables were first invented, to delight and refresh the hearts of men; Now
the fable here of was this. Jupiter (hating the Giants of the Earth for their
cruelty, and so likewise (for their sakes) all their posterity,) drowned all
the whole earth, except Pyrrha and Deucalion, who escaped the deluge, upon the
huge mountain Athos. These two (by Themis instruction) by casting stones
behynd them, did thereof repair mankind again. Some report this fable, and
the cause of the deluge otherwise, and that Pyrrha was daughter to Epimetheus,
and Deucalion son to Prometheus: and that on Parnassus hill, they increased
mankind again. As also that the meaning of this fiction is, that those few,
who escaped to the topp of this hill, (during the deluge, hiding them amongst
the bushes, and rubbish of these rocky places,) and arising from thence
afterward, were said to be made of the stones, which (upon the forsaking those
strong places) they left behynd them. Moreover there were two general deluges,
whereof stories report, one in the reign of Ogiges, King of the Thebans; the
other in the time of Pyrrha, and Deucalion. And by these deluges is morally
signified the alteration and mutation of times.

The Fowls of Caucasus. That is, the Eagle which fed upon Prometheus his
heart, upon the Hill Cancasus.

Prometheus theft. The Poets feign that this man made men; (induced
thereunto,) because he was the first who devised the making of Images: and
they feign that he went to heaven, and stole fire from thence to inspire his
men with life: at which Jupiter being sore displeased, bound him to the hill
Caucasus, and there set an Eagle to tire and gnaw continually upon his heart.

The meaning of all which, is this: Prometheus (according to the Etymology of
the name) was a very wise man: for Prometheus is derived (...) that is
Providence. He was the first; who taught the Assyrians the art of Astrology.
To which knowledge he attained by observing the stars on the high Mountain
Caucasus; where with great study, and continual pains, he did carefully and
diligently frequent. Now this Mountain in Assyria is so high, that it is said
to reach almost unto the stars, so near, that upon it he did observe, and
descry the greater stars, together with the rising and setting of them all, in
their several seasons and times.

And whereas an Eagle is said to eat his heart, it has relation to the
curious scrutiny, and deep contemplation of his studious mind, ever busy, in
beating his brains, for the finding out of the motions of the stars, and
celestial Bodies: (the same word (...) signifying in Greek, an Eagle, and
Carefullnesse.) And because by wisdom, and wondrous Prudence and
understanding, he effected this by the help of Mercury, who is the God of
wisdom and reason among the heathen: therefore he is said to be bound, by
Mercury, to the Rock Caucasus: alluding to the custom of great students, who
sit so close and continually at their books, as if they were even tied to
their seats: He found out also the reason of the Lightning, and taught it
unto men: And thereupon sprang that part of the fable, which says, he stole
fire from heaven. For by a secret art, which he taught them, posterity learned
how to draw fire from heaven; which proved very useful to man, whilst it was
used to a right end: But after once men abused it, it turned to their
destruction; as we read in Livy, of Tullus Hostilius, who was consumed with
all his his whole family, by that kind of fire: and yet we read of Numa
Pompilius, that he used it with very good success, employing it only in the
sacrifices of the gods. And this gives occasion to that part of the story,
which says, that the gods being angry at the stealing of fire from heaven,
sent down diseases and Plagues upon the earth, in revenge thereof.

Thus much Servius.

And next of Hylas, etc. This young man was the son of Theodamus, and companion
to Hercules; who in his journey to Colchos, going to land in the woods of
Mis^a, and sending Hylas to the River Ascanias, to draw him some water, Hylas
(overreaching himself,) fell into the River, and was drowned: whose loss.
Hercules took so impatiently, that not knowing of his drowning, till long
after, he travailed all over Misia, in quest of his dear Hylas, ever crying
out and calling him by his name, all the way he went.

And fortunate Pasiphae, etc. The sense of this seems obscure, here he
brings in Pasiphae comforting, and as it were blessing her self from the love
of the Bull: So that the words following, ( ah hapless Maid,) seem to be her
own; in which words she comforts her self, about the absence of the Bull,
taxing her own furious lust; yet in the second person, (which bears more
weight, and seems to be more passionate,) the like manner is that where
Corydon bewailes his misfortune in the second person, as more forceable to
express his passion. But presently she pursues her speech in the first
person, in these words, If this Bulls straggling tracks I chance to spy, etc.
That is, if he should chance to come hither and attempt me, I pray let me
entreat you to shut up all passages to prevent his coming: see^^g perchance
he will come, though not purposely, yet casually, as he follows some
beautiful Cow or other of the Heard, whom he has undertaken; or seeks after
some more delicate pasture. Therefore restrain him within the woods, that the
fury of this filthy Love, may at least by absence be assuaged, and not be
farther provoked, or inflamed by behoulding.

Servius upon this passage glosseth thus: The Poet (says he) may seem to
excuse her misdeede, as having committed this foul fault, by inforcement
rather of Fortune, and desteny, then of her own disposition: and therefore,
(out of his pity, and tender commiseration of her,) he cries out ( Ah
hapless Maid) comforting her herein, and alluding to the cause, that enforced
her to this action: For so it happened, that Venus being infinitely angry with
Sol, for bewraying to the world, her adulderies, with Anchises, or (as some
say) with Mars, or rather with both: in revenge possessed his daughters mynds
with monstrous desires, to abuse their bodies with unhonest and unnatural
lusts: To as did Cyrce, Medea, and this Pasiphae. And in this sense he calls
her unhappy; and that in this kind of lamentable madness; others were less
unhappy, in that they thought themselves to be very Beasts indeed; whereas
she, though she knew her self to be still a woman, yet she doated so
through extremity of lust and passion, as (against her reason, which she still
retained,) to follow a Bull.

What madness thee bewitched, etc. In these words he seems rather to chide,
then to comfort her: perhaps giving it as a rule, that the office of a true
Comforter, is to mingle (as he sees cause) sharp reproves, and as it were,
vinegar with his oil, (allbeeit to a mind that may seem half overtaken with
sorrow.)

But the Poets ground this fable of Pasiphae upon a true story, as they most
commonly do in all the fictions which they have left unto the world. For the
truth is, she was wife to Minos, King of Crete; and as Servius says, falling
in love with Taurus, Secretary got her with Child of two Twyns, whereof one was
like Minos, and the other like Taurus. And this was the cause that gave first
occasion to the Poets to fable, that she was in love which a Bull, and suffered
the Bull to have carnal copulation with her, within a wooden Cow, made by
Daedalus, and that she was thereupon delivered of a Monster, half a man, and
half a Bull, which (according to the shape partaking of both natures,) they
named Minotaurus; intimating therein the foul play which she used therein
with the Kings Secretary, by allusion to both their names joined in one.

The Praetides, etc. These were daughters of King Praetus, and the fair
Staenobaea; or as Homer says Antiope; who for preferring themselves before
June in beauty, (or as some hold, being her Maids of honor, adventuring to
take the gould from her raiment, and convert it to their own use,) were by the
Goddess, (being heereat extremely in censed,) distracted in their mynds; so
that (conceiving themselves to be Cowes,) they strayed up and down, lowing
amongst Fields and Forests, being fearful to come near any mankind, least
they should be put to draw in the plough. Now the Coheherence of this example
with that which went before is this: That howsoever these distracted poor
Ladies were so deprived of their reason, as that they did verily believe them
to be Cowes indeed, and in very nature, and their fancies being so
destroyed, as that their behavior was now in every thing answerable to that
conceit which they had of themselves, yet none of them in these their bestiall
imaginations, were so transported, as to long and to lust after the unkindly
company of the savage Bulls, as Pasiphae did: And therefore her lust was
monstrous, and so much the more monstrous, and foul, because she still
retained both her outward shape of womankind, and knew her self to be still a
humane creature, enjoyed her right senses, and was in her right mind, all the
time that she was overtaken with this kind of lust: so that her madness was
beyond expression, and skill of man to conclude, from what ground it might
proceed.

Dictaean Nymphs, etc. They were so called of Dictis, a Mountain in Cretae,
where they used much to haunt: and here (as Servius says) Pasiphae did first
fall in love with Taurus.

E^aunter: least that.

Then Phaetons Sisters, etc. Phaeton wa^ son to Phoebus, begotten of fair
Clymene: who instantly entreated his Father to give him leave to rule the
chariot of the Sunn for one day, which with much importunity, and great
unwillingness Phoebus at last granted. But (not able to govern the unruly
Iades,) they run away with the Carr, and overthrew it, and set the whole world
on fire. Whereat Jupiter being sore afraid to be burnt likewise, and to be
fired out of his Kingdom, struck Phaeton with lightning, and threw him into
the River Padus, in Italy now called Po: for which untimely and unfortunate
death of their brother, his three sisters, Lampaeti^, Phaethusa, and
Lampethusa, grieved so extremely, that the Gods (in ruth of their incessant
weeping and dreriment,) turned the^ into Alder trees, which ever since, delight
most and thrive best in moist and wet places.

Invelloped: clothed, or wrapped about.

Then did he sing how Gallus, etc. In all this whole tract, there is nothing
spoken more sweetly, or sung with greater influence of the Muses then this,
wherein the admirable praise of Gallus is set forth: who was himself a
renowned Poet, of whom Virgil makes mention in Alexis, and after in Gallus.

Lowly lowted: did make obeisance down to the ground.

Permessus: a delicate River in Boeotia.

I^to the Aonian Mountains did him lead, etc The study of one science and
art, draws and leads a man by degrees, to the knowledge of others.

And how the Attendants all, etc. The very Muses-selves, did admyre Gallus his
wit; which they once perceiving and thoroughly understanding, they fell in love
with him, showing themselves courteous, affable, and very friendly unto him.

In divine verse, etc. He calls the verse divine for the excellence thereof,
either for that he was some great Heroes the son of Calliope,) or because (as
says Servius) he was a kind of Prophet, and a diviner of things to come.

Which erst to old Ascraeus, etc. Hesyod, the Greek Poet, borne in Ascra, (a
town in B^etia, near to mount Helicon) was of that towns name, surnamed
Ascr^us.

These shall derive, etc. Of the Grynaean wood, etc. The wood Gry^nea is in
Ionia, dedicate to Phoebus. Of this wood, and of this wood, and of the works
done therein, (namely of the Prophecy of Mopsus, and Calcas, as also of
Apollo's self, Euphorion the Grecian, of the City of Calcis,) wrote an
excellent Poem: which Gallus, with great dexterity and skill did translate out
of Greek into Latin; following rather in his translation, the argument and
manner of his Authors handling, then the very words: which by these means he
made his own, as Virgil did his Bucolicks, and his Aeneiads; in both which he
did follow Theocritus, and Homer. He says therefore these pipes shall derive
the first original of the praises, unto thee of the Grynaean wood: (because
that by his translation, he shall hereafter seem rather the Author and
inventer of that work, then Euphorion himself:) whereby it shall happen, that
by thy commendation, and song of that wood, (though Phoebus have many other
Temples, and sundry other Groves sacred to his service,) yet he shall delight
in none more, or rather not so much, as in that, as it is set forth by thy
excellent wit.

What should I speak of Scylla, Nisus child, Ovid in his fourteenth of his
Metamorph. says, that this was daughter to Phorcus, and not to Nisus; and that
(she falling in love with Glaucus, ( Circes her sweete-heart:) Circes out of
disdain, and mere malice, to see her preferred before her self, despitefully
poisoned the Fountain with venomous herbs, where Scylla wont to bathe her
self; of which villainy the poor soul being utterly ignorant, (as she was
washing for her recreation,) spyed suddenly all her nether parts turned into
snarling and howling dogs: at which deformity she was so aghasht, that she
threw her self presently into the next Sea she came at: where they say, she
was metamorphosed into a Rock, lying right against Charybdis, which ever since
prooves very dangerous to Passengers sailing that way.

Of Tereus changed shape, etc. Tereus defloured his wives sister Philomela: his
wise Progne to be revenged kills young Itis, (his only son,) and dressed his
body like meat, and set it before her husband: whereof he having fedd, she
brought in the head of the dead child, and set it before him; at sight whereof,
Tereus rann after Progne to kill her; but in flying from him, she was turned
into a Swallow; Tereus into a Lapwing; Philomela into a Nightingall, and Itis
into a Phesant.

Blessed Eurotas, etc. A River in Greece, which he therefore terms blessed, in
injoyning the company of so learned a man, and hearing so excellent songs, as
he sang, by the banks thereof.

Till evening Vesper, etc. It is the west star, which by reason it appears
first of all the other stars, after the Sunn is set, is called Vesper, or the
Evening starr: and it is also called Hesperus: it is also Lucifer, and is so
named, because it is the last of all the stars, which in the morning, upon the
first preparing of the Sun to rise, is last seen, and stays longest to our
discerning, before it vanish (as it were,) and set out of our sight.

And maugre Olympus, etc. This is a Mountain in Greece, above which (by reason
of the exceeding height,) no clowd appears: and therefore among Poets, it is
taken, and used for the heaven. And yet the Evening starr, (seeming to rise
from the bottom thereof,) in despite of his height, was clamberd up above him.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE SEVENTH EGLOGVE.
VIrgil here faignes, that at his being at Rome, he was present at the
contention of two Poets: one whereof (as may be thought) was his dear friend,
and perchance was either Gallus, Varus, or Asinius: whom he does wondrously
extol, of purpose to extenuate the commendation of the other, who happily was
one of his rivalls, which envied him, for the grace and acceptance he found
amongst the Nobles of Rome.

MELIBAEVS.
Egloga septima.
ALL underneath a tall straight Holme, whyleere
Sat Daphnis: whilst Thyrsis, and Coridon,
Their simple sheep, and milk-stuft-Goates, yfeere,
(Their several flocks) compelled into one:
Arcadians both, and both of equal years,
In answers prompt; and both in singing Peers.
As I from could the tender Myrtl'es save,
The Goat (the husband of the heard) did stray,
I Daphnis spyde: he me: and me did wave,
And cryde; ( Melibae) thy kidds are well: away
Come; here is thy Goat too: if thou may be staide,
(Of fellowship) come rest thee in this shade.
Here all the herds done leave their meadow-feede,
To come to drink: here quiet Mincius bounds
The verdant flowrie banks with tender Rheede,
And sacred Oak with buzzing swarms, resounds.
What should I do?
Not having Phillis, nor Alcippe, whom
To send shutup, my weaned lambs at home:
And much to do, was like to be (God know,)
Twixt Thyrsis, and Corydon; yet foolish I,
Did for their toys, my business forslow:
Tho, both by turns, their verses began to vye,
And each with turning songs invoke their Muse,
First Corydon; next Thyrsis his course ensues.
Cor. ( Lybethrian Nymphs) (my joy, my dear delight,)
Or done me help sike ditties to endite,
As Codrus erst ye taught: (for none so nie
As he, to Phaebus-selfe can versifie:
Or if we cannot all so happy be,
I Will hang my Pipe, on this Pine-sacred tree.

Thyr. Crown your new Poet, (ye Arcadian Swains,)
With ramping Ivy: that so, Codrus raines,
And very guts may crack, with fell despite:
Or if he praise him more, then is his right,
With Berryes bynd his front: that his ill tongue
Hereafter may not do your Poet wrong.
This Boresrough head, Micon (my little wagg)
And branched horns of a long-lyved Stagg,
Does here present (fair Delia) unto thee:
Which if he find, them fair accepted be,
Of finest marble thou shall stand upright
(Thy Calves, lapt all, in Punick-Buskins-light.)

Thyr. Thou, but an Orchard-Keeper art, no more;
(Poor Pryapus:) enough is thee therefore
This bowl of Milk, and wafers every year:
Now, for the while, allbee I make thee here,
But of course marble; yet if once my Fould
Double my stock, I Will carve thee all of gould.

Corid. ( Naereus dear daughter) Galatea mine)
More sweet to me, then Hybla's precious Time,
More (then white Ivy) smooth; then Swans, more fair,
When once the Bulls, from feed returned are
Unto their stalls, if that thy heart be right
To thine own Corydon, come bless him with thy sight.

Thyr. Let me be held more sour then Sardian-grass,
Rougher then brush-wood; abject more and base,
Then the Seas weedy wrack, if not to me
Long as a year, this one day seem to be:
(My Bullocks) having fedd, no farther rome
For shame, (if ye have any shame) go high you home.

Corid Ye mossy Fountains, and ye Herbs which be
Softer then sleep: And (oh) thou Strawberry-Tree,
(Who thy thinn shade do over all extend,)
From the Solstitium done my beasts defend:
The soultry Summer gins his broyling heat,
And the Vine buds, done burghen broad and great.

Thyr. We, Chimnyes here, and Torches-dropping fat,
And Fires (nose-high) we have: and unto that,
Posts, with continual smoke, as black as Iet:
Here, we by Borras could no more do set,
Then one woolfe fears whole flocks of sheep: no more
Then tumbling Tides, reaken the several shore.

Corid. The Juniper, and rough-ryn'd Chessnut stand,
And under every Tree, each-where on Land,
The Apples ready lie: and every thing
Does laugh for joy: but if my dear darling
Alexis, from these Mountains chance to stay,
Soon shall you see the Floods quite dride away.

Thyr. The Field does wither, and the dying Grass,
By th'ayres distemper does to nothing pass,
The Vine envies the Hills her branched shade:
But all the woods full goodly been arayd
At my fair Phillis coming, and self- Jove,
In precious showers, descends from above.

Corid. Most is the Popler, to Alcides leefe,
The Vine, to Bacchus; Venus, myrtles-cheefe
Affects: and Phoebus, Laurels most approves:
And Phillis, Hazels: which (whiles Phillis loves,)
Nor Myrtles, can the Hazels parallel,
Nor Phaebus-Laurels ever them excel.

Thyr. The Ash is glory of all Timber-woods,
The Pine, of Orchards; Popler, in the ^loods:
The Firr is beauty of the Hills so high:
But (would my Licidas continually
Come visit me,) both Firr, and Ash, and Pine,
To thee (my Leefe) the Guarland must resign.

Meli. These I remember, and that after long
Contention vain; Thyris was laid along:
And ever since that time, is Corydon,
My noble Corydon, and Paragon

MELI BAEVS.
The GLOSS.
AS I from could the tender, etc. Whilst I addicted my self to the milder
studies of the Muses, I lost the greatest part of my patrimony; and for that
cause I came to Rome.

Whileere: a while since.

I Daphnis spide, etc. By Daphnis he means some one of the learned friends
of Caesar; who wished him to fear nothing, notwithstanding the loss of his
grounds: and therefore invites him to be secure, and to lend his time, quietly
to the hearing and determining of a great controversy between two singers.

Yfeere: together.

Here Is thy Goat too etc. Not only all which thou have lost, but whatsoever
thou houldst at this present, (and more too,) shall be kept safe for thee.

If thou can be, etc. If thou can be spared from thy necessary business
at home, rest here in this cool shade, (that is) at Rome, here among us, in
tranquillity, and peace of mind, free from all strife, and contentious jangling.

All the herds, etc. The tide of all businesses to be decided, flows hither:
The Prince himself, and the chief Commanders of all his Army, will be here;
yea, Arius the Centurion, who expelled thee from thy land, will be here: so
that thou may bring all thy matters to pass, according to thy hearts desire.

Mincius. A River (rising out of Benacus, (a Lake in Gallia Cisalpina, near
unto Brixia, (a Town of the Venetians) with his broad waters, makes another
Lake near unto Mantua: from whence, (sucking in many small streams by the
way,) it empties it self into the River of Po, anciently called Padus, of
which the City of Padua, took first the name.

( Lybethrian Nymphs) So called of a Cave, called Libethra: wherein was a well
called Libethros, where the Muses did much frequent.

My joy, my dear delight, etc. As being pierced with infinite love; from
whence proceeds, that divine fury, which does raise the mind above the common
strength and scope of nature; whereof Plato in his Ion, (being a dialogue of
poetical fury,) does discourse.

As Codrus erst ye taught, etc. He adapteth him to the imitation of some
noble, and famous Poet.

As he to Phoebus, etc. Phoebus is the God of the Muses.

Or if we cannot all, etc. If we have not skill given to us from above: for
(as the common saying is,) Poeta nascitur, non fit, a Poet is so borne, and not
made. There must be a certain natural quality, and a kind of ex^taordinary,
supernatural wit, to this faculty: so that oftentimes there are many most
excellent Poets, who in all other learning are very meanly qualified.
Wherefore study, and all the in^ustry of the world, avail nothing heereunto,
unless an an be fitted, and naturally cut out (as a man may say) for the
purpose.

The Pine was dedicate to the Mother of the Gods: the Oak to Jupiter: The
Laurel to Phoebus: To Venus the Myrtle: The Popler to Hercules: The Hazell to
Phillis.

If he praise him more, etc. Here he may seem to allude to the general
received opinion, that (as there are some complexions, and some men, of such a
colored hayr, whom antiquity has branded, for unlucky people, to buy or sell
with;) so it has likewise been observed, that there are Persons of so unlucky
a Tongue, that if they offer money for a Horse, or any other Beast, (if they
have it not at their own price,) it either days soon after, or never thrives
more. Of this kind Solinus writes, that whole Families, are noted in Africa,
People, naturally so fatal and mischievous, that even their very praising and
commendation of any man, woman, or any other creature, is a kind of witchcraft,
to forespeak them, to pine, and dwindle away to nothing: and therefore not
without great reason, were all men shye of such, and very fearful to receive
a good word, (against their desire, or desert,) from such mischievous mouths.

With Berries bind, etc. Antiquity has conceived that the Bay tree has a
natural virtue, and privilege, against blasting by Thunder and Lightning:
according to that of the Poet, Missa triumphalem non tangunt fulmina Laurum:
and perhaps from thence they have imagined, that the Berries of the Laurel,
worn about them, is as a spell, and powerful charm, against the blasting and
injury of an evil tongue.

Fair Delia, etc. Delos was the most famous Island of all the Cyclades, (lying
in the Aegean Sea:) Latona was here brought to bed of Apollo, and Dyana, both
at a birth: and of this place, Dyana ever since was called Delia: so sacred was
this Ila^d in the opinion of all the world, for the estimation of these two
dieties, that the Persians, (who threatened all Greece, and even God and Men
with their invincible Army,) ariving at Delos with a thousand sail of ships;
yet departed from thence, peaceably, doing no manner of wrong thereunto.

( Poor Prayapus,) etc. Pryapus was said to be the son of Bacchus and Venus:
and by superstitious Antiquity, believed to be the God of Gardens and Orchards.

More sour then Sardian grass. Writers report, that in Sardinia there grows
an herb, (as Salust faith) which so soon as a man does but taste, it
contracts, and dilates his mouth to and ^ro, with contrary convulsions, that
with extreme pain, he days, yet (as it were laughing:) from the effect of
which deadly herb, wiseth the Proverb, Sardi^ios g^l^s, Sardinian laughter:
applyable, when a man sets a good face on it, (as we say,) and feignes a
forced kind of mirth; when yet his heart is all sad, and heavy within.

Having fedd, got high you hom^, etc. Country people do not distinguish the
times, by the hours, but by signs and observations to them best known, and
most familiar, taken from the Summer and harvest: the noon they know by their
cattle sitting down to rest.

Ve^^^ Myrtler chief, etc. They say that the Myrtle is dedicate to Venus,
because when she went out of the Sea, she hidd her self under the Myrtle,
from being seen naked: or else, for that it is brittle, like as Love is
unconstant; or else, because the Myrtle yields a sweet pleasant savor, as Love
is woodrous delightful to those, who are there wit^ affected.

Most is the Popler etc. Other of the gods are diversely delighted, some with
one thing. some with another, whereby those things are highly esteemed, and had
in honor; but so long as Ol^vian takes pleasure in Poetry, none of all the
other arts shall be so acceptable and lovely, as it: (...) it may be^
understood of (...) diverse are delighted with several kinds of verses, but so
long as Pollio likes the Pastoralls best, it shall bear away as great
commendation as any other kind whatsoever, and howsoever esteemed, of the
greatest Gods.

Leefe: beloved, or dear.

To Alcides leefe, etc. Hercules loved this Tree best, because he shaded
himself with a Guarland hereof, in his return from hell: and by a Guarland of
this tree, (whose leaves are of two colors, he testified his double labors
of heaven and hell, as faith Servius: of this tree the Poets have this fable.

Leuce, was the most beautiful amongst all the Nymphs, and the daughter of
Oceanus. Pluto falls in love with her, carrying her away with him down to
hell: who after a certain time dyed. For whose death, Pluto (as well to comfort
himself, as to remember her by some monument,) planted thee Tree Leuce, in the
Elysium of the Saints: of the branches of which Tree, Hercules made him a crown
at his return from hell.

These I remember, etc. Corydon adores the Gods; Thyrsis railes at his
Adversary: Corydon begins from piety, Thyrsis from rage: Corydon invokes a
chaste Goddess; Thyrsis an obscene God: Corydon sings of pleasant matters; the
other of sad and doleful things: he wishes; this curses: Therefore full
worthily was the victory adjudged to Corydon.

And ever since is Corydon, etc. Maelibe addooming the conquest to Corydon,
after a clownish manner, (the Poet therein observing most excellent decorum,)
imagining more then he has words to express, or ability to utter, breaks of
abruply, and as it were in admiration and applause of his absolute conquest,
and superl^tive worth so far beyond the other.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE EIGHTH EGLOGVE.
Here two Shepherds sing: The one disdaigneth that all praise, honor, and
reward, is bestowed on the woorthless and unworthy, the whilst men of desert
are neglected.

The other perceiving that favor and acceptance, could not simply, by good and
virtuous means be attained, casts about to gain them by tricks of policy
and knavery. And in the persons of both these Shepherds, Virgil does closely
act his own cause: For he does herein secretly inveigh, both against
th^baseness, and lewdness of the paltry Poets of his time, and withal does
tax the blockish, and gross Judgment of the Nobility of Rome.

PHARMACEVTRIA.
OR THE WITCH.
Egloga octava.
THE Shepherds Damon, and Alphesibeus Muse,
(Whose strife, the Herds admiring,) did refuse
Their wonted food, and (harkning) stood at gaze:
Whose songs, the spotted Lynces did amaze,
And in their course, enforced the Floods to stay:)
This Damon, and Alpesibeus Muse (I say)
Befalls me now, in order to discourse:
And thou (great Lord) now whether in thy course
Over Tymanus Rocks; (or sailing over
The mighty main, unto the Illyrian shore,)
Shall I so luckie be, to see that day,
When I thy doubty deeds, may brave pourtray?
Or shall I live, unto the world to tell
Thy haughty songs, (which none may parallel?)
(Of Sophocles his buskin worthy best:)
In thee I do commense, in thee I rest:
Vouchsafe these verses of my hand to take,
Which I by thy command, did undertake.
And this slight Ivy, let thy Temples daign
With thy triumphant Laurels, them to strain:
Scarce falln from heaven, the Nights coole-shadow was
(What time, the deaw, (like Pearl,) on every grass,
To beasts most pleasing,) each-where did rely,
When honest Damon, (leaning carelessly
On slender Olive-plant,) thus sadly said:
Damon. (Luciser) break forth, and, coming, done prevent
The blessed lingering day, whilst I lament
The cursed cousenage, which I now do prove
By my wife Nisa's, foul, unworthy love
And whilst, I all the Gods, to witness may
Invoke, yet once, before my dying day,
(Though thereby little help, (God wot) I win,
With me Meenalian verse, my Pipe begin.
For, Maenalus, has underwoods, great choice,
And lofty Pines, which speak with human voice.
He Shepherds loves, and self Pan hears each day.
(Who first did teach, on painful Pipe to play.)
With me, Menalian verse, my Pipe begin.
Moisus, and Nysa, wedd together are,
What lover ere, hereafter need despair?
Gryphons, with Horses, shall now joined be.
And doubtful Dear, and dogs, so well agree,
That they shall drink together at one cupp:
Torches, new-dight, now ( Mopsus) done set upp,
For thy new-wedded Bryde: fling (Bridegroom brave
Thy Nuts abroad: now Hesperus leaves the wave,
And for thy sake, his Oeta does forsake.
With me Maenaelian verse, my Pipe begin.
Oh, goodly match, and wondrous worthy make,
Choice piece (I wis) whilst for his proper sake,
Thou all else scorn'st, and hould'st in hate my song,
And slights my Goats; and my beard lovely-long.
And thick-hayrd brows; and in thy mind do think
That all the Gods, at things on Earth, do wink:
With me Maenalian verse, my Pipe begin.
I saw thee once, and then I was thy Guide,
When thou were yet but young, to our backside;)
Where, amongst our hedges, thou and thy Mother,
Ripe Queen Apples, into your lapps did gather.
I then was twelve years old and from the grownd
The tender boughs could reach, and plucken down:
Soon as I saw thee, I entangled was,
And by lewd error, quite misled (alas:)
With me Manalian verse, my Pipe begin.
Now what this whooresonn Love is, I well wot;
It is a little busy Boy, begote
Not of man's seed, ne sibb to one of us,
(But farthest Garamants, and Ismarus,
Or rocky Rhodope, (as it should seem) In their rough ragged hills engendered
him.
With me Maenalian verse, my Pipe begin.
Lewd love was cause, the Mother first defiled
Her guilty hands, in blood of her own Child:
Crewell Mother, thou the while: but whether
Mother crewell more, or Boy wicked? either
(Both wicked boy, and mother crewell been.
With me, Menalian verse, my Pipe begin.
Henceforth let woolves, of their own nature fear
To touch the flock: and boystrous Oaks, let bear
Oranges; and Alders, Daffodillies brisk:
Fatt Myrrh, let sweat, from bark of Tamarisk:
Henceforthlet Shretch. Owls with the Swans compare,
And Tityrus Orpheus been: Orpheus as rare
Amongst the woods, as was Aryon dear
Unto the Dolphins, in the sea whyleere,
With me Menalian verse, my Pipe begin.
Yea, midst the mayn, let all surrounded lie
Ye woods farewell: and let impetuously,
On highest topp of airy mountain placed,
My self from thence, against the waves be cast
And this last duty, acted for her sake,
By'a dying man, vouchsafes she to take.
Now cease (my Pipe) Menalian verses cease.
These words spoke Damon, and so held his peace:
But now what answer Alph^sibeus made,
( Pyerian Sisters) be by you bewrayde;
For none of all, can do all manner thing.
Alphesib. Come bring forth water, and soft Filleting,
To guird this holy Altar round about;
And for a Sacrifize, be poured out
Fatt oily Vervin, and male Frankincense;
Wherewith to vvitch my Husbands sounder sense,
By sacred magic, where now naught does want
But Charms, and powerful words him to inchant.
Bring home from Town, my verses Daphnis bring.
Why: Charms, the Moon can from the vvelkin wring
Circe transformed Ulysses men, this way.
And Charms, the could-grass-serpent, can dismay.
Bring home from Town, my verses Daphnis bring.
First I about thee vvynd, this threefould Thredd,
(Each trebbly brayded, each discoulored)
And thrice thy Portraicture, (thus crossed, and bound)
About this holy Altar bear I round:
(God still delights in this odd numbering)
Bring home from Town, my verses Daphnis bring.
These Knots discouler'd ( Amaryllis) ^ay,
(Done only tay them;) then Amaryllis say,
These Knots I tie, in Venus endless string.
Bring home from Town, my verses Daphn^s bring.
Like as self fire, melts wax, and hardens clay,
Ilk, Daphnis, for my love, so suffer may.
Sprinkle on meal, and done with brimstone burn
This brittle Laurel, till to dust it turn.
For, crewell Daphnis, does me all inflame,
And I in Daphnis steed, will burn the same.
bring home from Town, my verses Daphnis bring.
Such love, as takes the Heipher in her pride,
When (tired with seeking, through each Grove and spring
Some Bull, her longing to have satisfide,
(Forehayld with last,) by some green Rivers side,)
Lies down at last, (forgetful to depart
When night avayles:) ilk, like salatious tide
Of satelesse Love, mote seize on Daphnis heart:
Ne, let me care (regardless of his weal,)
With timely help, his malady to heal:
Bring home from Town, my verses Daphnis bring.
These Relics, erst this Faictour did me leave,
(Dear pledges of his love;) which I bequ^athe,
Oh Earth to thee, within this Portall here,
Daphnis is owner of these pledges dear.
Bring home from Town, my verses Daphnis bring.
These herbs, and poisons, of his gathering.
For me in Pontus, Maris did bestow.
For, these in Pontus, in abundance grow.)
By power of these, I often Maris viewd
Into a Woolfe to have himself transmewd,
And hide him in the woods, from peoples sight:
By power of these, he woonted to excite
The quiet Ghosts, from forth their deepest grave,
And standing Corn, I als', have seen him wave,
And from their native soil elsewhere traduce,
By secret power, and virtue of their juice.
Bring home from Town, my verses Daphnis bring.
Bring hither Ashes, ( Amaryllis) swing
And paddle them, in some fair running stream:
Then (cross thine head) fling and bescatter them:
(Look not upon them, I do thee areade:)
Heerewith my Daphnis I Will assay to win,
Since Gods nor Charms, he reaketh not a Pin.
Being home from Town my verses, Daphnis bring:
See, how the Ashes, (whilst I them forslowe
To bear unto the Altar, there to blow)
Gin blaze alone: God sends good luck; and bark,
Als' does the Hyl^x in the Portall bark.
There Is something in it, (if I could it areade;)
Dcon we believe, that things been so indeed,
Or is it trick, from which no lover's free,
To feed on hope of things, never like to be,
Trusting to dreams, which in their busy brain,
And soothed Imaginations they do faigne?
But Charms now cease: my Dephnis is come home.
PHARMACEVTRIA.
The GLOSS.
Refused their woonted food, etc. They sung such verses, which like to
Orpheus, did affect the very dumb brute Beasts: and yet their song was
altogether plaintive, (as not attaining the end of their desires.

The spotted Lynces, etc. The Lynx is a Beast like to the Panther, and is under
the protection of Bacchus.

And thou great Lord, etc. This he speaks of Pollio, who had the government
of Illyria: to which Countries he took his Journey through the Territories of
Venice, from that part of Gallia, which borders on the River of Po; from whence
he was sent to that war in Illyria. The verses are full of delight, and above
the usual neateness of Pastoralls.

Tymavu^, is the Gulf of Venice, or Hystria.

Illyrian shore, etc. Dalmatia

Of Sophocles, etc. Not only to celebrate thy renowned deeds, in war, but
thy wit, and excellence in the Muses: For Pollio wrote diverse Tragedies.

His Buskins, etc. This kind of Buskin, coming but half way up the leg, was
wont to be worn by Tragedians, upon the stage, in acting their Tragedies;
and first devised by Sophocles, (as some writers report) who was, for his
lofty, stately style, esteemed the most excellent Tragick-writer of all other.

In thee I do commence, etc. I began this kind of Pastoral verse, at thy
command, and will cease to go on in this kind likewise, any farther, when it
shall please thee to command.

And this slight Ivy, etc. Give leave, that this glory of the Muses, may be
numbered amongst thy Triumphs, and suffer thy self to be praised both as an
invincible Captain, and an excellent Poet.

With the triumphant Laurels, etc. Victorious Emperors were wont to be
crowned with Bays, and Poets with Ivy: some give these reasons, why the
Tryumpher was crowned with bays, either for that Jupiter had a branch of
Laurel in his hands, when he over came the Tytans: or because the General of
the Army under Romulus, (upon the conquest of the Fidenati,) was crowned with a
Guarland of this Tree. Or else, because this Tree is ever green, and does
always flourish.

As for the Reason why Poets are crowned with Ivy; some say it is, because
Poets are great and professed wine-drinkers, (for the most part,) as Horace
report, of Ennius; and all the Lirick Poets in their verses do testify.
Again, Ivy is a very could herb, and tempers and qualifies the heat of the
wine: And thereof grew the custom of setting this kind of Guarland npon the
head of the Poet, rather then upon any other part of his Body. And Varro says,
that Bacchus was wont to be crowned with Ivy, for this very reason; as also
that the Muses themselves were woon^ed to be crowned heerewithall.

Lucifer break forth, etc. He invokes the light against so great darkness,
and obscurity of Judgments; and in mentioning of the morning, he intimates a
beginning already of the alteration of Judgments.

And whilst I all the Gods invoke, etc. That is, all the Peers and Noblemen of
Rome.

Though little good, etc. By reason of the gross wits and poor understanding
of these great men.

Yet ere my dying day, etc. Out of very indignation, he falls into despair of
any amendment, and thereby into impatience.

Maenalian verse, etc. Maenalus is a Mountain in Arcadia, where the most and
best Poets frequented; and Pan also, the Shepherds President, and first
deviser of Pastoral verse.

What Lover need despair? etc. Who need despair the obtaining of any thing,
when a most elegant Nymph was marched to Mopsus, (a homely Shepherd of mean
quality:) That is, the honor of learning and favor is conferred upon a
Loze^l, having neither knowledge, nor understanding to commend him what may not
any person, of what sordid condition soever, either by squint-eyed favor, or
power and violence, hope to attain, if but boldly he will put himself forward.

Gryphius with Horses, etc. This he speaks of Impossibilities, alluding to
the natural Antithesis and enmity of the Gryphen, to the Horse.

This Beast lives in the Hyperborean Mountains: The shape of his whole body is
like the Lion, but his face is like an Eagles; and he has wings: and is
consecrate to Apollo.

Torches new-dight, etc. In these verses he alludes to certain ceremonies
used in Marriage: For they were wont to bear Torches made of horn, before
young Maids, so soon as they were made sure to their Husbands: And the young
Brydes, did use to snatch at them, out of their hands that bare them: The
meaning of which ceremony, was to show, that being now to marry, she did take
her husband for her guide and direction, intimated by the light of the Torch:
and for her protection, and defense, against all hazards and injuries, that
after this might happen to her life, or otherwise: all which was signified by
the horn.

( Bridegroom) fling thy Nutts, etc. This other Ceremony of flinging Nutts
about upon the Marriage day was, that all the Boys might scramble, that so by
their continual noyses and tumults which they make during this their striving
for the Nutts, one from an other, the Bryde might hear nothing elsewhere, that
might discontent her, or any business to disturb her Marriage day.

Some think the using of this Ceremony is, for that this kind of fruit is
very potent to stir up lust.

Varro says, that the reason of this custom was, that so Jupiter might give a
blessing to the Marriage, and that the Bryde might prove a Matronlike woman,
like Juno. For Nuts are loves fruit, and under his protection: whence the Latin
word Iuglandes, quasi Iovis glandes. Others say, it was the order to fling the
Nuts about, that so by the noise of the Boys scrambling for them, the Bryde
might not be heard cry out in the lossing her Maydenhead.

Now Hesperus his Oeta does forsake, etc. Oeta ia a Mountain of Thessaly, where
Hesperus is said to be worshipped. Under this Mountain the Stars seem to
set, as they seem to rise out of the Mount Ida: The Poets faign, that Hesperus
(which is now taken for the Evening Starr, which first appears before the
Sunsetting,) loved a beautiful Boy, named Hymenaeus; who (as they say) lost
his voice with long singing at the Marriage of Aryadne, and Bacchus: from whose
name Marriages ever after were called Hymenaei.

Oh wondrous worthy make, etc. Oh thou Fame, and rash breath of popular
commendation, how worthy art thou like the Rheum, falling on the weakest
places, to settle on the unwoorthiest persons, being herein justly punished,
for despising the good, and most worthy; and being proud and disdaignfull
toward all in general. For indeed, there is nothing more base, nothing more
absurd, and foolish, then public praise and commendation from the vulgar.

And houldst in hate, etc. The common people most commonly pass their verdict
for the worst; that is, such who are disposed like themselves, whilst they hate
the good and honest, whose worth their gross apprehension cannot reach unto,
because they baulk wholly from their nature and condition; as the people of
Rome, who (in bestowing the Praetorship,) forsook noble Cato, and gave their
voices with factious Vatinius.

And slight'st my Goats, etc. Thou despisest the things, which are simply and
truly honest, sound and profitable, and followest after the vain and false;
which have in then^ only a mere show, and counterfeit shadow of truth.

Do think the Gods, etc. Thou do feeme by thy actions, as if thou had
no reverence or esteem of the Gods, or of their divine power; insomuch that by
thy deeds many are seduced to believe against Gods providence, when they see
thee translate the reward due to the good and just, upon the sordid unwoorthy
sort; and contrarily in a preposterous manner, do affect innocence, with
scorn, punishment, and obloquy.

Amongst our hedges, etc. The first love and desire of study, and glory; which
(as it were the first shootes of a young hedge,) did begin to sprout in my mind.

The tender Boughs, etc. I began to have now a little smatrering in learning.

Now what this love is, etc. By the name of love, we mean all the desire and
lust in the mind, whether it be of gould, honor, glory, government, or
venery; and when this racker of the mind, does once get the conquest, it
enforces a man, to do and suffer many foul, crewell, and base passages, to
attain the scope and end of his desires. Certainly, desire, like a T^rant,
does harry and torment the mind with great violence and fury.

Begot not of man's seed, etc. This strong lustful and impetuous love, is not
naturally proper to man, as he is civilized, and brought to true humanity, but
fitting rather the savage immanity of brute beasts.

Lewd love was cause, etc. Here by the way he touches the fable of Medea:
who (because she found her self rejected by her husband Iaeson,) slew her
own children, which she had by him.

Yea, midst the Main, etc. Through mere indignation to see, in what a beastly
base course, without any order or respect, all things were carried, he breaks
into despair, that ever the world could prove better, or amend, and so falls
even into a very loathing and hatred of all Mankind; like Tymon, who was termed
Misanthropos, or the Man-hater.

Why Charms the Moon, etc. Carmen in the Latin has many acceptions, as
being used both in the better, and worse sense; sometime it is taken for
Incantation, (which (some say,) is verbis solis, vel etiam rebus adiunctis,
aliquid supra naturam moliri: either merely by a set form of words, (which
we call a charm,) or some other ceremonious action, together with the words
to assay to bring something to pass above the common course of nature: by
power whereof they at-tempt the effecting of some ill, or the helping some ill
already done, or the preventing some ill to be done. And Julius Firmicus:
lib: 1. Mathes: observes, that there are some Persons, whose Horoscope is under
the forepart of Scorpio, who naturally prove Inchanters, or good Witches, (as
we call them;) that with certain powerful words shall have skill to cure and
mitigate pains, aches, and Agues, and uncharme, and unbewitch things that have
been bewitched, and enchanted by others. Now the Poet here alludes to the old
received opinion of the superstitious Romans, who when they saw the Moon, in
the Eclipse, thought that she suffered great pain, by reason of some
mischievous Enchantment that was upon her, and during the time of her absence,
in her wane, when they could not see her, as at other times, that some strong
witchcraft had wrested her from her place in the firmament down to the Earth:
and that by powerful and skillful Countercharmes, she was releeved, and
brought forth of her darkness, and painful passion again: at which ridiculous
conceit Iuvenal in his sixth Satyr scoffs notably (deriding their ringing of
pots and pans, blowing of trumpets and horns, and such like confused loud
noyses, as the only remedy to succor her, and bring her to her self again.

Circe transformed Ulysses men, etc. Someime Carmen is taken in th^e ill sense,
as here, wh^re it is sai^, Circe, the famous sorceress, transformed Ulysses his
men, into other shapes; so that by power of words (metrically disposed, or
other wi^e,) and pronounced against any man or woman, a charm shall work so
strong upon their fancy, and distempered Imagination, and spoil the reason in
such sort, that for a time they shall verily conceive themselves to be Hoggs,
or Dogs, or of some other shape and form, and adapt themselves really to the
nature of those things, to which they think themselves turned: such a kind of
Enchantment was that also of the Praetides, which thought themselves to be
Cowes: though there is no doubt, but the Poets, in these and the like feigned
transformations did aim at some real truth indeed, altogether beyond that
which the outward vizard of the fable does seem to import.

Charms the could Serpent, etc. Sometime Carmen is taken for a ^ong: (as here
by my Autho^,) alluding to the custom practiced by Antiquity upon the Adder,
(a venomous, and harme^ull kind of Serpent:) whom by certain words digested
into meeter, and set to some musical tune, they wrought so vehemently upon his
senses, that they cast him into a deadly transe for the while: the powerful
effect of this charm of Music, may be seen daily amongst Nurses, who use to
lull their wayward Infants asleep, with the melody of their songs: And that
which is reported of Alexander Musitia^ Timotheus, declares abundantly the
strength and power thereof: who playing to the King (new set to supper,) a
Phrigian strain, (which is a lusty warlike melody,) it wrought so upon his
courage, that (forgetting his meat,) he in a rage called for his Arms, (as
if he had had a sudden alarm from the enemy,) which his Musician perceiving,
changed his stroke into the Lidyan or Ionique air, and presently his mind was
also changed, and he sat him down as still, and peaceably, as if he had been
at his Council Table. But (as an instar omnium of all other proofs, for the
excellent virtue of Music, let us imagine we see David with his melody,
charming the evil spirit that so tormented King Saul: and (if we believe
Bodin,) he will tell us, that no house is haunted with spirits, where much
Music is used; and he tells us the Reason, because it presents still to the
Devils memory that blessed Place, where he had once a happy Interest, where
there is Melody and sweet Harmony beyond expression: so that Music ever since
torments his soul worse then Hell it self: And if this fancy be true, the
Invention of ringing of Bells to clear the air of bad spirits, may seem to
have some grownd of reason, and probability to defend it; seeing the Harmony of
Bells (I know) shall have many to maintain it, for none of the meanest Musicks
in the world.

The could Serpent, etc. He is said to be could, because of his poison, which
is of a quality extremely could.

Sometime Carmen is a charm, or formal set of words in nature of a
Conjuration; Such was that which the Ancient Romans used at the besieging of
Cities: by which they did call forth the Tutelar Gods and Goddesses of their
enemies, lest otherwise they might seem to presume to make war, and offer
violence also unto them.

Sometime Carmen was by them used in the nature of a Curse, whereby they were
wont to forespeake the Army of their Enemies: such was that perhaps, which
Balak entreated Balaam to practice against the Host of Israel: Macrobius sets
down the formality of both these, lib. 3. cap. 9. Saturnal.

Circe transformed, etc. Circe was a notorious sorceress, and exquisitely
skillful in that damned art of poisoning; and one of the arrantest Light-skirts
of her time: she poisoned her husband, King of Sarmatia, and usurped his
Kingdom; but was soon spued out by the people, for her cruelty, and banished
the land: she loved Glaucus, and transformed Scilla (his sweete-heart) into a
Sea Monster, (to possess him wholly to her self:) she changed Ulysses
companions into swine: she suffered Ulysses afterward to get her with child,
and for that courtesy restored his people to their former shape: she turned
Picus (King of the Latins) into a byrd of his name, for that he had praised
his wife Canens, before her, for worth and excellence: By all which fictions
the Poets have painted her out for a noted woman, who may seem to have been
some rare and beautiful creature, and used her beauty, and excellent skill in
Music, as baits to entice men, who being even bewitched with her delicacy,
had no power to forsake her, but spent their whole time in Luxury, and
effeminate wantonness and pleasure with her; (a life suiting better indeed with
swine, then with the divine soul of a reasonable man:) she was a prime one
amongst those Mulieres quinque literarum, Women of five letters; who have made
the fifth an unfortunate number, in being blemished with the names of many
infamous and notoriously noted Curtizans, such as Medea, Flora, Elena, Lhais,
Trine, Thais, with Iulia, and Livia, (the daughter, and Niece to Caesar,) whom
he termed his Vomicas, his two Impostumes, for the uncleanness of their
lives: beside Ioane, (a Queen of Naples,) and Ioane, to whose honor that
verse was made, Papa, Pater Patrum, peperit Papissa Papillum: and Arden, Ambry,
Nubry, and Arlot, (the Conquerours Concubine,) whose name (by the addition of
the aspiration,) ever since (as some say) has increased our English tongue
with one Synonima more for a whore then it had before.

But yet the learned Catholics have redeemed the credit of this quinary number
in their legends, with diverse goodly observations, (as a number full of oracle,
miracle, and mystery, with which God has made it sacred to the world:) As by
those five words of our Lady to the Angel, fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum, our
Savior pleased to become Man, in the womb of the Virgin.

By five words, Hoc est enim Corpus meum, Christ appointed his Body to be
consecrate in the Eucharist.

And at the five words, Deus propitius est^ mihi peccatori, our Savior
absolved the penitent Publican: but as one says, qui sanae fidei est, nunquam
committet, ut quod Dei est, verbis demurmuratis adscribat: no man sound in
faith, will ever dare to ascribe matters of Gods worship or honor to the power
of words, superstitiously mumbled over.

Male Frankincense, etc. So called, because in modum testiculorum nascantur.

This threefold thread, etc. Three white, three red, and three black.

God still delights in this odd numbering, etc. Either by God here, he means
some one of the heavenly Gods, according to the doctrine of the Pythagorians,
who ascribe the Ternary number, for perfection, to the high God, from whom the
beginning, the middle, and the end of all things does proceed: or else, he
means Hecate, whose power is said to be threefould, according to the verse,
tria Virginis ora Dianae:) Though indeed the power of all the Gods may be
manifested, by a triple sign: as Jove's threefold Lightning: Neptunes trident,
or three-forked Mace: Pluto's three-headed dog, Cerberus: Apollo, Sol, and
Liber, are three in one: Or he speaks this, because all things concerning the
Gods, or heavenly matters, are contained in the ternary number: As the three
Destinyes, three Furies: Hercules begotten in three nights. The Muses also
counted by threes: the three Graces, called the Charites: And many other
things, if not in this direct number of three, yet in an odd number; as the
seven Chordes, seven Planets, seven days dedicate to the names of the Gods;
seven North stars: and many such like. The odd number is held to be immortal,
because it cannot well be divided. The even number is said to be mortal,
because it may be divided: though Varro says, that the Pythagorean should the
odd number to be finite, and the even infinite: and therefore for Physic,
Surgery, and many other such like conclusions, odd numbers are wont to be
kept, and observed by some very curiously, and with a kind of superstition.

Like as self fire mealts wax, etc. The witch here makes two medalls, one of
clay, for her self, and another of wax, for Daphnis: and these words are in
the nature of a charm, wishing, and bewitching the heart of Daphnis, to grow as
hard (toward her whom he loved so dearly, and all others after whom he
stragled, and haunted,) as clay does by being heated in the fire; and to
relent, and mealt with extreme love and passion in such manner toward her
self, as wax is wont to fry, and wast, by the heat of the same fire: as if
she should say, let him grow careless, disrespective, and hard hearted to all
others, but so affectionate, and passionate toward me, that he forsake all
other loves, for the love of me alone.

Forehayld, vexed, or distressed, even to tiring out.

Oh Earth to thee, etc. Vesta, and Tellus, are the same Goddess under two names.

Look not upon them, etc. It was a Ceremony observed amongst the heathen, not
to look upon the filth and excrement of those things, which had been
sacrificed for the expiation of any crime for fear they might draw infection
from thence into their Bodies.

I aroade, etc. I warn or charge thee.

Reaketh. Cares, or respects.

See how the Ashes, etc. Her mind bodes her some good luck, from the sudden
flaming of the Ashes without blowing: and by the dogs barking, she assures her
self, some body was coming, and it might be her husband, (if good luck
served.

Hylax, or the Barker, is here a dogs name, taken from Vlactein, signifying to
bark.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE NINTH ECLOGVE.
AFter Virgil had escaped murdering by Arius the Centurion, he returned to
Rome, giving order to his Baylives to see to his grounds in his absence, and to
carry themselves fayrely, in the mean cime to Arius: hereupon Maeris (Virgils
Bay live,) (following his Masters direction,) carried two Kids to Mantua, as a
present from his Master to Arius: In his Journey another Shepherd and he fell
into discourse of their meseries, and diverse other things. This Eclogne is all
mystical, and a mere Allegory throughout.

MAERIS.
Aecloga nona.
VVHither go ( Meris) directly to the Town?

Maer. (...) (ah Lycidas) (...) to see
(What least I send) a man to (...) known
Possess my land; saying in scorn to me,
^how ancient Owner, now thy Right resign,
Hence, (...), beegone: for now these fields be mine.
Yielding, (though loath,) yet (setting how things (...)
(...) by Fortune) unto him I send
These Kids, of them the (...) him good,
And all ill (...), together with them w^nd.

Lici Certes I heard (all where the ^^lly C^ag^,
(...), and lower, (...) descend,
(...) and the broken s^^^gs,
(...)) Menakas, (thy dear friend)
(...), and (...) defend.

Maer. Right have thou heard, and so reported they:
But ( Lycidas) our songs done here prevail,
Amongst Martial bloody Arms, much (as they say)
Chaonian doves, when eagles them assail:
That but the lucky Crow, (as on a day
On hollow Ilex sitting,) had bewrayd
New garboyles, like to happen every way,
Neither had Maeris, (whom thou love so dear,)
Nor self- Menalcas, now been living here.

Licy. Ah, may it be, that so great villainy,
Mote any man befall? (ah weladay)
All solace almost, and sweet jollity,
With thee Menalcas, would been rapt away:
Who then the Nymphs renowned praise should sing?
Or who the Earth should have invelloped
With flowrie herbs? or who the crystal Spring,
Should with green shadows, have incourtained?
Either who should those verses sing, which erst
(As thou to our dear Amaryllis went,
I softly reading to my self rehearst:
Feed my Kids ( Tityrus) the whilst I go
A little way, and instantly return:
Then water them: and (driving to and fro,)
Look to the Goat, (he will butt) beware his Horn.

Maer. Yea, who should sing, the precious lines, which he
(Vnfinisht yet) to Varus sung whyleere?
( Varus) thy name, (whilst Mantua lives to be
Mantua, too, too, to poor Cremona near,)
The singing Swans, shall to the stars indeere.

Lyci. So may thy swarms, escape the Cyrnean-Ewe;
And may thy Cowes, (on juicy Cloverfedd)
Their strutting Vdders swell: now then (if you
Ought can,) begin^ilk, me a Poet, bredd,
The Muses han: and I can versifie,
The Shepherds als', (forsooth) say I'se a Bard,
But deele a bit done I believe their lie:
For naught yet woorthy' of Varus, have I framed,
Ne learned Cynna's Ear: but make a noice,
And muchil^like the gagling Goose have scram'd
Amongst melodious Swans, sweet tunefull voice.

Maer. I am about it, and I beat my brain,
If I could called to mind: and sooth, the song
Is worth the hearing, and no common vain:
Come hither ( Galatea) there among
The wastfull waves, what pleasure's to be found?
Here is perpetual spring, all the year long,
Here (round about the pleasant streams, the grownd
Has every way, discolored flowers shedd:
Eke, the white Popler, and the plyant Vine,
A shadie Canopy, have here dispredd,
And hand in hand, over this Cave inclyne:
Come (my dear Love,) let be, the Bedlam floods
Against the shore, to dash their surging sudds.

Lyci. But where is the song, which (sitting all alone)
I heard thee sing, in the cleere-star-bright night,
The tune, I wot well, but the words are gone

Mar. ( Daphnis) why do thou still observe the site,
The rise and setting of the antic signs?
Dion^an-Caesars starr-s, now come to light,
(The starr, in open hills which helps the vynes,
In colors new, the tidy Grapes to dye,
And glads the Ears of Corn with rich increase:)
Observe it ( Daphnis) and thy Pears, thereby
Graft thou; and thy Posterity in peace
By it, their riper Apples, gather shall:
But age reaves all; man's mettle, mind and all:
Whole Summers days; I often in singing spent,
I well remember, when I was a Ladd,)
Now all is forgot, both songs, and merriment,
And Maeris voice is quite decayed and badd,
(Ere Maeris them, the woolves han Maeris spyde:)
But now enough of this; Menalcas-selfe,
Hereof shall thee relate, some other tide.

Lyci. Ah what delays and scuses do thou find,
To while my Love: (though all things now invite:)
Dead-calme the Sea: and now behold the wynd,
And all the boystrous blasts, are ceased quite;
Besides, wee'have gone but half our Journey yet:
(For, see, Byanors Monument, in sight:)
Here ( Maeris) now we will sing our Carolett,
Where the thick bowghs* the Ploughmen, wont to sheare,
Here, leave thy Goats; we time enough shall get
Unto the Town: but if so be, we fear,
Enaunter, Night before do gather rain,
Let Us sing; (our way the shorter will appear;)
Until the City we at last attain;
And that we may go singing all the way,
Thy cumbrous load, my self I will defray.

Maer. Leave (Ladd) of this now, more at all to say:
And turn we to our instant Business,
We better (when he comes,) shall to our songs address

MAERIS.
The GLOSS.
ILK me a Poet bredd, etc. I feel in my self a kind of poetical fury, not
so much by institution, and gained by precept and rules, as by divine
inspiration.

For naught yet worthy Varus, etc. I esteem not my self a Poet, though the
world so esteem me, because meethinks I have sung nothing which may seem
worthy the approbation of two so excellent Poets.

Cynna: was a Poet, who wrote a Poem entitled Smyrna, which lay concealed, (as
Quintilian affirms,) thirty years: but it should seem, that it was wondrous
acceptable to that age: For many noble Grammarians, wrote diverse Comments upon
it: but Cato Grammaticus excelled them all therein, (as Suet^niu^ reports;)
though, of so famous a work, there are but only two verses extant, which
Servius cites in his first book upon the Georgicks.

And all ill luck, etc. The Devil give him good, etc. This manner of sending
presents may seem to be drawn from that which is reported of Hector and
Ajax; who being professed enemies, sent each other a present, which afterward
proved very unlucky and fatal: and therefore might seem to be ominously
sent: for the sword wherewith Ajax killed himself, was sent him by Hector: and
Hector had the guirdle on, which Ajax sent him, when he was thereby dragd up
and down the Town of Troy, after Achilles had slain him.

Menalcas thy dear, etc. By Menalcas, is here meant Virgil.

Even to the water, etc. That is, the River Myncius.

Did with his songs defend, etc. This has relation to Virgil, for whose sake,
the people of Maniua had their grounds restored to them again.

Come hither Galatea, etc. These words are spoken by Cyclops to Galatea, and
are taken out of The^critus: The Allegory is applyable to Augustus; entreating
him to return from the Sea-wars, into Italy: for Virgil often uses Galatea for
Augustus, (as in the 3. Eclogue.

Mantua, too, too, to, etc. The reason of this passionate Repetition, depends
on the story of Caesar, who having overcome Anthony, and the rest of the
murderers of Julius Caesar, gave the territory about Cremona, (which City had
taken part against him) for a prey to his soldiers: which being not
sufficient for the whole multitude every one some, Augustus gave the Fields of
the Mantuaus, to be divided amongst them: though not for any fault committed
against him, or his Father, but merely by reason of their vicinity, lying so
convenient upon the borders of Cremona.

The Cyrnean-Ewe, etc. The Taxus, or Ewe-tree, is held to be venomous: Corsica
is full of this wood, and this Island in Greek is called Cyrne, of Cyrnus, the
son of Hercules: if Bees eat hereof, their hunny prooves extreme bitter;
therefore Lycidas prays, that Maeris his Bees may not taste of this unwholesome
tree.

Daphnis, why do thou, etc. Thou shall not need to observe hereafter the
old and traditionary rising, and setting of the stars namely of the Ram-star,
the seven stars, Aryadnes Crown, the Canicular, or Dog Star, and the like, in
setting, ploughing, sowing, planting, and reaping: Julius Caesar's one star will
suffice in steed of all these: neither need we implore the help of any other
Godhead but only that fortunate and propitious Numen of Caesar, under whose
protection all things shall succeed most luckily unto us. And because he
speaks of the rise and setting of the signs, he observes good decorum, in
saying he sung of the Night, and in a clear Night: seeing the course of the
stars are the^ best observed, (according to the manner, which the Assyrians,
and the Egyptians held, who were the greatest Astronomers.)

Caesar's starr's now come, etc. When Augustus Caesar did celebrate the
funeral plays to his dead Father, there appeared a starr at noone day, which
he by a decree commanded to be called his Fathers starr. And Baebius Macer
says, that Caesar affirmed it to be his Fathers soul, and erected a statue
thereunto; upon the head whereof was placed a starr of gould, and at the foot
this inscription, Caesari Ematheo.

Ere M^ris them the woolves, etc. In these verses he shows, that he has
lost his skill in singing, which he once had: And by an Allegory does
demonstrate, that his mind is oppressed with misfortune. Now to show some reason
for the loss of his voice, he has relation to an old received opinion, that
if a wolf spy a man, before the man espy him, the man presently loses the use
of his speech for a time: which opinion the natural Philosophers do
confirm-Whereupon the Proverb, ( Lupus est in fabula,) does arise; and is
properly used, whenever the party, of whom we talk, comes into our company,
and does by his presence (as it were,) take away our power to speak that,
which otherwise, (if he were away,) we would confer of. Now as there are
unlucky to^gued people, so are there also men of an unlucky Eye: who by looking
earnestly upon any living object, send an insensible wound suddenly thereunto,
that causes it to pine and wast away, (like a mortling Dear,) ever eating,
never thriving till it consume to death. Such an Eye the Shepherd in the third
Eglogue complains had looked upon his Lambs: this kind of mischievous looking
he calls Fascination: Pliny (out of Cicero,) reports, that there are some
women born with Eyes, having duplices papillas, the apples or pupills of their
eyes double: and that such do naturally faescinu^ circumferre, bear about
them this kind of Eyewitchcraft, (as I may term it.) There are two sorts of
this fascination: the one proper to men and women, and effected only by them:
and this is done noxio vultu, and fictis laudationibus, by a mischievous look,
and feigned counterfeit praises and commendations mingled together, and is
that, which (as Tully says of Invidentia,) does fortunam alterius nimis
intueri, behold an others prosperity too curiously, and with too fixed an Eye,
full of envy, with looks even bewraying an inward indignation, and malicious
grief and repining of the heart at the good which we see. The other sort is
that which is done merely by the eye: such is that of the Woolfe, spoken of
here by Virgil, by bereaving a man by his very sight, of the power of speaking
for the while.) Such also is y^ which they write of the Basilisk his sudden
killing by his so virulent and piercing sight: and if we can believe that
which they report of the bird Icteros, (so called of curing the yellow
Iaundies, only by being looked upon by the sick party,) we may easily
believe the witchcraft, and mischief of an evil Eye, to be a most true
conclusion.

Dead calm the Sea, etc. He exhorts him to sing: that is to addict himself
to the study of the Muses, during the peace wherein Italy now was: For
howsoever the Actian war, which Octavian raised against Anthony, were a civil
war, yet that part of Italy, where Caesar governed, was quiet: Although
indeed it was not the wars, but the taking away of his grounds, which
troubled and hindered Virgil. Han. i. Have.

Byanors monument, etc. This I take to belong to the true description of their
journey, ( Byanors sepulcher being just half way, between Virgils land, and
Mantua, and may seem to have his name given him, of his great wisedoome and
strength both of mind and body: for so it signifies, being compounded, apo tes
bias, kai anorees, quasi animo and corpore fortissimus: strong both in mind and
body.

Leave (Ladd) of this, etc. Having necessary affaites, and matters of
consequence to dispatch, let us apply us to them, and leave our sports, which
will befit us better, then when Virgil (having recovered his grounds again,)
returns in peace to his own house; or when Augustus returns from the wars,
into Italy, the study of the quiet Muses shall be restored unto us again,
without interruption. Enaunter: Lest that.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE TENTH ECLOGVE.
Cornelius Gallus, (a man of most exquisite and dextrous wit, and an admirable
Poet, after he had been preferred to Augustus and raised by him to the
government of Egypt,) was accused to Caesar, to have conspired, and to attempt
something contrary to his mind; for grief of which accusation, he killd
himself: This his death Virgil deplores under the title of Love.

GALLVS.
Aecloga decima.
OH Arethu (a) lend me of thy skill,
This same last labor, goodly to fulfill;
Some verses, (yet such as Lycoris may
Self daign to read, I must to Gallus say,
(For who few verses, Gallus will deny?)
So may thou glide full fair and easily,
Unmixed, with bitter Doris filthy mudd
Under the Channel of Sycanus flood.
Begin; let us Galius careful love bewray,
The whilst our Goats, do brouze the tender spray:
We do not to the deaf, our songs partake,
For, unto all, the woods done answer make.
(Ye Maiden Nayaedes) what Woods or Grove,
When Gallus perished through unwoorthy Love,
Did hold you then, (against, or with your wills?)
Since not Parnassus-tops, nor Pindus hills,
Not thee, th- A^nion Aganippe kept:
The very shrubbs, and Laurels for him wept:
And (as he lay under his lonely Rock,)
The Pene-tree Me^^lus, and frozen stones
Of chill Ey^^us, him with tears bemones.
And all the Rocks, about him flocking were;
Ne, ever they, of me, need them repent,
Ne, (divine Bard) needs thee repent of them:
Since, fair Ad^nis, erst, along the stream
Wont feed his sheep: Vpilio, als' among,
And the slow Neate-heards, thither eke did throng:
Men^as came, with winter-mast bede^^d,
And all enquire, whence grew this Love so leawd:
And sooth, Apollo-selfe, there came and said:
(Ah Gallus) been thy wits from home astrayd?
Thy Love Lycoris, thorough frost and snow,
And th-horrid Camp, after new Love does go:
Silvanus, allgates, (with his head adornd
With rural honor,) came, and in his hand
Fresh Find waved, and large Lyllies spand:
Eke Pan, (th- Arcadian God) (whom bespyde
With dangling Danewoorts bloody herries did,
And vermeil Synople) and what (quoth he)
(Alack the while) hereof will the issue be?
For sike-like things love cares not a pin;
Nor thirsty grass, with Rivers sated been,
Nor Goats with brouce, nor Bees with trifolio,
Ne crewell love, can tears e're satisfy:
He (sad) ^^thless, said; ye (...) shall
Sing these things, on your hills; ( Arcadians ye,
Who only skilled in skillfull singing be:)
How quiet will my bones henceforth remain,
If your sweet Pipes, my lucklesse love proclaim.
And sickerly, I would I had been seen
One amongst you, or your Flocks-keeper been;
Or your ripe tidy clusters set to gather:
Sure, whether Phillis I had loved, or whether,
Black-browd Amyntas, I affected had,
Or any other Country-Lass, or Ladd,
(What though Amyntas, browneas berry be,
And Violets sable, so we likewise see,
And shining Hurtl'es, black as Ebony,)
Certes with me they should together lie:
Amongst the Sallowes, underneath the Vine,
She guarlands gay, should for my head combine,
Whilst he in singing spend the merry time;
Here been cool springs, here meadows in their prime
And here, thick groves, ( Lycoris) been beside,
Where I once meant, with thee to have lived, and did
Now frantic love detaines me fast in arms
Of awful Mars, amidst the deadl'alarmes,
Of such, as against me, done contrive mischieve:
Thou (far from home) (which let me never believe)
The snowy Alps, (without me) do behold,
And frozen Rhene do see: (ah) let no could
Thy body hurt; (ah) nor the Icie grit
Cut the soft soles, of thy nice-tender Feet:
I now will go, and to my self rehearse
Those songs, which erst, I, in Calcidick verse,
On the Sicilian Shepherds Pipe, did frame:
Much rather choosing, among the beasts untame,
Henceforth to suffer in this lonely Cave,
And there, my love, in bark of Trees ingrave,
That as they grow, (my Love) thou als' may grow:
Eft, then on Menalus, I to and fro,
Will spend my time, the dainty Nymphs among,
Or hunt, to lay the boystrous Bore along;
No could shall let me make my Ringwalkes, round
The thick Parthenian thickets, with my hound.
Meethinks I so, how sometimes I dispase
Me, amongst the Rocks, and hollow Woods do traces
Sometime I joy, to dravv, in Parthian bow,
Cydonian arrows, at the mountain row:
(As if these things mote cure my malady,
Or that, that God, mote e're relent thereby,
Or pity learn, the poor to give them ease:)
Again, sometime, nor th- Hamadriades,
Nor songs, delight, nor ought that I can tell;
And (ye delightful Woods,) now fare you well:
Not all, which we can do, may change his mind:
No, not, allbee in bittrest could, and vvynd,
I Hebrus shoulden drink, or clamber upp
The hanging heaps, or headlong mountains topp,
Of candid snow, or chill Sithonian Rocks;
Ne should I tend the Ethiopian flocks
Under the Crabstarr, when the dying Vine
On th-Elmes provvd topps, does dvvindle away and pine.
Love makes all yield; and I to love must yield.
( Pycrian Ladies) now suffice it ye
This song, which once your Poet sung, as he
Of small soft twiggs, fate making Baskets fear;
To Gallus, ye can make them seeme-n great:
( Gallus) whose love eekes in me every hovvr,
Much as (revived with Phoebus blisfull povvr)
Green Alders wont to sprout, in prime of spring:
Now let us rise; it is naught in shade to sing;
Shadows of Juniper unvvholesome been,
And shadows hurt young fruits, and herbage green:
Go Kiddyes, (see) now Hesperus does come,
Enough ye now have fedd; go high you home.
Verbae, non sensum, transtuli.
GALLVS.
The GLOSS.
OH Arethusa, etc. This was a Fountain in Sicily, dedicate to the Muses; and
here he invokes the Fountain, as if the Muses by their presence, had infused
virtue, and of there power and influence thereunto, to help the Poets
Invention, and to make him facetious, and witty, in the handling of his matter.

Arethusa, was a River rising in Peloponesus, and running a long course within
the veins of the earth, (unseen) as far as Cicily, (by Virgil here called
Cicania:) where near to that part of the City of Siracusa, named Ortigia, it
breaks forth into a goodly broad water: The Poet here alludeth to the course
that this River houlds quite underneath many other Rivers, and by that means,
never mingles with the salt and brackish water, by the ebbing or flowing of the
Sea, (which is here meant by Doris.) Of this River, and of the cause of the
course thereof under the ground, the Poets have this fiction: Arethusa was a
young dainty Virgin, Companion, and fellow huntress with Dyana: with this Nymph
(they say) the River Alpheus fell in love; and thinking to have forced a
courtesy from her, which he could not gain by fair means, Dyana, (pitying
the danger, and willing to save her,) turned her into a clear fountain of her
own name: then Arethusa, (to be safe from farther violence of her rude
suitor,) stole away closely from him under the grownd, (like a modest maid,
shrinking down into the bed, and hiding her head within the clothes, at the
sight of a stranger,) and never appearing again, till she came at Siracusa:
which when Alpheus knew, and with much ado finding which way she was gone, he
followed day and night after, in quest of his sweet heart; at last he
overtakes and injoyes her.

Such a River is that of Gadez in Spain; of which a King of Spain once (in a
merry discourse between himself and some other Princes, about the riches and
rarities, each one of their own Country,) boasted of: that he had a Bridge in
his Country, that fedd every year ten thousand Cattle upon it: (thereby
meaning the River of Gadez; which from the spring head, runns seven miles under
grownd, and then breaks forth into a fair, and pleasant River. Near to this
River (as may seem) is that little Island, (called the lesser Gadiz,) where the
land is so frank and fertile, that the Cowes milk yields neither whay nor
Cheese; except they mingle therewith a great deal of water: and so wonderful
rich, and barning is the pasture, that they must let their Cattle blood often,
or else in thirty days they so overgrow, that they are stifled with fatt.

Such as Lycoris, etc. Augustus himself so dear to Gallus.

For who few verses, etc. To so great a man, to so great a Friend; or so great
a Poet.

Doris bitter Flood, etc. Doris is said to be the daughter of Tethis and
Oceanus: and is here taken for the Sea.

Sicanus Flood, etc. That is Sicely.

For unto all the woods, etc. That is, the Echo of the woods will answer us.

Ye Maiden Nayades, etc. The Nymphs of the Meadows.

Parnassus-topps, etc. A Mountayn of Greece, having two topps, under which the
Muses dwelt.

Nor Pindus Hills, etc. A Mountayn in Thessaly.

The Aonian Aganippe, etc. A Fountayn in that Country of Greece, which is
called Aonia; dedicate to the Muses: and hereof they were sometime called
Aganippides.

Menalus, etc. A high Mountayn in Arcadia.

What woods, etc. These were the places of Gallus his retrait amongst the
Muses, and to the study of sweet Poesy: wherein if he had still retired
himself, and not addicted him so eagerly to the gaining the acquaintance of
the great ones, and had not aspired to the great Employments, and Business of
state, which caused his ruin, he had still lived.

Since nor Parnassus, etc. For, by his study Gallus waded so far, that Greek
was as familiar, as his own language: therefore the knowledge of the Greek
Poets and the other Arts, was no hindrance, but that he might still have
persevered in his study, so happily begun.

The Laurels, etc. The Shrubbs, etc. All sorts of people lament Gallus his
death: the Laurels, that is, the Poets and students in that kind of Learning:
The Shrubbs, that is, the Commons: The Stones, that is, the most inferior,
amongst the vulgar; (the most rude, and ignorant sort, had a sense of his loss.

The Flocks about him, etc. The Bucolicks, which he himself had made.

Ne ever they of me, etc. That kind of verse, that is, (Bucolicks,) is so
handled by me, that it need hold no shame, to have fallen into my hands.

Ne, needs it thee, of them repent, etc. Thou, howsoever thou art so excellent
in Poetry, and so admirable in this art, that now thou may even be counted
for divine, yet need not repent, or shame to be known to have addicted thy
self, and taken pains in this kind of Pastoral verse.

Vpilio came, etc. Here he describes the wonder, that all, both Lords and
Commons were in, about the cause of Gallus his death. For all sorts held it
incredible, that he, (so great in authority, so wary a wise man, every way,
and so dearly inward to Augustus,) would once be drawn, so much as to think
an unworthy thought against Caesar: or that Augustus would deal in any hard
manner with such a friend, whom he favored as his right hand.

With winter mast bedeawd, etc. The difference between the two Synonima's
uvidum, and humidum: this is referd to the outward moisture, and that, to the
inward: and hereof uva, for a grape; as much to say, as the fruit full of
inward juice.

Are thy wits distraught? etc. The Poet here brings in Apollo, (the God of
wisedoome) fore warning, and prophesying alteration of Fortune to Gallus:
intimating thereby that Gallus should have had recourse to his wisedoome, and
have armed himself with patience, and constancy, to abide, and withstand, yea
and foresee all hazards and accidents before they happend: seeing he could not
choose but find, (by comparing matters, and marking the strange carriage of
things,) that Caesar's heart was alienated, and his love beginning to grow
could, by the secret practice of such as bare him an inward grudge: and this is
it which he means, when he says, that his Love Lycoris followed others;
that is, he was willingly ledd by others Council, who intended mischief
against Gallus.

What will the issue be? etc. There will be no end of this anxiety, grief,
and sorrow, for Caesar's displeasure: For the ambition of Princes, and their
love to domination, and ruledome, is blind: against which if any be but barely
imagined to have attempted, or practiced in the least sort, the offense is
implacable, and no merit or satisfaction ever held sufficient.

Nor thirsty grass, etc. By these similitudes he does illustrate his former
speech: as dry grounds, and the like, are never satisfide with water, so love
of rule and dominion, (having once taken offense,) is never reconciled, or
satisfied, with tears, and repentance.

He sad, nathless, etc. Being full of heaviness, for the loss of his great
Friend, and his dearest life, (in both which he was at the point to suffer,)
and being now resolved to dye, he bequeathes the memorial of himself, unto
the learned, and great students, (as a legacy:) having now nothing else of his
mighty Fortune left him or remaining, which he could truly call his own.

And sickerly I would, etc. I wish now that I had continued my study, amongst
my Books, and held me to my private life, then I had proved learned like
others; at least I might have had the happiness, to have been always in the
company of Scholars, and learned men.

Whether some Phillis, etc. That kind of life would have affoorded me some
pretty delights, if not so glorious, and goodly, as might be had in that
Sunshine of dignity, and honor, yet no less sweet, and pleasing.

She Guarlands gay, etc. I should have had two Guarlands, that is, glory, and
commendation of my wit: and songs; that is, private pleasure, and delight.

Now frantic Love, etc. Now in steed of the peace, and tranquillity, wherein I
should have lived, by means of Augustus his great love, I live amongst my
capital enemies, who have contrived my confusion, and brought this calamity
upon me; and am forced to keep amongst the wars, where my Adversaries do
undermine mine estate, and conspire against my life.

Thou far from home, etc. Thou art quite changed from that inbredd, and
woonted humanity, and bounty, wherewith thou did usually embrace me: yea
thou art quite altered from the Roman civility, and gentleness, which all do
profess.

Let me never believe, etc. I am loath to believe this change in thy sweet
nature, but yet, so it is reported.

The frozen Alps, etc. Thy disposition being me^amorphosed, into a barbarous
hardness of heart, (not against others, to whom thou art still the same, in
courtesy, and noble usage,) but against me alone. Of Augustus his clemency,
Seneca writes, in his book, de clementia.

The Alps. Mountains, which part Italy, and France.

And frozen Rhene: A famous River in Germany.

Ah let no could, etc. I am not careful for my self, but for thee; for fear,
lest by the change of thy disposition, and sweet manners, thou might draw
hatred, and envy upon thy head; whereas now all love, and wish thee well.

The Icie Gritt, etc. Gritt, is the small sandy gravill, incorporate and frozen
amongst the Ice, which makes it rugged and sharp.

And there to ingrave, etc. And there to commit my love unto writing, and to
bewray it in my Poems: which as my verses grow in number, so shall it, grow in
fervency and zeal.

No could shall let, etc. The venom of de^^action, and malice of my Accusers,
shall not hinder my delight in my studies and meditations.

As though these things, etc. This is Ironically spoken; as if he should say,
I flatter my self in my own Imagination, if I think by these means to heal
my misfortune, or make my love again acceptable to Augustus.

Nor the Hamadryades, etc. Here is described the inconstancy of a troubled
mind: that it hates the things, which erewhile it did long for; and by and by
desires the thing, which even now it contested most against.

Hamadryades, Were Nymphs, who were borne together with the first springing of
Trees, and dyed again, when they dyed; their name being accordingly
significant unto their nature: apo tou ama, kai tes druos: una cum arbore. Such
a one was she, whom Erisicthon slew; who cutting a Tree unwillingly, there
issued from thence, both a voice, and blood; (as Ovid testifies.)

Dryades, are Nymphs, whose abode is always amongst the woods and groves;
according to the Etymology of their name.

Oreades, were Nymphs inhabiting the Mountains, whereof they have their
denomination: and indeed the Nymphs had sundry appellations, upon diverse
respects; as from sheep they were named Peribelides from the waters Nayades:
from the meadows, Licmoniades: and from the sockling, and nursing of young
Infants, Curotrofae.

Not all that we do, etc. Let all beware how they touch Kings, and Princes in
their ambition; or endeavor to cross them, in their aspiring to domination,
and government, or attempt to lessen their dignity, or authority; For I say,
there is nothing which can mitigate these their thirsty and ambititious desires.

Hebrus: A River in Thracia.

Sithonian Rocks, etc. Sithonia, is held to be Thracia: others say, it is that
part thereof which from Mount Haemus, reaches to the Euxine Sea: It is a
Country in the North parts of Europe; neque Coelo, neque solo tractabilis, the
soil and Clymate, very rough and unpleasing, as being extreme could and
beaten with continual frosts and snowes: so that except it be on that side,
to the Sea ward) it is very barren and unfruitful.

As once he sat, etc. That is, he was quiet, and conversant amongst his
learned studies.

Making small Baskets, etc. Exercising his homely Muse, or his humble plain
manner of style; (namely) his Pastoralls.

Seeme-n great, etc. These poor Pastoralls, (...) sorry stuff in themselves;
but if ye Muses do but favor the work, and add (...) my dull brain,
capacity, invention, (...) such matter, as a Book (which must (...) live
acceptably long in the world,) ought to have, they will bring rare and great
praise to Gallus: or, these simple small trifles ((...) your help) will seem
worthy of Gallus his best acceptance, as if they were greater.

Whose love eekes, etc. Virgil here, (as the pattern of a true friend, and
constant,) does not dissemble or conceal his Love, to him dead, whom he
professed to love living: and that which is more, he professes, that his love
and desire of his dead Friend is increased not every day, but every hour.

FINIS.

