The first part of the Christian Instruction, and general so^me of the
doctrine, contained in the holy Scriptures, wherein the principal points of
the Religion are familiarly handled by Dialogues, very necessary to be read of
all Christians. Translated into English, by John Shute, according to the late
Copy set forth, by the author Master Peter Viret.

1565.

Ouersene and perused, according to the order appointed, by the Queens
majesty's Injunctions.

2. Timothe. 3. Al Scripture divinely inspired of God, is profitable for
doctrine, to improve, to amend, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man
of God may be perfect, and prepared unto all good worckes.

No man that lays his hand to the plow and looks behind him, is meet for
the kingdom of God. Luke. 9. printer's device of a bear and ragged staff
within the garter, later associated with William Seres and Henry Denham (not in
McKerrow) HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



Imprinted at London, by John Day, dvvellyng over Aldersgate, beneath Saint
Martins.

To the honorable the Lord Robert Dudley, Baron of Denbigh, Earl of Licester,
Master of her Majesty's horse, and knight of the order: and one of her highness
preuye Council. John Shute, wishes health with increase of honor and Godly
understanding,
WHen Hanniball a manifold wintered soldier, a General of marvelous
judgment and worthiness had given ear a while to Phormio^ ye Philosopher,
discoursing before him of martial matters, the duty of a General and office
of each man yt comes to field: being demanded at length what he thought of
him, whom the Lippewise men esteemed the wysest and learned of the world,
answered: that fools he had heard many, but a more dotyng fool then this
Phormion was, he never heard. It seemed to him very strange, that he which
never went further then the scoole, never fought but with the rod, should give
precepts to him that had spent all his life in martial affairs, obtained more
vistories then he had red overthrows. And may it not (right honorable) seem as
strange to your good Lordship, and be deemed of some others, as great dotage
for me a simple souldior better practiced abroad in martial matters, then
furnished at home with cunnyng of the scoole: to deal with matters of hie
divinity? But I take not upon me to teach of my self: but to translate out
of others, nor do I mean to brag of any skill, but to testify my good will
employed to profit others: yet do I not think it a matter unmeet for my
profession and calling, to know the truth of Gods holy word, and to further
in the same as many as I may. For requisite it is (as your honor and wisdom
right well understands) all Christians to know their God: further if they
will be the children of his kingdom to work through obedience to his will as
the Apostle says: their own salvation with trembling and with fear. A
souldior is not excluded from this band, he must needs in this battle keep
his order ^hil. ^
and do (by grace) his uttermost endeavor: least the muster master, Christ
do casse him, and so ^osuc, 7
with great reproach deualize him. We read that for a little pilfering of a
common souldior, the whole army of the Lord was in danger and like to have been defeacted, But the blasphemy, inco^tinency, outrage, and such like that
in many countries, in the wars in our days are used: are in deed a great
occasion to procure and purchase those dreadful plagues, which we often see
light upon nations. Wherefore that we may continue in quiet peace, and when
occasion shall require, obtain Godly victories, expedient it were, and for my
countries sake I wish, that our soldiers may be well instructed, in the
knowledge and fear of God: so much the rather, for that their life is doubly
incertaine. Anacharsis thought sailors and such as travail by sea, to be
rather of the number of the dead, then of the living: by cause that he which is
in most assurance, is always within eight or ten inches of his death. And is
not a souldior every moment of an hour more nere his bane, amyd so many great
shot, samll shot and other weapons? Wherefore it were good, not only for the
parties them selves, but also for all Christian common wealths, if they which
are called to serve in wars, were well instructed in the knowledge and fear
of God, as god be thanked some of the^ are, I would thinck my self surerer in
the company of five hundred well trained soldiers, which were instructed in
the fear and love of God: then in that of xv. hundred which are as well
trained and exercised in the use of their weapons as they, and do want the
other chief instruction. And for my part being a simple one, am not ashamed to
be exercised in the study of Gods book: no more, then to be in the field
exercised, in the use of any weapon or order, although my study in it be not
such as I wish it to be: yet having received great profit and comfort of
conscience, by reding of sondrie works of divinity: and namely by the readyng
of a work of Master Peter Viret, entitled the Christian instruction, I
would not bereave my country me^ the commodity of the same: but thought my
self bound in conscience to make them partakers thereof. Wherefore having
translated the first part of it into our tongue with boystrous and rude
terms, as a man utterly void of eloquence: I have committed the same to the
printe, and so far presumed upon your honors goodness, as under your
Lordshippes name to suffer it to come to the sight of others. May it please
you, to accept this simple token of my travail and poor good will toward
your honor. I dout not but some shall receive such fruit of it, as they shall
like well my labor, and pray for your Lordship, under whose name it is
published. And so shall my desire in Christ be satisfied. God prosper your
honor in health and high estate. God increase his faith and his fear, in you.
Right honorable I have added in the end of this work, a table containing the
principal matters, that are entreated of, in this work, to the end that men
may the more easily find them. God defend you and preserve you.

John Shute, to the faithful reader, Grace mercy, and peace from God the
father, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Considering that God requires no more of man, for his innumerable benefits
(which he has and does from time to time bestow upon him) but only fra^ck
obedience, the which he can no wise yield duly unto him, except he know him,
and he can not know him but by his word, and for that there be many adversaries
at this day, who will not have men to deal with the word of God, nor to
receive any Religion, but such as shall be given unto them by general
Councels: I have thought good to turn into y^ English tou^g this little work,
framed by the right famous, worthy and godly learned man, M. Peter Viret:
wherein you may see what commodity the Church of God, has reapt from time to
time, of the Decrees and determinations of general Councels, and of the
ordinances and decretalles of Popes. And because that a number of these which
so greatly reverence Councels are Atheistes and Epicuriens, saying in their
hearts there is no God, and do scoff and fleere at the word of God, being over
well seen in the principles of the Popes divinity, which say that there is no
God, and that all that ever is spoken of Jesus Christ is but fables, and the
whole Scriptures lies, as by their lives right well they do declare. And least
that any should think that I speak this of malice and without proving any
thing, I think it not amiss somewhat to say of the virtuous acts of these
worthy fathers, who have been the heads of a number of general Councels, and
have there ruled the roste, by their holy Ghost, whom they have there had at
their own will and pleasure. The Pope Alexander the vi. devising on a time
with the French kings Ambassador said Note the good acts of Popes, Read the
life of this Alexander in Io. ba, act Romanoru^* Pontificum*
unto him these words: That fable of Jesus Christ has brought to us great
riches. Besides this H^eronimus Marius, in his work entitled Eusebius
Captiuus, speaking of this Pope Alexander the vi. says of him among other
things: what needs it to recite the abominable and detestable acts of
Alexander the vi. This Alexander when he had made an aliaunce with devils, he
gave him self wholly unto them and became their subject, to the end that by
their mean he might attain to the Papal dignity, which thing they promised
and did fulfill: after that he governed him self in so holy a sort that
afterward during his life he never entreprised any thing, without their
counsel. There are many things in writing, which are very notable, and
worthy of a Pope of Rome and successor of S. Peter: for there are in the Latin
certain excellent verses and very worthy to be noted, which set forth very
well the praises of this most holy father, the sense whereof does follow here.
Alexander sells Crosses, altares yea and Jesus Christ him self: first he
bought the^, wherefore, he may well sell them. Rome passes on from one vice to
an other, and from the flame to the fire under the government of this
Spaniarde, Tarquinius, was the vi. king of the Romans, Nero the vi. Emperor.
And this the sixte of his name. Rome has ever ben plagued under those sixtes:
this Alexander caused Gemma (who was fled to Rome for succor, being brother to
Bajazet Emperor of Turckie) to be poisoned for the some of CC. M. Ducates,
which he received of the said Bajazet. This Alexander to maintain his
tyranny, called to his aid Bajazet Emperor of the Turckes against the French
king Charles the viii and enforced him self by all means possible to make the
realm of Naples, yea and the very City of Rome it self, the frontieres of ye
Turckysh Empire: he caused the toong^ and hands of Antonie Manciuell, a man
meruelously well learned to be cut of, because he had written an Oration, very
elegantly against the wicked manners and most abominable and villainous life of
the said Pope. On a time this pope made a very sumptuous ba^quet, in the
which he had commanded to give to drink, to certain rich Senators and
Cardinals, whom he had conuited thither, of a flagon tempered with poison, and
his taster mistakyng the flagon: gane him to drink of the same flagon,
whereof he dyed with those Senators and Cardinals, this Alexander, as soon as
he was Cardinal, became a Negromancer, cou^selled with devils whom he had
familiar, if they would be so gracious unto him (who was their obedient vassal
and humble disciple) as to help him in his practice and suit which he made for
the Papal dignity: whereunto they fra^ckly granted, conditionally that he
should make solemn oath in the preseuce of ye prince of darcknes, y^ he should
show him self an assured protector of Satan, and his infernal common wealth:
whereunto the Cardinal assented. Only requiryng that when this homage and
oath should be given: it would please the devil not to appear unto him in his
hydeous and fear full form, but rather in man's shape in the likeness of a
Prothonotarie, which thing being granted, at a day appointed: in the summer
time, the Cardinal conveyed him self secretly alon^ into a chamber in a
certain place called mount Cauallus, and there came unto him my Lord the
Prothonotarie, being a man of a mean age very honorably apparelled, who after
certain devise and discourse had, assured him, that he should be Pope, who
being then full of joy enquired of the time, and how long he should raygne.
This reverend prothonotarie made him a deceptiue answer, full of doubtfulnes,
to wit that he should reign xi. and viii. the Cardinal foolishly persuaded him
self that he should raygne in the Papal dignity. 19. years, albeit that the
promise was but for xi. years and. 8. months when Innocent the. 8. was dead
Rodericke Borgia was created and established Pope, who forthwith named him
self Alexander the vi. now he did for the space of. 11. years and 8. months
meruelously trouble and oppress Italy, he being old began to be diseased and
sick whereupon he kept his bed, and commanded one of his servants named
Modena (who was most privy and familiar with him of al those of his Court) to
go into his guard robe and to bring him a little book richly set, with gold and
precious stones: which was in a certain box or drawer, which he appointed him
unto. This little book contained all the sorts and kinds of illusions and
enchauntements of Negromancie, where at, this old man determined to enquire and
to assertaine him self, of the end and closyng up of his life: this servant
according to the commandment of his master, went to the place, and as he was
entryng in at the door of the chamber, he saw one fit in the Popes chair, who
was very like unto his master, which when he saw (being horribly affrayd)
returned and ran to his master, without bringyng the book with him, to whom he
declared what he had seen: which thing when the Pope understood fully, and saw
his servant so affrayed: he let him alone for a time, afterward he so wrought
with him, that he caused him to go again to his guard robe, to see if he could
epsy the aforesaid Pope: and whether he would say any thing to him or no. The
servant being entered into the chamber again, found there him whom he had seen
there before but he was far greater: he that sat asked him, why he came
thither, and what he had to do there: who being excedyngly affrayde and in
manner out of breath, answered, that he came for a certain garment for the
Pope, Then the devil cast forth an horrible groan, and said to him, what Pope?
I am Pepe my self. when Alexander understood this, his malady increased, and
his death approached. Shortly after one appareled like a courtier, came to the
chamber where the Pope lay, and knocked very lowdly, saying that he must needs
speak with him. The door being opened unto him, he came and spoke with the
Pope, all others were retired from them. The Pope and he talked very secretly,
but me^ might se be their cou^tenances, that they were very earnest and in great
contention between them selves, and that the Pope was not well content, for he
said to him: how may this be? my time is not yet expired, thou know that I
had 19. years, whereof I have passed but. 11. and 8. months. where upon they
heard the courtier answer him boldly, you did mistake that word, for I said
not. 19. years, but I meant. 11. years and 8. months, should be the raigns
of thy Papacy, and therefore thou must needs dye. Now albeit the Pope requested
instantly, that he would have consideration of his life, and term of years
concerning his Papacy: it was as if he had spoken to a deaf man, for all his
exceptio^s, requests and allegations could stand him in no stead: for all that
were in the chamber might well see, that the devil was more perfect in
Arithmetique, then was the Pope, and in the end it was easyly concluded that
Alexander had erred in his acco^ptes. Finally to conclude the matter, when
Satan departed from thence, forthwith the soul of the Pope: most miserably
departed from his body, with horrible cries and fearful gronyngs and
bewaylyngs. And in this sort most miserably, wretchedly and wickedly, dyed the
Pope Alexander, surnamed the 6. leauyng to his son his patrimony, greatly
engayged and encombred, and the Italians their Roman common wealth, wholly
confused disordered and spoiled, to the end he might be an example, to all ages
to declare how that things evil gotten are consumed and spent miserably and
wickedly, ^ontanus writes that thy^ Pope, had a daughter who^ his son did
use and so did the Pope him self, her name was Lucresse, Sanazarius, the
Italian Poet, in his Epigrames and 2. book speaking of this Pope Alexander and
notyng his incest, says thus. O Lucresse, will Alexander yet still covet thee?
O horrible case, he is thy father. In the work entitled l'Estat do l'Eglise,
it is written of this Pope Alexander, that not only he did use his daughter
Lucresse, but his son did the like, whereupon she is called his wife, his
daughter, and daughter in law. etc. Vrspergensis notes of Bregory the. 7.
otherwise named Hildebrand, that the common wealth of Rome, and the Church was
in great danger under him, by means of errors and new Scismes, which were
never heard of before, and that he did usurp the Papal seat by tyranny, and
not be lawful election. The Council holden at worms, in the year. 1080.
says of Gregory the. 7. that it is certain that he was not chosen of God, but
that he did shamefully thrust him self in by disceate and money, and did turn
up side down the order of the Church, and troubled the state of the Christian
Empire, and framed the destruction of both the body and soul of the Catholic
king, and did defend the perjured king, and did sow discord among such as did
accord, and strife among the quiet, offenses among the brethren, divorce among
the married, and sturred up and changed all things that might tend to quietness
among such as were of honest life. we therefore being gathered together by God
against the said Hildebrand, who preached nothing but sacrileges and fires,
main tayned the perjured and murderers, and brought the vniuer fall and
Apostolic faith of the body and blood of the Lord into doubt, being an
obseruer of diuinations and dreams, and an open Nigromancer, having a familiar
spirit, and leaving in this sort the true faith, we judge that he ought by
lawful authority to be deposed, driven from his seat, and perpetually
conde^pned, if he leave not his seat when he shall understand these things. I
refer such as will understand more of the said Gregory to the readyng of the
Cardinal Benno, his work, wherein the life of the said Gregory is set forth.
Moreover I wish them in Platina. to consider the lives of John the. 8.
Siluester, Bennet the. 8. with many others. Also in Sabellicus, in his. 9.
Eneide and first and 2. book, where they shall see of the Popes before written.
Also in the Commentaries of that worthy man John Sleydan in his. 21. book,
where he mencioneth of an Italian, which wrote a book very sharply against
Paul the. 3. namyng him therein Antechrist, declaring that in the time of
Innocent the Pope he was committed to prison being a wicked prelat for if
murders, and for the poisoning of his mother, and his nephew, whereby the
inheritance might come to him further, after that he was delivered out of
prison he made great fute for a Hatte of a Cardinal, and was three times
refused by the Cardinals: in the end his sister Iulia Fernese, obtained it. For
she threatened the Pope Alexander the. 6. that from that time forth, she would
never be at his co^maundment, the Pope fearing her displeasure accepted him
into the troop of Cardinals: further, that he poisoned an other sister of his,
and used an other of them, and also his nee^e and his own daughter, and for
that that he would the more liberally enjoy her, he found the mean to poison
her husband Bose Sforce: he was also a great Nigroma^cer, as witnesses Sleidan
in his Commentaries and. 19. book, and John Bale, in the life of the said Paul
the 3. in his act. Roma Pontificum, where he fully declares the virtues of him.
Let us see one mo among a great number of these reverend fathers, Clement the.
8. of that name borne in Florence, bastard to Leo the. 10. (his nephew I
should say) named before Julius, Cardinal Priest of the title of S. Laure^ce in
Damase. etc. It is written of him in certain Co^me^taries upon the articles of
the Doctors of Paris, that this Clement was a bastard, empoysoner, homicide,
bawd, simoniaque, Sodomit, perjured, whoremaster, negromancer. Church robber,
and a worker of all wickedness. etc. Such as will understand more of the goodness
and of the lives of such holy fathers, I refer the^ to the readyng of the
Florentine hystory of Machiauell, let them read Volateran. Sabellicus, Platina
John Bale act. Romans pont. John le Maire in his work of Scismes, the sea of
histories. Fascicul. te^p. Naucle. supplime^t. chro. with a number of others,
who^ for briefty I do omit. Truly these fathers ar jolly folowers of Christ,
who ought chiefly to be followed, he sent his Apostles abroad into the world
commaundyng the^ to preach the Gospel to all men, and to A comparion
between Christ and the Pope
baptize in the name of the father, the son and the holy ghost, etc. the Pope
commands his to hallow Churches, water, bread, oil, belles, chalices, grene
bowghes, candles with such like traishe, and to sing Masses for the living, and
for the dead, and to apply them to sundry uses, but the pulpit is not greatly
encumbred with them, and when they do preach, they preach nothing else but lies,
as their own dreams, phautasies, Legenda aurea, a Scripture of their own
inspiration, and their own traditions, decrees, and ordinances. Christ
ordained only two Sacraments, which two they have corrupted and added to the^
five, because that Christ did not so well know what is meet for his Church as
they do, O horrible Gene, 2
presumption. God him self when he had created man in Paradise, said: It is
not good that man be alone, we will make i, Cor, 7
him a helper. The Apostle s. Paul says: It is good for a man not to touch a
woman, yet to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and every
woman her own husband. Heb, 13, ^
The Apostle says, marriage is honorable among al me^ and the bed undefiled:
but God will judge the whore masters and adulterers, these words are general
and have regard to all men and to all estates. Jesus Christ did not only allow
marriage: but did also honor it with his presence In Cana of Galilee. S.
Augustine in his treatise of the goodness of marriage says, in his. 21. Chap.
that he dare not prefer the virginity of S. John, before the marriage of
Abraham. S. Ambrose in his first book says. Touching virgins S. Paul says.
I have no co^maundme^t of the Lord, but I do counsel or advise, if the doctor
of the Gentiles had no commandment, who is he that might have any? And truly
he had no co^maundment, but he did counsel thereunto, for virginity can not be
commanded, it may well be desired, for that which is not in our power is not to
be commanded, but it is to be wished for. Origens upon S. Matthew in his. 24.
Homely says. That they which do forbid men to marry, do enforce the^ to a
licentious villeni forbiddyng that which is expedient. The like he says of
those that command abstinence from meats, and such like, where unto the
faithful may in no wise be constrained, he says that they lay he any burdens,
on the shoulders of men contrary to the will of Christ: who says, My yoke is
pleasant and my burden light and easy. etc. Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical
history. 3. book. 30. cha. recites, that S. Clement writing against such as
did condemn marriage, among other things says, will they reprove the
Apostles: S. Peter had a wife. So had Philippe, Paul also had a wife, as
appears by one of his Epistles, in the which he is not ashamed, to send
salutations to her: whom he says he would not carry about the country with
him, because he would be the more ready to preach the Gospel. Many of the
ancient fathers were married as Patriarchs, Prophets, and Bishops of the
primitive Church. Yet is not the Pope affrayde to say (and stand against God
and Christ) that marriage is uncleanness, pollution and carnal filthynes, as it is
said in the. 4. of the sentences. Did c. 17. chap. 4. and his decret. 27.
Quest. 2. chap. which begins. Cum societas Tertulian in his prescriptions
against the heretics, says. It is not in our power or choice lawful* to bring
in, to choose or allege for authority, that which any other has brought in,
or alleged for his own pleasure: for we have the Apostles of the Lord for our
authors, who have brought in nothing for their own pleasure* nor any new thing,
but have faithfully preached and taught to the nations, that discipline which
they received of Christ S. Augustine upon S. John in the. 46. treatise and. 10.
chap. says, if they which sit in the chair of Moses do teach the law of
God, it does then follow that God teaches by them: but if they will teach any
thing of their own, hear them not, nor yet do it. etc. And in the. 6. against
Faustus. chap. 16. and in the. 18. book. chap. 12. does call by the words of
Christ (not only false Prophets but also thieves and murderers) all such as
dare preach any other thing to the people of God, the^ the Canonical
Scriptures: and against such he alleges the saying of Christ, al those y^
came before me, are thieves and murderers, S. Paul in his. 1. Epistle to the
Galathia^s does accurs^e him, that brings any other doctrine the^ that which
he has taught, yea if it were an Angel of heaven. Further in his Epistle he
says, that which I received of the Lord, the same also deliver I unto you.
etc. It is not so with these men, of whom we have already spoken, they deliver
unto us their own traditions, inventions and dreams in the stead of the word
of God. And I doubt not (although these men have nothing in their mouths but
the fathers, the fathers which must authorize the scriptures unto the^) if the
fathers lived in these days, but they would be as ready to persecute them as
they are to persecute those which in these days do profess Christ. Let it be
seen, how many of them were which suffered in the late time of their late
persecution that did deny any one article of the Christian faith, but they did
by Gods grace most costantly affirm them, even sealing them up with their
blood: examine Theodoret, Epiphanius and Augustine, Fathers of great holiness
and doctrine, who have largely written of heresies, and let it be seen whether
they maintained any one of those which they cite, no not one: let us see how
many Arrians, Anabaptists Pelagians, Marcionistes, Nestorians, Ebionistes, or
any other kind of heretics they did then execute. I suppose the number will
appear very small, for they are al in leage with Satan. I doubt, not but (if
the Gospel had as fat a smoking kitchen tied unto it, as have the Romyshe
rytes) we should have a great number of Gospellers: for this kitchen Seducers
of the people
is of great effect among the Romanistes. S. Chrysostom upon S. Matthew in
his. 48. Homely. chap. 24. says thus: There are some which do greatly seduce
through lies and vntrouthes, they preach Christ, they teach the faith, they
have also churches, orders and elders as the faithful have. They do also read
the Scriptures of God, it seems that they give the same baptism and the
sacrament of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, likewise they honor the
Apostles and Martyrs, and by these means they do greatly abuse the
understanding, not only of the simple, but also of such as are wise. who shall
he be that Antichrist shall not be able to shake or move? partlye doing the
works of Christ, and the antichristians, fulfilling in a sort the duties of
christians, unless it be peradventure such an one as does consider that which
the Apostle says: if Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light, is
it then a great matter for his ministers to be transformed like to the
minister of justice? whose end shall be according to their works and not
according to their feigned show of Christianity. S. Hierom upon the. 9 cha. of
the Prophet Osee faith: I do no^ find by the ancient hystories that any other
have divided the Church, and seduced the people of the household of God, but
only the Priests and Prelates, whom God has appointed to be the spialles and
watch me^ for the Christians against y^ enemies of the church S. Bernard in his
Appologie, to william the Abbot says. The walls of the Church do shine, but the
pore are in distress, the stone Whereof the church cons^steth.
works of her, are clothed with gold, but she leaves her children naked.
Isichius upon Leuiticus. book. 4. chap. the. 14. says They may well be called
the deckyng of the house that do maintain it: to wit those orders of men,
which teach godlynes or godly things, for of such is the Church made in
deed, and not (as many do thinck^) of wood and stones. And therefore when in the
old time it was commanded to assemble the church, Moses did not bring
together timber, stones and such like, but the people, the elders and the
Leuits. Saint Chrysostom of his resignatio^ or banishment, Hom. 20 says. The
church consists not of walls, but of the multitude of good people. S.
Bernard upon the Cantique^ in his 33. sermon says: Now, from whom shall the
church hyde her The co^plai^t of Bernard.
self, all are friends and all are enemies, all are allies and all are
adversaries, al are of the household, and none is at quiet, al are neighbors,
and every man seeks his own profit, they are the ministers of Christ and serve
Antichrist, they walk in honor with the goods of the Lord, and yet they
honor not the Lord, from thence comes that beauty of the whore which thou
daily do see, clothed as players of staige plays, apparelled as a king: of
this thou see the gold upon their brydles, fadles and spurs, of this are
the tables furnyshed with meats and vessels, of this are the dronkennesies
and gluttonies, of this proceeds the harp and vial, from thence are the
flowing wine presses, and the full sellers: the one equal with the other, of
this are the little boxes and pottes full of sweet oyntmentes and savors, of
this are their pursses filled, for this cause will they be, and ar the princes
of the Church, the Prouostes, the Deanes, the Archdeacons, the Bishops and the
Archbishops, and such things come not lawfully to pass, but because they walk
in the affairs of darkness, heretofore it has been spoken of and now is the
time come and fulfilled. Behold in peace my bitterness is very bitter. It Esaias,
38. d
has been heretofore bitter in the death of the Martyrs, after that more
bitter in the controversies of the heretics, and now it is most bitter in the
manners of the servants of the household: they can neither be driven away nor
avoided, they are so strong and so infinitely increased. The wound of the
Church is in her entrayles and bowels, and it is incurable, and therefore is
her bitterness very bitter, etc. S. Hillarie writing against Aurentius says
these words: I warn Admonition of Hillary,
you to beware of Antichrist, you do to much esteem the walls, seeking the
Church of God in the gorgiousnes of buildinges, thinking that the unity of the
faithful is there contained, do we doubt whether Antichrist have his seat
there or no. The mountains, the woods, the lakes, prisons and wildernesses
are more assured unto ^e and more safe, for the Prophets being in them hidden
did prophecy. Saint Bernard upon the. 90. Psalm, and verse 6. says, in
manner all the Christians seek their own gayn, and not the gain of Jesus Christ.
And they have turned over the very offices of the ecclesiastical dignity,
into shameful and dishonest gain, and into affairs of darkness, and do not in
these things seek the salvation of souls but the pleasures of riches. For this
cause are they rou^ded, for this cause do they haunt the churches, say Masses
an^ sing Psalms. At this day they strive by process and go to law for
Bishoprikes and Archbishoprikes, in such sort y^ the revenues of y^ Church are
vestowed in superfluities and vain vsages: there rests no more but that the
man of sin the son of perdition be reveled, etc. Saint Bernard in his
sermon of the conversion of S. Paul says, O Lord God, those whom we see to
covet the chief places in thy church and possess the principality: they are
even the first that persecute thee. They have taken the Arc of Sion, and they
have possessed the castle, and afterward have freely through the power thereof
set the whole ci^ie on fire: their conversation is miserable, the subuersio^ of
thy people is lamentable. S. Bernard in his book de consid^r ad Eugeniu^,
toward the end of his. 4. book speaks to the Pope in this sort: what is it
that thy flatterers say unto thee, go to hardely The description of the
Romish Court.
thou byest them with the spoil of the churches: The life of the poor is
sown in the gates of the rich. The silver shyneth in the dirte, me^ run
thither out of al par^es, the poorest caryeth it not away, but he that is
strongest, or else he that runs most spedelye: this custom, or rather
deadlye corruption, began not in thy time, God would it might end in the same.
In the mean time thou art adourned and decked preciously, if I durst say it,
thy seat is rather a close of devils then of sheep. Did S. Peter so: Did S.
Paul so mock? Thy court does use rather to receive the good, then to make any
good, for such as are evil do not amend in thy court, but the good do there
wax worse. Bernard also says: Behold the Ad E^gen. l^b. ^e^tio.
common murmr and complaint of all the Churches, they cry out that they are
wounded and corn in pieces. There are very few or none ar all, who fear not
that wou^d: do thou ask what wound it is? The Abbotes are robbed and
spoiled by their bishops, the Bishops by their Archbishops. It is a marvel if
any man be able to excuse it. In so doing, you do very well declare that you
have plenty of power, but not of justice, you do it because you are able to
do it: but the question is, if you ought to do it. You are ordained to
conserve to every man his honor, and degree; and not to be envious toward him.
etc. S. Paul does rightwell setforth in his colors this Romish prelate
(which will be called Sanctissimus, or most holy) in his second Epistle to the
Thessalonians and. 2. chap. naming him the son of perdition, the man of
sin. etc. S. Peter also in his. 2. Epistle and. 2. chap. does most lively
paynt out the manners and life of this Romyshe rabble of Prelacy. Furthermore in
the distinctio^s. distinct, 34 cap, Lector, gloss and distinct, 82, chap,
prisbit. and in the Canon of the Apostles. 17. quest, 4, chap, Si quis,
distinct, 40, chap, Si papa, distinct, 96 chap, Satis, chap, Simplici, and
Incipitis. It is written in these canons, that the power and authority of the
Popes is such, that they are able to dispense against the doctrine of the
Apostles, against the right of nature, and consequently against the Gospel and
word of God. etc. O horrible blasphemy. Christ commanded that none should
add, or diminish from his word, his word must be our guide or Scholemaster and
instructor, and yet in these days the number will say, it is not for us to
read the Scriptures, it appertains only to priests, Friars and Monks to
read and understand the scriptures, as though the kingdom of heaven belonged
only to such: truly if y^ they which live as it were in solitary life have need
to be armed with the understanding of the Scriptures, to heal their wounds
which they daily receive in the battle of this mortal life, being ^isburdened
of a great number of cares, which he is charged with that is burdened with
office of Magistrate or of rule in the common wealth, and also that he is
charged with, that is burdened with wife, children and familye: he that is in
this sort burdened shall have more often occasion to offend the majesty of
God, then he that is not so burdened, wherefore it is the more needful that he
have his medicine prepared wherewith to heal his deadelye wounds which he
daily receaueth by mean of sundry occasions given unto him: which medicine is
y^ understanding of gods word, wherewith he may assuredly furnish himself
against al temptations, as witnesses the Psalmist saying: The words of the
Lord are pure, even as the silver which from the earth is seven times tried and
purified. Eusebius in his ecclesiastical historye Psalm. 12
6. book. 15. chap. alleges the Epistle of Alexander bishop of Jerusalem,
against Demetrius, and does reprove him saying: That which thou say in thy
letters, affyrmyng that it was never seen, nor known, that secular and lay men
should dispute of the The scripture ought to be had in the vulgarae tongue.
faith in the presence of Bishops: I know not what has moved thee to affirm
so manifest a lie, for so much as when so ever any is found sufficient and
meet to instruct and teach the people, the bishops have accustomed to desire
the^ to take the matter in hand, So did our brother Neon Bishop, to Euelp^' in
the city Larande, and the Bishop Celsus to Paulin in the city Iconie, and
the Bishop Atticus to Theodore in ye city Synnade: and there is no doubt but
other bishops do the like in their dioces: when they find any man mete to
profyt the people. John Gerson, a great pyller of the papacy, in the first
part of his examination of doctrynes says, that the first veritye is so sure,
that any simple man not being authorized may be so excellently seen and
instructed in the holy Scriptures, that me^ ought to give more credyte to his
affyrmation in matter of teaching, the^ to the doctrine of the Pope: for it is
plain that we ought to give greater credyte to the Gospel, then to the Pope:
and within few words after he says, that if a general Council should be
holden, and that such a well instructed man were present there, if that the
greatest number should through malice or ignorance declyne and decree any
thing against the Gospel, such a lay man might lawfully stand against the whole
general Council. Panormitan, albeit he were a great Idolater of papacy, in
the chap. significasti, extra, de electronibus says these words: In matters
concerning the faith, the saying of a lay man ought to have place, before the
saying of the Pope, if his saying be more probable, and better authorysed by
the old and new Testament. Saint Hierome in his first tome writing to
Marcelle, encouragyng her to go to Bethleem says: In the vyllage of Jesus
Christ there are none but rusticall men, there is nothing heard on any side,
but Psalms: The plowe man holding the plow by the tail, does singe Alleluya:
the harvest man being at his labor sweating, does pass the time in singyng of
Psalms: and the laborer in the vineyard with his hook cutting the vynes, does
sing some thing of David: such are the songs of that country, such are (as
men commonly say) their songs of love. S. Hierome in the proem of his 1. book
of his exposition upon the Epistle to the Ephesia^s in the. 9. Tome says: All
words and al sentences are contained in the book of God, by the which also we
know God, and are not ignorant of the cause of our creation. I do not a little
marvel that some have been so given to folly and sluggishnes that they would
not learn those things which are excellent, but have thought, and do thinck
worthy of blame, al those that are given to such studies: to whom albeit I
could make more stricte answer, and soon leave them offended or pleased, I
say that it is much better to read the Scriptures, then to be gredy and to fish
for riches, and to gather and heay them together. S. Hierome upon the. 6. chap.
to the Ephesians says if he command the lay men of the Ephesians, and such as
be occupied in the affairs and business of this life (as men see among the
common people) to instruct and bring up their children in all godly discipline
and learning, what may men then think of Ministers and elders? of whose order
and manner of life he wrote to his disciple Timothe saying, having their
children subject in all reverence. etc. Primase Bishop of Vtica, in the
country of Affricke, and disciple to S. Augustine, writing upon the. 3. chap.
of the Epistle to the Collosia^s says: let the word of God dwell ple^tuously in
you. etc. Hereit it is plainly declared, that the lay people ought also to have
the word of God, not only slenderly, but also abundantly, and also that they
ought to admonish and teach one an other. Theophilacte upon the Epistle to the
Ephesians the. 6. chap. showing fathers and mothers, by what means they shall
make their children obedient and ready to do their commandment, declares the
cause of their obedience, to the commandment of their father saying: fathers
provoke not your children. etc. If thou will have thy children obedient, bring
them up and exercise them in Gods word, accustom them to sermons, and say not
that it belongs to Monckes only to read the holy Scriptures: for truly it is
rather the office of every Christian man, and namely of him that is occupied in
the affairs and business of this world. And y^ more y^ he needs help, so much
y^ more needs he to understand, for he is the more tossed with the sourges and
assaults of this world. It shall be much for thy profit, that thy children
do hear and read the holy Scriptures: for out of them they shall learn, honor
thy father and thy mother, but thou do the contrary. Thou bring the^ up
in the study of the writings of the heathens and Gentiles, out of the which
they learn very noughty things: which happen not unto the^, if they be
instructed in the holy Scriptures. etc. S. Chrysostom upon Genesis, in his. 5.
Homely. 6. chap. and. 1. Tome says: I beseech you that we be not negligent as
concerning our health, but rather y^ our talk be of spiritual thigs, and that
some one take in his hand the book of God, and calling his neighbors to him,
he do water his own soul, and theyrs with godly sentences, to the end that we
may chase from us the treasons, and awaytes of the devil. S. Chrysostom in
his. 3. sermon of Lazar says: I do alwais exhort you, and will not cease but
still exhort you to give heed, not only to what is said here, but also when
you come home into your houses, that you be continually occupied in the readyng
of the Scriptures: which I have not left to urge the^ with in particular, that
have been conuersaunt with me, and let no man say unto me (these words are cold
and of small effect) I am an advocate or lawyer, I am occupied in the affairs
of the commonwealth: I am a man of occupation. I have a wife, I have a charge
of children. I am burdened with house keeping, I am a man of the world, it is
not for me to read the Scriptures, but it is for those that have forsaken the
world, which dwell in mountains, and lead a co^tinent and solitary life. Man,
what say thou? have not thou to do with the readyng of the Scriptures,
because thou art occupied with many cares and businesses? But thou have greater
need of it then they have. For they have not so great need of the help of ye
Scriptures, as you have, which are tossed and turmoyled among the sourges and
wanes of wordly business: for truly, the Monckes and so litarie men, which dwell
in the deserts, are without process and wordly cares, and have none
acquaintance with any, but do Philosophe and study for knowledge in peaceable
quietness and sucetie: and as they were in a sure haue^, have fruition of things
permanent and certain: and co^trarily we (being tossed with infinite wordly
cares and business, as it were in the midst of the sea) have always need of
continual solace and comfort of the Scriptures. They are far of from the
co^batte, but thou art daily in the battle, because thou receyuest many
wounds: therefore have thou greater need of remedy. S. Hierome writing to a
Lady named Gaudence, of the bringyng Education of youth
up of her daughter ^acatulla says: when the little and young maiden shall come
to the. 7. year of her age, and that she begins to have shame, and to know
whereof she ought to be silent, and to doubt of that which she should speak, let
her then learn the Psalter, by heart, until she come to the. 12. year of her
age, that she lay up a treasure in her heart of the books of Solomon, of the
writings of the Apostles and Prophets, writing also to an other good Lady
named Leta, exhorting her to instruct her daughter in the holy Scripture, even
from the cradle, saying thus: let her embrace the book of God, in the stead of
precious stones and sylke, in the which books let her delight, not in their
goodly couerings of so^dry colors, but in the distinct erudicion, being
corrected according to the faith: let her first learn the Psalter, and by such
songs let her withdraw her self from the world. Let her learn out of the
Proverbs of Salomo^ to live virtuously, let her learn out of Ecclesiastes to
tread worldly things under fee^e, and out of Job example of virtue and
patience: let the Gospel be continually in her hands, let her thorowlye learn
the acts and Epistles of the Apostles. And when she has in this sort
enriched the Cabinet of her heart with such treasures, let her learn by heart
the Prophets, the books of Moses, of the kings, the Paralipomenon, Esoras,
and also Hester, and last of all the song of songs, called in latin Canticu^
Canticoru^; for if she should read it first she might be hurt by it, not
understanding the holy so^ges of spiritual marriages, by those carnal phrases:
let her avoid all the Apocripho books, let her have also continual exercise in
the works of Cipria^, Athanase and Hillary. S. Chrisostom in his. 31. Homeli
upon s. John the. 4. chap. says: who is he of us I pray you, who when he is
returned home to his house does any thing belonging to a Christian? who is he
that searches and sounds the meaning of the Scriptures: Truly not one, but
we find oftentimes tables and dice, but very seldom books, and if any have
books, they keep them shut up, as though they had none, or else they employ
their time in beholding their brave painted coueringes or fair figures and
letters. etc. S. Chrysostom upon S. John in his. 10. Homely. 5. Tome and. 1.
chap. says: And Go^moditie of the scripture.
you shall be much more sharp and subtle, not only to hear and understand,
but also to teach others. etc. And within few lines after in the same Homely
he says, they which are negligent have yet an other excuse very un apt, to wit
that they have no books. This were a very vain answer for the rich to
make, but for so much as many poor men do often times make this excuse, I will
some thing say to them: and Careless nesse of the Christians
will ask the^, if they have not al their tools and instruments, which do
belong to their occupatio^s and crafts not withstandyng their poverty. Is not
this then a great folly to excuse the^ by their poverty, and yet they so
provide that they want nothing belo^gyng to their occupatio^s, and yet they
excuse the^ selves upon their poverty and occupatio^s, in a matter which is so
commodious unto the^. S. Chrisosto. in his. 3. sermon of Lazar says: See
thou not the workers of metals, gold smythes, silver smithes, and such like me^
of occupatio^s, that they have al their tools ready which belong to their
occupations? and albeit that hunger pinch them, and poverty afflict the^, yet
had they rather endure any kind of these miseries, the^ to sell any instrument
that belongs to their occupation, by the which they live. etc. S.
Chrysostom in the same sermon says, that a man may get great holiness and
perfection by reading of the holy Scriptures, and the holy Ghost has so
tempered them, that he would have sinners and Publicans saved: yea and to the
end that the Idiots and unlearned should be without excuse touching the hardness
of the understanding thereof, he has willed that the things therein spoken,
should be so easy even at the first sight, that men of occupation and laborers,
servant, women, widows, and such like that are most ignorant of all others,
might by the readyng thereof obtain understanding. etc. The Scripture is the
power of God to salvation, by it we know God and Christ, by it we know our
selves, by it we are taught our duty toward our neighbor, by it we learn to
obei our prince, by it we know the true Prophet from the false: the Scriptures
ar to be preferred before all the writings of men, it is the touch stone whereby
we ought to examine Ad Regina^ derecta fide
the doctrines of men. Cyril says, it is necessary for us that we follow the
holy Scriptures, and not to swerve in any thing that is commanded in them. S.
Ambrose upon the. 1. Epistle to the Corinthes and. 4. chap. says: what soever
is not received from the hands of the Apostles is full of wickedness. Cyprian
in Sermon ^ de lapsis: And how dare they ordeyne and decree any thing without
Christ, whose hope and faith, virtue and glory is whollye in him? Origin upon
Ezechiell Homili. 7. let us follow no man, and if we will follow any, we
have Christ set forth to us to follow. The acts of the Apostles are set
forth unto us, and we know the doings of the Prophets by the holy volumes,
that is a sound example to follow: and Theophilactus upon the Epistle to the
Romans the last chap. says: They which bring any thing beside the
determinations and doctrine of the Apostles, they bring in offenses, heresies
and dissensions, Ireneus aduersus Valentini and similiu^ scripta lib. 2. cap.
56* Lean to the holy Scriptures, which is the sure and undoubted truth: it is
a sure stone wherewith to build: when ye leave this and cleave to any other
doctrines. etc. S. Augustine in his prologue of his. 3. book of the trinity
says: Obey not my writings as thou will the Canonical scriptures, for what
so ever thou shall find in the^, that thou beleuest not, the same believe
without douting: but in mine if Authority of the wryting^ of the fathers.
thou find any thing wherein thou art not persuaded thoroughly, believe it not
assuredly. Again in his. 112. Epistle which he writes to Paulm, he speaks
to the like end. Ite^ in his. 2. book of Baptism against the Donatists. 3.
chap. he says: you always allege to us the letters of Cypria^, the sayings
of Cypria^, why take you authority of Cypria^ for your Scisme, and refuse his
example, to trouble the church? who is he that does not well know that the
Canonical scriptures, as well of the old as of the new Testament, are
contained within limits which are certain, and that the same is to be preferred
to the writings of all the Bishops, y^ have been hereto fore? so yt we may not in
any thing doubt or dispute of it, to wit whether y^ all y^ therein is be true or
no, but it is lawful to reprehe^d the writings of ye Bishops, which were
written before, or which were written after the confirmation of the Canonical
scriptures, either by word. etc. Moreover Origene upon the Prophet Jeremy in
his. 1. Howelie says: we must needs call to witness the holy Scriptures, for
without the^ no man ought to credit our sayings or writings. S. Hierom upon s.
Matthew faith: That which is spoken without the authority of ye scriptures,
even as it is spoken, so may it be rejected and conte^ned: and upon Jeremy. 9.
chap. says: The error of fathers and mothers and of au^cesters ought not to be
followed, but the authority of the scriptures, and the commandment of God,
which he teaches us etc. And within few lines after he says: Assuredly
through ignorance of the law, men shall receive Antichrist for Christ. etc. S.
Cypria^ to Cecil in his. 3. book of his Epistles and. 3. Epistle says: if you
do that which I command you. I will not call you my servants, but my friends.
And also that Christ ought only to be herd, the father has borne witness from
heaven, saying: This is my well-beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear
him: wherefore, if it be so ye Christ only ought to be herd, then ought we not
to look what any man before us has thought good to be done: but yt which
Christ, who is Christ and not custom is to be followed
before all has done: for we are not bound to follow ye custom of me^, but the
truth of God, for so much as God says by his Prophet Esaias, in ye. 29. chap:
They honor me in vain, teaching the co^mau^deme^ts and doctrines of me^. And
again in ye Gospel, Matthew. 15. you reject ye commandment of God to
establishe your own traditions. And therefore dear brother, if any of our
predecessors, either through ignorance or simplicitye, have not observed that
which the Lord has taught us to do by his example or doctrine, that same may
be refused, for the symplenes thereof, and may through the mercies of the Lord
be pardoned him. etc. And shortly after he says, if we be the elders and
ministers of God and Christ, I find not that we ought to follow any but God and
Christ, for so much as he says in the Gospel of John chap. 8. I am the light of
the world, he that follows me shall not walk in darcknes, but shall have the
Diui^^^um institut. lib. 6. cap. 8
light of life. Lacta^ti' Firmian' in his. 6. book of his godly institutio^s.
8. chap. says: we ought not to follow me^ but god. The canons and decrees of
the Popes in the. 9. distinct. ca. Noli. and cap. Ego, and cap. Negare. and
did. 24 and. 1. quest. ca. Non affermam' say thus: Men must dwell upon the
holy Scriptures, and not upon the sayings of men, how holy soever they be. etc.
S. Chrysostom upon S. John, says in the end of the. 16. homely: That me^ of
occupatio^ do seek and strive to be excellent in their occupacions, Gredi
desire of corporal things, and carelessness of spiritual things.
but the christian can not render reason of his religion: and if these handy
occupations were not known, it were but loss of money, but the contempt of
the christian religion carries with it destruction of the soul, and yet we
tranayle in so great miserye and madness that we bestow in the^ all our study
and care, but the things which are most necessary for us, and are most sure
fortes of our salvation, we esteem not at all. It is it that lets the
heathens from acknowledging their error, and causes the^ to scoff at us: for
albeit they are grounded only upon lies, to do all that which they do, and to
defend the ignominy of their doctrine, we which serve ye truth, dare not once
open our mouths to defend that which is ours: why should they not condemn our
great imbecillitie, and have us in supicion to be crafty and disceitful? why
should they not speak evil of Christ as of a liar, who by his fraud should
have abused the simplicity of the multitude? we are cause of this blasphemy:
for S. Peter in his. i. epistle. 3. chap. commands us to be always ready
to render reason to all that shall demand us of the faith and hope that we
have. And again S. Paul Colo. 3. chap. Pro^. 10. b
let the word of God dwell plenteously in you, but what answer make they to
that which are more folish then the very fools in deed. Blessed is every
simple one and he that walks surely. But that is the cause of all evils, for
that: that many know not how to allege aptly the testimonies of the
scriptures: for in this place we may not understand the simple for the foolyshe
and for him that understands nothing, but for him that is not craftye and
melicious. For if it should be so understood, it should be superfluous to say,
be ye wise therefore Math. 10. b
as serpents and simple as doves. S. Ambrose upon the 2. epistle to Tymothe.
3. chap. says: All scripture given by inspiration from God, etc. It is
manifest that all Scripture whereof God has declared himself to be author, is
profitable, For it is given to that end that it should profit the ignorant,
reform the deformed, drawing the wicked into al good works: for, by profiting
a little and little in newness of life, it makes the man of God, etc. The law
of the Lord is perfect, restoring or converting souls, the testimonye of the
Lord is Collo. 3. b Psalm. 19 Psalm. 119
faithful and sure, it gives wisdom to the ignorant. The statutes of the
eternal are righteous, rejoicing the heart, the commandment of ye Lord is
pure and does lighten the eyes. And again: Thy word is alampe or lantern to
my fete and a light to my steps. The Prophet Esaias in his. 8. chap. says, is
there any where a people that asks not council of his God? Should men turn
from the living to the dead? If any man want light let him look upon the law
and the testimony, whether they speak after this meaning. The light of the
Ezech, 20. c
morning shall not be given unto them. Moreover the Prophet says. Say to the
children in the desert, walk not in the ordinances of your fathers, and
observe not al their statutes, and be not defiled with their idols. I am the
Lord your God walk in my ordinances and keep my statutes and do the^. Eccle.
1, a
Ite^ the fountain of wisdom is the word of the soueraign Lord God, and the
enter into the same are his eternal co^mau^dements. And again: Search the
scriptures, for in them you think you have eternal life, and they be they
which bear John 5 John, 20 g
witness of me. And Jesus did many other things that are not written in this
book, in the presence of his disciples, but these things ar written to the end
that you should believe that Jesus is the anointed son of God, and that in so
believing you may have life through his name. The holy scriptures are In what
recommendacion God has his Word,
full of the like sayings. The ancient fathers are full of the worthiness of
the scriptures. S. Augustine in his. 56. sermon made to the brethren that were
in solitude says: he that makes none account of the reading of the holy
scriptures sent from heaven, ought not only to fear that peradventure he
shall not receive everlasting rewards: but also that he shall not escape the
everlasting punyshmentes, for it is so dangerous unto us, not to read the
divine precepts, that the Prophets with great sorrow exclame and cry out: for
yt cause have Esaias. 5. c Ose, 4. b 1, Cor, 14
my people been brought into captivity, because they had no knowledge: for he
that is ignorant, shall be ignorant: out of all doubt he that in this world
makes none account to seek to know God by the holy Scriptures, God will not
vouchsafe to know him in the joys everlasting, we ought to be a feared to hear
(after that the gates shall be shut) with the folyshe virgins, I know you not,
I have none acquaintance Math, 25, ^
with you: you that work iniquity, depart you from me: what means this? I
know you not; I am not acquainted with you, how knows he not those that he
sends to the fire? There is neither of the^ spoken without cause, for as it
has been already said, such as would not in this world seek to know him by
reading the Scriptures, GOD will not acknowledge them at the day of judgment.
We ought also not to hear negligently (but with attentive ear and fear) that
which is written in Salomo^, he yt turns (says he) his ear Prou, 18, ^
from the hearing of the law, his prayer shall be abominable: wherefore he
that will be heard at Gods hand, must first hear God. For how would he that
God should hear him when he does so despise him, that he makes none account
of the readyng of his commandments? Saint Hierome in the proeme of his
Commentaries upon Esaye, to Eustochius, says: therefore I yield unto thee, and
to him by thee, that which I do owe, obeyng the commandment of John 5. f
Math. 7 ^
Christ, who faith, search diligently the Scriptures, Seek and you shall
find: to the end that it be not said to me, as it was to the Jews: ye err,
not knowing the Scriptures, and the power of God and the wisdom of God: and
truly after S. Paul, if Christ be the power and wisdom of God, and he that
knows not the scriptures, the same knows not y^ power of God nor his
wisedo^. To be ignorant of the Scriptures, is not to know Christ. etc. S.
Chrysostom in the Homely. 29. upon Benefis, says: There is neither grief
of body no^ mind in the nature of man, but it may have medicine of the
Scriptures. etc. These are sayings of great importance, and are true. They are
no Legend lies. They are confirmed by the word of God, which is the infallible
truth, Then if man know not God, as he ought to do, but by the Scriptures, and
that none can be saved, but by the knowledge of God, and Christ: The^ must it
needs follow, that ignorance of ye Scriptures bryugeth with it damnation. I
have alleged here mo sayings of the fathers, then I would have done (and
nothing so many in number as I could have done) but because the great swarm of
adversaries say, that it is not lawful or expedient, that every man should
read the Scriptures, but rather that the people should be ignorant, affirmyng
ignorance to be the mother of devotion: I could have au^swered it to the full
by the word of God alone, which word I think to be most sufficient: but
because these kind of men before named, will not accept Christ, to be a true
man of his word, except he have some of the doctors and fathers for witnesses:
Seeing now that it has pleased our good God, in mercy so to deal with us, as
he has in these our days, gyuyng us such means and introductions to the true
understanding of his most sacred word, as he has not of many ages done to any
nation, let us now therefore call upon the name of our merciful and mighty God,
desiring him to strengthen us, to search out this truth, and then in deed to
practice the same in our lives: least that he should in his justice take that
excellent Jewel of his word from us, and give it to a nation that shall bring
forth the fruits thereof. I humbly beseech that good God, in ye bowelles of his
mercy, for his Christ's sake: that he will so direct our lives, that by our
good example, such as he has not as yet called to the true knowledge of his
word, may embrace and receive the same, and so profit therein, that in the
end we may be all of one sheep fold, under the charge of our great
shephearde Jesus Christ. So be it.

The content of the first Dialogue, Entitled of the holy Inquisition,
Dependaunces, or the Accessories.
THe principal end whereunto I tend in this Dialogue, is to procure men to
search and to inquire of the will of God, by such means as he has given us
in his holy word, and sacred Scriptures, to the end ye they may know how to
frame and govern them selves according to the same: and that they give the^
selves to that study before all other things, in the most diligent and earnest
wise that shall be possible for them to do, without any delay at al: And that
they do thereof very well consider, seeing the great mischiefs and
inconveniences into the which men may fall, for not so doing, and the great
profit and commodity that may come unto them, if they do so diligently
employe them selves in the study thereof, as they ought to do.

And for so much as the heart of man is so froward, that he will in no wise be
governed according to the rule of the will and word of God, and yet for all
that he will in no wise acknowledge and confess the same openly, but searches
all excuses and color that may be found to cover and hide his hypocrisy and
wickedness: I do show plainly a number of the principal and chief excuses and
color that men allege at this present, to hinder and empeach them for
coming to God, and to procure their own health and salvation. After that we
will speak of such as arm them selves for their defense, with their
predecessors, with antiquity, with the number and outward appearance of the
world, and of those that think that their ignorance shall excuse the^, and of
the diversity of ignoraunces, and of the simplicity and malice that may be in
the^, and of their obstinacy, and persecutions, and of the negligence of all
men in matters of Religion. I will also speak of those that cover them selves
with the obedience that they do owe to their princes, and make them their
shieldes and their Gods, and of the mean that both the princes and people
should keep in such affairs. There shall also be mention made of such as
excuse the^ selves by means of their great business: moreover of Epicurians and
mockers of Gods word. Beside these there shall be mention made of such as are
of opinion that all nations shall be saved every one in his law. I will also say
somewhat of the certayntie of Gods word, and of the constancy, and assurednes
of his will, and of the law. And afterward in the Dialogues following, I will
speak of those that dwell upon Counsels, and will show upon what Council we
ought to dwell. I have entitled this Dialogue the holy search, or enquest:
because that in it mention is made, not only of that inquisition which falsely
is called holy, the which is made by the ministers of Antechrist, which
wrongfully are called the tryers of the faith, and work continually against
the true Christians that will acknowledge and confess none other doctrine or
Religion to be Christian, but only that doctrine which Jesus Christ has
taught, which is the holy inquiry of the knowledge of Gods word, necessary
for the souls health of all true Christians. It may also be named the
Accessories, for so much as I do set forth in this same, the shifts by the
which men have been accustomed to wage, the law with God, and to excuse the^
selves and cover their rebellion, which they have committed against his
Majesty.

The first Dialogue is entitled, the holy Inquisition, or the Dependaunces.
Of the blindness and disorder that is among men, in the matter of Religion,
and of their Salvation.
Tymothe. Daniell.
Daniel. And truly for my part, I meruell not at all, although the disorder
be great, but I meruell greatly to see that it is no gretter: albeit it were a
hard matter to add any thing thereunto. Tymothe. Why say thou so? Daniel.
Because that men are so blind and wicked, as though they had determinatly
conspired against their own salvation and health, and to thrust all, even
heaven and earth, into disorder, confusion and ruin, they could do no worse
then they do.

Of the Authors and causes of all order and disorder among men, and of the
goodness of God, and of the ingratitude and malice of men.
T. I Would be very glad if thou would declare and open unto me somewhat
particularly the causes hereof. D. I first ask thee, who is the author and
cause of all good order? T. God only, who has created and made all things,
and has set an order amongst his creatures, such as he knows to be meet
for them. D. And who is the author and cause of all disorder? T. The devil,
adversary to God and to all his creatures: who continually employeth all his
forces to overthrow and confound the whole order which God has set amongst
his creatures. D. Seeing that it is so, and that men estraunge them selves from
God, and flee from his council as much as in them is, and on the contrary,
endeavor them withal their power to join them selves to the devil, pleasuryng
in nothing so much as to follow his councels, and therefore do thou meruell
if all be in disorder and extreme confusion? Have thou not rather occasion much
more to wonder at the great goodness and inestimable suffraunce of God, how he
can endure so long, not only on so great an ingratitude, but rather so great
a fury and rage wherewith men are filled, by the which they enforce them by
all means possible utterly to destroy them selves, and to hasten their
destruction and to make it more fearful and horrible? T. It is very true. And
the whole being well considered, it seems that we have made a league with
Satan, our mortal enemy, to aid him to destroy our selves, and to hinder the
goodness that God of his grace, being moved of his own only goodwil, will
bestow upon us: and co^trarely that God by his great goodness and mercy does
fight against our malice and frowardnes, even as to bestow of his graces upon
us, will we, nill we, and to withdraw us from these bottomless pittes of
wickedness, into the which we go about to throw our selves most willingly.

Of the cause of the fall and ^uyne of mankind, and of the remedy and mean
how to recover the same.
D. THat same was the first fountain and spryng of all the disorders and
mischiefs that ever entered into the world. That same was the very pathe that
our first parents took: That same was the very mean by the which they fell
from that hye degree and state of felicity, peace, quietness, and joy, in the
which God had placed the^ in the beginning, through the which they have
dampened them selves withal their raze, and are fallen into this great
disorder and confusion, in the which we are even at this present, because that
we as their proper children follow eue^ the self and same council that they
followed. Therefore seeing that we do know the cause of the evil, why do we not
travail to find out the remedies contrary to the same? for so much as the
evil does proceed of that, that we refused to follow the council and will of
God, and followed the council and persuasio^ of the devil. Let us now leave the
devil withal his intisementes and persuasions, and let us enquire at the
mouth of God and take council of him, how to learn to know his will and to
follow the same: and then all disorder and confusion shall be clean put away, and
every thing shall be brought into good order. For in deed the only will of God,
and the obedience thereunto belongyng, is the mother and nource of al good
order. It is only she that does beget it, nourish it, and maintain it, and is
the only rule wherewith, if you measure all things well, al disorder shall be
changed into good order.

Of the difficulty that is in men to acknovvledge their errors and faults,
and of the arguments that they hold of ancient custom, and of the authority
of their predecessors, and of auncientie, and of the multitude, vvherevvith
they arm them selves.
T. I Do like all that which thou have said very well, but there are very
few that will take that way, for there are, that are so hard hearted and
obstinate, that a man shall not make them believe that they are in error: what
reason soever he bring against them out of the book of God, nor they will not
acknowledge their abuses and faults: although they be so filthy and apparent
that every man does see the^, and that every man does handle them. These men
allege their predecessors, and say that they will be no wiser, nor better then
they: for they say that they were honest men, and wise enough for to know the
will of God. Whereupon they conclude that if those were dampened, they will be also
dampened with them. An other sort allege ancient customs and the multitude of
men, and the continuance of time, and the auncienti of their order of life.

Of the process that men bring against God, and of the shyftes that they seek
to cloak their rebellion against hy^ word.
D. FOr so much as men will not be brought to that pass, to yield that
obedience unto God which they owe T. I would be very glad thereof.

How that al false Religion may be well defended: if that antiquity and the
authority of predecessors may have place.
D. LEt us now see, what foundation that has, whereof you have now spoken.
There is no error, sect, heresy, false doctrine, nor wickedness so great,
but that it may easily be defended, if such reasons might be allowed, For a
Jew, a Turcke, and a Pagane, may well allege as much. T. I confess the same.
D. If then these Christians (as they name the^) were Jews, Turks, or Pagans
borne, they would so continue, because they were so borne and also their
predecessors before them. T. There is no doubt of it. D. These kind of men
have none other reason to main tayne their order and manner of life, but only
wilfulnes and obstinacy, by the which they do right well declare that they have
not well considered what ye Lord says by his Prophet Ezechiell: Walk not in
the ways of your fathers, nor be Ezech. 20
you filed with their Idols, for I am ye Lord your God: you shall walk in my
commandments, and see that you swerve neither to the right hand, ne yet to
the left hand. It is also written, you shall not do as those ye ar gone before
you, neither file Leu. 18
you your selves as they have done. Take heed that you do not according to ye
custom of ye land of Egypt, in the which you have dwelled: Nor yet after ye
custom of ye land of Chanaan. So ye you walk not in their statutes: but se ye
you observe my ordinances, and that you give good head to my co^mau^deme^ts:
to ye end that you may walk in the^. Let us consider also how ye spirit of
God, did blame and reprove ye au^cie^t 1. Reg: ^^.
Samaritanes: These people did not hearken at all, but did live according to
their ancient custom. These people then feared ye Lord: but yet they served
their Idols notwtsta^ding. They follow their ancient custom even to this very
day. They do not fear the Lord, nor keep yt ceremonies and yt judgments, and
the law, and the commandment that ye Lord gave to the son of Jacob, which is
surnamed Israel. If our predecessors have walked in ye ways of ye Lord, we
may justly allege the^: for God has commanded us to follow such personages:
not for their own worthynes, for they are but me^ as we are, and not Gods: but
because yt they have followed in the way of the Lord, which says yt it is he,
yt is ye Lord our God, not our fathers. For he is ye most au^cie^t father yt we
have, which only is ye father of verity and truth, as the devil is the
father of lies, who is in deed a very ancient father, but not so ancient as
is God the father of all truth.

Of the arguments taken of the multitude.
T. WHat say thou of the arguments taken of the multitude? D. If it were
lawefull to allege the multitude of me^, the fools and wicked should always
have the better: for they are always the greatest number. Wherefore we are
forbidden in law, to follow the multitude, for to do evil. And our savior
Jesus Christ has willed us to pass through the strait way, for it is yt way
that leads to eternal life: and co^traryly forbids us to follow ye large,
through the which many pass, for that way leads to destruction. Esech. 20


Of the arguments of time auncientie.
T. WHat say thou of those that allege long time and auncientie? D. There is
no greater reason in the alleging of time and auncienti, then in the alleging
of the multitude. For what is more ancient in this world, then lying,
rebellion, and disobedience, manslaughter, violence, extorcion, whoredom,
Idolatry, villeny, and all kind of wickedness and abomination, for they
have had their being even immediately after the beginning of the world, as soon
as men were borne into the world. T. These things have begone at the least even
from the time, that the devil has been in the world, which is as ancient as
any man that ever was: for he is the auncientest of al creatures, and the
father of all the evil that ever was, is, or shall be in the world, and it is by
him, that it is entertained, increased, and maintained.

Of the fall of the devil, and of his children, whose predecessor he is.
D. IN deed it is very well said of thee, for our Savior Jesus Christ does
call him not only a liar, but also the father John. 8.
of lies. For albeit that God did creat him an Angel, and in ye same truth
that is in God: yet he could not so continue, but did fall from truth into
lies, which is the original of all other evils, even as truth is the
fountain of John. 8.
all goodness. He is also called a mansleyar and a murderer from the beginning.
And because that Cain did by and by follow him, S. John says that he is the
son of the devil, John. 3.
and that he slew his brother because he was of the wicked. And in the same
place he says also: he that sins is of the devil: for the devil sins
even from the beginning. In the which Saint John has followed the manner of
speaking of his master Jesus Christ: who called the Jews, children Ioh. viii.
of the devil: for that they were liars and murderers of the servants of
God, and of him which was and is the very son of God, which thing proceeded
of the very hatred that they had against the truth, which was preached unto
them by Jesus Christ and his Disciples.

Of the predecessors of the wicked and infidels, and how the auncientie of
sins does procure Gods wrath upon men, and does not excuse them.
T. IT follows then by this accoumpt, that such as follow and do the work of
the devil, ar ye devils sons and successors. D. The matter is plain,
wherefore thou may easily perceive by this what predecessors such kind of
me^ may allege, that will follow any other order of life, then yt which has been taught us by God: and what cause they have to glory of auncientie and of
old worlds. Let them the^ allege the devil for their most ancient father,
and with his lies fight against the eternal truth of God: let the mansleaers
and murderers allege Cain, and the Sodomites, those whose name they bear. All
these kinds of me^ and al other wicked ones have fathers very ancient, they
do follow one doctrine and one sort of life, which is very ancient: but
truth, virtue, holiness, innocence, and God which is there father, are yet more
ancient, for the devil, sin, and lies, of the which he is author, have had
their beginning, and reign, and therefore they shall once have an end. But
God is eternal, without beginning and without end, and so is his truth,
whereof he is father, and of all virtues else. And therefore God does not only
not supporte heresies, errors, superstitions and Idolatries, because of their
auncientie: but contrarylye he threateneth the Idolaters and wicked ones, that
the longer that they have continued in sin and followed the same, the greater
vengeance he will send upon them. Wherefore it is spoken by the Prophet Esaias:
Behold Esaias. 65.
it is written before me, I will no longer hold my peace, but will yield and
throw into their bosoms, your iniquities, with the iniquities of your fathers
also, says the Lord, and immediately after: whereby I will yield again unto
them in their bosom the measure of their first work. The Lord speaks this
upon good occasion, for if the father have been wicked, and the son is yet
more wicked, the iniquity of the father does not amend that of the son, and
make it virtue and not vice. T. No, but does increase it much more, for the
more of our predecessors that have been rebels against God, so much the greater
is our fault. D. It seems unto me, that those which allege their
predecessors and au^cientie, to maintain thereby their errors and abuse, do
even like as does a traitor, which would excuse and purge him self to ward
his prince, whom he has offended, through his treasons, that should allege in
his defense that his predecessors have always been traitors, and lived in ye
like infidelity toward their princes, as he has done toward his.
Thinckest thou not y^ this excuse were very lawful and mete to appease the
prince? T. Eue^ so mete that it might occasion him to cut clean from the
earth so wicked a race, to the end they should never be any more heard of. D.
It is even so.

How that none may so well allege au^cie^tie, as the faithful may, and how
that all the allegatio^s of the unfaithful, are nothing else but clokes, to cover
their hypocrisy and wickedness.
T. FOr so much as it is so, it seems unto me, that if auncientie might have
place, there are none that may so well allege auncientie as may the true
children of God. D. No man may deny yt. For God is the ancient of all worlds,
Esaias. xli. Daniel, vii Apoc. 12. 13
the first and the last, whose truth they follow, by the which they are made his
true and lawful children. Wherefore these men may lawfully allege, and
command unto their children, that which the Lord spoke by Jeremy, search
you out among Ierem. vi.
the ancient paths, which is the good way, and walk in the same. T. I do
think that those reasons, which thou have alleged, are sufficient enough
to confute and shame those kinds of me^, ye use these colors of
predecessors, of ye multitude, of times, and ages, to cloak therewith their
disobedience and rebellion against the word of God: for when al is said theris
but one thing, that hinders all this, to wit that such me^ will not be
obedient to the voice of the Lord, nor take counsel of him, nor follow him.
But for so much as they dare not say and declare the same openly, because that
they will not be known to be such as they are in deed, but would be thought of
me^ to be honest, and such as fear God, they seek these shifts and starting
holes. They are like to those advocates yt plead an evil cause, who have
determined to do no right to their contrary party, but seek only by
cauilling, how to shift out the matter, because that they will never be
enforced to grow to any honest end.

Of the langage that is in the heart of the hypocrites and wicked, and how
they cloak it before the world.
D. THou have stricken the white in the midst, and haste touched the very
pithe of that universal disease that raygneth through out the world, the
which Jesus Christ does thoroughly open unto us, when he says, speaking of his
doctrine: That he, that is desirous to do the, will of his John. vii.
father, shall soon know whether it be of God or no. There is but one thing,
that disguiseth this whole matter: which is that some of them can cover and
cloak otherwise and more finely then can the others. T. It is certain, without
any circumlocution, that those which search out such starting holes, should
rather say even at one word, that which the wicked ones spoke, of whom the
Scripture in the book of ye Prophets declares saying, we have nothing to do
with Esaias. lviii. Psalm. ii.
God: We will not know his ways: nor walk in the same, nor yet bear his
yoke. D. It is very true. But that should not be so honorable for them: nor
have so good a grace. For although they speak it in their heart, they will in
no wise that the world understand it, yea and that which is more vile, they are
so beastly, and do so much delight in their folly and filthy sophistry, that
they think eue^ by the same to be able to abuse and mock God, even as they
abuse and mock men: as though he saw not the wickedness of their hearts, and
wanted wisdom and understanding how to trap the subtle and crafty in their
cauteles and finesses.

Of the persecutours of the verity, and of the diverse sorts of them.
T. NOw if those of who^ we have already spoken, have very slender reason to
allege: how do you think of those that are not contented with such excuses,
but employ their whole forces to persecute the truth of God, and as many as
will teach and follow the same? D. There are three sorts of these kind of
people: there are of them that persecute the truth and those that follow it, of
a certain malice, even against the witness that ye spirit of God yeldeth in
their own consciences, only for hatred that they bear against God and his
truth. There are also others which do it not so much for hatered that they bear
against the truth, as for the honors and riches which they hope to obtain, by
resisting the same, or else that they have already obtained. The third are those
that do the like through ignorance.

Of such as persecute the truth of a purposed malice, and of the sin against
the holy Ghost, or sin to death.
T. WHat say thou of the first sort of those men? D. I say that they are of
the very nature of the devil, for he has no cause to hate God, and his truth,
but only of the wickedness that is in him, and of the envy and immortal
hatered that he does bear to God and his truth. T. Then is the sin of such
men like to the sin of the devil. D. It is even so, wherefore they shall have
like punishment, for they shall never obtain pardon nor grace. T. It is then
that sin that Jesus Christ does call the sin against the holy Ghost, and
saint John, sin unto death, for the which Math. xii. John. 5.
he forbids men to pray. But thinckest thou that there are any so wicked
and so full of malice upon the earth, that will so of purpose make wars
against God? D. If there were none, then would none have been found among the
Scribes and Phariseis, and the rest of the Jews, before whom Jesus Christ
made mention of the sin against the holy Ghost. I do think he would have
holden no such purpose, ne yet Saint John neither. And I am well assured that
Alexander the Coppersmith, of whom Saint Paul complains much, writing to
Timothe, did very nere approach the nature of such, if he were not fully such an
one, or else I should greatly marueil of the prayer that saint Paul makes ii.
Tim. iiii
against him saying: Alexander the Copersmyth has done me great hurt, the Lord
reward him according to his deserts, of whom be thou ware also, for he has
greatly resisted our preaching. If he had offended rather of ignorance, then of
malice, I believe that Saint Paul would rather have prayed for him, as he did
in the same epistle for others, with whom he was not well pleased, I doubt not
but he would have followed the example of Jesus Christ, and of saint Steven,
who prayed for their persecutours, rather then to have prayed against him. For
it seems that he had no hope of his conversion and health. T. Men may call
these kind of men the most wicked of all wicked, and the eldest sons of the
devil. But it is wonderful to see them so wicked, and to see them so
dispitefully to make wars against God and his truth, and yet they will cover
them with the name of God, and of the zeal of his glory. For there is none, be
he never so evil, if he be not utterly desperate, but when he persecuteth the
truth, he will pretend to favor the same, and would that men should think that
he persecuteth not the truth, but error and lies, for the mayntena^ce of Gods
truth. D. The matter is very apparent, namelye in the Scribes and Phariseis,
and in the bishops, high Priests, and Princes of Jerusalem, which crucified
Jesus Christ, and Math. 24. 27. 28. John. 5. 8. 10. 11. 18. 19
yet feigned that they persecuted him for blasphemyng* the majesty of God.
Wherefore the more that such men so villanously abuse the name of God,
wherewith to cover their murders and wickedness, the more are they accursed and
worthy of greater judgment.

Of those that resist the truth vvittingly, and do persecute it against their
own consciences, to please men thereby, and to get the riches of this world,
and of the calamities of these days.
T. LEt us leave this first kind of men, and let us speak of the other two
kinds of persecutours whom thou have already named. D. The second sort are
very near approchyng to the nature of the first, because that those that do
abuse the knowledge of God, do commonly fall from this degree of evil, into
that other extreme degree of wickedness, whereof we even now spoke. I do place
in this ra^cke those that do wittingly resist ye truth, and do make wars
against the people of God, as did Balaa^: not for yt they have so great a
hatered against the truth, as have these others of whom we have already
spoken, but they do it to maintain their Number. 24. ^^. Peter. ii
worldly pomp, and for their particular commodity: or else that they are
corrupted, by such as do resist the verity, as is aforesaid. T. The number
of such is great. For the chief thing that makes men to resist the word of
God, is, for that it is contrary to their ambition, glory and covetousness,
and to all their pleasures and corrupt affections. But among all, there are
none more worthy to be accounted such Balamites, then the learned men, that
are at this day in Christendom, whose number is great, which set out for
hyer to Antechrist and his adherentes, both their pens and tongues, to curse
or speak evil of those, that they know right well that God does bless, and
to hinder the course of the word of God, and the reformation of his Church.
Wherefore I do not greatly marvel, if that God oftentimes does throw such men
into a reprobate sense, which do so wickedly turn the truth of God, unto a
lie, and his justice, into injustice, and in this sort oftentimes Roma. i.
they become in the end the greatest adversaries of God, and his word that
the earth does bear: to the end that they may fill full the measure of their
iniquities. For such a wickedness, and frowardnes does well deserve such a
punishment and vengeance, at the hands of God, which is the most horrible
that may light upon men.

Of such as do resist the truth, and persecute the same through ignorance, and
zeal without understanding, and of the excuse of the ignorant.
D. THese people are far worse, then are these of whom we now mean to
speak, which do not offend but Roma. 10
through ignorance, and of a zeal that they have toward God, which is void
of knowledge, as many have done before our time, and namely Saint Paul, in the
time that he was a persecuto^^ of the Christians, for he him self confesses
that he did it of ignorance: wherefore there is more i. Timo. i
hope in these kind of men, then in either of the others. T. But I would
gladly know, whether these men shall be excused by their ignorance or no. D. Our
Lord Jesus Christ says, that the servant that knows his masters will, and
does it not, shall be more grievously beaten, then he yt is ignoraunte Luke. xii
thereof, and does it not: yet for all that both shall be punished. He says also
that those which have thrown the Gospel from them, shall receive greater
punishements in the day of judgment, then those of Sodom, and Gomorha, Math
x Luke. x
unto whom God has not offered so great grace: yet for all that, he says not
that those of Sodom, and Gomorha shall escape the judgment. T. This is a
marvelous and a horrible threatnyng.

How that the vva^t of the knowledge of God, and his truth, reigns not in
man, without his great fault.
T. THen if those that are ignorant in the doctrine of the Lord, and by means
of their ignorance do not for low it at all, shall not be excused by their
ignorance: how much less shall they that are not only content to be
ignorant of it, but do openly persecute the same? For there is no ignorance
in that behalf, but that a great piece of the fault is in our selves. For in
how many and sundry sorts does God daily declare him self to us? By how many
means does he call, and as it were draw us unto him? We do all know that
there is one God which is the Lord of all. T. That is very true. D. If he
be the Lord of all, then all men are bound to obey his laws and
ordinances. T. That is but reason. D. We can not observe and keep them, but
first we must know them and understand them. Wherefore before all other
things we must seek for this knowledge and understanding. For there is nothing
more honest, more profitable, nor more necessary for us; and contrariwise
there is no thing more dishonest, more worthy of blame, nor more hurtefull,
then is the ignorance of the law, and of the will of God. For if the
ignorance of any thing that is worthy to be known (men having means to
attain to the knowledge thereof) be to be condemned, and that so much the
sooner, in so much as the knowledge of the thing is more commendable and more
necessary: how much should we esteem dishonest and intolerable the ignorance
of the law, and of the will of God? Of the which the knowledge is more
necessary for us, then is the light of the sun, and the usage of the fire
and water, without the which this humane life can not continue. T. I confess
no less. For in as much as the soul of man is more excellent then is the
body, even so are the things more excellent and more necessary that do
concern the soul, or at the least both soul and body together, then are
those which appertayn only to the body. For if the soul be well and in good
case, the body can not be but well: but if the body be well entreated and
delicately used, and the soul evil entreated and negligently looked unto, the
evil entreatie of the soul shall in the end make the body partaker of the
same.

Of the great care and diligence that is in men to get those things that do
appertain to this present life, and of their negligence and carelessness that
they do use, as touching those things that appartayne to the life eternal.
D. Therefore I do not a little marvel to se the great pains and trauayles, that
men take to maintain this casual and miserable life: which is as it were, of
the continuance of one day in comparyson, yea in deed very short and full of
sorrow and misery, which life also many do not pass through even to the end,
and yet do they learn many Arts, Sciences and occupations through great
diligence, labor and travail, to the end to be by them sustained and
maintained in this present life: and that there are so few that have any care
to learn that Art and Science, by the which we may attain to that eternal and
most blessed life which shall continue with us for ever. For what is the whole
age of a man even from the day of his birth to the day of his death? T. It is
as it were the time of one day, and is more short to some, then to others: If
we shall compare it with the age of that life which lasts for ever. D. Yet
do we learn Arts, and Sciences and occupatio^s, in number, in manner infinite
which can stand us in no stead, but only in this miserable and wretched life:
And on the contrary, we have but one to learn which is able to lead us out
of all the miseries and wretchedness, wherein we are here wrapped, and to make us
happy for ever: and yet we make none accoumpte thereof, but fiee from it, reject
it, and persecute it: How shall we now be able to excuse our selves? We will
rise three or four hours before day, yea at mydnight: We will ride and run
day and night, both by sea and la^d, with great pain and travail, and
oftentimes in great danger of life, and Heb. 1. Act. x.
all this will we do to gain a little piece of money. But although that God
does send us his Prophets, his Apostles, yea his own son, and that he does
teach us by the mouth of his servant, which is his own mouth, through the
which he speaks to us daily in his Church, and does present unto us his
gifts and graces in our own houses, yea even in our beds and tables: Yet
notwithstanding we will not vouchsafe once to receive him, we will understand
nothing of him, nor yet learn any thing of him. Shall we then allege our
ignorance, and excuse our selves by it? Our Lord Jesus Christ did very well
understand of this sycknes, and of the danger thereof, wherefore he said to
those people that did follow him more for their bellye, then for any spiritual
doctrine: Employ your selves and traueil, not for that meat that perishes,
but for that which endures John. 6.
into eternal life, the which the son of man shall give unto you. When he
names by the name of meat his doctrine, which is the doctrine of salvation,
and the salvation which he brings unto us by means of ye same, the which we
can find in none but in him only: He therefore gives us plainly to
understand how much this doctrine, and this health are necessary for us, and
how earnestly and diligent lie we should labor for them: for so much as they
are things that are much more necessary to eternal life, then is the bodily
meat, for the corporal life, and it is so much more precious, as is the soul
more precious then the body.

Of the diligence that is in men to do evil, and of their negligence to do
well.
T. THou say nothng at all of such as employe their whole study and travail
to do evil, If every one of us would take so great travail in the search of
this holy work, whereof thou speak, as does the thief to rob, or the whore
in the use of her whoredom, we should accomplish a goodly work. The thieves
rise up in the night, and put them selves in great danger and, take very great
pains to cut men's throtes: and we will not once lift up our head from our
pillow to waken us, and to open our eyes to behold and consider those things
that appertain to our salvation. Satan our mortal enemy is so dillgent, and
continually lies in wait to find means how to ruinate and destroy 1. Peter.
^
us, and we of our part are utterly slothful and negligent in arming our selves
against his ambusshes and assaults, whereby we might avoid his snares.
Wherefore all things well considered, I see very small reason wherewith to
excuse men: For there is no man but may find means sufficient to attain to
this knowledge of God. If that we were so careful of the eternal life, as we
are of this present life, and would as wyllinglye seek for the one, as for the
other: for there is nothing that might aid us in that behalf, but God has
given it unto us.

Of the vices that make men ignorant of God and of his truth, and how the
servants of God continually bring accusation against them.
D. Saint Paul was not ignorant of this, and therefore although he say that
he has obtained mercy for his 1. Tun. 1.
persecuting the Church of God through ignorance, yet does he not excuse
himself by the same, nor lets to show the greuousnes of his sin, calling
himself the greatest of sinners, a blasphemer, a persecutor, a man full of
violence and oppression, and acknowledges him self woorthye of death and
eternal damnacion. If God of his great mercy and grace had not succored him,
whereof he should not have needed, if that he had not sinned, or if that his
ignorance might have excused him. For how good so ever his meaning was, or
how great so ever his zeal was toward the law of God, yet notwithstanding
his ignorance was not without a great portion of that negligence and
carelessness which is naturallye in men as touching the knowledge of God and
godly things, nor without some portion of the pride, rashness, wylfulnesse,
presumption, and arrogancy of the Phariseis, and of the leaven of hipocrisye
and superstition, which are very great vices, from the which even those that
are most perfect and holy, cannot well shyft them, although they do not
appear unto men. T. If then this does happen to such as are of the most
perfect sort, as to Saint Paul: what shall become then of a sort of glorious
and arrogant hipocrites, which are much more full of hypocrisy, then of good
conscience, and have a greater care for their own glory and profyt, then for
the glory of God, and the edification of his church, and have such an opinion
of their own knowledge, justice and perfection, that they think that no man
may amend or correct any jot thereof? For there be very few such ignorant ones
amongst the persecutors of the church, as was saint Paul before his
conversion. D. There is no doubt of that. Saint Peter does also impute unto
ignorance, in the sermon that he made in Jerusalem Act. 2.
upon the day of Pentecost, that which the Jews committed against our Lord
Jesus Christ, in the delivering of Math. 17. John. 18.
him to death, and preferring of Barrabas before him: yet not withstanding does
not he let to lay it greatly to their charges, as very murderers of the true
author of life, and very son of God. T. I perceive by that thou say, that
God requires of us very great diligence, and a great humility, abiection, and
despising of our selves: and that our negligence, slothe, presumption, and
arrogancye, and our vain glory and opinion that we have of our selves, are
most commonly the cause of our damnable ignorance. D. It is eue^ so.

Of such as do contemn the knowledge of God, even as though they did know
all things that appertain to true Christianity, and also of the knowledge
that men may attain unto in this life, and how to increase it.
T. I May well understand by these, what excuses those men may allege, that
say, when they are wylled to D. Saint Paul, who was taken up into the third
2. Cor. 1^. 13.
heaven, and did there understand of things, of the which it is not lawful for
any man to speak: was never of that opinion. For he does declare, that all
that ever we may understand upon the earth, of those matters, is nothing else
but 1. Cor. 13.
as we should behold a thing in a glass, or in a dark cloud or mist. Wherefore
whilst that we do live in this world, we must think that we are always like
unto little children, as touching this godly understanding, and that we have
need to profit and increase in the same daily, even as do the little children
that are at the school: and that we shall never see it as it is, until that we
be with God, and see him face to face, and know him as he has known us. For
if there be no man of so excellent a spirit, that ever may attain unto the
perfect understanding of human and visible things, nor yet of one of those
sciences that appertains unto this earthlye life: how great presumption is
it then for man, which is wholly created ignorant, as touching godly things, so
much to challenge to him self the knowledge and understanding of those
things, of the which the Angels themselves cannot perfectly understand: T.
Surely it is a great presumption of us, if we think that we be more perfect
then are the Angels.

Of the true knowledge of God, and of the true manner how to know his will,
and of the contemplative and active knowledge of the same.
D. OF the other part there is one thing to be considered in the knowledge and
understanding of the will Ioh. 7.
whether I speak of my self. For there are, that for curiositye and for some
other affection that they have that are desirous to know the will of God, but
not to that end to direct their lives according to the same. And therefore our
Lord Jesus Christ declares plainly by these words, that there is nothing
that lets men from the knowledge of the truth of God, but only the want
of the fear of God, and of good will to obey and honor him: Wherefore it
follows that there is no true knowledge of God, but only that which is
joined with this good and prompt will, and that none can judge of the Lords
doctrine, but those that are of such a mind. T. If the matter be so, a man
may not think, that he understands or knows any thing, although he have
all the holy scriptures by heart, and that he can devise and discourse thereof
at pleasure like an Angel: if he have not the effect of that doctrine
imprinted in his heart, and that he be as it were clothed with the same, in
such sort as he may put the same in practice at all times.

Of the true study of the holy scriptures, and of the true fruit that comes
of the same.
D. THat is very true. For if it were sufficient to have only a bare
knowledge of Gods word, and so behold

For to what end does a man learn an occupacion? Is it for that he will
never use it, or else only to talk of it, without practicing the same.
Would thou thyncke him perfect in any occupation, that never did practice
the same, nor never declared his experience by any piece of his work? T. No
truly. D. Would thou then think him to be a good Christian, that only
does boaste him of the name and knowledge of Christianitye, without the
declaryng of the same by his works. T. No in deed.

Of such Christians as are ignorant of the word of God, and of those that
abuse their knowledge in the same.
D. ANd now, which thynkest thou more woorthye of blame, either he that does
know no occupacion, and woorketh not: or else he that has a good occupacion,
and had rather to loyter, and to be slothful and idle, then to work at his
occupation? T. This last man, which does most abuse the gift of God.
Wherefore, if I should see such men in necessitye, I would not very
wyllynglye give alms to him that has had so small care to learn some
occupacion, whereby he might iustlye live: much less to give unto him that
had rather fast, and become a beggar, then to work and travail for his
living, when he may. D. And how would thou handle him, that has a goodlye
wit, and is well exercised and very excellent in some occupacion, and does
travail in the same with all diligence, but not to do any thing, whereby the
glory of God, or the wealth of his neighbor might be auaunced: but rather to
let and hinder both the one and the other, and to live in all villanye and
filthiness? T. I would judge him worthy to be hanged, or at the least to be
whipped. For if the others be worthy to be accounted unprofitable and wicked,
this kind of man is much more woorthye to be so accounted of: in as much as
he is not Matthew. 24. and. 25.
only content to hyde in the earth the talentes that God has given him, and
so to keep them without yeldyng any profyt of them: but that worse is, he
bestows them wyckedly, employing them in all that he may, to the hynderaunce
and loss of his master, and to make wars against him, at whose hands he
has received them. D. Then consider thou well, whether the Christian be worthy
of great blame, that has no understanding of Christianity, nor of that
occupation, whereof he bears the name. What honor is this man worthy of,
that has the knowledge thereof, and abuses the same, and does not only, not
practice the same in life, but conuerteth the gifts yt he has received of
God, into weapons wherewith to make wars against him, and against his own
salvation: to what end serves this knowledge? T. It serves to his more
speedy condemynation, and to increase his judgment more and more.

How much necessary the study of the word of God is, for all men during this
life, how apt and how wise so ever they be.
D. FOr this cause it is more then necessary, that we study continuallye in
the scole of the Lord. First there to learn how to judge between the good and
the evil, and that which pleases or displeases God, and that which is for
our salvation and dampnation, which we can not do unless that we have our
minds lightened by the word and spirit of God, for so much as there is in
us, whiles that we dwell in our own natural life, nothing else but ignorance
and darkness. And when we are once thus taught, it is then needful that we give
our whole desire unto it, which can not be, for 1. Cor, 12.
so much as it is wholye perverted and corrupted, hating that which is good,
and loving that which is evil, if it be not also reformed, forced, and urged
continuallye to the same by that very mean. Wherefore to conclude, for so much
as we have always ignorance within us, and that most commonly we do not that
good which we know, we have always need of this teacher, to instruce us in
that whereof we are yet ignorant, and put us in mind of that which we forget,
after that we have learned it, and to cause us to practice that which we do
already know. T. And in this sort thou do conclude for a full resolution,
ye al men, how wise so ever they be, have always need to learn in this
scoole, even to the death, and that both the learned and ignorant, shall always
find enough there to learn. D. It is so. For there are forms so high in that
school, that no living man shall ever be able to attain unto them. Wherefore
when we may be in that school, yea although it be in the most low forms, we
ought not a little to esteem it, but to think it a great grace of God, whose
good will and pleasure it is to accept us into the number of his scholars.

Of the desired ignorance, and of such as are vvillinglye ignorant.
T. FOr so much as thou have spoken of forms and orders of scholars, I would
feign know in what place thou D. It is not possible to find such men that bare
so shameleslye once to open their mouths in such sort. T. I speak that which
I have heard with mine own ears. But how many thinckest thou that there are,
who when they have known that the word of God is wholye contrary to their
affections, and that it teaches nothing but yt which is good and holy, they
will for that cause in no wise hear it? for so much as they fear to hear
that which shall not like them, and y^ they desire not at al to know those good
things that they may learn of ye same, and last of all to do them, when they
have understood and known them. D. The ignorance of such is an affected and
voluntary ignorance, much less worthy of pardon, then is that of those of
whom we spoke before. For these men where they should study to avoid
ignorance, and to become wise in the knowledge of God, seek means as much as
in them is to be still ignorant, and to fly the knowledge of God, without the
which they are not only unworthy, to be accounted Christians, but unworthy to
be accounted men. These me^ put them selves in great peril, they are of the
number of those yt the Psalmiste speaks of, which stop their ears, as do
the Psalm. 57.
Aspes and Serpents against the voice of the inchaunter, fearing yt being
inchaunted by ye word of God, they should lose their poison, and their
serpentiue and deuelish nature, the which they would still possess. T. It is
very true.

How that the publicatio^ that God has made of his word, and the declaration
that he has given of himself and of his will even from the beginning, makes
the ignorance of men to be without excuse.
D. IF that the subject of any prince be taken, and have offended the prince
his laws, after that they have been published lawfullye by sound of trompet
through out the whole country: shall he then say that he was ignorant of
them, and so be excused* T. I think not so, for that should make men
careless for the search of the understanding of the princes laws; and then
would every man allege such excuses: and by these means ye laws should have
no place, and the majesty of the prince be had in contempt, and all his laws
and ordinances should be but a mockerye, and the publication of them should
be no more auaylable, then if they were not published at all: for the
publicatio^ is for none other purpose, but to take away all occasions by the
which men may pretend ignorance. D. But if yt the prince were advertised that
such a man had been admonished to hearke^ to the publication of his laws and
ordinances, and that he would nothing understand thereof, but did all that
he could possible because that he would hear nothing of the^, to the intent
that he might be the more void of constrainte to observe them: should that be
an excuse for him toward his prince? T. No, but should make him more
inexcusable and more worthy of blame, for ye contempt in ye behalf should be
very great and not sufferable. D. Then if it be so yt a prince can not endure
to have his majesty so contempned and despised: May God which is ye Sovereign
prince of all princes, endure it toward his majesty, after so great a
proclamation of his will, as he has continually made unto men, even from ye
beginning of ye world, and does daily by marvelous means.

Of the means by the which God has, and does declare himself daily to men.
T. I Pray thee declare unto me somewhat particularlye, by what means he does
this whereof you speak. D. First he does it by the firmament, and by the
earth, and by all his creatures: which as continual preachers, never cease day,
nor night, to preach unto us the knowledge and marvelous works of that same
great God and prince their creator, even as David and S. Paul do witness.
After yt the great Psalm. 1^. Romans 1. Act. 14. 17.
endeavor of so many Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and ancient Doctors, with
a marvelous number of other good servants of God, who by their pure and holy
doctrine, good life and conversation, have filled yt whole earth with the
knowledge of God, and also do teach us at this present day by their holy
writings. But what shall we say of the very son of God, who came into the
world in proper person, to make this publication in the most solemn manner
that ever was made in the world? And even at this present day, how many and
sundry means has God given us to be instructed by, either by the mouth of
diverse which he sends unto us daily, or else by books written in all
languages, sent forth into the world, to all nations and regions of the same,
by his most marvelous providence, which thing shall make us all to be utterly
without excuse. Wherefore we may well say with the Prophet: The people which
Ose. 4.
are ignorant shall be beaten, and because that thou haste contempned and
refused knowledge, I will contempne thee and cast thee from me also.

Of those that cloak their rebellion against the word and will of God,
under color of obedience which they owe to the laws that their princes
have made against the same: and of such as commit the charge of their
consciences to their curates and pastors.
T. THere are yet others yt have a little better color, which say, that they
will believe as their princes do, and that they are bound to obey all their
laws and ordinances. There are also an other sort which commit them selves
wholly into the hands of their Bishops and curates, which are their pastors,
and spiritual fathers, and only those that have the charge of their souls,
and consciences, and shall render account, and endure the punishment for them,
if that through their negligence they be evil instructed. D. I fear that it
fares with many of those me^ that have such shyftes, as it did with the
Citizens of Jerusalem, which greatly marueiled to see their Lords and rulers
to suffer Jesus Christ without contradiction to teach openly in their temple,
cons^dering that before yt time they sought means to put him to death, all ye
while that they thought that their governors and pastors condemned both
Jesus Christ and his doctrine, and that they forbad that any man should speak
of him: this was a sufficient empeachment to hinder them from coming to him.
But afterward when they saw that they had left of to pursue him, and that they
were of the opinion that they had changed their purpose, and did acknowledge
Jesus Christ to be the true Christ, they did then no more depend upon the
judgments and consciences of the rulers and prelates, nor would in any wise
follow the opinion that they then knew that they had of Christ, but builded
them selves upon fair theology, and began to dispute with them selves to be a
hindraunce to the^ selves, saying: John. 7.
we know well from whence this fellow is. But when the Christ shall come, no
man shall know from whence he is. Wherefore do they not now say we must
acknowledge him for such an one, for that, yt our pastors do so. We do here
see the nature of man is prompt to follow rather evil examples then good. T.
It is even so. D. And on the other part I can not say, whether that these me^
that would have it seen to the world, that they have so good an opinion of
their princes, and are so ready to obey their laws and ordinances, would
make any great conscience to betraye and sell them even in their great need,
if there were any goodly occasion offered unto them by other princes better, to
advance them to honors and estates, then by their own. But I would gladly
know whether they do make so great difficulty to violate and break the good
statutes that are made by their princes, for the maintenance of their commonwealth, and to withholde from them, if they might safely do it without danger
of their person, any part of ye tribute and custom that is due unto them by
Gods ordinance: Romans 13. Math. 22.
as they do to transgress those wicked laws which are made contrary to all
right and equity for to hinder the course of the Gospel, and would seek to
understand the will of God, and to know those things that are necessary for the
health of their souls, and to serve God as he himself has commanded in his
law! I fear yt this great obedience which ye greatest number of the^ do bear
toward their princes and their laws, proceeds rather of rebellion which they
have in their hearts against God: then of ye truth and good affection which
they bear toward their prince and his laws. But because they dare not declare
openly the malice that is in there hearts, they are very glad to have this
color, and would rather have tyrants to their princes, which should forbid
the^ to hear the voice of the Lord, then to have good and Christian princes
which should compel the^ to hear, serve, and honor God.

Of those which commit idolatries to their princes, preferring their laws
before the laws of God, and what authority Gods word has over all men, and
over all their laws.
T. I Fear that there are many such, but there are many others that are not
the worste people of the world, but yet they are idolaters of their princes. D.
Thou do rightly term such men idolaters of their princes, for in that they
take their princes for their law in matters of religion and conscience, and
seek not otherwise to understand the will of God, they make them their Gods
and their idols, and do them great wrong, for it apperteyneth to no prince
nor to any creature what soever or how excellent he be, no not to the very
Angels of God, to give laws of religion and of the service of God, but only
to God himself, unto whom this service and the honor of such things does
appertain. And therefore S. Paul says, that if he himself, yea if an Angel
Galath. i.
coming from heaven should declare any other Gospel then yt which he has
taught, which is ye true Gospel of Christ, let ye same Angel be a cursed. If
he make the very Angels subject to ye word of God, how much rather should all
men which are but mortal creatures be subject to the word of God? For unto
whom does it belong to give laws, either to the prince or else to his
subjects? T. It is for the prince to give laws, and for the subjects to
receive and observe ye same. D. Well then if religion have none other regard,
but to the honor and service of ye only God, and yt his pleasure is that none
shall have power of ye souls and consciences of men, but only he himself, and
yt he has as great authority over the greatest Monarchs, Emperors, Kings,
princes and lords, as he has over the meanest of their subjects, how great a
presumption should this be of them: to dare take in hand to give laws to their
sovereign prince (I say of those yt are but his subjects and vassalles) to
command yt men shall serve him according to their appointment, and not to his?
T. That were to be Lord and not subject, master and not servant. D. Would
they them selves endure this at ye hands of ye greatest of their subjects? And
yet is there no such comparison between God and them, as is between them and
their subjects. For they are mortal men as their subjects are, they may
err as other men may. And fall by the just judgments of God, from rule into
servitude and subjection, yea oftentimes into ye subjection of their own
subjects, as it has oftentimes happened to many: for that they would not obey
God, but took in hand to be above him, none of these things may happen to
God.

Of the office of good princes and good subjects.
T. IT is not then the office of a good prince, to abolishe the orders of
religion, which God has given, or to forbid his subjects to follow the same,
either else to change the^ and to give and establishe others at his pleasure.
D. This is easy to understand, but in the contrary, his office is to cause
his subjects to observe them by all means possible, and he himself to be ye
first, to give good example, yt should observe those laws which God has
given unto him, and to govern his people according to the same: for he is
ordained of God, to be a prince for none other purpose. And therefore the Lord
did command that the book of the law should be red to the king, even as soon as he was chosen, to the end Romans 13. 1. Tim. 1. Deuteronomy. 1^.
he should know how to govern both himself and the people committed to his
charge, according to the doctrine of the same. If he be then such an one as he
ought to be, he will in no wise that his subjects shall do him that honor,
which in no wise appertains unto him: but will in any wise have that reserved
to God, unto who^ only it is due. He thinks that his subjects can do to him
no greater honor then to honor God, as they ought to do, for his honor
depends upon the honor of God, and he can not miss to be wol honored and
faythfullye served of his subjects, if that both he and his subjects do truly
and faithfully serve God. Wherefore his subjects should do him the greatest
wrong, and the greatest dishonor that is possible to imagine, in giving to
him ye honor which is not due unto him, nor ought of him to be accepted, for
it should be to set him in the place of God, and to make him an idol, and a
very devil: for that it is an honor which the devil always desires, to be
esteemed in the place of God. D. He has always showed it even from the beginning.

How those men obey the devil, and not their princes, which obey any
laws, by the which it is forbidden men truly to serve God.
T. ANd if a man should find any prince of that unspeakable pride, as there
have been heretofore amongst the Emperors, Kings, and Heathen princes, and
as the Pope is at this day in Christendom, following their trace and example,
the subjects were no more bound to obey him, in that behalf, then to obey the
devil, which is in deed a greater prince then all Tyrants, and all such as
look for like honors: for he is called ye God of this world, the prince of
this world, and the master of all blindenes: unto whom all these little
tyrants are but subjects and vassals, and as 2. Cori, 1. John. 12 Ephe. 26
it were of his little claws. And therefore, when subjects are brought to this
extremity, they may lawfully use, not only the same that the Apostles did,
who answered in the like Act. 5.
case, it is better to obey God then man: but they may allege also in their
defense these words, it is better to obey, God then the Deuell. For he that
obeys man against the commandment of Godde he obeys devil by who^ he
is possessed, and therefore shall inherito the inheritance with the devil and
with the tyraunts, of whom they did stand more in fear, then of God.

Of the lavvfull laws and statutes of Christian princes, and what men ought
to consider in them.
T. I Do think that thy meaning in this, is not, but that it is lawful for
Christian princes to give such laws and ordinances to their subjects, as are
agreeable to the word of God, to lead them into true Religion. D. How should
I condemn that, for so much as I say, it is their only office and duty for
in so doing, they them selves preach the law of God, but that whereof I spoke
before, I mean of such laws and edictes as are made directly against the
word of God, either to abolishe, or else to deface the true religion. T. Such
as do so, are very tyrants and not princes. D. Doubt you not but Nabuchodnesar,
Darius, and Cyrus, these heathen Daniel. 3. 4. Es^r. ^
Emperors and Kings, that have made so good laws, for the publishyng of ye
knowledge of God, through out their whole Empires and dominions, and have also
so well aided the true servants of God, but they shall rise in the judgment
of the Lord, to accuse grievously those princes yt have been renoumed in the
number of Christians, and have after so great light of the Gospel, let and
hindered the preaching of the knowledge of God and his will, in the
aduaunceme^t whereof the before named have trauayled.

Of such as are unfaithful servants in princes Courts: and of their
Councels against God, and of those princes, that do rather favor such
servants, then those that are of conscience whole and sound.
T. IT may be that there are Christian princes, which make laws very
contrary, to those that they would make, if they had in their Courts such
Courtiers, as was Daniel, Es^ras, and Nehemie, which would procure and stir
them up to glorify the name of God, as did these good servants and holy
Prophets of God, among the others. But in the stead of such, they have
oftentimes those that are clean contrary, who as much as they may do, let
them from the hearing and understanding of the word of God, whereby they
might learn truly to understand their office and duty, and they do not let
by all means possible, to procure them to persecute that doctrine, which they
ought chiefly to advance and maintain. D. It is not greatly to be marvelled
at: for such men often times deal with princes, as does the fowler with the
birds that he sets for his stale. For they establishe such Religion as
pleases them, and seems unto them best for their purpose, to noryshe and
maintain their ambition and their bellyes. And because they want power to
authorize their laws and ordinances, whereby to maintain their abuse, they
abuse the power and authority of the princes in that behalf, trayning them by
their wicked and lend council to do whatsoever pleases them. And as these men
do often times abuse the ignoraunces and negligences of princes, even so on the
other part, princes oftentimes abuse the malicious minds of such men: to serve
their ambition, tyrannics, and wicked enterprises. Wherefore they do more esteem
them being such, then if they were more honest, for they could not endure them
if they were honest, and would give them faithful council, both for the
honor of God, and the health both of their own souls, and of their subjects
also, because they have a desire to obey God, and to set his people in
Christian liberty to serve him, nor yet to reform the Church according to
his word, but rather to pervert the true religion, and to make it serve to
their purpose, even as Jeroboam did. They had rather to have such Prophets,
and Priests as had Jeroboam, Achab, and Iesabell, and such as were the
Magitiens of Pharao, the more clenly thereby to resist gods truth, the^ to have
the true servants of God that follow the trace of the true Prophets and
Apostles, And for so much as both they and their people desire such, and do
well deserve to have such, God does send them even such as they wish for: but
it is in his wrath, as he threatens by his Prophets, to the end they may have
the more mete matter, daily to harden their hearts more and more, and more
spedyly Esaias. 3. 29. Ose. 5. 7.
to hasten their destruction.

Of the Judgment of the Christian doctrine, and of those by whom it must be
reported, and of the princes duty in that behalf, and of the fault of those
that in the same, despise the Council of the servants of God.
T. I Do fear also that there be many that trust to much in matters of
Religion, to those that falsely name themselves to be of the Church, as
Prelates and Pastors of the Church, and that it fares with the^, eue^ as it
does with those that commit wholly their souls, and consciences into ye hands
of their Curates and Prelates. D. It is certain that in all states there are
some that think of religion as they do of some science or handy craft.
Wherefore when there happens any controversy, they think yt the knowledge
thereof does in no wise appartaine to the^, but yt it is enough for the^ to
commit the decidyng of the matter into the hands of the masters of the
occupation, and the^ to give their sentence, according to the report that
those men shall make, and to esteem done and concluded, what soever they
conclude. T. It seems to me that their opinion is not very evil. For who can
better judge of an art, or occupation, then the masters thereof? Were it not a
great presumption for any man, to take upon him to judge of that, which he
neither understands nor knows? D. This that thou say, is not all
together void of appearance: but here must we take good head, that no man be
deceived, for sith that here is the question, whether that men of occupation,
shall judge of things appertaining to their occupation, thou must the^
understand, that ^p man can truly judge of the Christian doctrine, but such as
are true Christians: for no man can understand the heavenly language, and the
language of God, but only the children of God, and those that are heavenly,
and not earthly. Wherefore I do more esteem, the judgment of a simple laborer,
being one of the elect of god, and regenerate by his holy spirit, then that of
all the Popes, Bishops, Priests, Philosophers and Doctors, which shall be
infidels or hipocrites, for such are not of the occupatio^ whereof we speak.
And as touching that which thou say, that I do not allow the council or
act of a prince, if he take in hand to do any thing of his own head, in
matter of Religion, without askyng at the mouth of the Lord, and taking advise
and counsel of him, by the help of those, unto whom he has given special
charge to open, and make manifest his will unto men, and to declare his law
unto them. And for this cause he has don this honor to his Prophets, and true
Ministers of his Church, to call them his mouth, promising that he will put
hie word into their mouth. And when the princes or people have taken in hand
any thing, that has appertained to the honor of God, and to their health,
without enquiring of the Lords will, at the hands of his Prophets, he has
rebuked them, because they did not ask at his Esaias. 1. 30. Ose. 1.
mouth, and that they have weaued their cloth, but not by his spirit, he
speaks to the same purpose by Malachie. The lyps of the Priest do keep
knowledge: men shall enquire of Mal^. i.
the law at his mouth, for he is the aungel and messenger of the Lord of hosts.

Of the causes why the princes should enquire of the will of God at the mouth
of his Ministers, and of the gifts of God, with the which he endueth his
Ministers.
T. IT seems unto me, that it is very commendable in a prince, chiefly when
there is question of the reformation of the Church, to enquire in that behalf,
of the will of God at the hands of those that are appointed by God, to declare
the same unto him. D. The thing is not only honest, but so necessary as
nothing is more necessary. For albeit the prince be of the wisest of his
Realm, yet notwithstanding, he can not know all things, but may oftentimes
deceive him self, even in his own devises. Wherefore, if he will at any time
use the counsel of his counselors, in matters of less importau^ce, or at the
least he is not thought to be wise, if that he do contemn it: how much is it
more requisite to do it, in a matter of so great weight, which touches the
honor of God, and the health, or damnation of every man, and not only of the
person of the prince, but also of all his subjects? T. Such a matter is well
worthy to be considered. D. Of the other side it is very like, that a good
Pastor, which makes special profession of the study of the holy Scriptures,
and has commission from God to expound them to others, is more exercised then
others, which are less occupied in the same, and more occupied in other
affairs, chiefly princes, which are daily troubled with business upon business,
from all parts. T. That is very true. D. This is also to be considered: That
although God be bound to no sort of men or estates, but that he may
distribute his gifts and graces to whom it pleases him: yet for all that the
matter is so, that he has a great regard to that holy Ministerye, which he
has ordained in his Church. Wherefore he does commonly more adorn with his
gifts and graces, those which he has justly and lawfully called to the same,
then any others. In like sort that for the love of the same, he does bestow
often times goodly and excellent Number. 14. John. 11. 18
gifts, eue^ upon those that are evil, to the end they shall serve in his
Church, of the which he has continually a singular care, we have manifest
example hereof, in Balaa^, and Caiphas: for although he were as evil a man as the
earth does bear, and that ye gift of god did profit him nothing as touching him
self: yet notwithstanding for the love of him, whose person he does represe^t
(as s. John does right will give us to understand) John. xv
God to honor this holy ministry ordained in his law, has made him to
Prophecy: Although he have reproved yt man and all his counsels. T. This is
worthy to be considered. D. Then if princes and al other men do this honor to
those that are skillful in any thing, to demand their advise and counsel,
and in that behalf to be governed rather by them, then by any others, they
should do great dishonor, not only to the Ministers of God, but also to their
ministry, and to God which is auctor thereof, if they esteem the^ less in
their estate, and do make less accou^pt of their counsel then they do of the
counsel of others which are not of like price.

Of the dishonor that those kind of men do unto God, which do not
vouchesafe to enquire of his will at the hands of his Ministers, and what
authority the Ministry of the Church has over all men.
T. THey would not do them so great honor, as did the ancient Paga^s and
Idolaters, here to fore to their false Prophets. For because they did hold
them for true Prophets, yet in their error they had this reverence toward
God, that hardly durst they enterprise any thing that was of importau^ce:
chiefly in things yt appartained to Religion, without inquiringe of the will of
their Gods, at the hands of their Prophets. D. Thou say truth. And
therefore it should be a great dishonor and reproach to those that are
Christians, if they do not God and his Prophets so great honor at least, as did
the Pagans and Idolaters to the devil and his Ministers: thincking to honor
God, and his servants. And beside this, if there were none other reason but
only this: which is, to wit, that God has willed that his Church should be
governed by the ministry of his word, which if it were not, but only to
observe the order, that God him self has appointed: yet is it requis^te that
all men, both great and small, submit the^ to that holy ministry, and to yt
order which god has established in ye same, as all the good kings and princes
of the people of God have always done, notwithstanding they have been
maruelously endued with the gifts of God. Was there ever prince, king, or
Prophet, more excellent then David, which was both a king, and a Prophet? T. I
think not. D. Yet notwtsta^ding, when he would give order for the building of
the temple, and for yt offices and ministeries appartayning to yt service of
God, he did take in hand nothing without the advice of ye Prophets of ye Lord,
and namely of Natha^: by 2. Sam. 7 i. Chro. 17.
who^ he understood, that ye Lords will was yt the temple should not builded by
him, although he had determined, and purposed it, but by his son Solomon. In
like manner Moses, Exodus 1^.
that great and excellent Prophet, did he contemn the counsel of Ieth^o, his
father in law, which was of far meaner estate then he?

Of the mean and order that princes should keep in judgment of things,
appertaining to Religion, and to the reformation of the same.
T. ALl those things do confirm the opinion of those yt will commit all things
y^ touch Religion, to those yt are called me^ of the Church, without dealing
therein the^ selves. D. If thou did well understand me, I did not conclude yt
princes, and other men should so address the^, to the Ministers of ye Church,
in matters of Religion and conscience, that they should not deal therein so far
as their office should require, and to take good head to what kind of men they
came: least that instead of coming to the true Prophets of God and Ministers
of Jesus Christ, they should address them to false Prophets and Ministers of
Antechriste, as often times it happens. T. This matter is perilous. D.
Therefore, as those men are greatly to be blamed, that make none accoumpt of
the true Ministers of God, and of his Church, but will govern the Church,
and determine of those things which appertain to the reformation of the same,
following their own fantasy and opinion, or else as though they had to determine
of some worldly policy: even so on the contrary part, these kind of men, are
greatly to be blamed, which will not deal in it at all, but suffer others to
determine of it even as it pleases them, and are ready to execute that which
others shall appoynte, without having any consideration of the thing them
selves. But even as shall please the others, without due examynyng and
understanding what they do. For, as the first sort usurp a great tyranny
over the Church, and over the Ministry of the same, like unto that of the
Antichriste, who has plucked to him self the authority to dispose of the
Church at his pleasure: in like manner this last sort do wrong to them
selves, and do frame and establishe a derye dangerous tyranny, both against
them selves, and against the whole Church, and do confirm Antechriste in the
possession which he has all ready usurped over them. For albeit that a
judge, before he give sentence, and before he will execute the same, do ask
the advice and counsel of his assistauntes, yet does he not give his
judgment according to their sentences, until he have well examined and
understood them. Otherwise he should put him self in great danger, and his
office should not be greatly differyng from the office of a hang man. For the
hang man does not assiste in the counsel of the judges, he gives no
sentence, he has no voice, nor medleth with their process or causes of those
that are delivered into his hands: he has nothing to do but only to execute
that which is given him in charge. But a judge, has far other authority
and greater charge, the which Pilate did very well know. And therefore he
would not condemn Jesus Christ upon the only report of the Jews, when
they had brought him unto him, all ready condemned in their Counsel: nor was
forthwith priest to command him to be executed as an evil doer, according
to their desire, but did diligently enquire of the causes, for the which they
would have him to be condemned: gyuing them plainly to understand, that he
would not be their hangemen, but would do the office of a Judge, which is
duly to examine the cause. And if he see the sentence of his assistauntes to
be unjust, he ought not to follow it, but to reiecte it, according to the
authority that God has given him: and he ought to put in use that, which is
written in the law to Exodus, 10
that same purpose. Thou shalt not follow the multitude, to do evil, for if
he give sentence contrary to right and equity, he shall make answer for the
same before God. For if he know it be unjust, and do consent and agree to it,
or else do dissemble the matter, or else through negligence he has not sought to
understand the truth of it. he can not excuse himself but that he is greatly
culpable before God. T. That is very true.

How men ought to have greater care for those matters that appertain to
Religion: then for any others, and the reasons why.
D. Moreover, the case in matters of Religion is not like to that of other
matters, or of other arts, sciences, occupations and estates. For when there
is question in matters of Religion, we have not a matter in hand of a piece of
money, or of a piece of land, or for an other man which touches not us at
all. But a matter of the greatest importance, that may be, and touches all men
in general and in particular, so near, as nothing in the world does so
nearely touch them. If there were question, of a piece of an earthly
inheritance, or else of our honor and fame, we would not so greatly put others
in trust, but yt we would put to our own hand: and would know in what sort ye
matter should pass. And further, if it were a matter yt touched our life, we
would not sleep the matter, but would be so much yt more careful, we would
leave no mean unsought for, yt might stand us instead. T. Experience teaches
it plainly. D. Now in this matter, whereof we speak, ye question is of ye
greatest honor or dishonor yt ever may happen unto us: here is ye question of a
marvelous great honor and glory, or else of an extreme shame and confusion,
which we shall once receive, before the face of God, and before al me^ which
ever have been, are, or shall be, this question is of an eternal inheritance: to
wit, of Paradise or else of hell, here is the question of our death, or of our
life, not only temporal, but eternal, Wherefore I do greatly marvel of those yt
have so great trust in ye sond faith of their Curates, Priests, Monckes,
Bishops and Prelates, which commit the^ wholly into their hands, both body
and soul. T. There are no small number of those that do so.

Of those men that make greater accoumpt of their purses, then of their
consciences, and of the danger into the which they cast themselves, that
commit such charge to false teachers, and they them selves to have no great
regard to the same.
D. I Would gladly understand of those me^, if they would in the like sort
trust the^ with their purses, and never ask the^ any account, nor never have
regard, to their government. T. I do not believe it. For there is no prince nor
other, yt commits ye charge of his affairs to others, but yt sometime he
will know, in what sort they are passed and done. D. The^ their purse is dearer
unto the^, the^ is their conscience or their soul, or else yt inheritance of
ye kingdom of heaven: for they put their trust in such, and commit the whole
charge of their consciences, and souls to those, that they would hardly trust
for a couple of crowns: they esteem very sle^derly, yt price which our Lord
Jesus Christ has paid for the^, which is much more precious i. Pet. ^
the^ all the gold and all ye silver, yt ever was in ye world. T. They do
trust, as I have already said, yt these men shall aunwere for the^. D. It is
very true yt they shall answer, but so much ye worse for those for who^ they
shall answer: for so much as they shall not by means thereof, be acquitted of
the det: for if it must needs be shall, that they answer, for default of
that debt which they owe to our great Lord, which shall not be paid unto
him, according as their office does require, it shall be the^ for that the same
is lost. The Lord speaking of this matter, says by his Prophet Ezechiel, yt he
Ezech. 3. 33
will require at yt hands of the shepherd, the blood of the sheep which shall
perish through his default, it follows the^, yt the sheep shall be lost, whose
blud ye lord will require. When a murderer has slain a man, and is taken upon
the same, he must Exampl^
satisfy the justice with his own life: yet notwithstanding the pain, which
he shall endure shall be small recompense, to him that is slain. Wherefore I do
not think, that those men which make so small accoumpte of the life of their
souls, would lose their bodily life, for such a price. T. I am of your
oppinion. D. If a man do us wrong, either in spoylynge us of our worldly
goods, or else in vsinge any violence against our persons, and we endure the
same patiently for the honor of God: this same shall be no loss unto us before
God, but a great profit, for God has promised, great reward to those that
shall suffer wrongfully. In this behalf none shall sustayn the loss, but he
only that Mar. v
has done the wrong: for he has hurt his soul and there is no hurt that
can so hurt a man, as can that hurt. But in this matter whereof we do now
speak, the soul is not only hurt, but slain: wherefore the loss can never
be recovered. And therefore I would wish that such as are of that opinion,
should well consider that which Jesus Christ said, let them alone, for they
are blind, and leaders of the blind: If the blind lead the blind, both
shall fall into the dyke. He does not say that the blind guide Mathe. 15.
shall alone fall into the dyke, but he also that shall be led by him: wherefore
that council is best to be followed which Jesus Christ him self does give in
that behalf, in the same passage or text, he does not say: Follow such
leaders, and if they lead you wrong, they shall endure the punishment for
you, and you shall go free: but he gives expressed commandment to flee from
them, declaryng plainly in what peril they put them selves, that follow such
guides.

Of the care that every man ought to have, to know the way of salvation,
and how they ought to bevvare of false Prophets and seductors of the people.
T. THen we ought not to be so careless, but that we must enquire of that same
way by the which we should pass, to the end that we might easily know,
if that instead of leadyng us in the right way, they should lead us wrong.
D. It is very true: and also we ought not to be so rash and foolish, that we
should suddenly take guydes and conductors, without having any knowledge or
testimony of them. For if we should but pass through a wood, or some other
passage which were hard and difficill, we would not take a man at adventure
to be our guide, of who^ we could not assure us, least that instead of guidyng
us the right way, he should bring us into the lappes of thieves to cut our
throats, as it happens oftentimes to many. T. Yet not withstanding, this
way, which we must pass, is the most dangerous of al: for there needs no
great straying, to loose us all. D. Therefore it is more needful to take good
head in this matter, then in any matter else. And for this cause are we so often
warned in the holy Scriptures, not only by the Prophets and Apostles, but also
by Jesus Christ our Lord, to take heed of false Prophets, which Math. v^^
Acts. x Roma. xvi. Phill. 3
come to us in sheep clothing, and within are ravening Wolves. This
admonition is not given unto us without cause. T. That is doubtless.

How that the admonitions which are written in the holy Scriptures, against
the false Prophets, do make them to be without excuse, that suffer them selves
to be seduced by them.
D. FOr so much then that we are all advertised, and that the spirit of God
has given us so many marks and signs, whereby to know these false Prophets,
we may no more pretend ignorance in this point for our defense, then in the
other matters whereof we have already spoken. For the case is not like with a
Christian, in matters of Christian religion, as it is in other arts and
sciences, for that it suffices any man, because he ca^ not learn all arts
and sciences, to learn one or two, and to be excellent in some one science.
But the substance of religion is of an other nature, it is an art, it is a
science and occupation, which al men ought to understand, although all men may
not be of like excellency in ye knowledge of the same, nor yet be sufficient
to execute the office of a Prophet, or of an Apostle, or of a pastor and
Doctor in the church, yet at the least every man is bound to know so much, as
he may understand how to frame and govern himself according to the will of God,
to know how to embrace that which is good, and to refuse that which is evil,
and to know how to keep himself from false Prophets and seducers: for he that
ca^ not do this, shall pay for his ignorance, as it has been sufficiently
proved by the reasons before alleged. Wherefore every man has great occasion
before al other things, diligently to commend himself to God in these affairs,
with certain affiaunce to be heard, for he speaks not this in vain: seek
and you shall find, ask, and it shall be given unto you, knock at the door,
and it shall be opened unto you, for he that seeks, finds, Mat. 7.
and he that asks, receaueth, and he that knocks at the door, enters. For
the Lord is nere unto those that call upon him in veritye. Beside this it is
earnestlye required of every Psalm. 144
man to seek out diligently those that are good teathers, least that in steed
of the shepeheard, we follow the Wolf, trymmed like a shepeheard, which will
devour us: for we may not through our negligence attempt God. And if we do
this, having a sincere and true care for the glory of God, and for our own
salvation, God will not leave us without the conducte of his holy spirit, and
without provision of his goodness, according as it shall be needful for the
salvation of every man, for that which Jesus Christ has spoken, shall remain
always true: to wit, that he that will John. vii
do the will of God, shall understand of his doctrine, whether it be of God or
no.

Of such as alvvayes excuse them by their great business, and can never find
convenient time to hearken to the word of God, and to lay their hands to
his work
T. I Am of your opinion: but there are yet an other sort which seem to have
more reason, and are better affected toward the word of God, then are those, of
whom we did even now speak. But yet when I consider their works, I can not
commend them. There are that will soon grant us all that whereof we have
heretofore disputed: they will confess that we must inquire of ye will of God
in his word: They will well allow the doctrine of those that do truly preach
the word of God, and follow the same, and employe them selves in the business of
the Lord: but yet for all yt they will not be over busy in it, but will find a
thousand excuses. They will allege an infinite number of empeachmentes and
empedimentes, which let them. Tere is among these men a number of mockers,
which say, we must let God alone with the matter, and that he will well
accomplish his work without us. D. I do well understand of what kind of men
thou speak: they are of the number of those which our Lord Jesus Christ
tells us of in the passage of those Math. xx^i Luke. xiiii.
conuited gestes to the marriage, of the which the one excused himself by his
farm, the other by his oxen newly bought, and the other by his new married
wife: to be short, every one had such plentye of excuses, that not one of the^
came to the marriage, of those that were bidden, but that of necessitye
strangers were called. And as touching those men which say that God will well
bring his works to pass without them, they say truth, for God needs not any
man to accomplish any of his works, For when he sets us to work, it is
not for need as though he could not do all that pleases him to do, without
us. But when he calls us into his works, he does it to do us honor, in
that we honor him, making us the ministers of his grace. And therefore we
should be the more diligent to take the matter in hand, which if we do not,
he will assuredlye give us to understand that he has works to do, the which
he will not do without us: to wit, when he shall punysh us for our slothfulnes
and ingratitude. T. Thou say very well: for we must needs be there in
proper person, for that work shall not go in hand without us. D. These mockers
which so play with God, shall feel this sooner then they would. We may well
join also with these me^, those of whom the Prophet Aggeus does complain, who
being delivered from Agg. ^,
the captiuetie of Babylon, and having liberty and good means to build
again the Lords temple (the which in time before they had so much desired,
or at the least made it to seem so) had no care at all once to lay their
hands to it: but when the Prophet exhorted them to go in hand with it,
according to their duetye and office, they were never unfurnished of excuse,
they alleged that the time was not yet come, for the which they looked. And to
cover their hypocrisy the better, they would in like manner cloak their
carelesnes, even by the word of God. But the Prophet Aggeus does plainly show
where their grief does hold them, saying: that to build their own houses,
and to do their own business, they had always time convenient but to build the
house of God, and to lay their hands to his labor: they could never find any
meet time. By the which he does plainly give them to understand, that if they
had, had so good affection toward the work of the Lord, as they had toward
their own worldly business, they would have found the time as apt to take the
matter in hand, as they found it for other matters. T. It is to be feared that
God will recompense them according to their deserte: for if they can find no
meet time wherein to serve him, he will find time convenient enough wherein to
chastise them thorowlye for their hypocrisy and negligence. D. The Prophet
also did not hyde it, but declared plainly unto them what profit there would
rise unto the^ by such a contempt of God, saying: you sow much and gather
little, and if you scrape and gather money together, it is as though you should
put it into a bottomless sack or purse.

Of the means vvherby men's business may be advanced or hindered.
T. BY this account, men do greatly deceive them selves, they think that all
the time which is spent in the service of God, is lost, where as they should
think all other time to be lost which is not employed in the same. For if
they should bestow but one hour to hear the word preached, they would think
that their business were maruelously hindered, but they will never grudge to loose.
iij. or. iiij. x. or. xij either in a bancket, play, or such like vanity.
And for my part, I am of opinion that if we did lay our hands to the labor
of the Lord as we ought to do, one hour should more profit us, then does
now one day, one day more then a month, one month more then a year. But for
as much as we do it not, when we think to go forward, we go backward: and
find our selves so encombred with business upon business, and empeachment upon
empeachment, and evil hap upon evil hap, in such sort as we can never
come to any end. D. Our Lord Jesus Christ does plainly give us to understand
the same, when he says, after that he has spoken of necessary things
appertayning to this life, seek first the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, Mat. vi
and all these things shall be given unto you. Then by the contrary it
follows, that in seking first our selves, and not effeming God, his kingdom
and word, all that is contrary shall be given unto us. T. We are well worthy of
it.

Of mockers which love not the Gospel, and yet make the court unto it, and
make a show as though they had great devotion to it.
D. FOr a full resolution, it seems to me that these kind of men of whom we
do now speak, do not far otherwise differ from those men of whom we last
spoke, the^ the two brethren of whom our Lord Jesus Christ speaks in a
parable, differed the one from the other. The father commanded Math. xxi.
the one to go into the vineyarde, he answered plainly that he would not:
notwithstanding this churlishe answer, he did afterward acknowledge his
fault, repented him, and went thither. The like commandment was given to the
other, who answered franckly, he would do it, but in deed did it not, upon
this same Jesus Christ asked, who was the better of them both, and who did best
observe the commandment of the father. T. I would think the first did it:
for although he answered fiercely in words, he yet declared that his heart
was better then his words did express. And contrarilye, ye other declared
himself to be but an hipocrite, giving his father fair words, wherewith to
abuse him. D. It f^roth in manner so with these men, they sh^we as though they
did better understand, and had a greater zeal to the word of God, then those
which resist it more openly: and yet oftentimes they bear less good will
to it. There is no difference but in this, that these men are greater traitors
to God, and greater mockers of his word, in so much as they do it more
couertlye, and more craftelye. And therefore we see oftentimes come to pass in
them, that which our Lord Jesus Christ has said, the first shall be the
last, and the last the first. It is often seen Math. xx.
that those which in the beginning did most resist the word of God, in the end
have been the best and most constant, after that God has given them to know
their faults and ignoraunces, and has illuminated them. And on the contrary,
many after that they have made a goodlye show and countenance a long time
to the Gospel, they revolt, and being given into a reprobate sense, do
persecute it, being rejected of God as mockers, which have abused his
knowledge. T. That is a punishment most to be feared.

What diligence men ought to use in follovving that vocation whereunto God
has appointed them, and of those Epicurians that are among the Christians,
and of the diversity of them.
D. THerefore, when the Lord does call us, let us make haste as did the
Israelites in coming out of Egypt: and let us not take so great leisure that
we suffer our Exodus 12.
dowe to be leauyned, let us rather eat our bread vnleauined, then to suffer
it to be long corrupted with the leauine Mathe. 16 Mar. viii Luke. xvii.
of the Egiptians, Pharisees, Saduces, and Herod. Let us well remember that
which Jesus Christ spoke of Lothes wife, and that answer which he made to
him that des^red that he might tarry and burye his father: and to an Matthew.
^i^^
other which in like sort desired that he might go and take his leave of
his friends and cosins: suffer says he, the dead to burye the dead, but for
thy part show thou forth the kingdom of God. And again, What so ever he be
Luke ix
that has once laid his hand to the plow, and does look behind him, is not
meet for the kingdom of God. T. I do greatly fear that there are many
Epicurians among those hypocrites, of whom we have spoken. For although there
be many in the world that are taken for hypocrites, because they love not
God, nor show it so to the world: yet notwithstanding there are some
Epicurians the one sort more couerte then the other. There is one sort which
esteem the whole volume of the sacred Scriptures to be but fables, and they
turn it all into iestyng and scoffing. There is an other sort which dare not
so openly declare what they think: yet do they not much differ in opinion
from those of whom we have spoken. There is beside, these an other sort which
think that every man shall be saved in his religion, what so ever it be, if
so be that they serve God in a good intent.

Of the testimonies by the which men declare them selves to be very
Epicurians, and of the providence and justice of God against their false
opinions.
D. ALl those opinions are wonderful dangerous, and notwithstanding the same,
the greatest number of Math. xxv Roma. ^iii ^. Cor. iiii
men at this day declare them selves by their works, to be of that
judgment. For if they believed assuredly that there were a GOD, and an other
life, and a judgment, to the which every man shall be called to render a^^
account, and that there were a Paradyse and a h^ll: they would neither speak
nor live in such sort as they do: but would stand in more fear of God, and
bear greater reverence to his law and word. For if there be a God, (which no
man can deny, unless he be more barbarous then all the barbarous people that
ever were in the world, ye^ then barbarousnes it self, and more brute and
furious the^ are all savage and brute beasts, and more deuilish then the devil
himself) it must needs be that such things are, for the one of them can not
be without the other. God can not be God without his providence and justice, if
he have his providence, saying he has discerned men from beasts, and has
made him a partaker of his godly nature, there is no doubt but that he has
other care of him then of beasts, Gene. ii i. Pe. i Psalm. v John. 5 Roma. iii
and has created him to an other end and to an other life and felicity, then
he has created them. If he have justice and goodness in him, it is very
certain that the good pleases him, and the evil displeases him: and that he
will punyshe the one, and reward the other. And for so much as we do not here
plainly see his judgments in all things, that is unto us a most certain
argument that there is an other life, in the which God will make known that
which is hidden to us here: otherwise he should not be that which he is. T. It
is very certain.

Of the light of Gods word which is given to men, and of the nature of the
same, and of the contempt that is among men.
D. If it be so (as in deed every man that is of good judgment does know) we
ought not to think that he has created a Sun whereby to lighten the eyes of
man, and to conducte him and lead him to those things that are necessary for
this life, and that he which is the very true and only sun, fountain of all
light, has not prepared light for the spiritual eyes of our soul, to lead
them to those things which are necessary to eternal life. For if he have had
so great care for our body, which is but earth and corruption, and for this
present life, which is common with the life of other creatures, what shall we
think that he has of the soul, for whose sake he has made the body, and of
the immortality which he has prepared for him? And it is very true that the
true light of the soul, is that same word of God, by the which God does
instruct us. Which according to the testimonye of David is that only light
which does lighten our eyes, and does direct our steps, and does also give
wisdom to them that are ignorant, wherefore when psalm. cxix
we shall have to do with men, to persuade them to read the holy scriptures,
and to hear the word of God, and to behold that light which shyneth un to us
in the same: it is no more in effect but as we should exhort men to open
their eyes, to behold and receive the light of the sun. Should we not think
it very strange if we should be enforced daily to solicit men to this, and
should he not of right be thought to be very ingrate, that had rather to hold
his eyes shut and to be blind still, then to behold this light of the sun,
and to be lightened by ye same? T. Yes truly. D. Yet notwithstanding we do
daily much worse, when that we are provoked to understand and harken to the
word of God in sundry wise, and yet we will not understand of it at all. T.
Thou say very true: but men do not see so far.

Of the authority of holy Scriptures, and in what sort God has declared his
will unto men, and how much it agrees with his providence.
D. ANd as concerning those that do not believe that the holy Scriptures and
word of God, are the word of God, they are more void of reason then are
those y^ should say there is no sun in the world: or if there be one, that
he shyneth not: or else that the light by the which we are lighted, is not of
the sun, for we ought not to doubt but John. 1.
that God, who is the perfect and true light, has manifested himself unto
men, whom he has created of purpose to have the fruition and enjoying of this
divine light, and to walk in the same, And if it be so: I would gladlye
know of those which bear so small reverence to the holy Scriptures, if they
know any other more certain mean, more meet and more excellent, by the
which GOD has declared himself unto men: and whether there be any other
doctrine more worthy of his majesty, and does contain and reuele unto men
things more hye, more godly, more secreate, more unknown, and
incomprehensible to all men's understanding, more true and more certain, and
that does touch and press man's heart more, and has in them greater virtue
and effect, be it to humble and beat them down, be it to releue and
comfort them, and is in all respects more meet, more profitable, and more
wholesome for man, and better approved and confyrmed by infynite testimonies of
God: and that does better deserve to be credited, then this, which has been
revealed by the Aungells of heaven, who daily do see the face of God: Also
Mat. xviii Heb. i.
by the Patriarchs, Prophettes, Apostles, and the most holy and most
virtuous personages that ever the earth did bear, and that of so great an
accord and perpetual consent, and all ready by so long a time even from
the beginning of the world by continual succession. T. Thou alledgest here
great matters, and of great weighte, to approve that which thou haste declared.

D. Yea but I have not yet touched the principal: to wit, that the very
Son of God, which is the true word, the Image, the light and bryghtnesse
of the John. 1. Heb. i.
glory of God, has been sent unto us from the bosom of the Father, to
declare and confyrme the same the more, dwelling among men in the true nature
and shape of man. Also we have here no small testimonye that this doctrine is
of God, in that the devil did never make so long and cruel wars against
any doctrine, what so ever it was, as he has against this: and in that it
has been always so miraculouslye conserved, by the singular providence and
power of God, against all the assaults of the devil: and that God has
punyshed with horrible plagues those that have stood up against the same.
As the examples of all ages do right well witness. What shall we also say
in that it has been approved and ratifyed so myghtely by so many signs and
miracles (which could in no wise be done but by the only power of God) and
also by the blood, death, and confession of so many Martyrs and confessors,
which are in number infinite? T. If ever God did speak, or if ever he did
show himself to men to deliver unto them any kind of doctrine, there is
none other doctrine that we may assuredlye believe to be of God, but only
this doctrine, of the which thou haste now spoken. And therefore we are fullye
resolved, that GOD has showed himself to men, and that he has revealed unto
them the doctrine of salvation. For if the kings and princes of the earth,
yea the most barbarous, brute and cruel men of the earth, did well know that
men could not live without laws, but were constrained to make laws, and to
submit them selves, knowing the same to be very necessary for the
conservation of mankind, and common policy: do we think that GOD the
sovereign king and prince of every creature, who is himself the law to
all, would leave men without a law, and his people without geuyng them an
order how to live? He that has given a law to all his other creatures,
would he leave man, which is the chief of his works among all the visible
creatures, and he whom he has appointed prince and ruler over them, to be
without law and direction. D. Who can think the contrary, if he be not more
beastlye then the very beasts? T. Wherefore for my part I do conclude, that
this same, whereof we have spoken, is the true law and doctrine of God, and
that there is none other, but that all others must be governed by this only
law, and to reiecte all such as are not agreing with this.

Of the most deuely she peruersitie of the Epicurians, and how they do
agree with the doctrine of Mahomet, who is of opinion that all men shall be
saved in their own law.
D. THou do conclude very well, but the Epicurians, of whom we speak will
not so easily agree to our sayings. For it is hard to satisfye such as do
delight to mock God, and to make wars against him, and to persuade in matters
of religion, such as desire to live without religigion. And in deed such swyne
are not worthy to be disputed with in such a matter, for so much as in the
same they declare them selves to be more beastly then ye brute beasts, and
that they deny the foundation, which the devils them selves are compelled to
confess, for they doubt not at all but that there is one God, and one Lord
Jesus Christ, who^ they fear and stand in awe of. And even as those reasons
which we have already alleged, are sufficient for all such as fear God, and
are tractable and not contentions: even so are they sufficient to overthrow
and tread down the error of them that do affirm that every man shall be
saved in his own law, this proposition should be true, if James. ii Met. 8
Mark, v
every man did embrace the law of God, this point is an article of the law
of Mahomet, because that he does imagine that God has given diverse laws unto
men, in diverse times, and in diverse places, according to the diversity of
the people and nations, wherefore he does conclude that every nation shall be
saved in obseruyng that law, and form of religion that he has received of
God. In the which, although he do most filthilye err, yet notwithstanding he
has more reason then these men of whom we speak, which accept for a law
and religion, all that ever any of them does invent and imagine of his own
brains.

Of man's traditions and of the rule which is set before us in the holy
Scriptures, of all religion and doctrine.
T. THey think also, because they have received these things of their
fathers, that the same which they follow, is the law and religion which God
has ordained. D. Yea but there are of them that do well know the contrary,
and are well assured that they embrace many things which are invented by men:
wherefore if they will attribute so great worthiness to the traditions of men, as
to that law and doctrine which God himself has given, and reveled by his
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, and chiefly by Jesus Christ his only son
our Lord: we shall never have end of giving laws, nor shall we have any thing,
whereunto we may assuredly trust. There shall be no difference between God and
man, between the master and the servant, for every man shall be a law maker.
And Satan may continually by this means spread abroad what doctrine so ever
shall please him, and vouch it to be the doctrine of God. And then in vain
has God given his law and word, by his Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles,
and especially by his own son Jesus Christ. In vain should he have
forbidden to add any thing to it, or to diminishe it, Exodus 20 Heb. 1. Gal
iii. Act. vii. Deuteronomy 4 1^ P^o^^. xxx.
or else to receive any other doctrine, no although it were brought in deed by
the Angels of heaven. Wherefore if he will that we give such honor unto that
word, which has been once revealed by the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles,
and by Jesus Christ our only Lord, that the very doctrince of the Aungells
shall be examined by this rule: do we then think that he will give more
power to man over his word, then to Aungells. To what end do all the
admonitions serve which are given us, for to beware Deuteronomy. xiii. Mat. 7. Acts.
xx. Roma. xvi. i. John. iiii
of false Prophets, to shonne those that are heretics, and to prove the
spirits, whether they be of God or no, if it were all one to follow what
law a man would? and that God would be contented to be served with our good
intentes, man should never have neded that he should have given him any
law, but only his own intention, commaundyng him to do only that which
should come into his mind, and should seem good unto him. Which thing he
has earnestlye forbidden, saying, honor Deuteronomy. 11.
not thou the Lord in that sort that seems good unto thy self, but in that
sort only whicch I do command thee, without declyning either to the right
hand, or to the left.

How we ought to judge of that, where God forbyddeth us to do that which
seems good in our own opinion: and of the assurance of our consciences by
the word of God, without the vvhi^he nothing can please God that man can do.
T. IF he will that we do not that which we think to be good, what shall we
then do? That which we think to be evil? D. He does not at all forbid us to
do that which we think to be good, if it be good in deed, but for so much
as of our own nature we are ignorance and blind, and that oftentimes we take
darkness for light, and light for darkness, the good for evil, and the eui^l
for good, the sweet for sour, and the sour for sweet: he will not that we
govern our selves according to our own fantasyes, but has given us an order,
to the end that we might perfectlye discern these things, and not to take
the one for the other: which is not possible for us to do of our selves,
without the mean that he has given us. And for that cause he says, thou
shalt do only that which I do command thee. Wherefore it does follow that
what so ever Deuteronomy. ^8.
man does, can not please God, unless he be assured that GOD has commanded
and ordained it, and can not do it without doing great wrong and violating
the commandment of God. For first of al, none can please him without faith.
And secondarilye, faith can not be faith, without an undoubted assurance. And
certain assurance can not be, but in the word of God. For how can I be assured
that God allows this, and disaloweth that, but by the understanding of his
will, which I can not have but by the declaration thereof, which he has by his
word? On Heb. 11
the other part, howbeit that that which I should do, should not be contrary
to his will, but should be such as he has expressedlye commanded, yet could
not my heart be thorowlye agreeable unto him, but should be worthy of great
blame: if I did it without this assurance, because that I should not bear to
the majesty of God, the honor and reverence which I do owe unto the same.
For I ought to have him in that reverence, that if I doubt of the thing, I
should first inquire and be assured of it, to the end that I should not put
my self in danger to offend him: that, which we should more fear then
death. For if I make so small account to put my self in such hasarde, I do
declare by such contempt, that I do not so fear God as I ought to do, nor
do so reverence his holy name as my duty requires. T. If these kind of me^
offend, which do good things in doubt: how grievous is then the offense of
such as do those things which he has playnelye forbidden, and are
apparantlye evil. D. I commit that to your judgment.

Of the error of those that think that the works which they do contrary to
the will of God, are yet notvvithsta^ding agreeable to him, because that they
do them in a good intent.
T. BUt what will thou say of those, that doing things contrary to the will
of God, do assure them selves that they are agreeable to God, and ordained by
him. For there are many of that opinion, in manner all such as are
superstitious and idolaters are of that judgment, and almost all the
heritiques, which do all that ever they do in a good intent, if we shall
judge of their conscience. For if they thought not that their religion did
please God, many would refuse it, which seem yet to have some fear of God.
D. I answer to that, that GOD is not subject to our fantasyes, and that he
will judge nothing to be good or evil, because it pleases, or displeases
us, and because that we do so judge of it: but because the thing is so of his
own nature, and that he himself has so judged of it, and has commanded or
forbidden it, or else all superstition, and idolatrye, heresye, and wickedness:
should be lawful. For there is no wickedness nor abomination so great, which
in the opinion of many, is not holden for a good and an honest thing, or at
the least not evil. But how many heritiques, people and nations are there,
which have esteemed things to be good and honest, which are the most strange
and abominable, that may be thought or imagined? How many have there been
also that have had the most unjust laws of the whole world, which they have
no less esteemed then be the best and most just that are? T. The matter is
plain. D. Moreover, do we think that GOD will endure at our hands, that
which we our selves will not endure at the hands of our servants? Would
we be contented to have a servant to serve us after his own will and
fantasye? Will we not rather be served according to ours. T. If we should not be
served as we do command, we should not be masters, but servants, and our
servants should be the masters. D. And seeing it is so, will God endure,
that we shall serve him as pleases us, and not according to his will, and
that we shall take unto our selves such mastershyp over him? do thou not
manifestly see, how that all these most damnable opinions, abolishe and deface
the law and word of God, and consequently God him self, which can not be
known for God without these things? For if these goodlye reasons be true,
all these absurdities, and blasphemies do follow, and a general abolishyng of
all true Religion, and a horrible confusion of all things. For if this
foundation be once laid, all difference between good and evil, between
virtue and vice is clean wiped away. There rests then no more, but every man
to do what lyketh him, and so to give the head to all his affections, which is
a more perilous matter, and much mo^e dangerous, then it is to let lose all
the wild beasts of the world, to go at their own will among men, as does a
wolf lose among sheep, in executyng his rage and cruelty against them.

To understand whether God have ordained sundry Reliligions for men, and of
the diversity of men's laws, according to the diversity of nations and
countries.
T. THere is nothing more certain, then that which thou say, but could not
God have given to men sundry orders of life, according to the condition of
every people and nation? For we see by experience that there are laws and
customs in one country, which are very mete for it, and yet for an other
country, are neither meet nor agreeable. For what diversity of laws,
customs and manner of life do we see among men, and chiefly in the
administration of Justice, and in their policy? which seem in deed, to be
very contrary the one to the other, and yet notwithstanding are both just and
rightous in their kind, and very necessary to those unto whom they be given,
whereof it follows, that a law being good and just in one country, and not in
an other, that the fault proceeds not of the law, but of the diversity that
is among men, and of the circu^staunces of times, of places, and of persons.
And without alledgyng men's laws, which do greatly differ, the one from the
other: Let us come only to the law of God, and let us see if we find not the
like in them in some respects. How many commandments did God give unto the
Jews, unto which he would not have the other people to be subject, which were
before the coming of Christ: nor yet us which have received the word of God by
their ministry? For how many things are there abolished by the new Testament,
which were very straytly commanded and observed in the old Testament, and
could not be omitted, without greatly offendyng God, and without great
punishment, of those unto whom they were commanded?

Of the causes of the diversity of the positive laws, and of the difference,
that is between those laws, which are given as touching corporal things,
and those which do appertain to spiritual things.
D. THere are many reasons, to answer this question and difficulty. For the
first, it is no meruell if there be great diversity, yea and often times
manifest contrariety, and imperfection in ma^s law. For the men which make
them, are changeable and inconstaunt. And for so much as oftentimes they may
fail, either through ignorance, or else by being ruled by their affections, it
is often times seen that their latter laws do correct their first. T. But
often times it is seen contrary, and that the latter ar worse then the first,
and that they do abolishe others, which are better then they are. D. So much
the worse is it, but there may no such thing be found in god. And beside that
we may not judge of spiritual and heavenly things, as we do of corporal and
earthly things. For we daily see by experience, that there are many laws in
the policy, which if they were accepted generally in all countries, were as
unmeet and would as greatly hurt in some, as they do profit in others. And
for this cause, God would not make subject ye other nations, nor yet the
Christians unto al those laws, which he did give to the people of Israel, but
has left it to al men's choice, co^ditionally that this liberty be always
measured by the compass of his will, and eternal and unchangeable law, whereof
we will here after speak. For these laws have regard to our body and goods,
and to the co^seruation of the society of man, in the which it can not be, but
that there most be great diversity, because they are made of diverse
qualities, and are subject to diverse chaunges, wherefore it is required that
the law gyuer have respect to the ability, commodity or incommoditie, of
those people with whom he has to do, and to ye times and places wherein he
does establish them. But it is far otherwise with the soul, and with those
things that properly appertain unto the same. For it is not compounded of such
a substance, as is the body. And therefore is not subject to such chaunges and
diversities, and the things that belong unto her, are not for a time, but are
eternal. And therefore, it must needs be, that those laws which are given
unto the soul, must have a further regard, in that they must needs be of a
longer continuance.

Of the agreement that is between the positive laws, and the ceremonial
laws, and of the true usage of them.
T. BUt God has not only kept this order, in his civil laws, but also in
those that he has given for matters of Religion, which touch the soul. And
beside that, those same Civil laws, which he gave, were they not given to
help toward the observation, of those which properly had regard to the
soul. D. I deny not that which thou say, but thou ought to consider,
that this change of laws and ordinances, the which God has used, even in
the very matter of Religion, does not otherwise appertain, but to the
ceremonies, which are but outward things, and not at all, of the proper
substance of the unchangeable will of God. And therefore the ceremonial
laws have a great agreement, with the positive laws: for as the civil laws
are given for conservation of the civil policy, and to help also to lead
men to yield that obedience unto God, which they owe unto him: even in like
sort the ceremonial laws do serve to entertayne the Ecclesiastique policy,
and to frame men to the true service of God. But for that the means by the
which this may be done, may be diverse, and that some of them may be mete for
some time, in certain places and for certain people, which should not be
mete for others: God has therefore left it at liberty, provided that the rule
which I touched before, be therein always observed. For these things are in this
respect as things indifferent, and the change that in them happens, does
not proceed of God, ne yet of any inconstancy y^ is in his will, but of our
weakness and inconstancy, saving only that God of his goodness, does willingly
condescend to our rudeness and capacity. But there is an other reason in his
will which he has declared to be eternal, and in the things that he has once
de clared to be for ever good or evil, and that depend of the same, and are
not only as entries as are the ceremonies, for in such matters he never
changed any thing, nor never made law, by the which he allowed Idolatry,
blasphemy, adultery, murder, and other like wickedness, which he has once
forbidden by his law, which is nothing else, but a testimony of his eternal
will, and of the natural law, which is naturally imprinted in the hearts of
men, by the which he has put in them an impression of his eternal will, which
can never be clean plucked out. But for so much as it was meruelously
darckened by sin, and that it did remain as overwhelmed and buried, and in
manner in us clean wipte out, it has pleased God more plainly, to declare the
same unto us, and to awake us, to the end we should give the greater regard
unto it, and has given it unto us, as well by writting as by word of mouth,
and does put us oftentimes in mind thereof by the ministry of his word.

What liberty God has given, in the usage of ceremonies, and of the mean
that must be kept in the same.
T. IT shall then according to thy opinion, be lawful for me^, to dispense with
ceremonies, and with civil laws and to change them at their pleasures. D. My
purpose tends not to such an end. For when I do declare for what cause God
has left in this, greater liberty unto men then in the rest, whereof we have
spoken, I will not therefore say, although it be lawful for God to change all
those things at his pleasure, according as he does know it, to be mete for the
health of man, that man should challenge to him self such a license: but
contrarily when they have received any ordinance of God, be it ceremonies or
such like, they ought not at all to change any thing thereof, until that God
him self, which only has liberty so to do, do it: as we see it has come to
pass by the ceremonies, which were observed in the Church of Israel, which
were abolished by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, for that they were not
ordained, to serve but only until that time. Besides this, in that, in the
which God has given no certain, and expressed ordinance, but has left those
things in our liberty, as indifferent, we may use that liberty, which he
has left unto us, gouernyng the same always according to the rule of faith
and of charity, If there be then any question, as touching the ceremonies
ordained in the law of Moses, we must then have regard unto that part of them,
which was abolished by the coming of Jesus Christ, which may not now be
observed, without renouncyng of Jesus Christ: as though men douted whether he
had accomplished or no that which was figured by them. If there be any
question of Sacraments, ordained by our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the
ceremonies, and of the discipline, which he him self has ordained: we must
then take good head that we change no jot thereof, or to add, or diminishe
in any thing, that touches the substance of such things. If there be
question of man's traditions, and of the ancient Canons and Decrees, it is
requisite to consider, wherein and how they do agree, with the word of God, and
also how they may serve, to the edification of the Church, or how they may
hinder the same. For there are many (I say even of those, which are not
contrary to the word of God) which were good for a time, which not only
would not serve at this present, but would do great hurt, because the time
does not now require that, which it then did when they were decreed. And
therefore, if that of the very Apostles, touching the abstinence from blood
and from strangled flesh, which was decreed in the Counsel at Jerusalem, was
abolished in time convenient, when the usage thereof was no more necessary in
the Church: how much more reason have we, to do the like of others, that
are of such quality, when that the time and the edification of the Church
should require it? T. I agree well to all this: But there is beside these an
other sort of people, of whom we have not yet spoken, which seem to have
more reason then the others of whom we have now made mention: but it may
be, that we have spoken enough for one time, it shall be best that we
leave them until an other time. For I do not doubt, but we shall have
occasion to discourse sufficientlye of them. D. Who are they I beseech thee? T.
They be those that wait for a Council. D. And because that we have happened
upon this matter of the Council, I am well content that we put it over to an
other time: for it does well merit that men look narowly unto it, for so
much as many men depend upon them.

The contents of the second Dialogue named the waitinge for the Council, or
the Nevvtrall Gospellers, to wit, such as will deal between the true and
false Religion and doctrine.
Interim, and of such soliciters and worckers as will join Jesus Christ, and
Antichriste together, and instead of Christians, make Samarita^s, and of the
opinion of such as say, yt the Counsel ca^ not err, which is also continued in
ye other Dialogues following, in ye which I do a little paint and set forth, ye
manner of proceeding, which the Papists observe in their Councels, and I do
compare it with that, which God did use in his Council that he held with his
people, first in the mount of Synay, and after that in the hill of Sion. I do
show also what preparation there ought to be for the doctrine of such Councels,
and how that those two Councels, contain all the doctrine of the old and new
Testament, and how they do so agree together, that they both tend to one, upon
who^ only it behooves us all to stay. Whereupon also I make mention of the
agreement and difference that may be between the old and new Testament, between
Moses and Jesus Christ, between the law and the Gosspell, and the law which is
called the law of grace, and the law of rigor, and of the abolishing and also
of the usage of ye law of Moses, and of the vengeance of God, which is prepared
against those that will not willingly receive the Decrees, and Canons, of this
great and godly Council, and shall abuse his word, and of the great grace:
which he has offered to men, in his son Jesus Christ our Lord, which things
shall be entreated of every one in his place. And as touching this present
Dialogue, I have entitled it, the waitynge for the Counsel, or the newtrals,
in respect of the principal matters that therein are handled or entreated of.

The second Dialogue, entitled the waiting for the Council, or the Newtralles.
Of the reasons which cause many to desire and vvait for a Council: and of the
trouble that the difference which is in Christendom in matters of Religion,
does bring to simple and ignorant consciences.
Daniel. Timothe.
D. THou do well remember where we left, as touching those that wayt for a
Council. T. Yea in deed. D. Will these men tarry to believe in God, to serve
him, and to enquire of his will, until the time that the Council has been
holden, and that it has determined what order of life we should follow? T. It
seems that these me^ take their foundation, of that which thou have said, that
if they should serve God truly, it were first requisite to be well instructed
and assured of his will. D. Wherefore do they not then forthwith and withal
diligence enquire thereof? why do they then tarry for a Council? T. Because they
say, that in so great diversity of opinions, as at this present day, is in
Christendom, in matters of Religion, they know not which to follow in surety.
For they see that some teach after one sort, and the others after an other:
and that there is often times as great contrariety of opinions, as between
white and black, and between fire and water. That which one aloweth, an other
disaloweth: that which one holds for Christian doctrine, and for true
service of God, an other condempneth it as heresy, or else as superstition,
hypocrisy, Idolatry, and Apostasy. And besides this, there are of both sides
personnages of great appearance, great understanding and great authority,
according to the judgment of the world: notwithstanding the multitude is
far greater of the one side, then of the other: men hear their discourses,
men read their writtinges and books, there are goodly reasons of both parts,
which every of them endeavors to prove and confirm by the holy Scriptures,
and by all means possible. In this cause, what shall a poor man do, which
fears to offend God, and has a good desire to serve him, according to his
will, but he may not well attain to ye knowledge thereof, because that which the
one says is the will of God, the other says it is not the will of God.

How that the difference that is in Christendom, in matters of Religion,
should not stay men from the diligent inquiry of the will of GOD, but should
rather provoke them thereunto.
T. I Confess that these differences, which are in Christendom, engender
great trouble in the poor consciences of many: but that ought not at all to
let them to enquire by all means possible, of the will of God, and to employe
the^ selves with all speed possible to serve him: but they should the more
earnestly be moved, and provoked to do it, to rid them selves, with as much
speed, as they might out of such troubles. For why, least they tarry in it, if
they have any fear of God, in what trouble shall they live: and what quyetnes
may they ever have in their consciences. I for my part should think that I
were in hell, if I should long live in such estate, without having some
thing certain, and resolved in my mind, whereunto I might assuredlye stay.
T. For this they require a Council: for they think there will be there men
of greater judgment then they are, by whose means the matter shall be so
debated and examined, that there shall be a general, and a sure
determination, through the which every man may be out of scrupule and doubt,
and may know whereunto to trust. D. It seems unto me, that their hope is very
slender, if they have no better hope then this. I may not deny but their
desire is good, we all ought to desire the same, if there were any hope to se
it come to pass, and that with speed: for ye sooner it were, yt better, because
it is much more dangerous to delay or defer the medicyning of ye soul: the^
of the body, for if the medicine of ye body come not in time to him yt is
sick, yt sick person is not in danger, but only of his bodily life: but if
the medicine of y^ soul be to long deferred, there is danger of eternal
death: wherefore, I do greatly fear, that many do perish, in tarying for
those medicines. T. There is much to be feared, and also to be doubted in this
matter.

What profit the Church of God may receive of Councelles, and of their issue.
D. THe Sinodes and lawful Councils, is one of ye best remedies yt me^ may
have, to take away controversies in religion, it is ye remedi whereunto in like
cases yt Apostles and their true successors, and al yt au^cie^t church, have
oftentimes had their recourse: for albeit that the Councils, have no authority
nor power to give unto ye church any new doctrine nor yet to forge any new
articles of faith, but only to hold and maintain y^ doctrine, which is reveled
by ye holy Scriptures, and yet notwithstanding they serve to great purpose, in
so much yt they be as public witnesses unto it, to succor ye infirmity of the
simple and weak, and also such as shall come after us, by ye confession which
is made of ye same by the^, and by the public testificatio^ y^ there is
declared, by ye perpetual consent of ye Church, of ye doctrine of the Prophets
and Apostles. But although the Councels be ordained to this end, and that ye
au^cie^ts have had more rule of the^ selves and better means, much more meet
for such a purpose, then we have at this present: yet notwithstanding they
could never obtain yt in their Councils, which they desired. And such
untowardness was there, yt they did always not only not apease ye differences,
and abolish scismes, and heresies which troubled ye Church, but oftentimes eue^
there right many new did spring, and have been afterward from time to time
increased: if it were needful to prove it by examples, it were easy to do, but
we will not now enter into such matter. I will content me for this time, to
allege only touching this matter, yt testimony ye Gregory Nazianzen (which
was Master to S. Hierom) did give, writting to Procopius of ye Councils of his
time, which were nothing so corrupted as ar those of our time: if I must
needs, says he, write ye truth, I have determined to refuse all the Councils of
Bishops. For I have found the issue of no one Synod good, or rather that they
have more increased the evil, then quenched it. Here is the judgment of
Nazianzene, touching this matter. Which seems to me somethynge hard, for it
can not be denied that some of the ancient Councels, have greatly profited
unto Christianity, notwithstanding that the peruersitie of the wicked, has
always hindered that the fruit and issue has not ben such as was to be
desired, yet notwithstanding, Nazianzene has not given judgment of the
Councels without some just cause, or like a man that did not know what the
matter meant, but like a man of great understanding, and one well exercised in
those matters. T. At the least he lived in such a time, and bare such office as
of reason he ought to have had great experience.

Of the hope that men may have of the Council, in these days, and of those
that there shall assemble, and of the issue thereof.
D. NOw if Councels had such issue in those days, that Nazianzene had just
occasion to make such complainte: what hope may we have in these days, of
such like remedy? For, first of all, what hope may we have to assemble a
Counsel only? yea and if it might so come to pass, that one might be
assembled, what goodness might we hope for of it? For who shall assemble it?
who be they that shall be there assembled? Who shall there preside? Who shall
make the determinacions and conclusions of it? and who shall execute them? If a
man would reform or suppress a stews, to whom would thou give such a
charge? Would thou give it to the master of the stews? and would thou,
that he should have the chief authority in that reformation, and that his
bawdes and ruffie^s, whoremasters and whores should give their voice and
sentence, and that all should be done, according to their will and mind? Might
not me^ have great hope, to have some good resolucion and reformation in such a
case, of such a Council? T. It should be a great mockery, even like as to
make the wolf to be keeper of the sheep. D. Doubtless no more is there any
likelyhode, considering the state of things at this day in Christendom, to
have any Council much more honorable. For if the Pope and his ministers, have
their authority, which they have had in time past, even since they have
usurped that tyranny, which they now exercise over the Church, and that they
pretend to have there, thou may easelye understand what success men may
look for. For it is a thing most certain, that such men will never agree to
have a council holden, unless they know it to be for their profitte, and that
they may there rule at their pleasure, eue^ as they now pretend to do in their
Counsel of Trent. For if they did not think to reign and rule there at their
pleasure, it would have been a hard matter ever to agree the^ thereupon, or to
have drawn them thither. And if they may obtain this, it shall not be a
Council, but a coniuratio^ and conspiracy against God, as was the council of
Annas and Cayphas, of the Scribes and Pharisees, and of the priests of ye law,
and of the council of Jerusalem against our Lord Jesus Christ. This shall be a
Council to establishe more stronglye the seat of Antichrist, and his tyranny
against the Church, and wholly to abolishe the course of the Gospel, and to fill
the whole earth with the blood of the innocents and Martyrs, which shall
sustain the truth, and rather die, then to renounce Jesus Christ. T. Certainly
for my part I think it to be the only mark whereat they shoot. For what may
we look for at the hands of him, and of all his race, which has been a
murderer and homicide from the beginning of the world, we need not to doubt
whether the Antichrist the son of perdition and all his generation which make
wars against the truth, be the very natural and lawful children of this
great murderer and father of lies. Wherefore it must needs come to pass:
that they work the works of their father, and that they put in practice those
arts and sciences: which they have learned in his schole.

Of the means that the enemies of the truth do use for the maintenance of
their kingdom, and their false religion, and of the hope which they have given
by their Council of Trent for the reformation of the Christian church.
D. AT the least they do declare right well by their threatninges how well
they are inclined to follow that T. Their library is even meet for their
study. D. By these means ye Christianity shall be in worse estate then now
it is, and there shall be less hope of reformation of it, the^ before was.
And without passing any further, and without going from their council of
Trent, they have already given us a fair testimonye of the good will that they
bear to a true Christian reformation: by those goodlye determinations which
have been concluded not long since, in their sessions of that worthy
coniuration and conspiracy of Trent. T. The matter is plain, and therefore
do thou no wrong to such a council rather to call it a conspiracy to resist
the truth, then a council to maintain it.

Of the danger into the which they put them selves that attend only upon the
council, without seeking any other reformation, both in them selves and in the
church.
D. ON the contrary, if they should know yt their tirannie might have no
place, then would they find all the means possible to invent how to let it,
yt there should be no council at all holden: or if there must needs be one,
to hinder in all matters all the good that might otherwise proceed. And in this
sort, what shall become of the^ this mean while that depend only upon the
council without having any other care of religion, or of the reformation of
the same? And if they had none other care at all, they should die in their
ignorance, and doubt where in they are: and so should go to hold a council in
hell, where I doubt not but yt they should find Popes enough to proceed there,
and Cardinals, Bishops, Priests and Monks, to hold there a goodly general
council, better furnished of such personages, then any that a man might now
find in Christendom, if they hold it in such sort as they have already
begone, and that such personages do there rule, if these men which attend for
a council be already in error: they shall there be more confirmed therein,
and shall be in worse state then before. If they have received any light of the
word of God, it is greatly to be feared least it should be clearly put out in
them, being blinded with the appearance of the authority which men give to
counsels.

Of the hope that men may have of those Christian princes which do reign at
this present for to reform the church by the mean of a general council: and
of the negligence and want that is in that behalf, even in those churches
which glory of the Gospel.
T. YEt is there hope to remedy these things by the help of the Christian
princes. D. I see no great hope in that behalf. For who be the Christian
princes that may give order in this? if they be seduced by the Pope and his,
that Antichrist will be served of them for to make him continuallye more
strong: if they be well instructed in the doctrine of the Lord, and that they
have a desire to reform the church according to the rule of his word, that
Antichrist forthwith endeavors to stir up al those princes and nations yt
are abused by him to hinder so godly an enterprise. And when one prince will,
an other will not. Wherefore, it will be a very long time before me^ may cause
all ye princes and other estates of ye world, by whose means such assemblies
ought to be made: to agree in one opinion, and to come together and to consent
in one so holy a work. For we shall find in all these estates those same
difficulties, lettes and excuses, whereof we have already spoken. For there is
so great contempt of God and of his word, and so great negligence and
carelesnes in all estates, concerning those things that touch the honor of
God, and the health of souls, and so great a burden of their own glory, and
private profitte, and their hearts so rooted in the earth, that they forget
heaven, and can find at no time any leisure to labor in the work of the
Lords house. T. That is a very great evil. D. We may easily judge what hope
we shall have of a general reformation, by means of a general council, by
the experience of those things which we daily see, in those places where God
has already given of his grace to princes and Magistrates: to lay their
hands to his works: to begin some manner of reformation in his church. Let us
begin with ye best reformed church that may be found in christendom, and let
us compare the form and order of it with that that was in the ancient church:
I mean not of the most perfect that ever was, as of that of the Apostles, but
of that church that was long after the Apostles time, what difference shall we
find? T. I think we shall find very great difference. D. So great as we
shall be ashamed to call a reformation, the reformation that we shall therein
find, seeing ye deformity that there yet does rest: whereof every man
complayneth, and yet no man can remedy it.

Of the negligence and want that is in the ministers of the church, and
generally in all other estates, whereby the reformation of the church is hindered.
T. WHat is the cause thereof? D. Every man in his calling, for oftentimes it
is seen that the Ministers are negligent in their ministerye, and do not call
upon the magistrates and people, exhorting them to execute their offices
uprightly and sincerely, as they ought to do: for often times it is seen that
they them selves do as much or more fear a reformation, then others do. And if
there be defaulte and negligence in those men, which should be a light unto
others, let us then well wey what may be found in the magistrates and people.
For there are very few which on their part fear not a reformation, and desire
not at all to frame it according to the rule of the word of God, to direct
their lives and manners according to ye same: but rather to make the word of
God subject to them, and to have a reformation according to their own will and
pleasure. And from whence comes all this: but only from an evil conscience
and of a disordinate desire that is in men, of a carnal liberty, and of a
manifest rebellion against God? For they will not have God to reign over them,
but they will live and reign at their pleasure. They can not endure to have
their naughty affections, and dissolute manners to be bridled, and the abuse of
their estates corrected, and their tyranny suppressed by the word of God.
They besturre them on every side by all means possible, and employe all their
forces to cast of: the yoke of the Lord, to the end they will not be subject
to him: and consider not in the mean time that in refusing to yield unto God
that obedience which they owe unto him: they rest subjects to the devil, and
become daily more and more his slaves: for they had rather to reign by the
devil, and the devil to reign in them, the^ to live and reign by God, and
God to reign in them and over them. Wherefore we may well say of them
altogether, that which S. Paul did of the ministers of his time, at which time
the word of God did give fruit in other sort then now it does. Every one
says Phill. 1
he is about his own business and cares but for himself, and not for Jesus
Christ. It comes sometime to pass that there are good ministers, and that on
their part do acquit some piece of their duty in this behalf: but those
which are joined in the same ministry with them, and should help them, and
draw with them in the same yoke that they draw: are often times those that
hinder them more then any others. T. When this happens the hindraunce is not
small, for one only horse that draws backewarde, does hinder more then six
horses which draw forward are able to overcome.

Of the empeachmentes that men give one to an other in the reformation of the
church: and of the punishment of God upon them for the same cause.
D. IF it so come to pass that the Ministers agree well, and do well acquit
them of their duty, peradventure they shall not find the Magistrates and
officers of that same sort, which will put to their hands, to help them in
their ministerye, as their office requires: but will rather band against
them, to overthrow all good discipline, and will rather maintain vicious men,
then virtuous. Or else if it come so to pass that the Magistrates and officers
be well affected toward the reformation of the Church, they may meet with
ministers which shall not greatly hasten them forward, but will rather
dissuade them from it: where they ought to persuade them to it, and will rather
give them liberty to run a straye, then to put them in the right path. Or if
it so come to pass that ye Ministers and Magistrates with the officers be all
of one mind, as concerning holy things, and do help one an other in the
works of the Lord (which thing is very seldom seen) yet shall they have much
to do to range ye people under any good discipline. For there are few which are
tractable, and will willinglye submit them selves unto it, and if there be
some of so good a sort, there shall be some Minister or some Magistrate that
shall seek to altar him and be offended with him. Wherefore seeing that there are
so few Ministers, Magistrates and people, that are willing to submit them
selves to the true reformation of God, and would yield unto him that obedience
which of right they owe him, but they would every of them rather have such a
reformation as should please their fantasy, which should not displease the^
at all, but entertain the^ in their pleasures: And therefore it is no marvel if
all frame not well, and that men be so evil matched oftentimes in all
gouernmentes, and yt one be a hindraunce to the other. And it is not greatly to
be marvelled at, if the ministers do seldom find good Magistrates and good
people, yelding to the ministry of the word of God such obedience and duetye
as they ought to do. Moreover, it is not to be marvelled at if the
Magistrates find very seldom true and faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ,
diligente in their ministry toward the church of God, who without
flatterye will francklye show both them and the people their faults which are
subject to them as they ought to do, and do love and reverence them as
their fathers. And do we marvel if the people have more often Pastors and
Magistrates tyrauntes, which do devour them and destroy them: then good
Ministers and Magistrates which would be unto them in stead of fathers, and
desire more the honor of God, and the salvation of his people, the^ their own
glory and profitte? For it must needs come to pass that the offering must be
like to the Saint (as says the proverb) and that God do punyshe men in such
sort, the one by the other, to the end that they may learn to know in them
selves by the iniurye which others do to them, and by that which they
command of them, what iniurye they do to God, and how he may be pleased by
them. If then it be an hard matter to set good order in the church, when either
the Ministers, Magistrates or people be other, then of right they ought to be,
what discipline may we then hope for when they shall be all in leage together
to resist against God, and to make wars against his word, and to destroy
all good discipline? T. That does yet more often happen then the contrary.

Of the difficulty that is in the world at this day, to assemble meet men
for a lavvfull council, and of the example of the ancient Christians
concerning their fath toward the doctrine of the Apostles.
D. THe^ if it be so difficulte, as nothing is more to set good order in a
small country or little town, by means

When should they have believed ye Gospel? For who should have assembled and
ordained it? Should the Roman Emperors have done it: which were enemies and
persecutours of the Christian religion, which then were the most mighty
princes upon the earth? Or else Pilate and Herod, Annas and Cayphas or else
the Scribes and Pharisees, the Doctors and the Priests of the Jew, or else
the Philosophers and the Prophets of the Paganes, which were all adversaries to
the Gospel? what conclusion might men have looked for at the hands of such men?
How should the Apostles and their adherentes have been received among those
me^? and of what weight or value should their voice have been? How long
should men have waited before that all these men would have agreed together,
upon any good determination for the doctrine of true religion? That would not
have been done before the day of judgment.

Of the hindraunce which the Christians do cause in the reformation of the
church, more then all others, and of the end whereunto the suppostes of the
popish church tend under the title and name of a Council.
T. THe world is not in these days, as then it was. For we have now nothing a
do, neither with the Jews, D. I know not. But at the least I desire it for my
part, but I fear least the pure truth of God, will worse be endured of those,
which glory of the name of a Christian, then of the Jews and Turckes. For all
those that bear the name of Christians, are not for all that Christians, for
for so much as it is an other matter, to be a Christian in name only, and to
be one in deed, and name together. This fares much like the testimonies
which we have already brought sorth of ancient customs, touching the
ancient Samaritanes, of whom it is written that they feared the ii. Reg. xvii
Lord, and yet notwithstanding, they served continually their Idolles: and
afterward in this same passage he says, that they did not fear the Lord. T. I
was in mind to desire thee to agree these two passages, when thou did
allege them, but that I was loath to break of your tale. D. It is an easy
matter to agree them, for the one expounds and declares the other. It is
said that they feared God, for so much as they made a certain profession of
the law: but for so much as they did it not in deed, but mingled their ancient
superstitions and Idolatries with it, it is said that they feared not the
Lord, as it is declared following. But let us come to the Samaritanes of our
time, for truly we do not see at all, more cruel persecutours of the Gospel,
then are those which are Popish Christians. But to what end thinckest thou,
that the Council of Trent is continued, and that they have newlye confirmed,
and approved all those determinations, and resolutions that have passed? In the
same? Thou may well assure thy self that those worthy fathers, which
travail there, tend to none other end, but to confirm and establishe again,
all their ancient errors, to the end they may have a more better color to
defend and maintain them here after, and to persecute the children of God,
and to bathe all Christendom, in the blood of poor Innocents, and true
servant of God do they not apparently show, that they will not admit any
reformation, which is comformable in any one point to Gods truth, and that
they have no care, neither of peace ne yet of the union of Christendom, but
only how to maintain their most filthy and damnable estate, and to oppress
by their tyranny all true Christianity, and utterly to destroy it? For, if
they were desirous to hear and understand ye truth, and to bring into the
rightway, those which they hold for heretics, and Scismatikes, why do they not
there admit the^, and franckly and safely receive them, and to hear their
reasons, and to show the^ by the word of God (if their cause have good
foundation in the same) their errors, wherein they say yt they are? But they
pass not for that: for they will not hear their judges, nor endure that the
word of God shall judge the^: knowing well that by it they are already
condemned, but will be judges over it, and conde^pne it as their adversary.
Truly their doings must needs be good, their conclusions good, and their
condemnatio^s lawful: In so much as they are both judges, parties, and
witnesses, even as their predecessors were against Jesus Christ: and they have
their hangeme^, and executioners ready at hand, to execute their se^tences.
What difference is there, between such a Counsel, and a conspiracy of
thieves, which swear together to take in hand, some enterprise to cut men's
throtes? What authority ought such a Counsel to be of? What prophets are
there, and what doctors, what Christian princes, how may then al christe^do^
lawfully receive for resolucio^ and determination of ye christian doctrine, and
for a true reformation of ye church, ye co^clusio^ y^ shall be had in such a
co^spiracie of ye enemies of God, and of al Christianity? There is no man of
sound judgment, that will agree to this: for it is in a manner such a
co^spiracie, as was yt which Solomon discribeth of those which said: Let us lay
ambushes to shed blud, and let us lie in wait for yt innocent without cause.
It is a co^spiracie like unto yt of the false Priests, and false Prophets,
Prou. i Iere. xviii.
enemies of Jeremy, which said: let us go, let us wound and smite with the
tongue, for the Sacrificers shall never want wisdom. It is much like to y^
which the Papists say: The Councils ca^ not err. And if it be lawful to
co^strayne me^ by force, yt fear God, and wc great strokes of swords, by
wars, murders, and sheding of blood, and with great store of fagotes, and
mighty fires, as these worthy fathers do: I leave to thy judgment, what
edificatio^, what peace and union such a Counsel may bring to the church of
Jesus Christ, and to al christe^dom.

What Council the true Christians ought to follow, in waiting for the
general Council.
T. WHat shall we then do, if this hope be taken from us? D. Though we have no
occasion at al to conceive any good hope of the Counsel of Tre^t, yet will I
not therefore say that al hope is taken from us forever: but I will only say
that we living in this hope should be occasioned to stay without any further
inquiring of the will of God, and without the assuring of our consciences in his
word. And when such matter has been in question, I have always been thus
resolved in my self: Either there shall be a Counsel holde^, or else there shall be
none holde^. Ff there non holde^ I am the^ deceived in my waityng for it: if
there shall be one holde^, I know not whether I shall live unto yt time or no, or
at ye least to see ye end, and conclusion thereof. And in ye mean time if I dye,
not being well resolved in my conscience of religion: I shall dye in great
disquetnes of conscience, and in great peril of my salvation, as thou may
well understand by those matters, which have already ben debated sufficiently,
and at large, between us. Wherefore I had rather in the mean time, to assure
my self, following the admonition of our Lord Jesus Christ, which says: Be
upon your guard, watch and pray, and Mat. 24. 25. Luke. 12.
do like that good servant that is always ready, and looks for his master,
not knowing what hour he shall come. We are well assured that he shall come,
but we neither know the day, ne yet the hour. Wherefore let us live always in
such estate, as becomes Christians to be, when he shall come, and then shall
we never be suddenly taken.

Of those which would agree the doctrine of Jesus Christ, and that of
Antichrist together, and of the form of doctrine, compounded to such an end,
called Interum, and of the vanity of the authors of the same.
T. IN deed it is the most sure, but in the mean time it is a hard matter, to
find any kind of Religion, wherein a man may so well continue in waiting for
the general Council, as that which men call at this day the Interim D. Thou
have now put us into a very large field. I would gladly that these foregers of
Interim, should declare unto me the very cause why, they do call this new
form of Religion, which they have forged, by the name of Interim T. Thou
do well understand y^ Interim, signifies in the Latin tongue, in the mean
time, or whilst. D. I do know that very well: yet notwithstanding I would
gladly know what they mean by this word, in the mean time, or whylest. T.
They mean as I think, y^ that manner of life has been set forth only to that
end, that men should live according to the same, in matter of Religion: whilst
they away^ for a Council, in the which more ample and more certain
determination in matter of Religion, or else an other reformation, more perfect
shall be had. D. Is not that a very wise Council? I would desire no more, but
the title of this worthy manner of reformation, to declare the great vanity of
the authors of the same. For either it is builded upon ye word of God: or else
it is against it. If it be agreeable to Gods word, there needs not, either
whylest, or until, for it shall be always good and holy, If it be against it,
and if it endure but one hour, it shall co^tinew over long, for so much as what
so ever thing it be, that is against God, the same ought to have no place,
neither for short, nor long time. For it fares not with gods kingdom as it
does with worldly kingdoms, neither with Gods laws over the which we have no
power, as it does with man's laws. For when a king is dead, there is a certain
time between the decease of the dead king, and the creation of ye new king,
which is called enter reign, which is a time between both, which is properly
called neither reign nor kingdom, for so much as there is, as yet no king
chosen as head of the same, and me^ can not say, that there is utterly no
reign or kingdom, for so much as the laws, and country stand in their full
power and effect, saving only that they have not, as yet their king appointed
and chosen. And the like is when a chief Magistrate dies in a Seigmorie. Now
this can have no place in the kingdom of God: for the king thereof never
dies. Wherefore as he is eternal, so are his laws eternal, and the order of
life, which he has given to his subjects. T. For so much as it is so, there
needs then another other raygne nor other law, nor yet Interim, as these men
would have.

For what cause and reason, the doctrine of the Interim, can not be re^eiued
neither into the Church of Christ, ne yet into the Popes Church.
D. THerefore let us leave of this Interim, which does so much confound it
self, as ever did any thing: for it is made by such understanding and
judgment, that no man may by reason approve it: for so much as in every
respect, it is but a very Papistrie, somewhat disguised, published, and covered
with a mask, being finally different from the first. And therefore no man may
follow the doctrine thereof, unless that he renounce the doctrine of Jesus
Christ, and make a new aliance with that of Antechrist. T. Yea and it was not
framed, but to the end it might by little and little, pluck back from the
Gospel, such as had already professed it, and to bring the^ wholly in the end
to Papistrie again. D. In deed it is accepted of none but of such me^, for ye
papists will none of it, and that not without cause: for if they should receive
it, they should condemn themselves, for so much as the Interim does permit
things which they do utterly condemn. Wherefore as soon as they shall have
received and allowed it, their traditions are clean gone: for they have
embraced this foundation to build their kingdom upon, that their Church can not
err: because it is always governed by ye holy ghost. Wherefore if it should once
by the^ be admitted which they have condemned: behold al their doctrine
scattred and spilled, and co^seque^tly their kingdom overthrown. Afterward it
will fare with the^ as it does wc a piece of work made of woollen threde without
any seame: which being once broken in any place, and that there be one threde
plucked out of it, al ye rest follow after in order easily. For, if yt they
once do that, the^ must they needs confess ye either their Church has not
been governed by the holy Ghost, or else that they have an holy Ghost that
may err. Wherefore, to avoid this inconueniencie, they will leave no kind of
thing which they have inverted: they will never acknowledge their faults what
or how many soever they be: notwithstanding yt they know the^ apparently, and
that they be enforced to conde^pn them in their own conscience, and yt they be
so foul, yt the very beasts may judge of them. T. I have often times
meruailed at yt which thou now say: but now I do well see what it is that
lets them.

Of such Christians as be Nevvters and indifferent, which follow the doctrine
of the Interim: and of the mixture of the true and false doctrine, and how
much it displeases god.
D. FOr so much as it is so, we have no just occasion to dwell at al upon these
Interimists, ne yet upon their Interim, which is a name whereunto me^ may ioyn
whatsoever they will. It is a beast that has a very strong and a mighty
back, which will bear what soever men will lay on him. It is a name made of an
aduerbe, which does very well agree with the Gra^mer, of those Gramarianes,
which have forged it. For even as their Gra^mer. (I mean their divinity) is
strange and different from all other doctrines, and especially from ye true
divinity of the sacred Scriptures, even so his language is very new, and
strange, and has his rules utterly different. The Greek and Latin Gramer,
have the Masculine, Feminine, and Newtre Gender, the Hebrewe has but the two
first, and wants the Newter. And contrarilye the Interim, has neither
Masculine nor Feminine, for he is neither Masle nor Femasle: but is Newtre, or
at the least compounded of Masle and Femasle: and so must needs by common,
and must needs be Masle and Femasle, both together, or else he can be neither
the one, ne yet the other. T. Then shall he be a Monster. D. Yea in deed very
monstrous, and so contrary to the word of God, as nothing more: for his
Grammar is like to the Hebrewe Grammar. It aloweth no Newter Deuteronomy. ^^^.
Gender, and hardlye does it any common. It does not permit to couple the
Ox, and the Ass together in the plowe, no more does it permit to sow a
field, with sundry kinds of grain, ne yet to make a cloth, of sundry stuffes
and substaunces. It condemns also the confusion of seed, of nature in
beasts, and other living creatures, and holds those beasts for unclean,
that are engendered by beasts of sundry kinds, as are Muletes, and Mules, and
such other like, In the which it is plain, that the Lord has had a further
regard then to those things, when he gave such laws: and that he would
admonish his people by those same, to observe good order in all things, and to
eschew and avoid all confusion and disorder. Then if the mixture and
confusion of sondrye things do displease him, it must needs then displease
him more, when that the greater part is the worste, as it is in the Interim.
For there is very little pure doctrine in it: and that which is, is so darckned
and corrupted, that nothing is more. Wherefore this common kind, by which he
will be as a mean between the doctrine of Jesus Christ, and y^ of Antichrist,
does right well be seem him. For common in the Scripture, is as much to say as
polluted and defiled, as witnesses Saint Marcke in his. 7. chap. and Saint
Peter in the Acts of the Apostles the. 10. chapi. And in our language, a
common woman, is a whore. This Interim in like manner, makes us common
Christians, and Newters, like unto the Samaritanes. For even as the Samaritanes
were properly neither Jews, ne Paganes, but were made of them both: even so
are these men properly neither Euangelique Christians, ne yet Papists, but a
certain confusion, and mingle mangle of both together. T. Albeit that ye
doctrine of this Interim, be not in all respects so pure and perfect, as we
would have it, is it not yet better to have it so, then to have it more
corrupted, and to be such as is the doctrine of the Papists. D. In deed in one
thing it is to be preferred, before the Popish doctrine, whereof thou speak:
which is that the poison that therein is, is more hidden. Wherefore it is the
more dangerous, and the more to be feared and rejected. T. It is very true.

For what cause the Interim has taken his name of an aduerbe, and how in
sundry wise he may be applied.
D. WE may judge of al those doctrines and Religions, which are so confounded
and mingled, as of the law and Religion of Mahomet: for is it any thing
better then that, of the Jews and Paganes, for that it has many things,
taken out of the Christian Religion, mixed with that, that it has of the Jews
and Paganes? And more over, it comes very aptely to pass, yt these forgers
of Interim, have made him a name of an aduerbe: for as an aduerbe is a word
joined to a verb, even so the doctrine of the Interim, is an adiunction to the
word of God, not to open and declare it, as the aduerbe does the Verb, but to
darken and corrupt it. T. It is then like to the gloss of Orleance, which
marreth the text. D. It is a very dangerous gloss, and seeing then it is an
aduerbe, and that it signifies, in the mean time, or whilst, or until, if
they will interpret that word in the mean time even as thou have said, we
may also take him in this signification: In the mean time we die and shall be
in danger of going to hell: In the mean time Antichrist shall reign, and the
Gospel shall be persecuted: In the mean time they shall seek all the means
possible to suppress and banyshe the word of God, and more strongly to
establyshe the siege of Antichrist. And to be short, put to it all that ever
thou will, and all the evil that may happen in the world, in the mean time,
whilst, or until, will receive it all.

What profitte they which have been instructed in the word of God, may
receive by the Counsels: and what virtue and authority they have to bring
men to the faith.
T. I Agree well with that that thou haste said: but if there be a Council
holden, and if it serve nothing at all for such as shall dye looking for it,
yet notwithstanding it shall profitte such as may live unto it. D. And yet
shall thou not find there, by that mean, all that y^ thou think to find:
for if one be holden, either it will conclude for Jesus Christ, or against Jesus
Christ. If they do conclude for Jesus Christ, and I have been well instructed
in the word of God before hand, it shall not hurt me at all that I was
instructed before hand. It hinders not the commodity that I may receive of
the Council, but does increase it the more: for I shall be so much the more
glad, when I shall see that doctrine approved wherein I have already been
resolved, and have believed it, not only because it is approved by the Council,
and by men, but for that it is the pure word of God, and that it allows it
self, and that the holy Ghost bears me witness: If I have not already
been instructed nor resolved, either I will credit the determination which
shall have been made by the Council, or else I will not credit it. For it is
not a thing that of necessity must betyde that every man must believe the
determination of the Councels, as soon as they have concluded: although the
Council were lawful. For it is not in the power of men which shall hold it,
to make all that please them to believe it. It is a work that is only proper
to God, which gives faith. And to seek to make men believe of force, that may
not be: for faith may not be enforced. Wherefore if I make it seem that I do
believe it, and do not believe it, I shall then be an hypocrite: if I do believe
it, it is greatly to be feared least that I do believe only upon the credit of
others, being moved by the authority of me^, rather the^ by ye true persuasion
of ye word and of the spirit of God. And so, my faith shall be builded upon
men, and upon their opinions, and not upon God and his word. It shall be then
no faith, but only an opinion ready, to change as men shall change. T. It
shall be as firm as shall the foundation whereupon it shall be builded.

How we may not be the disciples of men, but of Jesus Christ: and how that
the word of god takes not his authority of the church, but the church takes
his of the word of God.
D. Now our Lord Jesus Christ wills that we be his Disciples, and not ye
disciples of men, and that we have none other master but he, for it is only
he that is gone Math. xxiii
forth from the bosom of the father, and that has fullye reveled unto us the
fathers will, and all that he has heard of him: as witnesses Saint John, It
is very he that has given us the whole sum of the articles of our Christian
faith, John. ii.
and of that doctrine we must needs hold, unto the which, it is not lawful
for any man to add, ne yet Deuteronomy. 11.
to take away any thing from it. It is only he that has brought us the
truth, and that doctrine which of it self is naturallye certain and
immutable, and of his own nature can be none other, whether men do allow it or
disalowe it. It is the truth and that only doctrine, upon the which, the
Church may surely dwell, which she may not, upon the natural wit of man, how
excellent so ever it be, ne yet upon usage and custom, how ancient so ever it
be. It is a truth and a doctrine not certain and worthy to be received because
the Church and men do allow it: but for that it is so of his own nature, and can
be none other. The Church does approve it and receives it, and may neither
reprove it, ne yet reject it, if it be ye true Church of Jesus Christ. In like
manner the Synagoge of Satan may nether approve ne yet receive it in any wise.
For even as the Synagoge of Satan ca^ not acknowledge it, but acco^pteth it
always for a stranger, for that she John. 8.
is the wife and daughter of the devil, which is ye father of lies, and the
enemy of al truth: even so by the contrary, it is impossible that the true
Church of Jesus Christ should not always acknowledge it, even as ye daughter
does know her mother: for that she is the daughter of God, which is ye truth it
self, the daughter I say, begotten of the incorruptible sede of his word, and
the wife of Jesus, which is the way, the truth, and i. Pet. ^ Ephe. v John.
xvi. John. x
life, and he by whom this truth of God is manifested and declared unto us. It
is that sheep that hears the voice of his shepeheard and follows it, and
not the voice of the stranger. The^ ye word of God receaueth not yt authority
yt it has of the church, but the church receaueth her authority of it. In so
much as show is signed and marked with the seal thereof. For she is to be
compared to a piece of paper, or parchment, and to the wax, which give not
authority to ye writing and seals yt are written and imprinted in them, but
do receive their authority of them, and are made authentike by their
authority, and by the authority of ye prince unto whom the seal
appertains, and for that he has allowed it by his authority. Wherefore that
doctrine, which of his nature is true and Christian, can not be made false nor
heresy by the authority neither of the Church, ne yet of any creature what so
ever he be: and that which of her nature is false and heresye, can not by any
means be made true and Christian, no more then God may be the devil, or the
devil God. Which things the questionarie Doctors them selves are foreced to
confess, namely the Doctor Gabriell. In senten. lib. did. 25


How the word of God does allow and authorize it self.
T. DEclare unto me I beseech thee somewhat more plainly that which thou haste
already spoken. D. Even so as I judge not the sun to be bright, because that
other men judge it so, and that I have heard so say, but for that he is so of
his nature, and declares himself such an one by his light: and in fine,
because I can not say the contrary, no in deed although I would: even in like
sort, I believe not in the word of God, ne yet hold it for certain, and
true, and for the inchaungeable will of God, by the authority of any man what
so ever he be, but because that God, who lightneth the eyes, and gives
understanding to little ones, Psalm, xix
has illumined me by the light of the same, and has constrained me to
acknowledge it such as it is, and to believe it: and I may not otherwise do, if
I be of the children of God, and led and governed by his spirit. For, if I be
of the children of God, God has given me eyes by the means of his holy
spirit, to see this light. And albeit that I can not see it if God do not
give me eyes to behold it, and that he do not open them: yet notwithstanding
having received this same of God, it can in no wise be showed, but yt I must
acknowledge and receive it. I can not hear the voice of God my father, ne yet
of Jesus Christ my shepeherd, but that I must understand it and follow it, if
I be of the children of God, John. 8. 10
and of the sheep of Christ. For he that is of God (as Jesus Christ says)
he hears the word of God, and the sheep hear and understand and know the
voice of their shepeheard.

What goodness men may receive by a good Council, and what evil may happen
unto them by an evil Council, accordinglye as they have been instructed in
the Christian religion.
T. I Grant that all that which thou haste said be true: yet because that God
will be served by the ministry of men, to make his voice to be heard in his
Church, thou can not deny but that the Council may do much good, if it be
of God, to show forth the light of the truth to many which know it not, nor
as yet can see it. D. I deny not that: but this only do I say, that if we
may have means to be illumined before that time, we ought not to have a
pleasure in tarying in our blindness until that time, but ought by all means
to travail to receive light with all speed possible, considering that God
does give us so many other means whereby to receive it, and y^ for those
causes which have been before alleged. T. I do not greatly deny that. D. And
on the contrary, if it so come to pass that the Council decree any thing
against the doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ (as it has oftentimes come to
pass in times passed, and as it is plain that it shall come to pass in the
Council of Trent, if the end do answer his beginning) if thou have not been
already well instructed, but have been nourished in superstition and
idolatrye, and being in that estate, do trust in men, thou art sure that ye
Council shall serve thee for no purpose, but only to confirm thee more
stronglye in thine errors, and continuallye to seduce thee more and more. And
for so much as the seduction being armed with the apparaunce of the Council,
shall have more authority, so much shall it be the more dangerous, and shall
take the deper root in thy heart. But if thou have been once well instructed
and well resolved, thou shall be the^ out of this danger, for that faith that
is founded on Jesus Christ, and on his word, is so firm and strong, that in
Math, xvi.
deed all the infernal powers are able to do nothing against it.

In what thing, and how far the good Counsels may bridle the audacitie
of the wicked, and give quietness to men
T. ALthough there be great appearance in that that thou say, yet
notwithstanding it seems to me that thou have not well satisfied min two points
wherein a man might reply: For if the Council conclude in yt favor of the
truth, it shall be greatly to purpose for the faithful, to repress and to
hold with closed mouths, the rebels, the wilful ones, the heretics, and
the Schismatiks. And as touching the other point which thou do prepone
concerning the inconvenience that may happen of an evil Council: What answer
would thou make to those which do affirm yt the Council can not err? D.
I will first answer to thy first point, and then after yt we will come to the
second. If the Counsel do refrain and make the enemies of ye truth to hold
their peace, yet for all that it can not change their evil hearts, but yt
they will secretly persevere in their errors, awayting some more mete occasion.
They will do as the Arians and the other heretics did, who for a time did hold
their peace, fering to be punished: but immediately as soon as they might find
any favor, they did prepared again their horns, and did more hurt the^ before.
And think not you at al yt the papists would do less in these our days, if
the Council were lawful, and yt their errors were there condemned, eue^ as
they do right well deserve: and thou may well assure thy self yt if they
were the stronger party, they would see whether party had the best swords,
before they would agree. And then if they saw that they could not prevail,
they would reserve them selves unto a better opportunity, until that time
that they might mete with some Emperors, Kings, and princes, that they might
seduce, by whom they might be maintained, and to find the mean to hold some
other Council fit for their purpose, to deface and abolishe all that ever
should have been decreed against them in the other. For it would be to great a
grief to my Lords the Prelates and to the pyllers of the church, and to their
cosins and friends, and to all those that live by the hyre of fornications and
adultryes of the great whore of Babylon, which are made droncken with the
venomous wynes of her fornications (made of the tree, not of the Lords vine,
but of Sodom and Gomorre) to leave their fat kytchin, and to renounce their
stalle fed bellyes (which is the God the which they would maintain by their
Counsels) to put them selves in order to serve and obey the living God, and
Jesus Christ his son our Lord. And without seking proof further of, to show
by the same what hope men may have of their obey saunce toward the
determinations of a good and Christian Council, there needs no more but to
behold how they do endeavor them selves at this present, and heretofore have
done, to observe the statutes and ordinances of the ancient Councels, of the
which they do so much glorify: yea even of very those which wholly have been
made for their purpose. For there is no one thing which is concluded in the^
according to the word of God, but that they the^ selves do first transgress
it, and do observe not so much as one point thereof: unless it be such as are
clean contrary to the word of God. For even as they make laws at their
pleasure, so may they dispense with them at their pleasure: for so much as
they are Gods upon earth. And therefore do fear neither GOD nor man what so
ever he be, but do permit to them selves all that which their earthlye
God, and Satan the God and prince of this world does permit unto them, now
if it be hard to amend and frame 2. Cori, 3. Ioh. 1^. 14.
yt wicked by yt mean of a good Council, it shall the^ be more hard to shut
up close yt mouths (by the means of a wicked Council) for the children of
God, who can not be overcome even by very death, but in dying do overcome: I
do say it shall be no less difficile to abolyshe and wype out truth, which
is the daughter of the invincible and immortal God.

What fruit the Church may receive of lavvfull Counsels, and what mixture
there is in her of good and bad, and what is her office tovvarde the one and
the other.
T. I Do willingly consent and agree to all that thou say: but how so ever
it be, the ancient Counsels have not yet been without fruit, for at the
least they have given some repose to the church for a certain time, and have
armed the faithful against the heretics: as we do see in Lib. 7. cont.
Donat. Lib. 1. cont. Donat.
Saint Augustine, for he does arm himself against the Donatistes with the
union of the holy universal church, and of the authority of the full
Council, as with a buckler: thinking that the full and lawful Council is the
consent of the whole church. I do not deny but what so ever Council is
holden, there may yet continue still in the church many hipocrites, which will
sceme to agree with it, and yet for all that in the mean time they will
nourishe their poison in their hearts. But the church leaves such to the
judgment Matthew. xiii.
of God. For even as our Lord Jesus Christ does plainly show it in his
parables, she can not be without hypocrites so long as she shall continue upon
this earth: upon the which she can not be so pure, but that she shall always
be myxed with good and evil. But it is enough for the church to teach simplye
and plainly that, which every man is bound to believe, and then the true
children of the church do believe simplye and constantly that which their mother
teaches them and that unfeignedly, and obey her without any gain saying. The
hipocrites which are not her lawful children, but misbegotten and bastardes,
may well through their false show deceive and abuse men, but not God: they
may deceive the espouse, but not the bridegroom, wherefore she holds her well
contented, when she has done that, which she is able to do, to wit to teach
the true doctrine, to correct by discipline such as be faulty, to the end
that she may bring them into the right way, and that she may entertain them,
every one in his place and vocation: or else if they be so perverse, wicked and
incorrigible, that they will not change their oppinions, and if they can do no
good, with such kind of men, yet will they endeavor them selves, at the least
so well to provide for others, that they shall not be able to hurt them, nor to
trouble their peace, and union, and in the mean time she leaves the judgment
of ye heart to god, and it is sufficient for her to entertain her sheep and
lambs in peace, and to let the wolfes, that they scatter not the flock.

What praise is due to good princes and Magistrates, which employ them selves
in the reformation of the Church, and what fruit it gets by their labor
and office, as well for the cause of the faithful, as of the hypocrites: and
of the chaunges that happen in Religion, according to the princes that raygne.
T. I Say not the contrary, or otherwise, when the Church is troubled and
scattered, we should reject the means, which God has given to repair it:
which we may not do without te^pting of God. Wherefore I do very well allow the
goodwil and diligence of such as trauail faithfully in ye procuring of a lawful
Council, or Synodes, such as are requisite in the Church of God: and I Judge
those princes worthy of great praise, which according to the example of
Ezechias, ii. Reg. xviii 22. 23 2. Chr. 29. 34. Ezech. iii.
and Josias, do endeavor them selves to reform those Churches, that are within
their liberties and countries. For allbeit that many dwell still in their old
skins, yet do they their duty, for their part. They glorify in their offices,
they do assure and entertayne the good in peace. They are a means to make
strong those that are weak, and do discharge their souls from the blood of
such as perish through their own default, and not in that, that they have not
done their duty. And therefore I deny not but that of lawful Councels, there
comes often times great profit, for a certain time, for the pollice and
outward peace of the Church: but I say that they are not sufficient thoroughly to
appease the troubles yt are in Christendom, and to edify perfectly the
inward man, and to quiet the conscience in deed, and to give it true quietness
and assurance, if nothing else. They are unto the wicked as the authority of
the sword and of the Magistrate, and may well stay their hands and feet, but
they ca^ not alter nor change Prou. 10
their hearts, which only God has in his hand, even as the division of
waters, and enclineth them to what part he will. We have the example hereof very
plain in Ezechias, and Josias, of whom we have already spoken: whilst these
good kings lived all errors, abuses, Idolatries, and superstitions were
abolished outwardly, and put away from among the people of God, and the Church
was well reformed: but it was not clearly plucked out of the hearts of them
all, but was secretly nourished, unto that time, that occasion was offered to
declare them selves, as experience does witness. For as soon as they had
changed their king, and that they had a prince which was an Idolatrer, the
people forthwith changed with the prince, and returned immediately to their
first Idolatry, as it came to pass under Manasses, Ioachim, and Zedechias.
And in manner the like happned in the time of the heretics, for they did
always either loose or ^. Re. xxiiii
increase their stoutnes, accordyngly as they found their princes. T. The
ancient histories of the Church do yield clear and perfect witness of that
which thou say.

Of the hypocrisy of those that depend only upon men, in matter of Religion,
and of the proof thereof.
D. NOw from whence do these sudden alterations and chaunges proceed? but that
the one sort are enforced through fear to leave of, and to set a good face on
it: as a horse does whylest a man has him short rayned in his bridle, which
after being put into the fields, as soon as he is at liberty, or else as a
river which is let or holden back by force of rampares, which floeth
forth violently, as soon, as they are broken. The other sort do change as
the prince does, because they dwell upon the authority and doings of men, and
not upon the only word of God. And therefore I say, that even as the Councels,
do make the one sort hypocrites, so make they the other, disciples of men,
rather then of Jesus Christ. For, to receive a doctrine, and to believe it, for
the authority and appearance of men, which do allow it, that is not properly to
believe the word of God, although it be nothing else but the very pure Gospel:
but it is to believe and wholly to put trust in men. For if those men, which by
their authority have moved me to receive it, should happen to forsake it: I
should be no less pressed and ready to refuse and to shake it of with them, then
I was to receive it and to allow it be their means. We do at this present see
very plainly the experience hereof in those Churches, which here to fore have
been reformed by the preachyug of the Gospel, which at this present have
received the Interim, and the Mass. For yt Interim is a very perfect toke^ or
proof for me^ to know in deed, who they be that have unfeignedly believed God,
and his word, and which they be, that have dwelled upon men, and their
authority, and have received the Gospel, either through hypocrisy and
dissmulation for the love of men, and the hope of their own gain and fleshly
liberty, or else by perfect faith and true simplicity of heart, and by yt very
persuasio^ of the spirit of God in their conscience, for the health of their
souls, and to serve to the glory of God. Those men that do change in such
sort their faith, with every wind that blows, do plainly declare that they
never understood Jesus Christ very well, when he said: Be Mat. xxiii
not ye called masters upon earth, for ye have a master in heaven, to wit Jesus
Christ.

In what sort we may esteem men for masters and teachers, and in what manner
we are made the disciples of Jesus Christ, or of men.
T. Does he thereby forbid us, to have masters to teach us, and to call those
masters of whom we receive instruction? D. How should he forbid it, considering
it is he him self, that does teach us by them that are nothing else, but the
ministers of his grace, by whom he, which is our chief master, does declare
him self to us: wherefore should he else have sent his Prophets, Apostles, and
disciples, to teach and preach his holy Gospel unto us? would he not yt we
should hear those that he sends unto us, as if it were him self in proper
person, that speaks to us, and does teach us? Wherefore said he then to his
Apostles, he that receives you receives me, and he that refuses and
despises you, refuses and Math. x.
despises me? and after immediately he shows the reason: For it is not you
that speak, but the spirit of your heavenly father that speaks in you. T.
What is there to be understood by these? how may we both have, and not have,
masters upon the earth. D. If by hearing those that he sends unto us, we
receive the doctrine which they preach unto us, and believe the same, not for
their sake that speak unto us, ne yet for their great authority and
appare^ce, neither for the opinion that we have of them, either to please them,
or else to receive some worldly honor or profit at their hands: but only
because it is the pure and true word of God, and yt we hear yt voice of Jesus
Christ our shepherd, through their mouth: being certain and assured by his
holy spirit, that it is he that speaks in them: we are not then the
disciples of men, but of Christ. And then is that same fulfilled in us, which
our Lord Jesus Christ alleges of the Prophet Esaye, and that which he
him self expounds in the Gospel of S. John: And thy sons shall be all
taught Esaias. iiii^ John. 6
of God. Then who soever has heard, and learned of the father, comes to me.
For when we believe, having been so taught by God, it is for his sake, that we
do receive the doctrine, Psalm. lxxx^
and we take him for our master, and not the men: all beit that he does
communicate his name unto the^, because that they are his servants and
ministers: as the name of God is given unto Judges, Prophets, and to the
elect of God, because that the Image of his majesty and justice does shine
and is present in them, although they be continually men, and not Gods. And on
the contrary: If I believe the doctrine which I hear, because that Tertullian
or Cyprian. Origene or Chrysostom, Irene or Ambrose, Hierome or Augustine,
Gregory or Isidore, Luther or Erasme, Eccius or Melancthon, Gratian or Peter
Lombard, master of the sentences, John the Scotte or Thomas of Alquine, do
preach and teach the same unto me: or else because that the Popes, and
Cardinals, the Bishops, and others, whom I esteem rich, mighty and wise
personages, of great virtue and holiness, do allow and commend the same, or else
because that the Emperors, kings, princes, and Lords, the Italians and
Spaniardes, the Almaignes the French, and other nations do believe it: I am
then no disciple of Jesus Christ in this doing, but a disciple of men.

Of the nature and virtue of true faith, and what difference there is between
it and opinion.
T. According to this account there are mo disciples of men, then of Jesus
Christ. For there are very few which have not greater regard to men, then
to any thing else. D. Yet notwithstanding if it be so, their faith to say truth
is no faith, but opinion, as it has been already declared. For seeing that it is
not builded upon the authority of God, and his word, but only upon the
oppinion which I have of such personages, it may be no faith. For faith may
have none other regard, object, subject, nor foundation, but God in Jesus
Christ, and his only truth. If it have any other foundation, if it be builded
upon men, and upon the opinion that men shall have of them, it shall change as
men do, and as the opinion does that men have conceived. It shall fall when
they fall, it shall be inconstant, variable and subject to change, even as
they are. For she shall not be builded upon Math. xxii i. Pet. ii Ephesians. ii i.
Cor. iii Math. xvi
the lively stone, which is Jesus Christ, and upon the sure foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, upon the which, the true Church must be builded, if it
will endure against the gates of hell, and the whole hellish power, otherwise
how may it be a faith? For these vices are as contrary to faith, as is the
fire to the water. Wherefore, such as dwell upon me^ in this sort, and do not
discern of things, nor prove the spirits whether they be of God or no,
according to the Counsel given by Saint John: What assurance may they have
John. iiii
in their consciences? Whylest they are at rest, and that they be not assailed
by temptacions, nor wakened by the judgment of God, and that they do haunt
among such as are of the same religion, that they are of, it seems unto them,
that their faith is very sure and strong: but when they shall find themselves
assailed with diverse temptacions, and compassed round with great dangers, and
that God shall a little astoone their consciences with his judgment, they shall
then find what stay they have of me^, and that there is no perfect assurau^ce,
nor true quietness of conscience, but in the true faith, engendered in the hearts
of me^, by the very persuasion of the word and spirit of God. And if it should
happen yt they should be co^uersa^t among men of an other Religion, what would
they then do? T. If they should be in Turckie, they would as well receive the
laws of Mahomet, and refuse the Christian Religion, as the Turckes do: for
they have even the same reasons and arguments to do it, as otherwise they have
to accept or refuse that, which they have already received or disalowed. They
would eue^ do the like, if that they were among the Jews, or any other nation,
which should hold any other religion, then the Christian. D. It is not to be
doubted.

Of the honor that is dew, to good and true teachers in the Church, and of
the mean that we ought to keep, to the end that we do give neither to much,
ne yet to little credit to men: and how perilous a thing it is, to trust to
much to a man's own judgment.
T. IF the matter be as thou say, to what purpose do the good doctors serve,
which have received so many excellent gifts of God, for the edifying of his
Church? D. I say not these things to despise or condemn them: for we should
be to much unkind toward them, if we should condemn or despise them,
considering they have taken so great pain to make the holy Scriptures more
plain and easy unto us, and that by their labor we have had great
commodity. They have sweat, to deliver us from a great deal of pain and
travail, and have greatly helped us with their labor, and made the way more
plain for us. Also we should be to outrageous against God, if that we should
despise them, blasphemyng the gifts of his holy spirit which he has
bestowed among them. Wherefore, think not that I do allow the judgment of
certain rash men, or favor a number of puffed proud spirits, who without
any regard condemn all men, esteemyng none but them selves. Because they
have known that the world has been seduced by gyuyng to much credit to the
judgments of men, and have been to light of credit, not enquiryng of the
truth, by the witness of the holy Scriptures, they have gone so far on the
other side, that they are no less to be blamed, then those whom they do
condemn. For if it be perilous to credit to much the judgments of men,
so is it also dangerous, if that we give not that credit that we ought to do,
to the judgments of those, which govern them selves according to the word
of God. T. It is a very hard matter to keep measure and mean, and so to do
thinckyng to avoid the one sort, of extremity and peril, that we fall not
more daungerously into the other. For if I give no credit to the judgment of
others, but will dwell wholly upon mine own, and upon my oppinion, wherein am I
more worthy of praise, then they who^ I do condemn? Am not I a man as they
are? D. There is no doubt but if I do follow only mine own judgment, and
fantasy, I follow the judgment of men, for I am no God, any more then other
men are. If the others be to be blamed, because of their over much lightness,
negligence, raysh belife, and folly, so should I also fear that I be not
subject to greater blame through folly, pride, self will and false
persuasio^ of my self. T. Here is no small danger: but before all other things
we ought to fear, least we stand to much in our own con- and trust to much to
our own judgments and understanding, despising the judgments of others, and
to be to much given and wedded to our own wills. For this vice is meruellous
dangerous, and is the chief fountain and cause of all heresies and Scismes,
which are the most dangerous pestilences, that may happen into the Church. D.
Therefore have I said these things to the end that we might know how to follow
that moderation, the which S. Augustine has followed without giving more or
less unto men, then faith and Christian charity may endure, yelding always
to God, and to the canonical Scriptures, that honor which we do owe unto the^,
and taking good head, that we give no more to Councels and to men, then to
them, what appare^ce or show so ever they have For they that come to Councels,
are men. And in that they are men: they are chaungeable, subject to errors and
untruth. They do conclude according as the spirit is, by whom they are
governed. If they be led by the spirit of God they will conclude in the favor
of the truth: if they be led by the spirit of error, as were the Prophets of
Achab against Miche, they will maynetayne and confirm lies. i. King. xxii.
And by these means they, that shall follow them, shall be in very good case.

Of the difference that men ought to put between the doctrine and vvritings of
the Apostles and Prophets, and of those that came after them, and the cause
thereof.
T. I Do confess that those which come to the Councels, are men, but a man may
replye, that in a lawful general Council, they are guided by the holy Ghost,
and that he will not suffer them to err. S. Paul and S. John, Iame. i. Act.
3. 14 Gal. 1. 2.
David and Ely, Esaias and Moses, and all the Prophets and Apostles were men
like unto others, subject to ye same infirmities that others were, and yet S.
Paul does so authorize his doctrine (as has been already said) that he
condempneth the Angels of heaven, if they do gain say it. Wherefore they
conclude, that even so as the Prophets and Apostles were men; and yet
notwithstanding all their writings are without error, even so fares it with
the fathers in all their determinations and Councels. D. They conclude very
euel, and speak wholly against the sentence of S. Augustine, who is as good a
christian as any one. For they attribute as much to the books and ordinances of
men, as to the Canonical books: whereupon we ought to consider, that albeit
the Prophets and Apostles were men, yet notwithstanding there is great
difference between them and those that came after them. For we are certain
that they spoke by the spirit of God, and that God has not suffered any error
to be mingled in their writings, because that he would they should be given
and left to us for most certain rules, whereby to examine all other doctrines.
There is yet an other matter beside this, which is well worthy to be noted: To
wit, that if any of those by whom it has pleased God to be served in this
work, have chanced to commit any fault in their office, the spirit of
God has not hidden it, but has manifestly declared it, to the end ye men
should not so be moved with the authority of such personages, that they
should follow lies in the steed of ye truth, and vice in the steed of
virtue. We have an evident example hereof in Nathan the Prophet, who without
having demanded i. Sam. 7
at the mouth of the Lord, said of his own only authority, and proper
council to David, that he should build the Lords house and temple, wherefore
he was rebuked and corrected immediately: the next night following by the Lord,
who commanded him to declare the contrary to David. We may also allege ye
example of the Prophet which was sent into Beth-el and was killed by the Lion:
i. kings. 17 Job in Iere. xx i. Kings. xix Jonas. 2 Gal. 2
and that of Job, and of Jeremy who cursed the day of their birth: and also
that of Hely and of Jonas, and so many faults of S. Peter and especially that
for the which S. Paul reproved him. I leave untouched a number of others:
such like. Now it stands not so at this present with us, ne yet with the
ancient doctors that were before us. For seeing that God would that this rule
should be observed in his church, it could not otherwise be, but yt it must
be appointed by a number of books certain, or else there would never have
been any end. Seeing then that the Lord has once appointed and allowed this
rule, we may compare unto it neither book nor Council, what so ever they
be. For if since the time of the Apostles there has never been man, of what
holiness or knowledge so ever he were, that has so perfectelye and well written
and taught, as the Prophettes and Apostles did without faylinge in any one
thing* we may not think that it is otherwise in their Councelles and
Sinodall statutes, then it is in their books. For those that write such
books, be the very self and same men by whom the Counsels are celebrated and
holden, unto whom their aduises and opinions are spoken, even as they are
couched in their books. Wherefore they may as well err in the one, as in the
other: we must also know that the most holy and perfect men in deed have not
all the gifts of God, neither continuallye nor in all ages, ne yet in all
things, no, not those gifts in deed which are given unto them: but that GOD
does reveal many things to others, and at other times.

What rule S. Augustine gives concerning Counsels and the writings of the
ancient Fathers.
T. Seeing it is so, it is very nedeful that we have some certain rule wherewith
to guide us in these matters. D. I do think that we can not do better, nor
follow a better rule, when any of these things come in question, then to
follow ye manner of proceeding that S. Augustine did use with Maximine, Bishop
of the Arrians, which would arm himself with the Council of Arimine, against
the conclusion that was made and confyrmed by ye holy fathers, touching the
divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Council of Nice, by the authority
of the truth, as it is said, and hy the truth of authority. Tom. 6. Lib. 3. I
may not now, says he, allege the Council of Nice, nor thou the Council of
Arimine, as for a prejudice, neither am I bound to the authorite of the one,
nor thou to the authority of the other. Let us debate the one matter with the
other, the one cause with the other, the one reason with the other, by the
authority of the Scriptures, not by proper and particular witness of every
man, but by indifferent to us both. Which thing he has also written in other
places as concerning To Paul, Epist. 112 To Hic. 29 Epist
the authority of the Canonical books, and agrees very well with this. I
will not, says he, that thou embrace mine authority, to the end thou
should think it necessary to believe any thing, because that I have spoken
it: but that thou believe the Canonical Scriptures. And again, I confess to
thy charity, that I have learned to bear that honor and reverence to the
only books of the Scriptures which are called Canonical, that I do believe
assuredlye that no one of the authors of them has in any one jot of his
writings erred. And i^^^diatlye after he says: But I read y^ others in such
(...) what excellency of holiness and doctrine so ever be (...), I think not
that which they say to be true because that they were of that opinion, but
because that I am persuaded that that which they speak, is agreeing to the
truth, either by the Canonical authors, or else by apparaunt reason. This is
his manner of writing to Saint Hierome. And again, thou see here how S.
Augustine submits the writings of the ancients, and the Councils, to the
word of God, and to the determinations thereof, contained in the holy
Scriptures, and makes it judge above all. T. I do find the advice of S.
Augustine very good: but me thincketh there are other things to be considered
in that conference and difference of the ancient Doctors and determinations of
the lawful Councels, whereof I would gladlye hear the resolution. But
because that we have entreated of many good points touching this matter of
Counsels, it seems to me very good for this present hers to make an end, to
the end I may have some little time to call to my remembrance those things,
whereof we have already discoursed to that purpose, and because I will not be
to tedious unto thee. D. Fear not to demand of me: for there is nothing that
I do more willinglye. T. I know that well, but I should be to much discourtese
and rude, if I should have no regard: nor spare thee more then thou would
spare thy self. Moreover it is not suffii^ent for me to hear only as do
many scholars, which charge them selves with more lessons then their capacity
may endure, doing nothing but hear without profitting or learning of any
thing. D. Thou haste reason in that that thou say.

The effect of the third Dialogue entitled the authority of Counsels: making
mention of the ancient doctors and decrees.
I Do conteyne in this Dialogue following, the matter of Councels, concerning
their authority, alleging many examples of ancient hystories, by the which I
do show the great contrarietye that has been between many Councels, and
many decrees and Canons, as well of them, as of Romish Popes. There is in the
same also mention made of the liberty given to Christians, for to reform the
abuses that shall happen in religion, and of the duty yt every man does owe
to the same: and of the attent of them that do attend upon those that are
called the prelates of the church. Likewise of the lawefull assembles that are
made in the name of Christ: and of the gift of Prophecy: and of the promise of
God, and to whom, and upon what condition. Moreover, of the authority of the
true and lawful Councels, which must be holde^ to be the very rule and line to
rule all others, and what proceeding and order the Pope and his do observe in
theirs. And as touching the rest, every man may the more easily understand the
other points and matters that therein are entreated of, by the little sums or
titles, by the which we have packed the^ together shortly, declaring them in
order, even as we have done in the Dialognes going before. It is easy to judge
by this some, why I have given this title to this Dialogue.

The third Dialogue, entitled, the authority of Counsels.
Of the asistance of the holy Ghost in lavvful Councels: and of his gifts: and
of the perpetual conservation of the truth in the church.
Tymothe. Daniell.
we did discourse at our last departure of the one, from the other. D. I am
ready when so ever thou will be ready to hear. And therefore declare what
thou haste to say, as touching the writings of the ancient Fathers and
Doctors, and what difference there ought to be put between them and ye decrees
passed and determined in the lawful Counsels. T. When these good fathers and
ancient doctors, do teach or write any thing in particular, they may more
easily err, being as particulars, the^ when they are assembled together at the
Council, in the which the spirit of God does assiste in greater effect and
virtue, in so much as the gifts and graces which he has given to every member
of the body of Jesus Christ, are all there together even as it were in one
perfect Roma. xii. i. Cor. xii Ephe. 4 i, Sam. 10
body. Wherefore the one helps the other, and every man feels the more
presently the virtue of the spirit of God in himself. For if Saul which was
forsaken of God, did prophecy among the Prophets, after yt he was come into
their companies, in such sort that it became a common proverb among the
Hebrews, and it was said: is not Saul also amongst the Prophets? Is it not
more like to be true that God will give the spirit of prophecy to them that
come together to the Council for his glory, and for the edification of the
Church? For where is it that the promises by ye which God does promise his
perpetual assistaunce, and an everlasting course of truth to his church,
should have place, if not in such a company? Has he not said: behold, my
covenant which I have made with them. My spirit which is in thee, and my
words which I have put into thy mouth, shall Esaias. iix
not depart from thy mouth, nor from the mouth of thy seed forever. And
again, he will give you an other comforter, the spirit of truth, to the end
that he tarry with you. And he shall John. xiiii
lead you in the knowledge of all truth. D. I will not utterly deny all that
thou say, if they come together to that end that thou speak of. But al
Synedes, Seanes and Councels, have not always ben assembled in the name of
Jesus Christ. The examples which are in the ecclesiastical hystoryes do
witness the same, and the Canons and decrees which have been ordained and
concluded in them. For oftentimes they repugne the one to the other, as much as
do: the fire and water.

What things there are to be desired in Counsels, yea even in those
Counsels which have been most excellent and lavvfull of all those that have
been celebrated and holden since the time of the Apostles.
T. I Would very gladly yt thou would prove by some examples worthy of
faith, yt which thou now say. D. Even those same yt have been most lawfullye
assembled, although they have ordained and established very good things,
founded upon the word of God, and yt they have mightelye defended the cause of
ye truth, and that God has not suffered them to err in the chief points,
and in matters that are properly the very substance of religion, and do
concern the articles of the faith, necessary unto salvation: yet does it not
follow for all yt, but yt they may have erred in some things, and that they
may have made constitutions that sometime are more contrary to ye word of God,
the^ comfortable. And without seking any further, we need but to examine ye
Canons, decrees and ordinances of the Council of Nice, which is accounted ye
chief of all, next to ye Council of ye Apostles, and of all yt rest
consequently, which men think to be yt most perfect and certain, and most
worthy of credit: and it shall be easy to judge, if every of the^ hold in all
respects ye Apostolic majesty and authority, how far of they are
oftentimes from ye purity of doctrine, which was in ye primitive church. For
God would not do unto others that honor, which he has done to his Prophets,
and Apostles: to the end yt the human authority should not be co^parable to
ye divine, which ought always to be preferred. How many laws and
constitutions may men find made in these Councels, which draw more nere to
man's wisdom: or to Iewishe and Paganishe supersticion, then to the
simplicity of the doctrine of the Apostles? I speak of the very same that
have been decreed by those Counsels that are best allowed in the church of God
and Christ, and are worthy to be esteemed the true servants of God.

Of the vveakenesses that have been found at the Council of Nice, in them
that were there gathered and assembled, and what holy and excellent
personages there were present at the same.
T. THou speak as yet but in general: I pray thee let us now come to
particular examples. D. We spoke lastly of the Council of Nice: but think
thou that all the decrees of the same be as well founded upon the holy
Scriptures, as were the disputations, arrestes and determinations which were
there agreed upon against the Arrians? T. I have no occasion to doubt it, if I
see not the contrary. D. If all those which are named unto it, were there
determined, there are some touching the discipline of the Church very
supersticious and curious, and an other sort rigorous and curious enough.
Moreover I see no great appearance in that which forbids men to knele, when
they pray on the Sondaies, and on the day of Pentecoste. I leave that whereof
Gracian makes mention under the same title, concerning the consecration of
temples or churches: because it is to beastly and to unworthy of such a
Council. On the other part, how much wanted it that it was not forbidden the
ministers of the church to use their lawful wives, yea by the common consent
of all such as did there assiste, directlye against the word of God, if one
Paphnutius had not had more of the spirit of God in that behalf, then all
Hist. trip. li. 2. c. 13. 14. Eusebius. hist. ec^l. li 10. ^
the rest of the Council, who let that determination, by the very word of
God. Moreover in the same Council was not the Emperor Constantine greatly
ashamed, to hear the Bishops and pastors of the church, which were men so
greatly esteemed for their doctrine and holiness of life, so to accuse the one
the other (being personages of so great honesty) and to contend and outrage
one an other, as it had been a number of women that had chidden. Was he not
constrained to cast all their accusations and libells of evil report (which
they had prepared the one against the other) in to the fire? For he well
understood that these affections and particular causes which they had one
against an other, should hinder the principal causes for the which they were
assembled. For many of them were more affectionate to their particular causes,
then to the common cause: and desired more their victory, then that of the
truth. There were there, three hundred and threscore Bishops by account in
that Council, the flower of Christendom: among whom was this Paphnutius, a
Bishop of Egipte, of whom we have already spoken, a very man of God who had
endured much for the truth, and had the gift of miracle. Spiridion Bishop, of
Cypre, who was a very excellent personnage, there was in like sort present:
Paul Neocharien Martyr, who had both his hands burnte in the persecution, of
Maximian, and many other such like who had the gift of miracle, and had
behaved them selves valiauntly and constauntly in that persecution, if then the
imperfections, weaknesses and affections were so great among the Bishops, in
such a company, that Constantine was all amassed and ashamed, to see at such
a time, that so worthy personnages should show them selves, in such sort
men, and so subject to their affections: let us then think what might be in
our time, and what assistaunce of the holy Ghost we may hope: for in such a
company as shall there assemble. T. It is easy to discern.

Of the great contearieties, discordes and dissentio^s that have been in many
of the ancient Councels, between the Bishops, and the Ministers of the
Church.
D. LEt us proceed: and for greater proof of that which we have said, let men
see in the hystories of ye Church what the partialities, the bands and
dissentions of the Bishops have done, in the Councels holden in Tyr, in
Jerusalem, in Antioche, in Sirmie, and at Constantinople. Moreover Sozo. 2 c 25
hist. tri. li 1. 2. 33. and lib 2 c. 10. c. 30. and lib. 4. c. 10 Rut 1. c. 28
hist. Tri. lib 9. c 12. The^do. ^. c. ^ and lib. 4 c. 24. and lib, 5
how has the Council of Alexandrie troubled that of Calcedonie, and the
Council of Antioche, that of Ephesus. There arose so great trouble in
Christendom, and it was so denided and was so full of sects, Scismes,
heresies and humane affections, that if men should have given more place to
the favor of Emperors, kings and princes, to the assembles of Popes and
Bishops, to the authority of Councels, to the art and eloquence of Orators,
to the subtilitie and understanding of Philosophers, the^ to the truth, it had been needful to have abrogated, cassed, undone, and abolished, that which had been agreed, determined and hollyly confessed for Christ, and for the Christian
doctrine, in the Councels of Nice, Millane, Sardice, Corduba and such like,
many other Councels, which were holden after them, would have overthrown all
that ever was determined and agreed upon in them, which had not much less
appearance then the others. If they had not so much or more. And the matters
whereof the differences did grow, were of no small importance. For there was
question of the divinity of Christ against Hist. Tri. li. 2. c. 20. Soz. 3.
the Arrians, for the which the Bishops of the East and Weast did celebrate
and hold Councels, the one against the other, the one sort condemnyng the
cause and doctrine of the Arrians, the other sort approuyng and maintaynyng
the same.

Of the contradiction of the Popes, and of their Decrees and Ordinances, the
one sort contrary to the other.
T. THou do declare unto me, things very unpleasant and offensive to those
that are Christians. D. There is yet much more, as well of Councels, as of
Popes which will be the presidentes of them. For how many Popes have there
been that have condemned and abolished that, which their predecessors have
established and ordained? What a number has there ben of them, which have
even as the ancient Roman Emperors did, who when they possessed the Empire
after the decease of their predecessors, did abrogate and make of none effect,
all that ever their predecessors had established and ordained? Behold one Pope
shall make laws, and shall cause a Council to be holden for his purpose, in
the which he will ordain, what so ever shall please him, and shall command
it under pain of excommunication and everlasting cursing, that the same shall be
kept and observed among the Christian people. And after him there shall come an
other, which shall abolishe all that, and shall do clean contrary, he shall
excommunicate and curse all those that will do that which before was
commanded under pain of excommunication and dampnation. T. If it be so, the
Christian people can not choose but stand always a cursed. D. It is certain.
For it is an impossibility to observe and keep their Decrees and ordinances,
without falling into such perplexities and inconuenie^ces: he that will not
believe me, let him read their Canons and Decrees, and Platina which has
written, the lives of the Popes, and has been nourished and brought up in their
Court, and Sabellicus, and the other historians which have entreated of these
matters. T. I beseech thee show me some examples to prove this to be true, to
the end that I may not thinck that thou speak of pleasure, without proof.
D. If I should allege al those that I might gather out of their books, I could
find enough wherewith to outretayne thee a long time: but I will hold me
contented with a reasonable number, to satisfy thy request. We will first
speak of the Canons and Decrees that the Popes have made the one sort
contrary to the other. Platin^
What agreement is there between the Pope John, the xxij. and the Pope Nicholas,
when the one pronounced iudicially ye Jesus Christ and his Apostles possessed
nothing neither in private ne yet in common: and the other did the clean
contrary. ^ecre. 4. ^itl. de diuor. ca 5 Plat. Sabel
In the matter of divorce, Celestine does permit that the faithful party
shall marry again: if that the other party be fallen into heresy, Innocent
on the contrary denies it. Afterward, Stephen the with has cut of and made
of none effect, the acts of the Pope Formosus, by the authority of the
Council: and again John the x. who succeeded this Stephen, did condemn his
sentence in the assemble of Rauenna, here must it needs be of necessity, that
not only the one or the other of the Popes has erred, but also yt Councils
which have followed their opinions and sentences, whom they have abused, to
confirm their errors, abuses, and tyranny by their authority. Wherefore
Gerson, which was one of their own doctors, said not without great reason,
that ye saying of one doctor approved by ye Canonical Scriptures, was more to
be credited then the declaracion of the Pope, and the saying of a doctor well
seen in the holy Scriptures, and alleging the universal authority, was more
to be credited then a general Council. T. He did not amiss, for so much as
they do so disagree among them selves. D. Panormitan which was at the same
time, a man of great reputacion, and was present at the Councels of Constance
^^nor. in ^a signifi. de Elecii.
and Basle, as Gerson was, has said no less, although he were a great
Idolatre of the Papacy: for he said that we ought more to credit the saying
of a simple lay man, alledgyng for his proof the Scriptures, then to all the
whole Council.

Of the contrariety of the Decrees of many Councels touching the Marriage of
the Ministers of the Church.
T. I Do not a little marvel, that such me^ durst affirm any such thing in
those days. D. It is so: but the verity is of such power, that she
constrains her very enemies, yea the devils them selves, to confess her, but
following our purpose, for so much as we have spoken of Popes, let us now come
to the co^trarietie of Councels. The Counsel of Nice, Hist. Tri. li. 2. c. 13.
did. 31 c Nicen. Plat. in. vita Silu. Did. 28 cap. Si quis and did. 30.
Siquis viroru^. did. 31. c. Quoniam.
of whom we have already spoken, which was holden in the year three. C.
twenty and three, did allow the Marriage of Ministers of the Church, and
conde^pned those that would forbid it. The first Council of Sangres, holden in
the year three hundred thyrty and three, has done no less: and did accursse
al such as under color of Religion, should leave their fathers, mothers and
wines. The sixth Council of Constantinople, has in like sort ordained that no
man should make any vow to live without a wife, and that the Priests which
should separate them selves from their wives, for their holy orders sake,
should be excluded from the Communion. did 27. c. Quidam.
The Council of Anticyre, holden in the year three hundred and four, has in
like sort permitted that Deacons should marry, yea even after that, they had
received their orders. And as concerning the Council of Carthage, holden Ex
Car. ^*
in the year four hundred twenty and one, in the which the heresy of
Pellagius was condemned by two hundred and seuentene Bishops, among whom S.
Augustine was, it appears manifestly, by the twelueth constitucion of the Apoc
c. ^ Extra de. Clem Co^, lib. 6. c. 1. Ep^p. li 2 Tom. 1. here is. 41
same, that the Bishops and other men of the Church were married. And Boniface
the viij. did suffer the religious to enjoy their liberties, although they
were married. The viij. Council of Tolletto, does allow to break al vows
and oaths which are made against the faith. And Epiphanius does earnestly
condemn those, who having not the gift of continency, had rather for shame
of the world, to commit fornication and adultery secretly, then to marry. On
the Albert. Craut^. in Saro. lib. 4 ca. 43 Navvcler.
contrary, the Council of Neocesarie, holden the year three hundred and
thirty, and the second Council of Carthage, holden the year four hundred and
twenty, and after them the Counsel of Magonce, did condemn the Marriage of
Priests and Ministers of the Church, and did wholly forbid it, and did bind
the Priests, Mo^ckes, and Nuns, to unlawful vows, impossible for men to
keep, and were clean contrary to the word of God. This Council of Magonce
was holden by the Emperor Henry the iij. in the which he assembled an hundred
and thyrtie Bishops, Some say that the Pope Leo the ix. was there also present
at it. It was also ordained in that Council, y^ men of the Church should keep
neytheir hounde, greyhond, spaniel, nor hawk, ne yet should use any seculer
traffic, and that none should be received for a Monk, unless he came of his
own free will, and were of lawful age: but these Decrees have not ben so well
observed as has the forbidding of Marriage. Likewise Gregory the vij. a Monk of
Clunie, otherwise called Hildebra^d, which was Pope in ye time of the Emperor
Henry the iiij. did command by his letters to Otto Bishop of Consta^ce,
Naucler. ^lbert. Crauts. Lambert Hirsweld
near about the year a thousand forty and seven, that he should forbid
through out all his diocese all Priests to marie, which were not then married,
and that he should disolue the marriage of all such as were already married. T.
I see in this no great accord. D. Notwithstanding, all this was done, and not
without great tyra^nie: ne yet without great resistaunce. T. I believe so.

Of the contrariety of certain Councels, concerning the forbiddyng and
difference of Meats.
D. HEre is as much as I did determine to speak, as touching Marriage, let us
now come to the forbidding of of meats. The second Bracarense Counsel, holden
the year Di. 30. ca. Si quis.
six hundred and nynetene, did acursse all such, as did abstain from eating of
any meat, through supersticion: and yt which the Pope Martin held, did the
like. The third Council of Tolede did accursse those that should forbid men to
eat. And the Pope Eleutherius did ordain, that no man should refrain
through supersticion from eating of any meat that was agreeable with man's
nature. On the contrary, the Roman Counsel, did forbid to eat flesh on
the Saturday: and afterward that defense was extended further, as we see at
this day, to Friday, Vigils, Imber days, and Lent. T. The Papists will reply
against this and say, that by making of those statutes concerning ye forbiddyng
of meats, they do nothing against the ancient Decrees and Councels, for so
much as they do abstain neither for supersticio^, ne yet for any evil
opinion, that they have of the good cretures of God, as did the ancient
heretics, but only for abstinence. D. I understand it well, but if they do it
for abstinence, how happens it, that they have on those days these kinds of
meat, which are forbidden, in so great abomination? Why do they attribute to
their abstinence so great merits? why do they not rather put difference in the
quantity of the meat, then in the kind? which they do not at all. T. It is
even so.

Of the Decrees of the Council of Consta^ce, and Basle, touching the supper of
the Lord under both kinds, and of the supremicie of the Pope, and of the
Romish Church, and of their contrariety.
D. LEt us now proceed to other matters. The Council of Constance did forbid to
administer, the supper of the Lord to the people under both kinds, to wit, of
bread and wine, and the Council of Basle, did grant both the one and the
other to them of Bohemia. But there is a more strange matter. That same very
Council of Constance, does evidently speak against it self, and against
that of Nice, and of Aphrique, and the whole Church of the East and Aphrique.
For it condemned that article of John Hus, to wit: That the Pope by the
authority of the word of God, is not the head of the Church: and yet was it
decreed in that same Counsel, that the Council was above the Pope, which
thing does very well agree with the sentence of S. Jerome, which says, if
there be question of authority, that of all the world is greater, the^ is that
of one town, in like sort is the whole Church greater then one Romish
Church, and the Romish Church is not above the universal Church, but on the
contrary, the universal Church is above the Romish Church. Now if the Pope
have authority over all Churches, and y^ the Council does represent them, it
does follow both that he is above the Council, and that he is not above the
Counsel, contrary to the determination of the said Council of Constance,
which is mingled with manifest contradictions. I leave a part that which
they did define: That the Church was not the university of the predestinate:
and that our good worckes must help to save us, as well as the grace of God. I
speak not at all of the Decree that was made in ye same Council, that men
ought not to hold any promise, oath, or safeconducte, made or given, to
heretics, which thing forthwt was put in use, not against heretics, but
against the servants of God, which were there condemned for heretics, and
were burned as heretics. T. Yet was this a general Council. D. It was so. T.
I do not a little marvel that such matters could pass in a general Council,
which the heathens would not have passed, but would rather, have judged it
meet to keep promise, even with a man's very enemies.

Of the contrariety that has been in many Councels, concerning Images.
D. IF I should allege the dissentions, that have been in diverse Councils
concerning Images, it would require Enti. de Re. To lib 23 Anton. Florent.
a long time. For Gregory the iij. decreed by his Council in Italy, that
Images should be honored in the Churches, and did reuolte and caused Rome, and
all Italy, to rebel against the Emperor Leo the iij. which was of contrary
Auspurg. in ^hro
mind. And afterward Constantine the v. son to the said Leo, did ordeyne
the contrary in the Council of Asia, and Gretia, about the year seven
hundred forty and six, at the which there were assembled thirty eight
Bishops at Constantinople. Again Stephen the iij. Pope, condemned this
Council of Constantine, by an other Council, which he caused to be holden at
Rome in the Church of Laterane, by the Bishops of Italy and France. The which
thing was done again by an other Council, in ye time of Hir^ne, wife to Leo
the iiij. After that, the Council of Nice (in the which the Greeks would have
condemned the Images again) was enforced to break up, by means of the
dissentio^s that there were, and through the practices of those that held for
the Pope. Whilst these things were in hand in Greece, the Council Elibertin
was holde^ in Spayn, by twenty and nine Bishops, and thirty six Spanish
Priests, which pronounced their sentences against Images: who were also
conde^pned by the twelfeth Council of Tolede, and afterward for the Popes
pleasure, and for the French kings sake, they were again allowed by an other
Council. T. Here was good stuff.

Of the Council of Carthage, concerning the Baptism administered by heretics.
D. IT is no maruayle since that the Romish Popes have usurped tyranny over
the Church, and especially sithe the time of the Emperor Phocas, if that there
has been small reason to be found in any of the Counsels, but I will allege
you others more ancient. It was concluded in the Council of Carthage (at the
which S. Cyprian was present Eusebius. 7. c. 5
with. lxxxvi. Bishops, to wit in manner with all the Bishops of Aphrike,
Numidie, and Mauritanie) that the Baptism administered by heretics, should
have no place, but that those which had been Baptized by them, should be
Baptized again. The which sentence was afterward condemned, as appears.
Did 5 quare.

Of the sentence and opinion of the Papists concerning the general and
particular Counsels, and of the diversity of their decrees.
T. THese against who^ thou do inuey, will confess unto thee that the
Counsels, yea the general Councels, De consangui. and affini^a cap. non debet.
For this cause Innocent the third said. That it ought not to be judged a thing
worthy of blame, if that according to the change of time, men's ordinances did
also change, chiefly when an urgent necessity and an apparaunt commodity
does require it. For God himself has changed diverse of those things in the
new Testament which he ordained in the old. And therefore me^ may not rashlye
judge and say, that the Counsels are contrary the one sort to ye other,
although that in things concerning the policy of ye church more then the
faith, the one has oftentimes changed: that the other has decreed. For the
lawful general Counsels, were never contrary the one to the other in any
piece of the substance of our faith, which is necessary to our salvation. And
in this sort must it be understood that S. Augustine has said. The former
Counsels have been amended August. Tom. 7. de baptis. cont donatist. li. ^.
cap 3
by the latter: and that the ordinances and decrees of provincial Counsels,
ought to give place to those of greater Counsels: but ye Canonical Scripture
does give place to none. And as touching the Council of Carthage, it was no
general but a particular Council, as Saint Augustine proves against the
Donatystes. And in deed they deny not but yt particular Counsels may err:
and yt they ought to be reformed by the general, as it is already declared.

Of the errors and abuses that have been brought into the church, what mean
there ought to be had for the correction and amendment of such Counsels, when
need shall require.
D. THen they do confess, at the least, that the provincial Counsels may
err, yea even those, in the which the most wise and holy men that were in the
world since the Apostles time have been present. For S. Cyprian was one Eusebius.
7. 5. cap
of the best learned men that has been in the church since that time, and was
of such zeal toward the word of God and his church, that he dyed a martyr for
the truth of Jesus Christ, And then judge you that if a Council in the which
such personages were, might err: what we may think of many Idolatries and
supersticions, and of many vain ceremonies, tradicions and abuses that have
been sowed in the church, not by Counsels and particular Synodes only, but by
particular men, who have charged the church to what so ever pleased them. For
one hooded Monk or Friar had been sufficient to have invented a thousand
manner of doings clean contrary to the Scriptures, and forthwith they should
have been put in use, and allowed as if they had been articles of the faith.
If it were lawful then to change those same very things which the general
and lawful Counsels had decreed, concerning the policy and discipline of the
Church, as touching their manners, according to the nedefulnes of the
circumstaunces, and the capacity of men, of places and times: it ought then
to be no less lawful to those unto whom God has given the knowledge of his
word to condemn and abolyshe so many abuses and innumerable errors, which
by so many means and wrong ways, without order or ecclesiastike discipline
have been sowed in the Church of the Lord: and are so intolerable, that the
very greatest enemies of veritye, even the Roman Antichrist have been
constrained to confess it. And without going any further to prove it, did not
the Pope Adrian confess, not many years since, that there were many
enormities and inconveniences in the Romish seat, and many abuses, offenses,
and disorders in the government of the Church? And beside this, what confession
did the Legates and orators of the Pope Paul deceased make, at the Council
of Trent, of ye estate of their church? But what will thou say if I do prove
by S. Augustine that not only the prouincial and national Councels may be
corrected by the great and general Councels, but also even they them selves
may be corrected the one by the others, the first by the last. T. If it be
so, our adversaries should not then think it strange if we would not wholly
dwell upon the authority of their Counsels. D. That same does plainly
appear by his writings, whereupon he declares, when that same ought to be
done and by what mean: To wit, that when by experience of things, that
which was secret is opened, and that which was hidden is known, without any
puffing up in pride full of sacrilege, without any swollen arrogancy, without
any contention and envy, but with holy humility, with the universal
Christian peace, he speaks here generally of all Counsels, and of all that
ever may be determined in them.

Of those that wait upon the Prelates of the Church, and vvoulde have them to
correct the abuses that therein are: and what liberty every man had to
sovve and bring them into the Church: and what agreement and difference there
is between the ancient Heathen Emperors, and the Popes, and their Counsels
and assemblyes.
T. THey do not utterly deny but that there are some abuses and errors in
the Church, but they say that it appertains not to every man to reform them:
but that the charge thereof belongs to the prelates of the Church, unto whom
GOD has given it. Wherefore, they think meet, to have a general Council, to
determyne what things should be observed, and what should be abolyshed,
before that any thing should be changed or altered. D. The Seducers and false
Prophets, which filled ye church with errors, did not tarry a general
Council to pour out their poison and to corrupt the Church of the Lord, but
we must tarrye for a Council to pourge it: and in the mean time the poor
souls shall go to the devil. Must we put the matter in question in a
Council, whether we ought to believe that Jesus Christ is God, and the very
Son of God, and our only Savior and redeemer? Shall we do as did the
Emperor Tiberius, who put the matter in deliberaion in the Council at Rome,
with the prerogative of his voice and the testimonye of his consent, whether
Christ should be accepted and received amongst the Gods, or no? Which thing
he did for that (as Tertullian witnesses) that the Romans had a very
ancient law, by the which it was ordained, that there should Apolo. 5.
be no God canonized by the Emperors, and that none should be so received,
unless he were allowed and confirmed by the Council. For this cause Jesus
Christ was not received for a God, because it pleased not the Council: albeit
that the Emperor was of contrary opinion. T. Then had not the Emperor so
great authority in the Council at Rome, ne yet in his Empire as the Pope will
challenge over the Counsels, over the whole church, over al Christendom, yea
and over the word of god it self. D. It is true, and therefore I fear greatly
that if Jesus Christ were now to be received, he should be as far of from
being received at the Counsels, in the which this Roman Antichrist does
preside, as he was then at that Council of Rome. For sith they do reiecte
and disalowe his doctrine, they do sufficiently declare what opinion they have
of him. T. It can not be better known by any thing then by that, for that is a
proof most sure.

Of the things vuhich of them selves are already sufficiently resolved among
all men, without looking for any resolution of the Council: and of the
negligence and carelessness that is in us to put them in use, and to govern
our selves according to the same.
D. IF they think him to be the very Son of God, and that his Gospel is
the word of God, they need not to tarry for a Council to determyne whether it
shall be received and observed, or no, but would rather endeavor themselves to
put in execution those things which are not in controversy, but are already
agreed upon and resolved among all men, as well by the word of God, as by
their own Councels. Let them therefore correct their ignorance and beastlynes,
their negligence and slouthfulnes in the executing of their office, and their
pompes and ambition, their insatiable covetousness, their execrable whooredome,
with ye number of those horrible vices which reign among them. For there
needs not any tarying for yt Council, to condemn or allow it, for it is
already resolved. Why do they not observe the decrees of the Pope Alexander ye
third, of Gelase, of Nicolas the second, of the Elibertin Council of Tolede,
of Carthage, of * Cabylone, of Chalcedonie, and of Laterane, which have
forbidden to any, money or presents for the satisfaction of sins, for
baptism, for the churches, for the Sacraments, and for the gifts of God:
which ordained also that none should be aduau^ced to any place in the church
for money, ne yet for rewards: and that he should be holde^ for Apostatike,
and not for Apostolic, that should obtain the seat of Rome, either by money
or else by favor? Why are not the poor nourished and clad, and also the sick
and weak, by the Bishops, according to the ordinances of the Aurelian
Council? Why do the Monks possess any thing in proper, contrary to the
determination of that same Council? But all this is old and abolyshed, why
may we not lawfullye reproach them in that sort that Jesus Christ did those
Jews, which sought to have him dead, because he had healed a man sick of
the Palsy upon the Sabbath day: and yet left not they to violate and break
the whole law upon the Sabbath day? And therefore he said unto them, did not
Moses give you the law, John. vii.
and none of you observes the same? Why do you seek to put me to death? They
declared plainly by that what zeal they had to the law, and yet would
they show as though they had a great care for the observation thereof, and
chiefly in the pursuit which they made against Jesus Christ. These good men
do even the like, making a show as though they did greatly desire the
reformation of the Church, and yet in the mean time there is no one piece of
the word of God, Council nor Canon which they do not violate and corrupt,
without giving order in any one thing. Now seeing that men are come so far,
there needs now but a Council to abolishe the reast that remains: for who
be they that shall hold it? Even those which have sowed, authorized, and
allowed these errors and abuses. And yet will they glory that their law, and
faith, with their whole religion is so well approved, that no one jot thereof
ought to be called in doubt. It may be no more disputed of, then may the
Alcoran of Mahomet among the Turks, but must be holden for fullye resolved,
what so ever they do approve or disalowe.

What lihertie Christians have to reform the abuses that are among them,
according to the power and authority which God has given them.
T. THey will confess that there are many things (as it has been already
said) which may be changed and abolished according as necessity shall
require: as we have Acts. xv
example in the Council of Jerusalem holden by the Apostles, as has been
heretofore declared. There were things that were ordained but for a certain
time, which we observe not at this present, for we have not that occasion, unto
the which the Apostles then had regard, now among the Christians none are
offended to see men eat blood, or to eat of a strangled beast. D. Then if
the Church having well considered the intent and end whereunto the Apostles did
tend, have abolished in process of time yt which ye Apostles the^ selves did
decree as touching ye ceremonies, knowing yt the ordinance did not touch at al
any part of ye substance of ye faith, but yt it was ordained only for a bond
of peace, to keep charity, and to bear for a time wc the infirmite and
weakness of ye Jews: why may she not the^ more lawfully use her authority to
abolishe ye idolatry, yt supersticions and men's traditions, which are directly
against ye faith, charity, all good discipline and good order, and against ye
health of souls? And if it ca^ not be done by a general consent of
Christendom, why shall not they yet in their behalf employ them selves, which
shall have best means to begin some good reformation? For if it have been
lawful for a hooded fellow so boldly to set forth for ye word of god, his
dreams: shall it not the^ be lawful for a Christian prince, being accompanied
with learned men yt fear God, and good ministers of the Gospel, having ye word
of God for their guide, to reform ye churches within their dominions and
countries, according to the example of Ezechias and Josias, and to pourge them
of so many intolerable iiii. Kings. xviii. and. xxiii
abuses, without tarying any longer for ye determination of a Council? But are
not all Christian princes bound to do this? for so much as those which ought
to procure it will not understand of it as they ought to do, but do enforce them
by all means to hinder it yt there should be none lawful, ne yet any thing
concluded yt were good. And therefore we ought not so to depend upon Councils,
be they particular or general, yt we should not do our duty always, according
to ye graces and means which god shall give us. For we may not think ye God is
subject to the greatest multitude, for then would he not have spoken yt which
has been already alleged in an other place: Thou shall not follow yt great
number in evil, and thou shall not dwell in any thing, because that many Exodus
xxiii.
do it, to wander out of the way, and to pervert judgment. This were a great
folly to imagine, if that we should think yt al those which shall assemble to
hold a counsel, be assured to shut in forthwith the spirit of God there: into
yt place where they shall come together, to have him at their pleasure.

Of the passages which the papists allege to authorize their Counsels, and
of the true meaning of these same.
T. THey do build upon this, that Jesus Christ said: When you shallbe two or
three gathered together in my Ma, 18. 28
you to the end of the world: if he promise to be in the myddest of two or
three, by more apparent reason, ought we to believe that he is in the midst of
a whole Council. D. But we must note upon what conditions he promises to be
among them: First he says, that if we do agree together upon the earth, if we
be of one accord, of one consent, of one heart and of one spirit, if we be
careful to keep unity of spirit through the band of peace, if we be one
body and one spirit, as we are called into one hope of our vocation, as there
Ephesians. 4.
is one Lord, one faith, and one Baptism, one God and father of al. And
besides this, if we be gathered together in his name, to wit in his virtue and
force, and not in the virtue and power of me^, for his honor and glory, and not
for ours, neither yet for our ambition for the edificatio^ of his Church and
the health of poor souls, not for our profit and aduau^cement, but wishing
verity to have the victory, and not we: now let us see if it be easy to
observe all these conditions, and what hope we may have in our time of a
Council, yt shall observe all these points, without the which in deed he can
not be called a Council, but rather a Synagoge of Satan, and can bring no
commodity to Christendom, but rather hurt and destruction: how is it
possible to have him such an one as he ought to be, considering that those
which should procure it, fear nothing more then to have a Council such an one
as he ought to be? T. It is easy to judge by that, that has been already said.

How that the holy Ghost, is neither subject nor bound to any kind of
person or estate.
D. THere is yet one thing more, very well worthy to be noted, which is that
our Lord Jesus Christ, did not say, when a general Council shall be gathered
together, or all the estates of Christendom, or the Pope, the Cardinals and
Bishops, or else a great assemble shall be had, I will be in the midst of
them: but he said he would be in the midst of them, yea although they were but
two or three, so that they were gathered together in his name. In the which he
does plainly declare, that he will be bound neither to men yet to estates,
neither yet to the multitude: but how small so ever the number be, of what
estate so ever the men be, he will be in the midst of them, provided that
they come together as they ought to do. For all though the promise of Jesus
Christ, be made to his whole Church, yet does it appartaine in no wise to
hipocrites, false Pastors, and false Christians, which are not in any wise
true members of the same, which is the body of Jesus Christ: but are members
of Satan, and of his Synagoge. And therefore only must it extend, to the true
members of the Church: among whom these things may be practiced, which S.
Paul sets forth to the Church of the Corinthes, sayng: let two or three
Prophets speak, and let the rest judge. And if any thing be revealed i. Cor.
iiii.
to any other of the assistantes, let the first hold his peace. There is no
man but may easily understand, that this ca^ not be observed, but in ye true
Church of Jesus Christ, and among those that have the gift of the spirit of
God, which is not given to carnal men, and strangers to Christian doctrine,
but to such as are spiritual, and those which call upon the name of God in
truth: for the spiritual man may judge ^. Cor. ii
of spiritual things, and not the carnal. how is Christ then in the midst
of his, and does assiste the^ by his holy spirit, in so much as they are
gathered together in his name, other wise he will be in no company, although
the whole world were gathered together with all her pomp, if it be not
assembled in the name of Jesus, to such end as has been already declared. We
have a manifest example, by the small assemblees of the Apostles, and of the
primitive Church, and by those of the great Synagoge of Bishops, of Priests,
of Scribes and Phariseis, and of the Councels of the Jews: for it is written
of such, It shall be given to every man that Math. xx^ Ose. iiii.
has, and he shall become plentiful: but he that has nothing, even that which
he has shall be taken from him. And in Ose, because thou have refused the
knowledge, I have also refused thee, to the end thou should not sacrifice to
me, and because thou have forgoten the law of thy God, I will also forget thy
children. And therefore he says, if you abide still in my word, you shall be
my disciples, and shall know the John. xvii^
truth. Then he promises not to be among them, which by a false title shall be
assembled in his name, to give new laws and ordinances to the Church
concerning Religion, but to observe and keep those which he has given, and to
use ye keis which she has received of him, in such sort as he him self has
ordained. For ye Church needs none other laws, but even those which she has
received of him, and therefore math, 16. 1^
the Council of Gangers, has accursed all those which continue not in the law
of the Lord, and do daily make new ordinances. T. This is very reasonable, and
does well agree with that which is written of ye Lord, happy are those Psalm.
cxi^
which continue without spot in the way, which walk in the law of the Lord,
happy are they which do enquire of the testimonies of the same. D. And
therefore Christ does say, search you the Scriptures, if any man do love me,
he will John. v John. xiiii i. Tim. iiii.
keep my word. And S. Paul to Timothe, Give attendance unto readyng. T. These
are very good aduertisementes.

What assembles the faithful do make, and of the ancient Decrees, concerning
the celebration of Councels.
D. IF there were no question, but to hold Councels and Synodes among the
faithful, which have professed the Gospel, and to gather them together to
agree them, if they have any difference among them, as there was in the
primitive Church in certain points, because the one did not well understand
the other: it were but an easy matter, as it was for the apostles and their
disciples: but that could not content the world. Such meetinges and assembles
are very good, to entertain the Churches in peace, and in the union of the
doctrine, and of the Christian discipline, for that cause it was decreed in the
v. Canon of the Council of Nice, that their should be yearly in every
province two Councels of Bishops, the one a little before Lent, the other about
the Autumn, which thing is now no more observed in the Popish Church, then
are other good thy ^ges, which have been ordained by the Councels: all be it
she do glory in them, yea in the most ancient, and that the Council of
Antioche, chap. 20. and the Council Agathense, chap. 71. have also ordained
and after confirmed. T. It were good holdyng of such Councels: For in the
mean time our adversaries and those which are out of the way, and strangers
to the true Church of Christ, would do nothing but scoff and mock, as they
now do, and would hold other Councels, to condemn all that should be
determined in the true Councels, as the Scribes and Phariseis, the Bishops and
Priests of Jerusalem, did condemn all the doctrine of the Apostles, and of
the Christian Church by there is.

Of the Councels of the heretics, which did co^dempne the Councels of the
faithful.
D. THat which thou say is no new thing: for in time passed the Council of
Arrimine did condemn al yt Hist. Tri. li. ^. c. 10. 21
was determined and agreed upon in the Council of Nice. And although it were a
general Council, and had in it six hundred Bishops, yet notwithstanding it
erred with Arrius, and did approve his doctrine, which before was conde^pned,
by the Council of Nice. And albeit the Arrians sought nothing else, but to
abolishe the faith of the divinity of Christ, agreed upon at the Council of
Nice, yet notwithstanding they would arm them, with the authority of the same
Counsel, to cause the Confession of their faith, under that color to be
received, which they had made there clean contrary to that, which they there
made, like very unjust and false men. And was not in manner, the like done at
the Council of Philopole in Thrace, by the Arrians against the Counsel of
Saraice holden in Illyrye? And did not the second Council hist. tri. li. 4. c
24 hist. Tri. lib 3. c 9. and lib. 3. c. 16, and. 34
of Ephese, also err with Eutiches and Dioscorus? T. And as touching the
Council of Arrimine, thou know that it was divided, as was the Counsel of
Seleucie in Isaurie, in the which a hundred and three score Bishops gathered
them selves together against the Council of Nice: for the Arria^s gathered
them together on the one part, and the true and faithful on the other part.
Moreover it is said, that the Council of Arrimine was not lawful, for so much
as it was called against the mind of Liberius, Pope of Rome, by means of the
heretics, who had on their side the Provost Taurus, which did so press and
insiste to the same, by prayers and by threatninges, by the commandment of
the Hist. Tri. li. ^ c. 36
Emperor, who favored the Arria^s. They say also that the simple Bishops of
the West, were taken unprovided, and seduced by the disceites and subtilities
of the heretics. And therefore after that they had well known them, they did
retracte that which was concluded at Arrimine. They say the like of the
Council of Milane, holden by the commandment of Constance the Emperor,
which was an Arrian, to procure the condempnation of Athanase, that worthy
defender of the Christian faith: at the which Deonice, Eusebe, Paulin,
Hillarie, and diverse others, were also chased from thence, hist. trip. lib 4.
c. 10.
because they would not subscribe to his conde^pnation, neither agree
thereunto. D. Thou may also well join to these the Counsel of Antioche,
holden under Constantius the Emperor, an Arrian, with four score and ten
Bishops: in the which Athanase was deposed from his Bishopric of Alexandrie,
and condemned being absent to exile: in which exile, he continued as some do
write, about vi. years, hidden in a cesterne, without seeing the sun, which
things were done chiefly at the procurement of Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedie,
which ruled the Emperor Constantius, of whom before that time he had obtained
a Council at Constantinople, against Alexander Bishop of that place, to
co^strayne him to receive Arrius, or else to chase him from thence if he Hist.
Eccle. lib. 10. c. 13.
did resist it. And the Council of Cypre, was it not holden for the pleasure
of Theophile Bishop of Alexandrie, only to chase Chrysostom from his Church,
and to have him banished, which thing he did obtain: having in deed seduced
Hist. Tri. li. 10 a. c. 8 Vsque ad 18. Socr hist eccles. li. 9, c, 15, 21
Epyphanius, a man of great judgment and authority, to be served of him in so
wicked an enterprise? And the Council holden in Sidone in the time of ye
Emperor Anastase, did it not condemn the Council of Chalcedonie? T. And the
Council of Ephese of the which thou have already spoken, was it not holden by
the heretics, among whom Dioscorus did preside? Wherefore it was not a lawful
Counsel, nor in a meet place. And therefore the Popes Legates Niceph, in
^nast, hist. eccle. lib 2, cap, 2
and Ambassadors, would not be at it, but it was afterward condemned by the
Council of Chalcedonie: Seeing the^ that these Councels were not lawfully
gathered, nor according to the ordinance of the holy Ghost, but were
celebrated by heretics, it is no meruell although they erred.

How it does appear by the contradictions, which have been in the ancient
Councels, that the Councels may err, and how their conclusions, have in manner
alvvayes been conformable to the opinions of those which have presided in
them, or have been the strongest.
D. NO more do I approve them: but all that yet has been said of these matters,
do co^firm my saying. For we see plainly by that, that Councels may err, and
that they are not sufficient to appease the dissentions and troubles of
Christendom, and to assure the consciences of men. For all beit that those same
have been contrary the one sort to the others, yet notwithstanding they do all
boast, that they were governed, and directed by the holy Ghost. There were also
in them, men of great appearance of wisdom, of virtue and of holiness from all
parts, to give them great show. They seemed to be gathered, in such sort as
lawful Councils ought to be, or at the least, they had ever one of them, which
were esteemed the chief heads of Christendom, to call them together, since the
Church has had Emperors, Kings, and Christian princes: the authority has been given them, to assemble the Councels, because they had better means to do
it, then others had, by reason of the power which God gave unto them. Which
thing in deed was observed in all general Councels, until the viii. that was
holden in the time of the Emperor Basile, as it does well appear, by that
which is written in that same Council. Act. 5. And if there have been any
holden, by the commandments of the Emperors, at the which the Bishops and
Romish Popes, or their Legates did not assiste, then would the Popes also
hold others by their authority without the Emperors, despising the
authority of them, rebellyng and making others to rebel against them, as has been already said. And although the Pope Iulie the first, did greatly reprove
(as Platina does witness) the Bishops of the East, and chiefly the Arrians,
Plat, in Iu^,
because that without his consent and agreement, they had holden a Council at
Antioche, which he said they might not lawfully do, considering that the
Romish Church was above al other Churches: notwithstanding the Bishops of the
East were not without reason on their sides, to defend them with all against
the arrogancy of the Pope, saying yt there was greater reason, why the Churches
of the East should have the pre-eminence, then the Romish Church or any other
of the Churches of the West, because the Gospel was brought from the East into
the West, and that then the Imperial seat was not at Rome: now be it yt the
Councels have been holden either at ye appointment of Emperors, or Popes, or by
the consent of both, ye issue always has been such as has been the doctrine
and religion of the Emperors and Popes, which have holde^ the^. For if they
have been heretics, the conclusion has been made in the favor of the heretics:
if they have been faithful, they have concluded in the favor of the faithful.
And if the heretics have found favor in some Councils, where ye Roman
Popes have not ben. The like have they done in those where the Popes have
presided since they have attained to the sea of Antichrist. Were not al those
things very coombersome, and more apt to trouble the Church, and to offend
the poor Christians, then to edify them? T. That is very cectayne.

How there is no hope that the Christians, shall ever have any lavvfull
Council, and reformation in the Church, by the means of the Pope, or of any
of his, if they bear any authority there.
D. ANd if there should be holde^ y^ best Counsel y^ were possible to be
assembled in all the whole world, there is no doubt but yt the Pope and his
would co^de^pne it. If it were not to their mind. For it is an i^possibilitie,
yt it should both please the^, and yet be a lawful Counsel. And to wait, yt
the Pope and his should provide for it, according as it is mete, this should be
a great folly: we se ye experience of their doings at this day in such matters,
to be eue^ wholly such as was yt of the ancient heretics in time passed. For
it is certain yt the Pope will do nothing but for his own commodity, as it
has been already right well seen in all yt ever has been done by him and his,
in these affairs. T. Show me wherein. D. Let us see if he have not always
chosen apt and meat places to hold a Christian general Counsel, franck and
free for all nations. Let us see what worthy Council there has been holden
even to this day, at Mantoa, at Vice^ce, at Trent, at Bologne. The Almaignes
have desired a Counsel, and yt an assemble might be had, they have presented
ye confession of their faith, they have offered to maynetaine their doctrine by
the word of God: yet for all that they were never but always condemned and
holden for heretics and schismatikes with all their reason, diets, and
Counsels, because they were not allowed by the holy Apostolic sea, nor signed
with the mark of the beast. What is there then to be done? If there be a
Council holden by the one sort, the other will condemn it. And on the other
side: to tarry til all the contrary parties be agreed, as it were needful,
that should be as far out of reason as to tarry until Herod and Pilate,
Annas and Cayphas, the Scribes and Phariseis, the Saduces and Herodians, with
all their whole Sinagoges should agree with the Apostles and the church of
christ, whom they persecuted and followed to the death. Shall we tarry til this
great king of Babylon the Romyshe Antichrist, which bears the three crowns
in token yt he is king of kings, which makes his feasts and banckets to his
princes and gentlemen, curtyzanes and whoores, as did Balthazar the king of
Babylon, do come, and throw down these three crowns, to take up the crown
of Jesus Christ? and that he will leave his pleasures and delites, and change
them into the poverty of the Apostles? Shall we tarry till he and his (which
drink ye blood of poor innocents in cups of silver and gold, which they
have robbed and spoiled from the temple of God) will deliver up the town of
Babylon, and to make it subject to Jesus Christ the king of kings, of whom
they have stolen the titles, and occupied ye Lordships? And that they will
restore to the temple of God, and to the holy city Jerusalem that: which they
have stolen from them, and to shed their blood, to fight under his
enseigne, and to build up unto him his holy city and to render unto him his
ornaments and vessels, whereof they have spoiled him? T. I believe that his
meaning is far otherwise, and yt he has determined to get more, for he is
not yet full. D. No, nor never will: but will be always more hungrye and
insatiable, he will never yield until the time that God himself do come and
write the sentence upon the wall or furniture thereof, as he did to Balthazar
ye king of Babylon his predecessor, and until the time that he be beaten flat
down by the sword of Dani. v
God, and Babylon taken and won: according to ye destruction thereof fore
showed in the Apocalips. And so shall there never be any remedy, but they shall
go on from evil to worse. Apoc. xviii.


What prayers all men ought to make for their princes, to the end that they
may employe that power which God has given them, to the aid of the people
of God: what a blessing of God it is upon such people as have such princes.
T. WHat is there the^ to be done in y^ mean while? D. It seems to me yt I ca^
not for this present give better counsel, the^ to will me^ first to pray unto
ye Lord, yt he will first stir up for us good kings and princes, and to
touch their hearts, as he has already touched ye hearts of Cyrus and Darius
kings of ye Medians and of ye Persians, to make the^ to come ^. Chro. 36 ^.
Eso. 1
by ye means of ye true Ministers of Jesus Christ, to besiege yt great City
Babylon, and to destroy yt cruel beast, renouncing ye mark of ye same, which
they have so long time borne, and to deliver ye poor innocents, and the poor
people of God which are captive: and to take the^ from ye burning furnace of
Babylon, to ye end ye being without fear of our enemies we might serve Jesus
Christ our king, in all freedom of spirit. But this can not be brought by ye
sword, by arms, nor by man's power, but only by ye cutting sword of God,
which is in ye mouth of Jesus Christ, by whose breath ye wicked and ungodly
Apoc. xiii Esaias. ^xi ii. These. ii.
shall be destroyed. Wherefore those people unto who^ God has given so great
graces to have such princes and Lords: which employ their power which God has
given the^, to the edifying of ye holy city of God, and the ruin of Babylon
his enemy, and do submit ye temporal sword which they have received of God,
to ye sword of Jesus Christ and his word, and employ it only to serve him: have
good occasion to render thanks unto God for y^ great benefit which he has
bestowed upon them, and to pray unto him effectuously to co^serue and maintain
such princes, and daily to increase his graces in the^, following ye council of
S. Paul in his exhortation which he made to the Christians, concerning yt
prayers which should be made in the Church. I do warn you then (says he) that
before all things men make request, prayers, supplications and render thanks
for all men, for kings and for all others which aro ordained in dignity, to
the end that we may lead a peaceable life in all fear of God, and honesty,
for that is good and agreeable before God our Lord.

What Council they ought to follow, which have princes that are tyrauntes
and enemies to the Gospel: and of the preparacion to the cross for the same.
T. THis Council is very good. But what say thou of them which in stead of
such princes, have cruel tyrauntes, who being drunk with the cup of the
great whore of Babylon, do persecute furiously the poor children of God, and
do daily bathe their bloody sword in ye blood of the poor sheep of Jesus
Christ? D. Let them pray heartily to God, yt it may please him to appease their
rage and fury, and that he will so change their hearts, yt where they have
been persecutours, they may become true feeders of the flock which God has
committed unto them, to save and defend them from the rage of that cruel
beast, whose mark they have to long worn. In ye mean time, because it is
more to be feared that many of the Princes, Lords, and Magistrates, which
have already tasted of the word of God, and laid hands to his work,
should not loose their taste and wax cold, or should rebel against Jesus
Christ in process of time, then there is of hope, according to man's judgment,
and the face which the world shows unto us at this present, that those
which resist the truth will embrace it, receive and maintain it: therefore it
is very nedeful in these latter days ye every man make ready himself betime to
ye cross. We have ye experience hereof very plainly in many places.

D. It is not to be marvelled at. For Satan is continually most busted, about
those personages that are most excellent. And also there is the corruption of
our nature, and the favor or fear of men, which peruerteth many. Therefore he
yt will be of ye children of God, let him always have in his ^ath. x. Luke. ix
mind these worthy sentences of Jesus Christ and of his Apostles: Who soever
will be my disciple, let him give over himself, and bear his cross continually
after me, and follow me. ii. Tim. iii. Acts. 14 John. 16
And again, who soever will live holily in Christ, he must suffer
persecution. Again, men must enter into the kingdom of heaven by many
tribulations. The time shall come that he which shall put you to death shall
think he does God service. For we should greatly deceive our selves if yt we
should promise to our selves in this world any rest and any estate or peaceable
reign, abounding in all kind of pleasures and voluptuousues, and a continual
peace, without any trouble or affliction. For we may not think yt the kingdom
of Jesus Christ, is any such reign, for so much as his kingdom is not of this
world. Therefore he yt would have such John. 6. 19
an one, let him seek it at yt hand of Antichrist: for his kingdom is in deed
of this world. And further, when we are in this sort disposed, I know no better
means, the^ to travail with all diligence to understand aryght the will of
God, by his word, and to amend our life according to y^ rule thereof: desiring
him earnestlye to give us true understanding, and a heart to follow ye same, and
then welcome be what he shall send.

Of the study of holy Scriptures, and of the decree which was made in the
Council of Nice concerning the same: and of the excellency and authority of
the Bible, and of his decrees.
T. I Find your Counsel, and your resolution very good, and for my part it
seems unto me, yt you have spoken yt which is ye most sure, and our duty is
to enquire with al diligence, and by all means of the will of God, by his holy
Scriptures. D. It is the Council y^ Jesus Christ himself gives, which says:
Search you yt Scriptures: let us follow y^ example of those of Beroa of whom
it is spoken in ye Acts of ye Apostles. They John. v. Acts. xvii Romans xiiii
i. Cor. iii^
were not like to a rabble of obstinate persons, which will not hear at all: nor
like unto a number of vain people, which lightly do allow all that ever is set
forth unto them, without taking any deliveratio^, and not proving yt spirits
whether they be of God or no: For they heard S. Paul, and then they searched
ye scriptures, to see if it were so as Paul had taught. And when they saw yt he
spoke according to the Scriptures, they received his doctrine, as the doctrine
of God. T. Here was a good order o proceeding. D. It is certain, for we must
every one of us answer for himself in proper person, before the judgment
seat of God, and not for others, nor yet by attornyes. Wherefore if others
will not do their duty, but will tarry for a Council, let not us fail to do
our duty and to follow better Council, if we may attain unto it. And if a
Counsel be of value, why do we look for new counsels? Why do we not cleave
unto ye old, which are holden long since, and ought to be of greater
authority then ye new? If we believe not and obey the ancient Counsels, why
shall we believe and obey the new, let us rather obey ye Council of Nice which
did ordeine y^ there should be none among the Christians but they should have
Bibles, to learn in them ye will of God: the^ to yt in the which Antichrist
and his Doctors have forbidden ye common people to have them, and to read the^
in their natural tongues against ye determination of ye Christian Council. For
ye book of ye Bible is ye true book of ye true and lawful Counsels, and of the
eternal ordinances of God, wherefore S. Augustine not without good cause
said, that the authority of the scriptures is much greater then all the
understanding of man is able to comprehend and know, how subtle, fine and
perfect so ever it be: with the which sentence S. Chrysostom agrees well,
saying yt the Council may ordeine nothing against the word of God: for what
so ever Hom. de perfect. Euang,
is ordained against the holy Scripture, is error.

Of the true Councels which do excel all the rest in authority and ar the
rule by the which all the rest must be examined.
T. THose which desire a Council, should consider in the same, what has been
ordained by yt ancient Counsels, and by the holy Scriptures: to the end yt
men may know which is the true doctrine of ye Church, and which men ought to
embrace. D. We have very good mean to know it, and not to tarry at all for a
Council. For among all the Counsels there are chieflye two of ye authority,
that all the reast are nothing in comparison of them, by whom all the reast
must be measured: whose decrees are so plain, yt there is no doubt in them but
yt every man yt will be governed by them, may understand them: as it is needful
for all those yt will be saved. T. I did think there had been four general
Counsels, to wit, that of Nice, of Constantinople, of Ephese, and of
Chalcedone, the which S. Gregory confesses to receive, allow, and honor, as
he does the four books of the holy Grego, i^ Registr. di^inc 5
Gospel. D. I do also confess that these four were yt principal of all
those yt were holden sithe the Apostles time: but it seems to me yt Gregorye
does give unto the^ more authority then he ought to do in comparing them to
the books of the four Evangelists. But what soever they be, the two of the
which I speak, are yet much more ancient then are those, and of far greater
authority, for God himself in proper person did there preside, and did speak
with his own mouth, and did there show his presence in great majesty, and by
great and excellent miracles and tokens. T. In what place and at what time were
these Counsels holden? D. The first was holden in the Mount Synai, in ye
beginning of ye third month, after yt God had brought ye people of Israel
forth of ye land of Egypt. The other was holden in ye country of Iewry, namely
in the Mount Sion, in the City of Jerusalem, at that time that our Lord Jesus
Christ was seen upon earth, and that he did accompany among men in the form
of man, but they were called and assembled by other mean then the Counsels of
the Papists, and holden in other sort.

Of the authority of the princes and of the Popes concerning the Counsels:
and of the Popes tyranny in that behalf, and what advantage he has at this
present.
T. Seeing we are happened upon this matter of calling and holding of
Counsels, I would be very glad if yt thou would declare unto me some
little piece of ye order yt the papists do observe in holding of Counsels, to
the end yt I might ye more easily understand if we should have as small hope in
the^, as thou have. D. Thou do ask of me a very hard thing. For how should
I declare to thee yt order of those which have no order? But ye troth is yt
thou make y^ matter somewhat the more easy, in yt that thou requires^ of me
but a little. But yet I know not where to find y^ little y^ thou do ask of
me, if it be true which I have heard of me^ worthy of faith, which have been
present and have seen y^ experience of it. Thou should have spoken a great
deal more aptly if thou had required me to declare unto thee ye disorder:
the which always they cloak in such sort, that it shall seem in deed to those
that shall behold the manner of their proceeding, that they will observe ye
order yt has been used in ye ancient Counsels, saving yt the Popes do
always seek to encroche not only upon ye authority of Emperors, kings, and
Christian princes, more then ye ancient bishops did: but also upon the word of
god, and the Church. T. In what sort? D. We have already showed how the
ancient Emperors, kings, and Christian princes did accustom to assemble ye
Cou^cells: not always by tirannie, but by good accord and agreement with the
good Bishops and the true pastors of the Church: now ye Popes do not only take
unto them authority over Emperors, kings, and christian princes, such as in
time passed they were wont to have over ye Popes and the other Bishops: But
also when they have had the means. They have caused Councels to be holde^ of
their own authority in despite of ye Emperors and princes* when they did know
that they could not have the Emperors and princes at their devotion: as we
have already showed by example. But now in these days, because yt the
greatest number and ye greatest princes of Christendom are much at the
devotion of the Pope, they do more easily agree together in this point, the^
those which are of contrary religion* if there be any other which do not well
agree with him, he makes no great account of them, but estemeth them unworthy
of his Council. T. Has he not reason so to do?

Of the manner of the proceeding of the Papists in their Councels, and of
their presidentes, and of the princes Ambassadors that are sent thither, and
of their instructions, and of the practice of the Pope and his, and of the
disputations that they have there.
D. THe Council being appointed and called, if ye Pope, the Emperor, the
Kings and the Christian princes be not there present, they have then there
their Ambassadors and Legates, to represent their persons, they have also
their instructions, to lead them according to that y^ every of the^ has in
charge: if yt Pope be not present to preside, then his Legates do preside.
These worthy me^, before they come thither, do first ask, as it is mete for
such Prophets as they are at ye mouth, not of ye soueraign god, but of the Pope
their God upon earth: to understand of him how he will have the^ to conclude in
ye Council. For seeing yt he is God, he has also his holy spirit agreeable to
his deity. And when they are in this sort well instructed of yt will of their
God, the^ go they on inspired with his sprite, and do put forth to ye Council
those articles which they have in charge from their God to propone, whose
kingdoo^ and glory they have chiefly in reco^me^da cio^. When this is don, the^
they dispute of the^ in so^e great haul and there those yt will dispute are heard,
not to find out thereby ye truth, and to conclude according to ye same, but to
make a countenance to hold some form of a lawful Counsel, in ye which it was
accustomed to give audience to all yt would come, as well of yt laity as of
me^ of ye church, for ye co^clusio^ yt shall be made, is already determined, in
the secret Council of the God of the earth, which governs that Council by
his holy spirit: albeit it he remayn still enclosed and hidden in the secret
chamber of his breast and heart, and of his authorized Apostles, until the time
convenient. Then his Legates which are the first borne of his children and
creatures, declare the will of their holy father, and their God. T. Here is a
goodly order of procedyng.

Of the prudence that is required in the disputations, of the Councels of the
Papists, and how dangerous it is, for those that behonest to be there.
D. IN the mean time it behooves those yt dispute, to have good regard, in
what manner and form they frame their arguments and silogismes, and how they
propone their disputacions. For if they do not conclude, according to the
manner, form and shape of that conclusion, which is already made between the
holy father and his Legates, or if they cast not their conclusion in the same
moulde, they will forth with give them to understand, that they are not seen at
all in that Dialectica and Logic, which is required of them. Whereof it
follows that either their conclusions are despised, as those of vain men,
which speak in the air, or else if they do somewhat press or touch the
honor of that God, which reigns in that same Council, the danger is very
great, for those that shall make any such co^clusions. For afterward they must
needs of force dispute with fagots, executioners, and fire. For that is the
last refuge, whereunto these worthy pillars of mother holy Church have their
recourse, and the God in whom they have greatest hope, to wit the God of the
Chaldees and Persians: as we have seen by experience in the persons of John
Hus, and Hierosme of Pragne, at the Council holden at Constance, about an
hundred or six score years passed. For he that agrees not to the conclusion
of that Antichrist, and of his spirit, the same does sin against the holy
Ghost, wherefore ye sin is not to be forgeuen, and there may be neither
Pardon, nor Indulgence found, whereby to purge the Church, saving only by fire.
T. Surely here is a goodly procedyng, and very meet for the Vicar of Jesus
Christ and his Apostles.

Of the resolutions and conclusions of the Papisticall Councels, and what
personages they are that have voices in the^: and what scoole masters the
Bishops have there, and what order they do there observe.
D. NOw when the disputacio^ is ended, they must needs come to the resolucion
and final conclusion: which is not done openly, nor by the consent of all,
but is done in ye Conclaue, in a secret place, where none are admitted to
come, but the Popes Legates, ye Patriarchs, the Bishops, and the generals of
the Monckes. These do there conclude what soever pleases them, without having
any regard at all to any thing, that has been debated of, in the Council, but
to that, whereunto every one of them pretends, and those who have sent them
thither. And for so much as the greatest part in manner of the Cardinals and
Bishops, that do there assemble together, to make up a number, are ofte^tymes
but well fed and fat beasts, shodde and horned, and fat Asses, and Mules
laden with benefices, they must have some kepers and Muletters to govern and
to direct them. And because they are in such matter much like unto little
children, they have need of scoole masters to instruct and teach them, and to
supply their ignorance. T. And who be those Ass kepers and muletters that
thou speak of? D. They are often times a certain number of hooded Moonckes,
and bellye Dyuines, which often times are in manner as ignoraunte as their
scollers, and as very Asses, and Mules as the Asses and Mules yt they govern
and lead, saving yt the one sort is more heuyly laden the^ ye other with
benefices, and that the one sort have a little more sense and knowledge, and the
others more farms and Lordships, but their consciences are all one. T. Then
are these me^ to ye Cardinals and Bishops, instead of ye holy ghost, by whose
inspiratio^ they speak, being instructed by the^. D. It is true: but this holy
Ghost, is but a little portion and a depe^dance of the universal spirit of ye
holy father, of the which the Legates are filled. For all these hooded belly
divines, pretend none other thing, but to fish for some Mitre, Cross, some
good be nefice or fat prebend, wherefore they are there as kitchine dogs,
waiting for some soope. These are the dumme dogs of whom the Prophet Esaias
does speak. T. Then Esaias. x^^.
they do not greatly care whether they do barcke at ye wolf and byte him: or
no. D. They are not there for any such purpose: for their being there is only
to flatter, to please and to procure their worldly honor and profit, and to
have their portion of the pray which those wolves do get. And therefore they
teach the Nouices to set their sail according to the wind which they seedoth
blow, and according to the spirit by the which they know that the Legates are
governed, and those who sent thither both the^, and the Bishops, to the end
that there might be there agreement of spirits, and that all those particular
spirits might agree and resolve with that universal spirit which does there
preside, wherefore they have not at any time so great dissension and division,
but that they may well say in their conclusions: It has seemed good to the holy
Ghost and to us, to wit that holy Ghost, which presideth over them.

Of the matters of discord that may be in the Councels of the Papists: and of
the causes of the agreement that is among them: and how dangerous it is for
those that do maintain the cause of the truth.
T. I Think for all yt they have not always the best agremen: of the world
among them. D. If there be any discord of opinion among the^, it is not
commonly for any matter that concerns the honor of God, the edification of
his Church, and the salvation of the Christian people: but rather for their
ambitions and honors, preheminences, benefices and particular affairs. For in
manner al those yt come thither, are assured the one of the other, and there is
nothing in the world that they have less care for: then for God, and for the
honor of his Church, and the salvation of their own souls, and of the
Christian people, wherefore in this respect they fear not one an other. For
there are seldom any other there, but Scribes and Phariseis, Saduces and
Herodia^s, Hipocrites and Epicures, Glottons and Dronckardes. Whoremasters and
Sodomites, Players and Hu^ters, with such like, very ignorant in divinity,
and of very filthy and detestable life, and should be al excommunicated, and
accursed and deprived from their offices, if they should be judge according to
the rigor of the ancient Councels, and of their own decrees, which do
excommunicate Ex council Carthag Dis. 23. Qui Episcopns, did, 24, c Nullu^,
and accursse and also judge al such men unworthy, of any Ecclesiastical
office. And if there be any other, they are very thin sown. There are very few
among the^, that are accounted for heretics, as was Joseph of Aramathie in
the Council of the Jews, because that he would not consent to ye death of
Jesus Christ. And if that by adventure there be any one, from whom their
happens any little word to escape, better Hier, in Mich, did 3, c. eccl, 5
Luke. xxiii. John. vii
then from the rest, how little so ever it smell of the smoke of the truth, y^
man y^ shall have pronounced it, shall be received among the^, as Nicodemus was
amoong the Jews, how little a word soever he speak in the favor of Jesus
Christ, he shall be in great danger either to be banished from yt holy
company, and deprived from his benefices, and that at the least, or else if
need be: he shall be in danger of the fire: or else to swallow certain pills
of a very hard digestion, which shall much anoye his stomach and cause him to
loose his voice. And I know that there are in ye world Godly men, who can
testify in deed, how they have wrought in such matters, not many years
passed, and can say of all that has been done even to this present in the
Council of Trent, but how so ever it be, if they can not easily agree in their
Co^claue, and that there be any one that will not forthwith and franckly agree
to that which yt holy father will have concluded there, the Legates dare
boldly say to such as shall stand against it: Conclude as you list, but the
matter shall pass in that sort: as it is said that the Cardinal of Monte
(which is now remounted by means of the Papacy, and called Pope Iulie) did
lately at the Council of Trent. And because he was so faithful a Legate, and
that he has not only in that, but in all other things showed him self,
worthy of the seat in the which he now sits, it has framed better with
him then with others, which have been esteemed men, of to much honesty to be in
such a company, of who^ some have been glad to flee, and others have had given
them for their recompense, drogues of very hard digestion.

Of the practices of the Pope, to have the determination and conclusions of the
Councels, and the places wherein they are holden, at his will and
commandment.
T. HEre are very dangerous practices. D. There are yet more, among the which
there is one chiefly that helps to bring the conclusion to what pass so ever
they pretend, which is not vnsittyng nor unmeet for their purpose. T. Which
is it? D. It is that if the holy father be advertised, that it is to be feared
that such conclusion as he would have should be hindered (albeit yt be not much
to be feared, considering yt which has been already spoken) he will forthwt
make new Bishops as many and more the^ shall need, to cause ye matter to pass
more surely on his side, he will take simple Curates, Chapellains, and simple
Mooncks, and he will make them Bishops in have, the one of Nazareth, the other
of Hebron, y^ other of Beethle^, and the other of an other title, and all without
any Bishopric, they shall come as thick as flies, to make a number of voices:
and they shall have pensions and wages of two or three crowns a month, as
scolers or soldiers, to entertayne the^, there during the Counsel. And if the
place be anything suspected and not fit for his purpose, and that he have a
desire to have the Counsel put over to some other place, which may be more for
his purpose, he will have immediately ready some well learned Physician if need
require, who shall have his ready framed reasons, to show how that the air is
not good in yt place, but it is dangerous to such as shall continue long
there, and that it shall be better to appointe some other place, as it was
practiced not long ago. T. By that that I can understand, all is done there of
purpose. The whole is nothing else but a very Comedy or play, in the which ye
blind are set upon high scaffoldes, to lead the blind, and to play their
part, according to their scrolle and cedule, which is given them. D. Behold
here their manner of working.

Of the ignorance of the Popish Bishops, and how far they are of from
that, that the word of God and the ancient Canons require of them.
T. I Find it very strange, that the Bishops, which be there assembled, as
leaders of the blind, and reformers of religion, to direct and instruct the
poor Christian people, have need the^ selves of scoole masters, and other
blind guides, to lead the^. D. This does not agree with yt name of a bishop,
which they bear Acts. xx
ye which admonishes the^ yt their office is to be watch me^ over yt Lords
flock. It is not according to yt admonition, which S. Paul gives the^, saying,
take good head to your selves, and to the flock, over the which the holy
Ghost, has appointed you watchme^ and kepers, to govern and feed yt Church of
God, which he has purchased with his blood. T. They have their worthy answer
ready for yt: to wit yt they be not Bishops of yt time, nor such as they were
to whom S. Paul spoke in this passage: and yt they are not appointed by ye holy
Ghost to feed ye flock of Jesus Christ. D. In yt thou say very truth: for
they are feders and Pastors only to feed the^ selves, as were the false Pastors
of who^ the Lord co^playneth by Ezechiell. Exec. iii
Wherefore they need no great knowledge, nor yet to observe ye Decrees and
Canons of Pope Hilarie ye first, of Alexander the ii. of Innocent the vi. of
Boniface the iii. of Gelase, and of Zozine, which have ordained that none
should be receined into any such office, unless he were very wise and known
Plat. in vis. Innoc. Romans Que. 16. did 36. c. illiterato: and. c. Qui eccle.
to be of good life and doctrine, and yt benefices of the Church should not be
given, under pain of cursing, neither for favor nor gifts, nor to any other,
then to men of such learning and life as is required for such offices, and that
the sheep of Christ must be kept by their own Pastors, and not by hirelinges
and Vicars. T. We should find a great number accursed, if such Decrees should
take place.

Of the final conclusion and resolution of the Council of the Papists, and
the solempnitie of the day vvhereupon it is done.
D. BUt we have left the best of the play untouched, which afterward is turned
into a Tragedy: to wit, y^ Sessions, in the which yt declaration of all the
conclusio^s which they make in ye Co^claue, is openly published in ye Church.
T. I pray thee the^ go through and make an end of ye play. D. The day whereon
this is done, all they of ye town where they are gathered to Counsel, must
make a feast. The Cardinals and Bishops do assiste al there, in their sieges
and seats, clothed with their robes, and decked as it were bridegromes. For it
is there yt the play must be plaide in deed. And for so much as they have had
from else where before yt time, and not from thence, the inspiracion of their
holy ghost, and that they be already resolved in that, that they go about, they
do not then at all call for their belly divines and hooded men, whom before yt
time they had for their scoole masters, but in such sort as they call the rest
of the hearers: for there they need the^ not. Notwithstanding this, to the end
that they may give all men to understand, that the determinacio^s which they
have brought thither, already framed by them without the spirit of God, before
that ever they came thither, do proceed from God, and from his holy spirit,
they begin with invocation of him, to wit with a fair blasphemy, to
oultrage the grace of him, and to renounce Jesus Christ our Lord, by whom it
is given, for they sing a fair Mass of the holy Ghost, with such ceremonies
and so great mockeries, and foolish toys, that the little children would be
ashamed to see it. For the Mass must be Episcopal, now there are many
mysteries and ceremonies in such Masses, more then in those that are song by
simple Curates and Priests. There is there also harmony, chauntyng, and great
store of Music, even as there was in the solemn feast holden at Babylon, by
the commandment of Nabuchodonosor, to cause his great golden Image to be
honored. There is also a gaye and pompouse procession, in the which all the
players, that play in that play, are clothed and disguised according to the
parts that Dan. iii
they play. Then do they cry out for the holy Ghost (with who^ they would not
have to do notwithstanding) with very great desire Veni creator spiritus: to
the end that he may come and inspire them, to do that which is all ready
done, when this is done, every man's opinion is asked, of those things which
are there proponed. Upon the which every man plays his part, according as he
has learned it, and answers according to the conclusion, which is al ready
made. Those which have better memory then the rest, and do trust thereunto,
pronounce their sentence by heart, the others reed it according as it has been
given them in writing, in the cedules that their scoole masters, and
instructors have made for them. In the which often times there happens great
inconveniences. For there are some that have so gross heads, and have so evil
studied their roll, yt they are maruelously troubled to reed it a right. And
often times it is seen that diverse of the^ have one kind of Billet, for so
much as one scoole master has made them al, and has given very one theme to
his disciples.

Of the order that the Bishops do observe in giving their consent in the
Councels: and of the end, and of the curses of the same.
T. IF the worst happen, it can not be denied but that there is great unity of
spirit among those me^, for so much as they speak all by one spirit. But is
there nothing else? D. Those that will make no long discourse, are discharged by
one word of two sillables, and a bowed down head, to understand placet, which
signifies, it pleases me: For if there were one syllable more, which should
be displicet, signifieng it displeases me, the answer would be very perilous.
When this is concluded, the holy ghost, without whose council they have
determined and done all that ever they would, and whom they have grievously
offended and blasphemed, has notwithstanding determined and concluded all
those things, according to their sayings. Wherefore they must be accounted
even as though they had proceeded from the mouth of God. And if there be any one
that will say against it, he is excommunicated, anathematised, and accursed.
Therefore, when their sentence and final conclusion is in this sort published,
they then frame the form of their excommunications, anathematisations, and
cursignes, wherewyth they thundder and lighten horriblye against all their
enemies. And not being contented with that, to the end that their thundrynges
and lightninges should not seem to be without virtue and force, men must come
to fire and weapons, to mayntaine and defend these holy determinations. T. This
manner of proceeding is very meet and worthy of such men as do embrace it. D.
Yet notwithstanding it is the very manner and order that they do observe at this
present. For it must needs be that after this feast of Nabuchodonosor, the
furnace must be warmed also. T. Then I do not greatly marvel, if that
Christendom receive final fruit of such councels, if they be holde^ in none
other sort, there is no great hope to be had of them. D. And good cause why,
for their holy ghost is to much burning, and of fire greatly different from
him that was sent to the Apostles, upon the day of Pentecost. T. Therefore I am
well Acts. ii
content that we leave them, and that we speak of that council of the which we
began to talk, and let us see what order was there observed, without any more
beholding that Tride^tine play, so magical and bloody. D. It shall be the best.
T. Seeing that thou art of that opinion, I will not suffer thee to be long at
rest, before I return to thee, to hear thee speak of so woorthye a matter. D. I
trust by the help of God, it shall not be all together without fruit.

The sum of the. 4. Dialogue entitled the resolution of the Councels: to wit,
vvherin the final resolution of al Christian Councels, and of Christian
doctrine is had.
ALbeit yt the little titles which I make of the principal points which are
entreated of in this Dialogue, may sufficientlye advertise the readers of those
matters yt are therein handled, and of the fruit that may come thereof: yet
notwtstanding I have thought it good to advertise them in the beginning of
every Dialogue, of the effect of every of them, co^prehending in general y^
which afterward is debated of in particular. Concerning this present Dialogue,
I do declare in it in what sort god gave his law to his people, by his servant
Moses, and to what end, and how it ought to be used, and what council he
held by mean thereof in the mount Synay, and what things ought to be
considered therein. And after that I do show in what sort this general Council
does lead us unto ye other which follows, being holden and celebrated in the
mount Sion and in Jerusalem, and how those councels contain in them al such
doctrine as is necessary for the church of God. Wherefore I have named it The
resolucion of the Councels, wherein there is also spoken of the difference and
agreement y^ is between the old and new testame^nt, the law and the Gospel, and
of the ministerye of the one and the other, and of the diversity and of the
usage of the laws given by Moses. and of his office, and of Jesus Christ.

The fourth Dialogue entitled, the resolucion of Councels.
Of the charge which God gave to Moses, and of the authority of the law by
him given, and of the whole doctrine of the Patriarchs and Prophets.
Timothe. Daniel.
D. All be it that I doubt not at al, but that thou have made prayer unto God,
before thou co^mest to me, to the end that he might grant grace both to thee
and me so to handle his holy word, that it might be to his honor and glory,
and to our health, as we ought always to do, when we take in hand so holy a
work: yet for all that it shall be very well done, that we both together do call
upon him, before that we proceed any further in this matter. T. That is very
reasonable and meet. D. The Lord for his mercies sake hear our prayers. But
to our purpose whereof we spoke before, thou must first note, that God himself
gave charge to Moses to call the people together, of whom he had ordained him
Pastor and leader, and was served by him in that vocation and ministerye, as of
his legate and ambassador. And albeit that God had already sufficiently
authorized the ministerye of Moses, by the great tokens and maruels which he
had done by his hand, in the presence of all the people of Israel, as well in
Egypt, before their coming out of it, as in the wyldernes after it: Yet
notwithstanding it pleased him not to speak at that time unto them by his own
servant and Ambassador Moses, as before time he was wont to do: but would
himself in proper person speak in the presence of all the people, and would
that the ears of them al should hear his voice, by the which he gave the
ordinances, determinacio^s, decrers, and Canons of this great Council, whereof
we have already spoken in the first place. For the doctrine of the law is an
understanding and knowledge of the will of God, which is as it were borne with
man in his creation, in so much as God has printed it in his heart, and has
endued him with that grace, as with others wherewith he has endued him, when
he did create and make him to his image and likeness. But for so much as it has
been greatly darkened and blotted by means of sin, which afterward came into
the world: we must of force come to the understanding and knowledge of the
Gospel, which is not natural, as is that of the law, nor of the benefit of our
first creation, as is this here: but of that of the regeneracion, redemption,
and justification, which is revealed unto us by the son of God, who brought
it unto us from the bosom of the father. Therefore thou may see here
plainly, who was the author and President of this Council, and from who^ this
doctrine which is brought unto us to be the rule to try all other doctrine by,
which should be set forth unto us in the name of God, is proceeded. For seeing
that God by this mean did auowe Moses to be his servant, and for his Prophet
and lawful Ambassador: we may be out of doubt that that law and doctrine
which he brought, is of God: wherefore we may assuredly receive and esteem it
not for man's doctrine, but for the doctrine of God. And for so much as that
doctrine which has been authorized and allowed in this Counsel, by the
authority and the very mouth of God, is that same doctrine which in time past
all the holy Patriarchs did hold and observe, even from the beginning of the
world, and that very same also which since has been embraced and followed by all the holy Prophets and true servants of God: there is no doubt, but that all the doctrine which the Church of God has followed, even from the beginning of
the world, and has always been entertained and continued in the same, by the
ministerye of the Patriarchs and Prophets, has been by that same mean
authorized, allowed, and ratified. T. For so much as it is one very doctrine,
there is no doubt but that the approving of the one, is also the approving of
the other.

How that the allowing of the doctrine of the old Testament, is also the
allowing of that of the new: and how the new expounds the old.
D. ANd albeit that that same which our Lord Jesus Christ has brought us
from heaven, and that it has been declared to men, as well by the ministerye
of him, as by that of his Apostles and Disciples, and of their successors has
been again authorized and approved in a far more excellent sort: yet
stands it so notwithstanding that the allowing and ratifieng thereof does
agree with that of the doctrine of the Patriarchs and Prophets: for Christ
Roma. x. Ephe. ii Act. 2.
and his have taught nothing contrary to the same, but have approved and
accomplished it. For this cause Saint Paul does call Christ the end, the
performance and fulfylling of the law, and the fou^dacion or ground work of
the Prophets and Apostles, and for that cause he speaks plainly before
Agrig^a saying, that he has taught nothing, but that which Moses and the
Prophets did teach before him. Likewise our Lord Jesus Christ did often times
refer the Jews to the testimony of Moses, saying that he had John. v,
witnessed of him, and did send and commend them to the scriptures, as it has
been already declared. Moreover this agreement of the law and of the Prophets
with Jesus Christ, Math. 17. Luke. 1^.
has been declared in his transfiguracion, in that that his Apostles did see
him with Moses and Elias, and also when he opened the hearts of his Disciples
going to Emans, he did allege the testimonies written of him in the law, in
the Psalms and Prophets: we may then easelye understand by this, that even as
the Prophets, which were sent from God after Moses, were as it were expounders
of the law, and of the doctrine which he had set forth to his Church, as well by
him as by the Patriarchs which were before him: even so our Lord Jesus Christ
and his Apostles have been the very true expositors of all the ancient
doctrine, and those by whom the last determinacion of all the doctrine of
salvation has been set forth and declared to the Church. T. I know it
certainly so to be.

Of the causes for the which God did allow and confirm with such
authority the ministry of Moses: and how hard it is to bring men under
those laws, by the which men's lives ought to be governed and directed.
D. Seeing then it is so, and that God would even at once give such testimony
of his heavenly doctrine, and of the ministry of all the Ministers by whom he
would have it declared to men: it is no marvel if his good pleasure were once
to show him self in such majesty, unto such a company, to the end that no man
might iustlye afterward take occasion to doubt of that doctrine of God, and to
reproach Moses, as if he had framed these laws of his own head, which he had
brought to the people of Israel, and that he should have made them believe that
he had received them of God, as many Heathen lawmakers have made theyrs to be
believed, and as many false Prophets have done of their drcames and false
doctrine. For they did well know, that men were of such nature, that they
would not willing ly become subject, but only unto him whom they thought to
be greater then them selves: wherefore hardly will a man make him self subject
to a man, to live according to his will and pleasure, if he be not thereunto
enforced. If it be done but by constrainte, it is but during the time that he
is the weakest. For as soon as he can find any occasion to cast that yoke
from him, he will not miss to do it with all his power. T. We see daily
experience sufficiently of this. For how ca^ one submit himself willingly unto
a man, who^ he estemeth to be his fellow, and equal to himself, and not his
master and superior, when he will not willingly submit himself to God his
Creator, his Master, his Lord and Sovereign Prince, ne yet unto his laws? D.
Thou may have a judgment by that: but albeit that man will not willingly
yield himself subject, neither to God, ne yet to men: Yet notwithstanding if
he must needs have a Lord, and to live according to the will and mind of an
other, and not of himself: yet is his heart so cruel and stubburne, that he
thinks it greater dishonor to submit himself to such as he is himself,
then to his superior, and to man, then to God. On the other side, whatsoever
darkness is fallen into the understanding of man, by mean of sin, yet for
all that there remains a certain impression of the knowledge of God, in the
heart of man, which compels them al to acknowledge that there is a souerain
and divine power, unto the which it must needs be that every man be
subject, will he, nyll he, and that this sovereign power, is God eternal.
Wherefore there is none, how wicked so ever he be (if he be not at all more
brutall then the brute beasts) that is not somewhat moved when the authority
of God is alleged, and that fears not punishment, when it is given him to
understand that God has commanded or forbidden that which is proponed, if he
say or do the contrary: and chiefly when we have a good opinion, and that we
think well of them that speak unto us. T. It is very true.

Of the faynings and subtilties that the Pagan law makers, and the false
prophets have used, to authorize their laws and doctrine, under the cloak of
Gods name.
D. FOr that cause Zoroaster the lawmaker of the Bactrianes and Persians, gave
them to understand, that he had received of the god Oromasis, those laws which
he gave unto them. Licurgus the Lacedemonian law gyuer, did the like,
fathering his upon the god Appollo: and Minos the law geuer of the Cretians,
which now are called Candians, did feign to have received his of the god
Jupiter. Numa Pompilius for the like cause, did feign himself also to have
conference with the Nymph and goddess Aegera, and that he received of her the
laws which he gave to the Romans, chiefly those that touched the religion.
^amolris the law maker of the Scythiens, has also reported his to be of the
goodesse Vesta. And Mahomet, by whom the Turks have been seduced, which have
had partly their original from the Scythyans, how many finesses he has used
to authorize his Alcoran, and making them believe, that it was sent from heaven?
And all the false Prophets and seducers have not inverted a little. And the
Romish Antechrist, companion to Mahomet, has not he observed the same order,
not only to give so much authority to his tradicions, as to the word of God,
and to cause them to be received for the word of God: but also to make him
self Judge of the holy Scriptures, and of their meaninges, under shadow of the
promise which Jesus Christ did make to John. 14. 15. 16.
his Apostles, to send unto them the holy ghost, and to direct and govern his
church by him, as though that: which is spoken of the true church of Jesus
Christ, and of the Ministry thereof, did appertain to that Antechrist and to
his Ministers? Their conclusion is even as good, as if a man would conclude in
this sort: The holy ghost was promised and given to the Patriarchs,
Prophets, and to the true Church of Israel, that therefore it must follow that
Ierobo am and his Priests, and Achab, Iesabel, and their false prophets were
inspired and directed by the spirit of God, and Annas and Cayphas, the Scribes
and Pharyses, and all the council, and the Synagoge of the Jews, which did
condemn Jesus Christ and his Apostles: and that Micheas, Elias, Jesus Christ,
and his Apostles, which stood against them, being so small a number, against
so great a multitude, were heretics. For these men had the Kings and Princes
on their sides, and did supplye the place and seat of the true Patriarchs and
prophets, unto whom, and by whom the promesses were made by God, and were in
deed of their own race and blood. Al be it that the Pope has no such color
as they had, he has notwithstanding armed himself with the authority of God,
as they did. For he did well know, that if men had not had such persuasion of
him and of his doctrine, he and his should never have grown to such
authority, as they are come unto. T. That is not to be doubted.

Of the testimonies that God has given to Moses of his vocation, and how
necessary it was.
D. Now it is not so with Moses, as it is with these men: for Moses was not
only auowed by God by word, and by his own authority, but God did give unto
him letters and seals: and this not only once or twyse, Exo. xix.
but often times. And to the end that he would leave the les occasion to doubt,
either of the letters or of the seals, he came in proper person to ratify all that by his own mouth: and that not in secret, or else before two or three
witnesses only, which notwithstanding ought to have some authority, but before
the eyes of all the people, which were in no small number. For before that time
in their coming out of Egypt they were about six hundred thousand men,
valiant Exodus xii
and able to wear weapons, beside the women and children, and a great number
of other people. T. Then was there a great number of witnesses. D. Yea, and that
of such witnesses as did see the thing with their own eyes, and did hear it
with their own ears. If Moses had come to the people, and should have said
that God had spoken to him and that he had given him the law, which he
presented to the people in Gods name, there is no doubt but y^ he should have
found mockers and evil speakers, and a great number of rebels and Mutiners in
so great a people, to have scoffed at Moses, and to have mutined and rebelled
against him, saying that he had been a liar, and a craftye and deceitful man,
which would cover him self with the name and authority of God, to erect a
tyranny over that people, and to deal with them according to his pleasure. T.
It is not unlike by that that happened, after that this was done: for if Core,
Dathan, and Abiron with their adherentes (which Numb. xvi
were the^ selves witnesses of al these maruels, by the which God did authorize
the ministerye of Moses) durst to conspire and rebel against Moses and
Aaron, and did find such a number of followers, after such an authorizing of
their voeation: what would have become of them, if that God had not so armed
them with his authority?

Of the declarations and aduertismentes that God did give to the people of
Israel, before he gave them his law by Moses.
D. ANd therefore God did first command Moses to declare unto the people the
works which he most marueilously had done, as well in the land of Egypt, as
in the Exodus xix
going forth out of the same, by the which he did show his great power, in
overthrowing the force of the Egiptians, through his wrath, and delivering his
people from their tyranny through his mercy: to the end that they might the
better understand of what power he was to punish those which should rebel
against his law, and to show mercy unto those that should submit them selves
thereunto: and how woorthye he was both to be feared and loved, and in what
reputacion they ought to have his servant Moses, by whose hand he had done
these great works, and afterward to cause his people the more to love him,
and the better to encourage them to hear his word, and to obey his law, he
does renew the ancient promises, which were made to them and to their fathers,
and more strongly does confirm and establish them, declaring unto them the
great honor, the great profyt, and the great wealth that should happen unto
them, if that they did obey their God, and serve him, according to his will and
law. After that he had made all these declarations, he then gave them to
understand how he was determined to show him self, and to speak unto them,
and to give unto Moses in their presence his law, according to the which he
will be honored and served, and then he declares the cause and the reason why
he will do it: To the end (says he) that the people do hear whilst I speak
to thee, and also that they believe thee for ever. T. These are godly
admonitions.

What tokens God gave of his presence in the mount Synay, when he did give
and publish his law.
D. IT cannot then be said hers, that these things were feigned, and that
Moses did unjustly make them believe that God did speak unto him, and gave
him that law Exodus xi^
which he brought to the people, and yet that there was no such thing at all.
For the people did see the cloud in the which God spoke unto Moses, to
declare thereby his majesty: To wit, that he is the chief King and Prince of
heaven and of earth, unto whom al creatures must obey. And for so much as God
does more manifest his presence, his glory, his power, and his majesty, in the
heaven and in the air, then in any other of his creatures, he took the
clouds for to declare his majesty and soueraigntye that he has over al. But
he was not yet contented with this, but before he would descend into the mount
Synay, in the thick and darck cloud, he caused the thunder to burst out in a
marvelous sort in the air, whose crackes were heard al over, and made a
horrible and a fearful noise. He did also send forth the great lightnings,
in such sort, that at the air was lighted and was filled with great fyres,
which were seen in all places very terrible. On the other side, the people did
see all the Mountain in a smoke, as it had been of a great fire, or of a
burning furnace. They heard also the cornet and the trumpet found, which did
ring with a marvelous violence, and made a very fearful noise, in such sort,
as there was neither great nor small that was not wonderfully afraid, and did
not tremble with great horror, and was not as it were half dead for fear. All
that while the whole mountain was covered with the great cloud, in the which
God spoke with a mighty voice in the hearing of all the people, and did
pronounce from his own mouth the very same words which he had written with
his own finger in the two tables of stone, the which Moses did afterward
bring down from the mountain of Synay, and of the talk which he had with God
in the same hill.

Of the signification of the signs which God did give in giving his law, and
of the reasons why, and how much they are agreeable with the nature of the
law.
T. WHat was ye meaning of all that? for it was not done without cause. D. It
served for the more strong confirmation of the things whereof we have already
spoken: for there was none of them but that they did know right well that
there was neither illusion nor enchauntmente in those things, and that they
were done by no power of man, but of God: wherefore, they served again as a
new seal for the confirmation of the ministerye, and vocation of Moses, and
of the majesty and power of God to save his, and to destroy his adversaries:
for by that he did declare that he was the God of nature, and that he did
dispose of her even as it pleased him, and that he did all that he would as
well in heaven as in earth. And therefore he would him self even from his own
mouth preach unto his people: he would also ring to the sermon that he would
make unto them, and prepare them and make them hedefull to hear him. He had
then for his belles, and for his Music, the Cornet and trumpette, to cause
them to hear his voice, and to awaken the^, which things did very well agree
with the nature of ye law. For by the same the sentence of the curse of God is
pronounced Deuteronomy. 27
upon all those that shall not observe it even to the uttermost jot.

Of the usage of the law, to lead men to Jesus Christ, by the knowledge of
their sins.
T. THen is there none but he is accurssed, for how may we observe and fulfill
the law thoroughly, when we are not able perfectlye to accomplish the least
point contained therein? D. All be it that it is evil as thou say, yet does
it not follow but that it profits us much: for it does condemn us, and
causes us to seek our absolutio^, having recourse to the grace and mercy of
him who condemns us by the same, to absolve us afterward, and to deliver us
from the condemnation which we have deserved. She declares unto us the curse,
to teach us to know the wrath of God against sin, and to stir us up to
seek that seed of To. ^. 4. 7. Genesis 12. 22 Galat. xxx
blessing which is in Jesus Christ, by who^ that curse is wiped away. T. They
have not a little profited that have learned this knowledge.

Of the cause wherefore God would make the people of Israel afraid by those
signs which he gave in the mount Synay.
D. ANd for so much as the heart of man is high, proud, and stubburne, and can
not humble himself under the mighty hand of God, nor acknowledge the power and
the Majesty of him, and his wrath against sin, and how much he is to be feared
and redoubted, his will was to declare these things by such tokens. For if the
sound of the thu^der, which is called the voice of God, be so horrible and
fearful, that there is none but is moved and afraid with it: and if ye
material lightning be so violent, that nothing is able to resyste Pl. 18. 104.
it, nor to stand before it, let us then think how horrible and fearful the
voice of God shall be when he shall speak to ye wicked in his anger, and in
his wrath, and when he shall Mat. 7. 25.
say unto them: go your way, and depart from me ye workers of iniquity: go
into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels. The
same shall be a terrible thunder which shall cast so exceeding a horrible
lightning, y^ no one of those y^ it shall smite, shall be able to abide it, but
that he shall be thrown hedlong into the bottomeles pit of hell. It shall
lighten a fire which never shall be quenched: for Esaias. 66. Mar. 9 Deuteronomy. 4 Heb.
xii Psalm. xviii. Gene. 19
the Lord is a co^suming fire which will burn and consume all those which would
not walk in his light. It is he that casts the great flames of fire, and
the burning coals out of his mouth when he speaks, as those of Sodom and
Gomorre have already proved. Then, whosoever he be, that will not hear his
fatherly voice, by the which he declares unto us his will in so loving a sort,
he shall be constrained to hear that thundering, roaring, and fiery voice, which
makes the the heaven and earth to ringe and tremble, of the which the thunder
is but a very little sound, and a very soft expression. T. Seeing it is so, he is
a Lord that speaks very mightily, and is greatly to be feared.

Of the trompet which did sound in the mount Synay, and of the meaning thereof
and of the blessings and cursings of the law, and of the publishing of the
same.
D. IN like sort this cornette and that trompet, was a sign and a token of
that great trompet which shall sound at the last day, and shall cause the
earth to open, and shall Math. xxv. i. Cor. 15 i. These. v. John. v.
come even to the ears of the dead, which are rotten in the dust of the same,
even from the beginning of the world, and shall call both the quick and the
dead to judgment. For even as the people were assembled together in the
mount Synay by the trompet that there did sound in like sort in the latter
day, al shall be gathered together by the sound of Leui. 23
the trumpet of that great God, to be judged according to that law which then
he gave: We may see the like of the cornets and trumpets which they used to
sound in Israel in the year of Iubile, and when they should gather the
people together to hear the law of God. Then when this last trumpet shall
sound, of the which these same have been even as figures, every man shall know
of what valewe the blessings are which he has promised to those which should
obey unto his law, and also the cursses with the which he threatens all the
rebels and wicked ones. For after that he had spoken on the height of the
mountain out of the midst of the smoke, and that he had given the laws, the
determinations, the decrees, and the canons of this great council which he held
with his people. He gave also the order and manner of his blessings and
cursses, and maledictions, which afterward likewise were published in great
solemnitye and majesty, For he commanded that the one Deuteronomy. 27
part of the twelve tribes of Israel should go up to an hill, to rehearse the
blessings: and the other should stand upon an other to rehearse the cursses,
and that the whole multitude should be in a valley, to subscribe and bind them
selves openly and solemnly to the observance of the same, in the which
obligation we al ar comprehended. T. This is not an obligation which a man may
discharge with a sum of money.

Of the last and general judgment of God, and of the sentence that shall be
given there, without respect of person, as well upon the faithful, as on the
infidels.
D. Therefore it behooves us to have good regard to our doings in this behalf:
for these are no plays of little children, nor lyghtnynges papal, which are
but in parchment and paper, and in yncke, and in wax, and in lead. There
shall be there an other assistaunce then is that of the Council of Trente.
There shall be there an other kind of song and melodye then in the feast of
the Image of Nabuchodonosor, and in the Popes sessions, the Popes, Cardinals,
Bishops, and generals of the Monks, shall not be set there to give the last
sentences, nor to pronounce the conde^nations, the cursses and maledictions
against the very disciples of Jesus Christ: nor yet the Emperors, kings,
Princes, and their Ambassadors, to execute the judge ments of these here: but
al these together shall appear there to be themselves judged every man
according to his works, Gal. vi
by the which they have declared what faith they have had in Jesus Christ.
Jesus the very son of God to whom the father has given all power and all
judgment, he shall be Math. 25. 24. John, v.
there set in the glorious throne of this majesty, with all his heavenly
Angels, and all his Patriarckes, Prophets, and Apostles, to hold a Council for
to hear the last appellatio^s and to revoke all the unjust sentences that have
been given against his, and against his truth, which they have followed by the
wicked decrees and Councels of tyrants and of his adversaries, and condemn
those which have condemned yt innocents, and to absolve such as have been
unjustly condemned. It shall be he himself that shall pronounce the sentences,
the blessings and the cursses, by the which the great beast, and the great
whore sitting upon the same, and al those which have borne the mark of the
beast, and those which have been dronken with the wine of her fornication,
shall Apo. 17. 18
be condemned, and the innocents delivered, whose blood she has shed
through the aid of the red Dragon: in the which she has died her garments of
purple and scarlet. The^ Apoc. xvii,
the beast and all his false Prophets and adherents, shall be thrown into the
deep pit, and into the furnace of fire and brimstone, which shall never be
quenched: which shall greatly differ from that in the which this cruel beast
did roste Apoc. xx
and burn the children of God, in a fire which is forthwith consumed into
ashes, wherefore we have no occasion so to fear it: nor yet the executioners
which light it, least ye thynking to flee it, we fall into that everlasting
fire, and be delivered into the hands of the hellish tormentors, to be
tormented with them and by them everlastingly, and to be shut out from the
company of this great king Jesus, and from all his heavenly Court, to dwell
eternally in the kingdom of darkness, in that hellish Court and company, so
curssed and execrable.

Of the sanctification and preparacion that God did require of his people,
when he would give them his law, and of the same that is required of us to
prepare us to receive his word.
T. Seeing that it is so, we ought then to give good ear to understand what is
commanded us in that law, Exo. xix.
and to hear it with great honor and reverence. D For that cause God before
he descended into the mount, commanded that his people should be sanctified
to receive him, and that they should prepare them selves two days before, and
that they should wash their clothes, and that they should come near no
woman, wherein he declared that al vncle^lynes and filthiness abhorred him: and
y^ to draw near unto him, and to hear and understand his voice, it was
requisite to bring thither a heart and a mind separated and free from al
earthly things, and wholye dedicated to him, and rapte in him. For he has no
respect to apparel, but by his outward cleanlynes and honestye, he would give
us to understand what the inward ought to be, and would us to understand that
if a foul and a filthy garmente do offend and loath a man, then by greater
reason has he just occasion to be offended with our hearts, and with out
filthy souies and consciences, being vile and infected with sin. And for so
much as they be such, and that the law was given to warn us thereof, and
that we ought to seek for our cleannes in him, he commanded that cere money.
In like sort, because that marriage is his ordinance, and that it is honorable
in all estates, and the bed undefiled: we may not therefore think that he
condemned it when he Gene. 12 Math. xix. Heb. xiii i. Cor. vii
did forbid the people to be conversant with their wives for the space of two
days. For if it were not holy and honest, he would no more suffer it in other
days, then in those days: but in showing us that it was expedient for us to
abstain even from those pleasures which were lawful, and which he himself
does permit unto us, when we will be occupied in meditacio^ and prayer, and in
the hearing of his word, and in other holy things, to the end that we should
be wholye void and separate from al earthly thoughts and affections, to y^ end
y^ they might wholly give them selves unto him: he gives us perfectly to
understand how much more necessary it is to abstain from al unlawful
pleasures, and from al filthynes and villainy. It is also y^ cause why that S.
Paul does permit those i. Cor. 7.
that are married to refrayn from lying together for a certain time, so that it
be by the consent of both the parties, to exercise them selves in fasting and
prayer.

Of the fastinges and abstinences, and of the differences of days and meats
which they observe in the Popish, church, and of their original and
foundation, and of the defaulte that therein is.
T. I Do think also that for the like purpose it was ordained in the old time
to fast the Aduente, the Lent, the Vigiles, and the four Imbers, and to
abstain from certain meats the Fridayes and Saterdayes, for to dispose and
prepare men through abstinence the more willinglye to hear the word of GOD,
and to prayer, and to the communion of the Sacraments, as well on the
Sondayes, as on other holy days, and chiefly on the most solemn days: as
on Christmas day, Easter, and Whitsondaye. D. It is like to be true. But al
beit that it may be alleged that this was ordained for a good entente, yet
notwithstanding there was a great fault in so doing, because that those which
were Authors of such traditions were so hardye, not only to give such
laws to the Church, by their own authority with out the expressed word
of GOD, but also to make them perpetual, and by them to put difference between
day and day, and between one meat and the other, and to make the Church
subject to those observations which are more then Iewyshe, and those which
have added unto it the opinion of deserte, and have bound them upon the pain
of deadlye sin, yea and have done worse: for they have defaced and blotted
the benefytes of Jesus Christ, causyng men by these means to trust and to put
the hope of their salvation in meats and days, and in their works, where
they ought only to put it in Jesus Christ.

Of the sobriety, abstinence, and honestye that is required of the Christians
in their assembles in the Church.
T. ANd if that those men have committed a fault on their part, ought not we
also on our side to take good heed, least that we taking in hand to amend
this fault, should fall into an other extremity, as many do even at this
day? D. You say very well: for if we think the superstitious abstinences of
the Papists worthy of blame, let us not think to correct them by gluttonye
and drunkenness and other dissolutions: but let us endeavor our selves to
bring them to a true sobriety, abstinence and Christian chastity. Wherefore
at what soever time, and when we shall either take in our hands the book of
the holy Scriptures, thereby to understand of the will of GOD, or else that
we come together in the Church to hear his voice, by the holy Ministry of his
word, or else to communicate and be partakers of his holy sacraments, and of
the prayers which are there made, we ought to go with no less reverence, ne
yet to prepare our selves in none other sort, then if we should hear Acts.
ii
God with his own mouth speak out of the cloud, and out of the great smoke
which was in the Mount of Synay, and that we did hear the great thunders,
and the lyghtninges that were then seen. For even the same God which then did
there speak, is even he that speaks at this present day in his Church, and
shall judge us according to that law which he has published there. And
albeit that he speaks unto us now more familiarly and more louynglye then he
then did: yet notwythstandyng let us not thyncke that he is of less power and
force, then he then was. But in that that he uses such gentleness and
benignity toward us, the punishment shall be so much the greater upon us,
if we do abuse the same. If we will understand how we ought to guide and
govern our selves, we must clean to the resolution of this Council, and
to the decrees and ordinances which we have received.

Of the Council that was holden in the Mount Syon, and of the conference of
the same with that which was holden in the Mount Synay: and of Moses, and
of Jesus Christ, and of the Ministry of the law, and of the Gospel.
T. This is a goodlye Council, and of great authority: but thou saydst that
there was yet an other in the land of Chanaan and of Judea, and in especial
in the Mount of Syon by the very Son of GOD. I would be very glad that
thou would declare unto me also what that was. D. That Council does even
so much excel the other, as Jesus Christ He^. iii
does excel Moses, and the Master of the house, the servant. For though
that GOD him self did speak in proper person in both, yet notwithstanding he
has showed him self this second time in a sort much more authentic and
more excellent, more amiable and agreeable to the weakness of man's nature:
then ever he did since the beginning of the world. For when he showed himself
in the mount Synay, the people did not see his Deuteronomy. 4. Exodus xi^ Hebr. ii
face nor shape, nor did see or hear any thing, but such as were horrible
and fearful. It was not lawful for them to do so much as to come to the
mountain, or to touch the vttermoste part thereof, with out danger of
death, and to be stoned or stricken through with arrows, were it man or
beast. Therefore, the people being greatly amassed and afraid, desired
Moses to be Exodus xx Eeu. xxviii
as a mean between GOD and them, and to declare unto them his will and
pleasure as his Ambassador, to that end that they moughte hear no more that
voice of GOD so horrible and fearful: for they thought that they could not
hear it again, but that they should all dye, and did much marvel that ever
they could hear it with out death. Wherefore GOD knowing the weakness of
his people, did promise them to send them a Prophet, even out of the midst
of their brethern, like unto Moses, into whose mouth he would put his word,
and by Deuteronomy. xviii
the same he would cause them to hear his voice. This Prophet, according to
the testimonye of Sain^t Peter, is Jesus Christ our Lord, of whom the
Father himself did say: This is my well-beloved son in whom I Acts. iii.
Math. 3. 1^
have set my whole delighte, hear him. And for that cause the Apostle says
writing to the Hebrews, that God has Heb. i
in time passed oftentimes, and in sundry sorts spoken to our Fathers by the
Prophets, but in these latter days he has spoken to us by his own Son, and
making comparison of this manifestation which was made by our Savior Jesus
Christ, with that of the mount of Synay. Truly (says he) you are not come
to the mountayn which moughte be touched, nor to burning fire, nor yet Heb.
xi^
to darkness and myste, and unto tempest, neither unto the sound of a
trompette and to the voice of words: the which those which did hear it,
refused that the communication should be addressed to the^ any more: for they
could not endure that which was commanded. If a beast touch the mountain, he
shall be stoned or else stricken through with a darte. And so terrible was the
sight that appeared, that Moses said, I fear and quake: but you are come to
the mount Syon, and to the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem,
and to the company of many thousands of Angels, and to the congregation of
the first borne, which are written in the heavens, and to God which is judge
of all: and to the spirits of just and perfect men, and to Jesus Christ the
mediatoure of the new Testament, and to the sprinkled blood of which
declares better things, then the blood of Abell. See yt you despise not him
that speaks: for if they escaped not, which despised him that spoke on
earth, much less shall we escape if we turn away from him that speaks from
heaven, whose voice then shook the earth. T. It seems to me that these words
conteyne a goodly conference of the Ministry of the law and of the Gospel,
and I have a great desire to hear it.

Of the manifestation of God in Christ.
D. THen where as the people saw nothing at that time but fire, and smoke, and
great darcknes, which let them from seeing both the Sun and the Moon,
and Deuteronomy. 4.
also the heavens, God has showed himself to us in Jesus Christ his son in
man's shape, in our own flesh: For it is he yt is the very Image of God, and
yt very form of his substance and the bryghtnes of his glory. It is he yt is
the true John i ^. Tim. iii Seb. i. Mal. iiii John. viii
Son of Justice, and the only light of the world, by whom all mystes and
darckenesses are chased away, even those which let us to see GOD. And where as
then the people durst not come to the foot of the Mountain, how perfect
and how well prepared so ever they were, to receive the Lord, we have now
access, even to the very throne of his Majesty, by Jesus Christ our Lord,
through whom it is given us, not only to come unto him, but also Heb. iiii
to touch and embrace him, for the sanctification which i. Cor. 6 Dan. ix
we have received of him, that is the holy of holy ones, is in deed of
other virtue and efficacye then was that of Moses toward the Israelites. In
the stead of that horrible voice and of the Trompettes, and of the thunders,
which did shake the heaven and also the earth, which made the Mountains to
tremble and ring, which according to the testimonye of David, is Psalm. xxix
of that force that it breaks and teareth down the Ceders of Libanus, and
makes them to leap like Calves, and the Mountain it self like young
Unicorns, and it makes the great floudes of water to come, and also to
return, and it cutteth a sunder the flames of fire, and launceth them forth
as darts, and makes the wyldernesses to shake, and does unclothe the
forrestes, and makes the Mountains to break, and the Hyndes to Calue: We
hear that sweet and loving voice of the child Jesus the Son of GOD, the
true Immanuell, Math. 1. 2. Esaias. vii. Luke. ii Math. xi.
by whom we may lawfullye say: GOD is with us, we hear that amyable voice
which says: Come unto me all ye that are laden and weeryed, and I will case
you, and you shall find rest to your souls. Take my yoke upon you, for it
is easy and light. We hear that sweet voice that comfort all those
which are poor and miserable which come to him, and declares to all poor
and wretched sinners, the grace, Esaias 61 Luke. 4 Heb. v Mat. 27.
and the mercy of GOD, and the forgeuynge of sins: which prays with
lamenting and tears for poor sinners. Yea, even for his very enemies, and
is heard, and does reconcile us to God. It is he that has brought to us
from heaven the resolution of the great Council of God, to the which all the
Patriarchs and Prophets have consented and agreed. The which he has
confirmed, Heb. iii Romans 3. 5
not only by signs and miracles, which were much more excellent then ever were
those that were wroughte by the hands of Moses: but also by his death, by
his resurrection, and by his ascension: and last of all by the holy Ghost
whom he sent to his Apostles and disciples, in wonderful majesty, in the
likeness of fiery tongues, and with a found from heaven, as it had been of a
mighty wynd, Mat. 27. 28. Luke. 24 ^cte. 1. 2. 3.
which was suddenly risen, but more loving the^ the fire and whirle winds which
were perceived and seen in ye Mount of Synay. T. The difference is very great.

Of the last seal, and of the last declaration and confirmation of the
doctrine of God, and of the nature and virtue of the holy Ghost.
D. IT is he yt was the great seal of the whole eternal purpose and Council
of God, by whom he declared with greater authority the^ ever he did, how he
did put his church in lawful and full possession of his holy spirit, with
signs and testimonies declaring his nature and virtue. For it is a wind, John.
iii.
whose spring and rising none does know, whose being and nature is
unsearchable, who by his power beats down all those that resist him, and
pourgeth and refreshes the souls and consciences, and gives life, comfort
and health to all those which give over the^ selves unto him. It is a fire
which lights, which pourgeth, which does warm and heat the hearts, and the
tongues of the chosen of God, which proves the faithful and the unfaithful,
and consumes all the reprobates: wherefore in vain do the enemies of God
conspyre against this mighty wind: in vain do they kindle their fires and
lighten their fornaces to quench and put out this divine fire: in vain do
they hold their Councels to blotte out the decrees of this eternal Council
of GOD sealed with such a seal. For when we have Jesus Christ the very son
of God, which was sent unto us from John. 1. 6.
the bosom of the Father, we have him that brings the true seal and printe,
and the very mark of God, with the which he is signed and allowed of the
father, to witness unto us that he did send him unto us, as he upon whom we
ought only to dwell. And even (as he is allowed by God his father, as is that
which is allowed by the authoritised sign and seal of a prince) so does he
also mark with the seal of his holy spirit al those which are marked with ye
seal of his eternal election, which is sure, according to the testimonye ii.
Tim. ii.
of Saint Paul. And therefore he says that the Lord does know all those that
are his: and that it is he that does streng then us, and it is he that has
anointed us, and marked us, and has given us in our hearts the earnest of
the holy Ghost, for the day of our redemption: Wherefore, even as the
children of God be marked with this mark and seal, even so can they not deny
him whose sign and seal they ii. Cor. i. Ephe. 1. 4.
bear, but for their part also do seal and allow the truth of God, in
receiving him which he did send with his seal. Seeing then that it is so, we
may not allege the multitude, John. 3
to take away the authority of that small company of six score persons, in
the which the Apostles were, who by the virtue of the holy Ghost which they
there received, have published the determinations of this great Council. For
the truth and the Spirit of God ar bound neither to times, places, nor persons:
no, not in deed unto them which do possess the seat of the very servants of
God, and do abuse their office, and are governed by a contrary Spirit. For all
be it that the Bishops, the Priests, the Scribes, the Pharisees, and the
Council of Jerusalem, did occupye the place of the true servants of God, and
had authority over the temple and over the people, and had all the worldly
power and pomp on their side, and did brag of the promises of the word of God:
Yet for all that the holy Ghost did never preside in their Council, as he did
in the Council of this small company: and their decrees against the truth,
had not so great power to overthrow it, as the decrees of this small company
had to establyshe, confirm, and advance it, and to destroy all lies and
untruth.

Of the examination of the true Christian doctrine: and of the spring and last
determination of the same, and of the curses against those which do falsefye
it.
D. THese be the decrees of y^ which it is written in ye Prophets: The law
shall come forth from Sion, and the word Es^y. ii
of God from Jerusalem, it is not said: The law shall come forth from yt Mount
Capitoline, or Palatine, or Adue^tine, or from any other of ye seven which are
in Rome, but from the mount Sion, and from Jerusalem, therefore it behooves us
well to consider, whether the doctrine that is set forth unto us for Christian,
be agreeable to that law and word which came from Sion and Jerusalem: and not to
yt which came forth from Rome, and from the Mountains of the same, but only
in y^ that Rome shall have received it from thence: for it is the rule by yt
which the church of Rome and the doctrine of ye same must be ruled, and not it
by the church or doctrine of Rome. That same then which was done in Jerusalem
on ye day of Pentecost, Acts. ii
in the company of the Apostles and Disciples of Jesus Christ, was done to the
end that the Apostles and Disciples of Jesus Christ, being armed with y^ power
of the spirit of God from on high, and with that goodly gift of tongues, should
(as Act. 1.
lawful and authorized Ambassadors, and Heraldes of this great King and son
of the eternal God) show and proclayme through out the universal world, the
determination of this divine and heavenly Council, first publyshed and
declared by their Lord and Master Jesus Christ, with the blessings and curses
prepared for those which shall receive or refuse it. It is the last
determination unto the which we must cleave and stick, which has again sith
that time ben confirmed by ye miracles and death of so many Apostles, and
Martyrs, that the number is in manner infinite. It is a determination of such
importance and of such authority, that ye Apostles the^ selves, yea and the
very Angels of heaven, must be subject unto it: in such sort yt it is by no
means lawful for them to set forth or declare any other doctrine then that
Gal. 1. 2.
of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, upon pain of eternal cursing, and
not without cause. For, seeing that ye son of God has spoken, is there any
creature in heaven or in Heb. i Gal. i, ii.
earth that may correct it? If then according to the witness of Saint Paul,
the curse and maledictio^ of this great Council be such, let us then see in
what sort we ought to esteem those which dare to take in hand that, which
neither Apostle nor Angel what so ever he be either dare or will: and in what
danger they put them selves, that will follow and harken unto such men.

Of the vengeance of God against those that despise the Gospel.
T. MEn ought to consider and think well on that which thou say: and truly
God has given us a great gift, and has showed unto us a great token of
love, when that after this great and worthy personage Moses, and so many
other excellent Patriarchs and Prophets, he would also send his own Son,
and would himself speak unto us by him, and teach us the true and right
way of sauation, and would lead and bring us thither Esaias. ii. Mich. iiii
by him, as a good father leads his little child by the hand. Therefore, we
should be very unhappy if we would not follow such a guide: for if we will
not hear the voice of the very Son of God, and trust in him, whom shall we
hear, and whom shall we believe? We may well say with S. Peter, Lord, to whom
shall we go? For thou haste the word of eternal life. D. The testimony
that John. vi.
has been recited out of the Epistle to the Hebrews, does show us
playnelye into what danger we put our selves, if we despise the doctrine
which the Son of GOD has brought unto us from heaven, which ringeth in his
Church through the mouth of his Ministers, and is daily set before us in the
holy Scriptures. T. It is greatly to be feared that if they which despised the
doctrine which was brought unto them by the servant, were so grievously
punished: Heb x
they which shall contemn the Lord and Master, deserve to be double punished.
D. For y^ very cause our Lord Jesus Christ said, that the judgment shall be
more easy Math. x Marck. vi Luke ix. x
against those of Sodom and of Gomorre, then against them that would not
receive his Gospel, and the bringers of the same.

Of the difference that men do commonly put between the law of rigor, and
the law of grace, and of the abuse that therein is.
T. HOw do these things agree then with the difference that we see men put
commonly between the old and the new Testament and between the law of Moses
which was given to the Jews, and the law of Jesus Christ given to the
Christians? For men do commonly call y^ of Moses and the old Testament, the
law of rigor: and that of Jesus Christ and the new Testament, the law of
grace. D. Do these men which make that distinction think yt God is changed
since the time yt he gave his law by Moses, and that he does not as much hate
iniquity now, as he did then? Do they think that he can better endure the
outrage that is done to his own Son, then he could do that which was done to
his servant? Do they think yt Jesus Christ came into the world to increase
and allow sin, and not rather to make it more and more hateful and to put
it away? T. It is like so: for if a man do allege that adultery must be
punyshed, and will show how much it displeases God, for so Leuit. x Deuteronomy. 22
much as he commanded in the law of Moses, yt adulteries should be punished
by death: they have forthwith their recourse to this distinction of ye law of
rigor and of grace, saying that we are under the law of grace, and not under
the law of rigor. And although they do the like in diverse other such crimes,
yet is there none to whom they would make this law of grace more beneficial
then to whores and whoremaisters. D. Wherefore do they not then cause that law
of grace to be as favorable to thieves, whom they condemn to death, which the
law of Moses does not, as it does the adulterers? But what is ye cause that
murderers and thieves, Exodus 22 Prou. ^
and all other evil doers are punished? why have they no part of this law of
grace? T. They think that they have greater reason concerning the punishment
of adulteryes, because that Jesus Christ would not condemn the woman John.
viii.
which was taken in adultery and brought unto him by the Jews. D. Will they
by that mean conclude that Jesus Christ did more favor adulteries, the^ he
did other offenses and crimes? They are therein greatly deceived. For Jesus
Christ did not that which he did in that matter, to give men to understand that
whores and whoremaisters should remain unpunished: but for y^ that his office
tended not thereunto: and that he would confound the hypocrisy of those which
had brought her unto him, and therefore he would have done no less touching
any other offense. Therefore we may not in this sort abuse the grace which is
brought unto us by Jesus Christ. T. Yet notwithstanding y^ matter passes so at
this day.

Of the difference and diversity of the laws of Moses, and of their nature.
D. IT is very true, as it has been already declared else where, that we
ought to consider in sundry wise of y^ law of Moses, and that there is great
difference between the law whereof Moses was minister, and the Gospel, which
appertains properlye to the ministerye of Jesus Christ. Men have accustomed
to deuyde the law of Moses into three kinds, of the which the first was
commonly called moral, the other ceremonial, and the other civil. Thou have
already heard a part of mine opinion and judgment touching that matter, I
have already declared how that the law of God which we do call moral, the
which contains the declaration of the everlasting will of God, did nothing
differ, or at the least very smally from that law that we call natural, which
God has engraven in the hearts of men: and y^ that law written was given but
only to make us to understand, and to restore unto us yt goodness which sin
has taken from us, and to declare unto us how far a way it has carried from
us the innocence, holiness and perfection, which ought to be in us: and should
in deed have been in us, if sin had not entered into the world, and that we
had continued still in that estate in the which the first man was created. For
seeing that he was created according to the image of God, there is no doubt but
that the will of God, and that which he requires of us, was printed in that
image, which should always have governed and ruled the will of man, and
should always have maintained it agreeable with the will of God, and should
have been unto us a law for ever. And afterward I have also declared how that
the law ceremonial and civil, were nothing else but as dependaunces of that
law, commonly called morale and decalogue, (because that it conteyneth ten
commandments, which are called in the Scripture, y^ ten words) to serve to
lead men in the keeping of that law, as well concerning those things which
directlye belong to God and to his divine service, to the which the
ceremonial law has regard: as unto those things which touch our neighbor,
to the which the civil laws have their chief respect: whereupon it has been
declared in what sort both the one and the other of these two kind of laws
might be abolyshed and put away, and what liberty we have concerning the same
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Of the abolishing of the law of Moses, and of the old Testament, and of
the things which ought to be considered therein.
T. I Have well understood all this, but I do think, that I have also heard
say yt the whole law of Moses was abolished. And in like sort I have heard say
yt we have now no more to do neither with Moses his law, nor any part of the
old Testament, but with Jesus Christ and his gospel. Wherefore I would gladly
know of thee if this law of decalogue be also abolished or no, or whether we be
yet subject unto it, or else that we be clearly free from it, and how we ought
to think of it. And then I do think yt it shall be more easy for me afterward
to understand, if the distinction of the law of rigor and of grace (of the
which we have lately spoken) be any thing meet in such a matter, and how we
ought to use both the one and the other. D. Beside those things whereof we have
already spoken, we must note if we will well understand this matter, that
this abolishing must be considered in two sorts. The one concerning the
transgression, the other the fulfillyng of the law. The transgression Leu. ii
Gal. iii. Romans 3. 11 3. King. 4. ^ Gal. ^^ Ioh. i. iii ^ Romans 8
brings with it the wrath and curse of God upon yt transgressour, and makes
every man subject to that curse and wrath. The mean to be delivered, is by
faith, by the which we embrace Jesus Christ with all the good gifts that are
in him, now it is written that he would become subject to the law, to
deliver from subjection of the law those that be subject thereunto: and that
he being hanged upon a tree, was made accursed for us, bearing upon himself
the curse Gal. 4. Gene. 12. ^8
which was due for our transgression to abolyshe the same, and to make us
partakers of ye blessing of God, which was promised to Abraham and to other
holy Patriarchs and Prophets through him. For it is he that is the true seed
of Psalm. ^^.
Abraham, in and through whom that promised blessing was sprinkled upon all
people and nations.

Of the difference that is between the faithful and the unfaithful,
concerning the blessing and the curse of the law, through Jesus Christ.
T. WE may then well take that which thou say for to be the mean whereby
the elect and the reprobate, the faithful and the unfaithful are divided and
sundred the one from the other. D. In so doing thou take it not amiss. For
as S. Paul witnesses, we are al borne the Ephe. ii. John. 3. 5.
children of wrath. But as it is written in S. John: he that believes in the
son of God, has eternal life. It follows then that he is delivered from
that curse, which brings everlasting death. And so he is delivered from the
law, as touching the condemnacion and curse wherewith she threatens all
transgressors. Therefore S. Paul says that there is no condemnacion for those
that are in Jesus Christ Romans 8
which live after the spirit, and not after the flesh. For Jesus Christ taking
upon him the curse which they had deserved, has also satisfied the justice of
God for them, and paid the debt which the law required. And the obedience
which Jesus Christ did yield to God his father, and the innocence and the
justice that is in him, is accounted for theirs, as though it were their own
properly. Therefore he esteems i. Tim. ii. i. Cor. i. ii
them for just. And in consideracion of this great benefitte, Jesus Christ is
called by S. Paul, our conversation, and our justice, and contrarilye
according to the testimonye of S. John, he that believes not in the son of
God, dwells under the wrath of God, in the which he is borne, through John,
iii. v
which burden he shall be thrown down in to everlasting death, and into the
very hell, because he has no part of this benefit of Jesus Christ, with whom we
can have no part taking at al, but only through true and lively faith. T. I
know that very well.

Of the benefit of Jesus Christ, and of the good things that we receive by
him, and what freedom of the law he brings to the faithful.
D. Moreover, the benefyt that we have in Jesus Christ does not serve us only
for the remission of our sins, i. Cori. i. ii
but also our sanctification. The benefit then that we receive of him is
double: for first he blotteth out and wipeth away all the sin that he finds
in us. After that he does regenerate us by his holy spirit, and does reform
and make ready our understandings and our wyls for to know truly the will of
God, and to agree unto the same, and to yield to God that obedience which is due
unto him. Therefore, how much the more so ever this regeneracion and reformation
is perfect in us, and the more we draw nigh to that estate of innocence, in the
which the first man was created and set, so much the more ar we free from the
law. For as S. Paul witnesses: the law is not ordained for the just, but for
the i. Tim. i.
unjust.

In what sort we ought to understand that the law is not ordained for the
just and the faithful, but for the unjust and faythles.
T. HOw do thou understand this passage or text? D. Tell me, to what end was
the law given? was it not to restrain men from evil, and to set forward well
doing? T. That is out of al doubt. D. Then, where there is no fear of iniquitye
and of transgression, there is also no need of law. For the just man being
joined unto God, and being made partaker of his justice and nature, he is a
law unto himself. For that that he has the law of God prynted in his heart
by the mean of that image of God, unto the which he is made like. Wherefore, he
keeps him self from every thing that he knows to be contrary to the will
of God, and employeth him to every thing that he knows to be pleasant and
agreeable unto him, not with such a heart and mind as does a hyreling, which
does nothing but in hope of his hyre: or as a man of an evil mind which
refrayneth not from the evil that he would wyllinglye do, but only for that
that the punishment which he fears, holds him from it. For such men do
nothing neither for the honor of God, nor yet for his justice, who of his
nature is woorthye to be loved and honored, although there were no reward for
those that honor him, nor punishment for them that offend him, and
transgress against his holy ordinances. T. Why do they then do it? D.
They do it only for the love of them selves. But the just man does it to
honor God, and for the love that he bears to his justice, in such sort, as
he cannot otherwise do, although there were no punishment at all ordained for
the transgressors, nor yet reward for the obedient, as we see many examples
thereof among men. For an honest man does not keep him self from being a
thief and a murderer, for fear of the punishment that is appointed for such
offenses, but for that he loves virtue, and hates vice. Therefore, although
that such vices should not be punished at all, yet would he never the sooner
do them. And therefore the law ordained for thieves and murderers, is not
ordained for him, nor makes him subject at all unto it, as is the thief and
murderer: for so much as without it he does of him self that which the law
requires. And therefore in this manner is the faithful delivered from the
subjection of the law, and in this sort the law is abolished unto him.

Of the causes for the which the unfaithful remain still subject to the law,
and wherein the faithful may also be subject unto it.
T. THe unfaithful remains still subject both in the one and in the other
sort: for he is not delivered from the D. It is true. And for that there is
none so just nor so perfect, in whom there rests not continually some root of
this natural rebellion, which through sin remains imprinted in our
entrails during the time that we abide in this mortal life: we shall remain
so long subject to the law, as there shall remain in us any rebellion,
weakness, or imperfection, and that we be far from that perfect reformation
given to the image of God, which is required in us. The which subjection I do
take, not in that sort that the law brings the curse to the
transgressors, for so much as that curse is to the faithful turned into
blessing through Jesus Christ: but I take it in that sort that the law does
serve us for instruction, to teach us to refrain our will, according to the
rule of the will of God.

Of the commodity that the faithful may also have of the law, and in how many
sorts.
T. THe law is then always profitable for us. D. Yea, and in sundry wise. For
first in declaring to us the good that we are bound to do, and the evil that we
ought to flee, she teaches us to know what great commoditye we have lost, and
in to what misery and wretchedness we are fallen by mean of sin, to the
knowledge whereof she leads us. And when she has brought us to that
knowledge, she does by this mean bring us to humble our selves before God, and
to demand his grace. For the law shows us our only refuge to be in Jesus
Christ, which is he by whom only Romans iiii. v
we may obtain it. For seeing that her office is to demand of us, to the
uttermost, that which we do owe unto God, or else to condemn us for defaulte of
the satisfaction which she requires of us, and that there is none able to
satisfy the least point therein contained, she does plainly show us that we are
dead and lost for ever, if we have not refuge and remedy else where. For that
cause S. Paul does call her a Pedagoge, to wit, a leader and a guide, to bring
us to Jesus Christ, in whom the help and remedy is set forth unto us. Galat.
iii Note this passage
T. That is one goodly matter. D. Afterward, for somuche as the justification
and regeneracion which we obtain through faith in Jesus Christ, and through
his spirit, is given us to none other end, but only to serve in justice and
holiness, where as before we served in injustice and iniquity: and also for
so much as that faith (by whose means Romans 6. 7.
we do receive all these great benefits) can not be idle, nor without bringing
forth the fruits of good works the which God requires of her, and whereof she
is the fountain and spring: the law does greatly serve us to make us to know
which be these works, for God requires none other of us: and faith ca^ bring
forth none other but such as God has declared in his law to be agreeable and
acceptable unto him. And for so much as there remains continually in our
understanding certain of those darknesses, which sin brought with it, and
that by means of the same we do oftentimes dishonor God, what good will or
intent so ever we have, thinking in deed to honor him: the law does also
serve us to lighten and cleanse these darknesses, and to keep us from choosing
the evil in stead of the good, and to correct that zeal without knowledge
which may be found in us, On the other side, for so much as it comes often
times ^et no^e
to pass that our flesh does cause our will to resist that very knowledge
which we have by the law of God: the law is very necessary to show unto us
continually that which we yet want, and to bring us by such declaration, to
repentance, which is the first part of the preaching of the Luke xxiii^.
Gospel, to make us ready thereby to obtain the other, which is the
remission of sins, through the acknowledging of our offenses, and the calling
upon the grace and mercy of God, through faith in Jesus Christ.

Of the agreement of the law and the Gospel, of the old Testament and of
the new: and of the turning or change of the law of rigor into the law
of grace, and of the law of grace into the law of rigor.
T. I Do very well know by that which thou say, the ignorance of those
which speak in this sort of the law and of the Gospel, as has been
already declared. D. Thou do here see how the law and the Gospel, the
old Testament and the new, the law of rigor and the law of grace, Moses
and Jesus Christ, do as it were hold Mat. vii. xi
hands: and how the Gospel does there begin where the law does end, and
does fullye make perfect and finyshe that which the law began, in such
sort that the one goes not without the other. And for that cause, our Lord
Jesus Christ did say, that the law and the Prophets had their course until
the coming of John Baptiste, in whose ministry the preaching of the law and
of the Gospel were joined: and the ministerye of the law did end, and the
ministerye of the Gospel did begin, to prepare men to that same of Christ,
the which he himself did establyshe in his perfection: and then afterward the
Apostles did follow and entertayne it by the preaching of the Gospel. Thou
do also see how by the same mean the law of rigor is turned into the
law of grace, to all such as are made capable thereof through Christ. But to
the other sort, it is not only not so much turned into the law of grace, as
the grace which is brought by Jesus Christ to the faithful, does the more
augment the rigor of the same against the unfaithful, which abuse that grace,
and cast it from them. For the more that the light of the knowledge is
plenteouslye spread abroad upon the earth, and that God does show more
aboundantlye the riches of his grace and mercy, and the more that his Son
Jesus, through whom he does make us part takers of these graces and mercies,
has showed him self unto us familiarly, and is not only more great and more
excellent, then all the Patriarchs and prophets, Heb. i. ii
yea then the very Angels, the more grievous and fearful shall the
punishment be upon him that shall despise so great a grace: For he casts from
him the mean by the which only he may receive that grace. Therefore where as
Jesus Christ should be unto him a loving Savior, he makes him his rigorous
Judge, and turns that life which he has brought unto him, into death, and
the blessing into curssing. Therefore we ought well to have in mind the warning
that the Apostle gives in his Epistle to the Hebrews, following David, saying:
if you do this days Psalm. xcv. Heb. iii. iiii
hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as your fathers did in the wyldernes.

Of the books of the great and general Councels of God, containing the decrees
and Canons of the same.
T. THou have thoroughly confirmed me, and have well contented and satisfied my
mind in all these matters, and chiefly touching the matter of the Council, I am
fully contented with these twain, to the which thou do direct me, the
which I see joined together, even as thou haste said that the law and the
Gospel, Moses and Jesus Christ, the old and new Testament were one with an
other. D. Thou ought not otherwise to understand it. For the Canons and
decrees of the first, are nothing else then the doctrine of the law and of the
Prophets, and of all the old testament, as those of the second are contained
in ye doctrine of the Gospel, and of the new Testament, beside the which we
ought not to look for any other. T. I am very well contented with the same, and
I desire God to give me his grace never to turn away from it, nor never to
receive any other. But for that that my understanding is very gross, I would
desire thee to do so^uch for me, as first to declare unto me the Decrees and
Canons of this first Council, which is the law of God, given in the mountain
of Synaye: and then I hope when I have once well understood them, that I shall
have a good entrye into the understanding of those of the other Council, which
are contained in the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. D. I am very well
content. But it seems that we shall do well to put it over till an other
time, when we shall have more leisure.

The table of this work, containing the principal matters of the same book.
The first number declares the page or side of the leaf, the second the
Section.
OF blyndnes and dysorder that is among men in matter of religion. 3. 1
Luthors and causes of all order and disorder. 3. 2 Of the cause of the fall and
reign of mankind. 4. 3 Of the difficulty that is (...) to acknowledge their
errors. 5. 4 Of the process that men bring against God. 6. 5 How that al false
religion may be well defended. 6. 6 Of the arguments taken of the multitude.
7. 7 Of the arguments of time and auncienty. 8. 8 Of the fall of the devil. 8.
9 Of the predecessors of the wicked. 9. 10 How that none may so well allege
auncienty, as the faithful. 10. 11 Of the language that is in the heart of the
hipocrites and wicked. 11. 12 Of ye persecutors of ye veriti. 12. 13 Of such
as persecute the truth of a purposed malice. 12. 14 Of those that resist the
truth wittingly. 14. 15 Of such as do resist the truth, and persecute it
through ignorance. 1516 How that the want of the knowledge of god and his
truth. 15. 17 Of the great care and diligence that is in men. 17. 18 Of the
diligence that is in men to do evil. 18. 19 Of the vices that make men
ignorant of god, and of his truth. 19. 20 Of such as do contemn the knowledge
of God. 20 21 Of the true knowledge of god. 22. 22 Of the true study of the holy
scriptures. 23. 23 Of such Christians as are ignorant of the word of God. 23.
24 How much necessary the study of the word of God is. 25. 25 Of the desired
ignorance. 26. 26 How that the publicatio^ that God has made of his word. 27.
27 Of the means by which god has and does declare him self daily to men. 27.
28 Of those that cloak their rebellion against the word and will of God. 28.
29 Of those which commit idolatries to their princes. 30. 30 Of the offices of
good princes and good subjects. 31. 31 How those men obey the devil, and not
their princes. 32. 32 Of lawful laws of Christian Princes. 33. 33 Of
unfaithful servants to Princes, and of their councels* against God. 34. 34 Of
the judgment of the Christian doctrine, and by whom it must be reported. 35.
35 Of the causes why the Princes should enquire of the will of god at the mouth
of his ministers 37. 36 Dishonor done to God by such as vouchsafe not to
enquire of his will at the hands of his ministers. 38. 37 What mean and order
Princes ought to keep in judgment of things apertaining to religion. 39. 38
How men ought to have greater care for matters appertayning to religion. 41.
39 How that men make more account of their promises, then of their consciences.
42. 40 Of the care that ought to be had to know y^ way of salvation. 44. 41
Admonitions in the holy Scriptures against false Prophets. 45. 42 How great
business lets y^ hearing of the word of God. 46. 43. Means to advance or
hinder the business of men. 48. 44. Mockers and haters of the Gospel, and will
seem no. 49. 45 Of Epicurians among the Christians and their diversity. 50. 46
Testimonies of Epicurians and of Gods providence and justice against their
false opinions. 51. 47 Light of gods word given to me^ and the nature of the
same. 52. 48 The authority of holy scripture. 53. 49. Devilish peruersitie of
Epicuria^s their agreement with the doctrine of Mahomet. 56. 50 Of man's
traditions. 57. 51 How we ought not to do y^ which seems good only in our
own sight and opinion 58. 52 Of the works that are done to a good intent. 60.
53 To understand whether god have ordained sundry religions or no 61. 54 Of the
causes of the diversity of the positine laws 62. 55 Of the agreemente of the
positive laws with the Ceremonial laws. 63. 56 What liberty God has given
in the usage of ceremonies. 65. 57.

The second Dialogue.
OF the reasons which cause many to desire and wait for a Council. 68. 1 Of
the difference that is in Christendom in matters of religion, and what it does.
69. 2 What profit the Church of God may receive of Councels, and of their
issues. 70. 3 Of the hope that men may have of the counsel in these days.
72. 4 Of the means of the enemies of the truth for the maintenance of their
kingdom and false religion. 73. 5 Of the danger into the which they cast
themselves which atte^d only upon Councels. 74. 6 Of christian princes to
reform the Church by mean of a general ^o^^cell. 75. 7 Of (...) negligence
and want that (...) ^he ministers of the church 76. 8 Of the empeachments of
men in y^ reformation of the church. 78. 9 How difficulte it is to assemble a
lawful Counsel at this day. 79. 10 How the Christians hinder the reformation of
the Church. 81. 11 What Council the true christians ought to follow. 83. 12 Of
such as would agree the doctrine of Jesus Christ, and that of Antichrist
together. 84. 13 The Interim may not be received neither into the Church of
christ, ne yet of Antichrist. 85. 14 Of such christians as be Newters and
indifferent. 86. 15 For what cause the Interim has his name of an aduerbe. 88.
16 The profit that those that be instructed in Gods word, may receive by the
Councels. 89. 17 We oght not to be the disciples of me^ but of Jesus Christ.
90. 18 The word of God does authorize it self. 92. 19 What goodness men may
receive of a good Counsel, and what evil of an evil Council. 93. 20 What the
good Councels may do to the wicked. 94. 21 What fruit the church may receue of
the lawful Councels. 96. 22 What praise is due to good princes and magistrates.
97. 23 Hipocrisy of such as depend upon me^ in matter of religion. 98. 24 How
we are disciples of men, and how of Jesus Christ. 100. 25 Of the nature and
virtue of true faith. 101. 26 Of the honor that is due to good and true
teachers in ye church. 103. 27 Of the diff^rence of the apostles and prophets:
and of those that came after them. 105. 28 The Council of S. Au^^^^yne
concerning Councels (...) ^^itings of the Fathers. (...)

The third Dialogue entitled, The authority of Councels.
OF the assistance of the holy ghost in lawful Councels. 109. 1 What is to be
desired in Councils those which are most excellent. 111. 2 Of the weaknesses
which were in the Council of Nice. 112. 3 Of the contrarieties between the
bishops and ministers that have been in many aunciente Councels. 113. 4 Of
the contradictio^s of the popes and their decrees. 114. 5 Of the contrariety
of the decrees of many Councels. 116. 6 Of the contrarictie of certain councils
concerning the difference of meats. 118. 7 Of the decrees of the Councels of
Constance and Basle touching the Lords supper under both kinds. 119. 8
Contrariety in many Councils concerning Images. 120. 9 Of the Council of
Carthage concerning the Baptism, administered by heretics. 121. 10 Opinion of
the papists, concerning general and particular Councils 122. 11 Of the abuses
and errors which have been brought into the church 122. 12 Of those that would
have the prelates of the church to correct the abuses that therein are. 124. 13
Things of them selves sufficiently resolved without resolution of the Council.
125. 14 The liberty of Christians in reforming abuses. 127. 15 The passages
which the Papists allege to authorize their Councels. 129. 16 The holy ghost
is not bound to any kind of person or estate. 1^9. 17 Of ye asse^bles of y^
faithful. 131. 18 Of the Councels of the heretics, condemning the Councils of
the faithful. 132. 19 The contradicions of the ancient Councels, declare that
the councels may err. 134. 20 No hope for the Christians to have a lawful
Council. 136. 21 What prayers men ought to make for their Princes. 138. 22 What
Council they ought to follow that have princes which ar enemies to the Gospel.
139. 23 Of the studi of the holy scriptures and of the decrees of the Counsel
of Nice concerning the sam. 140. 24 Of the true Councels which excel all the
rest in authority. 142. 25 The authority of Princes and Popes concerning
councels. 143. 26 Of the manner of the proceedyng of the Papists in their
Councels. 144. 27 Prudence required in dispu^a^ion in the papistik councels.
145. 28 Resolucion of the papistical councels. 146. 29 What discords may be in
the councels of the Papists. 147. 30 Of the Popes practices for his
determination and conclusion of Councels. 149. 31 Of the ignorance of the
popish bishops. 150. 2 Of the final conclusion and resolucion of the Council
of the Papists. 151. 33 The order of the bishops in giving their consent in
the papisticall Councels. 153. 34

The fourth dialogue, entitled, The resolution of Councels.
Of the charge which God gave unto Moses. 155. 1 The allowing of the old
testament is the allowing of ye new. 157. 2 For what cause God did allow and
confirm with such authority the ministry of Moses. 158. 3 Of the subtilties
of the Paga^ law makers and false prophets. 159. 4 Of the testimonies that God
has given to Moses of his vocation. 161. 5 Of the aduertisme^ts that God did
give to ye people of Israel. 162. 6 What tokens God gave of his presence in the
mount Synay. 163. 7 Of the signification of the signs which God did give in
gyuing his law. 164. 8 Of the usage of the law. 165. 9 For what cause God
would fear the people of Israel by those signs which he gave in the mount
Synay. 165. 10 Of the trumpet which did sound in the mount Synay. 166. 11 Of
the last and general judgment of God. 167. 12 Of the sanccifitation that God
required of his people, when he would give his law. 169. 13 Of fastinges and
of differences of meats which the papists use, and of their original. 170. 14
Of the sobrierie, abstinence and honesty that is required of the christians.
171. 15 Of the Counsel that was holden in the mount Syon. 172. 16 Of the
manifestation of God in Christ. 174. 17 Of the last scale, and of the last
declaration and contirmation of the doctrine of God 176. 18 Of the examinacio^
of the true christian doctrine. 178. 19 Of the vengeance of God against those
y^ despise the gospel. 179. 20 Of the difference that men do commonly put
between the law of rigor, and the law of grace 1^0. 21 Of the difference and
diversity of the laws of Moses, and of their nature. 181 22 Of the
abolishynge of the law of Moses, and of the old Testament. 183. 23 Of the
difference that is between the faithful and unfaithful. 184. 24 Of the benefyt
of Jesus Christ, ^ of the good things that we receive by him. 185. 25 In what
sort we ought to understand that the law is not ordained for the just and the
faithful, but for ye unjust and faithles. 185. 26 Of the cause for the which
the unfaithful remain still subject to the law. 187. 27 Of the commoditye that
the faithful may also have of the law. 187. 28 Of the agreement of the law
and the Gospel. 189. ^9 Of the books of the great and ^^neral councels of God.
(...)

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath Saint
Martins. ()
Cum gratia and priuilegio, Regiae Maiestatis per Septennium.

These books are to be sold at his shop under the Gate.


