THE CAVTELES, CANON, AND CEREMONIES, OF THE MOST BLAsphemous, abominable, and
monstrous Popish MASS. Together, The MASS entitled OF THE BODY OF JESUS
CHRIST. Fully and wholly set down, both in Latin and English, The Latin
faithfully taken out of the MASS BOOK after the Romish use. Imprinted at
Lions by John Cambray, In the year a thousand five hundred and twenty, The
title whereof hereafter ensues on the next page. With certain Annotations for
the understanding of the text, set forth by that godly and learned Minister in
the Church of God Peter Viret, and translated out of French into English by
Tho. Sto. Gent.

printer's device featuring an anchor ANCHORA SPEI



Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollier for Andrewe Maunsell, dwelling in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the brazen Serpent. 1584.

MIssale, ad Sacrosanctae Ecclesiae Romanae vsum, nunc cum variis additamentis,
etc. Impressum Lugd. Anno Domini, Millesimo, Quingentesimo vigesimo, per
Ioannem Moollyn, alias de Cambraye.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR WILLIAM CYCELL KNIGHT, BARON OF Burleigh, Lord
High Treasurer of England, Master of the Queens Majesty's Courts of Wards
and Liveries, Knight of the most honorable Order of the Garter, and one of
her Highness most honorable privy Council, continuance of health, increase of
all honor here in this life, and endless joy and felicity in the life to come.
HAVING englished (right honorable) this little short Treatise of the Cawtelles
of the most Blasphemous, Abominable, and Monstrous Popish Mass: And having
withal well weyed and considered that the enemies of the grace of God (the
Papists I mean) both in elder days held, and at this day hold in marvelous
great estimation and reverence the same, as the chief ground work, maine
pillar, and only corner stone of their superstitious and idolatrous religion,
(if it may be said a religion) an invention most contrary to the holy
institution of the supper of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the great dishonor of
him and of his Church, still fiercely and bloodely (where they have dominion
and rule) with sword, fire, and faggot mainteining it: I thought it (in my poor
opinion) a work most necessary both for the glory of God, and also for the
benefit of the ignoraunter sort of my country men, to send it abroad
amongst them, that they might thereby perfectly see and rightly judge (if they
will not continue wilfully blind) how grossly both their Ancestors, and they
them selves also, have been by that shorn brood of Antechristian Balamytes,
the only blockish and shameless deuisers of the same horribly abused and fondly
led. And because (Sir) the book especially and chiefly the comment upon the
same is worthy the publishing: I have therefore in a Christian boldness presumed
on your honorable courtesy, to offer and present it unto your wise and grave
consideration, as to a most honorable personage worthy and meet to stand the
Patron and defender of so notable a work, most humbly beseeching you not so
much to regard the baseness of the Translation, as the sound dealing of mine
Author in the discovering and confuting of their most monstrous and palpable
dolteries. In doing whereof your L. shall not bind me alone in mine own
particular, but all the whole Church of God also in general, within all her
Majesty's Realms and dominions, daily to pray for the prosperous estate of
your L. long to continue. London the sixth of February. 1584.

Your L. always to be commanded in the Lord Jesus, THOMAS STOCKER.

A PREFACE, DECLARING ALL SVCH MATTERS AS ARE TO BE handled and treated of,
within this present hook.
SINCE we are now grown to an end of that Cronicle which we were determined to
make, concerning the Acts and deeds of Popes, whereby their holiness, and the
rest of their ordinances, may the better be discerned and judged: I have not
thought it amiss to make some discourse of the Canons and decrees made and
established in the Councelles which have been solemnly held from the
Apostles time, even unto this present. I mean of the Canons and decrees, which
touch those matters that we now intend to treat of. Howbeit there are many
causes which give me occasion, at this time not to deal with the^. The first
is, for that I fear the book will grow to be over great, as I see it fall out by
another book of mine, which I took in hand entitled, Of the difference and
conference of the Supper of the Lord, and the Mass: Albeit I did at that time
cut of many things, which might very well have been set forth. The other
is, That a great part of the Decrees and Canons of the Councelles appartaining
to that matter which we presently are to treat of, are attributed to the
Romish Bishops, and especially to those who at that time enjoyed that sea,
wherein, those Councels were solemnized. And therefore the greater part of them
has already been published and set abroad. Moreover I do also consider, that
these Canons and decrees which are assigned unto the ancient Councelles, are
often allotted unto them under a false title, as many other ordinances also are
attributed to many ancient Romish Bishops, who never once thought of them:
and were falsely collected even by the very self same men which vpheld the
Popish sea, and all the abuses and superstitions that ever were brought into
Christendom. Wherefore, it is most necessary, that when any Councelles are
spoken of, that they which read the^ call to mind that, which we have spoken
of, in our other book, concerning the witnesses by us produced, for the
setting down of those ordinances attributed to Popes, of whom we have made
mention. For therein is likewise committed great leasings, by the reason of the
knowledge and practice of a great number of false witnesses by whom Antichrist
has served his own turn, that by them he might obtain a glorious glittering
show unto his false religion and tyranny, and chiefly under the title of
antiquity and ancient Councelles: under which color, the Suppostes of the
Romish Church labor with tooth and nail, to quench the truth and word of the
Lord. And therefore it is very requisite that the matter be well looked unto.
For, as we must not lightly contemn the authority of the lawful and
Christian Councelles: even so likewise we must be well advised how we allow
unlawful Councelles, for lawful, and that errors, superstitions, and
heresies, be not allowed and received under the color of Christian Councelles.
And besides, we must also understand thus much, That there was never any
Council so pure and Christian like since the Apostles time wherein some
chafe has not been mixed with the Corn, yea, and some notable beginning of
superstition also: by which mean Antichrist soon after, has not gotten some
matter to build an house for his reign, and to work his secret iniquity
withal. Wherefore, we are with very sound judgment to read, whatsoever is
set down unto us under the name of Councelles and ancient Fathers, and not
lightly approve any thing, until such time as we have thoroughly examined the
cause by the prescript rule of Gods word. For which causes I have purposlie set
down this advertisement, as well by reason of the Cannons and decrees which
have hertofore sometimes been alleged, under the name of ancient Councelles,
as also (if need were) for those, which hereafter might be alleged for the
declaration, and annotations which we have yet to make, as well upon the
Cautelles or instructions, as upon the form and manner of the Mass, which we
are now in hand to go on withal. But because we would be glad to observe the
best order that might be, we will begin at the Instruction which the Priests
in their Mass books call, The Cautelles of the Mass: Because they are taught
by them, those things which he is to observe that means to say Mass, and of
the dangers which therein might fall out: as may very well be discerned by the
reading of them. And therefore by a barbarous word they call them Cautelles,
chieslie by reason of the sense, which they mean to take at it, signifying
thereby, that every Priest must take good heed unto that which is set down
in them: although in very deed this word Cautell, properly signifies nothing
else, but falsehood and deceit. Wherefore, they them selves speak more likely
and truly in this behalf then they think: considering, that whatsoever is in
their Mass, is nothing else but mere trumperie and deceit, and a common
seducing of all Christian people. And in very deed, I have set them forth
after the self same manner and form, as they are set down in their Popish
Mass book, which title is already in the beginning of this book proposed
and faithfully translated: to the end that every man might the better
understand, the notable follies and horrible abominations which are in the
Mass, and in all those which celebrate the same, and are at it. And for the
better helping of the understanding of the Readers, I have added thereto
certain expositions and annotations, to make the matters more plain. Howbeit,
I am to beseech the Readers, not to be lightly offended at them, although they
seem very gross and strange Because I am to make them agree with the text,
which is to be declared: and is in very truth worthy the gloss which shall be
given thereto: which shall not be a gloss of Orlea^ce, contrary to the text,
but neat and pure, and of it self. And to the end that every jot thereof might
be the better understood, I have divided the matters into Chapters: and
besides, have set down the annotations of every of them in order, one after
another: and marked by the Alphabet and cifers every annotation, according as
the letters are marked in the text, to the end it might be the better
understood, unto what place every of them is to be referred.

decorative device featuring initials of printer, T.V. T V



HOW AND IN WHAT MANNER THE PRIEST THAT WILL SAY Mass is to prepare him
self, and what gestures and countenances he must use therein, and likewise,
all the cunning devises of legier de main or iuggling required thereto.
CHAP. I.
SEQVVNTVR informationes and cautelae, obseruandae presbytero volenti diuina
celebrate.
PRima cautela est, vt Sacerdos Missam celebraturus, conscientiam suam per
puram confesone^ optime praeparet sacramentum vehementer desideret, and
conficere 1 intendat.

Notulam de modo agendi officium, memoriter and been sciat.

Gestus valde compositos ac deuotos habeat. Cu^ enim quilibet teneatur Deum
diligere ex toto cord, and ex tota anima, and ex totis viribus suis: hic, Deum
diligere non probatur, qui in mensa Altaris, vbi R^x Regum, and Dominus omniu^
tractatur and sumitur, irreligiosus, indeuotus, impudicus, distractus, 2.
vagus, aut desidiosus apparuerit.

Attendat igitur vnusquisque quod ad mensam magnam sedeat, cogitet qualiter eum
preparari oporteat: sit cautus and circumspectus.

Stet erectus non iace^s in Altari, cubitos iungat lateribus: manus mediocriter
exaltet, vt extremitates digitoru^ modicu^ circa humeros videa^tur, non tamen
humeros excedant. Intellectu^ signis and verbis coaptet, quoniam magna latent
in signis, maiora in verbis, maxima vero in intention.

Tres digitos iungat, quibus signa faciat, reliquos duos in manu componat.

Signa faciet direct* non oblique: alie satis, ne calicem euertat: non
circulos pro crucibus faciat.

Cum vero inclinandu^ fuerit, non oblique, sed direct ante Altar toto
curuatus corpor ese inclinet.

NOW FOLLOVV THE conning instructions, which the Priest that will celebrate
this divine office, must observe.
THE first Cautel or fine devise is this: that the Priest which intends to
say Mass, a ought to prepare his soul and conscience thereto, by pure and
sincere confession: b Let him earnestly desire to receive the Sacrament, 1 Upon
this occasion this verse was made, Cu^ satur est vent^r, Monachoru^
sufficienter: Tu^c surgunt lent. m s^r^re canunt si^e mente.
and fully purpose to make it.

c Next let him perfectly understand without book, after what sort he is to
perform that office.

d Let him the^ forsooth, set a very devout cou^tena^ce upon the matter. For
seeing eueryma^ is bound to love God with all his heart, with all his soul, and
with all his power: he surely is not to be thought to love God, who shall
show him self to be a shameless, mad, in constant or idle person, e to be
irreligious and deuoutles, f at the Sacrament of the Alter: VVhereupon, this
verse of Chordigeris was made. Chordula nodosa, men's vaga, lingua dolosa. Haec
tria nudipe them ducunt ad daemonis aedem.
where the King of kings and Lord of all the world is taken and handled.

Let every man therefore consider that he sits at an honorable Table, and
for that cause let him think how he ought to come prepared: and therein
accordingly, both wisely and circumspectly behave him self.

b Let him also stand bolt upright and not leaning against the Altar: and set
both his elbowes to his sides: and then lift up his hands fair and easily, so
that his fingers ends may be seen even with his shoulders, and no whit above.
i Let him frame his whole mind and intent to the crosses and works. k For
under the crossings are great things hidden, greater matters under the words,
but the most notable in his mind and intent.

l He must join his three fingers together wherewith he makes the signs of
the crosses, and foulde the other two within his hand.

m He must make foreright crosses, and not thwart: and make them high enough
above the Chalice, for fear of overthrowing it: and beware that he make not
circles o in steed of crosses.

P And when he ducketh, he must ducke foreright, and not thwart, but bow his
whole body directly before the Altar.

a The confession which the Priest makes, 1. Cor. 11.
is in stead of the probations which S. Paul requires of those that will come
to the Supper. But because the Priest prepares him self to renounce Jesus
Christ in his Mass, he also ofte^tims purges his conscience in his
preparation, by great blasphemies: as herafter shall be showed in his place.

b For, if he has not this purpose and intent, all is nothing that he does.
And so by this means as many as worship the host that is between his hands,
commit flat idolatry. For according to their doctrine, without it, it is no
God. Now the people can never be able to assure them selves what the Priests
mind is. For, none knows his heart but God alone. Whereupon ensues, that
they which are at Mass, are always uncertain what to believe: and so
consequently can have no true faith. For; faith and doubting can in no wise
dwell together.

c That is to say, he must have his part by heart, that he may be the better
able to play it.

d To wit, he must have very good skill how to play the munky or Iacke-napes.

e The Romish religion and devotion wholly consists in Apish and bobtailde
toys, as here may appear. For he is accounted the most devout Sir John that
can best play at hey pass and repasse, Jupiter, Saturnus hey.

f It is not amiss done of them in calling it^ table: because they are thereat
slaall fed, as witness unto us their double chynnes and fat lunchious of flesh
on their bodies.

g This is a goodly king, for he can not defen^ him self from mise, neither
yet from worms and spiders, as hereafter shall be declared.

h Thus here we see the sine devises of the morris, shows and contenances of
the play which herein he must observe for a testimony of hi^ devotion and love
toward God, of whom n^ word has once been spoken.

i And this is the chief and principal parte^ for, seeing the landleapar or
rogge speaks hers of fingers, hands, feet, arms, shoulders, head back,
and belly: we are therefore here thoroughly to consider what is meant by this
kind of speech which consists altogether in dumb shows, a if it were a
mummery.

k These, no doubt of it, must needs be wonderful great heavenly mysteries
which are used it these iuggling pastimes, being meet disporte^ worthy such
puppies.

l This is for the driving away of the flies, because they should have no part
of the Priest* breakfast: and because also, that his God of him self, is not
able to drive them away, as it is sai^ of the Idols.

m It were no small danger, if in stead of fore right crosses, they should make
Saint Androwe^ crosses, especially if it should be in time of war between
the French and the Burgonions.

n There might also some danger fall out even in a sippe of wine, which
afterward might hinder the lifting up of the chalice.

o As for the circles let him leave them, to the Mathematiciens and Cowpers.

p There are in it also, French, Italian, Spannish, courtlike, Bald, clownish,
and maidenlike duckinges and Bowinges, and many other sorts wherein some vain
must be had, for the jolly leading of this friscaball morris, which they may
learn from women and maids.

What kinds of meats and drinks, and what manner of Cup must be set upon this
Table. CHAPTER II.
SEcunda est, vt non putet vel opinetur, sed certo sciat se debitas habere
materias: hoc est, panem triticeum, and vinum cum aqua modica.

De vino and aqua sic poteris certificari. Exigat a ministro, vt gustet tam
vinum quam aquam. Ipse autem presbyter gustare non debet.

Guttam fundat in ma^u: digito terat and odo^et, sic erit certior.

Non credat ampulle signatoe, non colori: qu^niam saepius fallunt.

Videat calicem, ne f^fractus.

Consideret vinum, est corruptum, nullo m^ do celebret: si est acet^ sum,
dissimulet: si nim^ aquosum, abstineat, (...) si sciat vinum aquae pr^ualere.

Et in omni casu, si co^tingat dubitari vel pr^pter acedine^, vel prop^^
mixtura^, vel in limpic tate^, virum possit confi^ co^sulimus abstinere: qu^ in
hoc sacramento n^^ subdubio est agendu^, (...) cer^issime est dicendu^ Hoc est
enim corpus m^^ and: Hic est calix sang^nis mei.

Item, hostias obl^^ conuenientes elegat, vinum competenter fundat: quia hoc
sa^mentum debet sensi^ deseruire, ad vidend^ tangendum, and gustan^ vt sensus
reficiantur specie and intellectus re contenta foueatur.

Aqua etia^ in paruma qua^titate infunda^ and saporem vini recipi^ no^ est enim
periculu^ q^tumcunque modicu^ apnatur de aqua: est autem periculum si multum.

Apponitur etiam aqua solum, ad significandum. Sed vna gutta tantum significat,
quantum mill.

Ideo caveat sacerdos ne cum impetu infundat, ne nimis cadat.

THe a second Cautell is this, he must not suppose, or think only, but be
fully assured that he has such convenient and meet matters, as he has need
of: to wit, bread made of wheat, and wine with a little water.

b And by this mean shall he know that he has both wine and water. First let
his Clark taste both of the wine and also of the water: c for the priest him
self must not taste of them.

d But let him power a drop into his hand, and then let him chaufe it with his
finger in his hand, and smell to it: and in so doing he shall be the more
certain.

e Let him not trust to the wine crewet, nor yet to the color: for by them,
may a man be oftentimes deceived.

f Let him look well, that the Chalice be not broken.

g Let him take good heed that he celebrate not with corrupt wine: if it be
sharp, he must dissimule it. If it be too full of water, let him abstain from
it, without he be assured that the wine will surpass the water.

h And if in case, the matter be doubtful, either by reason of sowernesse, or
because of some mixture, or vnfindenesse, to wit, whether it may be made or
not, we counsel him to abstain from it: because there must no i doubt at all
be had in this Sacrament, wherein must most truly be said, This is my body:
and, This is the Cup of my blood.

Item, he must choose out the eaunest and roundest hosts, and k power in a
competent portion of wine. For, this Sacrament ought to serve the senses, of
sight, touching, and tasting, to the end that the senses might be refreshed by
the outward show, and the understanding nourished with the things contained
therein.

l He must likewise put but a very little water, so that the wine may be the
stronger: for there is no danger by putting in never so little water: but by
putting in to much.

Now, the water is put in but for a fignification only. And one only drop
signifies as much as a thousand.

Let the priest therefore take great heed that he power it not in to fast, for
fear there run in overmuch.

a Herein, experience is more requisite then opinion and good intent, for in
this place we speak of that which is to be set upon the table.

b The art and cunning how to taste wine.

c It were very dangerous if whippit Sir John should sippe only the least
drop, but that he should for that day, lose two blanckes and all his whole
days work, besides the losing of his breakfast afterward. For he should then
be no more fasting: and so consequently not in the Estate to say Mass, without
it were such a dry Mass, as they say and be deawe or moisten about women's
beaddes that lie in.

d The Art and skill how to braye wine, and taste it without drinking thereof,
to wit, to taste it by the nose.

e If the priest of Payerne, whose wine was powdered with salt, to wit, his
bottell, when he gave it a soupe, had looked well to this cautell, he had not
been so deceived as he was. But had souped of his bottell without powdring. For
then, was it no more wine but blood: in the transubstantatio^ whereof, the
salt was not transubstantiated, as witnesses unto us the priest, who thought
him self to be poisoned, and with very fear, supposed that he should have
died presently at the Altar.

i Here it were dangerous pouring in of blood.

g Forasmuch as wine is better, and because also that the bottell and soupe of
wine therein are likewise better: and in like sort the blood, and so
consequently the soul. For, if we shall give credit to our ancient gossips
pint pottes, who love well typling, and are well seen in the judging of good
wines: They say, that good wine makes good blood, and good blood makes a good
soul: and a good soul is in the hie way of salvation: Whereupon, they like
lively gossips conclude with a jolly Logical Sorites or Sollogisme that he
which will be saved must drink well. And I verily believe that those venerable men
our masters the Sorbonistes, who love a cup of wine as well as our gossips,
ought not so greatly have opposed the^ selves against the Lutherans, and
annotations of Robert Stephanus his Bible as they have done, if they had done
well.

h Save that in the Adoration of the host and chalice, which he must worship,
with an, If, for fear of committing idolatry: because that idolaters cannot be
certain and sure of the mind and faith of the priest which says Mass.
Wherefore, according to their divinity, the host which the priest shows must
be worshipped, with this condition, saying in his heart, If thou be there o
God, I worship thee: but if thou be not there, I worship thee not, that is to
say, I will withdraw my pin from the stake and play no more.

i That is to say, according to the dryness and and thirstynesse of the time
and priest. For, men commonly, drink more in Summer then in Winter: and
oftentimes many priests are angry with their clearkes for pouring in to little,
especially at the last rinsing when they entend to make clean the chalice,
when as they say in the lifting up of it, Quia pius es.

k These ignorant doltes speak here better then they are ware of, saying, That
the outward signs serve the bodily senses: and that the mind and soul are
nourrished and fed with the thing signified and contained in them, to wit,
Sacrame^tally. The^ are not the body and blood of Jesus received corporally,
materially and sensibly, in the supper. For, the soul and mind have no bodily
mouth.

l Here, the boys and striplinges which serve at the Table are taught the
skill how to power water into wine. And besides, herein, I tell you, is very
great danger. For, over and besides that, the soupe of wine should be nothing
so good, neither could the wine be turned into blood, if there should not be
more wine then water.

Of the rehearsing and pronouncing of the Canon of the Mass, and especially of
the Sacrament all words and of the power and virtue of the priests intent.
CHAPTER III.
TErtia est, vt Canonem morosius legate qua caetera: and praecipue ab illo loco,
Qui pridie, quam pateretur, accepit, etc,

Tunc enim respirans, attendere debet, and se totum colligere, si prius non
potuit, singulis verbis attendens.

Et dum dixerit, accipite et manducate ex hoc omnes, respiret: and vno spiritu
tractu^ dicat, Hoc est enim corpus meu^. Sic non immiscet se alia cogitatio:
Non enim videtur esse rationabile, discontinuare formam tam breuem, tam arduam,
tam efficacem: cuius tota virtus dependet ab vltimo verbo, scilicet, Meum, quod
in persona Christi dicitur. Vnde, non debet cuilibet verbo punctus imponi, cum
id nulla ratione valeat, vt dicatur. hoc, est, enim, corpus, meu^. Sed totum
simul proferat.

Pari modo, hoc idem in forma consecrationis san guinis obseruetur.

Item, proferendo verba consecrationis circa quamlibet materiam, Sacerdos
semper intendat, co^ficere id, quod Christus co^stituit, et Ecclesia facit.

THe third a Cautel is this, That the priest must read the Cano^ b more
treatably and leasurely the^ the rest: and especially after he comes to this
place, who the same day before he suffered, took etc.

For then, when he takes his breath, he must be very attentife, and c gather
up him self roundly together (if he has not done it before) giving great
attention to every word he pronounces.

And after he has said, d take ye and eat ye all of this: he must take his e
breath, and then with one breath speak these words, for this is my body:
without once thinking any other thing. For, there is no reason that this so
short, so high, and so effectual a form of speech, should be discontinued,
the whole power whereof depends upon the last word, to f wit, My, which
word is spoken in the person of Christ. And therefore, there ought no point to
be made between those words, considering that there is no reason to lead any
man so to do, as to point it thus, for, this, is, my, body, but that the whole
sentence be pronounced at once.

This observation likewise is to be used in the manner of the consecration of
the blood.

h In like manner when the Priest pronounces the words of consecration, he is
always to bear in mind the intent of the institution of Jesus Christ, in
every matter and what the Church also does.

a Herein must good Mast person bestow the substance of all his five wits.
For here, I tell you goes the hare away.

b This venerable Pilate has not for this point, set down in his Latin Mass
book that which he thought to have done, for the instruction of his Mass
Priest. For he means as it is here translated: But, that which he sets
down in the Latin, is as much as if he had said, he must read the Canon
after a more doleful manner, pronouncing his words as a melancholic and testie
man, that is hard to be pleased.

c To gather him self up roundly together, ought to be understood of the
thoughts of his mind, which he is to gather and bind up together as it were in
a faggot: to the end they might be fast bound up together: so that their minds
should ever run upon their bellies and upon the maids, upon whom my Sir whips
have oftentimes more mind, then upon their consecration: which is a very
dangerous matter, especially in this place, by reason the people should become
flat idolaters in worshipping the host, if so be the Priest should not rightly
consecrate: which he is never able to do if his mind be not fully and wholly
thereon.

d He is to change these words, and pronounce words clean contrary to the
words of Jesus Christ, to wit: Take not nor eat not any of you of this:
seeing that none dare once take or eat any of this, save the Priest alone.

e This is meant if he be not broken winded, or if so be he has not been so
foundred, and so overtaken with the Pope, as that he is not able to take his
breath.

f In our language, this word My, is not the last word, but the Body is the
last. For we do not say Body mine, but, my body: neither do we say, This is
body mine. And therefore seeing the whole virtue of the consecration and
transubstantiation hangs upon the last word, he must not say, For this is my
body: But ought to say, shall be. For otherwise the bread should be body, before
it were, because it is not until the last word. For, all the words cannot be
spoken at one choppe. And besides our venerable Masters should be greatly
troubled about the difficulties that are in this matter.

g They feared that the Priest should eat him self and his own body, as they
say that Christ did eat him self and his own body, flesh and bones, and
that he drank his own natural blood in the Supper which he made unto his
Apostles. For, if these words be said in the person of the Priest, then the
bread shall be converted into the Priests body, and not into Jesus his body.

h There is much to do in words, about the intent of the Priest, because as
they teach, all the power of consecration and transubstantiation consists
therein: so that neither the pronunciation of the words are auailable in this
matter, neither yet the faith and intent of as many as are present at Mass, if
the intent of the Priest be not before them all in it. And yet there is another
point to be considered of, which is this: That if his mind should be so
troubled as that in consecrating the one, he intended to consecrate the other,
and had any such intent, then all his pain were lost: to wit, if he meant to
consecrate the wine, when he was about the consecrating of the bread, or
purposed to consecrate the bread, when he was a co^secrating of the wine.

What difference there is between the gods which the Priests make by reason
of their consecration, and of their numbers. CHAPTER IIII.
QVarta est, vt si plures hostias habet co^secrare, debet harum vnam eleuare,
quam sibi deputauerat a principio ad Missam: and tencat illa^ penes alias, ita
quod intentionem simul ad omnes dirigat, and signando and dicendo. Hoc est enim
corpus meum, omnes cogitet quas demonstrat, seu ante se habet.

Consulimus quoque vt canone^ presbyter memoriter sciat, quia deuotius dicitur:
semper tame^ liber habeatur, vt ad ipsum, si necesse sit, recurratur.

THE fourth is, that if he have a many hosts to consecrate, he must lift up one
of the^, to wit, the self and same which he made choice of at the first, when
he went to Mass: and he must let it lie amongst the rest, always provided
that his mind be upon them all at once, as well whed he crosses as when he
says, This is my body, and must think upon as many as he lifts up, or of
as many a^ he has before him.

c We give this council also, that it is best for the Priest to have the
Canon by heart, for by that mean he shall be able to say it the more devoutly:
Nevertheless it is good that he have the book still lyinge before him, because
if he should at any time miss, he might then look upon it.

a There is not only a difference between the singing cakes, whereon the
Priest means to make his Gods, besides his choice, which shall be the first:
But also which of them shall be the greatest or the least, and most honorable
amongst the rest. For, that which the priest choseth for to serve his own
turn, is of the largest sort, and more honorable then any of the other, and
gallantlier fr^^^eth, skippeth, and curtesieth then the rest which lie
blo^^^shly still upon the Altar. And this is vnde^stood to be done upon such
days as the sup^er ^s administered to all the parish or at least to the most of
them. For it is not sufficient that the priests, all the rest of the year
administer the supper unto them selves alone, clean contrary to the ordinance
of Jesus Christ: But they will besides also, because they can abide no
equality, that the priest which shall administer the supper publikly that day,
shall have his God by him self, and such a one as shall be both larger and
honorablier then any other, and both eat him, and drink his wine all alone by
him self long before any of the rest: making first of all, every man, most
solemnly and magnifically worship his God, which soon after he eats. And
therefore it is here said, that he is to have a far greater consideration and
mind upon him, then upon any of the other, which lie there dishonorably, and
do not so much as once pitch or turn as the other does, who danseth alone with
his venerable Master whip. And therefore he plays with these poor Gods, as
the poor young sluttes which go to the dansing games are dealt withal, whom
none take into the danse, making no reckning of them, but stand by, gasing upon
the fair virgins which do danse. For, every man knows how whipped Sir Hugh
sporteth with his God, and how many friskes, gamboldes, and capriaes, and what
reuerences, reprinses, and braules, he uses: and how he lifts, and tosseth
him above his head, and some time on this side and on that, and under his
arms. To be short, I can not be able to utter unto you the nombers of
sleightes of legier demaine, which he so gallantly makes him play.

b Now Sir, when he makes so many Gods at once, he has no reason, properly to
say, This is my body: but should rather say, These are my bodies. But he may
very well say it by the blood, because that in his consecration, he turns
none of the wine into blood, save only that which is in his chalice which he
iuggleth into it: which blood he makes only for the body of his own God, and
for none of the rest. And therefore it must needs be, that either the rest have
no blood, or else that he makes their blood all at once with the bodies: As in
very deed it ought to be, if this bread were turned, and as they say, really,
essentially, substantially, sensibly, and corporally transubstantiated into the
natural body of Jesus Christ: or else it cannot be chosen but that the rest of
the bodies which are made for the common people, have no blood at all in the^.
And although the priests God, has blood, yet because it is separated from the
body, therefore it cannot be but a dead body, because a living body is not
without blood. Wherefore the body of the God which they eat is a dead body.
Again, if they say that there is blood in the bodies which the common people
eat, the^ deal they more cruelly, making them eat them while they are yet
alive.

c This is a very necessary advertisement, because Sir John Shorn has not the
interlude book carried after him in this stage play, to be prompted behind in
the ear, if he should at any time happily forget his part, as they commonly do
in other stage plays.

In what sort the Priests are to take hold, and handle the Chalice, and how to
renew, and eat their Gods CHAPTER V.
THE a fifth is, he must so discretely and gently take the Chalice, as that he
rush it not against any thing by reason of some sodeine cough which might
happen him: but so charily take it, as that he be not thereby any way let.

b But when he shall take many hosts, as when the host is to be renewed,
let him take the first which he has consecrated, and the blood also. And
when he has so done, let him take the test that remain. But yet let him first
take his own before any the other. Because he believes and is assured of his
own: howbeit he believes of the rest, but is not assured. c Lastly let the
washings be.

QVinta est, vt sic moderate calice^ sumne propter impetum tuss^ inopinatae,
occurrat: s^^ caute sumot, vt impedimentum non habeat.

Si vero plures hostia debet sumere, vt quand hostia est renouanda, primo,
sumat eam quam co^fecit and sanguinem. Po^ haec alias quae super sum suam prius
sumat qua^ alias, quia de suis cred^ and scit: de alijs credit and nescit.
Demum, desuper ablutiones, and non priu^.

a By this, is learned the Art how to take and handle the chalice.

b Now because there must be always gods in the pixe, ready to carry to those
that are sick, when need shall be, and also to honor and keep the Church,
therefore they must often times be renewed, and new put in, in their stead,
for otherwise they would be moldy and filthy. And so by that mean they should
not remain white gods, but mouldye and green gods: as many times it comes
to pass through the negligence, securenesse, and default of their Guard, as
hereafter shall be showed. Now, when these gods are renewed, the Priest which
renueth them, must of necessity eat the old ones, and put in for them span
new ones. But whenever there is a general receiving of their maker (as they
say) if it so fall out, as that there be not as many receauers to eat as there
are Gods to be eaten, either the Priest must eat all that are left, or else he
must give to each man, more then one piece, either else put them into the pixe
to be afterward distributed, as we have before said. And for the greater
solemnizing of the banquet, when as Mast Person is to gobble them up, it must
commonly be done when he is at Mass. But because the same host which the
Priest has renewed, is the more honorable and surer, he for his honors sake
goes foremost, and is first swallowed up. For M. John Shorn is not so
certain of the other old Gods, as he is of his own new one: as well by
reason that some other blacke-Smithes might have made them, as also, for that
it is possible, they might have been changed: And therefore it is here said,
that he is sure of his own: that is to say, that he has breathed upon it,
with a good intent, to make a ioly, brave, round and white God of it, like to a
iolie large slise of a Turnipe: But he is not so certain of any of the rest,
nor yet of the intent of my masters the black-Smithes that forged them.
Wherefore it is said, That he believes all that the mother holy Church of Rome
uses, but he is not assured of it. And therefore he walks in the faith of
Priesthood, which is well to be considered of. For, either faith is joined with
knowledge or without knowledge. And if knowledge be joined with faith, what
manner of faith can that be, which knows not that, that it believes? But if
it be faith without knowledge, then is not the other faith, which is joined
with knowledge. And so both on the one side and on the other, there is faith,
without faith. I doubt not but that our masters could distinguish here very
well: But let them make what distinction they lust, they know neither Christian
faith, nor yet Christian knowledge. For, they have no foundation from the word
of the Lord of all that they here bring in.

c I understand by the washings that are here spoken of, of the last finger
licking which the Priest makes, after he has eaten his God, and his flesh,
and dro^k his blood, the last time that he pours in wine into his chalice, as
well for the washing and rinsing of his teeth as of his fingers and chalice: to
the end there should neither flesh, or blood, remain either in his throat,
hands, nor Chalice. And because this last wine that is powered in, is not
blood, as is the first, it behooves him to eat all the Gods that are to be
eaten, before such time as he powers in this last wine for the rinsing of his
teeth and fingers, for otherwise they should not be eaten to breake-fast: which
were a most grievous and deadly sin. But when it is blood, then it is another
matter. And the Priest has never broken his fast, no though he eat never so
many of his round singing cakes which are turned into Gods, until he be ready
to burst withal: and drink as much wine turned into blood, as that he be as
drunk as a pisse-pot, and so, be ready to burst and kill him self withal.

What commemorations are to be made in the Canon of the Mass, and for whom
they ought specially to be made. CHAPTER VI.
SExta est, vt paucorum nominibus se adstringat in Canone seu meme^to: nec
perpetuo, sed qua^diu velit, faciat, quando velit, omittat: Quia Canon de
multitudine nominum prolixatur, and per hoc, cogitatio distrabitur.

Dignum tamen est, vt pater, matter, frater, and soror ibi memorentur: and si
qui pro tempore commendantur, and specialiter pro quibus Missa celebratur non
tamen ibi fiat vocalis expressio sed me^talis.

THE a sixth is, that he busy not him self with over many names in the Canon,
or in his memento: and that not always, but he may do it as often as it
pleases him, and leave them when he lusts: because the Canon by reason of
the multitude of names is over long, and so by that means his cogitation is
distracted.

b Nevertheless it is good reason, that he have in remembrance, father,
mother, brother and sister, or any other, whom he thinks good to be
recommended c and especially such for whom he says Mass. Howbeit, it shall
not be needful that he express them in words: but in mind only.

a This admonition is chiefly made, by reason of the two Mementoes which are
thrust into the Canon, the one for the quick, and the other for the dead: in
which the priest, especially names such as pleases him. And therefore there
is an N. set down, that he might thereby be admonished to name all those to
whom he pretended most especially to apply the virtue and merit of his
sacrifice. He may refer them also to the commemorations which are there made
of the men and women saints, because that every priest puts in as many as
he has a chief devotion unto, and every curate, the patron of his parish,
and every friar his benefactour.

b Howbeit Jesus Christ never said, Do ye this in remambraunce of your fathers,
mothers, brethren, sisters, nor any other whatsoever: But, Do ye this in the
remembrance of me.

c This especially, ought namely to be understood of such as offer at Mass: in
which, the money that they gape after, serves them for the art of memory.

What cunning he ought to have in washing of his teeth and gullet before he say
Mass, and before such time as he eat of those Gods, and how and in what sort
he must afterward spit. CHAPTER VII.
SEptima est, vt ante Missam caveat, laua^do os vel dentes, (quos de facto
licitum est lauare) ne forte aquae gustum cum saliua immittat.

Et si forte a casu Sacerdos lauando os deglutiat stillam aquae, potest
celebrare secundum doctores, nisi fecerit ex proposito.

Co^cordat Richar. in iiij. distinct. vij. Thomas vero dicit, Veru^ nisi
traijciatur in magna quantitate.

His similiter concordat Angelus de Clauasio, in Summa sua.

Post Missam etiam caveat excreationes qua^tu^ potest, donec comederit and
biberit: and hoc propter reuere^tia^. Et etia^ ne forte aliquid inter dentes
rema^serit in faucibus, quod excreando eijceretur.

THe a seventh is, That he have great regard when he washes his mouth or teeth
(which in deed he may lawfully do) least happily, he swallow down the taste of
the water with his spittle.

And if the priest shall by adventure swallow down a drop of water when he
washes his mouth, yet in the opinion of the doctors, he may say Mass, except
he should do it of set purpose.

Hereunto agrees Richa^d in his iiij. Distinction vij. Howbeit Thomas says,
So that he swalloweth not down very much.

b Hereunto also accords Angel of Clauase in his Summarie.

c He must likewise take very great heed of spetting after Mass, until such
time as he has both eaten and drunk: and that for reverence sake, as also for
fear there be not somewhat sticking in his teeth or lying in his weasant,
which he might by that mean cast up.

a This Cautell or instruction is manifestly grounded, Matthew. 23.
upon those words of our Savior Christ saying, Woe be unto you Scribes,
Pharisers and hypocrites which strain at a gnat and swallow down a camel.
And again, Luc. 11.
Ye make clean the outside of the cup and platter: but within ye are full of
bribery and excess.

b This Angel of Clauase is the author of the Evangelical Summary, a
Sophistical and school doctor, as Richard and Thomas Aquinas and the rest
were, who had leisure enough to dispute of such speculatiue matters.

c The suerest way for him is, to swallow down his spettle, with hypocras and
malmesey at the beginning of his dinner, or in some other colation after his
breakfast, or spit in his bosom, to the end, that the pieces of flesh which he
has eaten, and the blood which he has drunk might be the more honorably
preserved.

The manner that is to be observed in saying of Mass. CHAPTER VIII.
QVamuis aute^ Missa deuotissime sit celebranda, contemplationis causa, est
tamen modus habendus, ne protractione nimia, vel acceleratione fiat homo
notabilis, nam acceleratio signum est incuriae. Protractio est occasio
distractionis quandoque sibi and auditoribus, quos arguit Guilliel. Parisien.
in Libro Rethoricae diuinae. Sed medio tutissimus ibit.

Eo autem affectu est quaelibet Missa habenda and dicenda a quocunque sacerdote
quasi prima dicatur, and nunquam amplius sit dicenda. Tam magnum enim donu^
semper debet esse nouum.

Habeat itaque Sacerdos diligentia^ ad conficiendum reuerentiam ad ta^gendum,
and deuotione^ ad sumendum. Sic sentiendo and agendo digne tractabitur
Sacramentum, rite peragetur officiu^: atque pericula and scandala euitabuntur.

ANd a although the Mass is very devoutly to be celebrated, by reason of the
contemplatio^ that is to be used therein, yet for all that he must observe a
mean, for fear the man be noted to be either over long, or else too short.
For, hastiness is a token of negligence. b And to be over long, causes both
him self and his Auditorie to be forgetful: either of which, William of Paris
in his book of divine Rhetoric finds fault with all. But he that walks
in the midst goes safest.

Now every priest ought to have this regard, as to say every Mass with such an
affection, as if he said his first Mass, and as if he should never say more.
For every such great gift, ought ever to be rare and strange.

Wherefore the Priest must have a great care in his consecration, great
reverence in his handlinge, and be very devout in the receiving of this
Sacrament. And in his so feeling and doing, he shall administer it worthily,
and with all, avoid all perilles and offenses.

a Here is one very hard question to be resolved as touching one thing that is
propounded in this Cautell, especially when Masses for the dead are spoken of.
For, if the souls of the dead be not delivered, until such time as the Mass
which is said for them be ended, then, without doubt, the shortest Masses are
most available. And therefore poor men's souls herein, have the advantage over
the rich men's. For they dispatch the poor men's souls with a short and quick
Requiem, which carries them to heaven in post, whereas the rich men's souls,
are fair and easily carried, with a long Requie^ in an horse litter. But
because we have already handled this matter, in one part of our Christian
disputations, entitled, The office for the dead, I will busy my self no
further with it at this time.

b Herein it behooves us to note what difference there is between the Hunters
and Soldiers Masses, and such other like. In very deed the Hu^ters masses are
most commonly best liked of, by reason they are short. Whereupon we are to note,
that forasmuch as the Priests are for the more part ignorant, therefore they
ought to say Mass more deliberately and with greater devotion, because they
can not so readily dispatch them, nor so lightly huddle them over, as they
which are better learned.

c He is so strange, Deuteronomy. 32.
as that we may very well say as it is written, That through strange Gods
they have provoked the Lord, and through their abominations, stirred him unto
wrath. They have sacrificed unto deuilles and not unto God, and unto such Gods
as they never knew; even very strange ones, and such as came next to hand,
and such as their fathers never feared. Thou have forgotten the mighty God
which begot thee, and put out of remembrance him, who fashioned thee. For, was
there ever a more strange God, then that God, which the Priests made in their
Mass? And from whence, I beseech you, came he? Surely not far of. Will you
know then from whence he came, forsooth first out of the field, then from the
mill, next from the fire, last of all, made by the Priest, causing him whom he
him self made and fashioned with his own hands, and breath, to be worshipped,
in stead of that God which has framed and made us all: and therefore is justly
fashioned into the form of a singing cake, because that by his means, the
true God and right Savior who said, do ye this in remembrance of me, is
turned into a cake. This is such a God, as neither the true fathers the
Patriarks, neither yet the Prophets, Apostles, nor any other of the Ancient
Church, ever feared or knew, Dan. 11.
This is the God Moasim of Antichrist, of whom Daniell prophesied, whom the
fathers knew not: and such a one as is honored with gold and silver.

Of the number of their Collects, and of the diversities of their Per omnia,
and of their conclusions. CHAPTER IX.
ITe^, in collectis dice^dis, semper impar numerus obseruetur, si co^mode fieri
poterit, vel nisi ex ordina rio aliter facere oporteret

Vna, propter vnitatem deitatis: tres propter trinitate^ personaru^: quinque
propter quinque partitam passionem Christi, and plagarum eius: septem, propter
septiformem gratiam Spiritus sancti.

Septenarium numeru^ excedere non expedit, propter multoru^ obliuione^ qui
aute^ aliter facere nouerunt, in priuaetis Missis vtique licitum est.

Item, in Missis defunctorum, nulla oration qua^ de defunctis dicitur, excepta
oratione, omnipote^s sempiterne Deus, qui vi uorum dominaris simul et mortuorum
etc, Eo quod etiam pro mortuis me^tionem faecit aequaliter, and hoc in Missa
priuata.

It^e, quandocunque o^^tio dirigitur solu^ ad P^^tre^, in fine semperdica^^ per
Dominu^ nostru^ I^^ Christum filium tuum.

Si vero dirigitur Pat^^^, and mentio fit f^^ in ipsa, in fine dicatur, p^^
eundem Dominum (...) strum filium tuum. Si ^^tem oration dirigitur s^^ ad
filium, in fine ^^catur, Qui cum Deo P^ere and Spiritu sancto ^^uis and regnas
Deus, p^omnia secula seculor^^*

Et si mentio Spiri^^ sancti, in quacunque ^ratione fiat, in fine dic^tur, in
vnitate eiusd^^ Spiritus sancti Deus, p^omnia secula seculor^^ Amen.

HE a must also in saying of his Collectes, always observe an od number, if
it possibly may be, or except if fall out ordinarily, that he must do
otherwise.

He must say one for the unite of the divinity: three, for the three persons
in Trinity: five, for the fiuefoulde passion of Jesus Christ, and of his
wounds: and seven, for the seven foulde grace of the holy Ghost.

Neither shall he exceed the number of seven, lest he forget many. But they
which can otherwise do, may do it in their private Masses.

Also in the Masses for the dead, no prayer is said but of the dead, save this
prayer only, O Almighty and everlasting God, who have power over quick and
dead, etc. because it makes also mention indifferently of the dead, and that
in the private Mass.

Likewise, so often as the prayer is made to the Father alone, he must say at
the end of it, Through thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ.

But if it be made to the Father, and any mention therein made of the Son,
then he must say at the end, Through the same our Lord Jesus Christ thy
Son. And if the prayer be made only to the Son, then he must say in the
end, who live and raignest, God with the Father and the holy Spirit world
without end. So be it.

And if mention be made of the holy Ghost in any prayer, then must be said in
the end, In the unity of the said holy Spirit, God world without end.

a We have before declared, what is meant b^ the name of a collect in the
mass, and from when^^ it came. Now, in this place they show them selue^ to be
right Pythagoria^s by their no^bring, whereby they make unto us here, not only
a Pythagorian kind of philosophy, which consists in no^bringe, but also a
very magical art. For the manner and custom of enchaunters, is, to dispose
the^ characters, magical figures, charms, enchauntementes and sorceries, by
certain nombres: wherein they suppose great mysteries to be, and wherein also
lies the whole virtue of their devilish arts. And so likewise, as the Mass
is none other but a very kind of sorcery, even so also it is compassed with
certain nombers: especially the prayers that are made in it, and the making of
the crosses, that they skirmish so withal. whereupon is to be noted, that there
are oftentimes great blasphemies committed in those prayers which they call
collectes, because of the men and women saints that are called upon in them,
in steed of God, and of their merittes, which are joined with the merittes of
Jesus Christ, as also by reason of the superstitious prayers, which are made in
them for the dead, presupposing thereby that there is a Purgatory, by mean
whereof, the blood of Jesus Christ our true Purgatory, is utterly renounced.
And therefore they had great reason to set down rules to conclude their
blasphemies with the name of God, and with the holy Trinity of persons, one
God in unity.

INCIPIVNT QVAEdam notabiles informationes, and Cautelae, seruandae circa
defectus vel casus qui oriri possunt: and circa accide^tia quae possunt
accidere in Missa, and praesertim circa co^secratione^ Eucharistiae. Primo,
quid sit agendum, cum Sacerdos infirmatur.

HERE BEGIN Certain notable instructions and Cauteles to be observed, about
the defectes or cases, which might happen: and of the accidents that might
fall out in the Mass, and especially about the consecration of the Host, And
first what is to be done, if the priest happen to be sick.

CHAPTER X.
IN primis, si sacerdos incipiat aegrotare in antari, post consecration (...)
taliter quod nec oput^^ ptum possit perficere^^^ si praesens est aliu^
^^cerdos, and si aegrotu^^ test indicare vbi di^^rit, ibide^ debet ali^^^
cipere and perficere* (...) vero non possit indi^^^ incipiat vbi ille per^^tae
signa creditur d^^sisse. Si autem alius ^^cerdos non sit presens (...) pectetur
in crastinum (...) clericus secundum (...) poterit indicet alij sa^^ doti, vbi
debet incip^^ Si autem per minis^^^ suum, vel per quenc^^ alium assistentem
cert^^ cari non possit, and sa^^ dos aegrota^s vi dimis^^ poenitus ignorauerit,
(...) consecrationem repe^^ ac deuote perficiat: q^^niam tradit authorit^* Non
dicitur iteratu^, q^^ nes^itur esse factum.

Si sacerdos deficiat^ue moriatur ante ca^^nem, non est necesse vt (...) lius
Missam complete (...) tame^ alius vult celeb^^re, debet ab initio M^^sam
reincipere, and to^^^ rite peragere.

Si autem in canone d^ficiat, factis ia^ aliquib^^ signis tamen ante
tra^^substantiationem and consecratione^ sacrame^ti, tu^c alius sacerdos ab
illo loco vbi ille dimisit, debet reincipere, and tantum illud supplere quod
omissu^ est.

Si autem sacerdos in actu consecrationis deficiat verbis aliquibus, ia^ in
part prelatis, sed in ^oto non completis, se^u^dum Innocentiu^: alius
sacerdosdebet incipere ab ^llo loco, Qui pridie, etc.

Si tamen sacerdos deficiat consecrato corpore, sed non sanguine, alius
sacerdos complete consecrationem sanguinis, incipiens ab illo loco, Simi^odo,
etc.

FIrst, a if the priest find him self to be ill at ease at the Altar, after
that he has consecrated, so that he can not make an end of the work which he
has begone: then, if there be any other priest at hand, and that the sick
priest is able to show him the place where he left, b he that is in health
ought to begin there, and so make an end of it. But if he cannot point him to
the place, then let him begin at such a place as may be gessed he leaft at. But
if there be never an other priest present, let another priest be looked for,
against the next morrow, and then let the clarke show to him as well as he can,
where he must begin. Howbeit, if the clarke be not able to certify him, nor
none of those that were present, neither can by any means understand where the
sick priest dwells, then let him say over again, the consecration, and
make an end of it devoutly. For authority says, That that can not be said
to be twice done, which a man knows not whether it were done or not.

If the priest happen to miscarrie, or die before he came to the Canon, it shall
not be needful for any other to make an end of the Mass: howbeit if any
other will take upon him to celebrate it, he must begin at the beginning of the
Mass, and devoutly finish it all.

Now, if he miscarrie in the Canon, and yet shall have made some signs or
crosses before the transubstantiation and consecration of the Sacrament: then
some other priest ought to begin again, at the place where the other leaft,
and only supply that which remains.

d And if the priest shall happen to miscarrie whiles he is in consecrating,
having already in part pronounced some words, and not fully finished: some
other, priest, in the opinion of Pope Innocent, ought to begin at this place,
Who, ye day before he suffered. etc.

e Nevertheless if the priest shall miscarrie after that the body is once
consecrated, and not the blood, some other priest may finish the consecration
of the blood, beginning at this place, In like manner. etc.

a The false doctrine and error of popish transubstantiation, has brought the
whole Romish church and all her doctors into marvelous labirinthes: and
engendered amongst them an infinite number of insoluble questions and
difficulties, and an exceeding number of doubts: and the most strange and
brutish absurdities that possibly may be devised as all men partly may judge by
the cautelles and instructions hereafter ensuing.

b Hereupon, might grow, diverse and sundry inocnueniences. For, as touching
the first, it might so fall out, as that there is none save the same body that
is there already made, and no blood at all. Or admit them to be both there,
what shall become of the sacrifice, which is yet to be made, and besides who
shall eat this body, and drink (...) blood, but to put the body into the pixe?

c By these signs, are meant the crossing (...) wherewith he must so often
cross the bread (...) wine which are upon the Altar.

d It would also breed a great inconuenie^^ to have two workmen to make one
body. Whe^fore, that which the one begins to make, is (...) compted as
nothing, if he go not through w^^ it, and make it up altogether, and withal,
that (...) body has not his full form, until such tim^^ the last word be
pronounced.

e In this case there are two body makers (...) the one breaths over the
bread, and thereu^^^ is the body made: and the other over the w^^^ wherewith
the blood is made.

Of the faults which the Priest may commit ab^^^ the matters appertaining to
his breake-fast, a^^ the sacrifice which he is to offer in the Mass. CHAPTER
XI.
IF he perceive, after he has consecrated the body, that there is no wine in
the Chalice, the host shall be put up again fair and clean into the
corporase case, and when he shall have made ready the Chalice as it ought, let
him the^ begin again at this place, In like manner, etc.

If he perceive, before he has consecrated the blood, that there is no water
in the Chalice, he shall forthwith put some into it and make an end.

But if he perceive, after he has consecrated the blood, that there is no
water in the chalice, yet must he go on, and mingle no water then with the
blood. b For so, the Sacrament should partly be corrupted: c Nevertheless he
ought to be sorry for it, and be punished for the offense committed.

d But if he perceive, after the consecration of the blood, that there was no
wine put into the chalice, but only water, he ought to put out that water, and
put in wine and water together, always provided, that he perceive it, before
such time as he receaueth the body: and besides, he ought to rehearse the
consecration of the blood, beginning at this place, In like manner etc.

c Howbeit, if he perceive, after he has received the body, f he ought a fresh
to take another host, and consecrate it a new, as the doctors of divinity say:
and rehearse the words of the consecration beginning at this place, Who, the
day before etc.

And in the end, he must again take the host that was last consecrated,
notwithstanding that he had received both the water and this blood also, before.

g Nevertheless, Pope Innocent says, that if the priest fear to offend, by
reason of his tediousness, yet that these words only do suffice, by which
the blood is consecrated: to wit, In like manner etc. and so receive the blood.

Also, if it fall out through negligence, that after the Canon is read, and the
consecration finished, there be neither wine nor water in the Chalice, he must
forthwith power in both the one and the other. and the priest shall begin
again at this place of the Canon: to wit, in like manner after he had supped,
unto the end: Nevertheless he must not make the two Crosses which are
severally made over the host.

Now, if thou would know what the priest should do, whenas, after he has
received the body, he has water in his mouth, and is assured that it is so in
deed, whether he ought to swallow it down, or spit it out, thou must look
for that in Hostiensis Summary, in the title, of the co^secratio^ of the Mass.
Howbeit it is better for him to swallow it down, then to spit it out, least
happily, when he voideth the water, he cast up some small crome of bread withal.

SI consecrato con^^ percipiat vinu^ n^^ in calice, debet ho^^ munde reponi in
corp^li: and calicerite pr^rato incipiat ab illo (...) Simili modo, etc.

Si ante consecra^^^ sanguinis percipiat (...) non esse in calice, d^^ statin^
apponere and conficere.

Si autem post consecrationem sanguinis percipiat quod aqua desit in calice,
debet nihilominus procedere, nec debet miscere aquam cum sanguine: quia pro
part sequeretur corruption sacrame^^i: debet tamen sacerdos dolere and puniri.

Si post consecrationem sanguinis percipiat quod vinum non fuerit positu^, sed
aqua tantum in calice (siquidem hoc percipit ante sumptionem corporis) debet
aquam deponere and imponere vinum cum aqua, and resumere co^secrationem
sangumis ab illo loco, Simili modo, etc.

Si percipiat hoc post sumptionem corporis, debet apponere de nouo alia^
hostia^ iteru^ cu^ sanguine consecrandam, secundum doctores in sacra pagina:
debet autem resumere verba consecrationis, ab illo loco, Quipredie, etc.

In fine aute^ debet iteru^ sumere hostia^ illa^ vltimo consecratam, no^
obstante (...) prius sumpsit aqua^, and ^tiam illum sanguinem.

Innocentius tamen dicit, quod si ex prol^^tione sacerdos timet s^^^ dalu^,
quod sufficiunt^^ tum illa verba, per^^ consecratur sanguis: (...) licet,
Simili modo, etc. sic sumere sanguinem.

Item si per negliger euenerit, quod per^^^ Canone and perfecta (...)
secratione nec vinu^, (...) aqua, reperiantur in^ce, debee statim inf^^
vtru^que. Et sacerdos rerabit co^secratione^, ab^ loco canonis: scilices, mili
modo postqua^ c^^ tum est, vsque ad f^^ ita tame^ quod suas (...) cruces
omittat, quae s^^ ratim fiunt super hosi.

Quid aute^ faciat^ aqua^ sumpto corporehabet in ore, and iam^ mo sentit quod
sit a^ vtru^ debeat eam de^ tire, vel emittere: req^ in summa Hostiensi^,
titulo De consecra^^ Missae. Tutius tam^^ eam deglutire, qua^ mittere: and hoc
ide^ aliqua particula cor^^ cum aqua exeat.

a Those things which serve for the sacrifi^^ of the Mass, and the wine
brewesse which th^^ priest there uses, are bread, wine, and water. A^^
therefore he must be well advised that he lack none of all these things.

b Surely there is great reason herein. And besides, there is also, a For,
which declares the same. For, since there remains no wine, but blood, there
is no reason why water should be entermedled with blood. Howbeit, if water had been mixed with the wine, before the wine had been turned into blood, no doubt
of it, but that the water had been transubstantiated into blood with the wine,
if there had been a discreet mixture of the^, as has been before declared:
although the questionarie Doctors and schoolmen, have wonderfully disputed
about this matter. But they which are of the soundest opinion, have made a full
resolution, That like as holy water, which is put amongst other water, makes
all the rest of the water, holy: eue^ so does the wine which is put amongst
the water, turn the same water into wine, if so be there be no greater
quantity of water, then is of wine. And therefore, were all these goodly
instructions and cautelles heretofore set down concerning this matter, which
might like wise as well serve for the work of miracles, as the hosts many
times served, by turning of water into wine. For, they were not to power in so
much water, as that it might easily be discerned to be so. Howbeit, to return
to the transubsta^tiatio^ of the water, it is to be noted, that that is two
ways to be considered of: for, it must first, be converted into wine, and
after that, from wine, into blood: for else, it is impossible to be said, to be
transubsta^tiated. I will not speak of those men, who thought it to be
transubstantiated into fleawme: Of the celebratio^ of the Mass. C. In quadam.
because Pope Innocent never allowed thereof, but by decrees condemned the same.

c Now, if they which forget to put in wate^ be punished, what shall become of
those who forget to put in wine.

d If this should be so, Then were the sacramental words pronounced in vain:
and tha^ which is worse, if there doctrine be true, then are those words
untrue. For, those words do verify, that what soever is by them declared, is
blood, and yet there is nothing but water. Wherefore, what shall we say of
those men, who have worshipped the chalice and water, as if there had been
blood. Now, should all they be Idolaters, according to the opinion of person
Poule Iawbone, who not only forgot to put water into his wine, bu^ forgot also
to put wine into his chalice? Howbeit, I suppose that this seldom or never
falls ou^ so, and that these jolly brewing drawers, rather forget the pouring
in of water, then wine. But because there should be no lack herein, the most
o^ them begin at that end, with their mass, catching the chalice in their
hand, so soon as they are confessed, before they be either reuested, or yet
put on either biggin, surplisse, or albe. Some of them do it about the midst
of the Mass, when as they come toward the secrettes thereof: or, if they
have already done it, they consider whether they have committed any offense
therein yea or no. Now, these dangers fall out the rather, when as these jolly
Sir Shornes are troubled in mind, as has many times happened in this country,
whenas at the beginning, the Gospel began here to be first preached. For, so
soon as any Minister or Preacher of the Gospel, were once entered into any
city or town, and that the Priests understood that he was come thither to
Preach, they were oftentimes without either sens or memory: which is a most
necessary thing to be had in such a case. For, if either toe tripper or land
leaper, should want his memory, how should he think him self of so many
passes and repasses, pitches, turns, and gallant tricks, for the beautifying
of his daunsing and tumbling toys? howbeit these poor wretched priests being
sore troubled in mind, is the cause that one of them forgets the putting in
of water, an other the putting in of wine, an other the washing of his fingers,
an other the lifting up of his God, and some, one thing, and some an other. And
when any man that is with them at Mass perceaueth it, and tells them of it,
they make this answer, These Deuilles so trouble us, as that we know not
where we are. But there are many who can especially testify, how often this
has been spoken by that good and faithful servant of Jesus Christ our good
brother Farel, whose name only has more feared them, then ever the Devils
did, whom they coniured with their holy water, or yet with bell book, and
candle. Wherein, God has showed his great power, condemning by the Judge,
these seducers as malefactors, even in their own consciences, and has put
them into the hands of the Lord chief Justice both of heaven and earth. No
doubt of it, out priests had never more need of these cautelles, then at this
present they have, considering how fearful and amazed they are, being no whit
at all persecuted. Howbeit they have good cause so to be. For, it gives their
kitchins a vile blow. And besides, there ensues a worse matter hereon then so,
because they are not able as they would, make their kitchen fire burn so
bright as mighr roste those which go about to put it out, being next coosin
German to the fire of Purgatory, wherewith they sees, roste, and bake, all
that they eat, at the cost and charges of the poor souls which lie there
tosted and fried.

e To receive the body, is here taken for the eating of the body, but because
this name seems unto them to be most horrible, they use an other, somewhat
more favorable, name.

f And if this should be so, Then the priest should eat in this Mass, two
bodies of God, the last of which, and not, the first, should soon after, be
well moisted with his blood. And the first, eaten without blood.

g This, is thoroughly to be considered of. For, if Christians should not see
these seducers knaueries, they should be in great hazard, and commit great
offense against their kitchen.

h This Hostien who is here spoken of, has made a great book full of these
Geew Gawes, able to lode an Ass: but especially in the fourth book, the 15.
Title. Where he treats of this matter.

i Note, That here, the bread is still called bread, both after the
consecration, and after the eating of it also: which is so great an heresy, as
who so ever holds it, is worthy to fry a faggot. Howbeit the Author may
herein, very well excuse him self, by alleging Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 11.
who has done as much and more too, for he calls it bread and wine, as well
after the consecration as before. But here, although it be called bread, yet
for all that, we must understand it to be flesh. And therefore it behooves
master Goblin to swallow down the water to his breakefast, for fear that in
casting up the water, he cast up withal some piece of flesh that might stick
in his teeth, or remain in his mouth.

In what estate the priest stands, which says Mass, who has either broken
his fast, or is in deadly sin. CHAPTER XII.
ITem si sacerdos post co^ secratione^ recordetur se non esse ieiunum, vel
co^misisse aliquod mortale peccatu^, vel esse excommunicatu^, debet conteri,
vel salte^ hanc gratia^ co^tritionis expetere: and nihilominus procedere cu^
proposito satisfaciendi, and absolutione^ impetrandi.

Si autem ante conse. cratione^ recordetur praedictorum, tutius est Missam
inceptam deserere, and absolutionem petere, nisi inde scandalum oriatur.

Now, if the priest, after consecration, remembers him self, that he has a
broken his fast, or committed any deadly b sin, or is excommunicated, he
ought to be c contrite, or at the least, desire to have the grace of
contrition: and then he may well enough go on, so he purpose to make
satisfaction, and crave to be absolved.

Howbeit, if he remember him self before the consecration, of the things
aforesaid, it were better for him to leave of the Mass which he has begone,
and crave pardon, d except happily by leaving of the saying of Mass, and
vnclothing of him self, some offense thereby should arise.

a There was a canon in the Salegaustadien Counsel, celebrated in the days of
Pope Benedict the eight, and of the Emperor Henry the second, by which was
decreed, that that priest which should have drank after the cock crow, if he
had not done it upon some necessity, should not once have dared to have been
so bold, as to have said Mass the day following. Now, if there shall be so
great danger only by the swallowing down of a drop of water, when he
washes his mouth and cleanses his teeth, The third Aphri can. Council Chap.
8.
about which, there have been so great disputations amongst the Popish
doctors: how greatly is it to be doubled, if that maste person shall have
wittingly and willingly well wet his whiscle, and that with no water? Moreover,
there was an other Canon made in the third Council holden at Carthage, Wall. of
the first beginning. C. 19.
about the time of Pade Syrice, wherein was ordained, That the Sacrament of the
Altar (meaning the Lords Supper) should not be celebrated but by such as were
fasting: saving at one time of the year, and that was on Corpus Christi day,
and upon holy or mawndy Thursday. Which Tolleration was afterward abolished by
the first Bracarien Council, A Council Wall. of the first beginning. C. 19.
holden about the days of Pope Honorius the first, and in the third year of
king Ariamire. It is not to be doubted that these ordenaunces were made by
these Counsels for superstitions sake, as though the Sacrament and communion
were blemished, if a man had eaten any thing before, as they of the Romish
church at this present hold, making conscience to communicate, if so be a man
should swallow down but one drop of water, in washing of his mouth, as before
has been said. For, to answer the first, all men know, that our Lord Jesus
Christ did not administer his first supper to his disciples, after they had
supped. The 9. Book of the Tripartite History Cha. 18.
Furthermore over and besides this, which we have lately heard out of the
Council of Carthage, we read also in the Ecclesiastical Histories, that in
old time, some celebrated the Supper in many places, in the morning, after
they had broken their fast, and other some, in the evening: and this they did
weekly. But because many abused it, and exceeded herein, it was not thought
amiss to induce the people to communicate the Supper fasting, by reason they
might more soberly and reverently receive it. And yet it therefore follows
not, that we are to observe these decrees so superstitiously, as they of the
Romish church do.

b These miserable ignorant souls know not what difference there is between
deadly sin, and venial sin. And therefore they make bu^ seven of the^,
with all their branches. Howbeit* we will not at this present speak any more
(...) this matter, as well for that the place requireth^ not, as also for that
we have both very largely and familiarly handled it in our first dialogue upon
the exposition of the commandments.

c The Romanistes divide their Sacrament o^ penance, into three principal
heads or parte^ to wit, into contrition, confession, and satisfaction. And
afterward they join with contritio^, two other kinds, the one called
atrition, and the other, contusion. Now, they say that contrition, is so great
and grievous a sorrow and heaviness for the sins committed, as that the heart is
therewith torn and broken, as if a man should break a stone with an iron mawle
all to fetters. And that attrytion i^ a great deal less, as if a man had
only taynted or broken but a piece of it. And this kind serves for all such,
as can not so thoroughly repent them as they would, or ought: and is in stead
of a little blaunching, which somewhat flattereth their consciences, and so
riddeth them of the doubt which otherwise might torment them. It should seem
that this cautell means to show this attritio^, by this desire of the grace
of contrition, whereof it makes mention: whereas the other kind is called
contusion, which is taken from a word which signifies to broose and break, as
a man stampeth in a mortar a thing that is very great into a number of great
pieces, and not into powder. For, it would go very hardly with master Iacket,
greatly to repent him that he had dronk in the morning, and then to weep so
much withal, as to suffer the wine burst out at his eyes: if peradventure he
had drunk to much: as oftentimes many have done, whose eyes by that mean
have been lined with Venetian skarlet. And so might the like fall out with any
of the rest, after they have come from displing of their harlots. Wherefore, if
they can not have this contrition in them upon the sodeine or presently, yet
let them have at the least attrition or contusion, and be sorry that they can
not be so heartily sorry for their sins as they would, or ought to be. And
this in my opinion, is the remedy which here is noted.

d These holy men are greatly afearde to offend their mother holy Church. For,
what were it if the people perceived these things? And therefore it were
better utterly to forsake and leave both confession and absolution, then fall
into such an inconvenience.

Of the little small vermin and worms which fall into the Chalice, and of the
wine that is poisoned. CHAPTER XIII.
ITem, si musca vel ara nea, vel aliquid taliu^ ante consecrationem in Calice^
ceciderit, vel etia^ venenum immissum fore deprehenderit, vinu^ debet infundi,
quod est in Calice: and abluto Calice, aliud vinum cum aqua poni ad
consecrandum.

Sed si aliquid horum, post consecratione^ accide rit, debet musca, vel aranea,
vel aliquid taliu^, caute capi, and in alio Calice diligenter inter dig^^^s
pluries lauari, and vermis comburi, and ablutio cum cineribus combustis in
Sacrario reponi^ vel, si sine horrore and abhominatione fieri potest, sumatur a
Sacerdote.

Sed, si probabiliter timeretur, quod species viniesset infecta veneno, vel
Sacerdos sine vomin vel horrore nimio sumere non auderet, comburatur vt supra:
quia, venenum nullo modo debet sumi, sed cum reliqui^^ debet sanguis talis, o^
venenum est immissu^^, in vasculo mundo reseruari. Et, ne Sacrament^^ maneat
imperfectu^, deb^^ Calice^ denuo rite praepa rare and resumere conse cratione^
sanguinis ab i^^^ loco, Simili modo, etc

Et nota, quod secund^ Doctores, nihil abhominabile sumi debet, occasion huius
Sacramenti.

ALso a if any fly, spider, or any such like thing fall into the Chalice
before the consecration, or if it be perceived that any man has put poison
into it, then, that wine that is in the Chalice is to be poured out, and when
the Chalice is washed and rinst, then shall other wine, mixed with water, be put
into it, to be consecrated.

b Howbeit if any of these things happen after the consecration, the^ shall he
slilie take the fly, spyder, or any other such like thing, and diligently
wash it between his fingers, over some other Chalice, in diverse waters, Wal.
upon the forced beginninges and increase of the Mass.
and so burn the vermin, c and put the water that washed it, with the ashes
into the pixe: d or else let the Priest if he do it without fear and abhorring
receive it him self.

e But if he fear, and that there be any likelihood, that the nature of the
wine is infected with poison: or, if the Priest dares not receive it, f for
fear he should cast it up, or stand in great horror, let it then be burnt, as
has bin before said. For, a man may in no wise take the poison. g But that
blood wherein the poison is, must be kept in a clean vessel with the
relics. And lest the Sacrament should be imperfect, he must again in due
order make ready the Chalice, and rehearse the consecration of the blood
beginning at this place, In like manner etc.

And here is to be noted, that the Doctors are of this opinion, that no
abominable thing is to be received by occasion of this Sacrament.

a It is not meet that any small fly, or any such like vermin, should so
trouble these God makers, Tully in his 1 and 2. books of Divine.
as the king of Molosses Ape troubled the Lacedaemonians, whenas he overthrew
the payle wherein the lots of Dodena were.

b Here, a man may learn the Art to fish for flies and spiders, and to make a
lie pot to put the^ in. In deed he must be very wary and cunninge how he
goes about them. For these beasts I tell you, are very subtle and dangerous,
but especially when they are dronk, as these are which are drowned in wine, or
to speak more properly, as the Priests say, in blood. Because the wine after
the consecration, is then no more wine, but blood. Whereupon there may some
question arise: to wit, whether these flies, spiders, or such other like
vermin, drunk blood or else wine, seeing that they are choked withal, eue^ as
they that are drowned, which had not so come to pass except they had dronk
more then was meet. Howbeit I will leave the determination hereof to the good
Gentlemen my masters the Sorbonistes.

c The shrine is a place wherein is put all the holy trash, as relics and
such other things. And therefore this shall be the shrine for flies, spiders,
and vermin: and so in the Popish Church, flies, spiders, and vermin shall be in
the number of their relics and holy trash, because such relics are meetest
for such Saints as they have.

d This is to be understood, of the ly pot which we erst spoke of, wherein
these flies, spiders and worms are washed. Howbeit if this mess of girtbrew,
or belly vengeance like not M. Sir John Pancridge: he is discharged of it, if
he pour it into the stewe amongst the relics: and besides, it has no very
good taste with it, by reason of the drugs that are mingled therein.

e In this place it is a great deal worse, then in the ly pot amongst the
flies. For that were a very dangerous blood, if it should kill him: and far
unlike the blood of Jesus Christ, that gives life, which Pope Victor the third
found by experience, as heretofore has been showed.

f It is rather better to set them on fire, then to make another shrine, and mo
relics of the Priests vomit, with the poisoned relics. For that vomi^
should be burnt, and afterward put into the shrine.

g This is not said without cause, for accident are not only without substance.

h Relics of the poisoned precious blood or the priests God. Wherefore it is
also to be honored, and carried about in procession, even as was the holy host
of Dion, which was so martyred by a Jew, a^ that, by the testimony of the
singing cake, or virgin wax, which the Priests colored and made red, there
came out of it very blood, even as came out of the host of the God of the
Iacobins of Berne, and out of the handkerchief of Ca^bray. For, is not this
holy blood to be said to be martyred, when as it is empoisoned. It had bin much
better for Pope Victor, that the empoisoned wine which he drank, had bin put
into such a shrine in the Church, then to make a shrine of his stomach and
belly, which could not digest it. Although the Popes cause the selves to be
borne upon an hie horslitter, and to be worshipped as God, yea with greater
honor and magnificence then their white cakie God, whom they cause to ride
before them upon a white gelding: yet do I verily believe, that they had
rather have such blud be carried and worshipped in their stead, then to gulpe it
down as Victor did.

Areceipt both for the Priests memory and also for their forgetfulness.
CHAPTER XIIII.
I Item, si sacerdos no^ recolit, se dixisse aliquid horum quae debuit dicere
non debet mente turbari

No^ enim qui multa dicit, semper recolit quae dixit. Etiam si sibi pro certo
constat, quod aliqua omiserit, si talia non sunt de necessitate Sacrame^ti,
sicut sunt decretae vel aliqua verba canonis vltra procedat, nec aliquid
resumat. Si tamen probabiliter sibi constat, quod omisit aliquid, quod sit de
necessitate Sacrame^ti, sicut forma verborum per quam consecratur omnia verba
consecrationis, super sua^ materia^ resumere bebet: quia co^secratio facta co^
esset, quod tame^ non oportet si quae alia praetermissa essent. Co^iunctio,
enim. Vel alia verba quae praecedu^t, vel sequu^ ^ur formam, non sunt de ipsius
substantia.

Si autem Sacerdos dubitaret an aliquod verbu^ pertinens ad substantian forma
omisisset, vel no^ nullatenus debet serua^^ forma^, sed sine temeraria
assertione formam totam super suam propriam materiam debet resumere, cum hac
intention, quod si consecratio esset facta, nullo modo velit co^secre re, Sed
si consecratio no^ esset facta, vellet corpu^ and sanguine^ consecrare.

a If the priest forgets, to say some of those things that he ought to
have said, he is not therefore to disquiet him self about it.

b For, he that speaks much, does not always remember what he says: yea
and although he certainly knows that he has leaft out somewhat, yet let him
go on, and make no rehearsal thereof: considering that there are no such
things necessarily required in the Sacrament, as are the secrettes, or some
other words of the Canon. Nevertheless, if he manifestly perceive, that he has
left out somewhat, that of necessity is to be used in the Sacrament (as the
form of the words of consecration) he ought to rehearse over again all the
words of the consecration, upon that matter. For otherwise it should be no
consecration, which he neded not do, if so be he should leave out many other
things. This conjunction, for, or the rest of the words which go before, or
follow after the form, are of no substance.

c Howbeit, if the Priest should stand in doubt whether he had left out some
word appertaining to the substance, in form or not: he ought in no wise keep
the form, or order, but may without any rash assertion amend all the order
and form concerning his own matter, so that he do it with this intent, that if
he had once consecrated, he would by no means consecrate again: But if so he
had not consecrated, that then he would consecrate both the body and also the
blood.

a The Priest that said, that he was far more careful about the Masses which
he had said, then about those which he had ouerslipt, made a much more ready
dispatch of them. For he said, that he had committed but one fault in those
which he had not said, that is to say, which he never said: but as for the
rest, that he had made as many faults in them, as there were words and ioly
iestes and countenances: for he could neither read well, nor yet iuggle well.

b And therefore it is commonly said, that a liar must have a good memory: for
otherwise he should be oftentimes cut short of.

c This is not spoken without good cause: for this witchcraft and sorcerie is
fetched from the Priests, who put all power in the pronunciation of the words,
as the rest of Sorcerers and Enchaunters do. And therefore if they mistake the
least word or syllable, the whole power and virtue of the charm is utterly
ouerthrown and of none effect. Nevertheless these Magicians which would make
an Art magike of their Sacramental words, (for so it pleases them to call
them) are not able certainly to show the form of words which Jesus Christ
and his Apostles used in this consecration whereof they so much brag. For,
although the Evangelists agree all with S. Paul in the substance: yet for all
that there is not one of them that in every point recites the self same
words alike. And besides, the Priests never follow the very form of any of
them, but use many more words in their order and form, then are in any of
the Evangelists and Apostles.

Areceipt against the default or want of the intent of the Priest in the
Consecration. CHAPTER XV.
ITem, si quis tempore consecrationis, ab actuali intention and deuotione
distractus fuerit, nihilominus consecrat: dummodo intentio habitualis and
virtualis in eo remanserit, summo Sacerdote, scilicet Christo, supplente eius
defectum.

Si autem per nimiam distractionem habitualis intentio cu^ actionalitollatur
(quod raro vel nunquam accidit) videtur quod debebat verba consecrationis cu^
actuali intention resumere: sic tame^, quod nolet consecrare, si consecratio
facta esset,

ITEM, a if any at the time of the consecration be distracted of his actual
intent and devotion, yet nevertheless he consecrateth, considering that the
habitall and vertuall intent remains still in him, for the great Priest Jesus
Christ, supplieth therein whatsoever is wanting in him.

b Howbeit, if by over great distraction, he lose both the habitall and actual
intent, (which seldom or never comes to pass,) it should seem that he
ought to rehearse the words of the consecration with the actual intent: and
yet in such sort, as that he would not consecrate, if he had already
consecrated.

a Because that the intent of these Gods forgers is so requisite about that
business which they go about, so that they can do nothing without it, as has
been already said: They in the first place make a difference between
attention and intent: saying, that intent is necessarily to be required
therein, but not attention: to wit, that it is sufficient that the Priest has
a purpose to consecrate, when he consecrateth, although his mind at that time
be not attentife, nor once thinks of that that he does, as he ought. Which
fault they judge to be well worthy of reprehension, but yet not so great, as
that it can any way be an hinderaunce, but that the Gods may be rightly framed
and fashioned. And because it may so fall out, that upon the very point of the
consecration, he has neither attention nor intent, but that his mind is so
ravished, as that both his heart and thought is otherwise occupied: yet they say
it is sufficient, that he have a general impression in his mind remaining
through a customable impression, much like unto the faith and devotion of the
Romanistes, who in matter of faith do generally and customablie believe as
their mother holy Church believes, albeit they either know not what the Church
is, not yet what it believes. And these villainous and cursed blasphemers thus
skorning Jesus Christ, make him their Vicar: saying, that he thinks for the^,
and that his intent supplyeth the want of their thought and devotion. That is
to say, whiles their minds run upon their gossips and minions, Jesus Christ
was to look to their business. For they pile him iolily well together with
their forceries and blasphemies. And what is he then that will not tremble with
fear to hear of these villainous mockeries?

b We have hertofore declared, in what sense they take this habitall and
vertuall intent, which they set forth for the want of the actual. Thus here we
now see an other kind of receipt for want of the Gods. For it may so fall out
(although they think it an hard matter) as that these fat swinish bollers will
sometimes enter so deep into the conte^plation of the kitchen, or some other
odd toy which comes in their brain, as that they will have as great regard
and care of that which they are in hand withal as an horse, and be as devout
in their mask, as a very Roge, save only for the wetting of their whistle.
But admit that this hardly falls out so, what then would they say of these
sorcering priests who were burnt after they had denied God utterly, as they
the^ selves have confessed, after they had practiced this occupation of making
of Gods, and saying of Mass, full out twenty years together? I would gladly
know of the^ what devotion and intent they had in their consecration? and what
manner of Gods they made? and what account a man should make of these Gods,
which were thus forged by sorcerers. I have alleged one example of this matter
in that part of my Christian disputatio^s, which is entitled, The Office for
the dead, and there fore I will here speak no more of it, save that I find
herein no cautell, which might serve for a receipt against such an
inconvenience.

Of the receipts and remedies, if the host happen to fall into the Chalice or
otherwise. CHAPTER XVI.
ITem, a if the consecrated host fall from the priests hands in to the
Chalice, either by reason of cold, or upon some other cause, before he has
divided the host, or after, he shall in no wise take it out nor begin again
any of the consecration, nor yet alter any thing concerning the celebration of
the Sacrament: but proceed with his crossinges and the rest of his business as
if he had it between his hands.

b But if the Euchariste fall to the ground, then let the earth whereon it fell
be scraped up and burnt to ashes: d and the ashes be bestowed nere about the
altar.

ITem, si hostea consecrata propter frigus, vel alia de causa labitur Sacerdoti
in cali^e^, sieve ante diuisione^ hostiae, sieve post, non d^bet, eam de sanguine
extrahere, vel immu^are circa deliberatione^ Sacramenti, sed procedat insignis,
and in aliis, ac si haberet eam in manibus.

Si Eucharistia in terra ceciderit, locus vbi iacuit, rodatur, and incineretur
per ignem, and cinis in^ia Altar re^ondatur.

a This miserable and wretched God is here, in as great danger to be drowned
in his own blood, as the flies and spiders, of whom we have heretofore
spoken. Or if he be not drowned, yet is he at the least well sowsed and soked,
and thereby has good Sir John a far greater goulp of wine. For it is not the
manner to plonge the whole God over head and ears in his own blood, save only
one of the three pieces. And again this God which is so plo^ged over head and
cares in the Chalice, has not so good sport as the rest have. For this gentle
Sir Friskaball, so daunseth his galliard, his capres, and fetches his
somersaultes with his hands alone, and so pitcheth and turns as that his
poor and miserable God stirs not one inche, but still looks, when both he
and his blood wherein he was plonged, should be whistled up at once.

b They call here, their host, the Eucharist, which signifies giving of
thanks: howbeit there is neither time nor reason in it. For, what thanks
giving can that be said to be in the Mass, which is nothing else but
continual blasphemy against Jesus Christ, and his holy Supper?

c This is a thing that right well so deserves to be dealt withal. Because
the earth is not fit to bear such an idol, nor the idol worthy to touch
it.

d By this, we afresh see new scraped relics come in place.

Of the receiptes and remedies for the spillinge of blood. CHAPTER XVII.
ITem, si per negligentiam aliquid de san guine stillauerit super ta bula^,
quae terrae adhaeret, stilla per sacerdotem cum lingua lambatur, and locus
tabulae radatur, and rasura igni co^buratur, and cinis iuxta altere cu^
reliquijs recondatur: and iuxta ca^ones quadraginta diebus peniteat sacerdos
cui hoc accidit, vel alias debite satisfaciat ad arbitriu^ co^fessoris
prude^tis.

Si vero super Altar stillauerit Calix sorbeatur stilla, et tribus diebus
poeniteat: Si vero super linteu^, and ad secundum stilla peruenerit, quatuor
die bus poeniteat: Si vsque ad tertium, noue^ die bus poeniteat: Si vsque ad
quar tu^ stilla sanguinis peruenerit, viginti diebus poeniteat: and linteamina
quae stilla tetigerit, tribus vicibus lauet Sacerdos vel diaconus, Calice
supposito, and ablutio cum reliquijs recondatur.

Item, if through negligence any of the blood drop down upon the table that
stycketh fast to the ground, a let the priest lycke up the blood with his
tongue, and the place where it fell, be scraped, and the scraping burnt, b and
the ashes kept about the Altar with the relics. And according to the Canons,
let the Priest do penance forty days, or otherwise let him make dew
satisfaction, at the discretion of a wise confessor.

And if the Chalice drop down upon the Altar, let him suck up the drop, and
do penance three days, c But if the drop fall upon the table cloth, and
run through unto the second cloth, let him do penance four days: and if
unto the third cloth, let him do penance nine days: and if unto the fourth
cloth, let him do penance twenty days. d And let the Priest or the Deacon
wash the clothes, which the drop touched, in three several waters over the
Chalice: e and let the washinges be laid up and kept with the rest of the
relics.

a It is said of the serpent and of the enemies of God, that they should lick
and eat the earth.

b Here again we see, matter of a number of new relics.

c Were it not better to put all the Table-clothes full and whole into the
Shrine? Howbeit in very deed, it would be over chargable so to do, and the
Shrine would never be able to quite the cost.

d Iolie Sir John should not in this case need to carry the past to the oven,
but make a stewe or lie pot of it.

e Why should not this lubberly Sir John have been caused to have drunk of
this? For it is far more likely for him to do it, then to drink up the
washinges of the flies and spiders, and the other vermin, whereof there was a
draught before made, if it pleased the patient to take it and suppe it of.

Of the Pristes which vomit up their God of the mass. CHAPTER XVIII.
ITe^, si quis aliquo casu gula Eucharistiam euomuerit, vomitus ille debet
incinerari, and cineres iuxta Altar debe^t recondi.

Et si fuerit Clericus, Monachus, Presbyter, vel Diaconus, quadragin ta diebus
poeniteat: Episcopus, septuaginta: Laicus, triginta, Si vero ex infirmitate
euomuerit, quinque diebus poeniteat: vel alias, vt supra debite satisfaciat ad
arbitriu^ Confessoris.

ITem, a if any man through surfeiting vomit up the Eucharist, the same vomit
shallbe burnt to ashes, and the ashes, thereof be bestowed and kept about the
altar.

And if any clark, moonck, friar, priest, or deacon do it, let him do penance
forty days; a Bishop, threescore and ten: and a lay man, thirty. But if
any man cast it up, by reason of sickness, let him do penance five days: or
else, let him, as aforesaid, make due satisfaction at the discretion of his
confessor.

a The Eucharist, is here again taken for the host, and Priests God. But
because they think it over strange to say, If any man vomit up the host, or
God, or the body of God, or flesh, they had therefore rather say, the
Eucharist: to wit, the action of thankesgiuinge. And so by this mean they
have not said greathe amiss. For in very deed, they vomit up all the
actions of thanksgiving, which ought to be rendered to Jesus Christ in the
Supper, thorough the horrible blasphemies that they spewe out in their Masses.
But, who is he that is able to abide to hear these their speeches, without
great horror? And besides, after that this most vile and wicked rabble of
Balaamites have thus cast up their most filthy and stinking gorge, then must
forsooth their most pestilent and stinking vomit be shrined, to make thereof a
most detestable relic.

Of the punishment that is to be inflicted upon such a Priest as shall suffer
his God to be either stolen away, lost, or putrified. CHAPTER XIX.
QVi vero no^ been custodit Sacramentu^, ita quod mus, vel aliud animal
comederit, quadraginta diebus poeniteat. Qui aute^ perdiderit il lud, vel pars
eius ce^iderit, and no^ fuerit inuenia, triginta diebus poeniteat. Eadem
poenitentia videtur dignus Sacerdos, per cuius negligentiam putres^unt hostiae
consecratae dictis autem diebus, poenitens debet ieiuna^e, and a co^munione,
and celebratione, abstinere,

Pensatis tamen circu^stantijs delicti and personae, potest minui vel augeri
poenitentia praedicta, secundum arbitrium discreti confessoris.

Non tamen tenendum est, quod vbicunque inueniu^tur species Sacrame^ti
integrae, reuere^ter sume^dae sunt. Quod si sine periculo fieri no^ potest,
sunt tunc pro reliquijs reseruandae,

And a whatsoever priest, shall not saflie keep the Sacrament from being eaten
up, either by myse or any other such vermin, shall do penance forty days. b
But if any lose it, c or if any on piece thereof fall to the ground, and the
same not possibly to be found again: let him do penance thirty days. And it
is also thought good, that that priest, through whose negligence the
consecrated hosts shall putrify is worthy the like penance! And such a
penitent, ought to fast and abstain from the Communion, and saying of Mass,
during all those days.

Nevertheless in waying the circumstances of the offense, and person, the
aforesaid penance ought, according to the will of the discreet confessor, be
either augmented or diminished.

Nevertheless, this is to be holden for a sure rule that wheresoever all the
whole species of the Sacrament are to be found, they are reverently to be
received. But if it cannot be done without peril, then they are to be reserved
for relics.

a Here they take the name of the Sacrament in the self same sense that before
they took the name of the Eucharist, and for one and the self same cause. For
this were toto gross a kind (...) speech, to say that God, or the body of
Go^ (...) or the flesh should be eaten with mise, or such (...) there like
bestiall. Whereupon we are to no (...) that it is requisite for this God to
have a Guard (...) attend upon him, for otherwise he should (...) always in
great danger, or at least, if the py^^^ should not be strongly and fast
locked, to abide the assaults of such valiant Champions. And yet all this,
could not oftentimes, suffice to hold them out.

b It is not a matter of small moment, to lose God.

c This is to be understood when it is broken in pieces, after that the host
divided.

d The consecrated hosts, are Gods made of bread. But a man cannot say that of
them, and of such Jesus Christ's, as it is written of Jesus the true Son of
God, Thou shall not suffer thie holy one to see corruption. Psalm. 16. Marc.
16. Acts. 2. Luke. 24. Matthew. 18.
And again, He is risen, he is not here: again, why seek you the living
among the dead.

e They call the species of the Sacrament, the accidents, without the
substance of bread. Wherefore then should they be so greatly afearde, if
there remain nothing else, but the form and color of bread, without any
substance either of it, or of the body, whereinto it is transubstantiated.

Of the doubtful and vomited Gods of the Mass. CHAPTER XX.
ITem si hostia, vel pars hostiae inuenta fuerit sub palla, vel corporali, et
dubitatur si est consecrata, vel non, debet eam post sumptione^ sanguinis
reuerenter sumere: vt in titulo, de Celebratione Missae before inuenies.

Item, si corpus Domini infirmo datu^, propter infirmitatem, sieve per aliam
qualemcumque causam reijcitur: prout diligentius fieri poterit recipiatur.

Et, si per humana^ fragilitate^ no^ inuenitur, qui reiectionem illam velit
sumere, aut non possit, co^buratur: and combustio in Sacrario reponatur.

ITEM, a if the host, or but a piece thereof, be found under the paten, or
Corporas cloth, and be doubted whether the same be consecrated or not, he
ought reverently receive it after he has taken the blood: as thou shall find
it more at large set out in the title of the celebration of the Mass.

Item, c if the Lords body given to a sick man or woman, be by him or her
cast up through infirmity, or by reason of any other cause: yet let it be
received again as carefully and as speedily as may be.

And if there can be none found that has so good a stomach as to receive that
which the sick body has cast up, the^ let him be burnt, and the ashes kept
in a shrine.

a This instruction is set down for those that be doubtful Gods, to wit, of
such Gods as are doubted whether they are Gods or not.

b This is meant, by the whole or broken Gods which lie hidden under the cover
of the chalice, which they call the paten, or under the fine linnencloth under
which they lay their Gods: and therefore is called the Corporas cloth, because
the body of their God rests him self upon it.

c I will here tell you a tale, for the better understanding as well of this
Cautell, as also of all the rest that follow, which fell out in Ausserre, in
the year a thousand, five hundred, twenty six, upon Corpus Christi day:
which was told me by such men, as are worthy to be believed, because some of
them played a part at that time in that pageant. The tale is thus: There was in
those days an old Friar Iacobin, in the coue^t of the Iacobins of the same
place, who was almost so thoroughly rotten with the pockes, as that he was
ready to fall in pieces. Howbeit I mean here to suppress his name, although
I right well know both his Christen and surname. This fatherly old Sir having
forborne saying of Mass a long time, neither yet having either made or eaten
any Gods a long space by reason of his age and feebleness, meaning to honor
his ioly mealy God upon his own festival day, went to Mass. Howbeit his
stomach was neither able to bear nor yet digest either the body of his God
which he had eaten, or yet the blood of him which he had drunk. Whereupon, as
he thought to return to his chamber, passing through the covent Cloister, it
so fell out, as that he cast his gorge, right before the Chapter door. I will
here leave to your considerations, what drugges he voyded out of the shop of
this miserable rotten pockie stomach, and how this God which he had eaten was
dressed. Hereupon forthwith arose a noise and great affray all the covent over.
And because the Prior was not there, by reason he was gone to preach not far
of, all the rest of the Friars were the more amazed and unprovided of council.
Nevertheless they were at the last advised, after long co^sultatio^, to set
over this holy body, that tabernacle, which they were wo^ted to set over the
sepulchers, when they sing for the dead, and this was done because none should
bestride this holy vomit, or, for that the dogs should not lick it up. For
this was a meet dishe of meat to banquet them withal. And to add more
honor to this holy vomit, there were four wax tapres set at the four
corners of the Tabernacle. After this, the nouices were commanded to sing all
the whole day, this versicle of the Hymn of the said Feast, which begins
thus, Tantum ergo Sacramentum, veneremur cernui, etc. That is to say: Let us
then, enclining and bowing our selves to the ground, honor this so great and
excellent a Sacrament: which was as much to say at that time, as this vomit of
this old fatherly Iakrum: which no doubt, was a very noble and most famous
sacrament. They song also the Antiphone of the same day, which begins thus,
O Sacrum conuiuium, that is to say, O holy Banquet. And in very deed they had
great reason so to sing. For they were worthy to have it, that so honored it.
Howbeit there was not one of them all, that would once taste of it, as holy as
it was: For, after they had thus honored it, they were determined to have some
priest or deacon amongst them, who should slip down this holy ba^quet into
his Gorge, as is their jolly manner and custom, and as the Cautelles, which we
presently have handled, do teach. Howbeit, there was never a Jack of them all
that once durst be so bold and arrogant as to take it in hand, and think him
self worthy thereof: in so much that they all, could never with a better
heart have said, Domine, non sum dignus vt intres sub tectum meum, when as they
mean to eat their God as at that time they said: to wit, Lord, I am not
worthy that thou should come under my house rouse: to wit, to be swallowed
down and lodged in his stomach. Thus here we see, Matthew. 8. Luc. 5.6.
to what sense these blasphemers apply these holy words of this good
Centurion, who spoke unto Jesus Christ. Wherefore seeing they all so utterly
refused it, it behooved them to take some other counsel: that is to say, that
this holy vomit should be reverently shoueld together and gathered up, with the
God in the pyxe, and that the ground whereon he lay, should be carefully and
speedely pared, and so be carried to the church. When they had hereupon
concluded, The Suppriour (whose name I forbear to tell, albeit I right well
know it) put on his holy vestmentes, and anon, all the Friars of the covent went
to church in a solemn procession and two Nouices going before this holy Shrine
with candlestickes and tapres. Which Nouices are presently here with us who can
witness the whole matter. And no marvel though they utterly forsook such a
kind of religion, and such doctrine, when as they had seen the ientle practice
thereof. For who is he that can abide to hear and think of these things,
without great horror? Howbeit who can not but marvel, that all Christendom,
has not been plonged ten millions of times more over head and ears, amongst
whom so horrible and great blasphemies and abominations, have so long
continued, yea even amongst those that were thought to be the very pillars of
the church? For here we manifestly see by these Cauteles, that the practice
hereof has been so common, as that it has been registered in writing. Who
would ever have thought or believed, that Christian people could have fallen, I
will not say into such brutishnes, but into such rage and fury? For, what is
fury and madness, if these be not it? Had they not great reason to persecute
and burn all such as would not give credit to such monstrous abominations,
and worship the vomit of such stinking pocky Iackes? O the goodness of God,
how could thou be so patient, as once to abide such horrible blasphemies,
against the holy majesty of thy son Jesus Christ? But since these abominable
wretches are not contented only not to acknowledge their faults, but that
which is worse, that where as they them selves well deserved to be fleane or
roasted a live, and yet persecuted and burnt such as would not co^se^t to these
grievous wickednesses, are they not well worthy to be manifested to be such as
in very deed they are, even by their own books and deeds? Go to now then,
you my masters the Iacobins, you I say my masters the Inquinatours,
Inquisitours I would have said, of the Faith, Go on I say and stay not to
persecute and burn such as will not worship the Gods, which you and such as
you your selves are, vomit up, and honor them in procession with you. But now
to make an end of this history. After that my lord Suppriour, and all the
whole covent were reuested, and had set them selves in order to go on
processio^, the ground with all speed was pared, and the holy vomit gathered
up, with jolly holy and anointed fingers. Then began some of the Iacobins a
fresh to howl up their notes, and other some of the most hypocritical sort of
them, when they saw this so doleful and pityfull a spectacle began to mourn
and weep. For, this inconvenience greatly troubled their solemn feast. After
that this holy vomit was brought to the church in procession, they fell again
in counsel, to know what should be done with it. Then, some of the auncientest
doctors of the covent were of the opinion, that it should be burnt, and the
ashes of it be put up and kept in a Shrine. For, they thought it better so to
deal with it, the^ suffer it any longer, to rot and corrupt. Wherein they very
well observed and put in practice that which is appointed by this Cautelle.
Now, by this history, every man may the better judge of the rest, and consider
with him self, whether there be any dirtie and filthy dealing in this popish
religion yea or no.

Of the rotten and burnt Gods. CHAPTER XXI.
THe like is of the inuetered Euchariste set down by the concell of Orleans in
the 5. Chapter. Every sacrifice that is cast away through inueteration, is to
be burnt, and the ashes thereof to be bestowed about the Altar.

IDem de Eucharistia inueterata ex Concilio Aureliano, cap, 5. Omne sacrificiu^
sordida vetustate perditum, igne comburendum est, and cinis iuxta altar
co^de^dus.

a The Euchariste and sacrifice are here in this Cautele taken again for the
host and body of Christ. But I beseech you tell me, what the judgment of God
has been upon these Apostles of the church of Antechrist? has there not
fallen a marvelous fury amongst them, when as by their own very councels,
they have established laws, and made decrees and canons for such bald stuff?
They may soon perceive what their Gods are which they keep in their pixe, when
as they them selves can not keep them selves from rottonnesse and corruption.
And therefore what incorruption and immortality may we look for at their
hands? And how may we take these rotten round hosts, for that true lively
bread which came down from heaven, to give life to the world? It is written,
the^ (...) ^euer waxes old: howbeit this God ro^^eth even with very age. But
the worst of all the rest is this, That, after they have suffered him to mo^ld
and rotte, or to be vomited up, they forth with burn him to ashes. Let them
now go to, and dispute as much as they lust, and say also that they burn
nothing else but rottenness, and Accidents without substance. We, will at
this time dispute no more hereof, because we have already, else where spoke
enough of the matter.

Of the Gods, which vermin eat and devour. CHAPTER XXII.
ITem, si corpus Domini a muribus vel araneis consumptum ad nihilu^ deuenerit,
sieve multu^ corrosum fuerit: si integre vermis in eo inue^tus fuerit,
comburatur. Si sine horrore residuu^ praedicto modo corrosum sumi poterit,
tutius est vt sumatur.

Similiter, si quis statim post sumptione^ passus fuerit nauseam, quamuis no^
in ventre^, sed in mentem transeat cibus ille, qui est cibus animae: tamen
propter sacramenti reuerentiam, si ibi aliqua pars Eucharistiae inueniatur,
illa cum reuere^tia sumetur, and vomitus comburatur, and puluis cum reliquijs
reponatur.

ITEM, a If the body of Christ being consumed either by Mise or Spiders,
comes to naught, or be overmuch bitte^, b if the worm lie whole and sound in
it, then let it be burnt. But if the remnaunt that is so bitten, as before said,
may be taken without lothinge, it is a great deal better that it be received.

Likewise, if any man, in contine^tly after the receiving thereof, cast it up
again (albeit this food which is the food of the soul passes away into the
soul and not into the belly) yet, for the reverence that is to be had to the
Sacrament, if there be found never so little a piece of the Euchariste, let it,
be reverently received again, e and the vomiting burnt, and the powder thereof
put amongst the relics.

a O earth, why openest thou not, and swallowest up this horrible blasphemers?
For what a kind of speech call you this. If the body of Christ being consumed
by Mise and Spiders, comes to naught? O you villainous and detestable
blasphemers, what Lords body is it that you speak of? Is it the body of the
Lord Jesus, the very true son of God? does he suffer him self to be eaten of
Mise and Spiders? But you say, that you mean hereby Christ's body, the
species and accidents of bread only, without any substance, and not Christ's
natural body. O bestly and brutish Balamites, do you not see how God makes
you speak, even to the co^founding of your selves by the testimony of your
own mouths, writings, and words, and have entered suit against your own
selves, that it might be a perpetual remembrance in your Mass books, of the
most execrable and cursed blasphemies that ever were heard of on earth,
sithence the world was a world. You, even you your selves at this very present,
expound the^ your selves: for you manifestly declare that your meaning
heretofore, was to signify the same, by these words, Euchariste, Host,
Sacrament, Species of Sacrament, Sacrifice, and such other like: and withal,
you confirm the exposition which you have made of them, to the end no man
should think, that we had done you any wrong. But turn your selves which way
you please; and interpret your body of Christ that is so consumed and eaten
with Mise, Spiders, and Worms, and brought to naught as it likes you best.
And yet if there were none other mischief in all this your hellish divinity,
but your so vnreuerent speaking of the most precious body of our Savior Jesus
Christ, surely, you most horrible blasphemours and most detestable heretics,
are well worthy to fry the hugest and most notable fagots that ever were in the
world. And therefore now make ready your fagots and set them on a light fire,
to burn and roste us withal, because we will not believe in your strange
Gods, and strange Christ's, who suffer them selves to be devoured of vermin,
and perish in their bellies.

b There are some of them that are not contented that the mouse or vermin
which shall be taken with the deed doing, be burnt, but give commandment that
it be first flead and pulled in pieces, and make thereof a fair Anatomy, that
they might pluck out such part of the body as remains vndigest out of the
belly and guts. For, is not this traitorous vermin worthy to be quartered,
as a traitor, and afterward burnt like an heretic?

c This Ordenaunce of burning the vomit, is but to supply the want, if there
be none to be found that will eat it. Which without doubt they are very well
worthy of, to the end it might be truly said of them, and without any manner
of figurative kind of speech, The dog is turned to his vomit again. For,
such dogs, are worthy never to eat any better kind of meat.

Of the sundry sorts of brewing of drinks in the Mass, and what choice is to
be made of them. CHAPTER XXIII.
ITEM, a as concerning the matter of the blood, take heed it be not sharp, or
else so small wine, as that it has no color of wine: neither let it be
reddish water, stained with a cloth that has been died in red wine: Let it
not be vinegre, nor wine utterly corrupt: Let it not be claret wine, nor wine
made of mulberies nor pomegranates: Because they keep not the true color of
wine.

Who soever consecrateth wittingly with wine that is in the way of corruption,
or tending that way, grievously sins, although he consecrateth: because it
keeps not the color of wine.

Item, there must great heed be taken, that but a little water be put into it.
For, if there should be so much put in, as to cause the wine lose his color,
the consecration were of none effect.

ITe^, circa materia^ sanguinis, vide ne sit agresta, vel vinu^ ita debile,
quod nullo modo habeat speciem vini: ne sit aqua rubea, expressa de panno
intincto in vino rubeo: ne sit acetu^, vel vin^i omnino corruptu^: ne sit
claretum, vel vinum de moris, aut malo granatis confectum: quia veram specie^
vini non retinent.

Conficiens scienter, and no^ coactus, cu^ vino quod est in via corruptionis,
vel ad corruptionem te^dens grauissine peccat, licet conficiat: quoniam non
retinet speciem vini.

Ite^, cauendu^ est ne apponatur nisi modicum de aqua. Quia si ta^t^i poneretur
quod speciem vini tolleret, non conficeretur.

a They say, that there are many kinds of pears, wherewith a man may make
wine, to say Mass withal for want of other stuff. And if a man may make wine
of pears, why should there not be wine likewise made as well of mulberies and
pomegranades, and of such other like? Now these poor asseheades greatly
torment them selves about these outward signs, being more careful about them,
then about these things which are signified by the Sacraments. For, this is
all the matter wherewith they busy their heads withal, seeing they have made
of Idols, visible and material signs.

b They needed not, so greatly have tormented them selves, nor yet moved so
many questions about the mingling of water with wine, if they would have stood
to the simple ordenaunce of Jesus Christ. For, seeing that Jesus Christ gave no
such commandment about the mixture of water with wine, what a mockery is this
for them, so greatly to break their brains about the matter? For, how
ancient a custom soever this is, and what soever reason and mystical sense
may be alleged to color this withal, we must always stand upon this sure
ground, That the surest way is, simply to follow the ordenaunces of Jesus
Christ, without adding any thing to them, or diminishing any thing from them.

Of the spilling of the wine and blood, and what is to be done to it, if it be
frosen. CHAPTER XXIIII.
SI ante tra^ssubstantiatione^ effusa fuerit pars vini aliqua, mutetur palla
sub silentio: and si celebra^s officiu^ prosequatur.

Si totum effusum fuerit, mutatis lint^ aminibus ministret denuo and reincipiat
ab. Ha^c igitur oblationem: praemissa tamen confessione.

Si post transsubsta^tiatione^ effusa fuerit pars sanguinis, nihilominus
celebra^s officiu^ prosequatur.

Si totum, quod nihil omnino remanserit (quod est valde difficile) penat super
propiciatorium: and ministret denuo paenem, and vinum and aquam: and reincipiat
ab, Hanc igitur oblationem: etc. confessione praemissa, and sumatur prima
hostia a ministro vel ab infirmo, vel ab alio ad hoc parato.

Si sanguis in calice co^geletur, debet tandiu exhalare desisper, donec
dissoluatur, vel prunas reuerenter apponere: aut e^^ si aliter non valeret,
solidum transglutire.

IF any part of the a wine be spilt before the transubstantiation, let him
change the b vaale, c without any words: and celebrating, prosecute his
office.

If all be spilt, let the clothes be changed, and let him minister it again,
and begin from, This oblation therefore, always provided that he first make
this confession.

If any part of the blood be spilt after transubstantiation, yet let not the
priest cease to do his office.

But if it be all spilt, so that there remain no jot thereof (which were an
hard matter to do) let him lay it upon the Altar, and minister the bread
again, and the wine and water also, and begin again from, This oblation,
therefore, etc. always provided that his Confiteor be first said: and let the
Minister, or sick body receive the first host, or some other that is ready
for that purpose.

d If the blood frese in the chalice (in frostie weather) the priest must
breath over it a good while, e till it be thawed, or with great reverence thawe
it with quick f chare coals: or if it can not so be thawed, let him swallow it
down whole.

a According to their philosophy, they talk very cunningly in these cauteles.
For, before the tra^substantiation, they call the wine, wine: and after the
transubstantiation, they call it blood. For, by that they teach, it is then no
more wine.

b This is it that covers the chalice.

c This is, because no body should see it, that thereby, no occasion of offense
might arise: although it be a far greater offense, to turn wine into blood.

d This manifestly shows, that this blood must needs be very cold when as it
is frosen, and separated from the body. For, blood never friseth in a man's body
except the body be stone dead.

e And by this means the blood shall be twice breathed over.

f It shall be very requisite, by this rekening, that the fire be next with the
blood, as with the body, which was first made and sodden in it between two
hoate irons.

g This may well be called a swallowing down, and yet rather, an eating of
wine: nay rather of blood, because it is no more wine. And therefore if the
priest be choked with it, whenas he thinks to swallow it down, a man may say
that he was choked with the blood of his God. And yet for all our jesting there
is greater danger in it, then we are aware of. For, if Anacreon was choked
with the stone of a grape, and Fabius the pretour with an hair, as he was
drinking of milk, and some others with a f^^e in drinking of water, if a man
shall believe the ancient Histories: must there not needs then (I beseech you)
be great danger in swallowing down an whole piece of ise?

Of the Conclusion of the Cauteles of the Mass. CHAPTER XXV.
ITem, si quae hic desunt, requirantur in Summa and lectura Hostiens. in titulo
de celebratione Missarum: vel melius, In summis modernorum doctorum vtriusque
iuris, and Theologorum.

ITEM, a if there be any other thing apperteining to this matter which is not
here set down, let them be sought for in Hostiensis Breuiarie and Lecture, in
the title, Of the celebration of Masses: or rather in the Summaries of the new
doctors of the civil and Canon laws, and of the Divines.

a There is never a wiseman a live, that would once believe, I will not speak
of the Pastors and guides of Christians, but even of the most sensles people
in all the world, that ever it were possible to think or imagine that there
could be such great mockeries and monstrous absurdities in these jolly
Cautelles, which hitherto we have heard of, if their own books did not set
them down unto us, as sure and certain testimonies. For mine own part, I
would never have believed it, if I had not seen and felt them. Nevertheless,
by the conclusion which is here made, we may easily understand that there are
carte Iodes of them, if all they were set down which the alleged doctors
upon this conclusion, have written on. For, how many questionarie and school
doctors and how many Decretistes and Cannonnistes have bloted their papers
with them? And besides, which of them all has not spoken of them, and bestowed
the greatest part of his time and study, to dispute and write their
resolutions upon these toys, mockeries, frensies and furies? And therefore
that that we have here published abraod is but a short abstract, taken word
for word out of their popish Mass book, whereof we have heretofore spoken:
which these venerable doctors have collected, and thrust into it for the
instruction of their anointed rabble. And because there arise a thousand other
inconveniences, of the absurdities which follow this doctrine of
transubstantiation, which are not comprehended in the same, they send all such
as would understand further of them to the masters of that art. Howbeit we
have of these here, more then a good many. For, there are over many of them to
be drawn out of this there durtie doctrine, able to serve all such as had
rather feed with them, like filthy stinking dogs upon that, which they have
vomited up, then be fed and filled with the true bread of life, and sound
heavenly doctrine. For if there be such an infinite number of mockeries, and
filthy villainous abominations in so small a pamflet, in respect of the great
volumes which have been written of them, what anhorrible thing were it to read
and hear all the blasphemies that are contained in those books? Wherefore,
what so ever he is that would understand any more things of them, and is not
contented to drink of these small streams which issuethence, let him go and
drink his fill at the spring head: What? do I say at the spring head? Nay I
might rather say at these stinking and filthy puddles, the only thinking of
which, is able to make a man cast up, even the very bowels out of his belly.

THE MASS OF THE BODY OF JESUS CHRIST.
How the priest is to make him self ready to go to the saying of Mass, and
what things are requisite for the same. And first of his secret Confession and
Absolution. CHAPTER I.
SEEING we have somewhat largely spoken of the first original, genealogy, and
foundation of the Mass, and of the parts and parcelle^ thereof, and of the
instructions given to the priests, as well to teach them how to play their
parts therein, as also how they may provide, for the inconveniences which might
be fall them in this interlude: it is now he time to set forth the full manner
thereof, wherein a man might see all the whole members set together in one
body: which we promised to do, according to the order of the Mass books,
whereof we have heretofore spoken. Wherefore we inte^d to begin with the
preparation of the person of the priest which must say Mass: in which is
required, that he first say his Co^fiteor, by the appointment of Innocent the
third, and afterward be combed and trimmed: after he has thus done he must
then wash his hands, and in the end reuest him with his holy garnments. I will
not speak of the preparatiue prayers which are specially enjoined him to say.
And therefore we will in the first place speak of his secret confession and
absolution, and see, in what sort that is done, according to the tenor of the
Mass books: and we will besides, set down the exposition afterward, answering
those letters that are marked in the text, Missa. 8. and. 9.
that we may thereby the better declare the abuses and blasphemies, which are
in them.

Praeparatio ad missa^.

Nota, quod volens confiteri peccata sua, debet primo dicere Sacerdoti.

Benedic Pater.

Sacerdos.

Dominus sit in cord tuo et in labris tuis, ad co^ fitendum omnia peccata tua,
In nomine Patris, and filij, and Spiritus S. Amen.

Tunc dicat peccata sua. Quibus dictis dicat Sacerdos.

Misereatur tui omnipotens Deus, etc. Indulgentia^, etabsolutione^, etc.

Meritum passionis Domini nostri Jesus Christi, suffragia sanctae ma^ris
Ecclesiae, bona quae fecisti and quae per Dei gratiam, facies, sint tibi in
remissionem peccatoru^ tuorum

Iniungat poenitetia^, dicens,

Et pro poenitentia spetiali tu dices hoc, and hoc: velfacies hoc and hoc.

Tunc absoluat, dice^s.

Dominus noster Jesus Christus, qui est summu^ Po^tifex, per sua^ pijssima^
miscricordia^ te abs^lua^. Et ego, auctoritate mihi concessa, absoluo te prim^
a sententia minoris exco^muicationis si indigea^ Deinde, absoluo te ab o^ nibus
peccatis tuis: In nomine Patris, and Filij* and Spiritus sancti. Ame^.

The a preparation to the mass.

Here is to be noted, that he which will make a confession of his sins, must
first say unto the Priest*

b Bless me o Father.

The Priest.

The Lord be in thy heart and in thy lips, for the confessing of al thy
sins, In the name of the Father of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. So be
it.

c Then let him make confession of his sins, and when he has so done, let
the Priest say.

The God almighty have mercy upon thee, etc. Indulgence and absolution, etc.

d Let thy sins be forgiven thee through the merit of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the prayers of our mother holy Church, the good deeds which thou have
done, and which thou shall hereafter, by the grace of God, do.

Then let him enjoin him his penance, saying.

And for an especial penance, thou shall say this and this, or do this and
this.

Then let him absolve him saying.

Our Lord Jesus Christ the high Bishop, of his pitiful mercy absolve and
forgive thee. And I, by mine authority, do first absolve thee from the
sentence of the less excommunication, if thou have need thereof. And besides,
I absolve thee from all thy sins, in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost. So be it.

A declaration of the abuse and blasphemies contained in this form of
Confession and absolution. CHAPTER II.
a BEcause the Priest prepares him self to blaspheme God, and renounce Jesus
Christ by the saying of his Mass: he, for the putting him self into a good
estate, for the performing thereof, begins with the most manifest
blasphemies that may be against God and his Christ, to purge him of his sins:
as may appear by the absolution that is given him, wherein, the merit of
Jesus Christ is utterly renounced: as oftentimes has been seen.

b In this confession, there are two persons to play this interlude, the one is
the Confessor, and the other he that is confessed.

c Who is able to fulfill this commandment, to number all his sins? Psalm.
19.
For it is written, who knows all the sins which he has committed? And
therefore David, who spoke these words, besought the Lord to purge him from
his secret sins, because he knew that it was impossible for him to
understand and know them, so far was it of from him as to be able to number
them all.

d The merit of the passion of Jesus Christ is sufficient for us to obtain
pardon and forgiveness of our sins at the hands of God, or else it is not.
Now if it be not, then without all doubt Jesus Christ is not Jesus Christ, to
wit, the very true Savior and Redeemer of the Souls of miserable sinners.
And if he be sufficient, why then do these blasphemers, add in their form
of absolution, not only the suffrages of our mother holy Churh, but also the
good deeds of him that makes his confession: attributing the remission of his
sins as well unto the^, as unto the death of Jesus Christ? What other meaning
have they then herein, but to make Jesus Christ no alone Savior, but only an
half Savior, or the third part of a Savior? And that we obtain not
remission of our sins, only by his death, but partly by it, and partly by
the suffrages of our mother holy Church (which as they term them, are called
works of supererogation) and partly by the good works which we our selves may
do. So that by this mean a sinner shall not be beholden to Jesus Christ, but
for the third part of his salvation, and for the other third part, to the
Church: by which is chiefly meant, the Priests, Monks, and Friars, and that
anointed rabble of shauelinges: and by their suffrages and prayers, and for
the last third part every man is to fetch it out of the shop of his own
works. Thus here we see what honor these abominable blasphemers give unto
Jesus Christ, and what means they use topurge them of their sins, who
confess them selves unto their venerable holiness.

e In this place they take repentance for satisfaction, by which they enjoin
such as they have absolved, that, which they here call, this and this, to wit,
whatsoever shall com in the Co^fessors brain: who therewith again adds
blasphemy upon blasphemy. For, for the first, that, which is enjoined him for
penance, is taken to be a satisfaction for his sins to God ward, which is
again set in the room of the satisfaction of Jesus Christ, or at the least to
each it withal, to supply the want that might be in him, to the end that Jesus
Christ should not have all the honor of being our only Savior, but that one
part thereof might still be atributed to our selves, and to our own merits and
works. Which thing is expressed in that form which is used at Geneua, in this
manner. Pro poenitentia salutari, vos dicetis ter Pater noster, vel facietis
etc. Ista poenitentia and meritum passionis Jesus Christi, and omnia bona per te
facta and facienda tibi valiant ad remissionem omnium peccatorum, etc. That is
to say, You shall say for your penance three Pater nosters, or do etc. Let this
penance, and the merit of the Passion of Jesus Christ, and all the good deeds
which thou have already done and hereafter shall do, be auailable to thee for
the remission of thy sins, etc. And besides, here is a worse thing then all
the rest, That the works which they enjoin the^ to do for such their penance
and satisfaction, are either full of superstition and idolatry, or else
manifest blasphemies, as to babble and patter over certain Pater nosters, and
Aue Mary's, before idols, or else to offer up candels unto the^, to make the^
sing Masses both for the quick and dead, to go on pilgrimage to make the^ buy
bulls, and other such like trash. Here we see after what sort the popish
Church uses to pay and content God, as if a man should satisfy the law, for a
fault that he had committed against the same, in paying the penalty that was
set upon his head by order of law, for his offense.

f Here good Mast Confessor, is not contented to announce to the miserable
sinner which has confessed him self unto him, absolution and remission of his
sins, in the name of Jesus Christ: But speaks like a Prince, as if Jesus
Christ could do nothing without his Mastship, saying, and I for my part, by
mine absolute authority do absolve thee, etc. And the^ forthwith concludes
most blasphemously, In the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, etc. And therein blasphemeth the whole Trinity.

In what sort the Psalms are to be recited, how he must be barbed and
trimmed, and how he must first wash, in preparing him self to go to Mass.
CHAPTER III.
AFter that Sir Swibbersale is thus confessed and absolved, then is he as pure
and clean of all his sins, as is a filthy and stinking conduct pipe through
which runs water that comes from a most stinking and unsavory puddle.
Bern. of the offi^e of the Mass. Nicolas de Plot. Frac. Sacer. de expo. Miss.
And that he may be hereunto the better prepared, he must needs (according to
the Romish guise) ruffle up a long time together, immediately at the beginning,
five Psalms, to wit, the LXXXIII. LXXXIIII. LXXXV. CV. CXXVIII. after the
numbers of their common translation. But here is the best of it, Linus 1.
that these liers make Linus the Author of this Romish order, whom they put in
to be Peter's first successor. Whereupon may be judged, by that which has been
heretofore said, what the workmen were, which have put to their hand to the
forging of the Mass, and what likelihood there is that Linus was he who set
down this apish manner which hereafter we shall see, by the fashion of the
Mass, which shall be set down, after the Popish manner: and chiefly when as
there was not a Mass at that time in use. Other some of them make Damasen and
Jerome the Authors thereof, as has bin already said. But what reason have
they to say, that these men should be the Authors more then any of the rest.
For the barking and iolye gestes which are in this office, manifestly declare
of what antiquity it may be judged to be. Howbeit let us go on with the rest,
and never trouble our selves to think who were the authors of it, Nicolas de
Plo. Frac. Sace. de expos. Miss. Duran. Rat. de off lib 4. Rub. de ca Comp.
because no man is able justly to name them. When he has said over these
Psalms, there is an express ordmaunce set down hereupon: that the Priest
must be barbed and trimmed as smooth as a fritter, and all the straggling hears
of his head taken away, which might fall from it. For it were a dangerous case
to have any of them light in the Chalice, for fear of choking the Priest
therewith, when as he should drink the blood that is in it, as Fabius the
Roman Senator and Praetor was in drinking of a little milk, Plin. lib. 7.
cap. 7.
as elsewhere has been said: and yet they never allege this reason for them
selves, albeit there is a great deal more likely hoode in it then in any that
they have alleged, which reasons, do very well like their spouse and gossip.
But who would have thought that these barbings and trimmings in this interlude,
had bin so necessary instruments to be used at Mass? And yet forsooth they
are, and gru^oded upon every point of their teeth, and that not without iolie
mysteries, and iolie mystical senses also, whereby is signified the purging of
all superfluite, and evil thoughts and imaginations. For there are as many
vile thoughts in the Priests head as there are hairs. And therefore these
blockheaded grooms are well worthy to have their heads barbed and trimmed
with a good big comb. And although this ordinance touches generally all
Mass sayers, yet the simple Priests do not so well obscrue the same in their
Masses, as the Bishops do: Nicolas de Plo. tract. Sacer. de expos Miss. Duran.
Rat. diu. Offic. lib. 4. Rub. de ca. Comp
And therefore I know not whether this use be in all places, as it is at Rome,
and the places thereabout. And it may be that the simple Priests are contented
to be barbed and trimmed at home, because they have no Barbers to furbushe them
so honorably in the Church, as my Lords the Bishops have. Now the common
people do scarce in deed understand, any thing of this secret, and of these
mysteries of barbing and trimming, Duran. Rat. lib. 4 de Cap. Comp. Nicol. de
Plotract. Sacer. de expos. Miss.
unless it be such as have very narrowly looked into all the ceremonies of the
Episcopal Masses. After this fine devise of barbing, follows the first
washing. I call it the first because there are three of them appointed for the
Mass: to wit, that which is immediately at the beginning, in the preparation of
the Priest, at which washinges he eftsoons also washes his face: the second
is in the midst of the Mass: and the third and last, he washes with wine
and no^ with water. And therefore at that time he licketh his fingers: and so
does he not ot any of the rest, howbeit he does that, because he had handle^
the body and blood of his God. Wherefore, it is meet that he should make them
clean, to the end no part thereof should stick to them. Now it is no marvel
although they wash them so often, considering they are so filthy, and so
besmeared over with blasphemies.

Of their holy vestiments, and of the consecration and signification of them.
CHAPTER IIII.
AFter all these preparations, the roge must also put on the masking garments
which are appointed for him, Nicolas de Plo. tract. Sacer. de (...) expos Miss.
Duran. Rat. l^b. 3 Inocen de Offic. Miss. Ber^ard. de Parenti.
for the playing of his part in this interlude (howbeit, there is great
difference between the simple Priests vestimentes, and the Bishops.) For a
Bishop puts on nine, and a simple Priest but six. And for the first, it is
ordained that every one be shod, so that it is not lawful for him that has
vowed to go barefooted, to say Mass vnshodde. For, as they say, the Priest
that says Mass, is likened to a man of war, and a valiant Champion, who
goes to fight with the Devil, in the defense of Christians. And therefore it
is meet that he should be armed and well furnished: for he has to deal with
a dangerous beast. And therefore the first thing that he must put on, must be
hisshooes, in stead of buskins of maile: which as they say, do signify also
the incarnation and humility of Jesus Christ. Is not the humane nature of Jesus
Christ, Nicolas de Plo. de expos Miss. Duran. Rat. lib. 3 Rub. de Calig.
which he took upon him for us, very reverently here honored, as to be
called a shoe, and compared unto it. And because they would yet show them
selves more horrible blasphemers against it, they allege Saint John Baptist
for the author of this iollie mystical exposition, saying, that he so called
it. Does not this deserve burninge? Is there any devil in hell, that is able
more notably to make a ieste of the word of the Lord, and turn it more
villanouslie into a strange sense, then these blasphemers have done? But let
us now leave the feet, and come we to the head, whereon the Bishop wears an
horned Myter in stead of an helmet and Beurgonet, where a simple Priest has
nothing on but his coyfe and a woman's couerchefe: which over and besides this,
signifies also according to their exposition, the wimple wherewith Jesus
Christ his face was covered, Mat. 27. Marc. 15. Luc. 23.
when as the soldiers stroke him, saying, Tell us now thou Christ, who is it
that struck thee? Now, the Bishops in very deed, are a great deal more
worthy to wear the miter, then the simple priests, because it is a toke^ of
infamous and pillary knights, as has been said elsewhere, because they are
more abominable then they. Because they are the men which make the Priests.
And therefore when John Hus was burnt at Constance, because they meant to make
a laughing stock of him, and declare him to be more infamous, they put a paper
miter on his head, whereon two deuilles were pictured, and between them was
written, Heresiarcha, to wit, the Prince of heresy. Thus here we see the true
devise agreeing not only with John Hus, the servant of Jesus Christ, but with
the Bishops miters also, to the honoring of the order of Bishops, with such
honor as belongs unto them. But let us leave now to speak of the Bishops
miters, and of the Priests coifes and kerchefes, and speak of the rest of the
harness of these villanouse Champions. Where good laborers are wonted to cast
of their clothes when they go about their work, for fear they should be to
hoate, the Bishops and Priests do clean contrary, putting garment upon
garment when as they go to work. But here we must understand, that to make an
amends for that, they cast of their clothes when they go to meat: For, there
they intend to play their part in good sad earnest, so that they will eat
till they sweat withal. But here, where they mean to mock God and his
people, they put their mothers smock, which they call an Abue, upon their
gowns, which, as they interpret it, is in stead of a shirt of maile, and
therewith represents the gown which Herod gave to Jesus Christ in a
mockery. For, these pieces of harness join iumpe together. And besides the
girdle wherewith he girdeth his smock, does signify the bow, wherewith,
these Archers serve in this bloody war: and the scourge wherewith they
scourged Christ: and the little cord, wherewith the stole is tied to his
girdle, signifies the quiver wherein to put the Arrows. The stole, that is to
say, the breast plate, which goes about the neck, and is crossed over the
belly like a Saint Andrews cross, as the swaddling bands of young children
are, serves for a lance to shake against the enemy: and also in stead of
the cord wherewith Jesus Christ was bound, when they scourged him. The
manipule, that is to say, the young childs swaddling band, which is put about
his arm as a braselet, is his mace or courtelance: and the cord also
wherewith Jesus Christ's hands were bound. The chasuble is his buckler or
Curate, and the purple garment, wherein Jesus Christ was skorned. The book, is
the sword to fight against the enemy. I mean not a^ this time to speak any
longer of the vestementes and ornaments, which the Bishops have over and above
the simple Priests. Neither will I any longer busy my self in recompting the
sundry expositions, nor yet the diverse, mystical, and spiritual senses,
which the Doctors of the Romish Church set down in their books, for the
interpreting of the mystical significations of these holy reuestiments. For,
there are as many diversities of the^ as their fond brains can dream
dolteries on. It is enough that I have superficially run over the^, as
slightly passing over that which has been already touched, that you might
understand with what furniture, this valiant Champion and Popish knight,
enters into the field to battle, to fight with the Devil, that is to say, to
play his masters prize, and then like a Roge, ef^sones to play the passion.
Wherein he far differs from Jesus Christ, who meaning to wash his Apostles
feet, would put on no more garments then he had at that time on: but rather
put of those which he had on, and sone after offered up him self a sacrifice,
stark naked on the cross. Moreover, we must also understand, that it is meet,
that all this harnes, and all these masking robes must, according to the manner
be consecrated, that is to say coniured and charmed. for if they should not so
do, the devil would never be aferd of the^. But what man is he that would not
sone judge, how fearful they are on the^, when as in this behalf, they se the^
so stra^gely disguised, and so notably armed from top to toe? Surely, they are
so afeard of the^, as that they will not once step a fotoe either from them,
John. 13.19. Nicol. de Plo. de expos. Miss.
or yet from their churches. Now, they make Pope Steue^ the 1. the very author
of the ordinance of the co^secratio^ of these habits: albeit the ordinances
which have bin aleaged under his name concerning this matter, have bin no whit
at all so spoken of, as in his place has bin seen. Neither do I know who were
the authors of so many kinds of weeds. Li Consi.
We read amongst the Canons of the 3. Bracarien counsel which was solemnized
about the time of Pope Vitalien, that by it was ordained: That no Priest should
say mass, or receive the Sacrament without he did were the holy weed, which is
there called oraciu^, and covers both his sholders: but we do not read any
mention made of these which are now rehearsed, neither yet of any of these
foolish toys, nor of so many sundry kinds of disguisings, as at this daywe se
to be in all this Popish church.

Of the prayers which the Priests huddle up, whiles they are apparelling of
them selves, to say Mass, and of the weeds which they put on. CHAPTER V.
THere remains now none other thing to be spoken of, but to see how this
gentle knight puts on his harness, to enter into this fight. Whereupon we
have here again to note, that over and besides the consecration of his masking
clothes, there are yet sacramental words, which the Priest must mumble up in
the teeth, whiles he is in furnishing of him self, and that every piece of his
harnes has his peculiar prayer by it self, that it might be of power to serve
the turn for the which it was ordained. Wherein we may see how they jest, both
with God and with his word. But as the divine office is diverse, according to
the diverse uses thereof, even so likewise ar the prayers diverse, which here we
will presently speak of, and also the application of the harnes and masking
apparel. But let us now hear them mentioned in their own proper and open
language to the end we may the better discover their villainies, and lay the^
so open, as that the very children may understand the^, and beware of the^

Here follow the words which the priest must say, when he apparelleth him
self to say mass first, when he has crossed him self and taken his amict,
Let him say,

Lord, put the helmet of salvation upon my head that I may vanquish and
overcome all the deceites of the devil, In the name of the father, of the
son. etc.

In girdinge him self with the stringes of the amict.

Lord make me clean both in soul and body, to the end I may worthily
pe^forme thy holy work through our Lord Jesus Christ.

In putting on of his Aubes let him say,

Lord put on me the vestiment of salvation, and the robe of righteousness. Or,
enuiron me evermore with the robe of gladness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

In girding him self with his girdle let him say.

Lord girde the reins of mine heart and body, with the girdle of faith, and
quench in me all lecherous humors, and let the love of chastity remain in
me, thorough Jesus etc.

In taking the manuple, let him say.

Almighty God I beseech thee, that I may so deserve to bear my manu^le both
going and weeping with patience, and putting it of with joy, I may with these
take part through Jesus Christ, etc.

VVh^n he puts on his stole, let him say.

Enuiro^ my neck with the stole, which is the yoke of righteousness.

When he puts on his Chesuble, let him say.

Thie yoke and burden, O Lord, are sweet and light, and therefore make me able
to bear them, that I may obtain mercy at thie hands, O Savior of the
world, who live and raignest one God in perfect Trinity, world without
end.

Sequuntur dicenda a Sacerdote, quando se induit ad Missam cele brandam Primo,
signo Crucis facto, accipiendo amictum, dicat.

2 Ponet Domine galea^ salutis in capite meo, ad expugnandas and supera^das
omnes diabolicasfrau des, In nomine patris etc

3 Circu^cu^do se and cin gendo cordulis amicti.

Munda me Domine ab immunditia mentis et corporis, vt digne possim adimplere
opus sanctum tuu^ per Christum Dominum nostrum.

4 Ad albe^ poneda^ dicat

Indue me Domine vestimento salutis, et tunica iustitiae, Vel, and indumeto
letitiae circu^da me sem per, per Christum Dominum nostrum.

5 Ad zonam ponendam, dicat.

Praecinge Domine cingulo fidei lumbis cordis and corporis mei, and extingue in
me omnes humores libidinis, and remaneat amor totius castitatis, per Christum
etc.

Ad manipulu^, dicat.

Te deprecor omnipote^s Deus, vt sic merear manipulu^ deportare, eundo and
flendo cu^ patientia et exultatione defcre^do, vt cum istis portione^ accipia^
per Christum Dominum nostrum.

Ad stolam ponendam.

Stola iugo iustitiae circunda ceruicem meam.

Ad casulam ponenda^

Iugum tuum Domine suaue est, and onus tuu^ leave. Idcirco praesta, vt illud
valeam deportare, quatenus tuam possim misericordiam consequi saluator mundi.
Qui in Trinitate perfecta viuis, and regnas Deus, per omnia secula seculorum.

A declararation of the things aforesaid. CHAPTER VI.
a WE have oftentimes spoken of the sign of the cross which they make in
saying Mass, whereunto they attribute great power, as else where has been
said.

b Is not this a marvelous mockery, nay rather intolerable blasphemies to
apply that, unto masking stuff and foolish toys, which S. Paul writes,
Ephesians. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
of the true Spiritual armor, wherewith every true Christian ought to be armed,
against the assalts of Satan? And in stead of the salvation and hope, which we
have in Jesus Christ, which hope S. Paul gives us for an helmet: these
blasphemers set before us a coife and a woman's kerchefe: for that is it which
they mean by the Amict. The use of sense and reason, is taken for the yoke
and burden of the Lord. But because others, place the Chesuble in stead
thereof, we will speak of it in his due place.

c There is not so small a string that is tacked to this Amict, which has not
great mysteries in it.

d S. Paul gives to arm the breast withal, the curate or breast plate of
righteousness, faith, and charity: And the Priest in stead thereof, takes a
woman's smock that traileth on the ground and is tucked up above the girdle
stead, to make large pockets both before and behind: as little boys make of
their shirtes in summer season, to carry pears, apples, nuttes, and such
other like fruit in.

e S. Paul says, Ephesians. 6. 1, These. 5.
Stand steadfast therefore having your loins girt about with the girdle of
truth And the Priest, in stead of this girdle which is an arming girdle
serving for the spiritual battle, takes a girdle made of a cord: by which
also is signified the chastity that ought to be in them: which they have so
slipperly tied up, as that it is far enough of them.

f Where S. Paul makes faith the buckler, Ephesians. 6.
and the word of God the sword, the Priest takes here a bend, for a bracelet
and gauntlet. And besides, where the children and servants of God, which
suffer here in the world for the name of the Lord, and do afterward greatly
glad the^ selves in their deliurance, and receive with great joy, the fruit of
their tribulations: and after that are greatly comforted in the harvest time,
bringing home with them their hands full of corn, and other fruits of their
trauelles: The priests in like sort, who have taken great pains to sow for
Jesus Christ, bring home with them also out of their harvest, some pretty
childs string wreathed about their arms, which they call a Maniple, that is
to say, an handful of corn, that their harvest might be according to their
seade time. Is not this good stuff to be put in?

g The Stole, takes the name of Stola, which, both in Greek and Latin, does
signify, a long robe, especially of a woman. We have already interpreted in
what sense this Stole is taken in this jolly interlude. Some of them take it
for a robe of righteousness, and other some for, a yoke. Galat. 6.
In stead of Jesus Christ the true robe of righteousness, wherewith all they,
which are truly baptized in him, are clothed, the priest takes this breast
plate, for an horse that should draw in a carte, or carry a sadle.

h Jesus Christ says, come unto me all ye that are heavy laden and I will
refresh you. Take my yoke upon you, for it is easy and light. Matthew. 11.
By these words, he would have every man submit him self to his discipline,
and acknowledge him for their master, and come to him for succor and aid.
And in stead hereof, the priest puts on this Gew Gawe, and slitted garment,
which they call a Chasuble, into which he puts his head through an hole, as
a partridge puts his head out of a cage. M. G.
Here is a jolly yoke of Jesus. Other of them do take it for a Shirte of Maile
or Brigandine. Lo, now here you see good Maste whip point de vise, armed cape
a pie, to enter the listes, and disguised to lead his base daunse, and play his
part. But before he puts on his Chasuble he must needs make and co^iure
his holy water, in his long smock, like a Grape treader, every time he makes
it, whether it be in winter or summer, so it be on the Sunday, and the Mass
parrochiale. Now we will speak no more of the coniuring and sprinkling about
of this holy water, Alexander 5.
by reason we have handled this matter else where. Neither will we make mention
of going of procession about the church, Agapetus 1.
which Agapetus ordained, as has heretofore been said. Thus we see how master
Curate begins to give the assault to the table, upon which he intends to
break his fast, and play a cast of legier de maine.

Of the division of the office of the Mass, and first of that part which is
called the Preparation, and of the coming of the priest to the Altar. And of
the confession which he makes before it. CHAPTER VII.
ACcording to the exposition of the doctors of the Mass, Nico. de Plou. de
expo. Mis.
we may divide the office thereof into six parts. The first is called the
Preparation, and that lasts from the beginning until he come to the Epistle.
The second, is called the Instruction, and that dureth unto the Offertorie. The
third, is called the Oblation, and continues unto the Preface. The fourth, is
called the Consecration, and lasts unto the Lords prayers. The fifth, is
called the perception of the Sacrament, and dureth unto the communion. The sixth
is called the Actio^ of thankesgeuing, and continues unto the end. Now we
will show you the reasons why they are so named, when as we shall enter into
the particular interpretation of every of them. The beginning the^ of the Mass
is called the Preparation, because it is put in for the prayers which the
ancient Church made, that thereby, the ministers thereof might be as well
prepared to the preaching of the word of God, as the hearers to hear and
receive it with fruit and edifying. And there is a form of public confession.
There are also prayers, and singing of Psalms. But let us see how the form
and manner of the ancient Church is here turned vpside down, and what
blasphemies are used amongst this stuff. And to the end that every man might
the better remember the names of the authors, to whom the pieces, that are
eeked to the Mass, are attributed, according to that discourse which has been
made of it, we will set them down in the margin, in the behalf of every of
them, and shall be marked with the lettres of the alphabet. And whersoeuer any
one ordenance shall be attributed to many, I will set down one lettre for all.

a The priest being thus, prepared, Miss. G. and R*
let him approach the Altar, saying the 43. Psalm.

Damascen.
Judge me o God, etc.

Unto the end, with.

Glory be to the Father.

Then must he repeat the versicle

Damascen.
And I will go, d unto the Altar of God, unto that God which gladdeth my
youth.

The versicle.

e Confess your selves unto the Lord because he is good.

The answer.

For his mercy endures for ever. Pontien.


f And I sinful and unworthy priest confess my self unto almighty God,
and to the blessed virgin Marie, and to all the Saints, and to you my
brethren: because that I miserable sinner, have greatly sinned against the law
of my God, in thought, word, deed, and by negligence, and that through mine
own default, my fault, my grievous default, g and therefore I beseech Marie,
the most blessed mother of God, and all the men and women Saints of God and
you my brethren, to pray for me wretched sinner unto the almighty Lord our
God, to have mercy upon me.

h When he has thus made his confession, with a lowly bending down of
himself, let him so stand still, until such time as the rest have answered.

The Clerks shall say, Amen.

i Misereatur, etc.

Paratus sacerdos accedat ad altar, dicendo Psalmum 43.

Celestine.
Iudica me Deus, etc.

Totum cum

Damascen.
Gloria patri.

Et postmodum repetat versum

Et introibo ad altar Dei: ad Deu^ qui laetificat inuentutem meam.

Versus.

Confitemini^ domine quoniam bonus.

Respons.

Quoniam in seculum misericordia eius.

Damascen.
Et ego reus and indignus sacerdos co^fiteor Deo on^ nipote^ti, and beatae
Marie virgini and omnibus sanctis eius, and vobis fratres: quia ego miser
peccator peccaui nimis co^tra lege^ Dei mei, cogitatione, locutione, opere and
omissione, mea culpa, mea culpa, mea grauissima culpa. I. deo deprecor
beatissimam Dei genetrice^ Maria^ and omnes sanctos and sanctas Dei, and vos
fratres orare pro me peccatore apud dominum Deum nostrum omnipotentem, vt ipse
misereatur mei.

Et sic facit co^fessione^ inclinatus profunde, and sic stet, donec respo^sum
fuerit ab alijs.

Clerici respondent Ame^.

Misereatur, etc.

Of the things that are to be considered, upon this entree and public
confession of the priest. CHAPTER VIII.
BEcause others have more at large and more particularly and plainly, handled
those places of the holy Scriptures which are here alleged, showing how ill
they are applied, and how they mock and blaspheme God, I will the lightlier
pass them over, and stay the longer upon the rest of the points, which may be
ouerslipt.

a Seeing the priest is thus in his own person prepared, to go to the Altar,
I will first of all demand of him, whether he used this Altar, which is here
spoken of, Hebr. 13.
after the manner of the Ieweish or Heathnish aultars. For, Christians, have no
material aultars, but only this spiritual Altar, whereon, it is not lawful
for the^ that serve in the Tabernacle, or that be still Ieweish, to eat, and
therefore much less for the^ that follow the heathen: as they herein do, which
are of the Romish church declaring them selves thereby, to be either very
Jews, or very Heathen, or else both: onelesse happily they mean not to take
the name of Altar, for such an Altar as they sacrifice upon for the
redemption of souls, as they say they do, when they are at Mass: but for the
Table whereon the supper is celebrated, and whereon they give thanks to God
(which are the very true sacrifices of praise) in that sense which the ancient
Fathers took the name of Altar, when as they speak of the Sacrament of the
Supper, which upon that occasion was called, the Sacrament of the Altar.

b If that which has been now said of the Altar, Psalm 43.
be well understood, it is an easy matter to judge, for what purpose this
Psalm is here set down, and the reason thereof.

c It was ordained in the 2. Council of Laodicea, La. Council.
that many of the Psalms, and their versicles, should not be confounded one
with an other: but be rehearsed in the self same form and manner as the
servants of God made them. Which ordenance they of the popish church do worse
observe in the Mass, then in any other place. For, either they confound pele
mele for every purpose, many of the versicles which are taken out of the
Psalms, as if they would make neither rhyme nor reason of them, or else they
divide a Psalm, and take out of it certain versicles which they mingle and
remingle, and so rehearse them to no purpose, and without all reason, as easily
may be judged, by the sight of this manner which is here used in their Mass.

d I my self knew once a parish priest, who never understood: either yet was
able to pronounce, this Introibo, but always said, Et introibo adtartara Dei:
that is to say, I will go into the hell of God. In which saying, he deceived
not him self much. For, to take the Altar in that sense, which they of the
popish church, here take it, and to do that which they do in it, is in very
deed the hie way to hell: for as much they forsake Jesus Christ upon it, by
whom only we are to be delivered thence. And therefore there is good cause,
why the priest looks downward, bowing him self to the ground, as a man that
had quite and clean forgotten heaven, yea and his own nature also wherein God
created him, and as if he were become a very beast, touching his smeller
downward, according to the manner which the Poet here writes of, Ovid. Meta.
lib. 1.
and in the same sense as it is here set down in English.

And though that every living thing
His eyes to ground is made to cast
Yet God, man's face has set shining
A lofte to look, on heaven to taste
That he might well perceive and see,
His dwelling place, on hie to be.
But this our master Ass driuer, leaves looking up into heaven, and stoupeth
to the ground, whereof he is more careful, then of heaven. But if he did this
in humbleness of mind and contritenesse of heart for his sins, as the
miserable Publicane did, there were great reason in it. But I think him far
enough of from that.

e This versicle is taken out of another Psalm, and not out of the former,
which manifestly conteruaileth the confession that the priest anonafter makes.
Psalm. 136.
For where the Prophet exhorts the people of God, to praise the Lord, and
give him such thanks as belong unto him (which the word, Confess, signifies
in the holy Scriptures) he addresseth him self unto another, them unto God.

f David says, Against thee alone have I sinned. I have said, Psalm. 31.
I will confess my unrighteousness unto the Lord, against my self: and thou
forgauest the iniquity of my sin. But here, the priest confesses him self,
to all the men and woman saints. For he thinks it not enough to confess him
self to God alone, with whom all the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles were
very well contented.

g But the worst of all the rest is this, that when he craves pardon in his
confession, for his sins, he never once makes mention of Jesus Christ, to
beseech him to be his Advocate unto his Father to help him: But only of the
virgin Marie, and of the men and women Saints. Which is too gross a
blasphemy against the office and benefit of Jesus Christ, 1. Tim. 2. 1. John.
2. Romans 8.
unto whom, the only office of Mediator and Advocate apparteineth.

h This low stowping, makes a jolly show of a penitent person.

i The clarke which helps the priest to Mass, absolueth the priest, as well
as the priest absolueth him anon after. And therefore it is, that they confess
them selves one to an other. But here is all the difference that is between
them, that the Misereatur which the clarke and the rest that help him at Mass
do pronounce to the priest, is said in the singular number, because it is
spoken particularly to the priest.

Of the confession and absolution as well of the clerks which help him at
Mass, as of those which are also at the hearing of it, and of the absolution
which the priest gives them, and of the prayers which he says before he
comes to the Altar and of the iestures, gapinges and gaspinges of his mouth,
and wreathinges which he must there make. CHAPTER IX.
ET post confiteor, assistentium, dicat Sacerdos.

Ame^, fratres and sorores, per misericordiam Domini nostri Jesus Christi, per
auxilium and signu^ sanctae crucis per intercessione^ beatae and gloriosae
semperque virginis Mariae, and per merita beatoru^ Apostoloru^ Petri and Pauli,
beati Michaelis archa^geli, beatiss. Iuliani, and omniis sanct. and sanctaru^,
misereatur vestri omnipote^s Deus, and dimittat vobis omnia peccata vestra, and
perducat vos Jesus Christus filius Dei ad vita^ aeternam, Amen. Indulgentiam
and absolutionem and remissione^ omnium peccatorum vestrorum, tribuat vobis
pius Pater and misericors Dominus, Amen. Et gratia S. Spiritus paracleti
illuminet sensus, corda and corpora nostra, and emundet nos a vitijs and
delictis omnibus, Amen.

Adiutorium nostru^ in nomine Domini, Qui fecit caelu^ and terram. Sit nomen
Domini benedictum: Ex hoc nunc and vsque in seculu^. Ora pro nobis sanctissima
Dei genitrix. Vt digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi. Domine exaudi
orationem meam: Et clamor meus ad te veniat. Dominus vobiscum: Et cum spiritu
tuo. Oremus.

Inclinando se ante altar dicat submissa voce Sacerdos.

Auser a nobis Domine, cu^ctas iniquitates nostras, vt ad sancta sanctoru^
puris mereamur mentibus introire, Per Christum Dominum nostrum.

Postea dicat secreto adhuc inclinatus.

Oramus te Domine, per merita sanctoru^ quoru^ reliquiae hic sunt, and omniu^
sanctoru^, vt indulgere digneris omnia peccata mea. Amen.

Quae completa erigit se, and manus super altar deponens, osculatur altar:
accipiensque thuribulum (si sit Missa solennis festi duplicis) a Diacono, a
incensat altar, and reddito thuribulo diacono, osculando patenam, dicat,

6 Adoramus te Christ and benedicimus tibi. Quia per sanctam crucem^uam
redemisti mundum. Qui passus es pro nobis, Domine miserere nobis. Oration.
Respice quae sumus Domine, super hanc familiam tuam, pro qua Dominus n^ster
Jesus, Christus non dubitauit manibus tradi nocentium and crucis subire
tormentum, Qui tecum viuit and reg.

ANd a after that the assistantes have said their Confiteor, let the priest say.

Amen, Brethren and sisters, that by the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, Miss.
G.
by the aid and sign of the holy cross through the intercession of the
always blessed and glorious virgin Mary, and by the merits of the holy
Apostles Peter and Paul, and of Saint Michael the archa^gell, and of the most
holy Saint Julian, and of all the holy men and women, the God almighty have
mercy upon you and forgive you all your sins: and I do further beseech the
Lord Jesus Christ the son of God to bring you to everlasting life. Ame^. I do
also moreover beseech our good Father and Mercyful Lord to pardon and forgive
you al your sins. Ame^. And the grace of the holy Ghost the comforter,
enlighten our minds, hearts, and bodies, and cleanse us of all our sins and
iniquities. Amen.

Our aid is in the name of the Lord, who has made both heaven and earth.
Blessed be the name of the Lord our God, from henceforth for evermore. Most
holy mother of God pray for us: That we may be made worthy of the promises of
Christ. Lord, hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee. The Lord be with
you, And with thy spirit. Let us pray.

c Let the priest in bowing him self before the Altar, say whisperingly.

Lord take from us all our iniquities, that our spirits being purified, we may
deserve to enter into the holy of holy ones, through Christ Jesus our Lord.
Then stowping, let him secretly say,

We beseech thee, o Lord, through the merits of the Saints, whose relics
we here have, and through the merits of the rest of the Saints, to forgive me
all my sins. Amen.

And when he has done all these things, let him lift up him self, and laying
his hands upon the Altar, kiss it, and if it be a solemn mass by reason of
the double feast, let him take the censour out of the deacons hand, a Leo 3.
and cense the altar therewith, and giving the deacon the ce^sor again, kiss
the paten and say,

We f worship and bless thee, o Christ, because that through thy holy cross
thou have redeemed the world. Thou o Lord which have suffered for us have mercy
upon us. The prayer. We beseech thee, o Lord, to look upon this thy family,
for ye which our Lord Jesus Christ refused not to be betrayed into yt hands of
the wicked, and abide the torment of the cross, Who lives and reigns with
thee, etc.

Of the blasphemies that are both in this Absolution as also in all these
prayers, and of the Sepulchers and relics which are buried in the Aultars.
CHAPTER X.
a HEre is to be understood, that after the priest is confessed, as we have
heard, and absolved as well, as the clarke is able to absolve him, his clarke
and they which help him at Mass, make likewise their confession, and the^ he
also absolueth the^, in such manner and order as here is set down: although
therein be some diversity, according to the several vsages. Now, there is
almost never a word wherein are not as many blasphemies as there are sundry
vsages, especially, for so much as, the honor which apperteineth to Jesus
Christ alone, is not only given to men and women Saints, but also unto the
sign of the cross. And so much as concerns the men and women Saints who
chiefly are named as well in the confession as in the absolution, we are to note
that therein is neither certain number, nor yet order. For, every of them
puts in whom soever pleases them, but especially their Patrons, and such as
they have a most singular devotion unto. It is easily also, by this form and
manner, to be judged, that this interlude is not fit to be played, without there
be more then one person with the priest at Mass: because it is an interlude
that requiteth many.

b After that this blasphemour has disgorged a cart loode full of blasphemies
against God, he then calls upon him for help: and forthwith he again
returns to blaspheme both him, and the virgin Mary also, calling upon her in
stead of Jesus Christ. Hereby we may understand, that a man may judge of what
soever is in the Mass, that is taken out of the holy Scriptures, seeing it is
entermedled with as infinite a number of blasphemies, as good and wholesome meat
is entermedled with poison. Wherefore, it is so far of that that which
seems to be good, is not there made any whit the better, but rather become a
great deal more detestable, for so much as the word and name of God, and of
the men and women Saints are therein more profaned and blasphemed. And again,
we se moreover what a mixture of sundry pieces is here heaped up together to
and fro without any judgment in the world, and without following any one
certain text of any certain matter.

c Why has the priest here a commandment to buzze the two prayers ensuing
softly and secretly? For this is manifestly against the Statutes and decrees of
the council of Basile, by which is ordained that the priests are to be
reproved and corrected which say Mass with secret prayers, and so low vowed,
as that they which are present and about them, cannot hear what they say: By
which also all they are condemned, who either mumble up or curtall their words
either in their Mass or canonical Hours, and do not so distinctly pronounce
the^, as that every one may well understand what they say. For if these prayers
whereof we now speak be such as in deed they ought to be, why the^ pronounce
they them not rather a loud that every man may hear them, the^ mumble them up
in their teeth as they do? Especially seeing they pronounce the^ not
particularly to the^ selves, but generally to all those which are at Mass, to
the end that all they might be also comprehended and wrapped, within the
horrible blasphemies in the^ contained? Wherefore it is no marvel though he
mumble the^ up secretly, as if it were a charm, and stowp down with his head
and back, still looking to the ground: for he is not worthy to lift up his
head to heaven stained it with such blasphemies. For, as for the first point,
that which is called Sa^cta Sa^ctoru^, that is to say, the holy of holy ones,
whereof he speaks, to go into, is not the same which God ordained by Moses,
Exodus 30.
amongst the Israelites: for, that is clearly abolished ^y the coming of
Jesus Christ, who has perfited that, Heb. 8.9.10.
whereof it was a figure. Neither is it that, whereinto Christ Jesus went, which
is heaven. And God ordained none other but these two. Whereupon must needs
follow, that that place whereof the priest, here makes me^tio^, is inverted and
devised by me^ and the devil together, and an hellish Sa^cta Sa^ctoru^. And
therefore looks he down to the ground, whereby he declares that he seeks
not after Jesus Christ, Coloss. 2.
who sits in the heavens at the right hand of God his father, and requires
likewise that he may go into it with his merittes, with all those that are at
Mass with him. For there is never a man that has deserved more to go into
hell, and into the infernal sanctuary of Satan, the^ he: And there is none
other mean to go into the sa^ctuary of Jesus Christ, which is heaven, save
only by his merits, whereof there is no more mention here made, then in the
prayer following, wherein he craves not only pardon for his sins of all the
Saints in general, but especially of those, whose relics are in the place
where he him self is, as if in them were more virtue, then in any of the rest.

d And as for the relics which are here spoken of, we are to remember what
was said heretofore, of the churches which were built in such places as the
sepulchers, relics, and commemorations of the Martyrs were. And because that
many Aultars and chapelles were here and there built and set up a broad in the
country, there to celebrate the remembrance of the Martyrs: soon after that
this custom was received, it was ordained by the first Council of Carthage,
Ex Libr. Con.
solemnized about the days of Pope Anastase that the Bishops might pull down,
all the Aultars and chappelles, that should be set up in any places where
before time had not been, some sepulchers, relics, houses, places of resort,
or some memorial of the Martyrs: or if they could not do it without moving of
some commotion, yet that they might at the least, forbid all Christians to
haunt any such places. And for this cause was it afterward ordained by the
Council of Epanuense which was solemnised in the time of Gelasius the first,
Ex Lib. Con.
that no Altar except it were of stone, and had also some relics of the
Saints, should be anointed and consecrated with Cresme. And because they could
not find places ynow wherein to set up so many churches and aultars as they
would, they were feign to borrow them in other places, or else make and
counterfeit them as they lusted. Wherefore it is enough for them at this
present, to put into the bowels of the Altar when it is consecrated and
dedicated, in at an hole which is made in the midst thereof, called by them a
Sepulcher, the smallest pieces of relics that may be, locked up in some pretty
coffer, with three graynes of frankincense. And it is out of all doubt, that
they may call this hole, a Sepulcher: because forsoothe it is made to represent
the Sepulchers of the Martyrs, for, they are not there in deed, but by
imagination, as those which the Heathen made, called Cenotaphion, because they
were empty, and had no bodies buried in them. And to the end that these
sepulchers should not seem to be altogether in vain, they make men believe
that they have put certain pieces of relics into them. But the Lord knows
and sees what great deceit is in them, and what relics they thrust into
them. We that have seen these abominable Aultars pulled down, can testify
what great villains have been found within these sepulchers of the Aultars,
and what notable knaueries have been discovered in these jolly works. But our
adversaries will not believe us herein, because they think us to be parciall:
howbeit we have no such meaning, for, they them selves may see it by
experience as well as we, and may also testify and understand whether we lie or
say true. But admit that these were the very true relics of the Martyrs,
yet shall they be never able to excuse them selves of the Idolatry and
blasphemies which they commit in these things.

e It is no marvel although this Shaueling, kiss the talbe whereon he means
to break his fast, and his paten, and sawcer also, and that he likewise makes
strong parfumes: for these things I tell you make him both fair and fat.

f And therefore this is the Christ which he worshippeth: that is to say, the
table and the sawcer. And in some places he kisseth also the feet of the image
of the ctucyfix which is in his Mass book, whereof we intend to say somewhat,
when as we come to the Canon.

Of the Introite, Kyrie eleyson, and Gloria in excelsis Deo. CHAPTER XI.
IN the entree into the Mass, Miss. G.
let the priest say,

Our help is in the name of the Lord, who has made both heaven and earth.
Blessed be the name of the Lord, from henceforth for evermore. In ye name of
the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. So be it.

Afterward, Miss. R. Celestine 1.
let him read the Greg. 1. Pontien 1. Damasc.
Introite of the Mass, his hands being a sunder, and lifted up a little.

Here follows the Mass of Corpus Christi Feast.

The Introite.

Thom. Aqui. Urban. 4.
HE fed the^ with the finest of the wheat praised be God: and filled them with
the honey of the rock, praise God, praise God, praise God.

The Psalm.

Rejoice you in God our aid, be glad in the God of Jacob. Con. Vas.


The Versicle.

Greg. 1. Con. Vas.
Glory be to the father. etc, Then let him begin and say again

He fed them. etc.

Then must he say,

Lord have mercy, iij. Christ have mercy, iij. Lord have mercy, iij.

f Then let him go to the midst of the altar, and bowing him self a little g
and if it be to be said, let him say.

Gloria in excelsis deo. etc.

And here is to be noted, that at every morrow mass he must always say.

Te Deum laudamus, Te Dominum. etc.

Without it be said upon any Saints even, in lent, or on the ember days,
Nevertheless there is said upon Easter and whitesonne even, accordinglye as
is set down in the black letter.

Glory be to God on high, and peace on the earth, good will toward men, we
praise thee, we bless the, we worship thee, and glorify thee, we give
thanks for thy great glory, Lord God heavenly King, God the Father Almighty:
Lord Jesus Christ the only son.

h The holy Ghost the comforter of the fatherles.

Lord God lamb of God, Son of the Father.

The first begotten of Mary, the virgin mother.

Thou, which take away the sins of the world have mercy upon us. Thou
which take away the sins of the world receive our prayers.

To the glory of Mary.

Thou which sit at the right hand of the father have mercy upon us. For
thou only artholy.

Sanctifying Mary,

Thou only art the Lord.

Which gouernest Mary.

Thou only art the most high.

Which crownest Mary.

Jesus Christ, with the holy Ghost, in the glory of the Father. So be it.

INtroitu Missae, dicat sacerdos,

Adiutoriu^ nostru^ in nomine Domini, Qui fecit caelum and terram. Sit nomen
Domini benedictum, Ex hoc nunc and vsque in seculu^. In nomine Patris, and
Filij, and Spiritus sancti. Amen.

Deinde perlegat Greg. 1. Pontien 1. Damasc.
introitu^ Missae disiunctis and paru^per eleuatis manibus.

Sequitur Missa in Festo corporis Christi.

Introitus.

Thom. Aqui. Urban. 4.
CIbauit eos ex adipe frumenti, Alleluya: and de petra melle saturauit eos:
Alleluya, Alleluya, Alleluya.

Damase. Conc. Toll. Siluester. 1.
Psalmus

6 Exultate Deo salutarinostro: Iubilate Deo Jacob.

Versus.

Damase. Conc. Toll. Siluester. 1.
Gloria patri, etc.

Deinde repetat, Cibauit eos ex adipe, etc

Deinde dicat.

Greg. 1. Con. Vas.
Kyrie eleyson, iij. Christ eleyson, iij. Kyrie eleyson, iij.

Postea vadat ad medium Altaris, and facta mediocri inclinatione, fi sit
dicendum, dicat.

Gloria in excelsis Deo

Et nota, quod hoc semper in missa dicitur quando in matutinas dicitur.

Te Deu^ laudamus, etc.

Nisi celebretur de vigilia alicuius sancti, vel nisi sit in quadrage. vel in
iiij tem. Tum in Vigil. Pasc. and Pentec semper dicitur vt sequi ^ur in nigro.

Gloria in excelsis Deo, and in terra pax hominibus bonae voluntatis. Laudamus
te, benedicimus te, adoramus te. Gratiam agimus tibi propter magna^ gloria^
tua^. Domine Deus Rex caelestis, Deus Pater omnipotens. Domine fili vnigenite
Jesus Christ,

Spititus and alme, orphanorum paraclete.

Domine Deus, agnus Dei, filius Patris.

Primogen^tas Mariae virginis matris.

Qui tollis peccata mu^di, miserere nobis. Qui tollis peccata mundi, suscipe
deprecationem nosiram.

Ad Mariae gloriam.

Qui seeds ad dextera^ patris, miserere nobis. Quo niam in solus sanctus.

Mariam sanctificans.

Tusolus Dominus,

Mariam gubernans.

Tusolus altissimus,

Mariam coronans.

Jesus Christ, cum sancta Spiritu in gloria Dei Patris, Amen.

The things that are to be noted and considered of, upon these od remnantes
before mentioned. CHAPTER XII.
a IN the first pitching and setting of this dance. the head and back are
they which play the chiefest part. And by and by after the hands, and eftsoon
the feet. Nicolas de Plode expos. Miss.
Whereupon we are here to note that when the Queresters begin to sing the
introit, the Priest which does the office, must come out of the Reuestrie, in
his players weeds to play his part. They say that this signifies Jesus Christ
coming out of the womb of the Virgin, as a bridegroom that comes out of
his chamber. For questionless this tricksie Sir John, is a pleasant
bridegroom, and ioly minion, apparelled and garnished like a comely paramour to
go to a wedding

b See here what a ioly entry he makes. He has fed the^, says this gentle
Sir John, and his queresters also sing the very same introite, very
chauntingly. But what is this food, and those whom it does feed? Forsooth the
food which David spoke of, Psalm. 81. Deuteronomy. 32.
which God gave unto the children of Israel according as Moses in times past,
had written of: these ioly scoffing mates, liken it to the banquet which they
make in their Mass, and to their God which they eat in it. Wherein they have
no whit said amiss. For, to say truly, this is a God which thoroughly feeds
the^ with the pure finesse of the wheat, and with all sweet, pleasant, and
delicate food. For, if there be any good and pleasant dish to be had in all the
world, it is kept for their kitchen and board. I remember that when we were
yo^g boys, we were told, because we should be the more desirous to study, that
we might be made Priests, that when we were Priests we should eat white
bread. But because this introite is a sentence gelt out of a Psalm, it has no
full sense with it. Neither is it taken in this place, in such sense as it is
set down in the Psalm. Wherefore if we will expound it, and give it the most
fit sense to the matter wheru^to it is applied, we may thus interpret it, He,
that is to say, the caky God of the Mass: has fed them, to wit, the
Priests: with the finesse of the wheat, and honey of the Rock: that is to
say, very fat, with the best and most delicate food. And therefore have they
so great a mind, and are always so ready to sing double and treble Alleluyas,
which are meary and pleasant notes. For this I tell you is no melancholique or
sad feast. And for this cause are all the streets strewed over with herbs,
flours, and green boughs, and behoong with Arras and tapestrie, and withal
the brauest ornaments that may be hanged abroad, and especially, when this
iolie white God is carried about on procession, he is then accompanied with
notable musical instruments, with goodly tapers and torch staves: and both he
him self, and they which bear him, and as many as accompany him, are
received with marvelous pleasant pastimes, enterludes, morisdaunces, and with
all the sports that may be devised: and this is to make him amends for the
straight imprisonment which he endures all the rest of the year.

c In this sort put they this versicle in practice which is taken out of the
self same Psalm, Psalm. 81 Ex lib. Council.
that the introit is taken out of, saying, Rejoice and be glad, etc. For, this
is their God and aid: whom they thus vainelye, like worldlinges, mock,
clean contrary to the Canons and decrees of the Council of Affrike, which
was celebrated about the time of Boniface the first, and of the third Council
of Toledo, celebrated in the days of Pelagius the 2. and of the Council of
Basil: which forbad daunsing, morisdaunces, enterludes and plays upon
festival days, and chiefly in churches.

d The causes why in times past, the Gloria patri was ordained to be said, and
song, at the end of every Psalm, does manifestly appear amongst the Canons
of the second Vasensian Counsel, which was holden after the days of Leo the
first, wherein an express ordinance is made, according to the practice that was
then in use in the east and west churches. Ex lib. Con.
Howbeit the third council of Toledo which we have so often spoken of, adds
thereto one point which at this day is not observed, that is, that no man
should say only, Gloria patri etc. but add thereto, And honor, saying,
Glory and honor be to the Father, etc. Because it is found to be so said in
the Apocalipse: and that upon pain of excommunication.

e The second Vasensian Council which we erst spoke of, has confirmed the
custom, which as well the East as the West Churches received, concerning the
rehearsal of the Kyrie eleyson: commanding it to be said and often rehearsed
not only in the Mass, but also in all the Canonical hours. We have here a
fresh, iollie gaye mysteries in the numbers of 3. and 9. which we will no more
here speak of, but leave this pithagoricall and magical divinity to such as
take delight therein.

f The Priest makes here a preatie pitch of his base dance, with a solemn
reverence both with his head and back.

g He sets down here a rule, at what times the Gloria in excelsis is to be
said, or not said, according to those ordinances which we have already set
down in their place. And because there have bin many laws given by diverse,
touching one only piece, I have also marked the names of every Author in the
margin, in such sort as has been before said, to the end that whosoever were
desirous to see the ordinances that are made for these purposes, may find
them upon the Popes heads that made them.

h These fragme^ts which speak of the holy Ghost and of the virgin Mary, have
been added to this himne by others, and not by them which made all the rest:
but I could never yet read who were the Authors of them, Neither are they
said, but in our Ladies Masses, and on her festival days.

Of the Dominus vobiscum, and of the collect, and of the writhing and wreathing
countenances that are to be used in this other Antique. CHAPTER XIII.
Conc. Brac. 1.
After he has thus done he k^sseth the Altar in the midst Thomas
and afterward, turns him self to the people, saying.

c The Lord be with you.

Answer

And with thy spyrit.

The priest

d Let us pray.

e O God, who under a marvelous Sacrament, have least us a remembrance of thy
passion, we beseech thee to grant us so to honor the holy mysteries of thy
body and blood, that we may always find the fruit of thy redemption in us:
who lyuest and reignest with God the father, in the unite of the holy spirit,
Gelase. Symmac.
God world without end, Ame^.

Here is to be noted, that when either the collect or the epistle is said: his
hands are not joined together: but the tops of his fingers,

Through our Lord,

Here, as well in the end of his prayer as of the mass, his hands are to be
joined together.

QVo a finito, osculatur altar in medio b postea vertet se ad populum dicendo:

c Dominus vobiscum.

Resp.

Et cum Spiritu tuo.

Sacerd. d Oremus.

Deus qui nobis sub Sacrame^to mirabili passionis tuae memoriam reliquisti,
tribue quaesimus ita nos corporis and sanguinis tui sacra misteria venerari, vt
redemptionis tuae fructum in nobis sentiamus qui viuis and regnas cu^ Deo
Patre, in vnitate: Spiritus sancti Deus per omnia secula seculorum, Amen.

Nota quando dicuntur c collectae vel Epistolae manus sint disiunctae: sed ad
vltimum.

Per Doninum.

Orationis, hic and in fine Missae, manus debent iungi.

Here follow the annotations belonging to the fragmentes aforesaid. CHAPTER
XIIII.
a GEntle Sir John is far in love with the Table. For he kisseth it often.

b He turns himself 5. times about unto the people during the time that he
is playing of his play, or dancing of his antike. Moreover, he continually
turns his back and hinder parts, because according to Vigilius ordinance he
must turn his face toward the East, Ala. de offic. Miss. cap. 8.
because the situation of the Churches and Altars are set East ward. Howbeit,
it becomes not a Iuggler, a player, but much less a Preacher to turn their
backs upon the people, before they iuggle, play or preach. For, it is the
ordinary way to turn their faces to whom they speak, and not their backs.
Howbeit, the Priests, mean not to speak unto the people, when they say Mass:
nether should they understand the^, if they did: but they talk to the bread and
wine, to the idols, and table, and to the board clothes and napkins, which lie
before them: and unto the Su^ne, over against which c Gregor. Innocent. 1
Jnnocent. 3.
they turn them selves: or else it were meet to have their Churches and
Altars so built, as that the Priest might have the people before him, when he
says Mass, as a Preacher is wonted to have his pulpit. But then again
should herein fall out a great inconvenience, when he should salute them, and
turn him self unto the^ as here is noted. For the^ his back should be toward
the^, and therefore should not need any whit to turn or return him self.

c The Bishops, in stead of saying Dominus vobiscum, shall say, pax Domini sit
semper vobiscum, that is to say, the peace of God be and remain with you for
evermore: Although, it was ordained in the first Bracarien Council, about the
time of Honorius the 1. that the Bishops and Priests should not have sundry
sorts of saluting the people, but that both the one and the other of the^
should use this common order, Dominus vobiscu^, and none other.

d These exhortations to prayers and such other like, manifestly declare, that
they which are at mass, should understand what is said. For, how shall the
hearers pray with him that says the prayers in the Mass, if they understand
not what is said in it, and what the exhortations are which are made unto them?
This also declares, that a Priest should not say Mass alone by him self.

e This is one of the prayers which they call collects, which serves not
greatly amiss for the Supper of the Lord, if it be rightly understood. For it
makes no mention of any real, material, and sensible presence of the body
and blood of Jesus Christ, in the Sacrament of the Supper, as the doctrine of
transubstantiation imports: But only a memorial, of the secrets and
Sacraments of the^, and of the virtue and efficacy of the death and passion of
Jesus Christ, of who^ we are made partakers through a spiritual communion,
which we have with his body and blood in the Supper, as is represented to us
therein by the signs, Breui. R.S.L.
and in the action and administration thereof. They use the same prayer and
collect at the euensong of the self same feast, whereof we have expounded the
Mass.

What gestures he must keep with his hands.

Of the second part of the Mass, called instruction, and for what causes it is
so called, and of the preaching that was used in the ancient Church, and of
the charge which was given to the Bishops thereof. CHAPTER XV.
THis title of instruction, Nicol. de Plo. de expos. Miss
which these Popish doctors them selves give unto their Mass, does the better
confirm that which we have heretofore said, of the order of the ancient
Church, concerning public prayers, and the preaching of the word of God, and
of the Ecclesiastical assemblies. For, we se by this self same order, which
is at this day observed in the Mass, that the doctrine of the Apostles and
Evangelists, is preferred before prayers: by which, as well the people as the
Ministers of the Church, ought to prepare them selves for this doctrine, the
one of them to teach it, and the other to hear and understand it. And
therefore, many ordinances were made by the Councelles, appertaining to this
matter, as well for the ministers of the Church, as for the people. And for the
first it was decreed by the fourth Council of Carthage, Ex lib. Con.
That whatsoever they were that went out of the Church and auditory, whiles the
Priest was preaching of the word of God unto the people, should be
excommunicated: neither were there any forbidden to hear or come into the
Church, were they heathen, Jews, or heretics, eue^ unto the Mass of the
Catechumeni, whereof we have spoken elsewhere. And to the end that the people
should never be without this food: It was also decreed by the council of
Arles, solemnized in the days of Charlemaine, That the Priests should not
preach only in cities, Ex lib. Con.
but also in every Parrishe Church in the countries, and that they should not
conte^ne nor neglect the doing hereof. And at the Council of Tours, holden also
in the days of the said Charlemaine: the Bishops themselves were enjoined to
do it, and to have Homilies: that is to say, Sermons containing necessary
doctrine, for the instruction of the people, but especially concerning the
principal points of Christian religion: and those to be very familiar and
meet for the capacity and gross understanding of the simple people: and to
that end were they translated into a tongue, wherein every man might best
understand them. By the like reason ar the Bishops commanded to study
diligently the holy Scriptures, but especially the holy Evangelists, and Paul's
Epistles, and to be so familiarly acquainted with the^, as that they might have
them by heart: and study also very diligently the books of the holy Doctors
and ancient fathers, in which they had made an exposition of the holy letters,
to the end they might be instructed to be able to teach and edify the people,
as well by good and wholesome doctrine, as also by their good life and holy
conversation. Ex lib. Con.
The like was also commanded and confirmed by a Counsel at Chalen, celebrated
again in the days of the said Charlemaine, which says, That God in the holy
Scriptures has commanded, and so have also the holy ancient Canons, That
Bishops should daily be studying of holy writ, seekinge out the mysteries and
secreates of the word of God: to the end they might shine in the Church
thorough the brightness of this doctrine, Ex lib. Con.
and never cease nourishing and filling the souls committed to their charge,
with the food of Gods word. And for the establishing of a very good order,
that no want should be found herein, it was again decreed in the first
Council of Magonce, celebrated in the year 813. That the Bishops should
perform this duty in their own persons, except they were sick, not at
home, or else were withdrawn by some necessary business: and that in such
cases, they should have meet men to do it in their steades, to the end the
people might never be without a Sermon upon the Sunday, nor upon any holy
days. The Council of Rheims celebrated about the time of Pope Leo the third,
Ex lib. Con.
still commanded and confirmed that which was before decreed, at the counsel
of Tours, concerning the Bishops studies of the holy Scriptures, and of the
Homilies and Sermons in the vulgar tongue, for the common people, Ex lib. Con.
Moreover, it was ordained in the Lateran Council, solemnized in the days of
Innocent the 3. in the year 1215. that in those cities and cuntries where
there were people of sundry languages, and had sundry ceremonies, and
fashions in the service of God, and yet were of one faith and of one religion,
that they all should be provided of meet men to say their service, and
administer the Sacraments, and to teach them also both by word and example,
according to their fashions and language. The like also was ordained concerning
the Preaching of Bishops, and the aid that they should have, if they could
not preach being withdrawn therefrom upon lawful causes, or were not them
selves alone able to do it: And then it is eftsoons said, that they shall in
no wise be borne withal, who by reason of ignorance are not able to do it.
Whereupon it was likewise established, that there should be appointed learned
divines, to teach the Priests and the rest, and Masters also to instruct the
poor, without wages, to the end the Churches should not be unprovided of
Pastors, to feed them with spiritual food, Ex lib. Con.
that is meet and necessary for the soul. Lastly the Counsel of Oxinford
holde^ in England, ordained again the like which others before had done,
concerning the preaching of Priests in every parish Church. Here now we may
see, how they, who have always the Councels and decrees in their mouths,
observe the^. And therefore every man may see what instruction there is at this
present, in this part of the Mass, which is called by the name of instruction.
We may easily judge by this, what is in it. Wherefore let us somewhat narrowly
consider of whatsoever is in it.

Of the order which the ancient church held in the reading of the Epistle and
Gospel, and of the ordinances which the ancient Councelles made thereon.
CHAPTER XVI.
THere was mention made in the Council of Rheimes which we erst alleged,
Ex lib. Con.
of the charge that was given to the Subdeacons for the reading of the Epistle
before all men, and to the Deacon, for the reading of the Gospel, for the
instruction of the faithful. And in the Council of Vale^ce, holden in Spain,
about the days of Symmach or Hormisd, Ex lib. Con.
it was decreed that the Gospel should be read after the Epistle: that is to
say, after Paul's Epistles: Because there was a time, when as the Mass began
with the Epistle, as elsewhere has bin said, and that they read nothing else
in it, but the Epistles of the Apostles, and after the^, the Gospelles. And
therefore it was ordained in the same Council, that according to the ancient
Canons, and custom of the ancient Church, the Gospel should be read after
the rest of the lessons, taken out of th'Epistles of the Apostles, in the Mass
of the Catechumeni, before the offertorie of the faithful: to the end that the
faithful who tarried long at the divine service, might be instructed as well by
reading of the said lessons, as by the sermons which the Bishops and priests
made on them, but also the catechumeni, penite^tiaries, and all the rest
likewise, which as yet were enemies unto the religion, or not well instructed,
or excommunicated, who were put out, when they went to the Sermon, and nothing
left undone but the communion, and offertory of the faithful, for the releuing
of the pore. And the cause of this ordinance is there rendered. It is, said
they, because that we have found by experience, that many by this mean have
bin converted to the faith, after they had once hard the doctrine. Wherein we
have again a very evident testimony of that which has been said, as well of
the preaching, as also of the divine service, which in the ancient time of the
Church was said in a language that all men understood. For, if it had been
delivered in an unknown tongue, they which are here spoken of, had not bin
converted, neither had it so fallen out with the^, as the holy Apostle him self
says it falls out with the very infidelles, 1, Cor. 14.
when they come into the Church, and hear and understand the doctrine that is
there handled. Their heart, says he, is touched therewith, and they right well
know that God is in them whom they hear so speak, but contrariwise, it had
fallen out otherwise with them, then as the same Apostle says it fell out, if
they which spoke, had spoken in an unknown tongue. They would have thought,
says he, that you had been fools and mad men. Moreover, because there were
some, then in those days which entermedled songs, and Psalms, between the
reading of the Epistle and Gospel, Ex lib. Con.
it is said in the decrees of the 4. Council of Tolede, celebrated about the
time of Honorius the first, that it is contrary to the ancient Cannons, and
ancient custom of the Church. Wherefore it is forbidden upon pain of
excommunication that it be no more so done, but that those prayers, songs, and
Psalms shall be reserved to be said or song after the reading of the Gospel,
to the end the order be not marred, but that the doctrine shall be preferred in
his place, without confusion. Wherein appears, that whatsoever is now in the
Mass, between the Epistle and the Gospel, to wit, the Response and Graduell,
the Tracts, Alleluya, and prose, have been added to the Mass, as well against
the ordinance of this Council, as also of the rest of the ancient Canons, by
it alleged. But it is no marvel although that this ordinance has not taken
any great effect, considering that the custom of reading and declaring of the
Epistle and Gospel in a tongue which all men understand, has been utterly
abolished in the Mass, wherefore there is no danger in confounding both of
order and doctrine, whereas is neither order nor doctrine, but altogether shame
and confusion. I have of set purpose handled these matters in this place
somewhat with the largest, (albeit I have already spoken some thing of them
hertofore) to the end that every man may the better understand, what
instruction there is in this part of the Mass, called so by that name. Let us
then first of all hear the Epistle which the Subdeacon is about to sing us,
spreading abroad his fair white hands, according to that instruction which is
given him thereof.

Of the reading of th'Epistle of the Mass that is celebrated on Corpus Christi
day, and of the matters worthy the consideration therein. CHAPTER XII.
THe lesson of the Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle to the Corinthes. Jerome. a
Damasc. Tel^spor. 1. Cor. 11.


a Brethren, b for that which I received of the Lord, that also I deliver unto
you. For the Lord Jesus, the same night wherein he was betrayed, took bread,
and when he had given c thanks, he d brake it, and said, e Take and eat f,
This is my body g which shall be delivered for you, h Do ye shall be delivered
for you, h Do ye this in the remembrance of me. And after supper he took the
cup likewise, saying, i This cup is the new Testament in my blood: Do this k
as often as you take it in remembrance of me. For as often as you shall eat
this bread, and drink this cup l you shall show the Lords death m until he
come Whosoever then shall eat this n bread or drink the cup of the Lord o
unworthily p, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord q Let a
man therefore prove him self, and then let him eat of this bread, and drink
of this cup. For, whosoever eats and drinks thereof unworthily, eats
and drinks his owner damnation, because he makes no difference of the Lords
s body.

LEctio Epistolae beati Pauli Apostoli ad Cor.

Fratres, ego enim a^eepi a Domino quod and tradidi vobis, quoniam Domi nus
Jesus in qua nocte tra debatur, accepit panem: et gratias agens, fregit, and
dixit, Accipite and manducate: hoc est corpus meu^, quod pro vobis tradetur:
hoc facite in meam co^memorationem. Similiter and Calicem, postquam caenauit
dicens, hic calix nouu^ Testamentum est in meo sanguine, hoc facite,
quotiescunque sumitis, in meam co^memorationem. Quotiescunque enim manducabitis
pane^ hunc, and calice^ bibetis, morte^ Domini annu^tiabitis donec veniat.
Itaque quicunque ma^ducauerit panem, vel biberit calice^ Domini indigne, reus
erit cor poris et sanguinis Domini. Probet aute^ seipsum homo and sic de pane
illo edat, and de calice bibat. Qui enim ma^ducat and bibit indigne iudicium
sibi manducatet bibit, non dijudicans corpus Domini.

a We may judge by this piece which is here thrust in, taken out of the first
Epistle to the Corinthes, with what judgment the places were collected out of
the holy Scriptures, which being taken from them, were applied to the Mass.
For, for the first, to what purpose is this here put in? Brethren. For, That
which I received of the Lord. etc. Whereunto is this, For, referred? wherefore
re^dreth he a reason: considering that there is nothing going before, that ca^
be referred to any thing which may any way serve the turn, for the matter that
S. Paul here treats of? This piece therefore must otherwise be divided and
sclantled, to make it serve for this purpose. Thus we see how they are wonted
ordinarely to deal with the Scriptures.

b S. Paul, by these words declares, that he was nothing so rash, as these
men, who have added so many things to the Supper, as that they have turned it
into a pestilent Idolatrous Mass, and have by those additions, so blemished
it, as that there remains not any face or form of the true Supper of the
Lord, whereby, he also shows that he was never any of their company. For, he
says plainly that he delivered unto the Corinthia^s, such a pure and sound
institution of the same, as he received from the Lord Jesus, without adding
thereto, or diminishing therfro^: wherein, he eftsoons gives to understand,
that it is not lawful for any man to do it, of what authority so ever he be.
1. Cor. 11.12.
If S. Paul then durst take no further authority upon him, being the man that
was rapt up into the third heaven, and saw things not lawful for any man to
speak, what shall we think of the forgers of the Mass, of whom we have
heretofore spoken, who thereby, have so blemished the supper of the Lord, as
that they have utterly overthrown and abolished it? whom then should we not
assueredly follow, 1. Cor. 11.
either S. Paul, who says, follow me, as I follow Christ, or these Apostates
and Antechristes, who do clean contrary to him: and besides, would burn all
those that had rather follow Jesus and the holy Apostles, then them selves.

c S. Mark, in his 14. Chapter says, that he blessed, declaring thereby, that to
bless, and give thanks, is here taken to be alone, as has been say in other
places.

d This breaking declares, that this bread ought to be distributed, as it is
here.

e He eats it not alone as the priest does, neither does he worship it, or
yet puts it into a pixe, to carry about on procession, and to carry here and
there to be worshipped, or to co^iure tempests: but commands it to be taken,
and eftsoons eaten.

f We have heretofore sufficiently handled this matter, to teach us in what
sense these words are to be taken, and how those words also are to be taken
which follow the cup dish, over and besides that, which we at larg have written
and disputed upon, in the book of the Ministry of the word of God, and of the
Sacraments. And therefore we will here only say, and not deny but that the very
body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, is truly delivered unto all the
faithful, in the supper, by an invisible power of the holy Ghost, spiritually,
and to the spiritual and regenerate man, which receaueth it by faith, and is
therewith spiritually fed in a spiritual life, as the body receaueth the
material bread, and is therewith fed in a corporal life, but that there is no
alteration of the substance in either of both, neither yet any natural and
material conjunction between the bread and wine, and the body and blood of
Jesus Christ.

g There is in S. Paul's words, according to the Greek, which is broken for
you.

h He says not, Do ye this as a sacrifice, for the redemption of the souls,
both of the quick and dead: but that we should do that which he did, and
caused to be done in the Supper, and not that which he did on the cross,
whereon he offered a sacrifice for the redemption of our souls, which is
sufficient for us, and can be done by none other, nor in any other place,
neither yet by any other mean, whereof, the Supper is a remembrance, and no
sacrifice, but much less a Mass: for it is neither the one, nor yet the
other, because they would make it that which it cannot be. For, it cannot be
this sacrifice, if it be not Jesus Christ him self, who offered him self, in
that sort that he was offered: And if that be it, the^ without doubt, Jesus the
son of God cease to be.

i If the Romanistes would strictly, and according to the letter, press the
words of our Savior Jesus Christ, which he spoke concerning the body and blood
of the Supper, we may also conclude by the same reasons, that the cup is
likewise the new Testament, confirmed by the blood of Jesus Christ, and not the
blood it self, according to the testimonies of Saint Paul and Saint Luke, 1.
Cor. 11. Luke 12.
who both use the very self same words therein.

k This is to declare that which he said: Do ye this: that is to say, eat this
bread, and drink this wine in remembrance of me, as I have appointed you:
which thing the Apostle manifestly explaneth immediately after, both of the one
and the other without any dividing of the^, as they of the romish church divide
the^ in the communion of the people.

l This expounds what it is to celebrate this remembrance of Jesus Christ,
for the which the Supper was instituted. He says not, As aften as ye shall
offer this bread, and this cup, you shall make a sacrifice of the body and blood
of the Lord.

m This accords with the testimony which the Angels gave unto the Apostles
that day that Jesus Christ ascended, Act. 1.
touching his return from heaven. By which words, S. Paul, gives us very
plainly to understand, that he meant not that Jesus Christ descended from heaven
corporally, in flesh blood and bones, and came into the priests hands in that
behalf, to be made a sacrifice, and afterward, to be really and in deed eaten
by him, as they of the popish church understand it: But declares, that he is
in heaven in his natural body, from whence we must look for him, to come to
judge the quick and the dead, according to the words of the articles of our
Faith: And that in the mean while, we should here celebrate the remembrance of
him, thereby to give him thanks, and that we might always more and more
assure our selves of his promises, and that we are in him and he in us, through
the power of the faith which we have in him, and of the holy Ghost, by whose
power he dwells in us.

n Here, S. Paul, after the pronouncing of the Sacrame^tall words, calls
the bread and wine, the signs of the Supper, and not the body and blood. 1.
Cor. 6. Ephesians. 1.
Which thing was not done, without the assuered council of the spirit of God.
For, although they of the Romish church, excuse this manner of speaking, in
their expositions, to the end it should not encounter with their
tra^substantiatio^: yet should they have had a far greater advantage, if
Saint Paul had rather used the name of the body and blood, then of the name of
bread and cup.

o They receive it unworthily, which receive it to any other end, and in any
other sort then the Lord has appointed it. Wherefore, all they of the Romish
church, but especially all the priests cannot receive it but unworthily.

p The greatness of the offense which is committed by his unworthiness, ought
to make all men a feared. For, it is as much as they should sell, betray, and
crucify Jesus Christ which, all they do, Hebr. 6.
as the Apostle witnesses, that abuse his benefit.

q He says not, let every man prove him self with a priest, or confess all
his sins to him alone, when as he is of the years of discretion, at the
least once a year at Easter: and that he endeavor him withal his might, to
accomplish the penance which is enioined him, upon pain to be driven out of
the church all the days of his life, and to be deprived of burial after his
death: as Innocent the third ordained in the Laterane Counsel, Ex libr. Con.
which we have already spoken of: But his meaning is, that every man should
prove him self, because that he is not capable to receive the Supper who
cannot approve him self, after this rule of Saint Paul. And therefore, in the
old time, the Catechumeni were not received hereunto, neither yet at this day,
are young boys and girls, until such time as they are instructed and taught
to do it.

r He now sets down the horriblenesse of the punishment, to the end that
they which will not tremble at the greuousnesse of the deed, should at the
least fear the greatness of the punishment.

h We are not by this therefore to say, that this bread is the natural body of
Jesus Christ: but that he does him as great wrong, as if he violated his very
body, for as much as he profaneth and blasphemeth it as much as in him lies,
because that through his infidelity, unworthiness, and unthankfulness, he makes
no more account of it, the^ if there were no more difference between the body
of Jesus Christ, and another man's, and that the Supper were no better, then a
profane banquet. Moreover, although I have, somewhat at large, handled all these
matters in other places and books, yet have I thouhgt good to touch this
matter a little by the way, thereby to let the Romanistes understand, by the
text of the Epistle which they sing in this Mass, how sufficient it is to
overthrow not only all their corpus Christi Feast, and all the idolatry
therein committed, but also all their Masses, Confessions, and men's traditions,
which are manifestly against the word of God, or that have no suer foundation
therein. And now, to the rest.

Of the Graduel, Response, and Alleluya, and of those things which are to be
considered as touching them. CHAPTER XVIII.
a Gradua.
OCuli omnium in te sperant, Domine: and in das illis esca^ in te^pore
opportuno.

Verse.

Aperis tu manum tua^, and imples onme animal benedictione. b Alleluya.

Verse.

Caro mea vere est cibus, and sanguis meus vere est potus, Qui manducat meam
carne^ and bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet, and ego in eo.

Greg.
The Graduel, or Graile. Miss. R. 2. Psalm. 104. Celest. Gelas.

THE eyes of all things trust in thee, o Lord: and thou give the^ meat in
due season.

The versicle.

Thou openest thy hand, and fillest every living thing with thy blessing.
Symmach. Leo. Conc. Tole. John 6.
Praise God.

c The versicle.

My flesh is meat in deed and my blood is drink in deed. Whosoever eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I, in him.

a We have spoken somewhat at large of the Graduell or Graile, and also of the
Alleluya, Tractes, and of the seasons to sing, and to be still. These are
fragmentes which change according to the diversity of the Masses, and seasons,
as the Introites. The versicles which are here put in for the Graile of this
Mass, have in them a marvelous jolly kind of doctrine, if the same be well
understood, and well applied. Psalm. 145.
But that which David spoke of the providence of God, concerning the governing
and bodily feeding of man, and all other living creatures, is here very unfitly
applied unto the matter of the supper. For, it, was not ordained for the
feeding of this corporal life, which is sustained with bodily meat and
drink, but for a spiritual and eternal kind of life: which we receive not in
the bread and wine, that is given us in the Supper, but in Jesus Christ the
true bread of life, and in his body and blood, which by them are represented.
This place, is quite and clean against the popish doctrine, because, it,
teaches men to run to dead men, which they call men and women Saints, that
they might obtain at their hands those things which the Prophet teaches us,
to ask and look for, at the hands of God alone.

b The fourth Council of Tolede, which we have heretofore alleged, makes
mention of certain priests in Spain, who at all times song Alleluya, and
namely in Lent: saying, that that is against the custom of all churches,
because it is a song of joy and not of sadness. Wherefore, it is forbidden, any
more so to be dealt withal, upon pain, that who soever does it, shall be
discharged of his office. And because, that this time, wherein this Mass is to
be celebrated, is a time of joy, and chiefly for the priests, for the reasons
before said, it is solemnly song in it.

c It is to no purpose to allege here the place of S. John, as it is alleged:
because it has no full sense in it, neither does it any whit agree with that
that goes before, neither yet with that that follows. Moreover, it is so
often repeated in this piece, as that they set it down for their Gospel. But
if they say it once, it is enough for them, whether it be to purpose or not,
considering that their mouths run over, with so much speaking of flesh and
blood, of meat and drink, and of manger and boire.

Of the Sequence, and Prose. CHAPTER XIX.
a Sequentia.
b LAuda Sion Saluatorem, etc.

Quod in Coena Christus gessit.

Facie^dum hoc expressit,

In sui memoriam.

Docti sacris institutis,

Panem, vinu^ in salutis,

Consecramus hostiam.

Dogma datur Christianis Quod i^ carne^ tra^sit panis Et vinum in sanguinem.
Quod non capis, quod non vides,

Animosa seruat fides,

Praeter rerum ordinem,

Sub diuersis speciebus.

Signis tantum and non rebus,

Latent res eximiae.

Caro cibus, sanguis potus:

Manet tamen Christus totus,

Sub vtraque specie.

A sumente non concisus,

Non confractus, non diuisus,

Integer accipitur.

Sumit vnus, sumunt mill,

Quantum iste, tantum ille,

Nec sumptus consumitur, etc.

Sumunt boni, sumum mali:

Sort tamen inaequali,

Vitae vel interitus.

Mors est malis, vita bonis.

Vide paris sumptionis,

Quam sit dispar exitus.

Fracto demum sacramento

Ne vacilet, sed memento

Tantum esse sub fragmento,

Quantum toto tegitur.

Nulla rei sit scissura,

Signi tantum sit fractura:

Qua nec status nec statura

Signati, minuitur.

Ecce panis Angelorum,

Factus cibus viatorum

Vere panis filiorum,

Non mittendus canibus.

The Sequence.
Nicolas.
OSyon, praise thou thy Savior, etc.

Vrb. 4. Thomas.
That which Christ did in his Supper,

He expressed that it was to be don,

In the remembrance of him,

c Being taught by the holy institutions.

We consecrate the bread and wine,

For the host of salvation.

d A rule is given to Christians, That the bread is turned into flesh, And the
blood into wine.

e Which thing thou comprehe^dest not, which thing thou see not, A courageous
faith keeps it,

Beyond all order of nature.

f Under diverse kinds,

Under signs only, and not under things,

Most excellent things lie hidden

g The flesh is meat, and the blood drink:

And yet remains Christ, full and whole,

Under both kinds.

h He is not broken of the receauer,

Nor pulled in pieces, nor yet divided,

But taken full and whole.

i One takes him, and so do thousands.

And as much has that one, as they all have,

And behing received, yet is not consumed, etc.

k The good folk receive him, and so do also the ill:

And yet not all a like,

To life, or death.

Death to the wicked, but life to the godly.

See the difference of the receiving,

How unlike the issue is.

l In the end, when the sacrament is broken

Let no man doubt, but remember

That there is as much under one piece,

As is under the whole.

There is no cutting of, of anything, But the breaking only of the sign: Which,
neither diminishes the state, nor stature.

Of the thing signified.

m Thus here we see, the bread of Angels.

Made the food of travelers,

The true bread of the children.

Which is not to be cast to dogs.

Of the things that are to be considered, upon these before said fragmentes and
matters, but especially upon the Prose. CHAPTER XX.
a BEcause the Prose and Sequence that is said in this Mass, is very long, I
have only here set down about the one half thereof, in such form and manner,
as that a man may the easelier judge of the rest.

b That which we receive so often heard out of Saint Paul, is comprehended
within this complement, wherein is said, that Jesus Christ commanded to
minister the Supper in such form and manner, and to such an end as he him
self had leaft them an example. How then durst these false prophets be so
bold as to alter and overthrow this holy ordinance, with this patched invention
of theirs in the Mass.

c Seeing then that Jesus Christ has taught us how to deal in the Supper,
where will this slibber Gibber find in the institution thereof, that he ordained
the consecration of the bread and wine, to be made an host for salvation: that
is to say, a sacrifice to obtain salvation thereby? For, an host, does not
fignify such a round white cake as that which they call an host in the Mass,
and as the simple so think of it: But signifies that which is sacrificed, and
the very sacrifice it self. And for as much as the priests, take the Mass to
be such a sacrifice, as wherein they sacrifice Jesus Christ with their own
hands: they call this white round cake the host, which they take to be Jesus
Christ, because they mean to sacrifice him, and offer him up. Howbeit the
supper was not ordained for this purpose, but contrary wise to admonish us that
there was none other sacrifice, but that which Jesus Christ made upon the
cross, which could not be by any means again sacrificed: but, that that, was
the remembrance of this sacrifice. And taking this name of the host in this
sense, the wine which they also offer for the blood of Jesus Christ, should be
an host likewise, as well as the bread, although it be not so called. Again,
neither should the little round Robins which are delivered to the people in the
administration of the Supper, nor yet the great ones that are kept in the pixe,
or shrine (as the holy host of Dijon, and such like) be any hosts, because
that they are not offered up, nor sacrificed as that is, which is in the Mass.
And therefore even by their own doctrine and practice, they do misterme them.

d Where find they me again this instruction, whereby Christians are taught,
that the bread is the^ no more bread, when as the priest has breathed over it,
and hudled up certain words in so doing, but very flesh: and the wine
likewise no more wine, but even very blood? For, that which is spoken in this
complement, that the bread is turned into flesh, and the wine into blood,
signifies the self same, which the author himself says in the hymn at
eue^song in the said feast, in these words,

Verbum caro, panem verum,
Verbo carnem efficit:
Fitque sanguis Christimerum.
Et si sensus deficit,
Ad firmandum cor syncerum,
Sola fides sufficit.
That is to say,

The word flesh, makes the true bread flesh by the word: and the wine, is made
the blood of Christ, although the sense cannot perceive it. And for the
strengthening of a sincere heart, faith only suffices. This last sentence is
very true, if it be applied to a true faith, founded upon the pure and clear
word of God as shall more at large hereafter be spoken. But the first is a
sentence altogether against the sense which they here take it for, not only of
the pure word of God, but also of the nature of all the sacraments (which ca^
be no sacraments, if they have not the true signs in them, and the things also
that are signified by the^) and likewise against the, judgment of the ancient
Church: as has been declared by the words of Ireneus: yea and also against the
very doctrine of Popish transubstantiation. For, they which are the vpholders
thereof, dare not themselves affirm, that the bread and wine are changed into
the very substance of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, by reason of the
great absurdities that would ensue upon this opinion: as has been by us
already somewhat largely handled, in the book of the Ministry of the word of
God, and of the Sacraments. And therefore they had rather say that the
substance of the bread and wine is nothing, and clean vanished away, and the
body and blood of the Lord to become in place. It must not be said then that
the bread is become flesh, that is to say, translated into flesh: or goes for
flesh, and so gives it place: But rather that flesh becomes bread, and that
the substance of bread gives it place, and lodges under his accidents. The
like is also of the wine and blood. We see now the certainty that is in this
doctrine, and what a notable foundation it has.

e Although faith beholds things which can not be seen with the bodily
eyes, nor yet perceived by man's raison: yet is it neither bleareyed nor blind,
to suffer it self to be lead as a young child that is without judgment, who
is easily made believe that bladders are lanternes, and what soever else it
sees, or like unto old foolish doting women who lightly believe what soever
foolish thing is told them, or like brute bestes who are easily led in a
string. For, faith, looks into the word of God with her spiritually eyes:
wherein she beholds and understands as it were in a glass, those things
which God shows and manifests unto her, which man's reason is never able to
understand nor co^prehe^d by the light of nature, without it be regenerated and
renewed by the spirit of God: and what soever faith sees in this glass, is a
great deal more certain the^ that which the body sees with his eyes or that
ma^s reason is able to co^prehe^d or perceive with all her natural senses. But,
as it cannot be faith, without it be first grounded upon the word of God: so
likewise can it see no whit, but in this glass, wherein God manifests and
represents himself unto it. But the faith of the Romanists, which Thomas of
Aquine makes so constant in this Prose, is a bleareyed and blind faith, and
altogether brutish, which suffers it self to be lead by the blind, the
leaders of the blind, as one that is blind her self: and by beasts, as a
miserable brute beast, which follows others. For, where is this glass of
Gods word, wherein it beholds that, which Thomas says it believes, and so
co^sta^tly keeps in heart, concerning this bewitched Popish tra^substa^tiatio^
and co^secratio^: for, it is not enough that the whole order of nature which
God has ordained be overthrown in it (as it is here said) but that eftsoons
the whole dispe^satio^ of the mystery of Christ's incarnation must also be
overthrown, and Jesus Christ robbed of his human nature, and the whole order
which God has placed in his church by his word, and the very true nature of
the Sacraments likewise. Wherefore it is greater reason to call their faith,
which follow the Popish church, and go to work thus aduenturously and
blokishly, rather a rash and arrogant faith, then a firm and constant faith.

f Let us see now what it is that they say is here done over and beyond all
order of nature. It is forsooth, that accidents of bread and wine do here
remain, and yet without substance either of bread or wine: and contrariwise,
that the body and blood of Jesus Christ is here, without the accidents and
qualities of bread and wine. Wherefore, by these kinds and signs, they
understand the accide^ts and qualities of bread and wine: and by the things,
under which these excellent things are hidden, they understand, the substance
of them: and by these hidden things, the body and blod of Jesus Christ, which
are in very substance, under the show of bread and wine, and not under the
bread and wine it self, but under a false show of them: so that the bread and
wine which they see there, are not there: but the body and blood which is not
seen there, and whereof is no show in the whole world.

g Although the body, according to their doctrine is under the kinds of bread:
and the blood under the kinds of wine: yet we must not believe forsooth, that
they are separated one from the other: but that the body is as well under the
kind of wine as the blood: and the blood under the kind of bread, as the body.
Thus we see the body and blood separated, and yet for all that they are not
separated. And no more is it in deed, if this presence, be spiritually taken,
as it is convenient it should be. But to take it corporally and naturally as
they take it, it serves to no purpose, except they deal with brute beasts,
who are contented, that my masters the Sophisters, sorcerers, and coniurers
have said that it is so, although they have no natural ground for it, nor yet
any ground out of the word of God.

h Let them here consider upon that which we have already said, when we spoke
of the breaking of the host, and agree thereunto, with Berengers honorable
amends and adiuration.

i Either the body of Jesus Christ is not a true natural body, or else this
cannot be, which is here said, taking it corporally and naturally, and not
spiritually. For, as Saint Augustine says, we right well know that this grace
is not consumed by piece meal.

k This is false, if it be understood not only of the signs, but also of the
things signified. For as it has been already showed by the words of S.
Augustine, that Jesus Christ, his flesh, and blood, ca^ never be received but
unto salvation and not to da^natio^: and yet forsooth the signs may: But it is
not because Jesus Christ is received with the^, but because he is not received
with them. For, if he, were received, then that would follow which he promised
by the receiving of him, and which has so often been said in the Alleluya, and
which shall be said in the Gospel following. The receiving then of the faithful
and unfaithful is not alike. For, the faithful receaueth the sign and the
thing signified, and the unfaithful receaueth nothing save the sign only,
although he be at the self same table, and receaueth the self same Sacrament
of the self same Minister.

l They which believe this so monstrous doctrine, are not without cause
admonished that they stagger not. For to say truly, they must be very drunk,
and more senseless then brute beasts. Now, as they would make men believe, that
the bread is changed into a body, and the wine into blood, and yet the one
fully and wholly in the other, as well as if it were all one: Even so likewise
would they make men believe, that although they have divided their round cake
into many pieces (which is the body of their Christ.) Yet that there is as
much substance in one of the pieces as was in the whole cake. But I do believe,
that if they should come to the partition of an inheritance of land, which
wholly appertained unto them, it would be a very hard matter to make them
receive and allow this philosophy: and make them agree, that there were as
much in one piece of it, as in the total. They would therein be as greatly
troubled as the Curate was who expounded this text, That to love God with all
his heart, signified, with the greater part, when as his parishioners told him,
that they would, according to that exposition, demand their part of the
Curate. For although he said, that it was all his, yet notwithstanding, that it
ought to be understood only of the greater part, and not of all, as he had
expounded it, of the love of the whole heart toward God: fearing that he should
have excluded the Saints, and so thereby have lost the offringes which he had
under their names. But to return to our new Mathematicians, and see how their
new and strange Philosophy is able to bear, that there are accidents without
substance: their Mathematical science may also as well bear it, that one
piece is as much as the whole in this matter. There were some reason in it, and
if they said, that he, receaueth as much of Jesus Christ, spiritually, which
receaueth but one piece of bread that is distributed, as he which receaueth and
eats the whole loaf: because the body of Jesus Christ is not delivered and
eaten by piece meal, as the bread which represents it. But this can in no
wise agree, if this bread be taken for the natural and material body of Jesus
Christ. For, he has always a true natural man's body, although he be
glorified and dispoiled of his whole mortal state and condition.

m If the Angels live with pretty round cakes, they may call this bread their
bread. But what blasphemy is this, to call a round white cake the bread of
Angels, and of the children of God, taking it for Jesus Christ him self, the
true bread of life, of the Angels, and of all the elect of God, and not of
such dogs as these are, to change the true bread of life into round cakes
which they the^ selves have charmed? And therefore there is more reason to call
these round cakes, the bread of Asses, wolves, dogs and hogs, then the
bread of the sheep of Jesus Christ: who hearken after none other voice but the
voice of their shepherd: and receive none other food, but that which he
gives them.

Of the Ceremonies that are to be observed before the lesson, or reading of the
Gospel, and of the visitatio^ or looking to the matters which are prepared,
for the consecration, and for the Sacrament. CHAPTER XXI.
POstea, deserat Missale ad aliud latus, dicendo.

Domine, labia mea aperies, and os meum annu^tiabit laudem tuam.

Deinde, visitet hic Sacrificium, surge^do patinam, supra quam deb^t esse
hostia, inspiciendo infra calice^, si sit vinu^ and aqua. Et si nondum accepit,
accipiat, benedice^ do vinu^ and aquam, and ponendo in Calice^, dicat.

De latere Domini nostri Jesus Christi exiuit sanguis, and aqua pariter baptisma
^s in remissione^ peccatoru^ Commixtio vini and aquae pariter fiat: In nomine
Pa^is, and Filij, and Spiritus ^^^cti.

Deinde, dicat.

Iube Domine benedicere, Dominus sit in cord meo, and in labijs meis, ad digne
pronunciandu^ sanct^m Euangeliu^ pacis. In nomine Patris: and Filij, and
Spiritus sancti. Amen.

Faciendo signum Crucis

Qua^do Diaconus dicit Euangeliu^, inclinet se coram Altar, and petat
benedictione^ a presbytero, dicendo.

Iube Domine benedicere

Socerdos respondeat.

Dominus sit in cord (...) and in labijs tuis, ad digne proferendum Euangelium
suum. In nomine Pa^^ket Filij, and Spiritus sancti. Amen.

Alexan. 1.
AFterward let him carry his Mass book unto the other side, Alph. and Miss. g.
and say.

O Lord open thou my lips, and then my mouth shall show forth thy praise?

b When he has so done, let him look to the Sacrifice, and lift up the
paten, upon which the host must lie, c looking into the Chalice, whether there
be wine and water in it or no: and if there be none in it, then let him take
some, blessing the wine and the water, and putting them out into the Chalice
let him say.

d Out of the side of our Lord Jesus Christ issued blood. And likewise the
water of Baptism for the remission of sins. Let the wine and water be
mingled together: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost.

After that let him say.

Lord command to bless, The Lord be in my heart, and in my lips, that I
may worthelye pronounce the holy Gospel of peace. In the name of the Father,
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Amen.

And then let him make a sign of the Cross.

When the Deacon reads the Gospel, let him kneel down before the Altar,
and desire the Priest to bless him saying.

Lord command to bless.

Then let the Priest say,

The Lord be in thie heart and in thy lips that thou may worthelie utter
his Gospel, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, Amen.

In what sort these aforesaid ceremonies are to be considered of. CHAPTER XXII.
a Here is to be noted, that whippit Sir Hugh has not showed all his sleights
and tricks in his dance, from the one end of the Altar to the other, and from
the first beginning of his interlude and antike, but with pawses, or with half
turns and reprinses, unto the midst thereof, continually returning from the
right side of the Altar. But now h^ fully and wholly gets to the other side
where h^ will again make long pawses, and after that half turns and
reprinses: one whiles going to the midst of the Table, and there stay a while,
making both short and very long pawses: and after that returning to the left
side, until he repasse again unto the right. Now, we are further to
understand, that there is never a one trick in the dance, nor yet ever a
mopping and mowing whatsoever, that has not many jolly mystical and
spiritual senses, which I will at this time suppress, because it would be
over long and toto foolish a thing to speak of.

b The name of Sacrifice, is here taken, for the bread and wine which should be
consecrated and sacrified, and yet are not. This admonition is here given for
the avoiding of such inconveniences as might fall out about these matters, which
we more at large handled in the Cautels. Whereupon we are to note, that that
which is here done in this behalf, after the Geneua fashion, and others, is in
other places done after the offertory, according to the Popish manner

c It was decreed by the Council of Worms, Ex lib. Con.
That there should be nothing else offered in the Mass, save only the bread,
and cup, as has bin by other Councelles heretofore ordained: but also that the
wine should in no wise be offered without water, as in deed it is not
tolerated to offer water wtthout wine, but both at once. Berno, de offie.
Miss. cap. 11. Ex lib. Con.
And in the Triburme Council which was after celebrated in the days of the
Emperor Arnulph, in the year, 895. it is in the same decreed, set down, and
expressly ordained, That two parts should be wine, and the third water. Which
ordinance is laid upon Alexander the fifth, of whom we have spoken in his
place, and upon the other ancient Fathers. Howbeit I know not how this
ordinance can agree with the decree of the fourth Council of Orleance,
solemnized about the time of Pelagius the first, in the days of king
Childebert: by which decree it was ordained, that none should presume to offer
any thing in the oblations of the holy Cup, but that which was thought to be
of the fruit of the vine: and that, not to be mingled with water. I know not
whether the fault be in the book, or in the ill ha^dling of it. And after the
reason is there eftsoon re^dred. For, it is said, That that is to be judged
sacrilege, when any other thing is offered, then that which our savior has
by his holy co^mandeme^ts ordained. I leave the reconciling of this matter to
those to whom it more concerns then us.

d The Councelles before alleged, Con. Worms. Con. Tril^^rine
which make mention of the mingling of the water with wine, allege for a
reason of this ordinance, that the same is a signification of the conjunction
and union of the people, signified by the waters in the Apocalypse, with Jesus
Christ, signified by the wine. And therefore it is expressly said, that 2. parts
must be wine, and the 3. water: because the wine which signifies the Majesty
of Jesus, is far greater then the water, which signifies but the majesty of
the people. But who gave them this commandment, and who revealed this secreat
unto them? what places and testimonies of the holy Scripture have they, to
testify this? For, if it were so, it is wonder, that they would not sound one
word thereof amongst all the words which they mu^ble up, when they power the
wine and water into the Chalice: but make mention rather of an other mystery,
which S. Augustine has touched: howbeit his mind was not of the mingling of
water with the wine in the Chalice, but looked unto the blood and water which
gushed out of Christ Jesus side. Whereupon he says, John. 1. August.
That that side was the fountain of the Sacraments of the Christian Church, to
wit of Baptism, and of the Supper: by which, as first by Baptism the washing
away of our sins, and by the Supper, our redemption. By which Supper the
sacrifice and sheding of the blud of Jesus Christ therein are signified unto
us: without the which, we could not be redeemed. Now there is far greater
reason in this mystical exposition of S. Augustine, which they here touch by
the words that they pronounce, when they make this mixture, then in this
application, and in the other mystery which hertofore was propounded. For it
is sufficiently enough represented in Baptism, and in the Supper, without
making of another new and strange Sacrament after their own fashion grounded
only upon allegories and imaginations of their own heads. For, what greater
union can they represent between Jesus Christ and the faithful, the^ that
which is represented by the whole action and administration of the Supper,
which is the true Sacrament of union? By which, the conjunction that is
between the head and the members is so lively expressed by the union of the
grains, whereof the wine and bread are made: which by the water can not be
so well represented, being not made of so many grains as the wine is. And
therefore they might very well content them selves with Jesus Christ's simple
and pure ordinance.

e We have here a very proper and pleasant interlude. For if the Mass be not
so solemnized, as that there be three players in it, to wit, the Deacon,
Subdeacon, and Sir Gurdegobresse, who plays the notablest part, Sir
Gurdebreasse must in this point play the drunken Priest, and both sing and
answer him self. For, first of all, he commands him self to bless him
self, and after, does that which he commands him self. But how ever it is
with him, he must take his leave to read the words of the Gospel: that is to
say, so to deliver it, as that no man understands one word that is in it.
For, such Apostles and messengers has the Popish Church, who are sent out to
announce the Gospel in the Mass, without declaring any thing of that they
say: which is not the office of a true and good messenger. And therefore is not
this a great mockery which the Popish Church uses, to have the Deacon desire
to have his lips and heart purified, as the lips of Isaiah were with an hot
burning cole, that he might be made morthy to set forth the holy Gospel? Is
not this even to mock and scorn both God and men?

Of the second incensing, and of the lesson of the Gospel. CHAPTER XXIII.
IN a all solemn feasts let the Deacon kneeling before the Altar, Miss. R.
desire to have the Telesp. Anust.
incense blessed, saying,

Bless ye.

Then le^ the Priest answer,

The Lord, Be thou blessed by him, in whose honor thou shall be burnt. In the
name of the Father, etc.

c After that, the Priest censeth the Altar, Chalice, and Mass book
therewith, that done, he gives it to the Deacon, who censeth the Priest him
self. And when he has so done he goes on to the reading of the Gospel,
saying.

d The Lord be with you.

Answer,

And with thy Spirit.

The Priest. Ic^om. Dam^s.


The things which hereafter follow, are taken out of the Gospel of S. John.
Con. Toled.


Answer.

Glory be to thee O Lord.

e When this is said, every man must make the sign of the cross, both on
his forehead and also upon his breast. Then must the Priest make a sign of the
cross upon his book and kiss it. After that, he goes on, and says.

f In those days, Jesus said unto his Disciples, and unto the multitude of the
Jews, g My flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed.
Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him.
As the living Father sent a Leo.
me, and I live by the Father: even so he that eats me, shall live by the
means of me. This is that bread which came down from heaven: not as your
Fathers eat Manna in the wilderness, and are dead: But he that eats this
bread shall live for ever.

And after he adds.

h By the words of the holy Gospel, let our sins be defaced. Amen. These
are holy words: and I believe and confess it.

IN festis sole^nibus dia conus flexibus genibus coram Altari petat
benedictione^ incenso, dicendo,

Benedicite.

Sacerdos respondet.

Dominus, ab illo benedicaris in cuiu^ honor cremaberis. In nomine Patris.
etc.

Deinde Sacerdos incensat Altar, and Calice^ and missale, postea reddit
Diacono, qui insensat ipsum Sacerdotem: post ea, procedit ad dicendu^
Euangelium, dicendo.

Dominus vobis^cum.

Responsio.

Et cum Spiritu tuo.

Sacerdos.

Sequen^ia sancti Eua^gelij secundum Iohannem.

Respousio.

Gloria tibi Domine,

Cum hoc dicitur, omnes debe^t facere signum crucis in front, and in pectore,
and presbyter debet signare librum and osculare: deinde pergit dicendo.

In illo te^pore dixit Jesus discipulis suis et turbis Iudaeoru^. Caro mea,
vere est cibus, and sanguis meus, vere est potus. Qui ma^ducat carne^ meam, and
bibit sanguine^ meum, in me manet, et ego in illo. Sicut misit me viuens Pater,
and ego viuo propter Patrem: et qui manducat me, and ipse viuet propter me. Hic
est panis qui de caelo des^e^dit: non sicut manducauerun^ patres vestri Manna
in de serto* and mortui sunt. Qui manducat hunc panem, viuet in aeternum.

Tunc addit.

Per Euangelica dicta, deleantur nostra delicta. Ame^. Haec sunt verba sancta:
credo, and confiteor.

What things are to be noted upon these foresaid matters. CHAPTER XXIIII.
a IT has been said, that Leo was he who first ordained the censinges in the
Mass, howbeit I cannot say whether he ordained them all yea or no, or whether
some body else added mo thereto. If it be not a solemn Mass, the Gods which
are made in it, are not perfumed.

b And again, the play were not worth a button, if this frankensence were not
charmed according to their accustomed manner. What kind of consecration and
blessing is this? And besides, what a mockery and sorcery is this, to speak
unto the frankensence? Now, if this frankensence be burnt in the honor of the
devil (as in deed it is, considering that he is the very Author, of such a
Mass as at this present it is) then call they for his blessing to be upon this
frankensence.

c The Romanists, Matthew. 2,
when they make an exposition of the mystical meaning of the gifts which the
wise men that came from the East, by the guiding of the star, to worship our
Savior Jesus Christ offered, say, that the offering of the gould, declared him to
be a King, and that the mirrhe, signified his humility and death: and the
fra^ke^sens, the acknowledging of him to be God, because that ince^se
betokens divinity, Deuteronomy, 33
and that God ordained the ince^sings in the law, that by the^ such homage
should be don unto him as appertained and was convenient for his divine
majesty. By this interpretation the^, the Altar, chalice mass book, and the
Priest himself also should be, God. At the least wise, that honor is here don
unto them, which, as they say, appertains unto God. And therefore it is no
marvel, that S. Gurdegobreas so honoreth his table and chalice, and his mass
book also (which by his will he would not change nor give for his mealy God.)
For, I may tell it to you, they are a great deal more beneficial unto him, the^
the Bible is. For, the Bible would never bring him to that honor, to drink in
so fair and goodly plate, nor so good wine, neither yet make him so fat, nor
so well liking. Neither is it any marvel though Sir Gurdegobreas himself be
censed, considering that by these his sleights of legier de main, he ca^ so well
iuggle, as that he can make Gods even with his breathing. Now, if he be a maker
of Gods, he him self must needs be far greater and more excellent then the
Gods, which he makes, for as much as the workman, does ever far excel his
work.

d If the Prist him self say or sing the Gospel, he saluteth the people with
his arse always toward them. But if the Deaco^ do it, he turns his side
toward them, and looks on the^, as cause my dear.

e We have elsewhere spoken of the ceremonies, wherewith the Gospel is honored
in the Mass. And that which has bin said of the priest, may also, in some
sort, be referred to the dealing of the people, especially about the cr^ssing
of themselves.

f They always begin the fragments of the Gospel which they rehearse in
this manner, In the place, as in the Epistles taken out of the Acts of the
Apostles, they say, In diebus illis, that is to say, in those days, and in
those which are taken out of the Epistles of S. Paul, they say, Fratres,
Brethren: and in those which are taken out of the Catholic Epistles,
Charissimi, Dearly beloved. Wherein, they speak as if they addressed their
words to the people, as if there were many of them, when as in very deed
oftentimes there is but one body with the Priest, and sometimes none at all
but him self alone. As for the other two prefaces, the Priests them selves
have made such a skorne and by word of them, as that when a man shows them
any of their follies and faults, by the rule of the Gospel, they answer,
that it was, in illo tempore, in that time: and, In diebus illis, In those
days. VVhereupon they would conclude, That that was in the old time and aged
days, and that those times and days are gone and past, as though the Gospel
appertained nothing at all to them. Which doctrine is so well put in practice as
well by them selves, as also by those which follow them, as that they most
manifestly declare, both by their doctrine, life and conversation, that they
make no more account, nor care no more for the Gospel, and the word of God,
then if it never co^cerned, nor yet appertained any whit unto them.

g The matter contained in this little fragment of the Gospel, according to S.
John, here alleged has both largely and sufficiently enough bin handled in
th'expositio^ of the office upon Corpus Christi day, where we showed how these
words wayed with the the doctrine of the Romanists, concerning the bodily
presence and communion of the body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, as
well to the believers as to the faithless, in the Supper.

h It should seem that he would here make a charm of the words of the
Gospel, requiring by them to have sins defaced, as though the power thereof
consisted in the words, and in the uttering of the^. But we are to note, that
as faith comes, and is given by God through the hearing of his word, without
which there can be no true faith: even so likewise, hearing serves to none
other purpose, but to comdemnation, if it be not received by faith, by mean
whereof, sins are defaced, by the blud of Jesus Christ. Now, seeing the people
understand not that which is spoken, how can their sins be defaced by the
words of the Gospel, which they can not believe to be true, and so can have no
true faith without they understood the^? For, Romans 10.
as the Apostle says, how can they believe without it be told the^. I will not
deny but that they may believe, howbeit it shall be after the manner of the Popish
Church: in which Church, to believe, is taken with them, to believe upon
credit, and report of the country, and think that whatsoever it says and
sets forth, is true, although they which believe it, understand not one
word of it. But this neither comfort, nor yet confirms the conscience of
any.

i This is even like to the manner of the Priests them selves, who are
oftentimes so ignorant, as that they understand not, what they them selves
say, and yet believe and confess these holy words.

Of the Nycene and Constantinople Creed, containing the sound faith of the
true and ancient Church. CHAPTER XXV.
ANd when he has made the sign of the cross, he kisseth the book a And
afterward let him say, if it be to be said.

I believe in one God.

Then let him begin in the midst of the Altar, with his hands a sunder,
and after he has begun, let him join his hands a while together, and make
an end after this sort.

The Father Almighty e maker of heaven and earth, and of all things visible,
and invisible, d and in Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, And
borne of the Father before all worlds.

God of God, light of light, very God of very God: begotten and not made:
Consubstantiall with the Father, by whom all things are made. Who for us
men and for our salvation came down from heaven, and was incarnate by the
holy Ghost of the virgin Marie.

Here he boweth his knee.

And was made man. And was also crucified for us under Pontius Pilate:
suffered, and was buried. And the third day arose again according to the
Scriptures. e He ascended into heaven* and sits on the right hand of the
Father. f And shall come again in glory to judge the quick and the dead: Whose
Kingdom shall have no end. And in the holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of
life: who proceeds from the Father and the Son. Who with the Father and the
Son together is worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the Prophets. And one
holy, universal, and Apostolic Church. I confess also one Baptism, for the
Remission of sins: and do look for the Resurrection of the dead: and the
life of the world to come. Amen.

ET facto signo crucis, osculatur librum.

Deinde a dicat, si sit dicendum.

Credo in vnum Deum.

Disiu^ctis manibus in medio Altaris incipiat: and postquam inceperit, paulatim
iungat manus, and sic finiat.

Patrem Omnipotentem factorem Caeli and terrae, visibilium omnium and
inuisibilium, and in vnum Dominum Iesum Christum filium Dei vnigenitum, and ex
Patre natum ante omnia secula.

Deum de Deo, lumen, de lumine: Deum verum, de Deo vero: Genitum non factum,
consubstantialem patri, per quem om nia facta sunt. Qui propter nos homines and
propter salutem nostram descendit de caelis. Et incarnatus est de Spiritu
sancto, ex Moria Virgin.

Hic genu flectitur.

Et homo factus est, crucifixus etiam pro nobis, sub Pontio Pilato: passus and
sepultus est. Et resurrexit tertiae die secundum Scripturas. Et ascendit in
caelum, sedit ad dextra^ Patris, and iterum venturus est cum gloria, iudicare
viuos and mortuos: cutus regni, non erit finis. Et in Spiritum sanctum Dominum,
and viuificantem, qui ex Patre, filioque procedit: Qui cum Patre and filio
simul adoratur, and glorificatur, qui locutus est per Prophetas. Et vnu^
sanctam Catholicam and Apostolicam Ecclesiam. Confiteor vnum Baptismum in
remissionem peccatoru^. Et expecto resurrectione^ mor tuorum. Et vitam venturi
saeculi. Amen

Of the things that are to be considered in this Creed, concerning those
matters which we are presently in hand withal. CHAPTER XXVI.
a WE have already spoken somewhat largely, of the singing and silence of the
creed in the Mass. In the Mass book, it is commanded to be said on this
festival day, and on the octaues thereof. There is concerning the recital of
the Creed, a Decree in the third Council of Tolede, solemnized in the days of
pope Pelagius the second: which expreslie commands, That it should be
recited and delivered very loudly before the Lords prayer, throughout all the
Churches of Gallice and Spain, after the manner of the East Churches, and
Council of Constantinople: to the end that the faith might be manifested, and
have testimony, so that the hearts of the people which were purified by faith,
might go and receive the body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ. Which
Decree, manifestly confirms that which we have already spoken hereof
elsewhere. There is also a Decree in the Council of Basil, against such as
should say it by halfes, as I have oftentimes seen them do, Ex lib. Con,
when I went to Mass being then very yo^g. Our Priests song the creed after
the Almain manner, which they called the Almaine creed, and it went no further
then to, and homo factus est, and there they ended it. They used it when they
had have to their dinner, and were wearied to say the Creed out at length: and
no doubt of it, they deal so with it even at this day, for all the decree of
the Counsel of Basil.

b This aduertissement concerns the iollie show of the countenance and
sleight of the hands, which Sir Gurdegobresse must hold and maintain.

c A Creator, is more proper and usual, then a maker: and the Greek word is
so set down for that purpose. And therefore seeing it is so, that God is the
creator of all things, and consequently the Governor and Guider of them, and
vpholdeth and mainteineth them, why run the priests to creatures, and other
what soever they are, whether it be to men, or women Saints, but to him alone,
if they take him for the creator, and father, and all the rest, for creatures.
For, to pray to any other then unto God, is against this Article. For, prayer
without faith, cannot be right. Now, none of us all confess in this Creed,
which contains the very whole some and effect of Faith and Christian
religion, that we beliue in any other then in God the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost. No, we do not say that we believe in the Church her self: But
only that we do believe the Church. For, there is a difference between that that
we believe of the Church, and that which we believe of God the Father, of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost, and in them: in whom, we say we believe: that is
to say, that we put our whole trust and confidence in them, but not in the
Church. For, it, is composed of men: and as the Prophet says, cursed is that
man, which puts his trust in man. Wherefore, we only say, that as we put
our trust in the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: we believe also that
there is a Church, that is to say, an holy assemblee, by reason of this
affiaunce that it has in the Father* the Son, and the holy Ghost, by whom it
is sanctified, and stays it self upon one God, who is father unto it, by the
love of his son Jesus Christ, through the sanctification of the holy Ghost.
Then is it not God, neither the Father, nor the Son, nor yet the holy Ghost,
nor any part or member of the Deity, no not the Angels them selves: but are
all creatures. And therefore, if it be not lawful to believe in them, neither
is it lawful to call upon them in steed of God, and of our Savior Jesus
Christ our Lord, and give them the honor which apperteineth to God alone, if
we will not gain say the whole volume of the word of God, the Church it self,
and the faith thereof: I mean not the Popish church, which is not pleased with
such a faith, but the true ancient Christian Church.

d Again, this only Article, by which the true Church confesses Jesus to be
the only Lord, and true Christ, the only true and natural Son of God, is
of it self sufficient enough to overthrow not only the Mass, but also all
the rest of the Popish doctrine and religion, For, if he be Christ, he is the
very anointed of the Lord, our very King, high and everlasting Bishop, and
Priest, and true Prophet, who freed us from the power and tyranny of Satan,
from sin, death, and hell, as our very true King, and reconciled unto his
Father, by the sacrifice of his death (which is spoken of in the Articles
following) as our true sacrificer, who only has power to do it, and our alone
Mediator and Advocate: and plainly revealed and manifested to us the whole
will of God, not only as a Prophet, but as the very true son of God, coming
from the bosom of his Father. John 1.14.
And therefore we need none other doctrine and revelation, nor yet men's
traditions, for our salvation: neither yet any other Sacrifice, Savior,
Redeemour, Mediator, Advocate, and patron, to God for us. For, as there is
none other, that is very God and very man, but he alone: Even so likewise can
none other perform this office. And this is the cause of that incarnation,
which was spoken of a little before: by which, the son of God, being one and
the self same God, and of the self same substance with the Father, took upon
him man's nature, and was made man, John 1. 1. Tim. 2, 3.
to the end that both God and man, might in him, be conioined and reconciled.

e If the doctrine of transubstantiation be true, and such as does admit and
allow, the carnal presence of Jesus Christ in the Mass, this Article of Jesus
Christ his Ascension into heaven is false, or else the body of Jesus Christ is
no true body. For it is not said that he hid him self, and became invisible,
continuing here below upon earth, but that he is Ascended into heaven.

f There is none other coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh, and in proper
person, spoken of throughout the whole Creed, save only these two which have
hitherto been here spoken of. There is here no mention made of this invisible
coming, of the host of the priests, nor yet of this carnal presence,
devised by them of the Popish church. Seeing then it is so, why are they judged
for heretics, which believe all that is contained in that Creed, neither yet
deny any thing that is thereof contained throughout the whole volume of the
holy Scriptures, whereon it is grounded? Contrariwise, why are they taken for
Catholics, and faithful Christians, which believe it not, but believe,
maintain, and teach all to the contrary, denying both by their doctrine and
works, that, which they here confess with their mouths, as we might presently
show from point to point, if we had not already, very largely and plainly
handled the same in our Dialogues upon the common Creed, called the Apostles
Creed.

Of the third part of the Mass, called Oblation. CHAPTER XXVII.
FRom the singing and rehearsing of the Creed, eue^ unto the Canon, there is
almost no speech had of the Oblation. This part also of the Mass, is so
named, which in old time was the beginning of the Mass of the Catechumeni. Now
a man may in it, see, many goodly things, for the building up of his faith,
and believing of that which heretofore we have treated of, touching the
offringes of the faithful in the ancient Church, and the presentation of them
unto the Lord, lifting up on hie, and recommending unto him, the things, which
they offered. All this gear, is now at this present referred to the bread and
wine, which are prepared in the sacrifice, with prayers, that the offering of
them is for the salvation, of quick and dead, of bodies and sou^les, and not
by the merit of Jesus Christ alone, but also through the merit of men and
women Saints. As concerning the principal part of this point of the
interlude, after that this scraping Squibbe, has gotten the money into his
maungy fistes, he then makes his Sermon. Howbeit we will here cease to speak
any farther of this matter. Dict. 3. Ca. Omnis Christianus. Nico. de Plou.
expo. 3. part. Miss.
For it shall suffice that we speak only of the offringes, amongst which,
there are some of them, which Christians, in some feasts are bound, unto,
according to the ordinary custom, as is contained in the Decres: Because
forsooth it is written, Thou shall not come before me empty fisted. And again,
there are other Canons amongst the ancient Councels, which are not at this
day very well observed. For, first, it was decreed in the Elibertine Council,
celebrated in Spain about the time of the Nicene Council, Libr. Con.
and of Syluester the first: that the Bishop might not receive either gifts, or
offerings, of those who communicated not at the Lords Supper. But at this day
it is clean contrary. For every man brings gifts and offringes to the
churches, and no man communicates there, save only the priest, which says
the Mass, except it be some days in the year. Libr. Con.
And in the Council of Aquisgraue (called Bawmorte) celebrated under king
Pepin the son of Lewys: it was decreed, that no man should offer any thing
which he had not received from the hand of the Lord, and which he had not
justly got, and was acceptable in his sight. For, it is written, He that offreth
to God of the spoil of the poor, is like unto him that offered a child in the
presence of his Father. Who soever he be then, that will offer any thing unto
the Lord as be comes him, let him first of all, Romans 12.
offer up him self, as the Apostle teaches, a lively and holy host or
sacrifice, which pleases the Lord, and afterward, those things which he has
justly gotten: that is to say, which he has received from the hand of the
Lord, and give it blessedly to his benefit, unto the Lord for usury. Thus we
see what is said in these Councels, of the offringes of the Church, which
should not be given to the profit of the priests, if it were rightly observed.
For, with what kinds of offringes are they most of all enriched, save only
with the riches of the great thieves and extortioners? And besides, if they
should receive no offringes, but of those which communicated at the Supper,
they should receive none but upon such days as they communicated it to all the
people. This ordinance, again admonishes us, that there was a communion for
all the people at the Supper, at such time as this was made: and that they, who
did not communicate without they had some lawful let, were accounted is
profane and Heathen people.

Of the Offering, and of the presentation of the chalice or cup, and bread.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
a AFter that, let him turn toward the people, Alph. G.
and with his hand joined together, say,

The Lord be with you.

Answer.

And with thy Spirit.

Toward the the Altar, say, Miss. R. Leuit. 21. Celestin.


b Let us pray.

Offertorie.

The priests of ye Lord, offer unto God, incense and loaves of bread: and
therefore they shall be holy unto their God, and not polute his name. Praise him
that is eternal.

After the Offertorie, let him join his hands together before the Altar, and
say,

c What shall I give unto the Lord for all his benefits bestowed upon me.
Psalm. 116.
I will take the cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.

the^ let him raise the chalice, and say

We offer up unto thee o Lord, the cup of Salvation, and beseech thee, that I
may ascend, with an acceptable sweet smelling savor before thy divine majesty.
Let this sacrifice be signed, ordained, blessed, and sanctified, in ye name of
our Lord Jesus Christ: and be acceptable unto God, the Father almighty, for my
self, for those that are here, and for all Christian people, that they may, in
this present world, receive remission of all their sins, and in the world to
come, obtain life everlasting. And for the soul of thy servant, and for the
souls of thy men and women servants, to the end thou may grant them
everlasting life, and make them partakers of the felicity of all the Saints.
In the name of the Father, etc.

e Holy Trinity, receive this oblation which we offer unto thee, in
remembrance of the incarnation, natioitie, circoncision, passion, refurrection,
and ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ: and in the honor of the blessed
always virgin Mary, and of all the Saints whach have pleased thee sithe^ce
the beginning of the world, to the end it may be auarlable for their honor,
and our soluation, both of body and soul. In the name of the Father, etc.

f Then let him make a cross upon the vaale that covers the chalice, setting
the chalice just in the midest. Then, let him take the patine and host, and
say,

In the name of the holy and inseparable Trinity, let this bread descend here:
and the blessing of God the father Almighty, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
desce^d upon us, and remain with us evermore. So be it. In ye name of the
Father, of the Son etc.

g Let him here, cover the Chalice with the vaale, and make a cross over the
chalice and host, saying,

In the name of the Father, etc.

POstea vertat se erga populum, and dicat manibus iunctis.

Dominus vobiscum.

Resp.

Et cum spiritu tuo.

Versus altar dicat.

Oremus.

Gelas. Greg. Thomas. Vrbain.
Offerrorium.

Sacerdotes Domini ince^sam and panes offerunt Deo: and ideo sancti eru^t Deo
suo, and non polluent nomen eius. Alleluya.

Post offertorium iungat manus ante altar, dicendo,

Quid retribuam Domino pro omnibus quae retribuit nihi? Calicem, salutaris
accipiam, and nomen Domini ^^^ocabo.

Surgat calicem dicendo,

Offerimus tibi Domine calicem salutaris, and deprecamor clementiam tuam vt in
conspectu diuinae maiestatis tuae cum odore suauitatis ascendat. In nomine
Domini nostri Jesus Christi, signatum ordinatum, benedictum and sanctificatum
istud sacrificium: and acceptabile si Deo Patri omnipotenti, pro meipso, pro
istis and omni populo Christiano: vt in pr^senti seculo remissionem cunctorum
peccatorum recipiant, and in futuro vitam co^sequantur aeternam. Et pro anima
famuli ^ui, and pro animabus famulorum, famul^rumque tuarum, and eis vitam
aternam tribuas and omnium sanctoru^ iubeas esse consor^es. In nomine Patris,
etc.

Suscipe sancta Trinit^s han^ oblationem, quam ubi off^r^mus ob memoriam
incarnationis, natiuitatis, ^^c^ncasionis, passionis, resurrectionis and
ascensionis Domini nostri Jesus Christi: and in honor beatae Mariae sen^ per
virginis, and omnium sanctorum qui tibi plac^er^^ ab origin mundi: vt illis
proficiat ad honorem, nobis autem ad salutem animae and corporis. In nomine
Patris, etc,

Faciat crucem cum calice super corporalia, ponendo calicem in medio postea
capiat patena^ cum hostia, dicendo,

In nomine sanctae and indiuiduae Trinitatis desce^^^ hic panis iste and
benedictio Dei Patris omnipotentis and Filij and spiritus Sancti descendat
super nos and man^^^ semper, Amen. In nom^^^ Patris, and Filij, etc.

Hic cooperiat calice^ cu^ corporalibus facie^do crucem super calicem and
hostiam, dicendo,

In nomine Patris, etc.

Of the points that are to be considered of, upon the matters aforesaid.
CHAPTER XXIX.
a HEre is another salutation, wherein Sir Rowley, drudg of the pudding house,
fetches another pretty turn, showing his foul paunch unto the people.

b This fragment, which is taken for the Offertory, is taken out of Leuiticus,
Leui. 21.
but not in such sort as it is there set down. Now, here in this, is a
wonderful skorning of God. For, first of all, the priest which says Mass,
exhorts the people to pray, saying, let us pray: and after, he himself
prays never a whit. For, there is no mention of prayer in these words, but
only an advertisement which the Lord gave, to the Leuitical priests only, how
they, should understand to govern and behave them selves in their office, and
not unto the Popish priests. For, there is no mention made here of the
sacrifices of the Mass, neither of the bread, nor yet of the incense which
therein are offered: But of the Leuiticall sacrifices, of burnt offringes and
loaves of bread, that were offered in them: not in the figure of the Popish
priests, and of their round wafer cakes, and sacrifices, but in the figure of
Jesus Christ the hie Priest (who is the true bread that came down from heaven)
and of his sacrifice, Heb. 7.9. Ioh. 6.
by which he offered and gave him self for the life of the world. And therefore
this sacrifice, ca^ in no wise iumpe with the priests of the Romish church,
without they will say that they are the Leuiticall succession, and Jews, still
looking for the coming of the hie priest Jesus Christ. For, if they should so
do, they should be no saints, but through such blasphemy, villanously trample
under foot the name of the Lord.

c These verses of the Psalms, Psalm. 116.
are here, marvelous properly applied. For, where David promises to give
thanks to God, for the saving health and deliverance which he had bestowed
upon him, and that through a banquet of praise: this blasphemour applies it to
his goblet, wherewith he here so pleasauntly plays his part, and whereby he
renounceth the very true saving health and deliverance, which we have received,
through the sacrifice and benefit of his death.

d Lo here the sleights and tricks of the goblet. Lo here, a pleasant cup
of salvation, and excellent sacrifice. It seems here that he means to offer
to drink to God, when as he tosseth up his goblet in so hie a manner. But what
is it that he here offreth? what is it that he would have mount up so hie? Is
it wine? For by their doctrine it is not yet blood. I am a fraid to speak of
the blasphemies contained in this prayer, for they are as many as their are
words and syllables. To what purpose serves Jesus Christ any more, if the
mass, and his sacrifice have this power and virtue both for quick and dead,
as is here set down?

e O thou hellish blasphemer, is this the honor which thou do to the holy
Trinity, to offer thy goblet, in the steed of the blood of the very Son of
God? and not only in remembrance of Jesus Christ, which died for us, but also
of the men and women saints who never died for us. And besides if this be in
remembrance, wherefore take thou it then for the sacrifice and oblation it
self, which was offered by Jesus Christ, Berno de off^c. Miss Ca 12. Berno
Nicol. de offic. Miss. Ca. 13.
of whom the Supper is a remembrance. Berno says and affirms, that this
prayer is not appointed to be said by any ordinance, order or usage, but only
by an ecclesiastical custom. He finds fault also with one thing that is
here committed in this usage, which we follow at this present: that is, that
after that this sacrifice is done in the remembrance of the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, that it is not convenient any other remembrance
should be had in it, either of the nativity, or of any such other like.

f He makes the goblet friske it here, all a pleasure.

g He takes the sawcer also in his hand, to make his round Robin also whip it
about, over which, he vomiteth as many blasphemies, as he does over his goblet.
And therefore all this is said in hudder mudder, after the manner of Magicia^s
or co^iurers. After this he falls a iuggling about his goblet, and jolly
round Robin, besides his encensing, according to the Romish office, which is
stuffed with as many blasphemies: and causes the goblet and cake also to be
ence^sed at the table. This is it, which they make Leo the third, to be the
principal author of, and they attribute it also to the Council of Roan. Now,
seeing the holy Scriptures manifestly tell us, Ephesians. 5.
that the encensinges of the law were the figures of Jesus Christ, who offered
his body a sweet smelling sacrifice, and that they likewise represented the
prayers of the Saints, Apoc 5. Psalm. 141.
as it is written in the Apocalypse, and Psalms, in which it is said, That my
prayer comes before thee like encense. We have now no more need of these
material ence^sings to serve and help the Religion, unless we will still play
the Jews: or use the^ to serve our turns only for persumes, to keep ill
smelles from us, and cleanse the air. For, if we otherwise use them, the Lord
shall say that unto us, which he spoke by his Prophet, Isaia 1.
I abhor your encensings.

Of the washing of hands, of the recommendation of the priest and sacrifice:
and of the secret. CHAPTER XXX.
a AFterward, let him go and wash his hands, at the right end of the Altar,
and say,

I will wash my hands amongst innocents, Psalm. 25.
etc.

unto the end of that Psalm, with Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was. etc.
Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us, Lord have mercy upon us.
Our Father which art in heaven. etc.

After he has washed his hands, let him make a sign of the Cross, standing by
the midst of the Altar, and say,

In the name of the Father, etc. Come holy Ghost replenish the hearts of thy
faithful, and enlighten in them, the fire of thy love.

Then let him bow him self down before the Altar, and say,

Receive us o Lord in humility of Spirit and contritenesse of heart, and let
our sacrifice be so made, as that it may at this day, o Lord my God, be
received at thy hands, and please thee. In the name of the Father, etc.

b Making a cross upon the Altar, and kissing it. Then let him lay his hands
a cross over the sacrifice, and say,

c Come, o invisible sacrificer and keeper: bless and sanctify this sacrifice
which is prepared in thy holy name. In the name of the Father, etc.

Making a Cross over the whole sacrifice and kissing the Altar.

Then let him hold his hands together, and turning him self unto the people,
say,

d Pray for me, brethren and sisters, and I for you, c that both mine and your
sacrifice together, may be acceptable unto the Lord our God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord: Lord, hear my prayer. And let my cry come to thee. The Lord
be with you. And with thy spirit. f Let us pray.

Then leaninge on the lefie side, he says the Secret or Secrettes.

The Secrettes.

We beseech thee o merciful Lord, to grant unto thy church, the gifts of
unity and peace: which are spiritually signified under the gifts offered,
through the Lord, etc.

DEinde vadat lotum manus suas ad dextru^ cornu altaris, dicendo,

Lauabo inter innocents manus meas, etc.

vsque ad fine^ Psalmi, cum Gloria Patri, etc. Sicut erat, etc. Kyrie eleyson.
Christ eleyson. Kyrie eleyson. Pater noster, etc.

Post lotionem manuum signet de signo crucis, sta^s in medio altaris, and dicat,

In nomine Patris, etc. Veni sancte Spiritus, reple tuorum corda fidelium, and
tui amoris in eis ignem accende.

Deinde inclinet se ante altar, and dicat,

In spiritu humilitatis and in animo contrito suscipiatur, Domine, a te, and
sic fiat sacrificium nostrum vt a te susciptatur hodie, and placeat ubi, Domine
Deus meus. In nomine Patris, and Filij, etc. Amen.

Facien do crucem super altar and osculando eum. Deinde ponat manus supra
sacrificium dicendo,

Veni inuisibilis sacrificator and custos: benedic and sanctifica hoc
sacrificium nomini sancto tuo praeparatum. In nomine Patris, etc.

Faciendo crucem supra totum sacrificium, and osculando altar.

Postea iungat manus, and vertens se ad populum dicat,

Orate pro me fratres and sorores, and ego pro vobis, vt meum, pariterque
vestrum sacrificiu^ sit Domino Deo nostro acceptum, Per Christum Dominum
nostrum, Domine exaudi orationem meam. Et clamor meus ad te veniat. Dominus
vobiscum. Et cum spiritu tuo. Oremus.

Deinde girans se ex part sinistra, dicit Secretam, vel Secretas,

Secreta

Ecclesiae tuae quaesumus, Domine vnitatis and pacis, propicius dona concede,
quae sub oblatis muneribus mystice designantur, Per Dominum, etc.

Of the things that are to be considered of upon the aforesaid matters.
CHAPTER XXXI.
a HEre is now the second, and solemnest, hand washing in the Mass, but yet
not the most delicate. And therefore John sweet lips, licketh not his
fingers. He is contented to wash and make clean his hands, as Pilate did,
when he was willing to condemn Jesus Christ. For, seeing he will needs
sacrifice it, and that there can be no sacrifice without shedding of blood, and
death, when any live thing is sacrificed, how far is he behind Pilate (I pray
you) who condemned Jesus Christ to be hanged on the cross? He may then very
well brag, that he washes his polluted hands amongst innocents, or in
innocence, as it is in the Psalm, which this blasphemour abuses here so
villanously. But is there either rhyme or reason here in this? I will speak no
more of the blasphemies which are in these prayers, either because they are
altogether contrary to the true calling on the name of God, and the merit of
Jesus Christ, or else because they are ill fauouredly applied, and the holy
word of God, by them, profaned and dishonored.

b Here are crosses plenty. The priests are very well contented to skirmish
with them, and kiss them as long as you will: but to bear the cross of Jesus
Christ for his words sake, back with that leg. They cannot skill of it.

c Who is that invisible sacrificer and keeper, that he calls upon, for the
sanctifying of so execrable a sacrifice? If it be he for whom it is prepared,
and in whose name it is offered, surely it cannot be the holy Ghost, Ephesians. 2.6.
nor yet Jesus the holy of holy ones, but the unclean spirit who guides and
rules the enemies of Jesus. Berno of the office of the Mass Ca. 12.
Berno testifies that this prayer is said after the use of the Gauls and
French.

d Every man may here see the pitches and turns, and legier de maines that are
used and played, to all ententes and purposes. And amongst all the rest it is
ordained that master John must turn him self to the people, and recommend
him to their prayers, promising them also to lend them his. Howbeit the people
understand not a word of that he says. Wherefore he loses this his
recommendation without happily it serve him for the stopping of a gappe, for the
better garnishing and furnishing of the play. Whereupon, we have to note, that
if he have but one to make answer, he should say, brother, pray, and not
brethren, pray ye.

e Here, he makes all these his companions, that are at Mass with him,
saying, that the sacrifice which he offreth, is as well theirs, as his. And
therefore if he renounce Jesus Christ in offering it, they all likewise renounce
him, which are at Mass with him. It should seem, that this was taken from the
manner and use of the ancient Church, wherein the Ministers of the word of God,
desiered the Church to pray for them, and wherein also, they which offered their
goods, as well for the sustentation of the poor, as for the maintenance of the
divine service, called upon God.

f He again exhorts to prayer, and after, prays him self in secret, when
he has a little pitched and turned. And therefore this prayer is called, Nico.
de Plou. expo. 3. part. Miss.
Secret. And because he sometimes says more then one of them, as he does of
the collectes, it is leaft to my young Masters choice that does the office:
who has a rule, to say always as many Secrettes, as he shall say other
collectes. Now, I could never yet find out the Authors, that put to all these
fragmentes which were put in, sithence the Offertorie, without, as I take it,
they be the Authors of the Secrettes, to whom they attribute the Collectes,
because they are such prayers as alter and change, according to the diversity
of the Masses. I know not whether these Secrettes, were put into the Mass, in
steed of prayers which are secretly made by every one in particular in the
ancient Church, after the delivery of the word of God, and the public
prayers, which the Minister says in the name of the whole Church, Alama. de
offic. Miss. Ca. 3. Cypria. de Dominica oratione. Sermon. 6. Matthew. 6.
yea or no. Alamarius meaning to render a reason hereof, alleges that, which
S. Cyprian wrote, of the modesty, countenances, and humility which are to be
used and observed in prayer, finding fault with the disorders that are
committed therein. And amongst all other points he teaches, that there is no
need to use much babbling: which thing our Savior Christ him self expreslie
has touched. And besides that it is not needful forcibly to cry out
therein, considering that we are to deal with God, who both sees and knows
our hearts. Howbeit Cyprian his meaning is not, that the common prayers, which
are said in the Church in the name of the whole Congregation, should so basely
be mumbled up, as that no man might be able to hear them. For he speaks not
only of such prayers, but generally of all. For, it is one thing to pray
particularly and a part, and another thing, to pray in common, as the ministers
of the Church do, who are, as it were, the mouth of the whole Congregation.
Again why apply they not likewise this unto their roaring and yelling,
wherewith they make a far greater noise in their Churches, then ever did the
Priests of Ball, as if their God were deaf, a sleep, or else drunk in some
Tavern? Wherefore say they not this in such sort, as they say the secrets and
Canon?

g There are some of their secrets in the Mass which contain horible
blasphhemies. As for this that is here set down is not amiss, nor yet
contrary to the true doctrine of the Supper. They make it not here strange to
use this word, Signifies, declaring that the Supper represents the peace
and union which we have in Jesus Christ: which cannot be understood of their
Mass, whereunto they apply it. For, what signification can there be of peace
and union in the Priests particular Supper, and in the bread and wine which he
offers? This may be said of the Supper, having regard to the sacrifice of
thanksgiving, which is there offered, giving thanks unto Jesus Christ by the
communicating thereof with a common accord and consent.

Of the Preface, and of the Sanctus. CHAPTER XXXII.
HEre a lifting up his hands a sonder he says.

For ever and ever.

Answer.

So be it.

The Priest,

The Lord be with you.

Answer.

And with thy Spirit.

The Priest.

d Lift up your hearts.

Answer.

We lift them up unto the Lord.

The Priest.

Let us give thanks unto the Lord our God.

Answer.

It is meet and right so to do.

The Priest.

e Verily it is meet, right, equal, Gelas. Symb. Vrb. in Pelag.
and healthful, that we should give thanks unto thee, holy Lord, Father
almighty, everlasting God, because the new light of thie brightness, has
enlightened the understanding of our eyes, through the secreat incarnation of
the word: that whiles we know God visiblie, we might by it be ravished with
the love of invisible things. Wherefore, with Angels and Archangelles,
Thrones and dominions and with the whole company of the heavenly army, we
sing the Hymn of thy glory.

Here he must join his hands together

Saying incessantly.

And somewhat bowing him self over the Altar, say.

Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, heaven and earth, are full of the
Majesty of thie glory, Osanna in the highest.

Here, he signeth him self with the sign of the cross saying.

Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Osanna in the highest.

HIc eleuatis and difiu^ctis manibus, dicit. Per omnia secula seculoru^

Resp.

Amen.

Sacerdos.

Dominus vobiscum.

Resp.

Et cum Spiritu tuo.

Sacerdos

Sursum corda.

Resp.

Habemus ad Dominum.

Sacerdos.

Gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro.

Resp.

Dignum and iustum est.

Sacerd.

Vere dignum and iustum est, aequu^ and salutare, nos tibi semper and vbique
gratias agere, Domine sancte, Pater omnipotens, aeterne Deus: quia per
incarnati mysteriu^ noua me^tis nostrae oculis lux tuae claritatis infulsit: vt
dum visibiliter Deu^ cognoscimus, per hu^c inuisibiliu^ amorem rapiamur. Et
ideo cum Angelis et Archangelis, cu^ thronis and dominationibus, cumque omnibus
militiae caelestis exercitijs, hymnum gloriae tuae cammus.

Hic debet manus co^iungere.

Sine fine dicentes.

Mediocriter inclinatus super Altar, dicat. Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, Dominus
Deus Sabbath. Pleni sunt caeli and terra gloriae tuae. Osanna in excelsis.

Hic signat se signo crucis dicendo.

Benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini Osanna in excelsis.

Of the points that are to be noted upon the aforesaid Text. CHAPTER XXXIII.
a HEre, M. hethethee hothethee, stands like a man in a great amaze.

b Here in this point is some great matter: for, he says the secret very
softly, for fear he should be heard, and soon after cries out aloude, to no
purpose in the world, for ever and ever: To the end that the people, and they
which help him at Mass, might answer, Amen. without either hearing or yet
understanding what it was that he said, neither yet whereunto he refers this
his Per omnia. For this word Amen, is an Hebrewe word, by which, they that
speak it, declare their consent to that which is said, and testify that they
take it to be true, and wish it to be so. But how can he that so answers
answer in truth, without he do it scoffingly and merrily, when as he
understands not that, which he affirms and testifies? For it is as if a man should set his hand and seal unto an obligation, or letter, having never
read it, nor yet knowinge what is within it. And therefore the holy Apostle
says, How shall he say Amen to thy prayer, who neither knows what thou
say, nor yet understands thee one whit? 1. Cor. 14.
And if this be to be done in the public prayers of the Church, it is much
more requisite in the administration of the Sacraments. For, since they are as
it were a confirmation of the contract and covenant which the Lord has made
with us: what protestation, are we able, for our parts, to make, if we
understand not the contents and articles of the covenant, whereof, the
Sacraments are as it were the seals? It is also much like, as if men should
seal to a covenant and understood not what it is, and as if they should bear
witness unto it, and yet knew not the contents thereof. And therefore the
Sacramental words of all Sacraments, are so to be uttered, as that they to
whom they appertain, might, as well as their capacity were able to bear it,
understand them.

c Here he saluteth the people with his tail toward them, without tourning
him self about unto them.

d We have already elsewhere declared to what end this is said, and from
whence it was taken, and how the contrary is done in the Mass of this
exhortation. And therefore the Doctors them selves of the Popish Church do
testify, that none can have part of this Sacrament, without he lift up his
heart on high, and that many of them which say, they lift them up on high, do
many times shamefully lie.

e Although all that goes before, serves for a preface, they especially call
all that which follows it, by the same name, unto the Sanctus. We have
somewhat at large spoken in other places of the diversity of Prefaces, which
also have their several tunes, according to the days and feasts, for which
they are properly appointed. The Canons which we have spoken of, that forbid no
Collectes, prayers, prefaces, proses, nor any other Apocriphaes, noranie thing
else that is not approved lawful, to be used, have yet rehearsed them in
diverse and sundry Councels, as namely, in the second Laodicean Council, and
in the Millaine. And therefore it was many times ordained, that there should be
but one form of the Divine office: in one self same Province and Country:
and especially in the Gerundense, first Bracarien, Ex lib. Con
fourth and eleventh Tolentane, Councelles. For which cause, they had their
diverse and sundry vsages given them, according to the diversity of the
Bishoprics and Diocesses. The form and manner of the Preface which is here
set down, is ordained to be said every day from Christmasse night unto the
Epiphanie. It serves also for Candlemasse and this Corpus Christi day. The
rest of the feasts, have theirs also, by them selves. Furthermore I find no
great hurt in that, that is herein contained, if it were applied as it should
be, that is, according to the form of the ancient Church.

f This advertisement that is here given is, because that hitherto M. Rowley
Rownsie as a man amazed, holds out his hands a stroute, as if iolie Saint
Frauncis should show the skarres of his wounds. And in the end of his preface
he puts them again together.

g Over and besides that which has been already said of the ordinance of Pope
Sixtus concerning the Sanctus, there is yet a Canon in the second Vasense
Council, which commands it to be said in all Masses, of what quality or
condition soever they be. It is a notable thing to see from whence this gear
it fetched. For, there is nothing, of it self, but is to the praise and glory
of God. But being applied to this Idol of the Mass, wherefore serves it, but
only for blasphemy? For, the Lord knows what goodly Angels, and
Seraphims, we have of these blasphemers, to sing praise unto him. They may very
well call him holy, holy, as often as they lust, when they so horribly blaspheme
him. And they may very well also take unto them, the name of Seraphims, which
signify as much, as burning and slaming, but not with love to God and their
neighbors, as men enlightened with the light of God, as the Angels are: but
burning and flaming with rage and fury, to persecute and burn the children of
God, which would praise him, as the Angels do: which they, quite and clean
take both from him, and from our Lord Jesus Christ also, transporting the same
unto an Idol of paast, and to that Romish Antichrist, whom they call
Sanctissime Pater, that is to say, most holy Father, in the Superlatiue
degree, comprehending all in one word, which the Angels made three of.

h They entermeddle many words of strange languages in their Mass (besides
their barbarous Latin) which they chiefly take from the Hebrews, and some from
the Greeks: counterfaiting the Magicians, and heathen, and Mark the heretic,
who were wont to intermeddle many barbarous, strange, and hard words to
pronounce, in their charms and divine offices, that they might thereby make the
people, the more amazed, Arno. contra Gent. The. de fa. ha^t Lucy in Necy,
and their doings, a great deal the more wonderful and strange, as Arnobius,
Theodorete, and Lucian do testify. They have here Sabbath and Osanna, from the
Hebrews, which them selves cannot rightly pronounce, and therefore much less
understand. But what a manner of speaking is this, thus to confound one
language with another, being not driven of necessity so to do, neither yet to
any purpose? It is as if we should say, Lord God exercituum, mingling Latin
with English, not speaking fully, either the one or the other, in stead of
saying all in English, Lord God of hosts, or in Latin, Domine 'Deus
exercituum. And this is like all the rest.

i The Lord also knows, to what great purpose the words of David are here
alleged, for the coming of this new Christ.

Of the fourth part of the Mass, called Consecration, CHAPTER XXXIIII.
AFterward, bowing him self somewhat low before the Aultare, with his hands
joined together, he says.

Thee therefore most pitiful Father. etc.

DEinde, profunde in cliuatus ante Altar iunctis manibus, dicit.

Te igitur clementissime Pater etc.

After he has made an end of the Sanctus, then follows the Cannon, which is
convenient for him to declare, with the ceremonies before mentioned, as well
here, as in the Cautels of the Mass already recited. There are also certain
vsages, according to which the Lauabo is only given in this behalf, Expo. 4.
part. Miss,
as that which Nicholas de Ploue ensues. Now, here begins the most
abominable sorcerie and Magical art that is in all the whole Mass, insomuch
that it may rather be rightly called a deuillish execration, then a
consecration, as they term it. We have already sufficiently spoken of these
forgers of this goodly piece of work, amongst which Nicholas de Ploue has put
in Clement the first, Ex 4. par. Miss
, saying, that he ordained the Canon, that is, before the consecration. And we
will here again set down as well generally as particularly in the margin,
the Authors to whom it is attributed. Now, because there is far greater
danger in this point, then in any other point of the Mass, it was ordained in
the Council of Oxenford, Ex lib. Con.
holde^ in England by the Archbishop S^eue^, that the Archdeacons in their
visitations, should provide, that if any faults were to be found in the Canon
thereof, that it should be amended and corrected: and that the Priests might
be able at the least very well to pronounce the words of it, and soundly
understand the same. Here is also to be noted, that when my Masters which say
the Mass are come so far, some of them must with great reverence and
humility kiss the Altar, and some, the image of the Crucifixe (which is
purposly pictured in the Mass book to that end) which seems to be a thing
very agreeable with the decree of the Elibertine Council, celebrated in
Spain, Ex lib. Con.
about the time of the Nicene Council and of Siluester the first, in which the
pictures of Images were forbidden to be in the Church: to the end that that
which is to be honored should not be painted and pictured on the walls.
Howbeit, when this ordinance was made, the Mass had not then that furniture
about it, which now it has. And therefore it is very meet that it should be
garnished with this ornament, and especially in this point: wherein is
contained the most shameful and horrible idolatry and blasphemy that is
possible to be devised. Moreover, the Masters of the ceremonies, and
expositors of this Canon, have divided it into certain parts, some only into
five, and other some into twelve, as every of them shall be seen in their
place and order.

Of the first part of the Cano^ of the Mass, containing a general Prayer for
the whole Church, and in especial one for Prelates and Princes. CHAPTER XXXV.
The Canon.
WE a beseech thee therefore most pitiful Father, for thie dear Sons sake
Christ Jesus our Lord, to accept and b bless.

Here standing upright, he kisseth the Altar, and makes three crosses, as
well over the host as the Chalice.

c These gifts, these presents, these holy sacrifices, with d out spot.

Soon after stretching forth his arms, and lifting them somewhat up he goes
on with the Canon.

Which we offer unto thee, first, for thy holy Catholic Church, which
vouchsafe peaceably to preserve, keep, unite, and govern thoroughout the face
of the whole earth, with thie servant N. e our Pope, N f our Bishop, N. g our
King and all those thy true and faithful ones, which honor and follow the
Catholic and Apostolic faith.

Canon.
TE igitur cleme^tissi^^e Pater, per Jesus Christum, Filium tuum Dominum
nostrum, supplices rogamus and petimus, vt accepta habeas et benedicas

Hic crige^s se, osculatur Altar and ter signar, tam super hostiam, qua^ super
Calicem.

Haec dona, haec munera, haec sancta sacrificia illibata.

Deinde exte^sis manibus, and mediocriter eleuatis, prosequitur Canonem.

Inprimis quae tibi offerimus, pro Ecclesia tua sancta Catholica, quam
pacificare, custodire, adunare, and regere digneris toto orb terrarum, vna cum
famulo tuo, Papa nostra N. and Antistite nostro, N. and Rege nostro N. and
omnibus orthodoxis, atque Catholicae and Apostolicoe fidei cultoribus.

a The prayer which is here set down in this first part of the Canon, stands
in stead of the prayers which were wonted to be said in the ancient Church,
especially as S. Paul teaches, for Princes and great men in authority, 1.
Tim. 2. Apoc. cap. 3 9.
a form whereof we have in Tertullian. But the beginning is taken out of the
prayer which is said over the offringes, which the faithful offer, but to what
uses, we have thereof else where spoken: which prayer these men improperly apply
to their singing cake, and Chalice, thinking to make of them a Sacrifice.

b As often as these words, bless, and blessing, are mentioned in the Mass,
there must always crosses be made with the hand and fingers. For, they think,
that to bless, is to make signs of the cross. Now there are very ioly
mysteries and magical Sacraments amongst these, howbeit we will pass them over.

c Our young Masters, make many stout and strong reasons, about the exposition
of these 3. words, and all because forsooth, mention is made in the plural
number, of gifts, presents, and Sacrifices, as if there were more of them then
one. Which thing they will in no wise confess. For, they say that Jesus Christ
is there offered, which is but one only gift and Sacrifice. Howbeit this
difficulty was not in the Church, in which such and the like words were
referred to the gifts and presents which the faithful offered in the Church,
which were bread and wine, wherewith the Supper was celebrated. And all these
gifts and presents, were called Sacrifices: some, because they were offered to
God, for the releeuing of the poor members of Jesus Christ, Heb. 13.
in that sense which the Apostle calls the alms and relief of the poor,
Sacrifices: saying, that with such Sacrifices and offerings God is well pleased:
and some others again, to wit, those which were taken to be used about the
Supper, were called also by that name, because that the Supper is cele brated
with thanksgiving, which the same Apostle likewise calls the sacrifices of
tha^kesgiuing, as all other sorts of prayers are. Heb. 13.
And therefore it is called the Eucharist, which imports as much. But to what
purpose is it, to offer bread and wine to God, for the whole Church? Surely
this must needs be a very goodly Sacrifice, and well worthy so high a Majesty:
and a very proper change, to change Jesus Christ into a singing cake and a
little wine, to make a Sacrifice of him. For, they are not here as yet
transubstantiated. Moreover, they say that these crosses and commemorations of
gifts and presents do signify amongst the rest, Nicol. de Plo. de expos.
Miss.
Judas his treason.

d They expound this word illibata for incorruptibile, although in very deed,
it signifies properly, a thing which was never disme^bred nor tasted of, but
an whole and sound thing. Now, they are again very much deceived in the
exposition of this word, because that oftentimes these iollie incorruptible
gifts, presents, and Sacrifices, do greatly corrupt and rot, as we have
understood by the Cautelles of the Mass, heretofore recited. Whereupon, Chap.
3. li. Con.
an ordinance also was made in the third Council of Arles (celebrated about the
time of Pope Leo) against those which looked not well unto them, but suffered
them to be lost, or be eaten with mise, or some other vermin: And therefore
surely these could not be called illibata, that is to say, whole and sound.

e It was ordained in the 2. Vasense Council, De expo. Miss.
that the name of the Pope of Rome should be recited in the prayers of the
Church. Nicholas de Ploue says, That Clement the first, made this ordinance,
and was after confirmed by Pelagius which says, That he, without all doubt is
separated from the world, who, for any dissension, remembers not the Pope in
the Mass, according to the custom in that behalf received.

f This second remembrance is for the Bishop of the same Diocese, where the
Mass is said. Nicol. de Plo.
This is not to be said, if the Bishop him self says the Mass, neither yet
at Rome, because the Pope him self is there, who is more then a Bishop. These
N. N. signify, that they of whom they will speak, must here be named by
their own names: For it behooves that my young Master, which says the
Mass, have a special mind upon them.

g It was ordained in the Council of Rheims. celebrated about the time of Pope
Leo the third, That prayers should be made for the Emperor, and his children.
Ex lib. Con.
If the Prince of the Country be any other then an Emperor or King, he must
name him by his name, whether he be Duke or Earl.

Of the second part of the Canon, containing the commemoration for the quick.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
For the quick.
a REmember, O Lord, thy men and women b servants c N. and as many as are
here present, whose faith and devotion thou right well know: d for whom we
offer unto thee, or which they them selves offer unto thee, e this sacrifice of
thanksgiving, for them selves, and for all theirs, for the redemption of their
souls, the hope of their welfare and health, and who also yield their vows
unto the, eternal, living and true God

Pro viuis.
MEmento Domine famuloru^ famularumque tuaru^ N. and omniu^ circu^stantium
quorum tibi fides cognita est, et nota deuotio pro quibus tibi offerimus, vel
qui tibi offeru^t, hoc sacrificiu^ laudis, pro se suisque omnibus, pro
redemptione animaru^ suaru^ pro spe salutis and incolumitatis suae, tibique
reddu^t vota sua, aeterno Deo viuo and vero.

a This commemoration is in stead of the recommendations that were wont to be
used in the ancient Church, in that form which has elsewhere bin spoken of
as touching the public prayers thereof: howbeit it is an horrible thing to se
the blasphemies that are herein. Our young Masters rendering a reason, Nicol.
de Plo. de expos. Miss
why there is a commemoratio^, made rather for the quick, then for the dead,
in this Canon say, That it is because that the quick are in far greater
danger then the dead, for although the dead are greatly tormented in
Purgatory, yet that they are without the danger of comdemnation, and so are
not the living. Now, if it be so, I greatly wonder why they have not put in the
co^memoration of these miserable dead souls, before the commemoration of the
Saints, which comes after it. For, the Saints which are already in
glory, have a more pleasant waiting, then these poor souls that lie
broiling in Purgatory. Again, if the Mass do them no good for whom it is
said, until it be ended, or at the least until the Sacrifice of it be
offered: then, Nicol. de Plo. de expos. Miss
these good souls lose nothing by it, although they be made to wait somewhat
the longer. Here is also to be noted, That these young Masters commonly say
their mementoes, as though they were a sleep and in a slomber, like unto
dormise. For which cause our Masters find great fault ^^th them, as well, for
that it comes oftentimes to pass, that they which are at the Mass go away
thence, being grieved to see them sleep, and tarry so long in their business,
because it is much better for the^ to dispatch them selves of that which they
carry in memory, for the avoiding of the wandringe of their minds this way and
that, as oftentimes it falls out.

b This naming of women servants does many times give occasion of offense to
many of my young Masters, because it puts them in mind of their women
servants that are at home in their houses. Which thing is sufficient enough to
trouble their minds, both to make them forget their minding of consecration
and also make all those become idolaters that are present with them at Mass.

e This N. does again admoyish them of their names, which they are especially
to recommend.

d This manner of speech declares, that not only the Priest which says the
Mass offers the Sacrifice which there is made, but also as many as are there
with him. Wherefore then attributes he the workma^ship to the^ that are with
him as well as to him self? And therefore seeing it is so, they which are at
mass with him do as much blaspheme the benefit of the death and passion, and of
the Sacrificing of Jesus committed in the same, as they which say it. Now a
man may easily judge, by that which follows, whether there be any blasphemy
in it yea or no. For, it is namelye said, that this Sacrifice is offered, for
the salvation and redemption of the souls of all those, which are present at
it, and also of all theires: which can no ways agree, but with the only
Sacrifice which Jesus made upon the cross. Wherefore I greatly marvel that
the earth opens not, and swalloweth up these blasphemoures, so often as this
horrible blasphemy proceeds out of their mouths. We have showed in what
sense this manner of speaking was in use, to wit, For whom we offer thee, or,
they which offer thee, when we spoke of the custom that was sometimes in the
Church, in those days when the Supper was communicated, to all, and that they
which there communicated, offered the bread that was there distributed, for the
making of the Supper: but not to make such a Sacrifice of it, as is here
described.

e We have already handled and treated in what sense the Supper might be
called a Sacrifice of thanksgiving. Howbeit, they are not contented to make
here of their Mass, such a Sacrifice of thankesgeuing as the Supper is, which
also it can not be, seeing it is not in deed the Supper: But which is more,
they make of it a propiciatory sacrifice, that is to say for the remission of
sins, in steed of giving thanks with it, of that remission and grace,
obtained through the sacrifice of the death of Jesus, as is made in the true
Supper of his, calling these jolly sacrifices of theirs, their vows, to wit,
that which they have promised and vowed to God: as if all what soever, both
they them selves, and all Christians besides, are by their Baptism bound unto,
were comprised within this sacrifice.

f This imports, that this sacrifice stretches it self no further for them
that are living, but for spiritual benefits, and for their salvation.
Wherefore then do they it for earthly benefits, and for brute beasts, and such
other like?

Of the third part of the Canon containing the first Commemoration of the
Saints. CHAPTER XXXVII.
Infra Actionem.
a COmmunica^tes and memoriam venerantes, imprimis gloriosae semper vir ginis
Mariae genetricis Dei, and Domini nostri Jesus Christi, sed and beatorum
Apostoloru^, ac Martyru^ tuoru^ Pe^i and Pauli, Andreae, Iacobi, Joan. Thomae,
Iacobi, Philippi, Bariholomaei, Matthaei, Simonis and Thadaei, Lini, Cleti,
Clementis, Sixti, Cornelij, Cypriani, Laurentij, Grisogoni, Joan. and Pauli,
Cosme and Damiani: Et omnium Sanctoru^ tuorum, quorum meritis precibusque
concedas, vt in omnibus protectionis tuae muniamur auxilio, Per eunde^ Christum
Dominum nostrum.

Under the Actio^ of thanksgiving.
Syrice. Gregory. 3.
COmmunicating and honoring, Linus.
first of all, and chiefly, the remembrance, of the glorious always virgin
Mary, the b mother of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ: and also of the
blessed Apostles and Martyrs, Peter and Paul, Andrew, James, John, Thomas,
James, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Simon, and Thade, Line, Clete, Clement,
Sixtus, Cornelius, Cyprian, Lawrence, Grysogone, John and Paul, Cosme, and
Damian: and of all those Saints by whose merits and prayers thou will grant
unto us, to be defended in all things, with the help of thy protection, c
Through the same Christ Jesus our Lord.

a We have heretofore, sufficiently spoken of the co^memoration of the Saints.
This is the first of this Canon, Dur. Rar. lib. 4. Ru. de 3. part. ca. Nic. de
expo. Miss. 4. part. Clithou. in Elucid.
which Nicholas de Ploue, attributes not unto Syrice as the rest do, but unto
Linus the first. Howbeit, who soever is author thereof, it alters and
changes in sundry solemn and festival days, by reason of diverse
additio^s which are put to it. We have spoken also of that which Gregory the
third added for the Saints days. And here is also to be noted, that each
monk, friar and priest thrusts in their patrones as pleases them. It is
easily to be judged, that this piece was patched, too long, after the death of
Jesus Christ, because that the names of Saints are in it, which were long time
after: yea and such saints to, as are not very well known: howbeit there is
no remedy, but that we must needs believe those men which have enrolled them.
At the least, there is one Grysogone, who, if I be not deceived, is put in for
Chrysogone. But I know not whence they had him. Here are two points,
principally to be noted, in this manner of commemoration. The first is, that
they join the commemoration of the Saints with the commemoratio^ of Jesus
Christ, as if they were all alike and fellows, and, as though the Supper had
been ordained as well for it, as for that of Jesus Christ's. The other is, the
praying that is made to them in it, and not to Jesus Christ alone. And what
soever we speak here of this commemoration, may also serve for all the rest
that hereafter ensue.

b Here is somewhat a strange kind of speech, whereas they say of the virgin
Mary, genetricis Dei, and Domini nostri Jesus Christi, which is as much as if we
should say, a begetter, or which has begotten God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
I know not whether they mean to counterfeit the poet in using for Matter, which
signifies mother, by this word, Genitrix, which the Latins never use, without
it be in versifying and in poesy: or else whether they think it to be more
elegant, because it is not so common, but less used. Wherein, they savor much
of their country Schoolemaisters, who furnish their compositions with all the
most eloquent words they can possibly get, be they poetical or otherwise, so
that they be strange, and rare in use. For therein consists al their whole
elegancie. Howbeit the manner of speech which they in the old time used, is
nothing like to this. For they have, according to the meaning of the
Scriptures, rightly said that, which we so often times have heard in the
Creed, that the Father being very God, has begotten the Son, who is also
very God of very God: but when we speak of the virgin Mary, we say that Jesus
was borne of her, and not begotten of her. But we will over slip this, as a
thing that may be more fitly handled. Nevertheless there is yet an other point
herein to be handled, and that is this, that when Saint Paul uses this manner
of speech, and says, God, and our Lord Jesus Christ: the name of God is
referred commonly to the Father, and the name of our Lord, to Jesus Christ.
For, although Jesus Christ the very Son of God, is very God with the Father,
and the Father also, Lord, as well as the Son: yet for all that, there is a
difference in speaking of the unity of God, and of the distinction of the
three persons in Trinity. And therefore according to the manner of Saint
Paul his speech, and the understanding of his words, we should here
understand, that the virgin Marie, should not be the mother of Jesus Christ
alone, but also of the Father, and that she had begotten, both the Father and
the Son. But if they would say, that this is here set down to meet with the
heresy of the Nestorians, thereby to declare, that Jesus Christ is not man
alone: or that there are in him two persons, as he is in one and the self
same person, very God and very man: it might be a great deal more properly
spoken in other words, and never abuse the words of the Apostle.

c This is one of the places, Rat. lib. 4. Rub. d. 4. part. chae. Nico. de
Plou. de expo. Miss.
wherein no, Amen, is answered: because (as they say) the Angels answer him.

Of the fourth part of the Canon. CHAPTER XXXVIII.
Infra actionem.
Leo.
HAnc igitur oblatione^ seruitutis nostrae, sed and cunctae familiae tuae
quesumus Domine, vt placatus accipias, Greg.
diesque nostros in tua pace disponas, atque ab aeterna damnatione nos eripi,
and in electoru^ tuorum iubeas grege numerari, Per Christum Dominum nostrum.
Amen.

Leo.
Under the Action.
Greg.
WE therefore beseech thee o Lord, not only gently to receive this oblatio^ of
our servitude, but also the oblation of thy family, c and direct our days in
thy peace, and command us to be delivered from everlasting death, and be
nombred amongst thy chosen, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it.

a They call the Canon likewise by the name of Action, And therefore, that,
which they say under the title of the Action, is as much as if they should have
said under the Canon. Howbeit I know not to what end it is that they thus say.
And as for the name of Action, they call it also the Canon. Because as they
say, it is as it were a suit or cause brought in by the priest before God,
against the Devil, for all Christians. And therefore it is no marvel though
Sir Bartill, who pleads this plea, causes himself to be well paid for the
suits which he co^menceth, considering that he takes upon him the part of a
lawyer in so dangerous a case. Let Jesus Christ therefore rest him self and be
still, Romans 8. 1. Tim. 2.
and let S. Paul also give him us no more for our Advocate, but give over this
charge unto good Sir Squibble Squabble, who plays the pretty man so lively,
herein.

b It appears by this prayer, that they follow the trace somewhat of that
which was sometimes used in the ancient Church, as concerning the offringes of
the faithful, which they offered unto God. For, we may here easily see, that
this jolly Sir whip offreth not his offringes alone, but the whole church
together, and that the church would never have made this request which herein
is contained, if she had meant to offer Jesus Christ, in offering of bread and
wine unto God. For she prayed for Jesus Christ, that he might be acceptable
unto the Father with his sacrifice, in steed that he might make us acceptable
unto him by his sacrifice. And therefore, what is he that sees not the
blasphemy that is here committed, and in many other the like prayers, which
are in this Canon, and how the custom of the ancient Church, and the manner of
dealing therein is utterly perverted?

c Nicholas de Ploue, Nic. de Plou. de expo. Miss. 4 part. Rat. lil. 4. Rub. de
4. part. cap. Berno. de offic. Miss. Ca. 13. Ala. de off^c. Miss. Ca. 23.
attributes the beginning of this piece unto Leo the first, and the conclusion
thereof, unto Gregory the first. Howbeit, Berno and Durand, do attribute the
one half of it to Gregory alone: to wit, the three demaundes that are in it.
And so, although it be but a very small piece, yet is it not all of one man's
making.

Of the fifth part of the Canon, containing the entrance into the
Transubstantiation. CHAPTER XXXIX.
a The Prayer.
b WHich oblation we beseech thee o God, vouchsafe to make it in every
respect, bles regi stred, rati fied, reasonable, and acceptable, to the end it
may be made unto us, the bo die, and bl ood of thy dear beloved Son our Lord
Jesus Christ.

c The three former crosses, are commonly made over the host and Chalice: The
fourth, only over the host: and the fifte, over the Chalice.

Oration.
QVAM oblationem in Deus, in omnibus quaesumus been dictam, ascri ptam, ra tam,
rationabilem, acceptabilemque facere digneris, vt nobis cor pus and san guis
fiat dilectissimi Filij tui Domini nostri Jesus Christi.

Tres praecede^tes cruces primae fiunt super hostiam and ^^lice^ co^muniter,
quarta fit tantu^ super hostiam, and quinta fit super calice^.

a This is one of those prayers which is again attributed to Leo and Gregory.
They which divide the Canon but into five parts, begin here the second
containing the consecration of the sacrifice.

b I will not here enter into the exposition of the epithetes and titles which
they here give unto their oblation. And therefore they which have a mind to
understand them, may learn them at their hands which have treated of that
matter. It is enough for us that we advertise here the Readers, to call to
mind that which we have already admonished them of, else where, as concerning
the bread and wine in the Supper, which were taken from the offerings of the
faithful: and remember likewise that which we have already handled somewhat at
large of the transubstantiation of the Ancients, and in what sense they
understood how the bread and wine were made the body and blood of our Lord
Jesus in the Supper, and changed and turned into them. For we have here, the
manner and testimony of all these things. For, this oblation, which is here
spoken of, according as they in the old time used it (in that sense that it
has already been interpreted) was taken from the gifts and presents which we
have so often made mention of. And therefore the Church made this prayer unto
God, not meaning that the substance of the bread and wine were changed into the
substance of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, according to the doctrine of
Popish transubstantiation: but that they were dedicated and consecrated unto
this holy Sacrament, truly to represent this body and blood, and the right
communicating of them, in such sense as we have already handled them, when as
we spoke of the nature of the consecration, and in what signification the same
ought to be taken. For, if these words be otherwise understood, they are taken
contrary to the meaning of the holy Scriptures and the ancient Church: as has
very largely and manifestly been showed by the testimony of the ancient Church
doctors, alleged for that purpose, by occasion of the office of the Feast of
Corpus Christi day: who have used the like words, in the very self same sense
that we expound these. Howbeit, these our Romanistes, have played their parts
herein, as they have done in all other such like things, applying this to
their transubstantiation, as they have applied the testimonies of the ancient
doctors: clean contrary to the meaning both of the doctors, and also of the
ancient Church. And therefore this prayer may very well be thus taken, as a
request which the Church requires, that the bread and wine might be so
dedicated and consecrated to this holy Sacrament, as that in communicating
thereof, it might also be a true partaking of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, and of their sacrifice: as in very deed they are figured by the bread
and wine, and as the bread and wine, by a sacramental and spiritual presence
and union do lay them open before us. And surely there is no reason why we
should take it in the same sense that the Romanistes take it, for, in it, is
contained a most intolerable blasphemy. For, what a kind of speech is this, to
crave at the hands of God, to have the substance of bread and wine changed
into the substance of the body and blood of Jesus Christ? For, if that should
be so, it would thereupon follow, that that which before was bread, is now
become the body of Christ, which in very deed it was not. And so, the body of
Christ shall be a new body, and not that body which is in heaven. For, if it be
the same body which is in heaven, the^ can not the bread be turned into it, and
be made that body that before it was. For, what should become of the substance
of bread, seeing it has no more the substance of bread. And therefore it must
either utterly become nothing, or else become such a thing as it never was
before. For, this bread must either be converted into the body of Jesus Christ,
or else this body must needs be a new boby of Jesus Christ: or, if it be the
same that is in heaven, it must needs be that the bread must be only joined
unto it, or else this body must needs grow into the same substance that the
bread is of, which is joined unto it. The Questionarie and Sophistical
doctors, seeing that these absurdities and an infinite number of other such
like, would follow upon this doctrine, have, through diverse gloses and
expositions, wonderfully tormented the^ selves, to make an open way to escape
withal, which we have sufficiently spoken of in our book of the ministry and
Sacraments. And therefore we will here speak no more of them.

c Our Romish doctors, make sundry and diverse expositions of the signs of the
crosses that are here made. But chiefly they diligently admonish, and namely
Berno, to have great regard, that the numbers be not odd, Ber, Micro. de
offic. Miss. Ca. 14. Alama. de offic Miss. Ca. 14.
according to the reasons by him alleged. And contrariwise Alamarius says,
that it shall not now be needful to be very inquisitiue, why they make more in
one place then in another, and more or less. For, says he, they that were
with Jesus Christ, when he made his supper, can right well tell, whether he made
any crosses, or not, especially, seeing the cross whereon he was crucified,
was not yet set up. Wherein, he gives us sufficiently to understand, that it is
more likely that Jesus Christ made none at that time, the^ otherwise. But,
seeing they have been not only added to the Sacraments, as he says, but are
also so requisite to be had in them, as that without the^, there is nothing
well done, as we have already treated in another place. Now because it is not
truly known who ordained these crosses, Micro. Ber. de ossic. Miss. Ca. 14.
Berno, refers them all to the Romish office, and to Gregory who ordained
it: saying that all this, came from the Apostolic sea, as all the rest of the
ceremonies of the Church did. And because Berno sets not down what Gregorye
it was, it is noted in the margin, amongst the exemplares which Cochleus
imprinted, Cochle in Specu anti deuo. im.
that it was Gregory the seventh. Which ordinances do right well agree with
his condition, like a coniurer as he was, if the testimonies which we have
heard of him be true. For it is the property of all coniurers to use diverse
caracters, signs, and sigures.

Of the sixth part of the Canon, containing the consecration of the Bread.
CHAPTER XL.
CVm autem perue^tum fuerit ad

Qui pridie.

ductis plane digitis super pallam accipit hostiam in manibus, dicendo,

b Qui pridie quam patereu^r accepit panem in sanctas, ac venerabiles manus
suas: and eleua^is oculis in caelum ad te Deum patrem suum omnipote^ tem, tibi
gratias agens been dixit, fregit, deditque discipulis suis, dicens: Accipite
and manducate ex hoc omnes.

Hoc est enim corpus meum.

Et adorato corpore domini cum mediocri inclinatione, eleuatillud reuerenter,
and postea illud in loco suo deponit.

a Now, when he is come to

Who the day before.

He then with his fingers smoothly stretched out over the vaale or cover of the
chalice, takes the host in his hands, saying,

b Who (the day before he suffered his passion) took the bread into his holy
and reverent hands: and having lifted up his eyes unto heaven unto thee God
his father almighty, giving thanks unto thee, blessed, brake, and gave unto
his Disciples saying, Take and eat ye all of this.

For, this is my body.

d And after he has worshipped the body of the Lord, in bowing him self a
little, he reverently lifts it up, and af^^^ward lays it down aga^^e in his
place.

a Here is showed, what ceremonies are requisite for the handling of the host
or round cake.

b Here we see the words of the consecration. Now, they that will confer
these words, with the words of the Evangelists and of S. Paul, shall easily
judge, what difference is in them, and that there is somewhat added thereto
which is not in their words. For, as we have heretofore said in other places,
they no whit follow either the Evangelists or yet the Apostles.

c Alamarius meaning to show that the mass was founded upon that which is here
recited, Alama. de off. Miss. Ca. 14.
that our Lord Jesus did, says for the first point, That the Priest does that
which Jesus did when he took the bread, when as he begins to take it into
his hands, after the offertory, and the Secrettes: and that he here takes it:
and gives thanks as he did, whenas he says the preface, and blesses it
here. Wherein he puts a difference between blessing, and thanksgiving,
notwithstanding that the Evangelists have put in the one for the other, and not
both of them at once, and so content them selves with the one, and leave out
the other, so long as one of them is in. Howbeit the Priests make them go
arm in arm together, as if there were some great difference between them, and
such a difference in deed as it pleases them to set down of them. Afterward
he says, that the Priest breaks the bread as he did, whenas he breaks the
host. And besides that he distributeth it, and makes a communion thereof, as
Jesus Christ did. But to whom distributeth he it? Forsooth to none but to him
self. Wherefore then says he here, Eat ye all of this. Either Alamarius was
disposed to be merry when he said this: or else it must needs be, that at those
days when he wrote these things, there was a public communion for all the
people in the mass. Now he was Archbishop of Trieues, in the days of the
Emperor Lewys the godly, unto whom he dedicated his book. At the least, he
never found that ever Jesus Christ lifted up either the bread or Chalice, to
cause them to be worshipped: neither yet any foundation of the manner how he
administered the supper, whereby he is able to show, wherein, he either
represents or yet follows Jesus Christ in this point.

d First of all, the priest here worshippeth the God which he him self has
made: and when he has so done, he lifts it up over his head with his arse
toward them, that others might also see it, and likewise worship it. And all this while there is such tolling and tingling of Belles, such playing of
Organes, and such delicate music, especially if it be upon any solemn
festival day, as was used in the worshipping of Nebuchadnezer his idol. There
is also great store of lights. And amongst the rest, there are some which have
staff torches lighted in one of their hands, and with the other they bear up
the chasuble of that worshipful Sir Gurdegobreas, as if they meant to set him
an end, as Apothecaries use to deal with those unto whom they minister their
clisters. And all this while it is a wonder to see what bald countenaunces and
vile faces every of them makes in worshipping of this jolly new printed
paasty God, as white and round, as the slyfe of a turneup root. Berno says,
that the Romanistes have ordained, that no mass shall be celebrated without
both tapers and wax candles lighted. And although they have many wax candles
and lamps at this their hellish sacrifice, continually burning, yet must there
needs be the greatest and most palpable darkness amongst them that possibly
can be, whenas they worship a round cake and piece of paaste, in steed of
Jesus Christ the very son of God, and the very true Savior and Redeemer of
all mankind. And for so much as that this round cake is not God until such time
as the Sacramental words be fully and wholly pronounced over it, our venerable
masters do of set purpose admonish the gentle master God forger, to be very
careful, so to deal with this round Robin of the box, as that none of the
people see it, before such time as it be consecrated and turned into God by
reason of the danger that some simple and ignorant folk might fall into, in
worshipping it before it were God, and thereby become very Idolaters. Now, it
is meet here to be noted, that in this consecration, are contained, the
conception, nativity, apparition and coming of this new Christ: unto whom
they chaunt up his Benedictus, before he be conceived or yet borne. And now we
will come unto his death and passion, which follows in that part wherein the
sacrifice is contained, which is done after that he is forged.

Of the seventh part of the Canon, containing the consecration of the
Chalice. CHAPTER XLI.
DEinde coopertum calicem accipit duabus manibus, and parum eleuat, dicens,

Accipiens and hunc praeclarum, etc.

Deponit itetum super altar, dicens,

Item tibi gratias agens.

Deinde signat dicens,

Benedixit.

Et iterato eleuans, dicit,

Accipite.

etc. vsque,

Memoriam facietis.

Simili modo postquam caenatum est, accipiens and hunc praeclarum calicem in
sanctas ac venerabiles ma^nus suas, item tibi gratias agens, been dixit,
deditque discipulis suis, dicens, Accipite and bibite ex eo omnes.

Hic est enim calix sanguinis mei, noui and aeterni testamenti, mysterium
fidei, qui pro vobis and pro multis effundetur in remissionem peccatorum. Haec
quotiescunque feceritis, in mei memoriam facietis.

Hic eleuat, and postea in loco suo reponit Calicem.

AFter that, he takes the Chalice in both his hands, being covered with the
vaale, and lifting it up a little, says,

Taking also this most excellent Chalice.

Then he sets it down again upon the Altar, saying,

Giving thanks also unto thee.

b After that, he makes a cross, saying,

He blessed it.

And again lifting up the Chalice, he says,

Take ye

etc. unto

Ye shall do it in remembrance.

In like manner when supper was done, taking also this excellent Chalice into
his holy and reverend hands, and again giving thanks, bles sed it, and gave
it unto his Disciples, saying, c Take and drink ye all of this.

For, this is the d Cup of my blood of the new and everlasting Testament, the
e mystery of faith, which shall be shed for you and for many, for the remission
of sins, As often as ye shall do this, ye shall do it in the remembrance
of me.

f Here he lifts up the chalice, and sets it down again in his place.

a Some of them lift up the chalice being covered, and some uncovered. And
although the ceremonies be contrary one to another, yet are there always great
mysteries in them. For, the covered chalice, signifies the hidden secret of
the Sacrament: and the uncovered Chalice, the separation of the body and blood
in his passion. And therefore they consecrate them apart.

b Nycholas de Ploue manifestly says, Gorrain Mat. Ca. 26. Nico. de Ploue, de
Expo, Miss. 2. par. Ca^.
That Jesus Christ made no cross, whenas he blessed and consecrated as well the
bread as the wine in the supper, because there was no virtue in the cross
before such time as he had suffered his passion thereon. And therefore he
expounds it thus. He blessed it (says he) that is to say, he gave the power
of blessing unto his words, to the end the bread and wine might be
transubstantiated into the body and blood. Here we see an exposition greatly
agreing with the words of our Savior Jesus Christ, if we will give credit to
this dreaming foolish doctor. And again, the power which these Magicia^s
attribute unto the cross after the passion, greatly sauoureth of their
Magical art. For is not this power in Christ Jesus crucified, in whom
consists all power and virtue, and not in the cross, nor yet in the signs
thereof which they make with their hands, as if a man should beat flies away,
or else play the fencer?

c The Counsel of Constance opposes it self unto these words of our Savior
Jesus Christ.

d Although these our venerable masters do both strongly and constantly
uphold and maintain that the Sacramental words must be taken according to the
letter, without any figurative kind of exposition: yet are they enforced to
expound this place figuratively: saying, This cup, that is to say, that which
is contained in this Cup. For, they dare not at any hand say, that the Cup is
changed into blood, as the words according to the letter, do signify, and
according to their doctrine of transubstantiation, and the exposition which
they make upon the words appertaining to the consecration of the bread. And
besides this I do verily believe, that they would be perillouslie angry, to see
their golden and silver Chalices turned into blood. For I tell you that that
were much against their profit. And therefore it is no marvel that they receive
and allow this gloss here in this place. Nicol. de Plo. de expos. Miss 2. part.
Can.
Nicholas de Ploue, mightelie finds fault, with all those Priests which
gasp and breath so much over the bread, and over the Chalice, and accompteth
the^ to be monstrous offensive puppies.

e This, and many other words more have bin put into the consecration both of
the bread and wine, which are not to be found, in such form and manner, as
they are here set down, either in S. Paul, or yet in any of the Evangelists.

f The Chalice is to be worshipped of it self, De celeb. Miss Ca. Sane
Nicolas. de Plo. de expos. Miss
as well as his round cake. And therefore it is ordained that the people, at
the time of the eleuatio^ as well of the singing cake, as of the chalice, shall
devoutly kneel on their knees, and worship the^ both.

Of the eight part of the Canon, containing the Sacrifice which is made in the
Mass. CHAPTER XLII.
AFter a that lifting up his arms a little he says.

Whereupon having mind.

And makes his first three crosses commonly over the host and Chalice, and the
fourth cross he makes over the host only, and the fifte over the Chalice.

b And here is to be noted, that from this place, even unto the last washing
of his hands, he must join his forefinger and thombe together, saving when he
crosses, and touches the Lords body.

c Whereupon, O Lord, we thy servants, as also thy holy people, being
mindful, not only of that thy so blessed passion and resurrection from the
dead, but also of the glorious ascension of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord
into heaven, offer up unto thie most excellent Majesty, of thie gracious
gifts, the pure Host, the holy Host, the immaculate Host, the holy Bread, of
everlasting life, and the Cup of everlasting Salvation.

After this, let him go on, with his fingers severed.

d Upon which things we beseech thee vouchsafe to look with a merciful and
glad countenance and accept of them, as it pleased thee to accept of the gifts
of Ab^ll thy child of righteousness, and of the Sacrifice of our holy
Patriarch Abraham, Leo.
and of the holy Sacrifice, and Host without spot, which thie high Priest
Melchisedech offered unto thee.

DEinde extensis aliquantulu^ brachijs, dicit.

Vnde and memores.

Et tres primas cruces deducit super hostiam and Calicem communiter, and
quartam crucem super hostiam tantu^, and quintum super calicem.

Et nota, quod ab hoc loco, vsque ad vltima^ ablutionem, iunge^dus est Index
cum pollice, praeterquam insignationibus, and cu^ tangitur corpus Domini.

Vnde, and memores Domine, nos serui tui, sed and plebs sancta tua, eiusdem
Christi filij tui Domini nostri, tum beat passionis, nec non ab inferis
resurrectionis, sed in caelos gloriosae ascenfionis, offerimus praeclarae
Maiestati tuae, de tuis donis and datis hostiam puram, hostiam sanctam, hostiam
immaculatam; panem sanctum vitae aeternae, and calicem salutis perpeiuae.

Deinde, continuet manibus disiunctis.

Supra quae propitio ac sereno vultu respicere digneris, and accepta habere,
s^ut accepta habere dignatus es munera pueri tui iusti Abel, and Sacrificium
Patriarchae nostri Abrahae, and quod tibi obtulit summus Sacerdos tuus
Melchisedech, a sanctum Sacrificium, immaculata^ hostiam.

a He is here commanded to spread abroad his arms, representing thereby Jesus
Christ ha^ging upon the cross. And therefore forsooth my good Pontificial M.
Ienkin underwood, must here cou^terfait the Crucifix. Now in very deed, both
the place and the text fitteth his purpose iump. For, this is the place where
this my M. the Sacrificer makes his Sacrifice, and wherein, he himself says
he sacrifices and offreth Jesus Christ, to God. And because that Jesus Christ
was Sacrificed upon the cross, therefore this our venerable Sir,
counterfaiteth the cross, with spreading out of his arms, whereon he is with
great ease crucified. Now, because the case so stands, I marvel much how it
falls out, that he is not rather commanded to spread them out at the
uttermost length. Nicholas de Ploue, who takes upon him to make an exposition
of these iollie mystical meaninges, Nicol. de Plo. de expos. Miss. 2. part.
Con.
is very angry, with a thraue of glorious young Masters, who shame to
spread out here their hands and arms, for the representing of the manner and
form wherein they were redeemed by Jesus Christ upon the cross: and yet are not
ashamed to retch out not only their hands and arms at unlawful dances and
many other their horrible and abominable pastimes: and perhaps, says he, to
the embracing of their women and strumpets with them, but also the whole body
likewise, representinge thereby, the very image and right figure of their
father the Devil.

b When our young Master speaks of the passion, he must hold his hands and
arms a cross: and when he speaks of the resurrection, he must withdraw
them: But when he speaks of the ascension, then his worshipfulnesse must
lift them up above his shoulders. Is not this here I beseech you, a iollie
merry Redeemer, and pleasant Jesus Christ? Who is it that will not be afeard to
hear these scoffs and blasphemies? Wherefore I will surceasse to speak any
more of these their mystical expositions.

c Here are notable iollie servants of God, and a wonderful holy people, who
utterly deny their Savior that redeemed them. For, what means this offering
of a round piece of past, unto the most excellent Majesty of God, which they
here call, a pure, holy, and immaculate host, and the bread of life, etc? Is
not here (I pray you) a goodly excha^ge to have Jesus Christ the very true
bread of life, to be turned into a round cake, and corruptible piece of bread?

d They which divided this Canon into five parts only, make the third part
there of in this place, which is a prayer, that contains another most
horrible blasphemy. For here, this cursed blasphemer prays for the Son of
God, to have the Father accept of him: that is to say, his Son Jesus, whom
he, according to his mind, offreth unto him, even as the ancient Patriarchs,
that are here named, did their corruptible things, which they offered unto the
Lord. For, although he offreth in very deed, nothing else but bread and
wine, yet forsooth, his intent is to offer the very body and blood of Jesus
Christ, the very true Son of God. Now, if the Sacrifice which he offered, had
not been more acceptable unto the Father, then those Sacrifices which the
ancient Fathers offered, it had not been needful for him to have come to
perform that, which they by no means were able to perform, by these
Sacrifices. And therefore seeing he is come, and has performed it, what means
here this blasphemour? For, if he offer up that sacrifice which Jesus Christ
offered, what needs he pray for the same, and become an advocate unto God the
Father for him, that he might be acceptable unto his majesty. And besides, why
makes he him a companion with the material Sacrifices of the ancient
Patriarchs, of whom he here speaks? Moreover, if there be nothing else but
bread and wine which he offreth, what need we any such Sacrifice to be
joined with the sound and perfect Sacrifice of Jesus Christ?

Of the ninth part of the Canon, which also appertains unto the Sacrifice of
the Mass. CHAPTER XLIII.
Let him here bow him se^fe down very low and say.
O Almighty God, we most humbly beseech thee, command these things to be
borne up by the hands of thine holy Angel, unto thine high Altar, before thy
divine Majesty.

b Here let him rise up, and kiss the Altar, when he says.

To the end, that as many of us as have been partakets at this Altar, of the
holy and sacred body and blood of thy Son, may be filled with all heavenly
blessing and grace, through the same Christ Jesus our Lord, So be it.

Here is to be noted, that the first of the former crosses is made only over
the host, the second only over the Chalice, and with the third the Priest
must cross him se^fe.

Hic inclinet se profunde and dicat.
SVpplices to rogamus omnipotens Deus, iube haec perferri per manus sancti
Angeli tui, in subline Altar tuu^, in conspectu diuinae Maiestatis tuae

Hic cl^uet se and osculetur altar, qua^do dicit

Vt quotquot ex hac Altaris participatione sacrosanctum fi^ij tui corpus et
sanguinem sumpscrimus, omni gratia repleamur. Per eundem Christum Dominum
nostrum. Amen. Nota, quod praecedetiu^ prima crux fit tantu^ super hostia^,
secunda tantum super Calice^, tertia seipsum Sacerdos signet

a What is the meaning here, of our yo^g Master, by these things which he
would have the Angels, by the commandment of God, carry up into heaven?
Surely, we can understand it to be none other thing, but only this body and
blood which he says he offreth, and the same which he calls the bread of
everlasting life, and the Cup of everlasting salvation. Howbeit, Thomas of
Aquin perceauing that this carries no reason with it, interprets these
words, Lib. 4. Sen. d^st. 13 Ni^^^l. de Plo. De expo. M^ss. 3. part. Can.
to be the vows and prayers as well of the Priest which says the Mass, as
of the people who are present at it: saying that it is not in the power of the
Angels to consecrate the body and blood of Jesus Christ. Whereupon he would
conclude, as I take it, that it appertains not unto them neither, to carry
them up into heaven. Some there are also who make other kinds of gloses
hereon, whereon are grounded far weaker reasons. Now, if it be meet that we
thus understand the matter of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, as in very
deed we ought, according as they teach, if we will not wreast the words of
the Text, then must we of necessity make an other consecration, to bring them
again out of heaven, if we will so often eat and drink them, as here it is
said immediately after. Nichol. de. Plo. de expos. Miss. 3. part. Can. Marc.
16. Luke 24 Act. 13. Hebr. 9.10.
Our Lord Jesus Christ is ascended up into heaven alone, without the help of
the Angels, where he now is in the high Sanctuary of God, making
intercession for us: But here in this place, the Angels must carry him up
thither: for they would deal with him in heaven, even as they deal with him
here upon earth: For, as they must needs carry their God, because he is of him
self neither able to foot it, or yet ride, without they carry him and hold him:
they would have the Angels carry him up into heaven, because they themselves are not able to do it.

b Here, gentle Sir John plays the parts both of Jesus Christ, and of Judas
also, if we will believe our venerable Masters: For, they say, that here he
rises up, representing thereby Jesus Christ when he rose up, after he had
prayed in the Garden: and then plays Judas part, kissing the Aultare, as
Judas at that time kissed Christ. Wherein their Maystershippes
VVorshipfulnesse, observe no great good order. For, first of all, they crucify
him in their Sacrifice, and afterward put him into the Garden to betray him,
and then play Judas his part, thrusting him into the hands of the Jews.

c These words manifestly declare, that they were not appointed for such
Masses as are celebrated at this day, but for a general Supper and Communion,
which was made unto all the people. For, to what purpose should such a prayer
serve, if there should be none to communicate but the Priest him self that
says the Mass? For, according to the meaning of this prayer, it exte^deth it
self no further, but to as many as are partakers of the body and blood of
Jesus Christ who communicate in the Sacrament of the Supper, in such sort, as
we have often heretofore said. Whereupon it follows, that the Mass also
serves for none, but for such as there communicate, and receive at the Supper
as the Priest does. I speak thus much because he him self believes that the
Mass should be received for the Supper of Jesus Christ. For, he there
commands, all those to take and eat the bread, and also drink the wine,
which there are offered, who according to the Lords ordinance, mean to be
partakers of the things by the^ signified, after such manner as he had
appointed.

d Here, Mast Person crosses him self, for fear he should lose him self,
if he were not crossed and marked.

Of the commemoration for the dead, which is the tenth part of the Canon.
CHAPTER XLIIII.
Commemoratio pro defunctis.
MEmento etiam Domine famulorum famularumque tuarum. N. qui nos praecesserunt
cum signo fidei, and dormiunt in somno pacis: ipsis Domine, and omnibus in
Christo quies^entibus, locum refrigerij lucis and pacis vt in dulgeas
deprecamur, per cundem Christum Dominu^ nostrum. Amen.

a The commemoration for the dead. Pelagius.

b REmember also, O Lord, those thy holy men and women servants. N. which are
gone before us, with the sign of faith, and do sleep, in the sleep of pea^e:
to them O Lord, and to as many as rest in Christ Jesus, we beseech thee
grant place of refreshing of light and peace, through the same Christ Jesus
our Lord.

So be it.

a It was forbidden by the first Bracarien Counsel, celebrated about the days
of Pope Honorius, that there should be no co^memoration made in the oblation
(that is to say, in the Supper, by the ancient Fathers so named, and now
amongst the Papists called the Mass) for those that violently killed
themselves, either by the sword, poisoning, hanging, or breaking of their
necks, or by any other mean whatsoever, and that their bodies should not be
buried with singing of Psalms, as they do in some places. The like also was
established for all such as were punished for their offenses, and for the
Catechumeni who died unbaptized. Which ordinance confirms that which we
have already spoken of, elsewhere, of those causes for which the commemoration
of the dead was in old time brought in amongst the Ecclesiastical
assemblies, and especially about the administration of the Supper, making
thereby a difference betwixt those that died in the union and doctrine of the
Church, and others that were separated from the same, or that had given
occasion of offense thereunto.

b This Memento, and the Prayer therein contained for the dead, greatly
serves their turns, who give money for the saying of Masses, for the
delivering of poor souls out of Purgatory: For, he speaks but of those
which are already in heaven: for whom Master Nicholas prays, that they
might enjoy that, which they already enjoy. For, what is it to sleep, and
rest in the sleep of peace and in Christ, but to rest with Jesus Christ in his
Kingedome? And what other refreshing of light and peace can they have, seeing
they have the same already? And therefore do we not here, manifestly see, how
these scoffers mock and jest at poor, abused, and blind Christians, and
under what color, they spoil and rob them? For, they think it not enough
that they have falsely counterfaited their Purgatory, to roast and fry poor
souls: But also, if all that they say were true, they more and more deceive
the miserable people, making them believe that they pray in their Memento, for
the souls, that are detained in the pains of Purgatory, and yet do nothing
less, as their own Canon well testifies: if they will not expound the words
contained in this commemoration, in a clean contrary sense, and otherwise,
then the meaning of those words import.

Of the eleventh part of the Canon, containing the last commemoration of the
Saints. CHAPTER XLV.
Hic percutit pectus suum, aliquantulum altius, dicens.

NO bis quoque peccat oribus famulis tuis, de multitudine miserationum tuarum
sperantibus, parte^ aliqua^ et societate^ donare digneris, cum tuis Sanctis
Apostolis and martyribus, cu^ Ioha^ne, Stephano, Mathia Barnaba, Ignatio,
Alexa^dro, Marcellino, Petro, Fe ilcitate, Perpetua, Agatha Lucia, Agnete,
Cecilia Anastesia, and omnibus Sanctis tuis. Intra quorum nos consortium, non
aestimator meriti, sed veniae quaesumus largitor admitie per Christum Dominum
nostrum.

Hic, non dicitur,

Amen.

c Per quem haec omnia Domine semper bona creas sanctificas, viuificas,
benedicis, and praestas nobis per ipsum, cum apso, and in ipso, and tibi Deo
Patriomnipotenti in vnitate spiritus sancti, omnis honor and gloria.

Nota, tres primas cruces fieri super hostiam and calicem communiter. Dicto,

Et praesta nobis.

Discooperit Calice^, and accipiens corpus Domini, signat ter cu^ ipso super
Calicem, a labio in labium, dicens.

Per ipsum etc.

Eleuatis aute^ digitis cu^ corpore Domini signat bis inter se and calice^,
alabio calicis incipie^do, dicens.

Est tibi Deo Patri. etc.

Quo finito, tenet corpus Domini super Calicem, and parum leuato Calice cum
ambabus manibus, dicit.

Per omnia saecula saeculorum Amen.

a Here he strikes him self on the breast saying somewhat louder.

b VOuchsafe to grant unto us also miserable sinners, thy servants, which
trust in the multitude of thy mercies, some part and company with thy holy
Apostles and Martyrs, as with John, Steven Matthew, Barnabas, Ignatius,
Alexander, Marcelline, Peter, Felicite, Perpetua, Agatha, Luce, Agnes, Cicely,
Anastase, and all the rest of thy Saints: into whose companies, we beseech
that it would please thee to admit us, not making account of any our merits,
but to pardon us through thy dear Son Christ Jesus our Lord.

c To this is made no answer of Amen

d For whose sake, O Lord, thou always createst, sanctifiest, quickenest,
blessest, and bestowest upon us these benefits: by whom with whom, and in
whom, to thee, God the Father almighty in the unite of the holy Spirit, e be
honor and glory.

f Here is to be noted, that the three first crosses are commonly to be made
over the host and Chalice, over the one and other. After he has said,

And give us.

He uncovers the Chalice, and takes the Lords body, and with it, thrice
crosses the Chalice from one side to another saying.

Through the same, etc.

And lifting up his fingers with the body of the Lord, makes the sign of
the cross twice between him and the Chalice, beginning at the side of the
Chalice, saying.

To thee it is, God the Father, etc.

When he has so done, he houldeth the body of the Lord over the Chalice,
and after he has a little lifted up the Chalice with both his hands he says.

For ever and ever. So be it.

a There is never a place in all this mask, wherein Sir Gurdegobreasse more
mumpeth and moppeth, and makes more pitiful faces, then he does in this,
without it be when he goes about to eat his God. This poor Sir John had here
great need to be comforted: for he is left here post alone, and has many
things to do. For, after he has, all alone, played the parts of Judas, the
Jews, Pilate, and the hangman, Alam. de offic. Miss. Cap. 25. Berno de offic.
Miss. Cap. 17. Nicol. de Plo. de expos. Miss
and crucified and Sacrificed Jesus Christ: he must here yet once more play the
part of the Jews, who knocked upon their breasts, after that Jesus was dead,
and of the thief that hong by him. Our young Masters say, that this was an
honest thief, but they may paraduenture be deceived. And besides this he must
also play the Centurions part, who said, Truly this was the very Son of
God. And therefore, he knocked upon his breast, lifted up his voice, and
confessed him self to be as great a sinner as any of the rest.

b This is the last co^memoration of the saints that is in all the Canon. And
here it might very well be disputed, wherefore the men and women Saints that
are here named, are rather put in in this place, then a great many of others
that are far more worthy. Howbeit we will leave the deciding hereof unto our
young Masters.

c They have great reason, that no Amen, be here answered, for the ratifying
of that, that has been already said. For, what hope ought these Apostles
have to come into the company of the Saints that are with God, who so
villanously here renounce the very Son of God, by whom and through whom the
Saints are entered into that heavenly glory, and who take a clean contrary
course, to walk in that way which the Saints went for the attaining thereto.
There is no doubt, but that this prayer is as well heard, as was Balahams, who
desired to be in the company of Israel, Dur. Rat. lib. 4. Nico. de Plo. de
expos. Miss.
and that his soul might die the death of the righteous. Howbeit, these
Gallauntes our young Masters never allege any such cause, but say, That it
is because that the Angels answer him, and that this is the very place
wherein they do this office.

d There is never a place in all this ioly mask and morisdaunce, wherein Sir
Gurdegobreasse better, or more notably bestirreth his slight fingers, nor
wherein he causes his God more Iustelie leap over, about, and on every side
his Chalice, or yet makes him fetch more dangerous somplesauntes fore right,
thwart, and every way, then in this. And besides, after he has made him
friske and gambaulde his fill, then he shows him on the one side of him, and
not over his head as he did before: But all on the one side, as our Roging
bearewardes are wonted to do with their Apes, when they have caused them
skippe and dance until they can no more: as if he should say as they are
wonted: Now Jack, see thy keeper. Here Sir Gurdegobreasse makes other manner
of countenaunces, then erst he did, when he was so pensive and alone. For he
right well shows that the gout is not in his fingers. And besides, there is
never a place that he had need take greater heed unto, that he make not
roundelles in stead of crosses, then this, according to the advertisement that
we have already set down in the Cautelles. For, he goes about his work so
nimbly, as that a man would think that he did but turn and return his
hands, as though he would make nothing but roundels, or else Saint Andrews
crosses, in stead of foreright crosses.

e If all honor and glory be due unto God, as it is in deed, why then do
these blasphemours so often spoil him thereof, and especially in their Masses,
giving it to creatures.

f This advertisement is to teach Sir Gurdegobreas how to compass his turns and
half turns which here he must make. But who would not tremble with fear, to
hear the words which they here speak? For, they always call their round
cake which they make here friske and gambauld, The Lords body. Are they not
afcarde, thus to blaspheme him? For, if this be the body of Jesus, must he be
thus led and played withal? Was there ever Cat in taking of a mouse, that
ever played with the mouse, as they play with him? What is he that can but
marvel at the great goodness of God, that is able so long to abide these so
horible blasphemies, as to call a round cake, the body of the Son of God,
and besides make it thus trippe and dance?

Of the sift part of the Mass, called the Communion, and first of the Lords
prayer, and silence of the Mass. CHAPTER XLVI.
PEr omnia saecula seculorum. Amen.

Hic reponit hostiam, and Calicem ipsum cooperit, dicens,

Oremus. Praeceptis salutaribus moniti, et diuina institutione formati, audemus
dicere, Pater noster qui es in coelis, etc.

Resp.

Sed libera nos a malo.

Post Pater noster Sacerdos leuando patina^ sursum, dicat.

Amen. Libera nos quaesumus Domine abomnibus malis praeteritis, praesemibus,
and futuris: and intocedente beata and gloriosa semper Virgin Dei genetrice
Maria, and beatis Apostolis tuis.

Hic, tangat de patena corpus Christi, postea, Calicem in tribus locis,
dicendo.

Petro, Paulo, atque Andraea cum omnibus Sa^ctis

FOr ever and ever. So be it. Gregory.


b Here he lays down the Host, and covers the Chalice, saying,

c Let us pray. We being by wholesome commandments admonished, and by the
divine institution framed, dare bouldelie say, Our father which art in heaven.
etc

Answer.

But deliver us from evil.

After the Lords prayer, the priest lifting the d Platine on high, let him say.

e So be it. We beseech thee, O Lord to deliver us from all evils past,
present, and to come, and by the intercercession of the always blessed, and
glorious Virgin Marie, Gods mother, and of thie holy Apostles.

f Her, he must touch the body of Christ with the Platine, and the^ the
Chalice in three places, saying.

With Peter, Paul, Andrewe, with all the Saints.

They which divide the Mass into six parts begin here, the fifth, which they
call the perception of the Sacrament, and communion, although there be no
communion at all.

a There is as great reason in this per omnia, as in the other which they say
after their secreats, for the beginning of their preface. For our young Master
the Consecratour and Coniurour, has mumbled up in secreat, all his Canon
hitherto, and afterward, begins to roar out in his bulchins voice this his
iollie per omnia.

b There is in this part, Ber. Micro de offic. Miss. c. 17 Alam. de offic.
Miss. Cap. 30. Dur. Rat. lib. 4. Ru. de resupar Nicol. de Plo. 5. part. Miss.
by the Romish order, in all solemn Masses, great mysteries, in the manner of
the handling, holding, covering and uncovering the Paten: and about the
Deacons, Subdeacons, and Acolites: who according to our yo^g masters
expositions, do here represent the women which came to the Sepulcher of Jesus
Christ. Howbeit, we will not busy our heads any farther about this gear. It
shall suffice us to understand, that our young masters expound the paten, to
signify the largenes of charity. And surely they have great reason in it.
For, there is no doubt, but that these our young masters have very large
platters and saucers at their table. Moreover, after that Sir Gurdegobreas has
played the passion and death of Jesus Christ, he passes from that, and
thrusts him self in, to play the burial, resurrection and ascension, even
to the very end of the Mass. And because, when he has made his white God
lustily dance and skippe, he now lays him down to rest a while: howbeit he
rests not there long. And after he has lifted him up, he lays him down
again, and when he has crucified him, he puts him into the grave. And
because he keeps here again silence, as he does in the recital of the
Canon: Therefore this place of the Mass, is properly called the Silence: and
the Priest, softly and secretly says this prayer, after he has said the
Lords prayer, because he has put his Jesus into the Sepulcher. And in this
sort expound they these ceremonies, and all the rest of the ceremonies that
follow. Howbeit this should never have needed, if a man would but touch the
tenth part of the dotages which these dottrels set forth, to make them agree
with their foolish dreams.

c It has heretofore been said, That the Apostles appointed the Lords prayer,
which they call Dominicall, to be recited in the supper. And we again read,
that this was ordained by Gregorye the first, and that he added this little
preface, which the Priest recites before it. Whereupon, there were some that
noted him of folly, Berno. Microlog. de offic. Miss. Ca. 12. Dur. Rat. lib. 4
Rub. de patr. no. Nico. de Plou. 5. part. Expo. Miss. Li. Council.
and reprehended him for it. And therefore he was enforced to purge and defend
him self of it, as in his registre we read: where he, amongst other his
reasons alleges: That it was not likely, that the prayers which the
schoolmen collected, and put into the Canon, were to be recited, and therefore
much less the Lords prayer. And because there were certain Priests in
Spain, which said it not, It was ordained in the fourth Council of Tolete,
celebrated about the time of Honourius the first, that what soever Priest, or
Clarke, that said it not as well in the publicque office, as in the particular,
should be deposed from his dignity and office. It is wonder to see how
shamefast our young masters are here. For they speak as if they durst not say
this prayer, except they were commanded and taught to do it out of the
doctrine of Jesus Christ: without which, in truth they ought not do. For they
ought not take in hand any divine service, without his ordenance. But why were
they not so ashamed, in all the rest of their dealings? And wherefore were they
so bold, rash, and arrogant, to thrust in such a number of their doting
inventions, dreams, and blasphemies, into the pure and holy ordenaunce of
Jesus, the son of god? Moreover, we might show how well this prayer agrees
with their own doctrine, if we had not set the same forth at large in those
our dialogues, wherein we have made an exposition of the same: howbeit we will
here touch only one point, that greatliest appertains to this matter: and
that is this, that when our Lord Jesus Christ teaches us to seek after god
our father in heaven, he admonishes us, that he will be served with a
spiritual service, and which alone he accepts of, as our Lord Jesus Christ
him self teaches us, in the talk which he had with the woman of Samary,
John. 4.
about this matter. Now, we must not worship and honor the son, otherwise
the^ we would honor the father, because there is always but one and the self
same essential and substantial God. And therefore if we will worship him, as he
is to be worshipped, we must lift our hearts up unto heaven, where Jesus
Christ, as S. Paul tells us, Coloss. 3.
sits at the right hand of God his father: and not seek to worship him
here below on earth in a piece of bread, a round cake, a goblet, in the hands
of my young M. in a pyxe, amongst vermin and myse, who are always at war
with this poor white God. Wherefore, we are thoroughly to consider of those
words which the Priest speaks, when he names heaven, in the beginning of his
prayer. Where he admoniseth us to lift up our hearts, and after when he comes
to say, Pane^ nostru^, etc. our daily bread, he in many places lifts up his
round cake above his shoulders, as if he would say, let him alone in heaven,
and worship him here in this round cake. Or, it may be, he does it for this
purpose, to declare that this round cake, is the daily bread of these young
masters. For they may boldly vau^t, that he feeds them, and that he has many
of these praesta quaesumus young masters, who would have very hungry bellies
and lean chappes, if this jolly little round shorn God, like a Priests round
shorn crown, got them not two or three, two pences a day, through out the
year.

d After that my young master has made great sport with his round cake, and
his goblet, then must his saucer also have his turn.

e In other places the Clerks, or else the Angels, say Amen. But here, our
master Martin him self says it: wherein, I tell you, are no small mysteries.
Howbeit we will not tell what they are, because they are above our reach. And
besides, After he has alowd roared out the Pater noster, he again returns
to the mumbling up of other blasphemous prayers, calling upon others, then
Jesus Christ. Now, our young masters yield a very strong and notable reason,
for the roaring out of the Lords prayer, seeing that all the whole canon is
said in secret, and besides, all the rest of the prayers which follow
immediately after. It is, say they, because this prayer is taken out of the
Gospel, and because that Jesus Christ commanded, that that which he said in
secret, and in the ear, should be preached above in the house tops, in the
open places and streets. Wherein I can not but take it in good part, and
greatly thank them for their so free confessing of the truth. Wherevpo^, we
may co^trarywise conclude, that it is no marvel, though they mumble up and
buzze all the rest, and especially their whole Canon, secretly and softly, as
all Coniurers do, which is clean contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, and
full of most horrible blaspemies.

f Here again we see, how he plays with his paten and sawcer.

Of the breaking of the host, of the Agnus Dei, and of the Priests draught of
wine. CHAPTER XLVII.
HIc signat se de patena.

Deinde submittit eam hostiae, and calicem disco operit, dicendo,

Da propitius pacem in diebus nostris, vt open misericordiae tuae adiuti, and a
peccato semper simus liberi and ab omni perturbatione securi.

Hic accipiat corpus Christi cum reuere^tia, and frangat super calicem in
tribus partibus, dicendo,

Per eundem Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum filium tuum qui tecum viuit and
regnat in vnitate Spiritus sancti Deus.

Et secundam partem in sinistra manu extans, reponit in patena.

Postea eleuet modicum tertiam partem cum calice, dicens,

Per omnia secula secul.

Respon. Amen.

Hic facit tria signa crucis cis super sanguinem cum illa tertia part, dicens,

Pax Domini sit semper vobiscum.

Responde.

Et cum spiritu tuo.

a Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis. Agnus Dei qui tollis
peccata mundi, miserere nobis. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, dona nobis
pacem.

In Missa pro defunctis dicitur,

Dona eis requiem.

Loco

Miserere nobis.

Et tertio additur,

Dona eis requiem sempiternam.

His dictis, mittat particulam hostiae cum qua signauit, in sanguinem, dicendo,

e Haec sacra sancta commixtio corporis and sanguinis Domini nostri Jesus
Christi, fiat mihi, and omnibus sumentibus, salus mentis and corporis, and ad
vitam aeternam capessendam, praeparatio salutaris, per Christum Dominu^ nostrum.

HEre, he crosses himself with the paten.

Then, he lays the host upon it, and uncovers the Chalice, saying,

Thou, being merciful, give peace in our days that we being aided through the
help of thy mercy, may always be freed from sin, and void of al trouble.

a Here, he takes reverently the body of Christ, and breaks it in three
pieces over the Chalice, saying,

Through the same our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who lives and reigns with
thee, God, in the unity of the holy Ghost.

And the second part being in his left hand, he lays down in the paten.

Afterward, he a little lifts up the third part with the Chalice, saying,

For ever and ever.

Answer, So be it.

Here, he makes three crosses over the blood, with the third part of the
host, saying,

The peace of the Lord be with you always.

Answer.

And with thy spirit.

a O Lamb of God which take away the sins of* the world, have mercy upon
us. O Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon
us. O Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, grant us thy
peace.

In the mass for the dead it is said,

Grant them quiet rest.

In steed of,

Have mercy upon us.

And in the third place is added

Grant them rest everlasting.

d When he has so said, let him l^i fall that piece of the host, wherewith
he crossed, into the blood, saying,

e Let this holy and sacred mixture, of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, be made unto me, and to as many as receive the same, salvation both of
body and soul, and an healthful preparation for the obtaining of everlasting
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Of the points that are to be noted upon the text next going before. CHAPTER
XLVIII.
a Mark here an horrible and wicked kind of speech. For, he speaks in this
place, of the body of Christ, as of the body of a thief which should be
delivered into the hangmans hands, to be broken and laid upon the wheel. And
although he be notwithstanding commanded, very reverently to receive it, yet
he means forthwith to break it in pieces: and that over the Chalice, for
fear any piece thereof should fall beside it, and so be lost. The Romish mass
book, and the mass book that is set forth according to the use of Lusanne,
call it somewhat more cunningly. For, in steed of calling it the body, they
call it the host, which, he must first of all break into two pieces, and
after that, break one of those two pieces into two other pieces, to the end
there might be three in all. Now, herein are again diverse and sundry
mysteries, mystical senses, and straung expositions, touching this breaking,
and the pieces of them, and the significations of every of them, howbeit it is
enough that we have sufficiently spoken of this trash else where. For it
grieueth me to lose so much time about the removing of this filthy and bald pal
try stuff, although I have but eue^ somewhat slightly and superficially
heretofore slipped them over.

b How is it possible that this young master, can any way once think of the
passion and death of Jesus Christ, when as he is troubled about so many
devises, and making of so many faces and cou^tenau^ces as he must make all the
time of this mask, wherein he entendeth to represent the same? Surely, this
sawcer and paten of his is very cleanly removed. There is not a kitchen boy in
the whole world that is better able, more speedily to remove his dishes and
platters then this good old shot remoueth his saweer.

c This poor lamb, me thinks, should here be greatly afeard, when he sees
him self in the wolves claws, ready to be devoured. We see here what a jolly
S. John this is, that speaks to so jolly a Jesus Christ, made and fashioned
of a piece of paaste. And it is no marvel, though he speaks his words
thrice one after another. For, the round cake, whereunto he speaks, has very
thick ears, and therefore very dull of hearing, for the understanding of that
which he speaks unto it. Alamarius and Berno, Alam. de offic. Miss. Ca. 33.
Microlo de offic. Miss. Ca. 18.
according to the ordenaunce of Sergius the first, as concerning the Agnus Dei,
etc. which has been already spoken of, say, that he ordained, that the Agnus
Dei, should be soong, whiles the body of our Lord Jesus Christ was in breaking,
and plucked in pieces, to the end, forsooth, say they, that he, whose body we
see and believe, to be broken, should be merciful unto us. Here, they speak
even as grossly and sclaunderously, as the Alphabet and mass book of the
Priests imprinted after the use of Geneua does, whereof we have so often
spoken. And besides, he adds that after this breaking, all must communicate,
during the time that the Antiphone, called the communion, be soong, whereof, we
will incontinent speak.

d Here, he takes his own draught of wine. We are not to make recital of
that which has been already said, as concerning this matter. It should seem,
that their meaning here, is, to join the blood and the body together: because
they were severed. And therefore they should temper the whole body together,
and not the third part thereof only, neither is it the third part in very
deed, but an half, of one of the halfes.

e Seeing there is none, that takes part of this draught of wine but Sir John
him self: he prays but in vain in that prayer which he mu^bleth and buzzeth
up, praying, that it might chiefly be for the salvation both of his own soul
and body, and then for the salvation also of as many as should take the same.
For, who are they that receive any part thereof? Here again we see, another
testimony, which very well agrees with that which we have heard Berno so much
speak of, Berno. Microlo. de offic. Mass. Ca. 19. De Conse. did. 2. Ca. Qu^m
omne and Ca. Cu^ primis.
as concerning the general communion of all. For if there be no supper and
communion, but only for the Priest which says the Mass, this prayer must be
changed, or else some of the words be left out. I will say nothing of the
blasphemy that is in it, wherein this blasphemer desires that the mixture
which is made with that draught of wine, might be for the salvation both of
soul and body, of all those that should drink thereof, and a preparatiue for
the receiving of everlasting life. But let us now speak what an hard matter it
is on the contrary side, where it is forbidden to mingle the bread and wine
together, as we have else where declared: and where commandment is given, that
they should be received severally: according to the ordenaunce of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and not one, without the other: as may appear by the decrees
which are recited under the names of Julius the first, and Gelasius the first.
Wherefore, by these decrees, It is not lawful by the first, either for Priest or
people, to mingle any of these things one with another: nor yet receive the
bread without the wine. Now, let our young masters, if it may stand with
their good pleasures, resolve us of this hard doubt: and yield us a sounder
resolution then that which is set down in the gloss of the decrees: or else it
will breed them a great inconvenience in the matter. Moreover, as concerning
this mixture of the bread and wine, which they call the Body and Blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Alam. de offic. Miss. Cap. 31.
Alamarius makes mention of the diversity that is therein. For some do it,
before the Agnus Dei, as the Romanistes, and others after, as the Geneuians and
Lausannistes. Howbeit, all this is to no purpose.

Of the Peace, Preparation to breakefast, and of the Priests Communion.
CHAPTER XLIX.
a Give peace in our time, Miss.
O Lord, because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O
God. Peace be in thy power, and abundance in thy towers.

b Let him here kiss the par, a Inno. 1. Leo. 1.
and say,

c Peace be unto me, O father, and to thee brother, and to the whole Church of
God also.

Howbeit in the Masses for the dead they use not the pax.

d Then let him bow down him self very low, and say,

O Lord, holy Father almighty, and everliving God, grant me, I beseech thee,
that I may receive this body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ worthily, that
by the same, I may e deserve to have remission of all my sins, and be
replenished with thy holy spirit, for thou art God, f alone, and without thee,
there is none other, whose kingdom is everlasting, world without end. Amen.
g O Lord Jesus Christ, the son of the living God, who through the will of the
father, working with the holy spirit, haste, through thy death, quickened the
world, deliver me by this thy holy body and blood, from all mine iniquities and
miseries: and make me always obedient unto thy Commandments, and never be
separated from thee. Who live and raignest with the same God the father, in
the unity of the holy spirit, world without end. Amen.

Let him continue thus bowed down.

h Let not the receiving of this thy body, O Lord Jesus Christ, which I here
unworthy, presume to take, turn unto my judgment and condemnation but let it,
through thy goodness, serve to defend both my soul and body, and be in stead
of a medicine to me, who live and raignest with God the father, etc.

DApacem Domine in diebus nostris, quia non est alius qui pugnet pro nobis,
nisi it is Deus noster. Fiat pax in virtute tua, and abundantia in turribus tuis.

b Hic osculetur pace^, dicendo,

Pax mihi pater, and tibi frater, and vniuersae sanctae Ecclesiae Dei.

Sed in Missis de mortuis pax non datur.

Demde profunde inclinatus, dicat,

Domine sancte Pater, omnipotens, aeterne Deus, da mihi hoc corpus and
sanguinem domini nostri Jesus Christi ita digne sumere, vt per hoc merear
remissionem omnium peccatorum meoru^ accipere, and tuo Spiritu sancto repleri.
Quia tu es Deus salus, and praeter te non est alius, cuius regnum gloriosum
sine fine permanet in secula seculorum. Amen. Domine Iesis Christ Fitij Dei
viui, qui ex voluntate Patris, cooperante Spiritu sancto per mortem tuam mundum
viuificasti, libera me per hoc sacrosanctu^ corpus and sanguinem tuum a cunctis
iniquitatibus meis and ab vniuersis malis: and fac me tuis semper obedire
ma^datis, and a te nu^qua^ in perpetuu^ separari permittas, Qui viuis and
regnas cum eode^ patre, in vnitate eius. Spiritus sancti, Deus, Per omnia
secula seculoru^. Ame^.

Continuet sic inclinatus.

Perceptio corporis tui, Domine Jesus Christ, quam ego indignus sumere
praesumo, non mihi proueniat in iudicium and condemnationem: sed pro tua
pietate prosit mihi ad tutamentum animae and corporis, and ad medelam
percipiendam, Qui viuis and regnas cum Deo Patre, etc.

Of the points that are to be considered, upon the matters next going before.
CHAPTER L.
a IF there is none other that can give peace, nor fight for us, but God alone,
which in deed, we must needs acknowledge and confess: we are not then to
desire these things at the hands either of men or yet women Saints: nor yet
make S. George, S. Christofer, or yet S. Barbara, and such like, the patrones
of war, as the heathen made Perseus, Minerua, and Bellona the Gods and
Goddesses of war, in the stead of Mars.

b The Priest, as the popish manner is, kisseth the Altar, and giving the pax
to the Clarke, says, peace be with thee: and the Clarke answers, And with
thy spirit. Miss. R. Berno de offic. Miss. Ca. 18.
Berno says, that the pax, according to the ordenance of Innocent, is given
before the Communion: signifying thereby, that he eats his own judgment,
which presumes to communicate, before such time as he be first reconciled to
his brother, and has agreed with him. Here again we see, that he joins the
pax with the Communion: which no whit agrees with that, that Durand and his
companions have else where brought in. But must he have an Idol to put him in
mind of that, whereof the Supper and Communion is a Sacrament? In stead of
this Idol my young master kisseth, as we have before said, either the Altar,
the image of the crucifyx, the relics, or else the sawcer, which they call the
Pate^. In other places, when any marriage is solemnized, both the Bridegroom
and the Bride also, must open their purses wide, if they mean to kiss this
jolly Idol the pax. In very deed, if it brought the^ a good and long lasting
peace, they could not pay too much for it. Howbeit it behooves them to have
another manner of peace then they shall get by it.

c Here is to be noted, that in this kind of dealing, my young master is
called father: which thing in deed, oftentimes falls out rightly, and
especially when the son helps the father to say mass, as it many times
comes to pass in this great multitude of Priests bastards.

d Here, M. Gourdy begins his Benedicite, and is more eagre and earnest unto
his breakefast.

e Although this blasphemer desires God here, to make him worthy of this
Sacrament, yet would he have forgiveness of his sins, and by his merits, be
replenished with the grace of the holy Ghost, and not by the death and passion
of Jesus Christ alone.

f He confesses here, that there is none other salvation but in God alone, and
yet for all this he seeks for more, and addresseth him self more to other
creatures then unto him, who is the alone Savior, and creator of all things.

g There were some reason in this prayer, if it were applied to the true supper
of Jesus Christ, which sends us unto his death: by which we receive his body
and blood, which is the fruit, that is here by them required, and not by this
most blasphemous sacrifice, whereof mention is made in the Canon. Micro. de
offic. Miss. Ca. 18.
Berno says that this prayer is not taken out of any certain order or usage,
but only from the traditions and inventions of devout men. He says the like
of others also, which are said in the delivering and receiving of the Communion.

h Here is a prayerful of great blasphemy. For our Savior Christ says, John.
6.
That whosoever eats me, lives by the means of me. And yet this blasphemer
prays, that the receiving of his body might not turn to his condemnation.
Howbeit, this so gross an error and blasphemy, proceeds from that which we
have so often heard out of the prose of Thomas of Aquine, which has heretofore
in part been expounded, for want of distinguishing the difference that is
between the Communion of the faithful, and the faithles, and of the sign,
without the thing signed, and with it. There might be here some likelihood, if
he meant, by the body of our Lord Jesus, the bread which it presents: howbeit
he understands it after the popish manner. For so the faithles may receive the
sign: but none can receive the body of our Lord, signified thereby, but the
faithful only.

Of the Priest his Breakefast, and Communion. CHAPTER LI.
Hic accipiat patenam cum corpore Christi, dicendo,

Panem caelestem accipiam, and nomen Domini inuocabo.

Deinde ter reuerenter dicat, percutiens pectus,

Domine, non sum dignus vt intres sub tectum meum: sed tantum dic verbo, and
sanabitur anima mea.

Hic sumat corpus reuerenter, signans se illo, dicens,

Corpus Domini nostri Jesus Christi custodiat animam meam in vitam aeternam,
Ame^. In nomine Patris and Filij and Spiritus sancti.

Postea discooperiat calicem, and flexis genibus salutet, and dicat,

Quid retribuam Domino pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi? Calicem salutaris
accipiam, and nomen Domini inuocabo. Laudans inuocabo Dominum, and ab inimicis
meis saluus ero.

Hic sumat sanguinem, signans se cum illo, dice^s,

Corpus and sanguis Domini nostri Jesus Christi, custodiat animam meam in vitam
aeternam. Amen.

Deinde dicat, capiendo vinum cum aqua.

Quod ore sumpsimus, Domine, pura mente capiamus: and de munere temporali, fiat
nobis remedium sempiternum, in vitam aeternam. Amen.

Et verbum caro factum est, and habitauit in nobis. Agimus tibi gratias, Rex
omnipotens Deus, pro vniuersis beneficijs tuis, qui viuis and regnas Deus, Per
omnia secula seculorum.

Postea purificando manus, and lingendo digitos, quibus tenuit corpus Domini,
dicat,

Corpus tuum Domine, quod sumpsi, and sanguis quem potaui, adhaereat visceribus
meis: and praesta vt in me non remaneat scelerum macula, quem pura and sancta
refecerunt sacramenta, Qui viuis and regnas, etc.

Nunc dimittis seruum tuum Domine, secundum verbum tuum in pace.

etc. vsque ad fine^ Cantici, cum

Gloria Patri. Sicut eerat

Kyrie eleison, Christ eleison.

Kyrie eleison, Pater noster. etc.

a HEre, let him take the paten with the body of Christ, saying,

b I will receive the heavenly bread, and call upon the name of the Lord.

c Then striking him self on the breast, let him reverently say,

d O Lord, I am not worthy that thou should enter under my house roufe: but
only say the word, and my soul shall be saved.

f Here, let him reverently take the body, and cross him self with it, saying,

g The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, preserve my body and soul unto
everlasting life. So be it. In the name of the Father, of the son, and of the
holy ghost.

h After this, let him uncover the Chalice, and bowing his knees salute it, and
say,

i What shall I give unto the Lord, for all those benefits which he has bestowed
upon me, I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.
I will give praise, and call upon the Lord, and so shall I be saved from mine
enemies.

k Here let him take the blood, and cross him self with it, saying,

The body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, preserve my soul unto
everlasting life. So be it.

l Then let him say, taking the wine with water.

Let us, O Lord, receive that with a pure mind, which we have taken in at the
mouth: and of a temporal present, Let this be to us an everlasting remedy unto
everlasting life. So be it.

And the word became flesh, and dwelt amongst us. We yield thee hearty thanks,
Almightye king, God eternal, for all thy benefits, who live and raignest
world without end.

n After that, when he has washed his hands, and sucked his fingers, wherewith
he held the body of the Lord let him say,

o Thy body, O Lord, which I have received, and thy blood which I have droonk,
I beseech thee vouchasafe to cleave to my bowels: and grant that there remain
in me no spot of sin, which have been refreshed with this pure and holy
Sacraments, who live and raignest, etc.

p Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word,
etc.

Unto the end of the song, with

Glory be to the Father, etc. as it was, etc.

Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us. Our Father. etc.

Of the matters that are to be considered of, upon the Priest his breakefast
and Communion. CHAPTER LII.
a THe body of Christ is not a round cake divided into four quarters, as is
the round cake of this our Sir Gurdegobreasse.

b He must receive another kind of bread, then this round cake, if he will
have the heavenly bread.

c Here is a very pitiful Sir Gurdey.

d Here is a pleasant Centurio^, who speaks unto his round cake, even as the
Centurion in the Gospel, spoke unto Jesus the very Son of God.

e The house rouffe of this scuruie shaueling, is his belly, wherinto, he
means like a ravening wolf, to swallowe up, this silly lamb which he now
calls Lord, upon whom before, he has called for mercy, that afterward he
might devour him.

f The body, that is to say, the round cake, is very easily to be handled,
and very light to cross him self, and serve him to play withal like a fly
flap, because the flies should not trouble and vex him when he is at
breakefast, and drinking of his wine.

g Such a prayer, no whit appertains unto this round cake, nor yet unto this
banquet whereat Jesus Christ is not present.

h Here, he more honors his Goblet, then he does the body of his God.
Howbeit I do not greatly marvel at that: Because his Goblet is made either of
goulde, silver, or at least, of very fine tin: and his God, is made of no
better stuff, then of a piece of paast. And besides, the Goblet is a pleasant
thing to such sipping mates.

i These verses of David are here again as properly applied as they were in
that place, wherein they were heretofore propounded.

k Here, he must make the Goblet also, to friske a little about for the
crossing of him self, as well as he made the round cake friske about to
cross his reverend worshipfulnesse.

l This wine and this water are no blood, as that was which he even now
swallowed down, but are only given him to make clean and rinse his Goblet
and wide weasant, least there should remain any blood in them.

m But in this prayer, which he here makes at his last washing, which they
call purifying, is great reason: For they have reason to purify and cleanse
them selves, after they have polluted their hands and mouths, with such
horrible sacrileadges and blasphemies, committed as well against the death and
passion, as also against the body and blood of our Savior and Redeemer Jesus
Christ. Howbeit let us consider of that which they speak. How shall we
receive the self same thing with our souls, which we receive with our
mouths? For, the soul has no such mouthas the body has, neither does it
eat or yet drink so: neither is it in such sort fed, either with such meats
and such drinks. For, bread and wine, do serve to feed the body, and not the
soul, save that the soul is taught by them, by reason of the bodelie senses,
of spiritual and invisible things, which are signified by these visible and
material signs. But the right meat and drink of the soul, are the body
and blood of Jesus Christ, not corporally taken by the mouth of the body, as
the Popish Church teaches. But spirituallie, by the mouth of faith: which is
the mouth of the soul and spirit, by mean whereof, the body is also
afterward spirituallie fed, and it can not otherwise be. For, admit, that a
man should eat the very body, and drink the very blood of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, yet should neither soul nor body Communicate thereof,
nor yet be fed therewith, unto everlasting life. For, the heavenly and
divine meat and drink, is spiritual, and received by faith. And where that
is, we shall need none other. And therefore, the signs of bread and wine
that are distributed to us in the Supper, are not given us, that with them and
by them we should receive the body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, as if a piece of flesh should be given us to eat without bread, or in
paast, and wine in a cup to drink, as the Romish rabble, and certain others,
understand and take it, who corporally conioyne the signs, with the things
signed and signified: But are given to us, lively to represent unto our bodily
senses, that which our Lord represents to our inward senses, or rather to
stir up and dispose the whole man, to receive the heavenly and divine gifts,
through faith and in spirit. Again, if this bread and wine which the Priest
receaueth in the Supper unto him self alone are the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, as he takes it, and would have men believe it, so that there
remains no more substance of the bread and wine: then surely, this gift and
present is not corporal, but everlasting even as Jesus Christ him self is.
And therefore he does him great wrong, so to name it. If this the^ be not the
body and blood of Jesus Christ, but only bread and wine, as in very deed it
is: which way can he make it become a remedy for eternal life? which remedy
is in none but in Jesus Christ alone. And besides, we are here further to note
that, which the Priest says, as if there were many, which banquetted with
him at the very same table, and as if they had communicated of the self same
Sacrament. Is not this a marvelous kind of mockery? He, verily thinks, that
this prayer was not made to be said in particular Masses, but when the people
communicated together.

n He forgets not here to suck his fingers.

o Our young Masters say, that after this Supper is done, the body of Jesus
Christ returns to heaven. Howbeit this our scabd, scald, shorn Squier, who
gobleth him up, means to have him remain in his entrails and bowelles. It
is also written in that small pamphlet called Stella Clericorum, that the
Priest is Jesus Christ his Sepulcher, because he swalloweth down his body and
blood into his belly. Morouer, he has great reason to have his sins
cleansed by the means of these notable and pure Sacraments which he has
received, by which, he has so horribly renounced and blasphemed, even Jesus
Christ him self.

p We here see, a very pleasant Simeon, singing that song, which that good
Simeon soong, when he held the young child Jesus Christ in his arms. Howbeit
this our new Simeon, has done much more, if we would believe him: For, he
has holden him, handled and tossed him, both alive and dead, even as big and
great as he was, when he hoong upon the wodden cross. May not he then very
well sing, like the good servant of Jesus Christ, who has very notably
honored and magnified the glory of his Master?

Of the sixth part of the Mass, called the Action of thanksgiving, and of the
communion thereof, and of the points that are to be considered upon these
matters. CHAPTER LIII.
ET interea du^ a ministro defertur Missale a sinistro latere Altaris in
dextrun latus, Sacerdos ebibit guttas, quae remanserunt in Calice, acdeinde,
extergit Calice^, postea legit Co^munionem, dicendo,

In nomine Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus sancti.

Commun.

Quotiescunque manduca bitis panem hunc and Calicem bibetis etc. vsque reus
erit Corporis and sanguinis Domini.

Alleluia

In medio Altaris versus populum, dicit,

Dominus vobiscum.

Resp.

Et cum Spiritu tuo.

Sacerdos.

Oremus.

Flexo vno genu.

Post Communio.

Fac nos quaesumus Domine, diuinitam tuae sempi^ernae fruitione repleri, quam
praeciosi Corporis and sanguinis tui temporalis perceptio praefigurat, Qui
viuis and regnas, etc.

a ANd while the Clarke is carrying the Mass book, standing on the left side
of the Altar, unto the right, The b Priest suppeth up the small drops that
are in the Chalice, and then makes it clean. c After that, he begins to
read the Communion, saying,

In the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

d Communion.

e As often as you shall eat this bread, a Gregory. Gelasius.
and drink this cup, etc. unto, He shall be guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord.

Praised be God.

f In the midst of the Altar turned toward the people, he says,

The Lord be with you.

Answer.

And with thy Spirit.

The Priest.

Let us pray.

Bowing one of his knees.

g The post Communion.

h We beseech thee, O Lord, cause us to be replenished, with the everlasting
joy of thie Godhead, which the temporal receiving of thy body and blood does
prefigure unto us, who live and raignest, etc.

a Here again, is another whole turn, from the one end of the Table to the
other. And in all this whole dance, there are but two of these. For, from the
first beginning of the Mass, even unto the Gospel, he stands at the right
side and passes not above the midst of the Table, in all the turns he makes,
until the reading of the Gospel, and then he goes further, and carries his
book unto the left side, and there remains until this time, never going
beyond the midst of the Table.

b It is a pleasant thing to see, how this pickpot, rinseth and tosseth
vpsidowne here, his Chalice and licketh it with his tongue and lips. There is no
doubt but that he makes clean his plate. For, there was never kitchen maid
that ever washed her spoones cleaner.

c Here begins the sixth and last part of the Mass, called the Action of
graces, Nicol. de Plo. De expo. Miss. 6. part.
because the Priest therein says his graces, after he has dronk up his wine,
and broken his fast.

d Berno says, Berno de offic. Miss. Cap. 18. Mam. de offic. Miss. cap. 34. Ex
lib. Con.
that this piece is called Communion, because it is said whiles the people are
receiving of the Communion, which they should receive immediately after the
Paxe. Here again we see, a very evident testimony of the Communion of the
ancient Mass. Whereof there was a Decree in the fourth Council of Tolete:
wherein mention is made that certain Priests Communicated immediately after
the Lords prayer was said: and after, blessed the people. Which thing is
there forbidden, and commandment given, to bless the people after the Lords
prayer: and besides, that the Sacrament of the body and blud of the Lord,
should be received in this manner, to wit, that the Priests and deacons should
communicate before the Altar, the Clergy in the Quier, and the people without
in the body of the church. So that by this decree, there was but one common
Supper for them all. And there was no difference in it, but the distinction of
places, which was done for the avoiding of confusion in the Church. And because
that in all ages, there were always many people, who honored not, nor
reverenced the Sacraments, ne yet the Communion of the Supper, as they ought:
The ancient Councels made many ordinances about them: as that for one, which
has already bin alleged, as to communicate thrice a year at the least, if
not oftener, which is continued amongst the decrees of the Agathens Counsel:
Ex lib. Con.
where it was ordained, that they which did it not, should not be taken for
Catholics, nor received amongst them: which is again renewed and confirmed by
the Council of Toures, without exception of any, save such as were put from
it for some notorious offenses.

e This piece called Communion, and the other following, Post-communion,
change, even as the Masses do. I have not set down this, here, at large,
because that whatsoever is in it, is contained in the Epistle already set
forth. Wherein we may again se, that these offices of the Romish Church, have
been made without any great judgment, as good as they are. For how often
have they been amended, and yet to no purpose? And besides, they set down this
piece as a prayer, and action of thanksgiving, neither has this bin in it
a^^^e long while, as herein we have an example thereof.

f This is the sixth time that the Priest saluteth the people, there lacks now
non but the last, and that is to close up the Mass withal. The first is,
before the first collect: The second, before the Gospel: The third, after the
Creed: The fourth at the beginning of the preface: The fifth, before he says,
The peace of the Lord be with you. In this sixth, he turns himself toward
the people, as he does in the last.

g There is greater reason to call this piece, the Action of thanksgiving,
then the other, consideringe what name it carries with it, which signifies,
that it ought to be said after the Communion: and the other that goes before,
during the Communion, whereof it carries the name. For, thanks are properly
rendered after that the Communion is done. This word again, gives us to
understand, that there ought to be a Communion in the Mass, and not the Priest
his breakefast alone, which cannot be so called. There is a rule set down that
as many prayers must be said for this postco^munion, as already has been
before said, of collectes and secrets.

h Me thinks that there are very improper and obscure kinds of speeches in
this prayer: although that in the rest it is to be born withal. For, the taking
and receiving of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, to speak properly, is
not temporal: as well because we receive them not only for the time, wherein
we outwardly receive the signs of them in the Supper, neither yet for any
temporal life: but that they should remain always in us, and we by them, be
fed and refreshed. And therefore this ought to be said, of the outward signs
and administration of the Supper, which prefigureth that perfect fruition of
the Lords Table which is prepared for us in heaven, where we shall eat of the
desired bread in the kingdom of God: which banquet we begin already here, by
a spiritual communicating which we have with Jesus Christ, as is figured to us
in his Supper.

Of the leave that is given to the people in the end of the Mass, and of the
prayer which the Priest says immediately after, and of the matters that are to
be considered thereupon. CHAPTER LIIII.
HEre let him kiss the image of the Crucifixe, which is in the Mass book and
then say,

For ever and ever.

Answer.

So be it.

In the midst of the Altar toward the people, let him say,

The Lord be with you.

Answer.

And with thy Spirit.

Priest.

a Go your ways, the Mass is

Answer.

Thanks be to God.

b Note, that when it is not said,

Glory be to God on high.

Then, for

Go your ways, the Mass is.

They say,

Let us bless the Lord.

c And for the dead.

Let them rest in peace.

Answer, So be it.

d After that he has bowed him self very low, in the midst of the Altar, he
says.

O holy Trinity, let the office of this my service be acceptable unto thee: and
grant that the Sacrifice which I unworthily have offered in the sight of thy
Majesty, may please thee, and by thy mercifulnes be propitiatory, as well to
myself, as also to as many as I have offered the same for, through Christ our
Lord. Ame^.

HIc osculet imaginem Crucifixi, qui est in Missali, deinde, dicat.

Per omnia saecula saeculorum

Resp.

Amen.

In medio Altaris versus populum, dicat,

Dominus vobiscum.

Resp.

Et cum spiritu tu^.

Sacer.

Ite, Missa est.

Resp.

Deo gratias.

Nota, quod quando no^ dicitur,

Gloria in excelsis Deo.

tunc pro

Ite, Missa est,

dicitur.

Benedicamus Domino.

Et pro defunctis,

Requiestant in pace.

Resp.

Amen

Deinde profunde inclinatus ante medium altaris dicit,

Placeat tibi sancta Trinitas obsequiu^ seruitutis me^e: and praesia vt hoc
sacrificium quod oculis tuae maiestatis indignus obtuli, tibi sit accepta bile,
mihique and omnibus pro quibus illudobin^, si^, te mise rante propitiabi^e, per
Christu^ Dominum nostrum. Amen.

a We will not here speak any more of the kissing of the image in the Mass
book, neither yet of his last salutation of the Priest unto the people.
Neither shall it be needful again to rehearse that, which has already bin
said of this leave, Ite Missa est. But only set down the exposition which
Barnard de Paratine, John Beleth, and Nicholas de Ploue, make thereof, saying,
that this is as much, Nicol. de Plo. in expo. 6. par Miss. Berno de offic.
Mess. Ca. 20. Alam. de offic. Miss. Ca. 36. Nicol. de Plo. expo. 6. part.
as if the Priest should have said, Get you hence about your business: For,
the Mass is, or the host and oblation, is made an end of. And therefore go
after it. Why? then must they go into out yo^g Masters belly that has eaten
it? Now, here is to be noted, that the Priest plays both Jesus Christ his
part in his ascension unto heaven, and also the part of the Angels who spoke
unto the Apostles after his ascension: and the people, play the part of the
retourning of the Apostles unto Jerusalem, after the ascension, or according to
the exposition of John Baleth, of the returning of the people of Israel from
Babylon. I beseech you are not here great reasons in every of these gentle
expositio^s?

b Moreover, this leave is not always given after one manner of fashion,
according to the rule which is here set down. For, if it be not given with Ite
missa est, the Priest turns not himself unto the people. And here Durand
renders a reason of this diversity, Rat. li, 4. par. Rub. de ora. no.
saying, that Ite missa est, was, in the old time said, when as the people met
together in great numbers at Mass, by reason of the Communion that then was
made, to give them leave after this manner: and that at other times, when the
people did not assemble after that sort, they used another kind of fashion.

c If the faithful that are dead rest already in peace, as before has been
said, then is this a vain prayer for that purpose that they make it. Moreover,
they say that there is no peace granted for the dead in the Mass, and that
there is no mention at all made of them in the same, because they have no need
thereof. And therefore it should seem by this, that they are quite and clane
forgotten in it.

d Even as all the rest of the Romish Mass, as at this day it is, is nothing
else but a continual blaspheming of the name of God, and of the merit and
passion of the death of Jesus Christ: it can not be chosen, but that it must
also conclude with a most horrible and cursed blasphemy. For after that the
Priest has forsaken Jesus Christ the Son of God, and withal, both the
Father, and the holy Ghost also, in him: he prays that the holy Trinity
would accept of this so insupportable blasphemy: manifestly confessing, that
he takes his Mass to be not only a Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving:
but also a propitiatory Sacrifice, for the obtaining, by mean thereof,
remission of sins, which we no ways can obtain, but by the only Sacrifice
which Jesus Christ made: as has already been often said. And seeing it is so,
it was impossible to make a better conclusion of the exposition of the Mass,
the^ Nicholas de Ploue has there made: greatly commending, not only this
prayer which we here presently speak of, Tract fac. de expos. Miss. 6. part.
but also the courtesies and bowings that are to be made in the saying thereof:
mightelie reproving al such as say it not, as it is here ordained. Whereupon,
he brings forth for his authority, A very pleasant tale.
a maruelouse pleasant tale as follows. There was, quoth he, a man possessed
with a devil, who was brought before a certain Priest, whom this Priest
asked, what he thought of two other Priests which he named unto him. Then
this devil that tormented this poor wretched man, said unto him, The first
Priest, quoth he, which thou namedst unto me, was sometime ours, but he is now
the Lords. And as for the other, quoth this gentle master devil, would be a
very honest man if it were not for stealing. This Priest who had demanded of
this M. the devil his prophet, this question, greatly marvelled to hear this
answer, because he took this priest, of whom the devil made him this auswer,
to be a very holy man. Whereupon he determined to enquire further of him more
substa^tially, asking him, what it was that he would steal, who^ the devil
answered, That it was this last prayer, whereof we now speak. Upon which
answer enquiry was made, whether it was so as the devil had sated or not, and
it was found so in deed. Whereupon this said Nicholas de Ploue, a Doctor of the
decrees, concludes, that the Priests ought, not only to be very careful to
see that this prayer, with these ceremonies, were not omitted, but also nothing
else, that was wonted to be observed in the Church, in the Mass. What is he
then that will not in good earnest, have great regard hereunto, considering
that so great a Doctor as the devil is, is a witness hereof, and has given his
sentence and judgment upon the same? For, without all doubt, this is a doctor,
prophet and witness, that is worthy to be brought in in such a matter. For, he
is able to be a witness thereof, as of a matter of his own handie work, which he
right well understood and knew.

Of the final conclusion of the Mass, and of the last blessing thereof.
CHAPTER LV.
When a he has made an end of this prayer, he makes a cross upon the Altar,
and therewith al kisseth it. After that, he rises up and puts of his
Chasuble, saying,

The Lord be with you. And with thy spirit. The beginning of the holy gospel,
according to S. John. Answer.

Glory be to thee O Lord.

The Priest.

He that was born of the most pure virgin help us at this day and evermore. In
the beginning was the word, and the word was,

etc. unto

Full of grace and verity.

Answer.

Thanks be given to God.

The Priest.

O blessed Trinity, we call upon thee, we worship thee, and we glorify thee.
Blessed be the name of the Lord.

Answer.

From this time forth for evermore.

The Priest.

Let us pray. O God which art the protector of all those that put their trust
in thee, without whom nothing is permane^t, nor holy, increase thy mercies upon
us, that having thee for our governor and guide, we may so pass through these
worldly benefits, as that we lose not the heavenly, through Christ our Lord. So
be it. Bless ye.

Answer.

The Lord.

The Priest.

God the Father, and God the Son deliver us from sudden death, and from
everlasting damnation.

Toward the people, making a cross, let him say,

The holy Ghost enlighten you all.

Answer.

So be it.

Priest.

And the blessing of God almighty be and remain with us now and evermore, In
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Answer.

So be it.

Then putting of his Aube, he says

Ye priests of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, ye servants of the Lord, bless ye
the Lord.

etc. unto the end of the same song, then let him say,

Praise the Lord in his Saints and praise the Lord in the firmament of his
power.

etc. unto the end of the same Psalm, afterward bowing his knees before the
Altar, he gives thanks saying,

h Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace.

Let us sing the song of the 3. children, which the said Saints sang in the
fiery furnace, praising and blessing God Lord have mercy upon us, Christ
have mercy upon us, Lord have mercy upon us. Our father, and lead us not

The Prayer.

O God which mitigatedst the flames of fire unto the 3. children in the fiery
furnace, be merciful unto us, and grant that the burning heat of our sins
burn us not up, through Christ our Lord. So be it.

FInita hac oratione, signat Altar, and simul osculatur. Deinde erigens se
exuit casulam, dicendo,

Dominus vobiscum and cu^ spiritu ^uo. Initium sancti Euangelij secundum
Iohannem

Resp.

Gloria tibi Domine.

Sacerdos.

Ille qui natus est de purissima sima virgin, succurrat nobis hodie, and in
omni tempore. In principio erat verbum et ver bum erat,

etc. vsque ad

Plenu^ gratiae et veritatis

Resp.

Deo gratias.

Sacerdos.

Te inuocamus, te adoramus, te glorificamus, o beata Trinitas. Sit nomen Domini
benedictum.

Resp.

Ex hoc nunc and vsque in saeculum.

Sacerdos

Oremus. Protector in te spera^tiu^ Deus, sine quo nihil est validum, nihil
sanctum, multiplica supra nos misericordia^ tuam: vt te rectore, te duce, sic
transeamus per bona temporalia, vt non amittamus aeterna, per Christum Dominu^
nostrum. Amen.

Benedicite.

Resp.

Dominus.

Sacerd.

A subitanea and improuisa morte, and a damnatione perpetua, liberet nos, Pater
and Filius.

Versus populu^ faciendo crucem dicat.

Illuminet vos omnes Spiritus sanctus.

Resp.

Amen.

Sacerd.

Et benedictio Dei Patris omnipote^tis descendat super nos, and mane at semper,
In nomine Patris and Filij and Spiritus sancti.

Resp.

Amen.

Tunc exue^do alba^ dicit.

Benedicite Sacerdotes Domini Domino: benedicite serui Domini Domino,

etc. vsque ad finem eiusde^ Cantici. Deinde, dicat.

Laudate Dominu^ in sanctis eius: Laudate eum in firmamento virtutis eius.

etc. vsque ad finem eiusde^ Psalmi. Postea, flexis genibus coram Altari,
gratias agit, dicendo.

Nunc dimittis seruum tuu^ Domine, etc.

Trium puerorum cantemus hymnum, que^ cantabant sancti in camino ignis,
laudantes and benedicentes Deu^. Kyrie cleison, Christ eleison, Kyrie eleiso^,
Pater noster, and ne nos

Oration.

Deus, qui tribus pueris in camino ignis mitigasti fla^mas ignium, concede
propitius, vt nos no^ exurat flamma vitioru^ per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Of the points that are to be considered of, upon the text next going before.
CHAPTER LVI.
a BEcause this our Iuggler would bid his table farewell, that he might go to
another, where he should have better cheer, he crosses and kisseth it for his
last farewell.

b Soon after, because he has played in this interlude, with his Chasuble, all
that is needful, he pulls of that piece first, which he last put on. Then
pawseth he a while, still standing in his white smock with the rest of his
masking robes, for the ending of some part of the play that yet remains
behind vnplayed.

c There is a Canon in the Salegunstadien Council, Lib. Con.
celebrated in the days of Pope Benedict the eight, and of the Emperor Henry
the second: wherein, mention is made of the superstition of certain men and
women, which customably always had the beginning of the Gospel after S. John,
and of the especial Masses of the Trinity, and of S. Michael, etc. which
thing is there forbidden. Now, the manner of the reciting of this piece of the
Gospel, after S. John, which the Priest here recites in the end of his
Mass, is nothing else but such a mere superstition and witchery as was
forbidden in this Council. For it is not said, to instruct the people withal,
because it is only buzzed up in the teeth without the hearing and
understanding of any. Neither is it said for a prayer, because there is no
such matter contained within it, but only a doctrine to instruct us in the
faith of the divinity and humanite of Jesus Christ. Howbeit, it should seem,
that the priest which recyteth it, and they that hear it do greatly merit,
only for hearing of it recyted, or for that it is there, recyted: and that
there is great virtue in the words thereof, though no body understand them, by
reason of the jolly words and notable matters that are in it. Wherein they are
much like the Jews, who attribute as great virtue to the words and syllable
of the names of God, which they have in their languag in the holy scriptures,
as if the power of God were tied to them.

d This prayer is very necessary for all these Gentlemen sacryficers,
Moonckes, Friars, Prophets, and Ministers of Antechrist. For, the fear which
they have of loosing their temporal benefits, makes them altogether forget
heaven, and all heavenly and eternal benefits. For why do they all, so
stoutly oppose them selves unto the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and reformation of
the Christian Church, for the mayntenaunce of their sacrilegous Mass, the very
syncke of all blasphemies: men's tradytions, full of all superstitions and
Idolatryes: and the popish sea also, the very sea of Antichrist, and of all
abhomynation, save only for the temporal benefits which they receive
thereby, and fearing to lose them? For take away from them their lusty
prebendes and fatt benefices, which they have for the mayntenaunce of these
filthy and stynkyng abhomynations of theyrs, and they will soon after, care
but a little for them.

e We have else where spoken of the ordenaunce, which bids the people to
beware, how they presume to go from Mass, before such time as they have the
priests blessing, and that the solemnite of the Mass be finished. This
ordenaunce is contained within the Canons of the Agathensan council, Lib. Con.
where it is ordained that the Bishopp should bring all those to open shame and
to do open penance which did the contrary. And in the first Council of
Orleaunce likewise, Ber. de offic. Miss. Ca. 20. Alam. de offic. Miss. C. 36.37
Dur. Rat. lib. 4 De ben nom.
celebrated about the time of Pope Hormisde, wherein it is ordained, that the
people should receive the priest his blessing, if the Bishop were not there.
This is to be understood of the last blessing, which is a double blessing:
For they send one of them immediately after the Ite Missa est, or, Benedicamus
Domino. And besides, there is yet another, which they call, the very last, by
comparing it with the foremost: which, they say, represents the coming of
the holy Ghost, that was sent unto the Apostles. Upon Whitesondaye, as the
other, represents the ascension, because Jesus Christ blessed his Apostles
and Disciples, Luke. 24. Nichol. de. Plo de expos. Miss. 6. par. Alam de offic.
Miss. Ca. 36.
when he ascended into heaven. Now, because there are two blessings, it is to
be doubted, of which of these two these foresaid Canons, mean. Howebeit,
Alamarius sets down a full and resolute determination hereof, satisfying all
such as are desirous to understand, in what place the Mass properly
begins and ends, to the end that if they can not be present at the whole
divine office, yet that they might be at the least, at the principal part
thereof, and which is properly of the Mass and of the very substance of it.
Whereupon he says, That the Mass begins properly, When the Mass
begins and ends.
even there, where the Priest begins the sacrifice: that is, in that place
wherein we have begoone the third part thereof, according to the division
which we have followed, and which some at this present use: and says, that it
ends with that blessing, which is with the Ite, Missa est. And for
confirmation of his judgment, he alleges Isidore, who says that the Mass
begins at that same very place, Isidore. li. Ety.
where the Catechumeni are put forth, when as the Deacon cries out, and
says, if there be any one of the Catechumeni, let him go out. And all that
which he there says, confirms as much as we have already heretofore spoken,
of the Mass of the Catechumeni, and of the faithful. And besides all this,
the said Alamarius renders a reason, why there is no mention made in the
Memento, but for the faithful that are living, and namely for those which are
there present. Because says he, that in the action of the sacrament there is
no prayer made, but for the faithful, and the sacrament is administered to none
but to them. And therefore they cause all the rest to go out. Ber. Micr. de
offic. Miss. Ca. 21. Con. Tol. Ca. 18. Con. Aga. Ca. 44.
Moreover, Berno moves a question, to know what kind of men they are that
ought to give this blessing, because that Pope Damasus the first, gave this
power and authority only to Bishops where Leo and Gelasius never forbad the
Priests, except the Bishop him self were present. Hieroni Rustic. Narbo.
He alleges also the testimony of S. Jerome, by whom, he again shows,
that if the Priests have right power and authority to consecrate and
administer the Sacrament of the supper, that they ought also as well give the
blessing to the people. Berno, for the resolving of this doubt, says, that
there is either a fault in the book, of the matter which is written of
Damasus, or else that this ordenaunce must be taken, according to Leo and
Gelasius their meanings, either else that the custom of the Church did
afterward carry it away, and that it was of greater force and authority, then
the ordenaunce of Damassus. And in the end he concludes, that this authority
was in the old time, only given to the Bishops, because as he thought it was
not greatly necessary for to have the priests give the blessing, seeing that
there were none of the faithful that continued at the Mass, but such as did
communicate: unto whom, the prayer that is called the postcommunion (which was
appointed for none but for the Communicants) served in steed of the blessing.
But whenas in process of time, the people were withoulden from the Communion,
and yet could not be suffered to be at the diuiue service, there was a
tolleration granted, that the Priest might give the people the blessing, to
the end it should not seem that they should go away bereaved both of the
blessing, and also of the Communion. To be short, how ever it was, were it by
reason of this occasion, or otherwise, he concludes, that the custom of the
Church grew to be such, as that this blessing of the Priest could not be
omitted, without great offense, C^n. Aga. Ca. 44.
whatsoever either Damasus, or yet the Agathensian Council, had herein
ordained, which thought it to be so meant, as Damasus had alleged. I have here
of purpose, again set down these things, that every man might the better
understand, what great difference there is between the Mass, as it is at this
day in the popish church, and the manner that was used therein, in the ancient
Church, to the end it might not be thought, that this Mass of the Popish
church, is used in the divine service, after that manner that it was in the
ancient church we: also see the superstitious difference that was between the
office of the Bishop and the Priest, being thus divided in two, in such manner
and form, and for the reasons which we have heretofore, else where rendered. For
seeing that the ministry both of Bishops and Priests, has been always one
and the self same ministry, so far forth as it touches, and extends it
self unto preaching, and administration of the sacraments: why should not the
blessing of the one, be of as great effect and power, as the blessing of the
other, considering that Blessing, is prayer, and that that prayer which the
ministers of the Church make, is made as it were in the person of the Lord God,
and in the name and behalf of the whole church, whereof the minister is as it
were the mouth, by which God him self speaks, and offreth and gives his
blessing and power to this holy ministry, which he him self has ordained? My
meaning is, by this my speech, of the ministerye of the Gospel, and of the
true ministers thereof.

f After that the Priest has pronounced his last blessing, he puts of all
his masking robes, which he before had put on, to play this part, and again
mumbleth up his prayers, as he did when he made him self ready: but the Lord
God knows to what great purpose they are said, and so buzzed up.

g We are to seek for other manner of Priests, and Gods servants, then these
are, for the executing of that, that is there spoken of in this psalm.

h Here again we see, how this jolly Simeon plays his part.

i Here is hudled up pele mele, both canticles, psalms and prayers, in Greek
and eke in Latin, one in another neck, from a post to a pudding prick. As
touching this Canticle, which the Grecians made in the behalf of the Hebrews,
Daniels companions, who were put into Nebuchadnezer his hoate burning furnace,
they have great reason both to allege and singe it, to make an end of such a
blasphemy as the mass is, and that by such infamous, and detestable people, as
these are, who execute the office, not of these faithful servant of God,
which were put into the furnace, because they had rather be burnt quick, then
they would worship any idols, against the express commandment and law of
God: but of Nebuchadnezer causing such to be burnt to death, who as these holy
people were, will not worship their idols, but chose rather to be burnt, the^ so
villanouslie deny Jesus Christ, as he is daily denied in the Mass, and by
men's traditions, which are observed under the reign of Antichrist, in stead of
the commandments and ordinances of God. And here we will make an end of the
Mass, which we have a great long time song, having touched no matters therein,
but only the most gross and doltish. Which thing we have done, to the end
that all men might the better understand, how far it differs from the holy
Supper of Jesus Christ, and what a mass and huge heap, of all abominable
idolatry it is, and the very reign and government of Antichrist, and his
whole prop and foundation, whom I beseech the Lord eftsoons overthrow and
destroy with the breath of his mouth. So be it.

FINIS.

