AN APPENDIX OF THE SAINTS lately Canonized, and Beatifyed by PAVLE the fifth,
AND GREGORY the Fifteenth.

DOWAY, By HENRY TAILOR 1624.

To the Catholic Readers in England.
Dear Countrymen, If my ability in Health, Wealth, or Understanding were
answereable to my desire of your good, you should hear from me oftener: But
these gifts are at the disposure of a higher power: And therefore at the
abounding in any one, or all of these ought to tend unto his glory, so their
want shall not enforce me to derogate either from that, or hinder me from
laboring to the utmost of my power to bring you such merchandise as may refresh
your souls with spiritual delight and comfort. Wherefore I have reprinted the
Appendix of such Saints lives as were lately Canonized and beatified by Paul
the fifth and Gregory the fifteenth; translated into English by M. Ed. Kinsman
The motives urging me hereunto, next after your good was the general
approbation and likeing of the book amongst all which had it, the raritie of
it amongst many which desirde it; it being annexed to the Saints lives of the
wholl year, and therefore cannot be had, without the byeing of the wholl
volume, which many will not, for that they have those lives all ready, and
others cannot, the volume being of so great a price exceeding their poor
ability. These are the reasons moving me to this I have here done, wherefore I
hope you will take it in as good part at I mean it, and therest of my
endeavors to you which, is sincerely, wishing they may prove happy Mediums to
bring you safe to the peaceable harbor of Eternal bliss, still resting.

Yours in what he is, Henry Tailor.

AN APPENDIX OF the Saints lately Canonized, and Beatifyed, by Paul the Fifth,
and Gregory the Fifteen. And First.
The Miraculous life and Virtues of Saint Isidore Husbandman, and Patron of
Madrid in Spain, lately canonized by Pope Gregory the XV. Abridged and
translated out of Spanish.
SAINT Isidore was borne in the ancient Kingdom of Castile, in the famous
City of Madrid in Spain, where the Kings Court is ordinarily kept, about
the year of our Lord 1130. of very Catholic and devout Parents, though of
mean condition, whom they piouslie brought up, and instructed in all kind of
virtue, according to their poor ability, especially in Prayer, saying of his
Beads, hearing Mass, frequenting of Sermons, Exhortations, and the like: and
for corporal exercises, he was brought up and taught to Till and manure the
ground in manner of a Laborer or Husbandman. After that he was grown to man's
estate, and his Parents both dead, he married a wife, of an honest, though
poor family, like unto himself, and begins to dispose and set in order
that little means which he had, still following his manual art of Husbandry,
laboring for daywages and hire, for other Husbandmen of the Country that were
rich, and had lands of their own to manure. But yet with all he had got a
pious custom and use, which grew up with him even from his Childhood, to hear
Mass daily before he began to labor, Which he never omitted, though there
were never so great have of work to be done.

And for this cause, certain of his neighbors, through the instigation of the
devil (who now began to make hoate war upon S. Isidore for his sanctity and
holiness of life which they could not endure) stirred up against him his
master, of whom he had taken a piece of ground to plow, and was to labor by
the day, complaining grievously of him, that he came every day very late to
work and that besides, he omitted the same oftentimes in the day and went to
his prayers. His master the Farmer was much incensed against him, by hearing
this their accusation, and one day falling into a fit of choler at their
reports, presently went unto him in the field, to see if it were true or no
which they had told him by way of complaint. And coming in all have unto the
field, where S. Isidore was to be at his work, he saw three plowes going, two
whereof were drawn and governed by Angels in the likeness of young men,
clothed in most pure and white garments.

At the first sight whereof standing amazed, he drew neeres unto them, when
upon the sudaine they vanished away. Here upon he came to S. Isidore, whom he
found at the other plow, and seeing so much work done beyond his expectation,
he fell down at his servants feet, and cried him pardon for so easily believing
the false reports, his neighbors had made of him, assuring himself of the
truth of the words which Saint Isidore had often told him, to wit, that how
much time soever he spent in prayer, the same was recompensed larglie in his
work, by the hands of his sweet Savior, and rather to the profit, then any
way to the lest hinderance or loss of his Master. And so he departed with
confusion in himself, and full of love and reverence toward his servant.

As soon as his said master was departed, the Angels returned again unto the
plowes, and as they labored, they taught S. Isidore, and instructed him in
many mysteries of his faith, accompanying him all that day until night, going
home with him also, even to his house, whither when he came he found a poor
Pilgrim at his door, asking an alms of meat, for the refreshing of his
body, who calling his wife, and bidding her give the Pilgrim some what to
eat, she replied sadly, and said, there was nothing in the house.

He bid her look into the Pot for some Pottage and Flesh: but she knowing
that al was spent said there was assuredly none left, and withal she took up
the Pot into her hands to show that it was empty. But behold a wonder, for she
felt the Pot heavy, and lookeing thereinto, found it full of very excellent
Pottage and Flesh, where with she fed the Pilgrim liberally, and with
admiration acknowledge the miracle: her husband in the mean time with drawing
himself into an inner room, and falling to his prayers as his custom was.
The same night he being a sleep, the said Pilgrim appeared unto him again in
the same habit, that he had done before in the Evening, and seemed to awake
him, and put upon him a Pilgrims weed, and sailing over the seas, conducted
him to the holy land, whether when he was come, he showed him all the places of
chief note, where our Savior had taught, preached, was taken, examined,
whipped, condemned, and lastly suffered death for our sakes. Which places S.
Isidore seemed to reverence, and greatly to adore, with gust and affection of
heart, and afterward was presently conveyed back to his own house, where the
Pilgrim took his leave and departed.

Upon a time in a great Frost and Snow, one John de Vargas a Farmer sent Saint
Isidore to the Mill with a sack of wheat, to have it ground to make bread for
his family. Saint Isidore took the sack of corn early in the morning, and
passing by a Church, he went in to hear Mass, as his usual custom was,
which when he had done, he hasted on toward the Mill, and met on the way
others of the same village that went also thither with wheat in like manner.
As they went talking and discoursing, they saw a great weather beaten tree
growing in the way, on the bows whereof sat white Piggeons so thick, as they
seemed even to cover the whole tree, being flocked together and almost starued
for want of food that hard season, the ground being every where covered with
snow and ice. Saint Isidore when he drew near unto the tree cried out with a
loud voice and said: O Earth, the Mother of all living creatures, why do
thou at this time deny food unto these thy innocent Creatures? And then he set
down his sack of wheat, and putting away the snow with his feet, uncovered a
great broad place of the ground, and taking Corn out of the sack, he strawed
it there for the Piggeons, who all presently came from the tree, and before
they would eat thereof did come to Saint Isidores feet, and with their beckes
touched, and pricked them, and his legs, in sign of reverence to his
sanctity, and having so done, did feed themselves on the Corn. One of his
Company that all this while stood by, and looked on, began to murmr against
him, for so destroying and casting away his masters wheat, but the rest were
silent and stood amazed at the thing. Then taking up his sack, which was well
emptied by his liberality to Gods creatures, he came to the Mill, and put what
was left to grinding, where the flower thereof did so multiply between the
Milstones, that he had his sack as full of excellent meal (and more in
measure also) as if he had not diminished any one grain of the corn. So as
the miracle was manifest to all that knew what had passed.

Another time, when at night his work was ended, going homeward from the
field, he went into a Church to pray, so as it being late before he came home,
supper was ended, and the other workmen had eaten up all the meat, save only a
little morsel of flesh and pottage, which they had reserved for him. He took
the same very contentedly, and carrying it to the door, he there began to
distribute it amongst a great number of poor people and pilgrims that passed
by, and behold, the said meat did so multiply in his hands, in the
distribution thereof, that he served a great multitude therewith before he
ended, and every one went away content and satisfied.

It so fell out at another time, upon a very hoate day in summer, that his
master or Landlord, coming into the field where he was at work, and being
much parched with hear, demamded if there were no water near, whereby to
quench his thirst. Saint Isidore said, there was a little spring not far off,
and showed him the place. The man went speedily to quench his thirst, but
finding neither spring, nor any sign of water at all, returned in great
anger, and thought Saint Isidore had mocked him. Whereupon the Saint said, Come
with me again to the place, and I will show it you. They went, and when they
came thither there was no sign of any water, but Saint Isidore pricking the
earth with a little goade he had in his hand, there presently sprung up a very
clear, and excellent fountain of water, which being taken by sick persons,
infinite number are daily cured of all kind of diseases. And this miraculous
fountain is yet even seen in the fields, not far from the City of Madrid,
and is visited with great concourse of people daily, both from far and near.

The devil envying the sanctity and simplicity of this holy man, began to
devise many plots and engines wherewith to entrappe him in his snares. And
therefore he incited some of his neighbors, to accuse his wife unto him of
lightness, and to be less chaste then she ought. Which when Saint Isidore had
oftentimes heard iterated in his cares, he was much afflicted and troubled in
mind, for that the rumor thereof began now to be spread abroad amonghst his
friends to his great disgrace, as they pretented, and he believed. His wife
whose name was Marie (being also a very virtuous Godly woman) understanding
thereof, and seeing her loving Husband perplexed and troubled therewith, said
unto him Dear Husband, I understand, and see also by your countenance, that
you are much troubled with suspicion of my Chastity: but be assured thereof
there is no such thing, and that it is a mere Calumniation of both our honor:
In testimony and confirmation whereof, I am even now ready to pass over this
River (which was hard by) upon the water, trusting wholly in the confidence of
Gods mercy to clear my self of this lewd imputation. And thereupon she
presently took her mantle and going to the great River of Xamara, spread the
same upon the water, and sat down upon it, and passed over without any hurt
or danger. This being done in presence of her Husband, and of many people, she
was fully cleared of all suspicion, and the thing accounted for a manifest
miracle.

S. Isidore, being much comforted in soul by the foresaid miracle, did very
much honor his wife always after for her virtue, till her dying day, which
(full of holiness) followed some few years after, and he left alone, who
continually bestowed his time, and followed the manner of life he was
accustomed unto before, but yet never omitted his hearing of Mass every day,
before he would take any work in hand, nor his other devotions at diverse times
in the day, as his usual manner was. He often also repaired to an Hermitage
near to Madrid, and spent many whole days and nights in pious discoursing
with the Hermit, who was a Monk and a very holy man, and famous also for the
gift of Prophesy, of whom Saint Isidore learned many things touching piety and
devotion, and was thereby wonderfully illuminated also in many mysteries of our
Holy Faith, especially touching our B. Lady, to whom he was always most
devout, saying his beads many times a day in her honor.

The holy Monk also instructed him, and taught him many other divine things,
whereby S. Isidore was greatly inflamed with desire of that kind of life, but
yet he was always still resigned to the will of God. By the Hermites counsel
also, he entered into the Confraternity of the Rosarie of our Blessed Lady, with
great devotion and exact observance of all ^ules and Constitutions of the said
Confraternity, and to the great edification of all his fellows. And there was
a custom in that Confraternity that on certain days a distribution of bread
and wine was made amongst the Sodales thereof and a certain part assigned to
each one, which he had for his own use. Always at these distributions, Saint
Isidore gave away his part to the poor. And on a time it happend, that his
part assigned by the Confraternity, arrived to a good quantity, sufficient for
the relief almost of twenty persons: Whereupon he taking the bread and wine
home to his house invited all the poor people round about, who flocked thither
in great numbers, to whom he began to distribute the same with his own hands,
and it multiplied so much, that it sufficed three hundred persons, all being
satisfied, and praising God for the great liberality bestowed upon them, and
acknowledging the miracle.

Other Miracles which he wrought in his life time are innumerable, and would
fill a great volume to recount them al. But those which have happened since his
death at his holy Body, by his intercession to God, are sat more in number,
some few only whereof according to the breuity this place requires shall be
recounted afterward, when we have said a word or two of his death, which
happened as follows.

In the year of our Lord 1170. which was the last of his life, whem by divine
Revelation, he knew that his death drew near, he entreated to have the B.
Sacrament brought unto him, which he received with great Reverence and
Devotion, and after made a long and most devour speech to those of his
househould and neighbors present, exhorting them to live Christian-like, and
in the fear of God, and observations of his holy Commandments. And so with a
most sweet and amiable Countenance, rich in merits, and famous for miracles,
he quietly and most happily gave up his soul to God.

When the brute of his happy death was spread abroad, the people of Madrid
came to see and to touch his holy body, whom many held for a Saint for the
miracles which they had heard him to have done, but especially those of the
villages near about, and of the poorer sort of people, that were better
acquainted with the manner of his life, and had seen, and been present at many
miracles, which he had wrought. Not-with-standing because he was exteriourlie
poor, his body was buried in the Churchyearde, in an ordinary Grave, among all
other people, where it remained for the speace of 40. years, of whom all this
while little or nothing more was spoken of, except it were amongst the meaner
sort of people of the adjoining Villages, who had byne best acquainted with him
when he lived.

But our Lord, who would have this his Saint honored as well in earth as in
heaven, at the end of forty years, revealed his intention to a pious and
venerable Matron of Madrid, who had all this time been very devour unto Saint
Isidore, for the miraculous things she had heard recounted of him by the
fornamed John de Vargas: wherefore to satisfy her devotion, she dealt seriously
with the Pastor of the Village, to have his body translated into the Church,
and laid in some decent place thereof, promising to defray all the charges
there about. The Pastor being a vertuens man, and having heard much talk of
the miracles which he did when he lived, made further inquiry thereof, and
found that he was in deed a very holy and innocent man, and that the
Fountain which was close by the village, and very profitable and commodious
for all the people, for the excellent water there of, was mireculously raised
out of the ground by his merits: he dealt with the Bishop, expounded unto him
the Matrons pious request, and having obtained his license, appointed a
certain day for the remouall of the said body into the Church.

In the mean time there was a little Vault propared, humble and decent, at the
cost of the foresaid devout Matron, where his body was appointed to be laid.
And when the day appointed came, the people there about resorted to the
solemnity, according as the Pastor had informed and invited them. All being
ready, the Pastor with the rest of the Clergy of the Church, came in manner of
procession to the Churchyard, and opening the Grave where his body lay, they
found it whole and vncorrupt, and as fresh and fair, as if he had byne dead
but the day before (it being forty years complete after his decease) and from
the same there proceeded so sweet and fragrant a smell, that it ravished all
that were present. The grave was no sooner opened, but all the bells of the
steeple began to ring in excellent tune and order, of themselves, and so
continued during the Ceremony, and until he was translated into the Church,
and laid in his new Sepulcher, to the astonishment of all that heard them: at
which time also were healed many persons of many sorts of diseases.

After his body was thus decently laid in the Church, very many began to do
great reverence thereto, and it pleased God to witness, of what great merit and
esteem he would have this his servant to be, by the many and wonderful
miracles daily wrought at the same by his intercession, of some whereof we
shall speak a word. And first to begin with a continual miracle, which
remains even unto this day, the water of the fountain which he miraculously
raised out of the ground, has cured infinite people of all sicknesses and
infirmities, and is had in very great esteem by all the inhabitants both of
the City and Country round about, where you shall scarcely find a house, who
has not some of the said water continually preserved in vialls of glass or
botles, ready for all infirmities or sudden sickness that may happen,
especially agues, or blew spots. And when oftentimes there happens the
sickness of the plague, the people find none so present or assured remedy, as
the water of the said fountain.

Another miracle, that has very often been seen and testified by thousands of
all sorts of people is, that the Lamp which hangs before his sepulcher, has
been oftentimes lighted from heaven, without putting any fire thereto by the
industry of man. Nay which is more, when there has wanted oil in the lamp,
and the same filled with water, the week has burned as clear, and as bright
as with oil. Which some curious persons have desired to prove and they
themselves, both by putting in water, and lightning the week, because they
would not believe the same without their own experience.

The women of Spain have a very peculiar devotion to S. Isidore when they are
great with child, and in labor of Childbyrth, because very many have been
safely delivered, by his intercession, and by commending themselves unto him,
in the extremity of their labor, and at such times as there has been little
hope of life.

Those also who be troubled with the Gout, have great devotion unto him, for
that many have been helped being in great extremity, and cured of that
infirmity, by his merits and prayers.

Upon a time, there was a man who desired to get a relic of the holy Saint,
whether for himself, or for another, is not certainly known. This man
watching his opportunity, and hiding himself in the Church till all were gone
thence, the doors being locked, came to the Tomb, and making shift to open a
corner, so as he might reach unto the holy body, cut off a finger from S.
Isidore, with intention to carry the same away: and having put it up into his
pocket, and beginning to close up the Tomb again, that the thieft might not
be perceived, he was suddenly there arested, and made so immovable, that he
could not styr afoote. Whereupon fearing exceedingly to be discovered and
punished for fact, he took the finger and put it to the joint from which he
had cut it, and it instantly fastened thereto again, and thereupon he was
presently set at liberty; and so closing up the sepulcher departed, giving God
and S. Isidore thanks, that no worse evil had happened unto him, being also
very sorry for the rash attempt, which he had put in practice.

There have happened many times great Drouthes in those parts for want of
rain, which has caused such barrenesse of the ground, that the people have
been ready to starve for want of corn: but by carrying S. Isidores sacred body
in procession, the said drouth has presently ceased, and rain has so watered
the earth, that it has become presently feuitefull. And all the husbandme^ in
Spain have taken this holy Saint for their peculiar Patron, and doevse, even
until these days, whenever they sow corn, to pray unto S. Isidore, and
call upon him to bless the same, offering a candle or some such like gift unto
his sepulcher, by whose intercession they hope to have a happy harvest, and
their piety in this kind is very seldom frustrated.

Certain Gentlemen of Spain trauayling on a time by Coach, and passing a very
strait and narrow way upon the side of a rocky hill, the horses being
furious, and their footing slippery, they fell down, drawing the Coach with
the people in it after them, into a mighty precipice; who seeing the imminent
danger cried for help to S. Isidore, and presently the horses and Coach
stayed, hanging upon the side of the rock as it were in the air, until the
people all got out, and saved themselves, to the number of 18. persons, and
afterward drew up the horses and Coach, without any further hurt. For this so
evident a miracle they all gave God and S. Isidore thanks, and sent donaries
to his Tomb in testimony of the same. The Angelical Music, and celestial
harmony which has been often heard at his sepulcher is wonderful, in so much,
that infinite people have witnessed the same, having been hearers thereof to
their great astonishment.

His apparitio^s to many have been very illustrious, as may be read at large in
the History of his life; and in particular he appeared once to Alfonsus King of
Castile, who making war upon the Moors, obtained a miraculous victory by his
intercession and merits. As also he appared in a vision at another time to one
that lay sick (and was berest of all hope of life by the Physicians) bidding
him take comfort and have confidence in God, for that he should recover, and so
presently he became well, and received again his perfect health.

And to conclude, the benefits which many have received by the infinite
miraculous Cures done at his sepulcher, are so many and great, that a whole
volume might be witten thereof. For there are recounted above twenty blind
persons to have received their perfect sight, many dease and du^be to have
recovered their hearing and speech, many crooked, lame, and deformed, to have
received perfect stre^ght and comlynes of body; many sick of the palsy, to have
received perfect cure; and infinite others to have been delivered from all kind
of infirmity wherewith they have been oppressed.

Finally the late famous miracle wrought upon the person of the late King of
Spain Philip the third, is testified by thousands of eyewitnesses, that were
present at the same. The substance whereof in brief was this. In the year of
our Lord 1619. the said King of famous memory going a Progress into Portugal,
to visit that kingdom, together with the Prince and his other Children, after
he had been received with most noble and magnificent Triumphs, as well in
Lisbone as other places, in his return to Madrid, fell very dangerously sick
of a hoar pestilent fever or Taberdillo, whereby he was in eminent danger of
Death, and almost despaired of, by his Physicians. The court and nobility were
strocken into fear at this sudden chance, and this dangerous infirmity of
their King, was recommended to the prayers and devotion af all the people,
especially of Religious Orders: but he continuing, so 2. or 3. days with out
sign of amendment, desired to have the holy Relics of S. Isidore brought
unto him, and with all his force and strength of body and mind, humbly
commending himself unto him and his merits, that thereby it would please God,
he might recover his health: he presently felt himself much better, the fever
relenting, and within a few days after became perfectly well.

As soon as he had recovered, he began to think how he might honor the
Saint, by rendering him thanks for so singular a benefit, and presently
determined to procure, with all endeavor, his Canonizatio^, thereby to have him
the more known and honored throught the world: but the death of Pope Paulus
V. as his own also ensuing soon after, the business was differred; yet on his
deathbed did he seriously commend the same, to Philip the fourth his Son, the
now present King of Spain, by whose intercession to the Sea Apostolic, he
was, with the greatest honor and solemnity, that perhaps has ever been made
in that kind, canonized for a Saint, by Pope Gregory the XV. the 12. day of
March in the year of our Lord 1622. in S. Peter's Church at Rome, that thereby
his memory might be famous to posterity.

His body being taken up the second time, and put into a costly Shrine 450.
years after his death, was found wholly vncorrupt, sending forth a most
pleasant and sweet smell, to the astonishment of all Spain, and so remains
even until this day.

His life is written elegantly, and at large in Spanish Verse, by Lopes de Vega
Carpio, Secretary to the Marquis of Sarria, by F. Peter Ribadeneyra, D.
Alfonsus Villegas in their Excrauagants and others. His feast is celebrated, by
many, upon the 12. day of march, on which he was canonized.

THE LIFE OF THE HOLY Patriarch S. Ignarius of Loyola, Author and Founder of
the Society of Jesus. Taken out, of the most part, of the Authentical Relation
made in Consistory before Pope Gregory the 15 by Cardinal de Monte, upon the
19. day of January 1622. a little before his Cannization, and translated into
English.
IGNATIUS Loyola was borne in that coast of Spain which belongs to the Mount
Pyraeneus, in the town of Aspeythia, within the Dioecese of Pamplona, the
year of our Lord 1491. of Bertram Loyola and Mary Sanchez both noble
Catholics, and godly parents, who in like godliness brought up their son: and
in the first flower of his youth, as one that was of an excellent to wardlines
both in mind and body, sent him unto the Catholic King Ferdinand his Court:
where after he had remained a while amongst those young galla^ts, he betook
himself to Antony Manriques, Duke of Najara and Viceroy of Navarre, living
then in Pamplona, a fair and principal City of that Kingdom, and there
began to give himself to the study and exercise of warlike affairs. And when
the said City was beseiged by an army of Frenchmen, Ignatius, who with other
soldiers had undertaken to defend the Castle, (as he was foremost in the
Conflict) by means of a stone which a piece of Attillery struck from off the
wall, having his left leg sore wounded, and his right grievously crushed and
broken, fell down half dead, and endured afterward at home a long and
painful cure, with such singular patience, that all the house did wonder
thereat.

But when by Gods help he had begun to be some what eased of his grief, and
had escaped all danger of death, seeing that he was yet longer to keep his bed,
he desired to have some profane book or other, such as he was wont to read,
to pass the time withal; which being not to be found in the house, two other
Spanish books were brought unto him, whereof one contained the life of Christ
our Lord, the other of his Saints. With the reading of these books he was so
vehemently inflamed, that he determined from the^ceforth to change his life, to
follow the steps of Christ and his Saints, and to go to Hiecusalem, that he
might worship those holy places, increase Gods holy spirit in the faithful,
and convert Infidells to embrace his holy law and gospel.

Wherefore as soon as his wounds were healed, he (very much against his
Brother Martin Garcia his will) forsaking his country, his parents, and all
frail and transitory things, as one that hereafter meant to become a fouldier
of Christ Jesus, took his journey to the Monastery of Montserat, and there
having made a general confession of his former life, and hanged up his sword
and dagger in the Church of the same Monastery, putting on a longside coat of
course cloth, girded about him with a cord, bare headed, with a staff in his
hand, all the night of the Vigill of the feast of the Annunciation of the
Blessed Virgin, watching before our blessed Ladies Altar, sometimes standing,
and sometimes upon his knees, asking pardon for his sins past, he dedicated
himself wholly to Gods holy service. From thence he went to a town near by
called Manresa, and took up his lodging in the Hospital of S. Lucy, where, in
a certain cave at the rivers side that runs by those plains, he began to
bring forth worthy fruits of pe^nance, leading a poor and austere life,
amongst poor and abject people, whom he daily served even in the basest
employments of their necessities.

Having exercised himself in this place, a good while in this schole of
penance and other virtues, this Noble Pilgrim came to Rome in the year of
our Lord. 1523. from whence as son as he had obtained the Apostolical ben
diction (which he received from Pope Adrian the Sixth, and that even upon Easter
day) he went first to Venice, and afterward to Jerusalem. But when he had
there visited those holy places, being afraid that he could not conveniently
stay and employ himself in the salvation of souls in Palestine, he returned
into Spain; where, to the intent that he might the better procure the
spiritual good of his neighbors, not withstanding he was now thirty years
old: first at Barcelona he studied Grammar, then heard Philosophy and Divinity
in the University of Alcala, for the space of a year and half: and after this
again at Paris he renewed all the same studies, living all this while of
alms, yet never leaving off, nor interrupting the works of charity, humility
and penance, which he was accustomed before to do.

At Paris he came acquainted with some others, whom he persuaded to the same
course of life, and they all together made this vow, that when their studies
were ended, all wordly things being despised, they should go to Jerusalem, and
there give themselves wholly to the salvation of souls by preaching, teaching
etc. But if either within the space of a year there should be no fit
opportunity to fail, or that they should not be permitted to stay at
Jerusalem, that the^ as being absolved from the aforesaid vow, they should go
to Rome, and present their sernice unto the Pope for the spiritual help of
their neighbors.

But when with over much studying and watching, Ignatius had fallen into a
grievous disease of the stomach, by the appointment of the Physicians, and his
Companions advise, he returned into his Country in the year of our Lord 1535.
and there in an hospital of S. Mary Magdalen in begging his victuals from
door to door, and serving of the poor, he very carefully bestowed the space
of three months: when having recovered his health he went thence to Venice,
whither his companions also of set purpose were to come, and in the same City
received the holy Order of Priesthood, and made a vow of Poverty and Chastity
before the Lord Verall Archbishop of Rosan, who being then the Popes Legate,
was afterward created Cardinal.

Now the year which they had agreed upon for their pilgrimage being expired,
and their sailing into the holy Land hindered by the breach of peace between
the Turks and the Venetians; Ignatius with his Company, came to Rome in the
beginning of the year of our Lord 1537. where being entertained by Quirinus
Garzonius a Citizen of Rome, and lodged in a certain farm of his, at the foot
of mount Pincius, he offered his service unto the Pope with all readiness
possible, to be employed in procuring the salvation of his neighbors. Mean
while by instructing the ruder sort of people, in the principles of Christian
Faith, and by other godly and landable living, he founded and got confirmed his
Order of the Society of Jesus, for the defense and increase of the Carholike
faith, and good of souls. And albeit in the same Society he ordained three
solemn Vows, yet unto those (which are common to other Religious) he added a
fourth vow, whereby he promised a peculiar and special Obedience to the Pope,
in undertaking of missions even unto the Turks, and Infidells themselves
wheresoever, without taking any thing to bear their charges, and in teaching
children the Christian Doctrine. This being done, he wrote the Constitutions of
the same Society, which he afterward being chose^ General, governed with very
great praise both for wisdom and virtue; And lastly after many labors and
travails, having received of the Pope his Apostolical benediction with a
plenary Indulgence of his sins, calling upon the Name of Jesus, he piously
reposed in our Lord at Rome the last day of July in the year of our Lord 1556.
being of the age of threescore and five years, and sixteen years after the
Society was confirmed by the sea Apostolic, at what time the same was extended
almost throughout the whole world. For he left established twelve Provinces, to
wit, that of Portugal, of Castile, of Aragon, of Andaluzia, of all Italy
(which comprehends Lombardy and Toscan) of Naples, of Sicily, of Germany, of
Franders, of France, of Brasile, and of the East Indies; and in these Provinces
there were at that time, about an hundred Colleges or Houses of the Society.

His body was buried first in a low and humble Tomb at the right band of the
high Altar, in his own little Church of our Blessed Lady at Rome, and
afterward in the year 1587. it was translated solemnly to the new and
sumptuous Church of the Casa Prosessa, which Cardinal Alexander Farnesius had
newly erected, and there placed in a Vault at the Right hand of the high Altar,
where it is yet reverenced with concourse of people from all parts of the
world, as well for his admirable life and sanctity, as for the innumerable
miracles that have been, and are daily wrought there at by his intercession,
some whereof we shall relate, at the end of this narration, after we have
briefly laid down his virtues, which follow in this manner: and first of his
Faith.

Such was the excellency of Faith, which the Holy Ghost by means of his
perusing the a foresaid books before his Conversion, began to plat in the heart
of Ignatius, that reading the wonderful things which God had wrought with his
Saints, and believing that he would deal in like manner with him, if he
should follow their steps, he therefore without any more ado leaving all,
followed only our Savior Jesus Christ. This same Faith made him so meekely and
patiently endure so many labors, and overcome so many difficulties, in
bringing to pass whatsoever he had once vndertake^ for the glory of God and
salvation of souls. This confirmed him so strongly in his poor and laborious
course of life, not only by perpetual perseverance, notwithstanding many great
impediments; but also by a formal institution of the same, established with
solemn vows.

Finally hence arose that wonderful care and diligence in procuring the
conversion of Heretics, Schismatikes, Moors, Jews, and Insidells: in
preaching the Gospel to the Indians, Barbarians, and other nations by means
of S. Xauerius and other of his Society: and in always teaching and holding
the most sound and Catholic Doctrine as a true scholar of the Angelical
Doctor S. Thomas, never giving care to any new fangled opinions, especially
about the sacred mysteries of our Faith, which he so firmly believed, that he
was wont to say. That although there were no Scriptures for his warrant, yet
was he ready with all his heart to suffer death in defense of the same faith,
for so much only as God had imparted and revealed unto him while he was at
Manresa.

First out of this so well grounded root of Faith, sprung up that his most
singular Hope; whereof his true contempt of all worldly things, his austere
penance, his rare confidence so little in himself, and so much in Almighty
God, his wonderful courage in strong and hard enterprises for the glory of
God, the delight and pleasure he took in the pains, reproaches and
persecutions which he suffered for Christ, and to be short, his most sweet and
continual meditation of death, are more then sufficient testimonies.

Secondly, his Charity toward his Neighbors was such, that besides his daily
serving of the poor and sick in Hospitalls, and not only curinge their
bodies, but with most profound humility even licking their botches and sores,
he also every day went a begging from door to door, bestowing the best part
of the Alms he got, upon the poor of the Hospitalls, and prisons of the City
where he lived, contenting himself with the refuse, and worst part of all.

Extraordinary was the care he had to instruct children and ignorant people in
Christian doctrine. And the zeal wherewith he was carried away in procuring the
salvation of souls, could not be contained within the bounds of one Kingdom,
but extended it self even unto Jerusalem, whither after one pilgrimage, he
vowed another, both for himself and the rest of his Society.

For his Neighbors sake, he composed the Book of Spiritual Exercises, which
is one of the best that has been written in that kind: for them he
exceedingly furthered and increased the Confraternity of the Blessed Sacrament
in his own Country. For them he was not a bashed at the age of thirty years,
to go to school amongst little boys. To conclude, for them after he had ended
his studies at Paris, together with a few more that had entered there into his
Society, he went to Rome, where for them he offered all his endeavors and
service to the Pope; for the^ he instituted the Order it self of the Society,
propagating and multiplying the same with Missio^s, Colleges, Churches,
Schools and Universities, of all kind of sciences, with other pious works
(besides in particular the German College, the Hospitalls of the Orphans and
Cathecumens, the monasteries of S. Martha and S. Katherine in Rome) throughout
all the world, every where by the exhortation and administration of his
subjects, teaching the people to frequent the Sacrament of Penance, and holy
Communion, Mass, Sermons, and other holy Exercises. And what wonder in him,
who even in the beginning of his conversion after he had been grievously
beaten, and almost brought to the point of death at Barcelona, for procuring
the salvation of his neighbors, did not only not complain thereof, but gave
God thanks for it, forgiving and (to fulfill our Lords commandment) praying
for his persecutours. In so much that after he had recovered his health, he was
not afraid to return to his former works of Charity, and to hazard his very
life for his brethren; notwithstanding all his friends dissuading him from it,
to whom he always gave this answer: Quid mihi optabiliue quam more pro
Christ and salute proximi mei? What can I wish for, that would be more
grateful and welcome to me, then to die for Christ, and the salvation of my
neighbor?

Thirdly if we consider how Ignatius did all that has been touched above,
merely for the love of God, how careful he was ever from his first conversion
to keep his heart pure and clean from all touch of mortal sin, either in
word or deed; how strictly, and often every day he examined his conscience,
least he should have any thing in it that might displease God, were it but the
least venial negligence in his daily meditation, how he had withdrawn all his
affection from all things that were not good, and fixed his whole heart upon
God; how he daily used to meditate upon heavenly things; eftsoons stirring up
himself to the love of God, by a certain Iaculatory prayer in his book of
Exercises which begins. Suscipe Domine vniuersam libertatem meam, etc. How
he leuelled all his thoughts, words, and deeds to the honor and glory of God,
in so much as he had always in his mouth (as a token of what was in his heart)
this sentence. Admaiorem Dei gloriam. If we (I say) consider all this, we
shall, the less wonder how he should out of the fervor of this charity, be
forced to say, That he had rather if he were to have his choice, remain alive
with uncertainty of his salvation, to the end he might serve God in the mean
time, then die and go straight to heaven: and moreover he did persuade
himself, if God Almighty should ever thrust him down to hell, that it would
be a greater torment for him, to hear those horrible blasphemies against the
name of God, then to be tortured with the most cruel pains that the damned
suffer.

Whatsoever he took in hand, first he commended it to God Almighties
providence and assistance; then he maturely consulted and examined what means
he was to use, and what impediments he was to avoid which done, with great
confidence and resolution, he achieued his intent and final end, which was
always the glory of God.

The great desire he had to satisfy Gods divine Justice for his sins past,
made him in Monserat, Manresa and Barcelona, go clothed in sackcloath, and
girded about the very bare skin with a chain of iron. It made him oftentimes
go barefoot, and that he might eschew vain glory, to cut out the soles of his
shoes: It made him sleep upon the bare boards and ground, afflicting and
punishing his body with iron whippes and disciplines, fasting and other such
like mortifications.

To these may be added the fervor of his Devotion; the abundance of his
tears; his daily prayer; his hearing or saying of Mass every day; his
frequenting of the Sacraments; his visiting of holy places; singular devotion
to our B. Lady; to the Angels, Saints, and holy Relics. Finally, his perfect
keeping and fulfilling of the vows of Poverty, Chastity and perpetual
Obedience, which he had made in the Society.

Moreover, touching his vprightnes toward his neighbor, his words were
always sincere, plain and deuoid of all deceit or flattery: his heart was
pure and simple, ever taking all things in good part.

His invincible courage, could not be quailed with the many and grievous
tentations he had in the beginning of his conversion; nor with the manifold
diseases he got in visiting of the sick; No nor all the injuries, reproaches,
nor difficulties he found (which were without number) were able so much as once
to turn him back, much less hinder him from attayning unto his desired end.

He took great pleasure in seeing himself wronged, and disgraced, still
requiting his enemies with special favors and benefits.

All the time he was at Manresa and Barcelona, his fare was bread and water
every day, except Sundaye.

Once in a Chapel at Villadord, and another time in the Cave before mentioned,
what with continual prayer, what with abstinence, he was found so lean and
weak, that he was scarce able to stand. But at Barcelona by reason of the same
extraordinary mortification, he fell into so grievous a sickness, that he would
hardly have escaped death, if a certain pious and charitable woman, had not
taken care of him, which he not without some difficulty admitting, said: Sinite
me pati haec leuia vt saluetur anima mea: let me suffer these trifles, that my
soul may be saved.

Out of the wonderful great care he had of Castity, both in himself and his
subjects, proceeded that clause of his Constitutions, to wit, That those who
were of his Society, should strive to imitate the purity of Angels, both in
mind and body.

After he had once made a purpose to change his life, he could not endure to
hear his brother talk of his Nobility, Riches, Warlike Prowess, and the
like, but as soon as he was well, he forsook the world. And once coming
near home into his native soil, to recover his health, for fear of being
honored by his brother and other inhabitants, if they should have notice of
him, he left the company of one of his acquaintance, and passing through desert
mountains and bywayes, made choice rather of a poor Hospital, then of his
Fathers Hall. Thus every where as much as he could, still hiding his Nobility,
he always shunned the speech and conversation of such as he thought would know
him. But if it were his chance in any place to mere with any that did know
him, or took acquaintance with him, he would be sure never to return to that
place any more.

This rare contempt he had, not only of the world, but even of his own
person, is sufficiently seen before in his poor and mean kind of living, and
in taking such pleasure when he heard any thing spoken or done to his own
disgrace.

When he was chosen General of the Society of Jesus (which he himself having
instituted desired therefore it should be accounted and called, The least of all
Religious) he altogether refused to undertake the charge, till such time as his
Ghostly Father commanded him to take it upon him. And again ten years after,
perseuering still in the same Humility, he endeavored by all means possible
to be put out of the office, alleging that he himself was not fit to bear
it.

Having taken the office upon him, first he bestowed some days in serving the
Cook in the kitchen, and afterward began to teach children the Christian
Doctrine, according to his Constitutions, that he might seal with his own
example the Ordinances of Humility, which he was to propose unto others.

He did what he could to conceal his own virtues and heavenly visio^s;
intermingling ever in his speech some words or other of humility, as Miserum
me, miseram animam meam. Woe is me wretch, woe is my wretched soul. Nay and
which is more, sometimes he was wont to say, that If he were to ask a boon of
Almighty God at the hour of his death, this he would be sure to request of
him, that he would permit him to be buried in a dunghill, because he esteemed
himself as dunge. And to this many times he added, that he was much edified
with the example and conversation of all but himself; and in a certain
Epistle he wrote, that he never had conference or communication about
spiritual matters with any man were he never so bad, that he did not reap
some profit by him.

Amongst the rest of the miracles of this great servant of God, we might well
account this one and not the least, to wit, the wonderful light and knowledge
he had in spiritual things as by the restimony of Pope Julius the third, in
the beginning of his book of Spiritual exercises, is sufficiently declared.

Miraculous was that brightness which S. Philip Nerius, and Father Oliver
Mannareus saw shine in his face whiles he lived. And no less miraculous was
the speedy co^course and flocking of the people unto his body, as soon as he
was dead, and the continual veneration and visiting not only of his Sepulcher,
but also of his Chamber, his Cave, and other places wherein he had done penance.

But besides these, God Almighty by intercession of this Saint, both before and
after his happy death wrought many miracles, which are to be seen more at
large in the Relation out of which this sum is taken, and in other histories
of his life. I will here only rehearse, some few of them for our better
instruction and further declaration of his sanctity.

And first his great charity and zeal in procuring the salvation of souls,
was miraculously confirmed in that, when a certain man whose name was
Lissanus, for being cast in a suite of law, and hanged himself, and was by all
men's judgment stone dead; he by his prayers obtained of God Almighty so much
time for him to line again, that might serve his turn to be sorry for his
sins, and to confe^^e them to a Priest, and receive Absolution.

Secondly to increase our devotion to holy Relics, that may suffice which
happened to Bartholomew Contesti, a Surgeon and Citizen of Maiorca, who was
so tormented with a continual headache, that for vehemence of the pain, he was
diverse times forced to fall dowen to the very ground. And besides this, he had
so grievous a disease in one of his eyes, that being unable to behold the least
glimpse of light, he was feign to be shut up in a dark chamber, eating no meat
but what others put into his mouth. As many and sundry medicines were applied
as could be devised, but all in vain, for his disease still waxed worse and
worse. In so much that Bartholomew, out of the intolerable pain he felt, was
not afraid to protest, if a certain Surgeon, whose name was Pastor, were
alive, that he would cause him to placke out his eye by the very root. But as
he lay, now in this pitiful estate, hearing by good chance of the manifold
miracles that were every where wrought by the intercession of S. Ignatius, with
great devotion and hope of recovery by this means, he desired that they would
bring him one of his subscriptions, or writings of his own hand: which was no
sooner brought unto him, but he found himself well without all pain, either
of head or eyes, rising out of his bed, and beholding the light of the sun
with great ease and pleasure. And that he might be the better assured that this
so sudaine a cure was to be attributed to the divine power, and to the
intercession of this servant of God S. Ignatius, for two or three several
times, the Relic was no sooner taken away out of his chamber, but his former
pain returned unto him; and the same Relic was no sooner brought back
again into the chamber, but his pain left him. So that Bartholomew was
advised to keep the Relic always about him, and thus within three or four
days, he came to be so perfectly well, as if he had never been sick.

In Rome a Lady called Drusilla Tursellina, being very much vexed with a
vehement sever, and with the headache, having used many remedies, and been let
blood in her arms, nostrills, and head, without profit, her sickness rather
increasing every day; was presently healed by a relic of one of the Blessed
Fathers bones, laid upon her forehead.

Another woman named Olimpia Norina, had such a vehement pain in her eyes,
that she came to loose her sight, and for the space of three months had such a
continual ague, and pain in her head, that she could notrest. They brought
her a subscription of the Blessed Fathers hand, at the time that her pain was
at the greatest, laying it upon her forehead, and eyes, and she began to see,
and was ryd of her ague and pain.

In the same City in the year 1597. a noble man's child of seven years old,
called Hierome Gabriell, being sick of a pestilent sever (called a Taberdillo)
and of a plurisy, having also the worms, so that there was little hope of his
life, was healed with the same subscription of the Blessed Father.

In the year 1599. the Lady Ioane Vrsina, being but a child, daughter to
Cornelia Vrsina Duchess of Cesi, had so great a cough, that she could scarcely
breath or suck. The Duchess her mother commended her very earnestly and
devoutly to blessed Father Ignatius, and beseeched him to obtain the health of
her daughter: whereupon the child having been a night and a half without rest,
presently fell a sleep, and her cough ceased, and she began to suck her
Nurses breast. For which cause the Duchess commanded a Tablet to be set on the
Fathers grave, in remembrance of the favor she had received.

In the same year 1599. Angella Ruggiera was troubled with an extraordinary
noise in her head for almost a year, and lost the hearing of her right ear;
whereto applying a relic of the Blessed Father, and making a vow to fast with
bread and water the day of his departure, and to communicate the day following,
recovered perfect health, and remained free from that infirmity.

In the City of Naples, in the month of June of the year 1599, Donna of
Aragon, Princess of Beltran, and Duchess of Terra-noua, had a great pain,
and swelling in her right breast: and finding no remedy, amongst many which
were applied in the space of four months, omitting, them all, as
unprofitable, and laying upon her breast, with much devotion, the picture of
the Blessed Father, she became well the same day: and coming to Rome the last
Holy year of 1600. commanded a tablet of silver, with four great wax Tapers
to be set upon the Blessed Fathers tomb, on Easter day, in thanksgiving.

In the City of Nola, the year 1599. in the month of Noue^ber, a knight
named Francis Blasius, being much vexed with a pestilent ague, and with a
grievous pain in his head and stomach, so that in the judgment of the
Physicians he was in danger of his life, his mother Zenobia Tolphia exhorted
him to lay a relic of the bone of Blessed Father Ignatius to his head, and to
commend himself unto him, desiring his favor. He did so, and remained free
from all his pains, and his whole sickness.

In the City of Lecha (which is in the Province of Apulia, in the Kingdom of
Naples) a child of three years old, son to the Baron of Belli-boni, fell
from his Nurses arms upon the ground, and did notably hurt his right knee,
which grew every day worse, because the Nurse for fear concealed the fall, and
it went so far, that it was necessary to open the child's knee oftener then
once, and this helped not: wherefore coming to cut it the third time, the
Father fearing his Sons death (whom he did see consumed with the wound, and
with the ague which followed thereupon) went to the College of the Society, and
there they gave him a Relic of the Blessed Fathers bone; which he laid upon
the child, before they opened his knee the third time, and when the Surgeons
came to do it, they found him much better, and within a few days altogether
well.

I will conclude with one more, which very much confirms the veneratiou of
holy Images and pictures. In the year of our Lord 1603. in Vall dolid a
principal Cirty of Spain, one Ferdinand Pretel of Mendoza upon the 29. day of
September, had fallen into a single Tertian ague, which not many days after
came doubling and doubling so long upon him, till at last it was turned into a
pestilent fever, which some call the black ague, the Spaniards, Taberdillo,
and fot all the Physic he took in great abundance, it brought him at length
to so desperate a case, that now quite and clean being given over of the
Physicians, he made his confession, received the Blessed Sacrament, and desired
that in due time he might have the Sacrament of Extreme Vnctio^. All which
things done the third day of December holding in his hands an Image of S.
Ignatius which he had hanging about his neck, he called upon him with a loud
voice, and with all his heart commended himself unto him, that he might
obtain his health; when upon the sudden he began to be well, and was
delivered from his disease, having his strength restored him again in such
sort, that the thirteenth day of the same month, he made nine days journey
from Valladolid to Valentia, through cold and craggy mountains in the very
heart of winter.

These and multitudes of other miracles being daily seen and wrought
throughout Europe, together with the Intercession of many Christian Kings and
Princes to the sea Apostolic for further declaration of his Sanctity to the
world, he was by Pope Paul V. beatified in the year of Christ 1613. and his
feast kept solemn with great devotion and concourse of people to the Colleges
of the Society throughout Christendom. And Pope Gregory the XV. being
assumpted to the chair of S. Peter, being moved with the foresaid miracles and
many new ones daily wrought, being also thereunto incited at the request of
Ferdinand the Emperor, of Philip the fourth King of Spain, Lewis the XIII.
King of France, Sigismond King of Polomia, the Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of
Bauaria, Sauoy, Florence, Parma, Mantua, and others, he was Canonized for a
Saint in S. Peter's Church at Rome upon the 12. day of March, in the year of
our Lord God 1622.

THE LIFE OF S. FRANCIS Xauier, of the Society of Jesus, and Apostle of the
Indies: taken also out of the authentical Relation made in Consistory by
Cardinal de Monte the 19. of January 1622. before Pope Gregory the XV. upon
the Acts of his Canonization, etc.
FRANCIS Xauier was borne in that part of Navarre which belongs unto Spain,
in the year of our Lord 1497. in the Castle of Xauier, of noble Parents, to
wit, John Iasse President of the Kings Counsel of the same Province, and Mary
Azpilcueta, Lords of the town of Xauier and other places there about, who
having piously brought him up, and diligently instructed him in the principles
of Christian Doctrine, when he was grown to ripenes of years, sent him to
Paris, that he might furnish himself with learning in that famous University.
And afterward when his father was about to send for him home, Mary Magdalen
Francis his sister, who then with great fame of sanctity was Abbess of the
Monastery of the Reformed Nunns at Gandia, being by divine revelation informed
of her Fathers present purpose, and the future glory of her brother, wrote unto
her said Father, that he should maintain Francis still at Paris in his studies
by all means possible, yea though he should be forced to spend all his
revenues upon him to that end: For that God Almighty had chosen him to be an
Apostle of the new found world.

Francis therefore at Paris coming to be acquainted with Ignatius Loyola (who
was afterward founder of the Society of Jesus) was with many prayers, and
tears by the same Ignatius, obtained of our Lord to be his companion in
procuring the glory of God. And being instructed by him in the spiritual
Exercises, profited so well thereby, that as one set on fire with the love of
Euangellicall perfection, and setting naught by all the honors and riches of
the world, he courageously undertook and constantly followed, under the bauner
of the same Ignatius, an austere and contemptible kind of life, going a
begging to get his victuals, giving himself to continual prayer and
meditation of heavenly things, and afflicting his body with fasting and other
works of penance.

Departing from Paris he came into Italy, and whilst he expected opportunity to
go with his companio^s into the Holy land, that they might labor there in
converting the Turks, as they had made a vow to do, he in Venice, Bononia, and
other Cities, with rare example of sanctity and fervor of spirit, by
preaching and doing other works of charity, took wonderful great pains in
procuring the salvation of his neighbors: Especially at Venice, where after he
was made Priest, with great example of humility and charity he served the sick
in the Hospital, being more ready and willing to assist and help those, whose
very sight by reason of their incurable diseases and loathsome wounds, others
were not able to abide, and that he might get a more glorious victory of
himself, he of tentimes drunk of the same water wherewith their sores had been
washed.

When there was no more hope of sailing that year, he and his companio^s as
they had agreed before, came to Rome, that they might offer themselves to the
Pope, to be sent whither he would for the spiritual good of their neighbors.
And while they were leading there an austere life, very poor in whorldly
commodities, but most rich in spiritual exercises and labors, taken for the
glory of God, having newly laid the first foundations of the Society of Jesus,
John, King of Portugal, being very earnestly bent to the conversion of the
East Indies, made humble suit unto Pope Paul the third, that he would send him
some of Ignatius his companions who for learning and holiness of life were by
all men's report judged fit for that voyage, that they might preach the Ghospel
in those most large and vast Provinces.

For this exploit, Ignatius by the Popes commission appointed Francis; who
having received of the Pope the dignity and authority of Legate of the Sea
Apostolic, as one now chosen by God for an Apostle according to his sisters
Prophecy, took in hand his journey without delay. And the signs and tokens of
his Sanctity and Apostolical fervor while he staid in Portugal were such,
that by the general voice of all, he was called the Apostle which name not
only while he lived, but after he was dead also he ever kept still. In so much
that for his sake throughout all Europe, Afric, Asia, and the new found
world, as far as the Portugalls dominions reach, all that are of the Society of
Jesus, are called Apostles.

Out of Portugal he took ship for the East Indies, but could not be persuaded
to take any thing to bear his charges, except only an old patcht cloak; and
so begged his victuals in the ship, slept in the open air above the hatches,
having a cable rope for his bed. He was always ready to help the sick, not
only begging of those who had meat for such as wanted, but with his own hands
also dressing and parting it amongst them, thinking no scorn even to wash
their clothes, or do any other service were it never so base, for them, in
whose persons this holy and prudent servant of Christ, acknowledged and
reverenced Christ himself.

Having spent all day in praying and taking pains, he incessantly watched all
night in comforting the afflicted, and administering the Sacraments to such as
were in danger of death. Whereupon some were wont to say, that the only thing
Francis took pleasure in, next unto prayer, was serving of the sick. And this
was ever his fashion and manner of living, not only in this, but also in all
other voyages he made by sea, where in he spent a great part of his life.
Neither did this his charity toward poor and sick persons shine only upon
the sea, but also upon land while he abode in Cities, the beams of the same
charity never lost one jot of their brightness. Nay rather being now made all
with all, that he might gain and purchase the souls of all for God Almighty,
to those that either by reason of wealth or health, had no need of this kind of
service, he was never wanting in other seruioe, of no less importance for them
when occasion was offered: never sparing of labor which he was to bestow in
furthering the salvation of his Neighbors.

When he arrived at the Indies after a long years seafaring he would grant
no time of rest to his weather beaten body; but presently began to fling about
the fire which he came to cast into those Provinces; going up and down the
City, and calling together with a little bell into some Church or other, the
children and people, there teaching them the Christian Doctrine, with such
effieacy of spirit, that it pierced even to the bottom of their hearts, like
unto the Doctrine of the Apostles. He persuaded them all to sing the prayers he
taught them up and down the streets, and to teach their friends and
acquaintance the same at home. Which custom by him brought into the Indies, to
the great glory of God, remains and is observed there even until this day.

Those that were come to years of discretion, by all gentle means possible,
he invited to confession and penance, and never ceased with an undaunted
courage, and many times with evident danger of his life, venturing into strange
and uncouth Proninces, and that often times barefoote, with torn and beggailie
apparel, to call heathens to the true liberty of the sounes of God. In which
enterprise Almighty God did specially assist the endeavors of his servant,
confirming every where what he preached with miracles, that were most
notorious, and like to those which the Apostles wrought, and inwardly moving
the hearts of those that heard him, in such sort, that he converted and
baptized: many tho Lsandes, and drew many out of the puddle of sin, not
without many and troublesome iourneyes both by sea and land. Many are the
Kingdoms, Provinces and Ila^ds through which the Legate of Heaven and of the
Roman Sea went sowing the word of God. And at length as he was seeking entrance
for the Gospel into the great Kingdom of China, this faithful servant,
quite bruised and broken with the intolerable pains, which beyond all humane
force he had so long endured for the glory of God, and altogether worn out and
consumed with the heavenly and burning desire he had to see Christ his Savior,
being now at last, out of a desert I Will named Sancianum, called home unto his
country of Heaven, and to the marriage of the La^be of God, entered into the joy
which our Lord had prepared for him, the second day of Dece^ber, in the year
of our Lord 1552.

The virtues of this holy Apostle are very many and most Heroical, some whereof
I shall here recount. The daily profession he made of his faith in receiving
of the Sacraments, himself with wonderful great devotion, and with no less
pains ministering the same to others; his heroical works; his great and
dangerous pilgrimages to preach the same faith to Barbarous and Savage people,
and that alone without any humane help at all, expressing and setting forth
so lively in himself, the purity and sanctity of the Eua^gelicall Doctrine;
finally the abundance of the fruit which he has sent out of those foreign
countreies, into the granaries of the Catholic Church, to wit, so many
millions of Christians, amongst whom so many glorious martyrs have watered and
fertilized the Primitive Church of those Country with their blood, and so many
Confessors in the very middle of most cruel persecutions have defended the
faith of Christ, are pregnant proofs of the excellency of that Evangelical
seed of Faith, which he carried with him.

Five things he had in him which cannot possibly consist without a most firm
and steadfast Hope. First, a contempt of all temporal things, most manifestly
seen in his despising of all worldly honors, dignities and riches which the
world in all abonda^ce did assure him of, and embracing an humble kind of life
in religious purity, under the yoke of obedience, and that in the very flower
of his youth. Secondly, his voluntary sufferance of excessive trouble, labors
and miseries, to the which by how much more grievous they were, so much more
willingly did he expose himself, as it most plainly appears in the whole
discourse of his life. Thirdly, an undaunted courage in attempting hard
enterprises, putting his very life so often in danger amongst strange and
barbarous people. As for example when alone he encountered a whole army of
Badagars, which afterward I will rehearse amongst other miracles. Fourthly a
wonderful great security in dangers, in so much that in the midst of cares
he was without care, and without fear in the midst of fears, ship wrackes,
enemies, and many other miseries, hanging many times over his very head. Lastly
an incredible joy in adversity, which may be evidently proved by his continual
cheerfulnes of mind and readiness of will, whereby glorying with the Apostle in
the hope of the sons of God, he suffered so many labors, and troubles, so
many perils and adversities, living justly and holily in this world, and
expecting the blessed hope and coming of Almighty God.

For the love of God, he most exactly and perfectly kept all his
commandments, daily meditating upon his sacred Law with a pure conscience,
and great horror of never so little transgressing, or doing any thing against
the same him self, and never without great care that others should likewise
observe the same; wherein, as also in keeping his vows of voluntary Poverty,
Chastity and Obedience, he so excelled, that he did not only thereby stop the
adversaries mouths, but by the mouths and tongues of all, not only of
Christians, but eue^ of Idolaters themselves, he was commonly called by no
other name but Saint.

For the same love, had he so familiar and often conference every day with God,
whereby he was so set on fire, that many times with his face all inflamed, and
his eyes fastened upon heaven, he was miraculously elevated, and raised up from
the ground: sundry times as one not able to contain the abundance of his
heavenly consolations, he would cry out, Satis est Domine, satis est: It is
enough O Lord, it is enough. He had Jesus in heart ad mouth, both sleepinge and
waking. And so in sleep would he often call upon him, Mi Jesus, dulcis Jesus and
even in the middle of whole multitudes of people, he would burst forth into
Faculatory prayers, which greatly moved those that heard him, to the love of
God.

Moreover this same Charity was that, which cast away all fears of so many
ship wrackes and dangers, in trauayling alone through strange and desert
countries, and dealing with the harsh, and savage humors and conditions of
those barbarous and rude Infidells. Finally his admirable Charity does so shine
in the contempt he had, not only of all worldly things but even of death it
self, that he might truly say with S. Paul: Quis nos seperabit a Charitate
Christi? tribulatio? an angustia? an fames? an nuditas? an periculu^ etc. in
his omnibus superamus propter eum qui diligit nos. Who shall separate us from
the love of Christ? shall tribulation? shall anguish? shall hunger? shall
nakedness? danger etc. in all these we get the upper hand, for his sake that
loves us.

Of his Charity toward his neighbor, he gave sufficient testimony in all
Hospitalls where he came, serving of the sick, dressing their meat with his
own hands, watching many times all night with the^, assicting the^ at the
hour of their death, washing their dead bodies and burying them, were they
never so loath some and full of sores. He was wont to part; not only all that
he had himself, but all that he could beg also from door to door of others,
amongst the poor, with such feeling of love, that he was not only called
commonlv, the Father of the poor, but many also would afirme, that Prayer and
Poor men, were his only joy and delight.

He took very great compassion upon prisoners, whom he often visited, and
comforted both with corporal and spiritual sood, pleading for them, and
making suite for their delivery, as far as he could proceed with any show of
reason: and thus without eating any thing he would spend whole days, and feel
no hunger, which he could not have done without another special meat which
was to do the will of Christ, in works of Charity toward his neighbor.

He was daily teaching Children the principles of Christian Doctrine, and
explicating the same more at large to such as were of more capacity; he was
always calling sinners to repentance, and driving away the darkness of error
and infidelity, with the light of the holy Gospel. To conclude, in all things
whatsoever he did or took in hand, he sought nothing else but the salvation of
souls, which he so tenderly loved, that he was ready to shed his blood for
them, as is most apparent by the hard and dangerous enterprises he undertook
for their sakes.

No time nor place, were they never so dangerous, no difficulties nor
employments were they of never so great importance, could defraud him of his
prayer. For whatsoever any extraordinary work of Charity took away from his
ordinary hours of meditation in the day times, he would be sure to make that
nights rest pay for it, in so much that many times, following the example of
our Savior, after whole days spent in grear toil and trouble, from midnight
until morning, pernoctabat in oratione Dei, he watched in meditation of
heavenly things: thus ordinarily in some garden if the night were clear and
the firmament all adorned, with glittering stars, by means of so beautiful
creatures, he would stand wholly ravished with the beauty of his Creator.

The flashing flames and brightness which have been seen in his face while he
prayed, did not only evidently show the efficacy of that fire of devotion
within his own breast, but enkindled also a new fire of devotion and love of
God in the hearts of them that faw it. Now what tongue of mortal man is able
to express the sweetness and iubily of heart which in prayer, his mortal heart
being unable to bear, he was often heard to say: Non plus Domine, satis est No
more, o Lord, it is enough. And once in Mass he was so raptin ecstasy, that he
could not feel him that served him now and then to pull him by his vestme^t,
nor for the space of an hour return unto his senses.

Notwithstanding all this, he esteemed himself the greatest sinner in the
world, and inferior unto all, there was nothing so base, that he thought not
good enough for himself; no honor so small, that he deemed himself worthy
of, so that he desired to have commau^d over none, but to be subject under all,
and therefore did he reverence all as if they had been his Superiors.

All ambition he troad under foot, blushing no less when he was praised, then
others are wont to do when they are dispraysed; and whenever he did miracles,
or any thing else that might redound to his praise or commendation, he did what
he could to put it off, by attributing what was done to the merits and
intercession of his companions, or other people then present.

He kept the great authority which the Pope had given him so close, that for
the space of ten years, none but only the Bishop of Goa knew that he was the
Popes Legate; neither did he ever use the same but only once, and that not
without the advice of the said Bishop, when he had no other means at all left
to maintain the glory of God.

In ships and hospitalls he always made choice (as we have seen before) of
the basest offices. He always bore great respect and reverence, to Bishops,
Priests, and all other Superiors: in so much that he never wrote letter to S.
Ignatius his General, but upon his knees.

Out of this Humility did he choose rather a beggars weed, then a noblemans
robe, finding more content in the gross fare he had by begging of others, the^
in the dainty dishes which he might have had of his own; and so he ever
refused the rich apparel that every where was offered him; But whatsoever
dainty dish he got by begging or otherwise, he parted it amongst the poor.

In his chamber he had nothing but a few necessary books, and a bed, with a
course couerler, and two hard bolsters, more fit to drive a way, then any way
to procure sleep.

In all his many and long pilgrimages a staff always was his horse, and all
his provision depended upon the liberality of the country which he trauayled
along. But if he were to go through any long desert, where no man lived, he
would be sure to provide the poorest victuals he could, and so in all that
long and desolate journey which he made to Mexico, he eat nothing else but
dried Rice. As for his apparel it was such as made the boys laugh at him as
he trauayled along the streets. Finally as he would eat nothing but what he
begged, so would he take up no lodging but in public Hospitalls with beggars.

Besides all that has been said, he would never drink wine, nor eat flesh, or
bread made of wheat; fasting many times without eating any thing at all for
two, or three, or four days together, and sometimes from Passion sunday to
Easter Eve. He did very often chastise his body by sharp disciplines platted
with wire, till he had fercht out great store of blood. Once in the beginning
of his conversion he went so long with his arms and thighs strait bound, that
the cords having buried themselves within his flesh, the Physicians and
Chirurgions judged him to be incurable, and that he could never have escaped
death, if the ropes had not been miraculously broken. He was contented with two
or three hours sleep, employing all the rest of the night in praying, and
visiting of the sick.

Thus he overcame the world in wholly vanquishing of himself and all his
sensual appetites, with such weapons as you have seen, and that which stout
stomachs would searce abide to hear of, I mean his drinking of the water
wherewith he had washed sick men's sores and botches.

From the year of our Lord 1541. when he sailed into the Indies, unto the
year 1552. when he died, he lived in conunuall trauayles amongst strange and
barbarous people, often enduring intolerable heat, cold, nakedness, hunger and
thirst for long time together, going many days iourneis amongst thorues and
briars, almost every where entertained with scoffs and reproaches, nay and in
some places, with stripes and stones, for which with a merry and cheerful
heart he gave thanks to God, humbly asking pardon for his persecutours.

As soon as he came into any of those strange countries, which were many and
diverse where he preached the Gospel, he spoke the language of the same
Nation, were it never so different from the rest, as elegantly and readily as
if he had been borne and brought up in the same country, and diverse times it
happened, that men of diverse nations heard every one their own tongue in one
Sermon. Worthy therefore, and thrice worthy of that most renowned title of
Apostle, which the people both of Spain and India do give as due unto him,
seeing that Christ himself seemed to confirm the same, not only by the
prophecy of Xauerius his own sister, but by that special gift also which his
Apostles had to preach his holy Gospel.

Amongst many examples of this rare gift which may be seen in the Relation
above written, since the breuity of this sum will not admit all, I have made
choice of one no less pleasant then profitable.

It happened that Xauerius upon a time coming to Peter Vellius a wealthy man
then living in a City called Machai, as he was playing at Chesse in one of his
neighbors houses, asked an alms of him for some special work of charity.
Vellius at the first word gave him his key and bad him go and take as much as
he would Xauerius went and took three hundred Crowns, and brought the key
back again to Vellius, who as soon as he canoe home, opening the chest found
all his money as he had left it, and wondering at the same, the next time he met
Xauerius, asked him how much money he had taken. Xauerius answered, that he had
taken three hundred Crowns. To which Vellius replied, that he found all his
money entire as he left it; and moreover he added that he delivered him his
key, to the intent he might have taken the one half of the thirty thousand
crowns that were in the chest. Which Xauerius hearing, I therefore (said he) in
the name of God do give my word unto thee Vellius, that thou shall never want,
but God shall always send thee whatsoever thou shall have need of, and all men
shall be liberal and bountiful toward thee; nay and which is more, the last
day of thy life shall be revealed unto thee. And so indeed all fell out just as
Xauerius had foretold. For albeit Vellius afterward had many great
misfortunes which might have brought him to extreme poverty, yet all men dealt
still so liberally with him, that he never wanted any thing neither for
himself, nor for his family as long as he lived.

To conclude, at length when many years were past Vellius, being by revelation
forewarned of his death, after he had given a great deal of his wealth unto
the poor, and provided a Mass to be song for his soul, bidding his friends
farewell, he told them all the prophesy of Xauerius and the event thereof. His
friends thought that the old man began to dote. But he having heard almost all
the Mass solemnly sung for the dead, made no more a do, but went and laid
himself along upon his beer, and covered all over with a veyle, there waited
for death. When Mass was done, and the Priest had said, Requiescant in pace,
his servants ran unto him to take the veyle off him, supposing that he was yet
alive; but he had already yielded up the Ghost, and rendered his soul into the
hands of his Creator.

As the Badagars (a furious generation of people) were coming in great have
over the tops of mountains, with an huge army to destroy those Christians
which Xauerius had baptized in the Kingdom of Trauancor, and about the
Promontory of Comorinum, Xauerius all alone armed with the buckler of an
muincible confidence in Almighty God, went to meet them, and coming unto them
began to rebuke the^ very severely, when upon a sudden the whole army stood
still and was not able to go forwards any further. In so much that all their
Captains calling upon them, and exhorting them to march on, nothing prevailed
with them, for they plainly answered, that they could no longer abide the heat
that sparkled out of the eyes, and face of a certain great man of a terrible
Majesty I in black that stood over against them with Xauerius. Which the
Captains themselves soon after, by their own experience finding o be true,
made a retrait to be sou^ded, and so all the army returned, and Xauerius having
wo^^e the field, deliueted from all danger his loving children which he had
brought forth in Christ.

Another time as he was travailing on the Mountains of Comorinum, there came
unto him a poor Beggar so full of fores and ulcers, that no man was scarce
able to behold the loath somnes thereof. Xauerius with great charity and
humility, washed his sores, and to get greater victory over himself, drunk up
the water wherewith he had washed them: And then kneeling down upon the ground,
he fervently prayed unto God for the health of the poor man, who was presently
delivered and freed wholly from all his infirmities.

Again, at another time also, as Xauerius sailed from Ambionum (a City in the
Islands of Moluca) unto the Island of Baranula, there arose upon the sudden a
cruel Tempest; for the deasing whereof, he took from his neck a little
Crucifixe about a fingars length, and held it in his hand in the water for a
good space, praying unto our Lord for the ceasing of the tempest. The ship
being tossed to and fro with the waves, by chance he let it fall from him into
the sea, for which he was very pensive, and showed great signs of sorrow. The
day following, they all arrived safe at the for said Island whither they were to
sail, where Xauerius going a land, with his Companion a long the sea shore
toward the town of Tamalum, behold, a great sea-Crabbe leapt from out the
sea to land, carring the said Crucifix upright and on high between her Finnes,
and made have to Xauerius; who seeing the wonder, fell down on his knees, and
reverently took the Crucifix from her, and then prosently without more ado
the fish returned into the sea. Xauerius having received the Crucifix, kissed
the same devoutly and with his arms a cross for half an hour, lay prostrate
upon the ground in prayer with his Companion, giving God thanks for so
wonderful a miracle.

Many more and strange were the miracles which God wrought by Xauerius his
intercession in his life time; as when with the sign of the cross, he turned
the salt water of the sea into sweet, when he cured the blind, raised three
bodies from death to life, whereof one had lain a whole day buried in his
grave, and the like, as may be seen at large in the said Relation.

All which together with his excellent virtues above touched, did so fill the
most wide and large Provinces both of East and West, with the great fame of his
admirable sanctity, that even while he was yet alive he was called by no other
name but Saint, both by Christians and Infidells, all ever calling upon him,
though he were absent, in all their dangers and afflictions.

As soon as he was dead, his body was put into a coffin full of pure lime, and
so buried under ground, that the flesh being consumed, his bones might the
sooner be carried into the Indies; But four months after, they found both
his clothes and his body as fresh and free from all corruption, as if they had
been then newly put into the coffin, and yielding more over a most sweet and
comfortable smell unto all that were present.

Wherefore putting it again into the same Coffin with fresh lime they brought
it unto Malaca, at the very first entrance whereof into the City, a great
plague which Xauerius had foretold, and had long afflicted the same, wholly
ceased; and there likewise finding it yet entire and sweet, they made a new
coffin, and by thrusting in the body (for they made it too little) blood issued
out of his shoulders, and so they buried him only with earth in a Church of our
B. Lady; where also nine months after his death being found as before, and
with the veyle that covered his face all imbrued in fresh blood, they made him
a rich and sumptuous Coffin, wherein being carried into the Indies he was
solemnly received in the City of Goa, with great Po^pe both of the Viceroy
him self, and of all the Clergy and people, who flocked thither from all parts
to see and reverence his sacred body, which after many ^^ialls found still to
remain uncorrupted, and that without balm or an yother precious ointments,
was placed at last in a sepulcher made of purpose, at the right side of the
high altar in the church of the Society in the same City.

Unto which as also unto other Churches in which his Images are set up to be
piously reverenced, all as well heathens as Christians do make great
pilgrimages, obtaining therefore of God no small favors by his intercession.
For by this means the blind recover sight, the leprosy and other diseases are
cured, the dead raised to life, and many other such like wonders wrought. Nay
which is more, and very wonderful, there was a woman called Lucy de Villanzan,
who being an hundred and twenty years of age, and had been baptized by
Xauerius, after his death got a Meddall made at Coccinum, whereon was engraven
his picture: and for the great devotion she had toward the said Blessed
Father, for twelve years together she used to touch sick and diseased people
therewith, with, as also diverse kinds of ulcers, cankers, and other sores,
washing the^ in the water wherein she did put the said meddall, and with great
reverence and humility making the sign of the Cross upon them, and saying. In
the name of Jesus, and of Father Francis Xauerius, be thy health restored to
thee etc. they were presently cured; and many other marvelous things were done
by the virtue of the said meddall, and sincere faith and devotion of that
Christian woman.

So great is the respect which the very Infidells themselves bear to Xauerius,
that although they have destroyed a dozen Churches within the Coast of
Trauancor, near to the Promo^tary of Comorinum, yet they would never touch, or
once meddle with the Church of Cottara, standing amongst the rest, which for
having in it the Image of Xauerius, they greatly honor, calling it the Church
of the great Father. And so amongst other wonderful works of God in
confirmation of the Christian Faith and sanctity of Xauerius, the very lamps
that hang before his Image, having nothing else but holy water in them, have
been seen to burn for many hours together, as if there had been oil, and
that with great admiration and wonder of many Turks and Infidells, whereof
some, especially such as the Christians did now and then inuit to see the
miracle, to the intent that they might make a full trial of the truth, diverse
times changed the water, and put new matches or weeks in the said lamps,
which nevertheless did burn as before, and sometimes even take fire and
kindle of themselves, Mirabilis Deus, in sanctis suis! O how wonderful is God
in his Saints.

THE LIFE OF S. PHILIP Nerius of Florence, Founder of the Congregation of The
Oratory; wittten in Latin, by Antony Gallonius, Priest of the same
Congregation; and translated into English.
SAINT Philip Nerius was borne in Florence, a famous and principal City of
Italy, the 23. of July in the year of our Lord 1515. Whose parents were
Francis Nerius and Lucretia Soldi, Citizens of Florence. When he was but five
years old, he was so obedient unto his father and mother, that whatsoever they
commanded him to do, or not to do, he most diligently and carefully observed.

It happened that on a time a servant of his Fathers, brought from his Farm
which he had in the Country, an Ass laden with apples, which being unloaded,
Philip, being now about 8. years old, got upon the Ass, who by misfortune was
cast from his back headlong into a Cellar, which thing being known, his
parents presently ran with sorrowful hearts to take up their son, without
hope to find him alive; but when they came to the Cellar, they found him safe
and sound, to their great astonishment. About this Age he was set to school,
who not only profited in learning, but in virtue also, far above his
fellows. And seeing he was as it were chosen by the holy Ghost to be a preacher
of Gods word, he did much delight in visiting and frequenting of churches, and
hearing of sermons, greatly reuerencing the Priests, and Preachers of the holy
Church.

When he was sixteen years of age and somewhat more, his Father sent him into
Campania to his Uncle Romulus, living there in the town of S. Germans, at the
foot of Mount Cassine, who was a very wellthy man, and had no children, and
who had sent for Philip his nephew unto Florence, to the end to make him his
Heir. But after he had stayed there a few days, fearing to be entangled with
the world, he left his uncle, and all other friends, and came to Rome in the
year 1533.

When he was come to the City, he went unto the house of one Galeot, who was a
Citizen of Florence, with whom he lived diverse years, in great sanctity,
leading an austere life, contenting himself with bread and water once a day,
and oftentimes he passed three whole days, without eating any thing at all,
delighting himself only with meditation of heavenly things, in the very youth
and flower of his age, wherein he spent whole days and nights. And that he
might be the better able to help others afterward in spiritual matters he
freque^ted the schools, and heard Philosophy, profiting so well therein, that
he became equal to any of his fellows, still retayning the innocency of his
childhood, even in that age of his, and amongst so many dissolute students, as
then he must needs be conversant withal.

When he had now ended his Philosophy, and also a good part of his Divinity, he
began to bid adue unto the world, and thought seriously how he might best
employ himself, in the honor of God and service of his neighbors. Wherefore
he betook himself, unto the Hospitalls, where he comforted the ficke, served
them with his own hands, assisted them in any thing he could, teaching and
instructing the^ how to make a good Confession, and to die happily if it should
please God to call them. He had always a special care, never to come
acquainted or be familiar with wicked persons. He exhorted as many as he saw
had good parts, to enter into Religion, and in this point he happily prevailed
with a great number, who by his persuasion daily renounced the world and became
Riligious: In so much that S. Ignatius of Loyola, who then lived in Rome, and
had newly instituted the Socity of Jesus, and with whomthis holy man was
greatly acquainted and conversant, was wont to call him the Bell, for that by
his good sound and pious voice, he called so many to holy Religion. And thus
laboring on all sides to gain souls to God, he became a most lively example
of Piety and Devotion, unto all, even whiles he was yet a lay man.

In the year of Christ 1551. He took upon him holy Orders, and was made
Priest by commandment of his Ghostly Father. In saying of his Mass he was so
rapt oftentimes, that he was seen to remain in the air 2 foot above the
ground, and was smetimes so taken in ecstasy, through the extreme love and
admitation of that Divine mystery, that he knew not where he was. His heart was
also so inflamed with the lolue of the Holy Ghost, that often times in the very
depth of winter, and in the greatest cold weather, he was forced to apply
outwardly some cooling and refrigeratiue thing unto his breast.

It happened on a time, that by his reading certain Epistles of the Indies, In
which he took great delight, he was so moved with compassion toward the
Infidels of those vast and remote Cou^treyes, for that they were not members of
Gods Church; that he resolved to go thither in person, with twenty others of
his disciples, to preach and teach the faith of Christ unto them, for their
Conversion. But this business, as all other of moment, he first commended
seriously to God in his daily prayers and meditations, craving his assistance,
direction, and declaration of his holy will therein. At length our Lord put
into his mind, that concerning this great affair, he should go and consult,
and take his direction from a Monk of S. Bernards Order, who then lived in the
Monastery of S. Vincentius and Anastasius in Rome, a greet servant of God, and
much reverenced for the holiness of his life. To him S. Philip presently
repaired, and expounded unto him his whole intention and desire: who presently
demanded some respite to answer, him, saying that this business was to be
sought from God for answer, by earnest prayer, and intercession to know his
will: wherefore joining both their prayers together, after some hours of
recollection, the Holy Monk told him, that he was not to go to the Indies
(for that work (was to be done by another) but to remain still in Rome, and
that Rome must be the Indies, and the vineyard which God would have him to
manure and cultiuate: Adding further, that S. John the Evangelist had appeared
unto him, and told him so: and that he should gather together many Disciples
in Rome, whose works should be very profitable to that City.

With this answer S. Philip was fully satisfied of the will of God concerning
that business, and therefore now began to apply himself to the help of his
neighbors, by teacing, preaching, reading of Saints lives, hearing
Confessions, and the like; so that in short time, he had many followers, and
worthy Disciples (amongst which Caesar Baronius, afterward Cardinal, that
famous Historiographer was one (with whom he laid the foundation of his order,
beginning by little and little, and calling the people together into the Church
with a bell at certain hours of the day; wherein after half an hour of
me^tall prayer spent, which every one made to himself (yet altogether in one
place) there were recited publicly te letanies and other prayers, commending
therein as well the public, as the private affairs of the holy Church. This
order was observed on Sundays, Tuesdayes, Thursdayes, and Saturdayes. The
other three days of the week, to wit, Monday, Wednesday, day, and Friday,
when they met together, thy made a discipline whiles the 50. psalm and the
Anthymne of Salve Regina (or some other Psalm or Hymn) was reading having
exposed before the^ only the Image of Christ crucified, placed in such order in
a lantern, that all the Confraternity might behold the same at once in the
dark. Which custom weekly observed, does yet remain in the said
Congregation, with great devotion and fruit of spiritual profit.

This was the first beginning and foundation of the Congregation, of the
Oratory which was erected in S. Hieromes Church in Rome, surnamed de Charitate.
And after a few years the same was brought into use in the Church of S. John
Baptist also in Rome, belonging to the Flore^tines, at the request and
intercession of the Citizens of Florence, and there remained, until S. Philip
founded a new Church and house, of his own, at our Blessed Ladies in
Vallicella commonly called the Chiesa nuoua, where himself lived until his
dying day: And now is greatly in creased and spread over all Italy, France,
Spain, Germany, and other Provinces, to the great advancement of Piety and
Devotion in the faithful.

His predictions, prophesies, and foreknowledge of secret things (being far
absent) are wonderful in him both alive and dead, and to set down an example
or two in this place, it will not be amiss. It happened upon a time that
Cardinal Baronius, being then a Disciple of the Blessed Father and a layman,
came unto him one evening to Confession. The Father as soon as he saw him
said, Go Caesar, go presently to the Hospital of S. Spiritus, and help the
sick, I will hear thy Confession afterward. Baronius was at this somewhat
troubled being now prepared for his Confession, and replied, that the time of
serving the sick was now past, and that he should loose his labor in going
thither, as coming at an unseasonable hour, when there was nothing to do.
Do as I bid thee, said the holy Father without more ado. Baronius being ready
to obey, went presently to the Hospital, and when he came to the entrance of
the room where the sick lay, he began to reason with himself, saying; Sure,
there is some mystery in this matter, that our Father commands me to come
hither at this unseasonable hour (for it was now even night and time of rest)
and whiles he was thus reasoning with himself, he espied a sick man, with a
candle standing lighted at his head, ready to give up the Ghost, to whom he
presently went, and began to comfort with words of consolation, demanding
whether he had confessed his sins, and received the Sacraments of the holy
Church: who being hardly able to draw his breath, answeree noe. Then Baronius
presently ran to the Chaplain of the Hospital, and willed him to come quickly
and hear his Confession. The Chaplain somewhat ashamed of his own
negligence, began to excuse it, and came with him instantly to the sick man,
who made his Confession, and presently received the holy Sacrament of the
Altar, and Extreme Unction, and so straight after departed happily this life.
Baronius returned home, and came unto the Father and related the whole story.
Why so quoth the holy Father, hence forward learn to obey more readily, and
do what thou art commanded.

After that Baronius was made Priest, and had a long time preached unto the
people at S. John Florentines Church aforesaid, who was also superior of the
Congregation of that house, he was exempted from his Office, and commanded by
the holy Father to write the Ecclesiastical History of the Church, which after
many difficulties proposed to the said Father, he obeyed his voice, and began
the same, and afterward very happily deduced it to the 13. hundred year after
Christ, as may be seen by his twelve Tomes extant every where.

Another time it happened, that the Parents of a young Gentleman, desirous to
promote their sone, caused him to be made Priest at the age of 17. years, by
reason that there was a great inheritance fallen unto the second Heir of that
family, which yet could not be possessed by him unless he were a Priest: So
his Parents concealing his age both from the Bishop, and the young man
himself, and all others, he was made Priest and took possession of the
Inheritance. Presently after it chanced that Thomas (so he was called) came to
Rome, and hearing of the great fame of S. Philip Nerius, he was brought unto
him to salute him. So soon as the holy man saw him, he said. You are a Priest
Sir: is it not so? Yea, quoth the other, I am without doubt, by the grace of
God. You say true, said Saint Philip: and then he could him his age truly, and
how all had happened, by his friends means, and for what cause, never seeing
knowing or hearing of the man before that hour. Afterward S. Philip was
demanded of those that stood by, and heard these things, how he knew, that
the was a Priest? He said, that he did see the face of the young man to shine
in the same manner, that all others who be signed with the Character of true
Priesthood, do use to do.

It happened also that a noble Roman young youth, who was given greatly to the
pleasures of the world, was by another like youth and friend of his who was
very devout, brought unto S. Philip under color to see and salute him. When he
came, his friend could the holy Father, that he had brought unto him a
Penitent. The Noble young man began to be angry, thinking that the other had
mocked him, for that he had noe cogitation of Confession; Yet in presence of S.
Philip, for fear and reverence of his person, he assuaged his choler. And
presently kneeled down unto him, saying that he would confess, and so began:
but with intention to deceive the Father by not confessing his sins truly as
he should. The Father by divine revelation knew his intention, and so let him
make an end. When he seemed to have done, the Father exhorted him, that if he
had committed any other sins, he should confess the^. The other replied, and
said, that he had confessed all. The^ S. Philip stood up, and imbraching him
said: You say not true, my Son, for you have made but a feigned Confession of
your sins. Now therefore I advise you in the name of God, that you confess
them wholly, that you may be made worthy of pardon and forgiveness. Which words
so pierced the heart of the noble young man, that repeating again his
Confession, he made it wholly and perfect of all his sins, even from his
childhood: and moreover committed himself to be wholly governed and directed
for the rest of his life to the holy Father Who profited so well in spirit
under so great a Master, that within a while after he became a Religious man,
and entered into the order of Saint Francis, wherein he happily continued and
made a holy end. His name was Raphael Lupus.

The miracles which it pleased God to work of his servant both alive and dead,
are almost innumerable. In the year of Christ 1552. one Mauritius Anerius, a
Roman, fell dangerously sick, who being forsaken of the Phisitia^s, as
desperate, prepared himself to die, and had now received the holy Sacraments
of the Altar, and Extreme Unction, expecting a happy hour. Saint Philip
hearing thereof, went in the evening to visit him, who found his wife and
kinsfolks weeping, bewayling the loss of so dear a friend. The holy Father
exhorted all present to kneel down with him, and implore the help of the B.
Virgin for the sick man, presently they did as he willed, and he in the mean
space laid his hands upon his head; which done, he went his way out of the
house, the others either not seeing him to depart, orels not marking the same,
being all full of grief and sorrow. But see a wonder; he was scarce gone, but
the sick man began to open his eyes, look about him, and talk as ready and
sensibly as ever he did in his health, saying he was well, and would needs
rise out of his head, sou^ding forth praises to God, and extolling the holiness
of S. Philip, by whose help and assistance he had recovered his health; and he
lived after this, until the year of our Lord 1593. continually praising God
and the How Father for the miracle.

The like happened unto one Peter Victricius a Citizen of Parma in the year
of Christ 1566. who living then in Rome, fell into a dangerous sickness, which
so increased, that the Phisirians gave him over for a dead man. In this mean
time came the holy Father unto him to comfort, and assist him for his last
passage, who holding his hands over him, and praying earnestly to God for his
health, he presently felt himself better, and within a dayor two, became
perfectly well, extolling and praising the sanctity of S. Philip.

The same year John Baptista Crescius, a young man of Rome, had such an
intolerable pain in his eyes, by reason of a burning water which ran from
them, that he could neither endure the light, or the air, or take any rest or
repose for many days, whereby he was in danger of his life, the Physicians
determined to make him an issue in his neck, but he not willing to have it,
desired an uncle of his to lead him to the holy Father Philip, which he did,
desiring him, that it would please him to pray to God for his Nephew that he
might recover the health of his eyes. The holy man presently touched his eyes
with his hands, making the sign of the Cross upon them and said. Thou shall
my Son, by Gods help, recover thy eyes; and presently he began to open them,
and see persectly, and could endure the light, which before he could not, and
so within two or three days he became perfectly well, without applying any
thing at all thereunto.

In the year 1569. Laure^tius Christianus, a young man, and a Clerk of S.
Peter's Church, fell into a burning fever, which was so vehement, that in few
days he was pronounced for dead by the Physicians. Wherefore having made his
Confession, and received devoutly the holy Eucharist and Sacrament of Extreme.
Unction, having wholly lost his senses, he expected the happy hour of his
departure. The holy Father came to visit him about one a Clock in the night,
who having asked of the standers by, how he did, and understanding that he was
past hope of recovery, kneeled down by his bed side, and prayed a good while
for his health. And then rising he said: Laurence shall not die of this
sickness, and drawing near unto him, laying his hands upon his head, he called
upon him by his name with a very loud voice. Wherewith the man that was now
ready to give up the ghost, was awaked, and began to start, and opening his
eyes, after a little pause called for meat, eat well, and within a few hours
arose whole and safe from his bed, praising God, and extolling the holy Father.
In the morning the Physician was called; and feeling his pulse, found him
perfectly cured saying. O Laurence, a greater Phisitia^ the^ my self has
cured thee; thou have not been helped by humane, but by divine aid.

In the year of our Lord 1570. there came to Rome from Atella, a certain
Gentle woman, who was grievously possessed by the devil, and though she were
wholly unlearned, yet did she speak latin, and that very elegantly; and being
also asked any thing in latin, she would also answer in the same tongue, to
the astonishment of all that heard her. Moreover she was so strong, that four
lusty men could scarce take her from the ground and lift her up, although she
seemed in outward show, to be a very weak and tender woman. She was brought
unto S. Philip, who began to exorcize her, after a strange manner yet in such
sort that he made the devil within a while to forsake her: and this was, that
he beat her very sorely with little iron chains. And though the Devil cried
out a loud, saying, come beat me, strike me, kill me, and the like, yet did
the woman not so much as once stir or move her body all the while, but stood
still like a statua of stone or wood. Which the holy man perceauing, left her
for that time, and caused her body to be refreshed with food. Upon this she
became so fearful of S. Philip, that when she did but see any one to come
toward her, she suspected they would carry her to him to be again exorcized,
which always they were forced to do with four strong me^. S. Philip every
day caused her to be thus beaten, together with other exorcismes that he used,
till he forced the Devil to depart out of her body, who the night after he was
cast out, came to the holy Father in his chamber, and with threatening eyes
burst forth into these words: You Sir, you good fellow, you have used your
pleasure upon me to day, but I will not forget the injury: and so vanished
away, and the Gentle woman remained always free afterward to her dying day.

Whiles the fame of this holy man was spread over the City, for his many
miracles, and other notable things by him done, he had many secret and
malignant adversaries, who envying his works of piety, began to spread abroad
some falsities of the man and his life. Some accused him that he drew many
noble young youths from the world, and shut them up in Cloisters; Others
accused him of simplicity and rudenes; Others, that in his sermons and
exhortations he either spoke many ridiculous things, or else did fail in
explicatinge the Doctrine of the Church aright. These things at last came unto
the ears of Pius Quintus, the Pope, who being a wise Pastor of his flock,
did not so easily believe every thing that was said: But sending for two
Dominican Friars, that were very learned, commanded them to go every day unto
the Church, to hear the Sermons and Exercises which S. Philip made, and to
relate unto him truly how the matter went. They did accordingly, and being one
of them present every day, for a long time, they never found the least fault,
nor cause of complaint, but contrary wise found him to speak with such force,
efficacy and fervor of spirit, that he moved all the Anditory, of what matter
soever he spoke. Nay which is more, when either he handled any high point or
mystery of faith himself in his Sermons, or when in other Exercise of the
Oratory, he was asked by any, he did explicate the same so clearly and
perspicuously, as any learned Divine could have done in the scooles, to the
admiration and wonder of the two learned Fathers, that were set to mark and
observe him: so as his adversaries inventions vanished into the air.

Another time he was called before the Governor of Rome (who is always
ordinarily an Ecclesiastical man) and accused of making a tumult and uproar in
the City, for that at a shrouetyde he had gathered together a great number of
pilgrims and others of the poorer sort, and some also of good fashion, and by
his good exhortation and counsel, had persuaded the^ to visit the seven
Churches on Shroue twesday at what time ordinarily there are more disorders
committed in the City then at others: and he himself going before them and
they following two and two in a rank, went singing one while the letanies,
another while hymns, psalms, and other devotions, to the great profit of
their own sowles, and edification of the behoulders. When the Governor had
heard the complaints general, and believed his adversaries, that their
accusations were true, he presently sent for the Father, and sharply
reprehended him, for his gathering together of people in that tumultuous manner
as he was accused to have done, threatening to send him to prison if he did not
desist. S. Philip did not go about to excuse himself, but answered humbly and
lowly, that he was ready as well to proceed in the work he had begun, as to
desist from the same if Superiors did command, and that he neither sought or
aimed at any thing, then the glory of God and good of souls. At which meek
answer, the Governor was yet so angry, that he commanded him to appear
before him as often as he should be called; that he should not hear any ones
Confession for fifteen days space; that he should preach no more at all
without express leave granted him a new; and lastly after many co^tumelious
words thrust him out of doors.

All these things S. Philip bare very patiently, and with so constant and merry
a countenance, that he was not perceived to be at all moved therewith. In the
mean while now that his adversaries triumphing, had thought to have so
prevailed against him, he incessantly prayed unto God for aid, and not in
vain. For within the prescribed time, the Governor having made more enquiry
of the man, and of his manner of life, and reflecting upon the humble answer
he had made him, to wit, That he was ready either to prosecute the work he had
begone, or to leave it when Superiors should please, found that he was injured
and brought into these suspitio^s of mere hatred and calumniation. Wherefore he
sent for the holy Father, and gave him free leave to live as he pleased, to
hear Confessions, teach, preach, as before, with signs of sorrow, that he had
been abused. And for that some others, who were also of high authority, were
adverse to S. Philip in this business, and would not have had him to be so quit,
they died soddenly, before the foresaid fifteen days were expired.

After that the holy man had suffered these and many such other brunts of
calumniation and emnity, and had always gotten the victory by his patience and
modest behavior; he settled himself seriously to erect and found a house of
his own, which he did at our B. Ladies in Vallicella, in the year of our Lord
1576. and adjoined thereunto a very fair Church, dedicated to our B. Lady and
S. Gregory. In the building of which Church, when some neighbors thereabout
did less favor the enterprise, and did seek to hinder the work of God, they
were taken out of this world by his just Judgment. And which is much to be
admired, the holy Father, when he began to lay the foundations of that Church,
did not know where to have one penny of money toward the building thereof, but
trusted wholly to the liberal hand of God; and his hope was not in vain, for
there were so great and abundant Alms daily bestowed upon the work, that the
same was finished in a very goodly manner within two years; and in that space,
were given in Alms for that purpose above seauenty thousand Crowns, besides
other particular great sommes of money given by Princes and Senators to the
same end.

This House and Church being thus built and established, and the Order of
Congregation of Oratory approved by the Pope S. Philip now began to entertain
a number of very noble and learned Disciples, whom he instructed in all kind of
virtue, and exemplar discipline. And in the yeate 1587. he was declared
General of the Order, in which dignity he continued until the year 1593.
when he resigned the same withal humility. As soon as he was made General,
he wrote certain Constitutions, which he prescribed to be observed of all that
should addict themselves unto his Order; but yet without binding any by vow,
but voluntarily, as is yet observed therein.

After this he grew to be sickely, and so continued for 2. or 3. years until
his dying day; yet nevertheless he left not off any work of piety which he
was accustomed to do, as well in visiting the sick, as otherwise; and in this
time he wrought many miracles in the City, to the great astonishme^t and
admiration of all Rome. And amongst others, hearing that Pope Clement the VIII.
in Easter Holidays, was sore troubled with the gout in his hand, he went unto
him to visit him; and coming into his chamber, he began to embrace the Pope
according as his custom was, through ancient familiarity. Hold, good Father,
said his Holiness, and come no nearer me I pray you, for my hand is much pained.
Fear nothing said S. Philip; and there upon taking him fast by the sore hand
and kissing it, presently the pain ceased, and was wholly driven away. This
happened in the year 1695.

The same year, and a few days after, to wit in the month of April, the holy
Father fell very sick, and upon the 12. day of May he was so surprised on the
sudden by a vehement vomiting of blood, which then oppressed him, that it was
greatly feared he would be suffocated; wherefore he was presently annoyled by
Caesar Baronius, in the presence of Frederike Borromeus the Cardinal, who at
that time was come to visit him. A little after that he had received this
Sacrament, he began to be better, opened his eyes, and his senses to return
again. Then the Cardinal asked him, if he would not receive his Viaticum:
whereto when he had yielded, the Cardinal in his own person went to the
Church, and fetched the same.

As soon as Borromeus was entered into his Chamber with the Blessed Sacrament,
the holy Father, all bedewed with tears, burst forth in to these words:
Behold my love, Behold my love: this is he wherein I delight, who only is dear
to me. Give him me Give me my love, and that presently, that I may enjoy him
within me. And this he spoke with such vehemence of spirit, that he moved all
the standers by to tears. The same night he sell again into an agony with
vomiting of blood, yet by the Physicians care he was preserved from death.
After a day or two, the Physicians coming unto him one morning somewhat
early, he said unto them with a loud voice. Get you gone my Masters, for I
have no more need of your help for the present. My soitting of blood is now
stayed and pain of my breast is gone, and I begin to get strength a pace. The
Phisitia^s feeling his pulse, found him to be in very good temper to their
great amazement, and by and by he arose out of his bed, and began to follow his
exercises as before, and so continued until the 25. of the same month, saying
mass every day with great alacrity of devotion, so as he seemed to be now in
very perfect health.

Upon the 25. day of May, which was that year the feast of Corpus Christi,
which is in Rome kept most sollemue of all the days in the year in saying of
his Mass he seemed to pronounce the words in a new tune, as it were singing
for joy: after which he spent a great part of that day in hearing of
Confessions, and communicating the people. In the afternone came to visit him
very many honorable personages, amongst whom were Cardinal Pamphilius,
Augustinus Cusanus Auditour of the Rota, and Spinellus Bencius Bishop of
Politianum, whom he entertained with a very merry countenance according to his
fashion, although he knew the hour of his death drew very near. These forsaid
Prelates that came to visit him, would needs say the Office of the Breuiary
with him, by which means they stayed there till it was far in the eueninge.
When supper time came, the holy Father eat very sparingly, and was very well
after supper: In so much as himself then said, that he had not been better in
health at any time for ten years before, the^ he was at that present Moreover
he was so merry, and of so pleasant a countenance, that death was the least
thing thought on of all, but of himself. After this he went to bed, and now
desiring to conceal his death no longer, though yet he spoke obscurely, he
said to those that stood about him: Behold, we must all die. The^ he asked what
a clock it was? And they answered that it was almost three; When two hours
more shall be added, said he, it will be five, and after one more added to those,
it will be six. Then he said, Go ye all to bed in the name of God. And so
they all departed. At six a clock Antony Gallonius, the writer of this his
life, that lay in a Chamber next unto him, soddanly awaking, seemed to hear
the holy Father to walk up and down in his Chamber. Wherefore he arose
speedily, and ran unto him; Where he found the holy man sitting upon his bed,
and his mouth full of blood, which he began to vomit in abundance Heerevpon
others were called, and many remedies applied, but all in vain. About a
quarter of an hour after, the vomit stayed of it self, and he took breath,
and spoke very readily, so as all now thought the danger of death was past. By
and by after, turning to his Disciples (who by this time were come all into his
chamber) he said. Stay with me a while, for now I begin to strive with death:
Which words when he had spoken, he held his peace, and seemed to repose as if
he had been in prayer. Remaining in this sort a good while. Caesar Baronius
read the Commendation of the soul, all the rest answering with watery eyes.
When this was done, Baronius stood up, and speaking unto him with a loud voice,
desired that he would speak unto his Disciples there present, and impart his
benediction unto them before he departed, The holy Father at these words
opened his eyes, and lifting them up toward heaven prayed a while, and after
that, gave them his blessing, and so without any sign of pain, or any
griping, or gasping, with a most sweet and delectable countenance, he gave up
his blessed soul to rest, the 25. day of May, being the feast of Corpus
Christi, in the year of our Lord 1595. about the sixth hour within night, as
himself had fortold.

As soon as he was dead, he appeared unto many in the City, and in particular
to a very devout religious virgin, clothed with a very white and precious
garment, saying thus unto her. I am now as thou see, called to the Crown of
my labors; have thou a care, to follow the course of life thou have begun, and
thou shall enjoy the same glory: and with this he vanished out of her sight.
The next morning his body was laid in the Church, whereunto all the City, great
and small, rich and poor, made concourse, and the Cardinals and Princes of
the Court did no less, all reuerencing the body of the holy Father; and well
was he that could come near to kiss or touch the same. Others brought Roses,
and flowers, and strawed his body all over, but as fast as they were laid upon
him, so fast were they taken away, and gathered as pious spoils, and applied
to all sorts of diseases and fores, whereby very many were cured.

And whilst he thus lay upon the Beer in the Church, one Augustinus
Magistrius a Roman young man, having a sore in his neck, which had eaten two
great holes, one to his mouth, and the other to his shoulder, and was pronunced
incurable, came to the holy body, and after he had made his prayers, took the
hand of S. Philip, and having kissed the same devoutly, put it to his neck and
touched the soar therewith, and was thereby presently cured. As soon as he came
home he told a young sister of his, whose name was Margaret, who for six years
had labored of the same disease: presently she hasted to the Church with her
mother, and for that it was impossible for her, being but a girl to get unto
the body, for the press of people, her mother took her up in her arms and
carried her with maine strength to the body, who taking the holy Fathers hand
as her Brother had done, and touching her neck therewith, was also presently
healed. Hereupon the Father of the young man and maid, named Alexander, who was
60. years of age, and who had a running also in his eyes, which had continued
above 2. months, so grievous that he could not endure so much as the least
light of a candle, hearing of the cure of his two children, ran presently to
the holy body, and making his prayers, and doing as his children had done, he
was also cured.

These miracles with many more being diuulged, there was such running for the
space of three days and neights unto his body, that his disciples of the
Congregation had great difficulty to bury him, which at last they found means
to do in a wooden Coffin, in an humble grave at the foot of the High Altar.
But when Cardinal Pamphilius had understood thereof, he was much displeased
therewith that a man so famous, and illustrious for miracles both alive and
dead, should be laid in so humble a place; and therefore dealt seriously with
the Fathers of the same Congregation to remove him: who consulting the business
with Cardinal Medices, he was taken up, and put into a newfaire Coffin, which
the said Cardinal had caused to be made, and placed in a more decent place at
one side of the High Altar, with an Arch made over the body; whereat miracles
were wrought so frequently, that the walls about were presently hung with
votiue Tables: and such a most sweet smell, as it were of Roses and violets,
was daily felt to proceed from his body, as was wonderful.

After some years that the holy Body had lain in this place, and so many
miracles were daily wrought thereat, a noble citizen of Florence, who had
obtained a Son by the prayers of S. Philip, caused a most sumptuous and
gorgeous chapel to be erected near to the right side of the high altar,
whereto his body was translated, and there remains to this day; and is
reverenced with great devotion of the whole Christian world. He was canonized
for a Saint the 12. day of March by Pope Gregory the fiftee^th in the years of
our Lord 1622.

THE ADMIRABLE LIFE of S. Charles Borromeus Archbishop of Milan, and Cardinal.
Written in Italian by Doctor Guissano, of the Order of Oblates of S. Ambrose
in Milan; and translated in to English.
SAINT Charles was borne in the year of our Lord 1538 the 2. day of October,
Paul the 3. being Pope, and Charles the 5. being Emperor. His father was
called Gilbert Borromeus and his mother Margaret de Medices, sister germane to
Pope Pius the 4. not inferior to other Lords of Mila^ either for religion, or
for antiquity of their family and nobility. Our Lord entending to decl are that
he had designed this child for the honor and increase of the Catholic Church,
it pleased his divine Majesty, to honor his birth with a strange and
wonderful sign. For in the same moment wherein he was borne, there appeared
over his mothers bed chamber a light, like unto the beams of the sun, and as
long as a crosbow can well carry, which was attentively considered by sundry
persons that beheld the same: foretelling by this unusual light, the sple^dor
and heroical acts, as also the holy and irreprehensible conversation of S.
Charles.

Many were the arguments which he gave of his future sanctity, being yet a
little child: as, to erect and adorn little Altars, before which he made his
prayer, and other like exercises of devotion. And it is almost incredible how
much this little. soul took delight and contentment therein. Which being
considered by his Parents, seemed to presage no other thing of him, but that he
was especially called of God to an Ecclesiastical estate: for which cause they
clothed him in the habit of a Cleark, which he received, and whore the same so
inyfully, as it seemed they had in this fully accomplished his desire.

His virtues increased in him together with his years: where of he gave most
rare testimony studying in the University of Padua, where never any heard word
to issue from his mouth, which sauoured not of virtue and edification: he was
exceeding patient, sweet, peaceable, modest, and humble, so that none ever saw
him arroga^t, never in any choler, never addicted to pleasures, or any youth
full leuity. During his studies, he had for master and conductor one Alciatus
(who was Cardinal) under whom he made so great profit, that at the age of 22.
years, he was with the general applause of all, adorned with the title of
Doctor.

Pius the 4. Uncle to Charles, being made Pope in the year 1559. he ^ent for
him unto Rome and created him Cardinal and Archbishop of Mila^, giving him
charge not only of affairs concerning the government of that Sea, but also
honored him with sundry titles of most rich and wealthy dignities. Being placed
therein (although he were set in the highest degree of honor) yet he never
omitted to instruct and teach by his wholesome examples, the Provinces as well
near at hand, as far off, pursuing the affairs of his charge, faithfully and
with singular prudence, to the incredible contentment of every one. Amongst
many affairs of importance which were effected and brought to happy end by his
labor and industry, one and that of chiefest moment was the concluding and
finishing of the Council of Trent, the which Pope Paul the 3. had begun in the
year 1537. to withstand and suppress the wicked heresies of Luther, Calvin,
Zuinglius, and other seducers, but could not have it ended for sundry
difficulties which occured; whereof Pope Pius the 4. having once again
vndertake^ the pursuit, he gave the first and chiefest charge thereof unto his
nephew Charles, as to one most zealous in this affair: wherein he traveled
with such solicitude, vigilance, and fervor of courage, as none but himself
could so well have effected a business so intricate as that was.

The Council being ended, himself was the first, who (his Uncle holding yet
the sovereign Sea) put in practice the execution of those decrees, in his own
bishopric of Milan; and other Bishops moved thereto by his exemple, did the
like by means whereof many kingdoms and Provinces in Christendom, increased
incredibly in the service of God, and in Catholic piety: but the greatest
fruit remained in the Church of Mila^ where this holy Pastor desirous to
reform his clergy and people, began first with his own person, then with his
house and family, dismissing out of his service all such persons as seemed to
him less profitable to his desine, to the number of no less then fourscore
(yet first reco^pensing them all well) retaining the Clergy men of who me he
hoped for good exemple and assistance, in that which concerned the reformation
of his Church of Milan.

The Catholic Church has received an immortal benefit by the means of this
holy man, for none so much watched and solicited as he, to bring into use the
ancient custom to hold Provincial and Diocesan counsels, according to the
decree of the council of Trent. For in the space of ^. years, that he resided
in Milan, he held six Provincial counsels, and eleven Sinodes of the diocese,
wherein he instructed his subjects with so many documents and good examples,
that the new order of the Church of Mila^ did illustrate all and especially the
adjoining seas. For proof of his zeal, charity, and liberality we may look
upon the many Churches, Chapels, Altars which he either builded or repaired,
as also sundry Colleges, and Seminaries which he erected for the education and
instruction of youth, who should afterward travel in the vineyard of Jesus
Christ. In Milan he built a College called the college of gentlemen, therein
to instruct the young nobility in all virtue, learning, and discipline: and
another for the clergy of the Heluetians and Switzers, where they are
instructed in Philosophy and Divinity, to help the the conversion of their
countries: which produces such exceeding fruit, that it may of right be
called, the rampaire and defense of the Catholic Faith in the confines of
Germany. At Pauia he built another, called the college of Borromeus, which is
without comparison, the most goodly and most sumptuous that is in all Europe,
and endued the same with great revenues. He founded a congregation of secular
priest, called Oblats of S. Ambrose. He built a Church near our Ladies of
Rauda, in his diocese, in honor of the Queen of heaven: and another very
sumptuous in Milan called the Church of S. Fidelis, which hegaue to the fathers
of the Society, for whom he also founded the College of Brera in Milan, where
they read all sciences, like unto that which was erected in Rome by Pope
Gregory the thirte^th. He likewise built a College for the order of Theatins.
Two other Seminaries he built in Milan, the one in the Church and house of
Saint John Baptist, capable of a hundred and fifty priests. The other, called
Canonical, wherein are resident sixty clergy me^, who study the holy
Scripture, and cases of Conscience to become able to take upon them the care of
souls: two others also in the Diocese of Celana. He erected two Conuents of
the poor Clares with he babit of Capucinesses, each containing fifty
religious, who lead so holy and austere a life, that all th City of Milan
hold for assured, to be succored by their prayers in any necessity. He built
also a house with provision spiritual and temporal for poor maidens, that
were left fatherless, that so their honesty should be conserved, and two for
women which either were forsaken by their husbands, or by some means had
blemished their good name, or were any way in danger of soul or body: and a
Hospital for those that were infected with the plague.

Finally, to omit many more of like sort for breuities sake, he let pass no
work of charity toward poor and distressed persons of either sex, as well of
body as of soul. For example, at what time there was in Milan an infinite
number of poor beggats gathered together, who were ready to dye for hungar and
thirst (the plague being then in chiefest fury) he caused to be given unto
them, all the provision that was in his house, and after commanded all his
silver and golden plate to be carried to the kings coyners, and to be stamped
into money, and given unto them. And moreover he disfurnished his palace of all
the tapistry, to the very carpets of his tables, to cloth the poor against the
rigor of the cold. Yea his charity exte^ded it self so far, as to lie himself
upon the bordes, and cause his own bed to be carried to the Hospital. And
further, he deprived himself of the Duchy of Auriana in the kingdom of
Naples, valued at ten thousand Ducats yearly money of Naples, giving all that
su^me unto the poor, unto Hospitals, and unto other works of piety: so that
one may justly say, that S. Charles was much more affected toward the poor,
then he was toward his own kindred. Amongst sixty or seauenty thousand poor
persons, sick of the plague, and of other diseases, one was not to be found
that wanted food or raiment, so great was the care and solicitude of S.
Charles, especially to those who were infected with the plague, to whom this
pitiful Pastor, did go in person from tent to te^t to succor and visit the^
as they lay in the fields, which visit he often continued till six or seven
hours within the night. And albeit he had in his train a great number of
priests, which he had sent for out of Sauoy, to administer unto them the holy
Sacraments, yet he himself also undertook the same work so full of peril, as
to visit them, and to administer the Sacraments unto them with his own hands,
making no difficulty to stand by the beds side of those that dyed, and to put
them in mind of the mercy of God, and to give them full pardon in the hour of
death.

Great likewise was the tempera^ce, abstinence and austerity of life of this
holy Saint; who first accustomed to fast once a week: then twice and
afterward four times a week, and so continued until such time, as quite for
saking flesh, wine, and all other meats, he accustomed himself to fast every
day (except holy days) taking only a mean refection in bread and water. He
likewise got a custom, to eat and to study altogether so to gain time: and
many times he was found eating upon his knees, because of his reading of the
holy Scriture, which he still did read in that posture of body, to declare the
great reverence that he bare thereto. Sometimes he remained in the Church by
occasion of the forty hours prayer, all the time that they lasted: and almost
in each hour preached to the people, the concourse whereof was great both night
and day. To these rigors of fastings, he added the chasticement of his body
with whippes and scourges, woare a shirt of hair, slept upon a bed of straw,
or else upon the bare bordes. He would not in the greatest cold, come near the
fire, and alwaise had his hands bare, so that sometimes the blood issued from
them.

For an evident sign of the fanctity of this servant of God and in approbation
of his great zeal in defending the rightes and privileges of the Church, and
reforming of corruption, crept in amongst the religious and clergy under his
care, behold how the hand of Almighty God was very present, assisting him, at
such time as a wicked Apostata attempted to slay him: the occasion of which
crime, was as follows. This holy Archbishop endeavoring to reform the order
of the Religious called Humiliats (of whom he was Protector by order of the
Apostolic Sea) and laboring to restrain their scandalous liberty, and to
reduce them to the first observation of their ancient rule; four of them who
stiffly withstood this reformation co^spired his death, not otherwise able to
avoid restraint, by reason of the great zeal and authority of their zealous
pastor and protector. Whereupon one of them named Hierom Farina, for a sum
of money received, promised to be executioner of this murder. This fellow
therefore conducted by the devil as a second Judas, in the year 1569. the 26.
day of October, at one a clock in the night, finding S. Charles according to
his custom at prayer in his Bishops chapel, eue^ as the quier sung these
words of the gospel; Let not your heart be troubled, nor fear you not. This
wicked murderer, having got on secular apparel approaching near unto the
Bishop, shot off a pistol, charged with a bullet, and sundry other murthring
shot: the bullet whereof lighted full upon his back, and some of the other
lesser shot pierced his garments even to his flesh, and others went thorough a
table of an inch thick, and the residue did notably batter the walls the were
before him. Suddenly all the assistants rose up on their feet, and began to be
sore affrighted, he only who had received the blow sitting still upon his knees
remained in peace not showing any sign of fear. But because the blow had made
him much to bow downward, fearing they should think that he were slain,
holding his hands still joined together, he at the last lifted up his head
toward heaven, and having appeased those that were present, he ended the
prayer he had begun, without so much as once more moving his body. Afterward
retiring himself to go to rest, he found that his Rochet was soyled with the
bullet, and his other garments also, but were not pierced. Notwitha^ding, there
appeared upon his back a bu^ch of a bluish coulor, like to dead flesh where
the bullet had light, which fell at the feet of Saint Charles, as it were for
reverence, not drawing so much as a drop of blood: which mark remained until
his death, for a memory of the fact. The Doctors of physic, and many others
which had seen and considered the place that was shot, judged that it was a
clear and manifest miracle. In fine the murderer was apprehended with his
four companions, by the commandment of the Duke Asburquerco couernour of
Mila^, by an edict which he published the self same night, and shortly after
were put to death for their horrible fact.

Having walked in the narrow way of this world, triumphed over vices, and
adorned himself with all the excellent virtues before rehearsed, the hour of
his departure approaching near, he first visited the holy Sudary of our
Savior Jesus at Turino, with a singular and unspeakable devotion, and from
thence went to the mount of Varalla near unto Nouara, where there is a devout
solitary place of Religious men, and the sepulcher of our Savior is erected
like unto that in Jerusalem with diverse other monuments of Christ's passion,
whereunto the holy man was specially devoted: where he abode the space of
fifteen days, exercising himself in most austere works of penance, and
re^dring his soul capable of celestial glory by a general Confession of all
his life, with many sighs and abundance of tears. But falling sick by his
too much rigor, and feeling that his sickness increased, he returned toward
Milan, enflaming those that went in his company in the love of God by a burning
charity wherewith he was wholly inflamed, and by his sermons which he made of the
glory of the blessed, which were so full of fire, and so piercing, that the
hearts of those that heard him were touched therewith in such sort that from
their eyes distilled fountains of tears.

He arrived at Mila^, upon the feast of All Souls toward evening and having
passed the day following in holy discourses, and received the Sacraments of the
Church with singular devotion and humility (holding his eyes fixed upon a
picture of the sepulture of the dead) covered with a shirt of hair, and with
ashes, like unto another S. Martin (whose virtues he had diligently imitated
during his life) with great tranquillity and quiet of body and mind, he rendered
his soul up to God, about three hours after sun setting, the last year of
the Popedom of Gregory the 13. and 47. year of his age. It is impossible to
declare what sorrow what lame^tations and what sighings, the unexpected death
of this most holy pastor, caused both in poor and rich. The Church, deplored
her vigilant Pastor; the tribunalls, their incorrupted judge; the orphans,
their protector and defender; and the needy, their most liberal benefactour.
Finally, to satisfy the great devotion of the people, which flowed thither on
every side, it was necessary to expose the body the space of three days in the
Church, to the view of every one. The Bishops Palace was filled with deep
sighs, the streets with sobbs, and the houses with tears and mourning: so
that there was not any in so great a multitude of people, which did not bewail
the loss of his good father (for hard it was to judge, whether there were more
people in the streets then upon the topps of the houses) and who pursued not
his most holy Pastor with complaints and inconsolable sorrow: in such sort,
that all the people cried out aloud, Mercy, mercy: every one thinking himself
right happy, to touch with their beads or Rosary, his venerable hody.

The miracles which Almighty God wrought by the intercession and merits of S.
Charles, were very many whereof these which follow were in part examined and
approved for his canonization. He healed by the virtue of his holy prayer, John
Pietro Stopano, at this day Archbishop of Maccia in the valley of Telino, of a
deadly disease, being forsaken of the physicians. By the sign of the cross,
he preserved the Abbot Bernardino Tarusi, and Joseph Cauallerio being drowned
in the r^uer of T^cino. By the force of his prayer, he saved from the peril of
death, Iulio Homatto, who being on horsback, fell from the top of a most high
and horrible precipice. He drove away by the benediction of his hands, diverse
devils who had long time obsessed a young youth. With the same benediction he
healed in an instant, one Margarete Vertua, who had a double tertian ague for
the space of eight mo^ths, and was brought unto so low estate, that she could
not (lying always on her bed) move so much as any one part of her body. In an
instant, he likewise healed by his blessing, a noble woman, of a disease
proceeding of witchcraft and devilish art.

These miracles with many others, were wrought by him during his life, but he
wrought a great many more after his death: whereof for breuity sake, I will
recount only some, omitting the circumstances, which make the miracles the more
famous, and declare only the matter it self and substance of the things. Dame
Paula Iustina Casara, religious in the great monastery of Milan, having been
for the space of eight years and a half paralitique, altogether dead on the
one side, infected with diverse other diseases, and lastly given over of the
best Physicians of the City, finally inuocated S. Charles Borromeus, and that
with very great fruit: for as soon as she had made her prayer before the
picture of S. Charles, by her sted-fast faith she was healed, the year 1601.
upon the feast of S. Ihon Baptist. And at the self same instant, fearing to be
more slack in giving thanks unto the Saint, then he had been to give her
health, she went forth of her chamber, entered into the Church, and sunge Te
Deu^, together with the other religious who were all assembled to see this
miracle.

Sister Candida a religious woman of the convent of Capucinesses in Milan,
having lain three years sick, and her disease being judged incurable by the
Doctors: having received the Sacraments ready to dye, arose up whole and
cheerful from her bed, for that at the same instant, she had made a vow unto
S. Charles, and had caused to be laid upon her the gown which he was wont to
wear in his chamber: which she the^ went and carried with her own hands into
the Church, to the great amaze went of the other religious. This hapened the
year 1601. upon the feast of S. Peter and S. Paul.

In the month of October, the year 1604. Philip Naua of Mila^, had a son
borne blind, his interior organs being offended, that there ran down
continually a pricking humor, which had caused to grow without, two strange
clods or bunches of the bigness of half an egg, under the which the eyes were
wholly hid and buried. This caused Lucina his mother, seeing the defect to
increase from day to day (the 25. day after his birth) to implore the
assistance of S. Charles, beseeching him, that amongst the many of his
miracles, he would restore her infant his eyes, and in particular for the love
of the name of Charles given unto the infant at his Baptism. Instantly S.
Charles appeared in a visible form, and having given his benediction, restored
to the child both sight and perfect health of his deformity.

The like happened to one Martha Vighia of Milan, who having been afflicted for
fix whole years with the pain of her eyes, and after al sorts of medicines,
out of hope to recover her sight, S. Charles appeared unto her in her sleep,
anno 1601. willing her to go visit his sepulcher, and so she should return in
perfect health: herevpo^ she was led by the hand unto the Church upon a friday,
where she made her prayers; and as soon as she had kissed the stone of the
sepulcher of S. Charles, her sigth was entirely and perfectly restored.

Candida Francisca, religious of S. Agnes in Milan, having kept her bed 22.
months, was so greatly afflicted in all her body that the Doctors gave her over
as a dead woman: the 22. of June, anno 1601. holding in her hand the picture of
Saint Charles, and inuoking him by most urgent prayers presently all her pains
ceased and at the same instant, her right leg, which was a handful shorter
then the left, was reduced to the just length and quantity of the other.

John Iacques Lomati, a gentleman of Milan, had his legs so grievously eaten
and full of holes, that he could not stand upon his feet, nor go one step
without a staff: so that the Surgeons of the City said, that there was an
end of Master Lomati. It chanced one day, that he was more sorely tormented
then ordinary; whereupon he went to the sepulcher of S. Charles, and besought
his help. And to the end to obtain the same so much the sooner, he adjured
this celestial citizen saying: If thou be that Saint whom all the people do
so honor, obtain help of God formee. Suddenly as he had made this prayer, and
that he had attentively heard the holy Mass, he found him self healed of all
his evils, and his soars converted into sound and lively flesh the 24. of
September 1587.

Ihon Baptista Tiron being a child of five years old, falling into the river
of Ticinio, as soon as he had called to memory the name of S. Charles, before
whose picture he was daily wont to make his prayers (instructed herein by his
father) this holy Prelat appeared presently in visible form, who drew him
forth of the flood, led him upon the waves thereof above a hundred cubits, and
brought him safely to the banck, before the sight of sundry persons, who
despaired of the life of the child.

Margaret, daughter of Angelo Monti of Milan, came out of her mothers womb,
with her two feet twisted together, so that the soles of the^ were turned
backwards, and the upper part was under. She being six years old, and having
still this deformity, her mother called Militia Verga, carried her to the
sepulcher of S. Charles anno 1601. to crave help, offering a burning wax light
unto this friend of God for her daughter. The child lighted the wax, and at the
same instant, her right leg was set straight and put in his place, and of
just length. By and by after she came again, and made and repeated her former
prayer, and her left leg received the like cure: but yet a little mark still
remained of the precedent defect, in memory of the miracle.

Ioane daughter of Ihon Baptista Maroni, citizen of Milan, had from her birth
her legs and her feet so exceeding crooked, that she could in no manner of
sort walk upon them: and the joints of her knees being out of their place, she
could make her legs turn this or that way, as she listed, and easily could
cast them upon her shoulders so that she trayled her self whither she would
go, upon her hands and knees, with little creepers made of wood. The 4. year
after her birth, her mother being praying at the sepulcher of Saint Charles,
the child received full and entire health in all her members, in the month of
July 1604.

Anastasia de Magis, of the same City, had been for the space of 36. years,
obsessed by sundry malignant spirits. And albeit that in so long a space of
time, she had proved sundry means, as Exorcismes and Invocation of other
Saints, made many voyages, and pilgrimages, and the like, yet nothing at all
did profit her: At the last she had recourse to this holy Cardinal, and as she
was in great devotion before his picture, craving to be delivered, the 24. of
October. 1601. she felt her self smitten upon the breast, and that with so
great a stroke that she fell down half dead upon the ground; And remaining so
the space of two hours, she arose free from all infection of the devil, and
was never after troubled more. The life of this Saint is extracted out of the
Italian Abridgment set forth by the very Reverend Prelate Francis Penia
Auditour of the Rota in Rome, and put into French by Charles de Canda, Prior of
Domp-martin, in Artois. He was canonized by Pius V. the first day of November
anno 1610. and his feast is celebrated the fourth of the same month.

THE LIFE OF S. FRANCISCA of Rome gathered out of the writtings of her ghostly
Father, and the Acts of her Canonization, by Julius Vrsinus of the Society of
Jesus.
SAINT Francisca was borne in Rome the year 1384. Her Fathers name was Paul de
Buxis, and her mother Iaquelina de Rofredeschi, both of a noble, and
illustrious family, and possessed with great riches. She was baptized in the
Church of Saint Agnes in Nauona. Her parents had a singular care to bring her
up in the fear, and love of God: who made the same appear, even in her
infancy, what a one she should one day become. For not only did she reject
those plays and toys, with which children use to be pleased and delighted,
but which is more admirable, eue^ in her cradle she whould never permit so much
as her parents, to touch, or handle her, unless she were first clothed.

Growing more in years, she fled from all the pastimes of that age, and
delighted only with solitude, by the benefit of which, she applied her self to
prayer and devotion, which together with her age so increased in her, that at
eleaue^ years old, she discovered an earnest desire to retire her self from
the world, and to serve God the rest of her days in some Monastery.

One day she saw in spirit a beauteous, grave, and noble matrone, fiercely and
nearly pursued, by many fearful and furious Giants, wherewith she being moved
to compassion, prayed for her deliverance with such fervor, that at last the
matrone seemed to be wholly delivered from the danger of her pursuers: which
matrone she understood after to be the holy Church, and the Giants that pursued
her, those which at that time had disturbed her peace by a dangerous Schism.

In another vision her glorious Patron Saint Paul the Apostle, together with
the Holy Patriarch S. Benet, and S. Mary Magdalen appeared to her, admonishing
her to redouble her prays and fervor, thereby to appease and auert the anger
of God, and his plagues (which were already prepared) from falling on the City
of Rome, to whom she obeyed, with such fervor and earnestnes, that she left
not praying until she was given to understand, that the wrath of God was
withdrawn, and turned from Rome, and from the holy Church.

She had likewise another Revelation from S. Benet, that she was come into the
world to help, to the salvation of souls, and that she was the particular
gift of God to men in those miserable and wicked times, for the good of humane
generation, and that therefore she was to apply her self wholly unto their aid.

This child admirable in virtue and piety, having sought and desired to
dedicate her self wholly in some Religious monastery to God, at twelve years
old, by the express, and absolute commandment of her parents, was
constrained to espouse her self to Laurentius de Pontiano, a Roman Gentleman.
After which marriage, she living in a House of her husbands, on the other side
of Tyber made it known, by a great, and violent sickness that she there had,
how grateful that kind of life was unto her. Being recovered from her sickness,
she lived as much retired as she could, excusing her self from ba^quets and
feasts both of parents and friends, and shunning all kind of sports, wherewith
others of her years and condition, used to be much recreated and delighted.

All her delight was in prayer, meditation, and frequent visitation of
Churches, where she attended to the Divine Office and Sermons with great
tenderness of devotion. She exercised notwithstanding all those virtues toward
her husband, which were most rare, or any way commendable in a wife: but above
all, obedience, joined with such a great respect and reverence unto him, that
it is most certain, that for the space of 40. years that they lived together,
the peace of sacred marriage was never violated between them, by the least
unkind word: for so perfectly and wholly had she subjected her will and desire
unto her husband, that upon what occasion soever, she never seemed to have
other will then what she saw to be his, If at any time she were called by her
husband, or by any other of the house, to put in order any household affairs,
she would promptly leave her prayers or any other kind of devotion vnsinished,
and go to do what she was required.

It pleased our Lord one day by an especial miracle, to sheew how acceptable
this her promptitude was unto him: for in saying the Office of our B. Lady, she
being called away four times, and as often being forced to leave off in one,
and the self same verse, and at last returning, found that verse written in
godden letters, which was done by her good Angel, as S. Paul afterward in a
vision declared unto her, by which it pleased our Lord to show, in what manner
we ought to prefer the obedience which we owe to our Superiors, before his
own service.

The holy Sacrament of wedlock, together with matrimonial chastity, this holy
woman conserved in such perfection, that every one of her acts, was a several
testimony of her continency, and purity: especially by the continual
afflicting of her body, with wearing of hair cloth, disciplines, and such like
austerities, it was easy to gather in what esteem she had all carnal
concupisce^ce and delight. Her austerities were so severe, that her husband
pitying her great and excessive mortificatio^s, accorded with her, for many
years before his death, to pass the rest of their lives in perfect continency.

The sight of men not only was unpleasing unto her, but also afflicted her; but
yet much more the sight of unchaste and dishonest women, whom nevertheless (moved
by an arde^t charity) she labored earnestly to convert to God, and to retire
from their lewd and naughty lives. One day passing toward the Jews street,
she saw diverse devils dancing in a certain house, and making great cheer,
which moved her to enquire of the neighbors who they were that dwelt in that
house; and having understood that there inhabited two famous Courtesans, who
were much freque^ted, she persuaded their Landlord to put them out of his
house, which was done, and the devils abandoned their lodging.

The foul Fienns for this cause, and diverse others, were greatly enraged and
animated against this S. and therefore desirous to revenge themselves, appeared
unto her, some times in the likeness of a man, sometimes of a woman, ever in
some or other lascivious and dishonest manner: whom she made still to depart
confounded, and ashamed, through the invocation of the holy name of Jesus.

But one day especially the devil being enraged against her, by reason of a
notable conquest, that she had gotten over him, he brought into her chamber in
the night, the body of a dead man, half putrified, casting forth a most
pestilent and intolerable stinck, which he drew over all the parts of her
naked body, so often, that he left her all over infected with that most
horrible stink, but especially there remained a lively, and loathsome memory
in her imagination, that for ever after, she never eat without vomiting and
loathing; and which is more, she conceived thereupon such an auersion from all
men, that whenever she came near unto any afterward she trembled with fear,
and even supposed then to feel the same most loathsome savor.

She desired of God to have children, not for earth, but for heaven, and
therefore when they were borne in bringing the^ up, she was more careful to
frame their minds then their bodies, and to teach them the art to die well,
rather then any art whereby they might apply themselves to line. She had one
Son named Evangelist, who in his infancy was not only endued with more then
mature wisdom, but also with the gift of Prophesy. This child playing one
day with his Father, drew out a knife from the scabbard of his Fathers sword,
and putting the point thereof to the reins of his said Fathers back, told him,
that in that very place he should shortly after receive a dangerous wou^d, as
it happened unto him in the year 1406. in a sedition between the Romans, and
the people of Ladislaus King of Naples. This Child likewise seeing another time
a Friar passing along the way, told him that ere long he should change that
habit for a more honorable, which proved true, for the Friar was shortly after
created Bishop.

The City of Rome being visited with the plague, this little Saint feeling
himself stricken with the contagion, and knowing that he should shortly die,
made great instance for Confession; after which he told his mother, that S.
Antony, and S. Onuphrius, to whom he was particularly devoted, were come with
a glorious company of Angels, to conduct him to heaven, and so this blessed
child being only 9. years old, with an inexpressible joy, passed from this
fading life, unto the joys of an everlasting bliss. At the instant of his
departure, a little girl them lying sick of the plaguein another house, and
having for a long time before been speachles, suddenly cried out, that she saw
Evangelist de Pontiano, with great glory borne up by Angels into heaven. S.
Francisca his Mother praying in her oratory about a year after, Evangelist
appeared unto her, of the same stature, and form (only that he was above all
expression more fair and glorious) as he was when he died, having another
Child with him of the same age, and no less glorious, who declared unto his
mother, that he was placed in heaven among the second quire of Angels, and
that the principal cause of his coming was to lead along with him to heaven,
his sister Agnes, she being only 5. years old, whose place was prepared in
heaven equal to his. Agnes therefore shortly after falling sick, her mother saw
a fair white dove flying up and down over her bed, not departing, till this
child had rendered her innocent soul, into the hands of Angels.

God had given to S. Francisca an Angel, not only to defend and guard her from
evil spirits, but also to rule, and direct her in all her actions: he never
left her one moment, and by especial priuildge she inioyed the sight of him
continually. He was of an incredible beauty, a countenance wondrous gracious,
more white then snow, more ruddy then the rose, his eyes ever looking up
toward heaven, his arms crossed on his breast, his hair long and curled,
more clear and shining, then the polisht gold, his robe extended long unto the
ground, and was for the most part of a pure white color, other times skyblew,
sometimes also red. From his face proceeded so great a light and brightness,
that it often dazeled her eyes to behold it, and sometimes there proceeded such
beams, that only by their brightness, she saw to read her Mattins at midnight.
Her Ghostly Father commanded her once to disclose unto him, the form, and
shape of her good Angel, which she did (holding her Angel by the little hand,
and the whilst looking friendly upon him) so properly, and so particularly,
that thereby her Confessor easily perceived his proportion, not to exceed a
child of 5. or 6. years old.

If at any time the devil molested her, either with horrible apparitions to
afright her, or by transforming himself into some holy shape to delude her,
her faithful Guardia^ Angel at the same instant by the shaking and moving of
his golden locks, would cast forth such comfortable beams, as would make her
soul at once both feareles and secure.

On the contrary, if in company of her parents or friends, there escaped from
her either any inconsiderate thought, word, or deed, or if she were to
sollicitous of her domestical affairs, presently she might behold this
blessed spirit turn away his eyes from her, whereby she became to reflect on
herself, and careful to examine her conscience, and so by knowledge of those
small faults that had caused his auersion, by this means she became daily more
wary and vigilant over herself, ever renewing her purposes to amend, whereby
she recovered the sweet regard of her Angel. If any one in the company of this
Saint forgot them selves in doing any thing that was indecent, she presently
perceived her Angel, as it were, in horror of their sins and imperfections,
to close his eyes with his hands.

A Gentlewoman, a dear friend and kinswoman of hers, called Vannosia, being in
a desperate sickness, had a great desire to eat of a Crab fish, after which
Francis carefully seeking, and finding that in that season of the year they
were impossible to be had, she put herself, in prayer, desiring one from God,
when behold in the sight of all the household, there fell one from the seeling
of the Chamber fresh and alive, as if newly taken our of the sea, which she
presently prepared for Vannosia, who eating thereof was not only satisfied of
her desire, but also perfectly recovered of her sickness.

She never dismissed any poor from her gate without alms, and once in a great
famine at Rome, Andreas her Father-in-law having made his provision of an
excellent tun of wine, she being importuned by the poor, and not having
wherwithall to satisfy them, gave to all that came of the said wine as long as
it lasted. Which when her Father-in-law understood, he was much offended with
her therefore, of which she humbly excused herself, assuring him that his wine
was not spent, but even as he left it, which to confirm she went with him
down into the Cellar, where drawing of the same tun, they found it full of
most excellent wine. Whereupon Andreas being not ignorant of her bestowing it,
was confirmed of the miracle, and she acknowledginge Gods bounty, remained
thereafter more animated to do the works of charity.

Another time having given to the poor a little quantity of corn which she
had swept from the beams and rafters of her husbands granary, by chance
returning thither not long after, she found there forty measures of fine
wheat, neither she nor any other, knowing how it came thither. She used to
reserve for herself those hard and moldy crusts and chippings of bread, which
were appointed for the poor, and in the place thereof, would secretly give unto
them the best and purest bread, that was in the house.

Although all the actions of this Saints life, were full of rare examples of
Humility, notwithstanding it appeared in nothing more, then in her art and holy
subtility to conceal the frequent miracles that she wrought: for whereas she
healed all sorts of diseases by her only touch, yet she would withal apply a
certain ointment to the diseased, which she had made of Mariolane, or Rue,
thereby to co^ceale the miracle, although this ointment for some diseases was
altogether unprofitable, and for many absolutely hurtefull. She never went
vested but in course cloth, although her condition was no less then Noble. She
had a vineyard out of Rome, without S. Paul's gate, from whence she used
ordinarily to bring fagots made of vine branches (or of other wood which the
place afforded) unto Rome on her head, and there to distribute it amongst the
poor, and oftentimes she has been seen together with her Companion Vannosia,
begging in the City from door to door, during a great famine, for the
relief of poor people.

Her patience is incredible, in bearing as well the adversities of the body as
of the mind, for when her husband (for being engaged in the civil broils of
the City) was banished, and his goods co^fiscated, and her brother-inlaw
Paulinus sent likewise into a miserable exile, and her son I hon Baptista,
taken forcibly away from her for hostage, the spirit of this S. remained
victorious and undaunted, as well in the loss of her childrne as of her
husband and friends. She praised God, in the ruin of so rich and honorable a
family so nearly concerning her as that of her husbands did: in brief, in all
the assaults and afflictions with which the devil assailed her patience, she
got the victory, put him to shame and confusion, and ever praised God.

She did eat ordinarily but once a day, and then very sparingly, and for the
most part fed upon herbs or roots, which she did eat only with salt. She
abstayned both from wine and fish, and never did eat flesh but in great
necessity, and then in very little quantity. She always eat without appetite,
for she had so lost and mortified her taste by her continual fasting and
abstine^ce, that the most sweetest things seemed to her bitter and unsavory.
When she was not with her husband, she used to repose her body upon a bed so
strait, as she mightmore properly be said to sit and lean, then lie or rest
thereon. She used to sleep in her clothes, and that only but two hours in the
night, and yet (contrary to the general custom of Italy) she never slept in
the day. She girded a sharp hairecloth unto her naked body, with a great
girdle made of horse hair, that it might the more afflict her: she disciplined
herself ordinarily with a discipline of six cords, each cord having a rowell
at the end. She used also a hoope of iron, which she fastened so straightly unto
her skin, that it became almost buried in the flesh: which hoope and the
discipline, her Ghostly Father commanded to use no more, and which, together
with her hairecloth, are to be seen at this day in her Monastery.

She made her a cup of a dead ma^s Scull, for to drink that little water in,
which she used for the sustenance of nature, both to diminish the little
pleasure she might have in drinking, by the hortor of that spectacle, as also
to have ever before her eyes, the memory and image of death. She had accustomed
so often, and so violently to beat her breast, that it became hardened like
brawne: and if it happened, that she offended never so little, by any one part of
her body, upon the same part would she presently and pitifully revenge her
self. And if her tongue had offended, she would byte it till the blood
followed, and so in like manner on any other part or sense.

This Saint went customarily to confession every Wedensday, and Saturday, and
to Communion at the least once a week, she visited often the Churches of S.
Peter in the Vatican, S. Paul's out of the walls of the City, our Blessed
Ladies de Ara Caeli, Sancta Maria Nuoua, our Blessed Ladies on the other side
of Tibur, and Saint Cecilies, where desiring one day to communicate, the Priest
not approving that married women should communicate so often, gave unto her in
place of the Blessed Sacrament, an unconsecrated host, by which S. Francis was
deceived of her expectation, but not by his imposture: for presently she
feeling the want of those inteteriour comforts of her soul, which she used to
receive by the presence of her spouse, knew he was absent, whereof (with a
great and sensible feeling of the loss) she complained to Father Antony de
Monte Sabellio, at that time her Ghostly Father, who thereupon examined the
Priest, and he confessed the crime, and humbly begged pardon, and secrecy of
the offense.

This Saint being one day retired with her Holy Companion Vannosia, to a hidden
Oratory which she had made in her garden, under the shadow of an Arbor, being
then the month of April, it pleased God to show them both how gratfull their
retireme^t, as also their communication together (which was about the
withdrawing themselves wholly from the world) was unto him, by his great bounty,
in causing that from the Arbor there dropped down at their feet ripe pears
both fair and excellent, although both out of season, and not the natural
fruit of that tree; which they having tasted, and finding wonderful pleasant
and delectable, bare the rest unto their husbands, thereby to stir up in the^
greater devotion and confidence in God.

After the death of her husband, she retired her self into a Monastery, which
she had so long and earnestly desired, wherein she attained to a most high
degree of perfection, and became a most perfect pattern of all sanctity of
life and holiness: In so much, that after a while she was chosen Gouernesse of
the whole house, and had many worthy disciples and Virgins under her, whom she
instructed with such sweetness, and fervor of spirit, having received a
wonderful new light, and learning from heaven, that she was a mirror to the^
all. She was very often rapt in ecstasy, and had therein such sweet and sensible
communication with her Lord and spouse Christ Jesus, as was wonderful; of
whom she learned infinite mysteries, and became endued with so divine and
prophetical a spirit, that God gave unto her the privilege of kowing the
state of all such persons souls, as came in her presence.

And thus this Blessed S. heaping up daily more and more merit, by her great
Sanctity of life, she fell into her last sickness the year of our Lord 1440.
who by divine revelation was admonished of the day and hour of her death.
Wherefore she making continual preparation thereto, without any great sickness of
body, when the day came, she heard mass, and communicated, and spent all the
rest of the same day in spiritual communication with her sisters and
disciples, saying the hours of the Breuiary, Euensong, and Compline with them:
and when the night grew on, she seemed to take her last leave of them all, and
setting her self as it were in prayer, being rapt into an ecstasy, and talking
with her spouse, she pleasantly rendered her holy soul into the hands of her
Creator.

When it was known she was dead, there was such a wonderful co^course of
people to do honor to her holy body, as was strange: and the miracles that
were wrought thereat, are sufficient to make a good volume by themselves. Her
body was carried to our blessed Ladies new Church, near unto Campo Vaccino,
commonly called S. Maria Nuoua, and there with great solemnity and veneration
interred, whereat miracles have been daily ever since wrought, and the same is
greatly honored and reverenced, by all the people of Rome even until this
day. She was Canonized for a S. by Pope Paul the fifth, the 29. day of May, in
the year of our Lord 1606. Her feast is usually celebrated upon the ninth day
of March.

THE LIFE OF THE HOLY Virgin S. Teresa of Jesus, of the Order of our Blessed
Lady of Mont Carmell, and Foundresse of the Congregation of the discalced
Carmelites.
IN the famous City of Auila, in the Kingdom of Castile in Spain, was borne
the holy and glorious Saint Teresa, upon the 28. of March, in the year of our
Lord 1515. Her Father was called Alfonso Cepeda, and her mother Batrixe
Ahumada. Both were noble, and excelled in all kind of piety and virtue; wherein
with great care, they brought up their children: and in particular this their
young and tender daughter.

She being about the age of seven years, and contemplating of the joys, and
glory of heaven, would often pronounce to her self these words, and say: O
Eternity, Eternity, Eternity! using also daily many prayers, especially the
Rosary, and (by her mothers instruction) made very devout to our Blessed Lady.

In these her young years, reading in the lives of Saints, the torments, and
deaths of the Blessed martyrs, and the glory they had obtained thereby, she
judged that they had gotten heaven at an easy rate; wishing, that she might
suffer the like pains, to attain the like glory. And being inflamed thus with
the love of heaven, and of death for Christ his sake, she instilled the like
desire into her young brother, in such sort, that they determined jointly, to
go together among the Moors, that at their hands they might receive the
crown of martyrdom. But beginning their journey; they met with their uncle,
who (by intercepting) hindered them, and brought the^ back to their parents.

Their intention thus crossed, as they remained in their Fathers house, they
passed their time often in the Garden, and Orchard, where they would build
little houses, like Celles, and Hermitages, and though after the manner of
children, yet it fore showed what she should afterward accomplish, as inded she
did.

At the age of 12. years her mother died, whereat being much afflicted, she
presented herself before an image of our B. Lady, desiring her to be her
mother, whom she ever after found ready with her protection, help, and
assistance in all her necessities.

Now our Lord began to enkindle in this his servant, the spirit of prayer and
inward devotion, in so much, that at the age of 20. years, she fully despised
the world, and desired earnestly a Religious course of life; though her Father
out of his extraordinary love to her, would not consent thereto. Yet she
remembering the counsel of S. Hierome, brake violently from all, and entered
into the Monastery of the Order of the Incarnation in Auila, where she passed
her Nouiceship, with great alacrity and comfort.

Shortly after, she falling into an extreme sickness, her Father was enforced to
couey her into the country, to the house of a physician for help. But it
auayled not, for her infirmity did daily, and diversely increase, and in such
sort, that all being out of hope of her life, the last Sacraments were
ministered unto her, and she lay a dying. At which time she was in a trance for
four days, and coming to her self again, she complained of those, that had
called her back from heaven, where she said, she had seen many mysteries, as
also the salvation of her Father, and diverse other friends which should be
saved by her means, and many Monasteries which she was to erect, and her own
happy death: all which proved afterward true.

After her recovery, by her prayers, she obtained health for a Religious person
of their Monastery, and new amendment of life for a Priest, who was besotted
with the dishonest love of a woman, who had bewitched him with her devilish
enchantments, by a Copper Idol which she had given him to wear, which this
holy woman obtaining of him, cast into a river, whereby he was freed, and lead
afterward a virtuous life, and died blessedly. And for diverse others she
obtained health, and many she reduced to virtuous life, by her example and
prayers, and by the intercession of S. Joseph, to whom she was very
affectionate, and devout.

Being on a time at her prayers, she cast her self prostrate before a piteous
Picture of our B. Savior, beseeching his grace, and assistance, to protect
her, from offending him any more: from which time ever after, she found
continual increase of spiritual comforts, and also amendment of her former
life. For after this time, our Lord did communicate himself unto her in diverse
manners, as well in inward and spiritual comforts, conuersing and speaking to
her soul, as also by outward and plain apparitions; guiding, and directinge
her with his counsel in all her affairs of difficulty, and speaking to her in
his own voice.

She being once surprised with an ecstasy, our Lord said to her; My will is that
hereafter thou be not conversant with men, but with Angels: which words made
such impression in her, as from that time, she wholly abandoned the world, and
all humane things, and adhered only to God. Our Lord himself from this time
teaching and aduising her (her sanctity being suspected by others) what she
should say, and answer, to stop their mouths, as she ever did. And our Lord
said also to her: Fear not daughter, for I will not leave thee. From which
time forward, she seemed wholly united to God.

Being once in her devotions, our B. Savior appeared to her again, having
with him S. Peter, and S. Paul and showed to her first his hands shining
beautifully, and after that his face: and thus continued with her the space of
three days.

Also hearing Mass upon S. Paul's day, our Blessed Savior appeared to her in
his humanity very glorious. And these apparitions of our Savior at Mass time
in diverse forms, continued to her, more then three years. These visions being
very frequent and increasing, her Confessor, and diverse others grew suspicious,
that they might be illusions of the devil, and she be deceived: but our Lord
himself did with his presence and speech to her, both satisfy, and instruct
her, how she should stop the slanderous mouths of all. After this a Seraphim
appeared to her with a flaming dart in his hand, wherewith he seemed to pierce
her heart so, as from that time forward she remained wholly inflamed with the
love of God, and of which wound she felt at diverse times very sensible pain.

Once in a vision she was taken up to heaven, where she saw such mysteries, and
fulness of glory and joys, as cannot be expressed: Our Lord saying to her:
Consider daughter, how great joys worldlings deprive themselves of. These
visions came to her very often, and in diverse kinds: As of the blessed
Trinity, of our blessed Savior, of our B. Lady, of S. Peter and S. Paul, and
of the Angels: yea, and these were not only in spirit, but her body also has
been seen many times elevated from the ground, until through her humility she
desired of our Lord the cessation of that miraculous favor, which he granted
her.

This holy Saint was fearful herself, least it might be a deceit of the
devil, and therefore was content to be narrowly sifted, and examined with all
diligence, not only in her Confessions, but also in her life, particular
actions, and proceedings, which were searched, by very many Fathers of the
Society of Jesus, and almost by forty other principal, and the most famous
learned men in Spain, and other Countries, all grave, and reverend, and the
best spiritual Masters then living: who all allowed and approved her life,
and her proceedings for good and virtuous, free from illusion, or deceit.

After this, the holy Saint beginning to build a Monastery, our B. Lady and S.
Joseph appeared to her, and promised to protect, and assist her, which did
encourage her so much, as though she found many difficulties, yet she brought
at last to good effect and finished the same. Adding to their former rules,
some others concerning Mental Prayer, and Meditation, all which were approved
by the Popes Holiness. And at the end, our Blessed Savior appeared to her, and
set a crown upon her head, as a reward of her former travails.

She founded diverse other Monasteries after this to the number of seauenteene
well known, as in Medina del Campo, in Duruell, in Malaga, in Valladolid, in
Toledo, in Pastrana, in Salamanca, in Alua de Tornes, in Segouia, in Beas, in
Seuill, in Carauaque, in Xare, in Palencia, in Sorry, in Granada, in Burgos.
Besides these, she founded diverse others, as namely, fifteen for the discalced
Brothers, all well known in Spain.

In all these her Monasteries she caused a reformation, with addition of many
good, and spiritual constitutions, all approved by her Superiors, and
confirmed by the Pope. And during her life time (with her infatigable labor,
and continual travel from one to another) she governed them all, in most
exact observance of their rules, and exe^plar life; to the great edification of
all, and ame^dement of many in the way of more virtuous life.

She wrote four books, One, of her own life, by command of her Ghostly
Father, one, of the way of Perfection, one, Of the Foundation of her
Monasteries. And afterward three other books, containing relations of her
life, and of devout prayers. All which said books, being approved both by the
Inquisition, and the grave, and learned Father aforesaid, her Co^fessours, with
diverse others, and being sound and Catholic Doctrine, and full of divine
learning and wholesome precepts, were thought good to be translated into diverse
languages, that others reading her holy life, and following her cou^sells,
might profit thereby, and increase in virtue, to the salvation of their souls,
as very many have done, by her means, as was before showed unto her in a
vision.

The virtues of this Saint, were very many and manifest, and great store of
examples there be thereof in every kind, though for breuity sake, I will but
touch, and only name a few of them. First she was so careful in observance of
the Commandments of Almighty God, as her Confessor thought, she never
committed any mortal sin. Her obedience was extraordinary to all her
Superiors, and Prelates, in all things, both humane, and divine. The gift of
Chastity, given her by our Blessed Savior, was such, as she was surnamed by
her Confessors: The treasure of Virginity. And the purity of her mind appeared
well, by thevncorruptio^ of her body after her death, and by the modest
obseruances she appointed for her Nuns, as the covering of their faces with a
veil, their strict in closure, their silence, and other the like.

She had a great love to poverty, praising it, and commending it to her Nu^nes,
and that not only in their holy estate, in having their means without
certainty of maintenance, and their house without rent, but also in their
habit, which she chose to be very mean. Yet principally she commended and
preferred inward poverty of spirit, wherein she was a rare, and exemplar
pattern to all.

In taming of her flesh, she was very rigorous, and austere, for besides her
spare diet, she used sharp disciplines, sometimes with cords, with keys,
with Iron chains, wearing continually a hairecloth next her skin, and
ordayninge her Order to be one of the strictest in the Church of God. And if
any meat was made something more dainty by the fire, as either roasted, or
baked, she would refuse it, saying: Meat is to nourrish our bodies, not to
delight the taste. Her sleep was seldom above three hours in a night, all
the rest she spent in prayer.

In humility she excelled, giving many worthy testimonies thereof, in diverse
places both at Rome and abroad, serving all the rest of the sisters (by her
good will) in the lowest, ad basest Offices in the house. Her courage was
great, as appeared by her continual trauells, and troubles, in erecting
Monasteries, which yet at last she always brought to good effect: Besides the
often apparition: of devils, which she feared not, but ever chased a way from
her, even as flies.

Such was her admirable patience in all crosses, and afflictions, as she took
great joy, and comfort in suffering them, having an ardent desire to die for
Christ his sake, and having these words often in her mouth: O Lord grant me
either to die, or at least to suffer for thy sake. In her body, she suffered
long and grievous sicknesses and infirmities, besides her continual travail,
and toil. In her reputation and honor she suffered great detriment, and no
less inward spiritual co^bats and desolatio^s in her soul. To speak of the
wonderful Prudence of this holy Saint, in governing of her many Monasteries,
of her simplicity, and sincere virtue in religion, and above all, her
extraordinary devotion to the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, and her other
virtues, wherein she did excel, and was so exemplar, it would truly fill whole
volumes.

The same may be said of her divine contemplation, of her eminent Faith, of her
Hope, of her enflamed Love to God: of her Charity to wards her neighbor, of
her forcible, and persuasiue virtue of speech, her grace of interpretation of
Scriptures, and Prophesy, and in discerning of spirits. And for all these her
virtues, service, and love unto our Lord, it may well cause admiration in us to
consider his reciprocal love, and his continual, high and divine favors
donevnto her: His often consolations to her soul, and inward spiritual
apparitions, as also corporally and frequently in diverse forms and manners,
instructing, and directing her from time to time, how she should proceed, in
all her affairs of importance, best to his liking and service: As also
dictating to her with his own voice, the very words she should speak, to
satisfy doubts, and answer all objections.

She had an extraordinary gift in healing of the sick of all infirmities by
her prayers, and working other miracles so usually, and as I may say
familiarly, as it seemed our Lord never denied her any thing that she requested
of him. The aged, and weak body of this holy woman, almost spent and worn out
with continual travel from one Monastery to another, being now at Burgos, and
foreseing her end approaching (which she had prophesied 8. years before)
hastened toward Auila, where she was borne, desiring to end her days therein
her first own House. But reposing (as she traveled) at the house of the
Duchess of Alua, she was enforced there to make stay, partly by her
importunity, as also by reason of a fever she had which continued with her, and
increased so incessantly, that at the end of three days, having received all
the rites of the Holy Catholic Church, recommended her self to God, with many
devout prayers, and given many wholesome precepts and admonitions to those that
were present, to their great comfort, and edification, with a joyful, and
peaceable serenity of mind, she sweetly yielded up her soul to her beloved
spouse and Savior, upon the 4. day of October, being the feast of S. Francis,
in the 68. year of her age, and 47. of her being religious.

It pleased our Lord to show the holiness of this Saint by some signs at her
death, and by many miracles after. For at the instant of her death, a certain
Religious woman, saw two stars to descend upon her Cell. Another sister saw a
bright star shinning over her Monastery, and another star at the window of
the chamber where she died. A Religious man in Valladolid saw (at the instant
of her death) the heavens open, and a glorious way prepared, whereby a soul
ascended. The prioresse of Segouia, smelt in her Cell a most sweet odor at the
instant of her death, with an extraordinary light. Another Prioresse in Paris
saw our Savior ascend to heaven with great glory, and many Angels with him.
Another sister saw a white dove to ascend from her mouth. All her Convent at
the instant saw a great light, and felt a very sweet smell, fillinge the house:
as also from her habit, and all things that she had touched.

The body of this holy Saint lying fair, fresh, and lively, as though she had
been yet living, a certain Religious man came, and touched with her hands his
head, and eyes, and presently recovered of two infirmities which he had in
those parts. Another Religious woman kissing her seete, recovered her smelling
which she had lost. And that night after her death, she appeared to diverse
Religious persons.

After that her body had been by many and with great devotion visited, she was
with great sollemnity, and due reverence enterred. Her habit, and all things
that she used, be kept still in Alua, with great reverence for holy Relics,
and many miracles have been wrought by them.

This holy Saint appeared to diverse after her death: and first, to one Mother
Antonetta, in Granada, she wing her the glory that she was in, and encouraging
her in her virtuous course of life. Also to a Religious woman in Auila, she
appeared in great glory. She appeared also in Segouia (with a sweet odor) in
the midest of the Quier, with a rich crown on her head. And to the Earl of
Osorne, to the Bishop, and diverse others there.

The miracles after her death were many. As the miraculous incorruptio^ of her
body. The pleasant odor, and sweetness thereof, filling the place where it was
kept, as also of her habit, clothes, and all things she had touched. By which
(being religiously kept) many of sundry infirmities were healed. Also there was
a precious oil, or liquor, that distilled continually from her body, and from
every small part thereof, though separated a sunder, whereby many miracles were
done, as appears by one of her hands that was carried by the Provincial of
her Order to Lisbone, and by one of her fingers at Malaga. Also a linne^ cloth
died with her blood, continued pure, and fresh, whereby many miracles were done,
in diverse places, and in diverse manners.

Don Aluarez de mendoza Bishop of Alua, having in his life time built a fair
chapel, with a Tomb therein for himself, an (by a fore-contract with the
Provincial of her Order) another by it for this holy Saint, and hearing now of
her death and burial, made suite jointly with the people of the town to the
Provincial for her body, which not being obtained, she was translated to Auila
in the month of Noue^ber 1585. with great sollemnity, and joy. But the Duke of
Alua, and Ferdinand of Toledo Prior of S. Ihons, made suit to Pope Sixtus V.
for her return to Alua where she died, which he granted, and so with greater
joy, and applause she was brought back to Alua the 23. of August 1586. where
she remains, and God by means of this his servant does work many miracles,
even to this present: as is daily seen by those that be devout unto her, and
frequent her sepulcher; the which has been adorned and enriched with many
great guiftes, and precious Jewels, of many of the greatest Princes, and
Religious Bishops, and Persons of Spain, and Christendom. And after all due
diligence, and examinations of her life, and miracles made, as in such cases
appertains, she was Canonized for a Saint by Pope Gregory the XV. upon the
12. of March 1622. But her feast is celebrated upon the 4. day of October.

To rehearse the manifold examples in every of her several virtues, the
frequent apparitions of our Blessed Savior, and other Saints, her visio^s,
raptes, and miracles, according to the truth thereof, and her desert, I should
never be able to say enough, all the aforesaid things being so certain, and
so well known in Spain, as they be yet fresh in memory, and many are yet
living that knew her well, and were present, and eye witnesses to all that
which is here written of her. And he that shall read her life written by
herself at the commau^d of her Ghostly Father (translated lately into English)
and also her life written by Brother Ihon of S. Jerome, and Brother Ihon of
Jesus Maria, of her own Order, from whence this is extracted may be there
further satisfied with examples in every kind: these things being here only
touched for breuity sake, as a taste, out of abundance. God grant that we
following her heavenly documents, and instructions, and imitating hervertuous
life, may by her intercession merit to come to that heavenly glory, which she,
with her deerespouse Jesus, now enjoys. Amen.

THE LIFE AND VERTVES OF Blessed Lewis Gonzaga of the Society of Jesus: taken
out of his history written at large by Virgilius Ceparius of the same Order.
BLESSED Lewis Gonzaga was borne in that part of France which lies beyond the
Alps, at the Chastle of Castilion in the Diocese of Brixia, in the year of
our Lord 1568. of Ferdinand Prince of the Empire, and Marquis of the above
named Castilion, and of Martha Tana-Sanrenia no less Noble, as the Inahbitants
about the Alps can testify, and virtuous, as appears in that even from the
first day of her marriage, she began to pray like another Anne, not for fear of
barrennes, but for the glory of God, that it would please our Lord to send her
a son, that in some Religion might wholly dedicate himself to his holy
service. And so it seemed that God Almighty therefore vouchsafed to se^d her
this Samuel, permitting him to have a dangerous entrance into this world, that
he might the sooner mark him for his own, with the character of Baptism,
which by the Physicians advise was given him before he was half come forth of
his mothers womb; but the danger of this passage at lenght by theintercession
of our B. Lady was taken away, although for a space there remained some fear
and doubt, whether he were alive or dead. For he lay still without moving for
the space of an hour, when, to show that he was alive, he gave one little cry
only, and so gave over, and never used to cry any more as other children are
wont to do; a presage doubtless of his future behavior and conditions, which
were always most gentle, mild, and courteous.

After his mother had brought him up in all piety and fear of God, unto the
age of five years or thereabout, his Father desiring to train up his son in
warlike affairs from his very cradle, took him away with him to a town
called, Casall the greater, in the Territory of Milan, where whenever he
mustered his soldiers, he made him march before them in light armor, with a
little spear upon his shoulder. From hence the Marquis his Father being to
march with his army to Tunis a City in Afrike, sent Lewis back to Castilion,
where growing now toward seven years of age, at which time children begin to
have discretion to discern between good and bad, he withdrew himself by
little and little from the conversation of soldiers, and began to apply
himself to the service of God, saying every day at home upon his knees the
prayers which are, The Daily Exercise, together with the seven Penitential
psalms, and the office of our Blessed Lady, with so great fervor and care
that he never omitted the same were he never so sick: and was wont to call
that, the time of his conversion.

When the Marquis came home, and saw his sons warlike audacity, changed into
a pious and prudent modesty, he rejoiced exceedingly to see how wise and
discret an heir he should have to succeed him in the government of his
subjects. But Lewis his intentions were leuelled at a far higher mark, which
he was not afraid now and then to signify unto his mother; who albeit she
desired nothing more, then that one of her sons should become a Religious
man, yet was she half afraid to hear her eldest son and heir, talk of
taking that course of life, much more to persuade him to it.

Not long after, the Marquis upon some occasion going to visit the Duke of
Florence, took both Lewis and his younger brother with him; and there set them
both to school, to the end, that in that Great Dukes court, they might not
only learn good manners, but other sciences also. Lewis at the age of nine
years being left there by his father, began to exercise himself in all kind
of virtues, especially of Chastity and purity, whereof, out of the great
devotion he had conceived toward our Blessed Lady, he made a vow to keep the
same perpetually, before an Image of hers which the whole City has in great
devotion. He heard Mass every day, and besides mass upon holy days, he
always was present at Euensong. And although he knew not yet how to meditate,
yet the never let pass the daily Exercise, and other Offices which we haHe
spoken of before, rising to say them every morning, as soon as it was day.
Here finally he began to wayne himself from all kind of pleasures, and
pastimes eschewing all conversation that might give him occasion to speak the
least idle word; for he had now begun to frequent the Sacrament of Penance
with much fervor. And so ever after he was wont to call Florence, the mother
of his piety and devotion.

Two years being now past in Florence, Lewis and his brother taking their
leave of the great Duke, with Order from the Marquis, went to live at Mantua,
where he came to take so great delight in abstinence and fasting, which was for
a time prescribed him for the health of his body, that afterward to the great
damage of the same, he could not be dissuaded from using still the same
medicine for the good of his soul. Here now as he began to think with
himself, how he might make all his inheritance over to his Brother, and take
upon himself an Ecclesiastical kind of life, being called home from the
heates of Mantua at the age of twelve years, he received of our Lord the gift
of prayer and contemplation, and by advise of Saint Charles Borromeus
Cardinal, then visiting that Diocese, he began to frequent the holy
Communion, with exceeding great devotion. But his stomach now with praying and
fasting was grown so weak, that he was scarce able to digest any meat at
all. Wherefore his Father sent for him to Montserrat, to see if by any means he
could draw him a little from that austerity, that he might recover his health.
But Lewis there for the space of half a year could take pleasure in nothing
but in his former exercises, using for his pastime only to visit holy places
and Monasteries, flying from the conversation of all but Religious me^, by
whose examples he was so efficaciously moved, that he fully purposed to take
upon him some Religious habit or other, although, being not yet full thirteen
years old, he had not yet determined of what Order he would be.

In the mean time being returned home again with his Father to Castilion, he
went forward exceedingly in all kind of virtues, especially in extraordinary
abstinence and mortification. From hence not long after as he travailed into
Spain in company of his Father, and other noble Italians, he never omitted his
accustomed contemplations and holy Exercises. But he so behaved himself for
the space of two years and more that he lived in the King of Spaines Court,
that no Proverb was so much in the mouths of the chiefest Coutiers, as that
the younger Marquis of Castilion, seemed not to be made of flesh and blood. Such
progress had he made in the contempt of all worldly honors and pleasures.

Here how Lewis being at the age of fifteen years and an half began to
feel in himself so ardent a desire of forsaking the world, that after many
days, commending the matter to God Almighty in his prayers, it pleased his
divine Majesty by a voice from heaven, to give him a particular vocation to the
Society of Jesus. Which thing his Ghostly Father understanding, approved his
good intention, so that it might be put in execution with the Marquis his
Fathers leave. Whereupon Lewis having first told his Mother (who with a joyful
heart soon offered up her Samuel to gods holy service) without delay went unto
his Father, and with all humility and reverence declared his mind unto him. At
which the Marquis was so enraged, that he bad him either get him gone, and
talk no more to him of any such matter, or he would cause him to be whipped
presently. To whom Lewis very modestly answered: Would to God I might receive
such a benefit, as to suffer that for his sake, and so departed from him. And
after a long trial by which he was undoubtedly confirmed it was from God, and
seeing his Father still remained inexorable, he going one day to the College
of the Society, (as at other times he was wont to do,) to visit the Fathers,
he desired his younger brother and the rest of his acquaintance that were with
him, to go their ways home, and leave him, for that he did not mean to stir
one foot out of that place.

Now, the Marquis his Father seeing the firm resolution of his Son, with
much a do persuaded him not to enter into Religion in Spain, but to stay till
they returned home into Italy, and that there he should have his own will
accomplished. As soon as they were arrived in Italy, Lewis claims promise of
his Father, but he thinking by that and other delays, to make his vocation at
length wax cold, answered that he could by no means condescend unto his
request, before that he and his brother, had saluted all the Princes of Italy.
Which Lewis having performed, returning home found his Father more obstinate
against him then ever he was before. In so much that after he had endeavored
all he could, by means of diverse grave Bishops and Prelates to dissuaded him
from that course of life, finding at last to be true which a certain
Cardinal, whom amongst others the Marquis had sent unto him, afterward
confessed. Diaboli parts apurl hunc Adolescentem agendas mibi imposuerunt.
Eas, quia necesse erat, quanto potui studio and ingenio sustinui. Verum nec
hilum profeci, stat immotus: percelli nequit. They made me play the devils
part and tempt this young man with all the wiles and allurementes which I could
possibly invent. But I prevailed nothing. He stands altogether immovable and
invincible: he cannot be daunied. After (I say) that the Marquis saw the matter
came to that pass having sent for Lewis and examined him by himself with an
angry countenance, and sharp words as he lay in bed sick of the gout, he
bids him get him out of his sight.

But hearing, that his words had made him leave the house and recollect
himself in a Monastery of Franciscans, he sent for him home again and did so
bitterly reprehend him for it, that Lewis every day, as one in great anguish
and trouble of mind, to see his Father so to cross his holy intentions,
casting himself down prostrate before a Crucifix with many tears and cruel
disciplines, began to act such a bloody Tragedy upon himself, as those which
beheld him thorough the chinkes of his door, could not endure so pitiful a
sight. In so much that the Marquis himself not believing others report, being
brought unto the door in his bed, and seeing it mith his own eyes, was so
amazed and moved to pity, that without any more resistance, he wrote unto
Scipio Gonzaga then Patriarch of Jerusalem, to offer his Son unto Father
Claudius Aquauiua, General of the Society of Jesus, who willingly accepted of
him, and after admitted him by a letter, which was the answer to one that
Lewis had familiarly before written unto him, to thank him for so great a
benefit.

But this was not the end of Lewis his persecution; for the Marquis not content
with employing him for nine months after, about certain affairs at Milan,
which Lewis, by reason of his Fathers sickness, and to give him the greatest
satifaction he could, with no less speed then prudence dispatched; not content
I say with this (when the writings and all were come, with letters patents from
the Emeperour, so that Lewis seemed to have nothing else to do but by
delivering the writtings to his brother to desinherit himself, and so depart
in peace) he came to Millane, and raised another tempest against him, so much
the more terrible, by how much he himself (besides many others) did sundry
times more earnestly plead his own cause before him, with such speeches as we
may imagine the passionate affection of a Father, ouerflowing with tender love
toward such a son, could affoard.

But seeing all his labor to be in vain, he caused himself to be carried in
a chair into the house of the Society of Jesus, and there sending for a grave
Father of account in that City, he declared the matter unto him, concluding
that he was determined to stand to his judgment, upon condition that he would
there in his presence examine his sons vocation, and urge him with all the
reasons he could devise, to auert him from his purpose. To be short Lewis was
called, and the Father in all sincerity, and with all severity set upon him,
and did the best he could. But Lewis gave so good satisfaction to all the
doubts and difficulties which were opposed against him, that the Father after
great admiration burst forth into this verdict: Aequum postulas, Domine Aloysi,
aequum postulas; neque dubium ess potest quin sit vt dicis. Mihi quidem
stimulos admouists, neque vllum praeterta quaerendi locum reliquisti. Which is
as much as to say, as that there could be no more doubt, but Lewis his petition
was just and reasonable.

The Marquis also being for this time fully persuaded to grant the same,
returned home to Castilion, and Lewis presently, (all things being put in good
order,) followed him: and after he had with an undaunted courage passed one
brunt more of his Fathers fury, at last taking his leave of Cast lion (all the
people with many tears lamenting their own loss, and exceeding sorry for that
they were not whorthy of so good and gracious a Lord) he departed with his
Father to Mantua: where in presence of other Noble men that were to be
witnesses of the deed, having renounced his title of Marquis, and cast from
him all other ornaments and toakens of that dignity, he went immediately, and
the same day put on the habit of the Society, which he had before prepared and
brought ready with him. And having spent a whole day in taking leave of his
father and mother, the next morning he took his joyful journey toward Rome.
He was scarce lighted from his horse in Rome, when going immediately to the
house of the professed Fathers, he cast himself down prostrate at the
Generals feet, professing and acknowledging to be his Subject. Then with his
leave, he went to visit the holy places, to salute his friends, and other
Princes there, and to receive the Popes benediction. All which being
dispatched, upon Saint Catherine the Virgin and martyrs day, at the age of
seauenteene years, eight months, and six days, he entered into the Nouiciate
of the Society of Jesus at S. Andrews in Rome, with as great joy and iubily of
heart, as if he had entered into a paradise of all delights and pleasures,
giving immortal thanks to God, for bringing him out of Egypt, into that Land
of Promise, flowing with milk and honey.

Here now Lewis having passed thorough all kind of exorcises in Humility and
Obedience, with great admiration of all, almost the space of a year, was sent
to Naples to recover his health, and to make an end of the course of
Philosophy, which he had begun at Milan. But after half a year, finding by
experience that that place, nor air agreede with his health, he was called
back again to Rome, and sent unto the Roman College, where he defended his
Philosophy publikly with great applause, and so proceeded to hear his higher
courses of divinity. After he had lived now two years in the Society, upon
Saint Catherines day, being the day on which first he entered, he also made the
three vows of Poverty, Chastity and Obedience, as the custom is. For albeit
he had not spent all this time in the Nouiciate, yet God by his holy grace did
so supply in his soul the want of that time, which the infirmity of his body
took from him, that wheresoever he lived all his life after, he remained still
as it were a Nouice.

The next year upon the eight abd twentieth day of January, he began to take
Ecclesiastical Orders, and by the 26. of Frebruary he had received one after
another, upon several days, all those which are called the Minores, or
inferior Orders. The year following, he was sent to Castilion and Mantua, to
compose certain contentions and debates between his Brother the Marquis (his
Father being now deceased) and the Duke of Mantua, which if he had not, by the
great authority, which for his sanctity he always had amongst them, taken up
and decided, would have cost much bloodshed on both sides.

The next year he withdrew himself, with order from his Superiors, to Milan,
where it pleased God to reveal unto him, that the hour of his death
approached, with which revelation he returned joyfully to Rome, with his
thoughts so fixed on heaven, so dead to the world and to all worldly things,
that he appeared rather as one dead, then living: his only sight stirred up
devotion in others, and his very words incited his hearers to the love of God:
In fine, he was in the estimation of all, aliuely pattern of all perfection.

In the year 1591. the City of Rome was sorely visited with a mortality, by
reason of the multitude of poor people that were enforced by a former famine,
to repair thither for to beg their sustenance, at which time the General
and others of the Society, inforcinge themselves to the aid and succor of the
poor, besides the large alms that they daily procured for them, they labored
the foundation of an Hospital to relieve and cure the sick, which were in
great number visited, with sundry dangerous and infectious diseases, where
those of the Society attended them with great diligence and charity; of which
number Lewis by much importunity obtained of his Superiors to be one, where he
served the sick with wonderful devotion, humility, and charity, exercising
himself ever most willingly about those that were the most loathsome and
dangerously infected. In this employment, he together with many others of the
Society, got that infection whereof afterward he died, which he feeling, and
knowing that our Lord was pleased to do him that favor, to deliver him from
the prison of his body, and to take him to rest, he rejoiced exceedingly,
giving God most humble and hearty thanks for so great a benefit, and the more,
for calling him, in such an age and before he was Priest, whereby he esteemed
himself secure of rendering account, either for the unprofitable expense of
many years, or the abuse of so great a dignity. He made a general Confession,
and having received his Viaticum, and Extreme Unction, he attended the hour of
his death: nevertheless it pleased our Lord that the seventh day of his
sickness the fury of it ceased, and there remained only a gentle fever which
held him three months, in all which time he never willingly entertained
discourse of any thing but of heaven, and heavenly things, in so much that we
may say (as it were) he had sent his heart before him.

He being by little and little sore weakened by the fever, it pleased our Lord
to reveal unto him the hour of his decease: whereupon with great signs of
joy, he said Te Deum laudamus, and told those that were about him, that he
should dye on the Octaue of the feast of the Blessed Sacrament, notwithstanding
on Corpus Christi day, as also during the Octaue, he seemed so well to recover,
that on the Octaue day they said unto him. That he should rather think of his
recovery, then of his death that day, since there appeared no danger at all. To
whom he quietly answered: The day is not yet past, I shall assuredly dye this
night. The evening being come, the Provincial came to visit him, who demanded
of him how he did? Lewis answered. I go Father. Whither said the Provincial?
To heaven (answered Lewis) I trust by the great mercy of God, if my sins do
not hinder me.

Pope Gregory the fourteenth, hearing that he was in the Agony of death, sent
unto him his benediction, with a plenary Indulgence of all his sins, and
drawing toward his end, he desired earnestly to take a discipline, or at least
(by reason of his own weakness) that one might be given him upon his back:
which being denied, he humbly beseeched leave of Father Provincial that he
might dye upon the ground, so great was his fervor and desire of suffering,
even then when his sickness had rendered him almost incapable of sufferinge. In
brief, after that he had taken leave of the Fathers and Brothers of the
College with many tears, he entered into long and sweet interior Colloquies
with our Lord, kissing often a Crucifix which he held in his hands, with his
eyes sixed thereon, and often calling upon the holy name of Jesus, he rendered
his soul to rest on Thursday at night, being the Octaue of the B. Sacrament,
the one and twentieth of June, in the year of our Lord 1591. and in the three
and twentieth year of his age, three months and eleauen days, after he had
been of the Society five years, and almost seven months.

He was interred in the Chutch of the Annuntiation in the Roman College, with
so great concourse of people, not only of those of the Society and Scholars,
but also from the Court and City of Rome, that not without great difficulty
could his body be buried, every one striving to kiss his hands, and for some
relic of him; some cutting his hair, others his garments, others even his
fingers ends. He was put into a Coffin, and laid in the Chapel of the
Crucifix, and from thence in the year of our Lord 1598. he was removed to a
more eminent place of the same Church; finally the thirteenth day of May in the
year 1605. he was solemnly translated with music, and lights, into the
great Chapel of our Blessed Lady in the same Church, and there placed in the
wall near the right side of the Altar. This translation was caused by reason
of the many miracles that it pleased out Lord to work by him, in diverse
places, and the multitude of people that came daily to his Tomb to offer up
their vows, which exceedingly increased the devotion of the people, and the
concourse to his B. Relics; which was a thing so celebrated at Rome, that
Pope Paul the fifth, in the month of September 1607. gave order, that an
inquisition might be made of his life and miracles for his Canonization.

Among the many miracles that have been wrought by the intercession of Blessed
Lewis, there be forty and four approved and recorded, which he has done in
the State of Castilio^, his own proper Country and patrimony, where his Image
is placed on an Altar with twelve lamps before it continually burning, besides
the other innumerable lights which the people daily offer unto his honor, and
before the same are hanged on the walls more then three hundred votiue
Tablets, offered in remembrance, and for devotion, of his miracles.

Our Lord in diverse other places has likewise showed forth his wonders by the
means of this blessed Saint, rendering health to diverse dangerously sick of
fevers, and other diseases, restoring the blind to sight, the deaf to hearing,
helping of women in the peril of childbirth, with many others, which are all
at large recorded in the Book of his life, out of which I will only rehearse
briefly these few that follow.

In the year 1593. his mother being in danger of her life, having received the
holy Sacraments of Communion, and Extreme Unction, her son appeared
resplendent and glorious unto her, with the comfort of whose presence she
presently began to amend, and in few days recovered her perfect health, which
was the first miracle that it pleased God to work by him after his death.

The Duke of Mantua, coming to Rome in the year 1605. visited with great
devotion the tomb of his Cosen Lewis, and had there given him (by his Brother
Francis Gonzaga, the^ Ambassador for the Emperor) a relic of his, with
which returning by Florence, to Mantua, he was taken with a grievous pain in
his knee, which had long and sorely vexed him, to which applying this holy
Relic of B. Lewis, he was presently cured: the which was testified by his
own letter, written back to Rome to the Marquis his Brother.

He had likewise the gift of Prophesy, and foretold unto his mother, that his
Brother Francis (who was the youngest of his Brothers) should be the Rayser up
and glory of their House, which proved true; as likewise diverse other things
which he foretold.

Who sees not in this life, and admireth not the bounty and liberality of our
Lord, who had so filled with his grace, this Blessed young man, whom he made
choiceof, even from his mothers womb, to render glorious both in heaven and
earth? How great spirit in so young age, what recollection in so many troubles,
what mortifications in the miedest of pleasures and delights, what humility in
greatness, what misprise of all worldly things, and earnest seeking after
heavenly? To what greater degree of perfection can a soul ariue in this life
(beyond the preservation of the grace received in Baptism) the^ not to feel
in their body the tentations of the flesh, not to suffer in prayer distractio^s
of thoughts, and to live on earth, as an Angel in heaven? All which virtues
are apparent to have been eminent in this blessed young man, whose life we all
ought to imitate, to the end that imitating his virtues, we may be also made
partakers of his rewards and merits.

He was Beatified by Pope Paul the fifth, by whom leave was also granted to
say mass of him. His feast is kept by the Fathers of the Society of Jesus,
with great solemnity; and plenary Indulgence, and in the Diocese of Mantua, is
for the most part, kept holy.

THE LIFE AND VERTVES of B. Stanislaus Kostka, of the Society of Jesus,
abridged out of his life, written by Peter Rybadeneira and others, of the same
Society.
BLESSED Stanislaus was borne in the Kingdom of Polonia, in the year of our
Lord 1550. in a Castle of his ancestors called Kostkouo, His Fathers name was
John Kostka, his mothers Margaret Keysban, both Illustrious, and of the
principal houses of that Kingdom, but much illustrated by this, that never
any of that house was tainted with heresy. Out of their family have issued
diverse Lords, Palatines, Electors, Senators, Captains, Bishops, and other of
great dignity in that kingdom. God blessed them with diverse children, and
amongst others with this Stanislaus, who having laudably passed his infancy at
home, was ^^^t by his Father, being the but thitteene years of age, together
with another of his Brothers, elder then he, to Vienna in Austria (where the
Emperor Maximilian, at that time kept his Court) for to study there, in the
College of the Fathers of the Society of Jesus, which was at that time very
famous for the education of youth.

Sta^nislaus studied so diligently there, being of an excellent wit, that he
surpassed all the rest of his Schoolfellowes, of whom for his gentleness and
modesty he was generally beloved. Every morning before he went to school, and
every evening after he came from school, he used to make his prayers in the
Church of the Society. He avoided all ill company, all conversation with
Libertines, or any other thing that had not the odor of devotion. With all
diligence he was a great lover of silence, and never spoke but what he had
first well weighed and considered. He was modestly cheerful, and cheerfully
modest, and affable. He conuersed most willingly with those that were simple
and sincere: he was very compassionate, and succored to his power, all those
that were in need or extremity: he was ever the first up (of his
schoolfellowes) in the morning: he contented not himself with hearing one
mass daily, nor on feasts with fewer then all he could possibly hear. He went
meanly cladde, and for all the cold season (which in those parts is very
bitter in the winter) he never wore gloves, nor would ever use the help of any
servant, unless when he was commanded by his master, or brother. Almost all
his Orations and Declamations that he made, in the exercise of Eloquence, were
in the praise of the glorious Virgin Mary, to whom he was singularly denoted.
He said every day his Beads: he prayed not only many times of the day, but
would rise in the night to pray (while his companions slept) accompanying his
prayers with diverse acts of humility and mortifications: he used sundry times
secretly to sweep his brothers Chamber, fasted in private diverse days, and
with sore disciplines often chastized his tender body. And although his Brother
often chid him for living so retired, yet he having his eyes fixed on God (who
above all he desired to please) would never omit his ordinary exercises and
devotions.

Stanislaus being thus virtuously employed and disposed, our Lord enkindles in
him more and more the flames of his Jove, and inspired him with a vocation to
the Society of Jesus; which he vowed although he discovered not his resolutions
to any one, besides his Confessor, until six months after.

About that time he was visited with a dangerous sickness, in the beginning of
which, being in his Chamber, the devil appeared unto him in the shape of a
great black dog, horrible and fearful, who took him thrice by the
throat, attempting to have strangled him: but he recommending himself
fervently to God, by his grace, with the sigue of the Cross, chased him away,
in such manner that he never appeared after unto him.

His sickness had reduced him to such extremity, that the Phisitia^s had given
him over: and the Blessed youth lay so afflicted, not so much for the death
which he saw before his eyes, as because he had no means to receive the
Blessed Sacrament, which he exceedingly desired, by reason that the Host of the
house where he lodged, was an Heretic. Wherefore he commended himself
earnestly to our Blessed Savior, and to S. Barbara, both because she was
Patroness of the Scholars of the College of Vie^na, where he studied, as
also that he remembered to have read in her life, that whosoever that was
devoted unto her should never die without the Sacraments of the Church. And for
that the last time, which he had communicated, was upon the seast of Saint
Barbara aforesaid, which is the fourth of December, he humbly desired of our
Savior by the intercession of that glorious Saint, that he might not yet
depart this life, without first having received the Sacraments of the Church.
And at that present finding himself almost in the agony of death, he renewed
this his petition with greater fervor and earnestness; which our Blessed
Savior granted. For being one night awake, languishing in the agony of death,
he saw enter into his chamber the holy Virgin S. Barbara, accompanied with two
Angels, environed with Celestial brightness, bringing with them the B.
Sacrament, from whose hands with wonderful reverence he received it, and
began to be a little better.

After this great favor, he received another most singular, and no less
marvelous: for being overcome with the violence of his sickness, and in the
extremity of his life, our B. Lady appeared unto him with the child Jesus in
her arms, and with a gracious countenance and regard admonishing him to enter
the Society of Jesus, she vanished away, leaving the child Jesus, lying on the
bed by him. Stanislaus aided by the celestial favor, suddenly began to
recouet his strengt and to amend, at which the Phisitia^s were astonished, as
at a thing contrary to all rules of Physic. These two admirable favors, B.
Stanislaus manifested a little before his death, to one of his fellow-Nouices,
named Stephen, as also unto Father Emanuel Sa, which notwithstanding having
done it at unawares, he remained so much co^fou^ded, that the tears stood in
his eyes.

Being now restored to perfect health, not unmindful either of the private vow
that he had made to enter into the Society, or of the admonition of our B.
Lady, and desirous to put it in speedy execution, he discovered the same to his
ghostly Father, who told him that they could not by any means receive him in
the College at Vienna, without the consent of his friends, and blessing of
his Father. But he not willing to expect so long, and despayring to obtain
leave of his Father; knowing likewise the auerse nature of his Brother Paul,
who had often times entreated him with bitter words, and sometimes with
blows, which he ever had endured, with great patience and inward consolation,
for the love of virtue; notwitstanding that he might have some fit occasion to
put his good desires in practice, he ceased not to give many outward
testimonies of his inclination; and one day he discovered it unto his brother,
who was thereat so much ince^sed against him, that he rated him out of his
presence, threatening to advertise his parents of his proceeding. But still
continuing to appease his Brother, and to get at least his good will, he spoke
unto him one morning in very loving manner; who in a rage answered, that he
should get him gone with a mischief chief whither he would.

Stanislaus, as an occasion fitly sent him from heaven, gladly embraced what
his Brother had said, and so putting himself in poor apparel, having
confessed and communicated, and earnestly commended himself to God, and out B.
Lady, took his journey on foot from Vienna to Ausburge, there to find Father
Canisius Provincial of Germany, to whom he had letters of commendations from
a Father of the Society, preacher to the Empress Maria.

So son as Paul missed his brother, he was much afflicted, knowing that he
principally by his choler and ill usage had chased him away: he searched
diligently many Churches and Religious houses in Vie^na, but could hear no
news of him, until by an Hungarian Gentleman who had been school-fellow with
Stanislaus, and by a little note that he had written to his Tutour and left
within a book, his resolution was known, and also the way that he had taken.
Wherefore his brother, with his said Tutour, taking with them also their Host
and one servant, followed him with all speed in Coach, whom they ouertooke on
the way, but it pleased God that they went on without knowing of him, and
shortly after by reason that the Coach-horses were young and unfit for
travail, they were forced to return without passing further.

Stanislaus now seeing himself delivered from this peril, was much animated
and comforted: and passing on his way, he went one Sunday morning to a Church
in a village, which he supposed to be Catholic, with a desire to receive the
Blessed Sacrament: but perceauing to belong to Heretics, he was much troubled,
and in his trouble had recourse to our Lord, beseeching him with tears in his
eyes, that he might not be deprived of the food of his soul which he so much
thirsted after. Our B. Savior vouchsafed to hear him and grant his request;
and as a pious Father desirous to cherish the devotion of his son, he sent
unto him an Angel of admirable beauty, from whose hands he received the B.
Sacrament, in the same manner as he had done before during his sickness, by the
prayers of Saint Barbara.

With this Celestial food Stanislaus, in short time arrived at Ausburge where
not finding Father Canisius, he went unto Dibsinge a town ten leagues from
Ausburge, where the said Father was, and where he was charitably entreated, and
shortly after with other two Companions, sent up to Rome: and in the eighteenth
year of his age, he arrived at his desired port, and where after a most
wearisome journey, for that he had trauayled more the^ two hundred and
threescore leagues on foot, he was received into the Society of Jesus, by
Father Francis Borgia, then General, upon the eight and twentieth day of
October, being the feast of S. Simon and Jude, in the year of our Lord 1567.

As soon as his Father understood that he was entered into the Society at Rome,
he was lively touched with sorrow, because according to flesh and blood, he
loved him dearly. Therefore he wrote unto him a letter full of passion and
threats. That he had dishonored his House and family by the course he had
taken, and that if ever he returned into Polonia, he would either force him
from that state of life, or send him to his grave; and that instead of those
riches, chains of Gold, and Jewels that he intended to bequeath him, if he
had remained in the world; he would load him with captivity, and chains of
iron.

Stanislaus answered this letter with great humility and modesty, and with no
less courage and constancy, that he was most unworthy to suffer for God, who
had suffered so much for man: yet nevertheless if it should please God to be
so bountiful unto him, there could not happen any thing more desired by him,
then even to die for the testimony of those vows, that he had made and
promised to God.

He gave also incessant thanks to God even with floudes of tears, when he saw
himself in the Nouiciate, free from the molestations of parents, in the
assured port of religion, having escaped the storms and dangers of the world,
he thought of no other Father but what he had in heaven, nor of other mother
then the blessed Virgin: he contemplated all his fellow Nouices as Saints, to
the end to imitate their virtues, and esteemed himself far unworthy to live
among such Angels, and to be employed (by the great favor and mercy of God)
in the service of them, that were his most devout and profitable servants. He
was truly humble, and well instructed in the knowledge of himself: his desire
to be despised, and not accounted counted of (for the love of Christ) appeared
in his poor habit, his earnest seeking for the most abject and painful
Offices of the house: he always rankt himself with the last, accounting every
one much more worthy then himself. When he was at Vie^na before his entrance
into the Society, he gave himself so much to prayer, that by reason of his
long continuance and atte^tion, his heart and senses had often failed him, in
such sort that not without diverse remedies, he has been brought unto himself
again. And if this Blessed Youth did so apply himself to prayer and devotion,
living in the world, how much more did he excel, being now secure in Religion?
This only may suffice, that he did not only spend in prayer all those hours of
the day in which he was not otherwise employed, but also the most part of the
night, reserving only so much for sleep as would hardly serve to suffice
nature.

By his long exercise and custom to pray attentively, he had obtained such a
particular gift of our Lord, that the Master of the Nouices, and his
Confessor have affirmed, that he had never any distractions in prayer: so
perfectly had he subdued his imagination to his will. And when any one
complained of distractions or wandering thoughts in prayer. Stanislaus wondered
at it, as a most strange thing unto him: nor was he only so united unto God in
prayer and meditation, but also in his exterior and domestical works, which
he performed with such recollection, that it was easy to see, that no outward
thing could trouble the inward quiet of his mind, nor attention of his spirit;
which was increased in him to such perfection, that in time of prayer many of
the Nouices would endeavor to pray where they might see him; for in behoulding
him they learned to compose themselves, and were incited to an extraordinary
recollection of spirit. Many repaired unto him in their troubles and
tentations, recommending themselves unto his prayers, by which means diverse
were delivered from sundry tentations, and restored to quietness of spirit.

One time a Brother of the Society of Jesus, who is now a Priest, being
assaulted with a great and vehement tentation of auersion from a Superior,
communicated the same with Staniflaus (who at that time served in the Kitchen)
desiring him to pray to God that he would grant him grace to overcome it.
Stanislaus presently went into the Church, and by his prayers obtained his
present delivery from that tentation. He had the great gift of tears, which
he shad in great abundance with a mernailous sweetness of spirit: and our
Blessed Savior had illustrated him by his divine light, with such a knowledge
of spiritual things, that every one admired to see so much prudence,
discretion, and spirit in so young a Nouice.

Our Lord had bestowed diverse great and celestial gifts and consolations on
his B. Soul, whereby he became so inflamed with the divine love, that diverse
times with the force and fervor thereof, he sell into ecstasy out of which they
could not sometimes recall him, without applying to him of linen dipped in
cold water, whereby in short time his health was much impaired. But who can
imagine the singular devotion that he had to the sacred Queen of Heaven, being
dissolved in sweetness of mind as often as he thought upon her admirable
virtues: and it seemed that both night and day he had no other care, but how to
serve her, and meditate upon the mysteries of her holy life. For his affection
to her was so arde^t in his breast, that it could not be contained from
discovering it self, by his words, saluting her often, speaking always of her
graces and virtues, making even whole nights most amorous Colloquies with her,
whom he ever used to call his mother.

This devotion of Stanislaus to our blessed Lady, was so notable among the
Nouices, that they to content him when they were together, would always hold
discourse of the praises, privileges and excellencies of this most excellent
Virgin; and for his sake the Master of the Nouices ordained, that both at
rising in morning, going to bed, and likewise at night after letanies, all the
Nouices should, kneeling toward the Church of S. Maria Mayor (which is
situated in Rome, near to the Nouitiate of S. And rews) salute the B. Virgin,
demand her benediction, and desire her to favor and protect all those that
desired to enter into the Society. This devotion that he bare to the Blessed
Virgin, made him desire to die the Eve of her glorious assumption, which he
long before foretold should be granted him.

What shall I say of the other rare and singular virtues, which, as from the
lively fountain of the divine liberality, filowed plentifully in his soul?
And of his so entiere and perfect Obedience, that he never found repugnance in
any thing that was commanded him: he obeyed the voice of his Superior as the
voice of God, and had ever a perfect co^formity of will with his.

What shall I say of his sweetness and affability, or of his Compassion, modesty
and silence, of the rigorous and austere mortifications with which he afflicted
his body, by fasts, disciplines, and hairecloth, as if he had been a most
grievous sinner, it being certain by the report of his Confessor, that in his
life he had never sinned mortally, and that often in his ordinary Confessions,
he could not find him culpable of any sin, for which to give him absolution.
In brief all the Nouices beheld him as a mirror and model of the Society,
and the Master of the Nouices would exhort them to imitate his example. All
those which freque^ted him familiarly, esteemed him as a soul particularly
elected by God, rich of virtues and merits, and even in behoulding him they
were enflamed in the fear and love of God.

Stanislaus thus rich in virtues, having made so great a progress in so few
days of his Nouiceship, consumed with the divine love and desire to honor the
Blessed Virgin in heaven, humbly beseeched our Lord to take him from hence,
into his kingdom, that he might see and enjoy his glorious presence: which
petition our Lord granted him, as follows. The Eve of Saint Laure^ce, he
meditaring of his martyrdom, with a fervent desire to imitate him, and to be
burned in the lively flames of the love of God, demanded of the rest of the
Nouices, who were all the^ assembled, how one might burn and suffer for Jesus
Christ in the imitation of Saint Laurence? Every one said his opinion; to which
he answered, that he would suffer some mortification in honor of that blessed
Saint, to the end that he might pray for him unto the B. Virgin his Mother, to
take him quickly out of this exile, and that he might be present in heaven at
the celebration of her Glorious Assumption. To this intention he made a
public discipline in the refectory on his knees, could his fault, kissed the
feet of every one, begged his meat, and eat it on the ground. From thence he
went to serve in the kitchen, where by occasion of the fire that he saw, he
contemplated the torment of Saint Laure^ce on the Gridiron, with such vehemence
and attention, that his spirits languished and senses failed him: In that
manner he was carried to his bed, and was found to have a fever, which
althought at the beginning it was light, and the Physicians secure of any
danger, yet Stanislaus told the Rector, that for certain he should not live,
nor ever rise from his bed.

So he began to decline daily toward his end, which when he felt approaching,
he desired that they would suffer him to dye upon the ground. He was taken with
a great flux of blood, and there upon ensued a cold fever. Having received the
blessed Sacraments of the Altar, and of Extreme Unction, most devoutly he fixed
his eyes on heaven, and so remained a small space, with his thoughts ravished
and lifted up to God, until the Rector demanded of him, if he were resigned
into the hands of our Lord, and prepared either to live or die, according to
his pleasure. To which he answered cheerfully: My God, my heart is ready. Then
having lovingly embraced all those that came to see him, he embraced also an
image of our blessed Lady which he had ever held most dear: he said some
prayers propre for the time, and made a Colloquy in Latin unto the Crucifix
which was before his eyes, thanking out Lord with his whole heart for all his
benefits and mercies bestowed upon him, and desiring him for the merits of
those blessed wounds of his feet, his hands, his side, and head, which he
often kissed, to pardon him all his sins, and to receive his soul into his
blessed hands in peace.

The B. Virgin Mother of God appeared unto him, accompanied with diverse other
Virgins, to whom he spoke a long time, and a little after with a sweet silence
he delivered his soul into the hands of his Creator, about the ninth hour of
the night, the 14. day of August 1568. the 19. year of his age, and sixth
month of his Nouiceship, having with few days labor, obtained as many
crowns and merits, as others perhaps in many years.

His body remained so fair, his cheeks so ruddy, his eyes so clear, as one
would have thought him living. It was observed, that during his sickness (except
when he was spoken unto) his eyes were always closed, although he were awake;
and when upon any occasion he opened them, he lifted them up toward heaven,
with a smiling countenance, as if he had beheld some pleasing object. His body
was put in a Coffin (which was extraordinary, but granted to him in particular
by reason of the great opinion of his sanctity) in the Church of the Nouiciate
of Saint Andrews, he being the first of the company that was there enterred.
There came thither such multitudes of people to kiss his feet, that Doctor
Tollet, afterward Cardinal, was amazed, thereat, and said: Is it not a strange
thing, that all Rome should run to reverence the body of a yenge Polacke
Nouice, as a Saint?

The opinion of his sanctity much more increased, by a book written in Italian
of his life, printed in Rome two years after his death, wherein he was styled
Blessed; and in Polonia the same was written in Latin, where it was so frequent
and affectuous, that many only with reading thereof have been incited to enter
into the same Society. Presently after his portraicture was painted in Polonia,
and his pictures were set up publicly with the tittle of Saint, and reverenced
not only by the vulgar, but even by the Bishops, Prelates, Palatines, Lords, and
also by the King himself, who placed the same among the rank of Saints
pictures in his Palace, upon the feast of S. Michaell the Archa^gell, in the
year of our Lord 1604.

Some of his relics being carried to the twone of Gallici in the year 1602.
were received there with a solemn procession, and kissed with great devotion
by all the people. Clement the eight, (who had been legate in Polonia before he
was Pope,) granted out two Breues, in one whereof he beatified Stanislaus, and
in the other, granted six years, and six quarentens of pardon, to those that
should visit (on the day of his decease) a certain Chapel, built and
dedicated to his honor in Polonia. His body is still honored at Rome with
great veneration and concourse of people: and in the year of our Lord 1605.
the fourteenth day of August, Pope Paul the fifth having perused the Su^mary of
his life and miracles, permitted that his Picture might be publicly set up
near unto his Tomb, with lights burning before it, and the memories and
votiue Tables of the miracles, which our Lord had wrought by his intercession,
to be there likewise publicly hunge upon the walls: the which was done with
a wonderful and extraordinary co^course of people, both from the City and
Court of Rome, the King of Polonia his Ambassador being present; and the
Sunday following, the Bishop of Seruia sunge Mass at his body, assisted by the
forsaid Ambassador of Polonia, and other of the Nobility of Poland, that were
then in Rome.

Likewise in Polonia in diverse Churches, mass was publicly said in his
Commemoration, where the Altars were richly adorned with his Relics, and
Images placed thereon: diverse rich guiftes and presents were sent from Polonia,
and other Countries to adorn his Tomb and Altar in Rome, which are visited
every day with singular devotion, by reason of the many miracles that it has
pleased our Lord to work by his intercession in diverse places of Europe.

Many praying at his sepulcher, have felt a most sweet odor to proceed from
his body, which being opened a long time after his death, his said body was
found entire without any corruption at all. The miracles that it has pleased
our Lord to work by this his servant are very many, and at large set down in
the book of his life, out of which these few that follow, are briefly taken
forth.

In the Province of Rusia, a venerable Priest being grievously sick, B.
Stanislaus appeared unto him, with two other Saints, assuring him that they
shortly should meet all together in heaven: upon which the Priest, who was
much devoted unto him, was greatly comforted and shortly after died.

One that was possessed by the devil at Rome, and exceedingly tormenred with
evil spirits, was delivered by the intercession of B. Stanislaus. A certain
Lady in Frence, being become lame and impotent, by reason of certain poison
that had been given her, desired to be carried in a chair to a certain Church,
where humbly beseeching our Lord by the merits of B. Stanislaus, to restore
unto her her health and strength, she was suddenly healed, and rising from her
chair, in the sight of many people, she walked alone, to the wonder and
astonishment of all that were present, especially of the Physicians who had
long before esteemed her incurable.

Diverse other women have been succored by his intercession in their trauayles
of Childbirth; others have been delivered from fevers, swellings, blindness: many
broken legs and arms have been made whole, and many diseases almost
incurable, healed. By drinking a little wine wherein one of his bones had been
steeped, one was cured of a dangerous sickness. Another was cured by the touch
of one of his teeth, and by other his Relics, diverse others. At Rome in the
year 1602, a Gentleman of Poland visited with a continual fever, desired a
certain Priest to pray unto B. Stanislaus for his recovery, who with great
confidence, in the name of God commanded the fever, by the merits of that B.
Servant of his, to depart and no more afflict the Gentleman, which God by his
intercession effected, and the Gentleman was suddenly restored to his health.

For these, and diverse other restimonies, by which it has pleased God to show
forth the Sanctity of his Servant Stanislaus, his sepulcher or shrine is
wunderfully frequented and reverenced at Rome, and adorned by the piety of
devout people, with so many ornaments and riches, that of the number of the
remarquable and memorable things to be seen at Rome, this is reckoned for
one. He was of small stature, his hair black, of fair complexion, full
faced: he always looked cheerfully, and was of a pleasing composition of body,
and of so rare and singular modesty, that the only beholding of his face, did
move others to devotion, and purity of life.

His holy life is of very great esteem, and read with admiration both in
France, Italy, Flaunders, Bohemia, Germany, Polonia, and Spain (whereof this is
only an abridgement) the which whosoever shall peruse attentively, shall find
full of rare examples of virtue, and learn that there is no age so young that
may not with its own endeauours, cooperating with Gods grace, and employing it
self wholly in his service, gain to it self the treasure of many merits, the
testimony of an holy life, the blessedness of an happy death, and finally the
glory of an everlasting kingdom.

THE LIFE AND VERTVES OF Holy Alphonsus Rodriquez, a Brother Coadiutor of the
Society of Jesus: abridged by Father Michael Julian of the same Society.
ALphonsus Rodriquez, was borne at Segouia a famous City in Spain, and
studying in Valentia heard his Humanity and Retoricke two years, leading a
very exe^plar kind of life in all modesty and devotion. He was called
miraculously to the Order of the Society of Jesus, and was received therein for
a Coadiutor. The first year of his Nouiceship, he was sent to the College of
Maiorca (an Island between Sicily, and Spain) and because the story of his
whole life is now in hand to be written at large, remitting my self thereunto,
I will only touch some few principal things out of an infinite number which
might be recounted.

From the first day that this holy Brother began to serve God in the Society of
Jesus, he made a firm resolution to serve him with great diligence, and
therefore he besought his divine majesty, that he would be pleased to exercise
him in continual pains and travails. He was so excellent in all kind of
virtues, that he was a perfect model and pattern of the same. He was so
humble, that he esteemed himself the greatest sinner in the world; and though
he knew by revelation that he should be saved, without going to Purgatory, yet
was he wont to weep for his sins; neither did any thing so grieve him, as
when he saw himself esteemed by others, wo^dring how any body could endure to
treat with so base and vile a creature; such was his opinion of himself. He
was very notable in mortification both exterior and interior, seeking in
every thing, that which was most repuguant to sense and fensuall appetite, as
well in distasteful meats, which if they were by chance given him, he eat in
great have least they should be changed, as also in other pennances and
corporal mortifications, fastinges, wearing of hairecloth, and the like: and
even in these latter years wherein he has benevery sickly, to have desired
leave he might not omit any fasting days, besides that every week he used to
take three disciplines, during the time of his infirmity.

He was so given to fervent prayer, that he passed many ho wers of the night,
and the whole day in continual prayer, in so much that his exterior
exercises, did not any way interrupt it; giving sufficient testimony by his
rare modesty, and singular good carriage, how fervent his prayers were, so that
he never lost the presence of God, not for one minute.

His obedience was so rare, as you shall hardly find more perfect in these our
times. For trial whereof being once bid by his Superior to go into the
Indies, the word was scarcely spoken, but he was presently ready to have put it
in execution, if the Porter would have opened the door. And the Rectour
demanding afterward of him, how he thought to have gone, not having either
provision or commodity of shiping? he answered that he went with great
confidence in God, whom his Superior represented, and who would provide him
of all things necessary, and that if he had not found the commodity of a ship,
relying upon holy Obedience, he would have adventured to have gone upon the
seas. He shut a door (through which he had occasion to pass) almost
continually, every time he passed, for the space of many years, because his
Superior had asked him once why he did notshut it.

Another time the good Brother being sick of a vehement ague, the Rectour
discoursing with him of spiritual matters as his manner was, asked him, if his
head did not trouble him? whereu^ to he answered, that it did. The^ said the
Rectour unto him, Brother talk no more; which he so punctually observed, that
he spaken or one word all that night, thou the infirmamaria^ did ask him many
questions. He continuated in the same manner the next day, and when the
Infirmarian told him he might well answer, because it was a necessary matter;
he said, not without leave of Father Rectour: hereupon the Rectour was called,
and the Brother began to say: If your Reverence will give me leave, I will
answer the Infirmarian and Phifitian when they ask me any thing. The Rectour
asked him why he did not answer before? Because, said he, your Reverence
yesterday, bad me speak no more.

He had a great zeal of souls, yet always conformable to his estate, for by
his spiritual talk, his modesty, and good example, he continually preached,
being Porter of the College of Maiorca, for the space of 30. years, with
virtuous reputation at home, and edification abroad. He has done admirable
things in conversion of souls, stirring up all those who treated with him, to
great devotion and holiness of life. He was very careful to pray continually
for the conversion of the whole world, and that with so great fervor of mind,
that he did offer himself to endure the pains of hell for all eternity, for
gayning the soul of one poor Blackmore, or slave, if God were pleased
therewith. And once or twice God did so eleuate him in spirit, that he faw and
knew all the men and women in the world, and revealed unto him, that by those
godly desires of his, he did merit as much as if he had converted all that
multitude.

Concerning his modesty; there was no man that ever saw him to have swarued
from the least point of perfection: he went with his eyes still fixed on the
ground, without casting them any way, so that for the space of 40. years, he
never looked any woman in the face, though he usually gave wine to the
Communicants after receiving the B. Sacrament at Mass. He was so given to
silence, that albeit he conuersed all his life both with domesticalls and
stra^gets, yet he is not known to have spoaken the least idle word. He
delighted much to talk of God, and if others did happen to talk of others
matters, he presently fell a sleep. He spoke of spiritual things with so much
affection, that many persons of this Island, came of purpose to treat with him
about their spitituall affairs, and to ask his advise in their doubts. By
frequent conversation with Almighty God, he had attained to so great and height
of spiritual knowledge, that he left some Books written with his own hand,
in which he speaks so excellently of virtues, that he far surpasses many
learned men, writing of the same subject. By reason whereof the Viceroy of this
Island, Bishops, Counselors, Magistrates, Knights and gentlemen, had such an
opinion of his wisdom, that they would not undertake any business of
importance, without his advise: to whom he gave great satisfaction, and by his
plain and pious discourses dismissed them, with assured hope of the good
success of their business, which was never frustrated if they observed his
counsel. His poverty was so extraordinary, that he was never content but when
he tried some effects thereof. He was sorry when the worste things of the house
were not given him. If he found but a pin, he would not keep it without leave.
He desired continually to feel some want both in his diet, and apparel,
lodging and the like.

It could not be, but that he who was so careful over his senses, should have
attained unto such angelical purity, as Saint Ignatius his Father required in
those of the Society, both of body and mind. And therefore he never looked any
man in the face, but he wept most bitterly for a good while after; which he did
all his life time, for having once cast his eye by chance upon a coach passing
by. To be brief, by his practice of all sorts of virtue, he seemed rather to
be an Angel then a man: for not only in these later years, but for 40. years
together, he has not been noted to have done any thing, not only not
imperfectly or according to his own humor, but so that it might seem to be
done most perfectly: in so much that although the whole world, and the forces
of hell it self should have opposed against him, he would not have ceased to
do that which was most perfect, and for the greater glory of God, which he had
continually in his mouth, and much more in his heart. He was so punctual in
the observation of his Rules, that he would rather have been cut in pieces then
break the least of them. He did so hate singularity that even in these later
years wherein he was subject to infirmitys, he could not endure to sit at the
table of the Conualescentes, or such as were weak, and in recovering of their
health, much less to have any particular thing brought him. Many have
conceived so great an opinion of him, that they would willingly have passed the
seas, only to have seen him: and many great men both Secular and
Ecclesiastical, were wont to come to the College, and stay there sometime,
only to converse with him, who went away astonished with his readiness in
answering at the gate, satisfying of all which came, with his good carriage,
sweet answers, and diligence in his Office.

Thus going on, and mounting by degrees, he came at last to that perfection of
love toward almighty God, that if his divine Majesty had notin a manner by
miracle preserved him, he had died through the vehemence of his love, as
himself has left written, and also delivered in giving an account of his
conscience to his Superior, which his rule commands twice a year. And to
the end those things may be more assured, he has for these ten years past, by
order of his Superiors, given the account of his conscience in writing.

He had great conjunction with the Angels and Saints, with whom he conuersed
both in heaven and earth, and especially with 24. of the more principal,
amongst whom he divided the 24. hours to treat and recommend himself unto
them; wherein he never failed, though in the night and in his sleep, awaking
duly at the beginning of every hour, to perform his accustomed deuouotion:
which diligence of his, our Savior recompensed, by discovering unto him his
glory, wherein he saw more perfectly, and knew all (...) B^ in Heaven, their
names, and all particulers as if he had conuersed with them all his life time.
From his very infancy he bare so extraordinary and tender devotion toward the
Blessed Virgin, at whose hands he received many favors, that one time
discoursing and recreating as it were with her, he said: O Queen of heaven, I
love thee more then my self, I love thee more then thou love me. The
motherly affection of the Blessed Virgin could hold no longer, but appearing
presently, she made answer unto him, No, no, Alpho^sus, it is not so, I love
the more then thou love me. His familiarity with the Blessed Virgin and her
Son was such, as is wont to be between friends, one to another, or as of a
little child with his father and mother: and indeed he esteemed them for such,
who affoarded him often their corporal presence, he spoke unto them (but once
especially when they entered into his heart) with such devotion and sweetness,
that he caused the same effectinall those that did hear him, whom he exhorted
wholly to forget themselves, and only to delight in his sweet Lovers, Jesus and
Mary, for so he was wont to call them, because they would be careful both of
body and soul.

For 40. years together he daily said the Office of the Immaculate Conception
of our Blessed Lady, to which mystery he was much devoted: and the Blessed
Virgin one day told him, that she was very much pleased with his devotion;
which he did exhort all the Society daily to practice, telling them that one of
the principal reasons of the Institution of the Society, was to preach and
defend the Immaculate Conception of our Blessed Lady. And this he said with so
great affection, that he never used the like fervor: thereby assuring them that
he spoke it nor of himself, but had recaued it by revelation from heaven. The
continual use of his beads, as was found after his death, had caused an
extraordinary hardness in his fingars ends.

I omit an infinite number of things which might be said of his rare virtues,
of his admirable lights and divine favors, remitting the Reader to the history
of his life (which without doubt is one of the most rare and perfect amongst
the lives of those Saints, which have received extraordinary favors from
almighty God) and will briefly recount his last sickness, death, and burial,
though from the very beginning of the 47. years which he lived in the College
of Maiorca, our Lord exercised him in all sorts of pains, as well diverse
persecutions of the devil which vexed him for many years, as corporal
infirmities and grievous sickness wherewith he visited him from time to time; yet
he seems to have made choice of the last 7. years, wherein, besides those
infirmities which ordinarily accompany old age, he began to be extremely
troubled with the stone, which caused him to keep his bed continually; and the
three last months of his life, to lie only upon one side, being not able to
turn himself. He spent all his time in prayer, begging earnestly of almighty
God, not that he would mitigate or take away his pains, but rather he would
augment them, and lay upon him others more grievous.

His ordinary complaints in his sickness were, that there was too much care had
of him, who desired rather altogether to be forgot or detested, as a carrion or
dead beast. When the Rectour once bad him take a few conserues, of sweetmeates
to comfort him, he answered: Believe me Father, those sweet things are pains
unto me, and these pains sweetness, which he usually also answered to those who
asked him how he did. By reason of great familiarity and conversation with his
Father and mother Jesus and Mary, he spoke unto them with great affection those
words which he had learned of our Savior himself. O Jesus and Mary, my only
comforts, grant me that I may suffer and die for your love, and that, I may be
wholly yours, and not mine own. Once when he could scarcely speak, the
Infirmarian asking what troubled him, he answered. Nothing but self love.

Some few days before his happy death, he was taken with such a vehement ague,
that renewing all his pains, it seemed God would take him away within one
hour, in which time he did nothing but repeat these words: Yet more good
Lord, yet more. Therefore he received the B. Sacrament (which for many years he
had received twice a week) for his Viaticum, with his accustomed devotion, as
also the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, still begging of God with invincible
patience, to increase his pains. He bare such extraordinary respect to the
Fathers, that when he could scarce stir his arms, yet he would always, when
any came to him, pull off his night cap. Upon Saturday in the evening being the
29. of October, almighty God performing that which he had promised him before,
he fell into an ecstasy, much like to those which he had diverse times the year
before, in which he perseuered the three last days of his life. And although
his sickness had disfigured his body, yet after his ecstasy, he became as
beautiful as an Angel, and as red as a Rose, which were certain proofs of
the great flame which burned in his breast, and brake out by those exterior
signs, and exclamations which he uttered from time to time, O sweet Jesus, O
my dear mother, and the like. About ten a clock in the night, having given
some sign of death approaching, all the house came unto him, and they often
repeating the name of Jesus, and giving him a Crucifix to adore, he presently
opened his eyes, which for three days before he had kept shut, and looking
upon the Crucifix, they perceived the^ to be more quick and lively then when
he was in best health. And with this, kissing the feet of the Crucifix, and
saying O sweet Jesus, he gave up the Ghost, the Eve of All Saints about
midnight in the year of our Lord 1617.

The rare virtue of this holy Brother was in such esteem, that not only those
of this Province, but also those of Italy, Cast le, And alusia, Portugal, and
the Indies, have sent to Maiorca, with earnest entreaty for some of his
Relics. Many wrote unto him, commending themselves to his prayers, and only
to have his name written with his own hand, as grave Ecclesiastical and
Secular men, Ge^tlemen of great note, Grandies of Spain, and Cardinals Upon
the report of his death the whole City came flocking to kiss his hands, and
feet, and among others the Viceroy with all the Nobility and kings officers,
the Ecclesiastical, and Religious me^. After dinner his body was carried into
the Church, and with much ado to pass through the press of people, it was
laid upon a hearse. All the Religious Orders came to sing the office of the
dead, the Dominicans, Mercedes, Franciscans, Augustines, Trinitarians, Minimes,
with their Superious and Prouincialls: as also the whole Chapter of Chanons,
and all the Priests and Pastors of the town. Incredible it is to one that did
not see it, what a multitude there was of those who came to touch his body with
their beads, or to get some little piece of his garment for Relics, and of
sick folks who came to touch him; in so much that six of the Society, and
two Fathers of S. Dominicke who affoarded their help, were not sufficient to
reach the beads and meddalls, wrapped in ha^dkerchiffes, and thrown by the
people that could not come near, to have them touch his body. The Office of
the dead being said, as the custom is, there was made a short Sermon only to
declare unto the people some few particulars of his life, during which time, no
man presumed to cover his head in presence of the holy Corpse, though the Church
was as full as it could thrust; and all as devout and silent, as if there had
been no man there.

The next day, being Friday, he was most sole^nely interred in the Church of
the Society, whereat the foresaid Viceroy, Nobility, Ecclesiastical and Regular
were again present, as also the Lord Bishop, who the day before was sick and
could not be present. The Mass was song with Organs, music, and other
significations of devotion. At the same instant that he was carried to be
buried, a young man who by reason of a thin skinn covering his eyes caused a
great dimnes, was almost become blind, came full of hope to the holy Brothers
Hearse, and kneeling down and kissing his hands, presently all the pain
ceased, and the little skin which before covered the ball of his eyes falling
away, he received his sight most perfectly.

And to the end that some there present might open the eyes of their minds
shut with incredulity, Blessed Alphonsus opened also his own eyes which death
had closed; a thing no less admirable then profitable, that might conceive a
great opinion of his holiness, whom almighty God did honor with so great
miracles. For a certain Priest amongst the rest not being very well contented
to see the Viceroy, and all the Senate one after another to kiss the Blessed
Brothers hands, yet least he might give offense by omitting that duty which
all others did perform, resolved with himself, not to kiss the holy man's
hands as others did, but coming with the rest, to kiss the cross which he
held in his hands, thereby intending to conceal his thoughts from the standers
by, which yet he could not do from the dead man. For as soon as he came
near, to the astonishment of all, the dead man opening his eyes, cast them
with a smiling countenance upon the Priest, and stretching out his hand, seemed
to inuit him to kiss it. The Priest astonished presently with great reverence
kissed the same, and departed thence, and wholly became another man. The same
day a child was healed of a rupture by the only touch of a piece of his
cassock. The same time also a sucking child was cured of a vehement ague whereof
it lay desperate, whose throat being stopped with a great swelling in the
jaws, it had not sucked for 4. days: therefore a certain gentlewoman having
confidence of supernatural help, encouraged the parents of the child, and
applying an handkerchiffe wherewith she had touched the holy man's body,
recovered the child presently, that there remained not so much as any sign of
infirmity.

Two days after Blessed Alphonsus his death, there came a woman afflicted with
many grievous infirmities and diseases, and among the rest with a dangerous
bloody flux, in so much that there being no hope of her life, a Father was
called to assist her at her death. Before the Father came she was past sense,
having turned up the white of her eyes ready to give up the ghost, when on the
sudden, a peace of B. Alphonsus his cassocke being applied by the Father, she
cried out that she was cured. Her flux ceased, the ague went away, in so much
that one might doubt whether was first, the Relics applied, or she healed. As
son as she was come to her self she made her Confession to the Father, with
the same joy of mind wherewith she had received her corporal health. Being thus
restored to the health both of body and mind, she lived after with much
devotion toward him, by whose means she received it. Some 4. days after his
funerals another woman being desperately sick of an ague, which came every day
upon her, with a great headache, made recourse to God, sending her little Son
of 7. years old to say his beads at B. Alphonsus his Tomb, and to touch the
Tomb therewith: the child did so, and returning home, his mother took the
beads and touching her head, put the^ about her neck, and the pain presently
ceased, God Almighty recompencing the childs prayer and the mothers devotion
and confidence, with restoring her health: and by and by she falling a sleep,
saw B. Alphonsus compassed with a great light, who for the accomplishment of
the benefit restored also her strength, so as she presently rising out of her
bed, as well, and as strong as ever before, began with all her forces to singe
his praises by whose intercession she had obtained that benefit.

Another woman having a sore breast extremly swollen and hardened for the space
of two months, had in vain tried all humane remedies, who being wonderfully
encouraged by the example of others, began to have hope in Alphonsus, and laid
a piece of his cloacke to her breast, saying a Pater noster, which before she
had ended, the swelling began to be assuaged, and the corruption to break
forth in such abou^dance, that she began, to fear least all her breast being
inwardly putrified would fall away: which fear increased the miracle, and the
miracle the joy. For two days after, both the holes of the ulcer were so
grown up, that there remained not so much as any mark thereof; and out of the
same briest, having two days before come such abundance of corruption, now
the third day there came forth milk, as good and pure as ever before; by which
miracle the mother was preserved from death, and her young suckinge child, from
staruing.

These miracles recou^ted, are testified by the disposition of sworn
witnesses. Many other things be daily related which shall after be publshed:
for God seems to have set up this holy Brother as a light to the world, who
also (...) the same before by his ve^tues. The general devotion of the people
does witness it sufficiently, who from morning to night never cease coming,
some offering ca^dles, others making vows, and the like; in so much that he
seems to live in his sepulcher, such are the wonders he works. A man may
gh^sse of what sa^ctity he was in his life, which being dead, causes such
devotion in the people that resort unto him, and he reco^pe^seth their reares
by gra^ting their desires. That you may expect many the like things hereafter,
I will briefly recount one, worthy of a large relation.

Some days before his death as he lay in his bed, thinking on the heavenly
felicity which was prepared for him from all eternity, he began to taste of
those delights so much the more purely and abounda^tly, as being abstracted
from sensible things, he drew nearer to Almighty God, who represented unto his
mind the kingdom of Maiorea, as he did the whole world to S. Benet, in a beam
of light, adding these words: Do thou see this kingdom? I have resolved to
make t^ee famous in ^^ by Working of many miracles, by means of thy prayers.
And we already hoping of this promise, I conclude, wishing that whosoever has
been stirred up to admiration by these, may likewise be stirred up to devotion
to this Holy man; that as the better part of him does live immortally in
heaven, he may also in some sort live still immortally with us on earth. For
the Divine Goodness has seemed to determine with itself, so to recompense
the Devotion of Holy Alphonsus Rodriquez; that as in his life he made him a
pattern of Religious perfection for the example of others: so now being dead,
for the glory of himself and his Saints, he makes him wonderful to the
world; causing many to have confidence in his patronage; that being departed
hence he may not have less Honor by this confidence in his sanctity, then
whiles he remained here alive he had gained by the opinion of the same. His
body lies buried at Maiorca, in the Church of the Fathers of the Society, in
the same Island, the which is so honored by all the Inahbitants thereof, that it
is wonderful to see: and the daily and certain miracles wrought thereat, are
already sufficient to make a whole volume. His memory is very famous all over
Europe, and his Picture is exposed to be publicly reverenced, with license of
the Popes Holiness, in many Churches and Oratories, thereby to put us in
remembrance of that saying of the Holy Prophet: Mirabilis Deus in sanctis suis.
God is wonderful in his Saints. To whose prayers and merits, let all good
Christians commend themselves. Amen.

La^s Deo.
FINIS.
APPROBATIO.
HORVM Sanctoru^ Vitae, ex alijs linguis in Anglicam a D. Eduardo Kinesman
versae, tuto and cum fructu edi possunt.

Audomarop. 27. Maij M. DC. XXIII. Joan. Floydus Soc. Jesus Theologus.


