DIDOS DEATH.

Translated out of the best of Latin Poets, into the best of vulgar Languages.

By one that has no name.

LONDON: Printed by N. O. for Walter Burre. 1622.

The fourth Book of VIRGILS AENEID.
But the already hurt heauy-grieu'd Queen.
The wound seeds in her veins of fire unseen:
The man's much worth, great honor of the nation
Runs in her mind, his looks, and his relation,
In print stick in her thoughts, no rest grief yields.
Next day with sun light had suruayd the fields,
And from the Pole remoou'd the Dewy shade,
When she thus ill in health, well yet ill said
To her owne-minded sister, sister Anne,
What dreams fright me in doubt? who may this Man?
This new guest be thus lighted on our Land?
What man-like looks? How stout of heart and hand,
He is in says, faith is not vain, of Race,
Doubtless divine, Fear argues spirits base:
Ah, with what fortunes tossed, what battles fought,
Saw he and sung? Sure settled in my thought
Were it not never more wedlock to prove,
Since I through death alas, lost my first love,
Did I not loathe joys of the marriage bed,
This one time I, perhaps, might fall to wed,
For I Will confess Nan, since our houses stain,
My hapless husband was by brother slain,
This only man has moved my faltring mind,
And stirred some sparks, marks of old flames I find.
But may the opening earth first swallow me
(Chaste modesty) Jove's Thunder make me see
The Ghosts, pale Ghosts of hell, and deaths deep night,
E're I wrong thee, or thy laws loosly slight:
He that my first love had, has, and shall have
All my affection buried in his grave.
So said and bosom filled with weeping eyes;
O, more then life loved sister Anne, replies,
Will you alone still mourning, youth outwearing.
Bar your self Venus blessing-sweets, son bearing?
Think you the dead like that, or souls departed?
Although no suitors, sick, while fresh grief smarted,
No Lybian Lords for husbands could be prized,
Though even at Tire Iarbas was despisde;
And Chiefes, which Africa rich in Triumphs shows
Were scorned, will you a love you like oppose?
Forget you in whose coast you planted are,
Here Towns Getulian, men unmatched in war;
Unbridled Numids there, sands on that side,
Of Syrtis Desert dry, and raging wide
Barcaans: not to tell wars that may tide
From Tire through brothers threats --
Friend Juno, lucky gods, auspicious weather,
Sure brought these Trojan ships in good time hither.
O what a Town of this (sister) your eyes
May see from such a match, what Empire rise?
To what exployts, if Trojan valor go.
In company, may Punicke glory grow?
Ask you but gods good will, go sacrifice,
And entertaining ghest with courtesies,
Quoyne causes for his stay, winter amain
Rages at sea, and stormy stars now reign,
Such bruisd ships may not brook weather so foul:
These words inflame the with love burning soul
Give doubtful hopes, and blushing fears control.
First to the Temple Altars they repair,
For luck, as use is, slain two-yeerelings are,
To Bacchus, Phabus, Ceres, lawgiuar,
And Juno chief, that takes of wedlock care,
Fair Dido in her right hand holds the cup,
Which in the white Cow's forehead she turns up,
Or for the gods, and their fat Altars lifts
Her dancing lims, or day makes new with gifts,
Or in poor Beasts cleft bosom poring pries,
With their yet panting entrails too advise:
Alas blind Augurs, what help can be had,
From holy Church, or vows for women mad.
A soft sweet fire the marrow eats, conceald,
A green wound in the heart is hid, not heald:
Poor Dido burns in love, out of her mind,
All over the Town she gads, so the hurt Hynd,
Some shepherd hunting in the forest hit,
Unawares, far off, leaving, not knowing it,
His deadly arrow sticking in her fide,
Through woods and lawnes, over hills and valleys hied,
Now through the streets she does Aeneas guide,
Shows the Towns wealth, and how it is fortified,
Offers to speak, half vtterd words call in,
And as day ends, the same feasts still begin.
Again to hear Troyes turmoyles fond she prays,
Hangs on his lips, depends on that he says,
And parted, when by turns, clouds, moonlight shade
And shooting stars declining sleep persuade,
Alone she mournes, for bed on void floor lies,
And absent, absent him both hears and eyes,
Or caught with fathers shape in lap does feate
Ascanius, love unspeakable to cheat,
Buildings begun, rise not, young men vntrain'd,
Nor ports for peace, nor forts for war maintaind,
Works broken off stand still, huge threatening wall
With skie-high Engen stands as it would fall.
When Jove's dear wife found her so plaguey ill,
That no care of her fame stopped her wood-will,
Thus to fair Venus Saturns daughter says,
Large spoils no doubt you get and goodly praise
You, and your lad, great memorable Name,
If craft of two gods conquer one poor Dame,
Nor faild I, knowing how my Town you fear,
And how suspect high Carthage houses were,
But shall there be no end? Why still such strife?
Better eternal peace make man and wife.
Contract let us, you have your hearts desire.
Poor Dido burns with love, her back's on fire,
Let us in common then this people sway,
And blesst, let her love cherish, and obey
This Trojan, that for dowre these Tyrians may
Handfast. To her that with dissembling heart,
She saw spoke this, Romes Empire to convert
To Carthage, Venus answered, who would choose,
Unwise to war with thee, or this refuse
Great Juno, so success make thy words good,
If (which I doubt) with fates decree it stood,
To make one Town of Troy and Tire if love
Such mixing league, such union approve,
Y^u are his wife, his mind it is sit you move,
Oh then I am your servant. Juno cries,
That care be mine, but now let us devise,
How things may come to pass, mark and I Will show
AEneas and unhappy Dido go
A hunting to the vvoods when next days light
Shall show the world the suns beams rising bright
On them a black cloud mixed with hail I Will pour,
And while the fearful troops ride searching over
The woods for shrowds, thunder shall fill the sky;
And dark night hide the flying company
About the forest round, a Grot or Cave
Dido, the same the Trojan chief shall have,
Where present, if your mind be well made known,
In wedlock firm I Will join her for his own,
A joyful wedding twill be, naught opposing.
Venus does nod, and smiles at her found glosing;
Mean time the sea forsaking morning rose,
By day break through the Ports, youth chosen goes
Hays, toyls and hunting staves, steel headed round,
Rank riders store, and deep fleet good nosde hound,
At the Queens lingering chamber door, the best
Of Cartha^e wait, in gold and purple dressed,
Feirce tra^pling horse stand champing foming bits,
At length with mighty troop forward she sits,
Rich robe about imbrodered sca^^ she wears,
At which gilt Quiver hangs ^old curles her hairs,
And golden loops, the (...) garment tie,
Brave too the Troia^ (...) ^s go stately by,
And glad I^vlu^, b^ ^^^^^e them all,
Fairest Aeneas joining troops, does fall
In consort, like Apollo, when he rides,
From Lycian wintering, and Xanthus tides,
To visit Mothers Dele, to mask and dance
About his altars mixed Cretans prance,
Mad, merry Greeks and painted Scythians,
On Cynthus top he stalks, his loose locks wound
Up in gold curls for sport with green bough cround
The arrows clattering at his back like pace
Aeneas went, like glory in his face.
Come to the mountains, and wild dens vntrac't,
The put-vp kids, from craggy rocks make have
To clamber up the hill, while down amain.
Dust raising Herds of dear, scowre ore the plain
While in the Lawns now these now those in course
Ascanius beats, proud of swift running horse,
And for those harmeles beasts from hill prays some
Wild foming Boar, or Lion fierce may come.
Mean while great thundering murmur fills the clouds
And storm with mixed hail follows, soon for shrouds
The Lords of Tire and Trojan vouch seek out,
And young Ascanius fearful fields about.
From hills down torrents rush, one cave or grot,
Did^, ^he same the Trojan chief had got:
First earth, and Juno wedlocks friend, give signs
As party to the Match, skie-lightning shines.
And fairy Nymphs house from the highest hills,
This first day of her death, first of her ils,
Cause was, no care of State nor fame does move
Dido, henceforth no thought of stealing love,
She calls it marriage, and with that fair name,
Clokes the foul fault: but quickly the ill fame
Through Africks Cities great goes. Fame an ill,
None fleeter, that does grow with moving still,
And going gathers strength, small first through fear,
Forthwith unto the sky her self does rear,
The go by ground in clouds does hide her head,
Whom Mother earth, stird by gods wrath it is sed,
Brought fourth Euceladus and Ceius last
Sister swift feet and wings pernicious fast
Th'huge dreadful monster has each fether under
A waking eye, as many more (to wonder)
Tongues, speaking mouths, and listening ears like number.
A nights, to sweet sleep never bending eyes,
Through heaven, amidst earthes shades she shreiking flies.
By day strange sentinel, on top she sets
Of house or towers high and great towns threts,
As well as uttering truths lewd lies regrating,
Glad now she filled the people with much prating,
Things done, and never done alike relating,
How Dido fair matching her self is mating
With one Aeneas come of Trojan blood,
But through lewd love forgetting kingdoms good
They winter too long hugging now in sports
Consume. Men's mouths filled round with these reports
The fiend to King Iarbas bends her course,
T'incense his mind, and raging wrath enforce.
Him Garamas his ravished daughter bare,
To: Ammon. he a hundred Temples fair,
In his large land to Jove had consecrated
A hundred Altars where Priests ever waited,
And holy fire still burnt with blood of beast
Fat soil, doors flourishing with Garlands dressed,
He mad in mind, inragde with this ill news,
Before the Altars and the gods did use
This speech on knees, with hands up heau'd to love,
Almighty Jupiter, whom Moors that love
To seast on painted beds do honor, now
Like Bacchus see thou this? or do we bow
With vain fear father to thy thunder strokes,
Or do clouds empty sounds and shining smokes
Fright us! a woman wandering up and down
Our Coast bought leave to build a little town,
She to whom laws with land to till we gave,
That us to husband would not daigne to have,
Master AEneas takes to Lord and marries,
And now with his half men the spruce-chind Paris,
Whose gofferd hair newfangled cap keeps down;
In joys his rape, while with rich gifts we crown
Thy Temples, fond of such sires vain renown.
Him plaining thus and Altars holding fast.
The Almighty heard, and angry look down cast
On the Queens Court, and to forgetful Lovers,
Of their good name, then thus his will discouers
To Mercury: go son, call west-winds, fly
To Trojan chief, that does in Carthage lie,
Looking for Cities yet by fates decreed,
Respects not, post my words through air with speed,
Say his fair mother no such man proposde,
When twice in combat twice with siege enclosde
From Greeks we saved him; but one such as should
Rule Italy in Empire fruitful, bold
In battles, and such race from Troy unfold,
As might the whole world in awe and order hold.
If glory of so great things move him not,
Nor his own praise with pain and labor got,
Enuies the fire his son Ascanius
Should rule in Rome? what plots, hopes make him thus
In foes l^nd linge^, laying Italy,
And all thoughts of his Latin offspring by?
Get him to sea, that is all, from us this tell,
Quoth Jupiter, his s^nne beving fell
To tying on his golden winged shoes,
With which, over sea and land aloft a goes,
Swift as a gale, the white wand in his hands,
With which he calls pale souls from hell: co^man^s
Some thither sad: gives sleep, and sleep depriues,
Eyes sealing up in death, with this a drives
The winds, and over clouds tempestuous swims,
Now flying tops he sees, and craggy b^ims
Of Atlas hard whose height heaven underprops,
Of Atlas, that in foul mists eve wrops
His woody wind and weather beaten head,
His shoulders with deep snow still fall ng spread,
Rivers run down his aged chin, his beard
With I ceacles all horrid, hory-hayrd.
Here first Cyllemus his wings plaining, stayed
Then shooting body down, steep stooping made,
Like River hanke that late Tree, steeple high,
Now close, by fish, full brooks bank low does fly
Cyllenes son, so coming from her father,
His twigging wings, twixt heaven and earth did gather
Ore Africks sandy Coast cutting the wines,
Soon as his winged feet huts touched, he finds,
Aeneas founding Castles, new house building
His sword shind, set with stones like stars and guilding
Fire-red, rich robe about his shoulders told,
A gift fair Dido wrought with finest gold:
Straight to him O thou man vxorious says,
That founding Carthage fair Town now do raise,
Forgetting thine own State affairs, the King
Of gods, whose power heaven and earth can wring,
From bright Olympus, sends me down to bring
Thee post through air with speed this his command:
What plot's? hopes make thee linger in Foes land,
If glory of those great things move thee not,
Nor thy own praise with pain and labor got,
Ascanius rising yet regard, and those
Hopes of thy son and heirs, to whom Rome owes
Empire in Italy: Cyllanius
Out of his sight as a was speaking thus,
Vanished to air, the vision senseless struck
AEneas mute, in throat speech faltring stuck,
Through fear his stairing hair an end did stand,
Feign would he fly, and leave the loved sweet land,
Astonished with such message, gods command.
But O, how shall he do? what words may win
The angry Queen? where shall he first begin
(...) musing mind, now this, now that way hasting:
^^guing to and fro, and all doubts casting:
At length on this, as best opinion falls,
Mnesteus, Sergestus, stout Cloanthus calls
To rigge the Fleet, get men aboard, Arms fit,
All without noise, dissembling cause of it.
Mean while, ere Dido know what they intend
Good soul, that hopes such love shall never end,
Himself will try the best time Ice to break,
And way most fit for his affairs to speak,
They glad, obeying all, soon did his will,
But to deceive a Lover, who has skill?
Their craft, their plots, and all they go about,
The Queen suspecting all-safe, first found out
The same fame impious to her rage declard,
The Fleet was arming, men for sea prepared,
She storms, and witless round about the town,
Runs mad, like Bacchus she priests up and down,
Incensde in their Trienniall sacrifice,
With Bacchus and Cytherons nightly cries.
At length she first falls on AEneas thus,
And could thou hope false man, to go from us
In silence, hiding sin so detestable?
Was not my love? nor thy faith plighted able,
Nor the ill death Dido would die? to stay
Thy voyage, but that posting thus away,
Thou will in winter, and with storms unkind,
To sea, strange lands dwellings unknown to find?
Alas, if old Troy were to sail unto,
To Troy, in sea so grown thou would not go.
Me fliest thou? By these tears, that hand of thine
Since I have naught else hapless left me mine,
By our contract, half marriage, if of thee
I ought deserved well ever, if in me
Ought pleased, some pity let house falling find,
If prayers may take place, pray change this mind,
For thee all Africks peoples hate I bear
Of Numid Kings, and Tyrians ill will fear,
And chastity I lost for thee the same,
My so to stars extold first fame, good name,
For whom, O do thou leave me dying, Guest,
That only name of husband, now does rest,
Why stay I? till Pigmaleon overthrow
My Town? Or till the Moore Iarbas show
Me captive: had I yet ere thou had gone
By thee, to play withal some little one,
Aeneas only looking like A child
I should not seem so wholely left beguild,
Quoth she, On Jove's will he, that fixed his eyes,
Suppressing sorrow in his heart, replies
At length, thus short, fair Queen never will I,
Most you can speak of, your deserts deny,
Nor leave remembering Queen Elizabeth,
Tll I forget my self, while I have breath.
Now to the business, somewhat I shall say,
I never went about to steal away:
Invent it not, nor hoped to hide my going
Nor ever marriage meant, nor came a woing,
If fates would let me lead the life I would,
And as I list compose my cares, I should
Troy first affect where friends sweet relics rest,
Pyrams high house should stand, and my hand blessed
Another new Troy for the vanquished found,
But now for Italy by Phoebus bound,
Great Italy, by Oracles command,
There lies my love, and that my Country land,
If you a Tyrian Carthage stay to eye,
A Town in Africa, why should you envy
Us men of Troy, to plant in Italy,
We two for Crowns, may foreign kingdoms try,
My sire, Anchyses troubled ghost does fright
Me in my sleep, warning as often as night
Clothes earth with dewy shades, and stars rise bright
And dear head wronged, Ascanius to my child
Mooues me, of Crown and fatal lands beguild
But, lately Hermes sent from Jove (I call
Both heads to witness, through swift air brought all
The Gods w ll, I the God saw plain as day,
Entering the Town, and heard all he did say,
Leave then to vex me, and thy self with plaining
I Italy pursue not of my self --
By this on him thus speaking with a frown,
She looked auerse, and ^owl^ng up and down,
St ll eyes beheld him round, at last a fire
Burst out, false-man: true Trojan to thy Sire
Thou never had, Nor Goddess to thy mother;
But some hard-hearted stony Rock or other
Bred thee, some Scythyan Tygres was thy Nurse,
For why dissemble I? or stay for worse,
Not sigh while I wept? not at all eyes moving,
Not yield, overcome one Tear, nor me so loving
Once pity: which to which shall I first settle,
Now now alas no more, Juno the great
Nor Saturnes, son beholding this is just,
Whom, when, ah where shall any safely trust.
I entertaind thee landlesse, poor, out cast
And witless, partner in my Kingdom plact,
Lost fleet and friends, from death restord to thee
O whither fired do Furies hurry me.
Apollo now forsooth, now Oracles
Now sent from Jove himself, Gods Truch-man tells,
Their pleasure harsh, as if those higher powers
Would take such pains or quiet cared for ours.
I stay thee not, nor to thy pleas reply,
Go, seek Kingdoms at Sea, search Italy
Among the winds. I trust if ought at all
Good Gods can do, thy punishment shall fall
Among the Rocks, and thou on Dido call
Full often, I Will follow in fire Funeral,
And when cold death from flesh this soul shall sever
A ghost i will haunt thee lewd man, tortured ever
Thou shall be and I hear of it in Hell,
Then ill air. As these speeches from her fell
She flies, and from his sight flinging away,
Left him much fearing, meaning much to say:
Her fainting Limbs her waiting Maids conuey'd
To Chamber rich and soon in soft bed laid,
But good AEneas though he feign would ease
Her grief with Comfort: woe with words appease
In mind, made weak through mighty love, much mourning
Yet does obey Gods Will. To Fleet returning,
And then along the shore the Trojans fall,
To work, to launch their new Carynd ships tall,
Bearing aboard for Ores green boughs and all
Rough Ok^s unwrought for have.
By Gy^ges from all parts one might see them hurry,
And as when Ants soreseeing Winter, bury
In their small hills, huge heaps of spoiled Corn,
The black troop flocks a field, and often borne
The booty is through grass by narrow path,
Great grains to shoulder forward one part has
In charge, another to conduct the swarm,
And punish faults, all parts with work wax warm.
What seeing this thought Dido, what felt she
Poor soul, how sight on shore such work to see
From her high Castle, and before her eyes,
Her whole-sea filled so, with such shooting cries,
V ld Love what do thou not man's heart compel?
Again to weeping forced again, she fell
To love submitting humble prayers to try,
That she vnprooud leave nothing ere she dye,
^ee sister Anne to sh^re, how hasting heady,
They flock on all sides, sails f^r wind are ready:
With streaming Flags, glad Saylors, Poope have crowned,
Could I have thought such sorrow to have found,
I should have borne it, Sister this alone
Do for me hapless, for that fa thlesse one
Loves thee, only to thee, thoughts secrets showing
All the Man's ways our meeting times all knowing,
Go sister humbly say to that proud foe
With Greeks in Aulys, Trojans overthrow.
I never vowed, nor flee^e against Troy sent,
Nor wronged his fire Anohises ghost, nor rent
His Grave, why hard, will he not hear a word,
O whither headlong hasts he? yet afford
His hapless Lover this last boon, he may
For safer passage and winds fairer stay.
Now the old promised marriage which he brake
I ask not that for my sake, he forsake
Fair Italy, or leave a Crown to take
Small time space, Rest my raging to relieve,
Till my mishaps teach me overcome to grieve,
is all I crave, oh sister pity get
This last suit for me, death shall pay the debt,
Such woeful words she used, such to and fro,
The wretched sister carrid but no woe
Mooues him, nor words at all, a gentle hears
Fates hinder, God stops the man's gentle ears.
As when North winds striving to overthrow
Some old hard-hearted Oak, in full strength blow
Broad branches up and down, storms blustering sound
Goes far, Trunk shaken, bows deep strew the ground,
Yet fast in Rock the Tree sticks, for as high
As the proud top grows toward Heaven, as nigh
The Roots run down to Hell. Aeneas so
With frequent Messages tossed too and fro,
And torn in his great heart does feel much pain,
Yet mind stands firm, and tears are shed in vain.
Fate-frighted hapless Dido then does pray,
For death, loath more to look on heaven or day,
And more to make her desperate, mind to dye,
Fearful to tell, late sacrificing by
The Incense burning Altars, as she stood
Black holy water grew, to filthy blood,
The pourd Wine turned, this fight she told to none,
Not to her Sister. In her house of stone,
A Temple too she had, of former Spouse,
By her much Reuerenc't with holy bows,
And Snow-white Wool adorned, whence often she hears
A voice that like her husbands call appears,
When dark night holds the World. The ellenge Owl,
Often on her housetop dismal tunes did houle,
Lamenting woeful notes at length outdrawing,
And many former Fortune tellers, awing
Forewarnings fright; Aeneas too in Dreams
Makes her run mad, left by her self, she seems
Alone, some uncouth foul long way to have taken
Tyrians to seek in desert Land forsaken.
So troops of Furies, Pentheus in his rage
Beholds too sons, and double Thebes on stage,
So tossed Orestes, Agamemnons son,
From mother armed with snakes and brands does run,
While at his door hell hags re^engefull rest,
Overcome with grief, with furies so possessed,
Dido resolves to dye, and when she had
Cast when and how, thus said to Sister sad,
Fair hopeful looks hiding a purpose bad,
I have found out a way sister, joy bid
To make him loving me, else of him rid,
Nere the Seas utmost bound where sun does see,
From furthest Ethiop^ Land where Atlas great,
Wheel fit for burning Stars, turns with his shoulder
A Massyle Shee-priest is to me the vnfoulder,
That is the Hesperides fair Temple-houlder,
And feeds the Dragon, sacred boughs to keep
With honny sops and poppy sauct for sleep,
She undertakes what minds she list to cure
With charms force others loves hard pains endure,
Stay Rivers, turn back stars, make mortals Meet
Hob-goblins, or earth groan under their feet,
And Trees stalk down from Hills: dear Sister all
The Gods and thee, and thy sweet head I call
To witness for it, I try Art Magicks power
Go you and in some inner open Tower
Make secret fire, the man's sword that in our
Bedchamber hangs, and all he left lay on
With wedding bed wherein I was undone,
The showing Shee-priest wills that every token,
Of the lewd man be burnt, she ceast this spoken,
All deadly pale, yet Anne no funeral,
In these new rites so cloak't suspects at all,
Nor sister half so mad imagines
Nor worse can fear then in first husbands death,
She therefore does her will --
But now in one of the inner open Towers,
Huge fire of Pine and Wainescore made, with flowers,
The Queen the place strewed, and with Funeral
Wreaths crowned, then on she lays the sword, and all
AEneas left, and in the bed alas,
His picture knowing what should come to pass.
Shee-priest with Hair loose altars round about,
Three hundred names of gods does thunder out
Hell Chaos, and the threefold Hecatee,
Moons Powers, or Maid Dianas faces three,
Then water powers, Auernus counterfetting
Ripe herbs with Brass Sith mowed, by moonlight getting,
With milk of poison black. Hippoman torn
From vnlickt forehead of the Fool newborn,
The Ma^es fore-rauisht love.
Herself w^^h holy Lamp near Altars side,
In pure hands one foot bare, and Cloths untied,
Dying to witness calls or coniureth
The Gods and stars acquainted with her death,
Then mindful prays just powers if any are,
That of unequal tide Lovers take care,
It Was night, and in the world limbs weary took
Sweet rest, no winds woods or seas raging shook
When stars were turned half down and every field.
Was still, beasts, painted birds, and all that held
Large liquid Lakes, or bush-rough thickets lay,
A sleep in silent night, toils of the day
Forgetting, at hearts case, but not in mind,
Unhappy Dido she no sleep could find,
Her breast no rest, her sight no night received,
But care increased, and when she rose more grieved,
Love raged, and with great tide of choler swelling,
Thus she insists in heart, thus falls a telling.
What shall I do? shall I the wooers woe,
Whom first I mocked, or humbly seek unto
The Numid match which I disdaind so still,
Or follow Trojans fleet and their last will
So well I sped: my first good turns have won
So much? so long they mind old favors done,
But who w^ll let me say I would abord
To take me scornd, which proud ship will afford
Ah know thou not? feelst thou not yet sorlorne,
How false Laomidons Race is sorsworne?
What then? with singing saylors shall I fly
Alone? or chase them with whole company
Of Tyrians strong, and whom I got scarce well,
From Tire again to Sea to fail compel.
Dye rather, let deserved death grief aswage,
You sister with my tears won in my rage,
You first these ills brought on me to this Foe
Subjected, matelesse then I might not so
Like Turtle live, blameless and neue^ know
These cares, but keep faith promised, Husband dead.
Such she in heart, broken plaints uttered.
But in tall ship, sure now resolved to go,
Aeneas slept, things ready right in show.
The same God looking like again appears
To him in dream, warning he thinks, he hears
Like Mercury in all, speech hue, and hair
So yellow, limbs so handsome youthful were,
Sleep can thou Goddess son in such a case,
Fond see thou not what dangers thee embrace,
Do thou not hear how happy good wind blows,
Plots Dido in her heart, mischievous sowes,
Resolved to dye, strange tide of Choler flows,
Fly then in have, while power to have thou have,
The sea soon full of masts, fierce flames thou may
Behold of fire all ready, all on shore,
If day on this Land take thee lingering more
Dispatch. A woman strange, false fickle thing
Still is, quoth he in dark night vanishing.
But frighted with the Dream, Aeneas then
Rousing himself from sleep, calls up his men
Wake haw, have sons, fall to your Ores amain.
Hoist sails the God from high Heaven sent again
To post away, and Cables cut spurs me,
And so we will good God, who ere thou be,
We follow glad obeying thy command,
Come O come help us pleased on thy right hand,
Stars lucky show, said he, and sword like thunder
Flashing, drew forth and hausets hewed in sunder,
Like heat had all, they hale, have farewe'l bid
The shore the sea under their sails lies hid,
Their strokes together force foam blew seas brushing,
And now on earth first casting fresh light blushing,
Aurora Tythons yellow Couch-bed leaves,
When Dido from her watch tower first perceiues
Daylight break white, the Fleet in order sailing,
Coast clear, no Ships in empty port, then wayling,
Her fair breast often she smit, and from her head,
Tearing gold hair. Oh Jupiter she sed,
And shall this stranger go thus ieering hence,
Mocking my Land, in arms is there no sense,
May not my whole Towns forces after make,
And Fleet with Fleet, with ships ships spoiling take:
Go quick, fire, fight, sail, row, what is it I speak,
Where am I? am I mad? unhappy weak
Queen Dido, moved with this lewd part of his,
Now art thou touched? thou should have thought of this
When King thou madst him, see the troth and faith
Of him that country Gods in Consort has,
Men say the goodman on whose shoulders borne,
Sire aged was, Oh that I could have torn
That flesh of his, and carcass cast to fishes,
Killed friends, or slain Aseanius, and in Dishes
For Father to have fed on, set the Lad.
But wars chance doubtful had been. Would it had.
Whom feared, I dying, I had set on fire
Cabins, filled Decks with flames, and son and fire,
And race destroyed, my self and all undone,
Oh all earths works with light suruaying Sun,
And thou these cares Interpreter, all-knower
Juno, thou Hecate by night way goer
So hallowed, ye reuengefull powers all,
And guilty Stars of dying Didocs fall,
Hear this, and with mishaps deserved grace, give
My prayer, if needs this naughty man must live
To Port, on Land, in Italy to get,
If Jove's decrees such end have set, Oh yet
By people bold in battle vexed, through war
Banished from home, from sons imbracements far,
Aid let him beg, friends base deaths let him see
And yielding to unequal peace-lawes he
Nor Kingdom nor wished life enjoy, but dye
Untimely, and in dirt unburied lie
I pray, this last wish I with blood power out,
And you oh Tyrians, let your offspring stout,
Hate his, this comfort send me to my grave,
Noe Love, no good league let his people have,
But from my bones may some revenger spring,
With fire and sword Trojan Race following,
Now and in times to come of power and might,
Shore against shore, seas to seas opposite,
Cursed swords with swords, may childrens childrens sight,
Thus saying and on all sides casting thought,
To end a loathed life forthwith she sought
Straight to Sythaeus Nurse, Barce she sod,
For in old country Land her own was ded,
Dear Nurse, my sister Nan, cause to come hither,
Bid her first washed in running streams together,
Bringing the cattle, and the offering shown,
Com^ you with holy veil, ore your head thrown,
To sacrifice to Pluto, I intend
Rites well begun, prepared my ears to end,
And Trojan to hel-fire in picture send
She said, old diligence her pace did mend,
But Dido quaking through fierce purpose wild,
Looks bloody, casting trembling cheeks defild,
With spots streak't pale as death, through death to come,
Brake through house inner doors, and furious clombe,
The high pild fire and Trojan sword did draw,
Gift begged for no such use, here when she saw
Aeneas clothes and bed she too well knew,
A while she musing paused, wept, then threw
Her self upon it, and these last words spoke.
Sweet spoils, while God and Fates so suffered take
This breath, and clear my cares my days are done,
Of life the Glass course Fortune gave is run;
And under earth now shadow great of me
Shall go, brave Town I purposed, and did see
The walls, revenged for husbands death I made
Foe brother suffer pains, Pygmaleon paid
Happy, thrice happy had I been, and more
Had only Troy ships never touched my shore
She said; kissing the bed, and shall we thus
Die unrevenged? but yet die let us
She said thus, thus it pleases to expire
Let Trojans cruel eyes draw in this fire
From far, and with him our deaths il-luck bear
She had sed, when her women waiting there,
Behold her fallen on the sword, that lies
Poming with blood, her hands all smeard, their cries
Fill court, through town, amazd Fame mad does go
With mourning sighs, and women's howling woe,
Roofes ring, the skies with cries of sorrow sound,
As if all Carthage, or old Tire to ground,
Were rasing by foes entered in their Ire,
Houses of men and Gods setting on fire:
This sister heard nere dead, and fearful pase,
Beating her breasts with fists, with nails her face
Defacing, scard she Rushes through them all,
And on her dying by her name does call.
Ah sister was it this? me to beguile,
Was this the holy fire and Altars wile.
Oh what shall I complain of first forlorn,
A sisters Confort dying did thou scorn,
Called to the same fate had thou, both had our
Last grieved on one sword, in one hapless hour.
And must I make the fire? must I so pray,
Gods cruel at thy death to be away,
Me sister, and thy self thou did undo,
The Commons Aldermen, and City too,
Water. The wound i will wash and if breath last.
Last breath from mouth, with mouth take said she, past
Stayre Top, in arms sister half dead she takes
And weeps, and sighs, from clothes the black blood shakes.
She lifting up her heavy eyes does sound
Again, wind whizzes in breasts deadly wound,
Thrice she her self, on elbow leaning raised,
Thrice fell back on the bed, eyes wandering gazed
To secke the light, she mournd to find deep groaning,
Her pains so long, and death so hard bemoning.
Almighty Juno down did Iris send
Her struggling soul and sinews strong to unbend,
For nor by fate nor death deserved, in Age
Untimely dying wretch through sudden rage,
Proserpina yet had not cut her hair
So yellow, nor to hell damned face so fair,
The saffron-wing'd wet Rainebow therefore hasts
That gan'st the Sun, thousand strange colors casts,
And lighting on her head, says I from this
Body thee free, thus sacrifice to Dis
Inioynd, so clips her hair, and therewithal
Breath-flitting-life hear, does to ashes fall.
The end.
P. Virgilij Maronis AENEID. LIB. IIII.
AT Regina graui iam dudum saucia cura,
Vulnus alit venis and caco carpitur igni:
Multa viri virtus animo, multuique recursat
Gentis honos: harent infixi peolore valtu^,
Verbaque nec placi dam membris dat cura quietem.
Postera Phoebea lustrabat lampade terras,
Humentemque autora polo dimouerat vmbram,
Cum sic vnanimem alloquitur male sana s^rorem.
Anna soror, qua me suspens^m insomma terrent:
Quis nonus hic nostris successit sed: bus hospes?
Quem sese ore ferens? quam forti pectore, and armis?
Credo equidem (nec vana sides) genus esse deorum,
Degeneres: animos timor argun: heu quibus ille
^actatus fati^? quae bella exhausta canebat?
Si mihi non animo f^xumo, immotumque sederet,
Nec cui me vinclo vellem sociare iugali,
Post quam primus amor deceptam mortefefellit;
Si non pertasum thalami, t^daque fuisset:
Huic vni for san potui sn^cumbere culpa.
Anna (fatebor enim) miseri p^st fata Sich ai
Coniugis, and sparsos fraterna coede penates,
Solus hic inflexit sensus, animumque labantem
Impulit agnosco veteris vestigia fla^ma.
Sed mihi vel t^llus optem priusima dehisc^t,
Vel pater omnipotens adigat me fulmine ad umbras,
Pallentes vmbras Erebi, noctemque profundam;
Ante, pudor, quam te violem, aut tua iura resoluam.
Ille meas, primus qui me sibi iunxit, amores
Abstulit, ille habeat secum, seruetque sepulcre.
Sic effata, finum lacrymis impleuit obortis.
Anna res^rt: o luce magis dilecta sor^i,
Solane perpetua marens carpere iuuenta?
Nec dulces natos, Veneris nec prenna noris?
Id emerem, aut manes credis curare sepultos?
Esto, agram nulli quondam flexere mariti,
Non Libya, non ante Tyro despectus Iarbas,
Ductoresque alij, quos Africa terra triumph^^
Dives alit: placetone etiam pugnabis amori?
Nec venit in mentem, quorum consederis aruis?
Hinc Getula vrbes genus insuperabile bello,
Et Numida infrani cingunt, and inhospita Syrti^
Hinc deserta fiti regio, lateque furentes
Barcai, quid bella Tyro surgentia dicam,
Germanique minas
Dijs equidem auspicibus reor, and Iunone secunda
H^c cursum Iliacas vento venisse carinas.
Quam tu vrbem soror hanc cernes? qua surgere regna
Coniugio tali? Teuerum comitantibus armis
Punica se quantis at tollet gloria rebus?
Tu modo posce deos veniam, sacris que litatis
Indulge hospitio, caussa^que innecte morandi:
Dum pelago de sauit hiems, and agnosus Orion,
Quassat aque rates, and non tractabile caelum.
Hu dictumcensum animum inflammauit amore:
Spemque deda dubia menti, soluitque pudotem.
Principio delubra adeunt, pacemque per aras
Exquirunt, mactant lectas de more bidentes
Legifera Cereri, Phoeboque, patrique Lyao,
Iunoni ante omnes, cui vincla iugalia curae,
Ipsa tenens deutra pateram pulcherrima Dido,
Candentis vacea media inter cornna fundit;
Aut ante or a deum pingues spatiatur ad aras
Instauratque diem donu; pecudumque reclusis
Pectoribus inhians, spirantia consulit exta.
Ileu vatum ignara mentes: quid votafurentem.
Quid delubra iuuant? est mollis flamma medullas
Interea, and tacitum viuit sub pectore vulnus.
Vritur infelix Dido, tot aque vagatur
Vrbe furens: qualis coniecta cerua sagitta,
Quam procul incautam nemora inter Cressia fixi^
Pastor agens telis, liquitque volatile ferrum
N^scius: illa fugo siluas, saltusque peragrat
Dictaos: haret lateri letalis arundo.
Nunc media Aeneam secum per mania ducet,
Sidoniasque ostentat opes, vrbemque paratam.
Incipit effari, mediaque in voce refistit.
Nunc eadem, labente die, conuinia quarit,
Iliaecosque iterum demens audire labores
Exposcit, pendetque iterum narrantis abire,
Post, vbi digressi, lumenque obscura viciss^m
Luna premit, suadentque cadentia sidera somn^^
Sola domo marcet vaci^, stratisque relielis
Incubat --
-- illum absens absentem auditque, videtquo:
Aut gremi^ Ascanium genitoris imagine capta,
Detinet; infandum si fallere possit amorem.
Non captae assurgunt turres: non arma iuuentus
Exereet, portusue, aut propugnacula bello
Tuta parant: pendent opera interrupta, minaeque
Murorum ingent^s, aequataque machina coelo.
Quam simul ac tal^ persensit peste teneri
Cara Iouis coniux, nec samam obstare furori^
Talibus aggreditur Venerem Saturnia dictis.
Egrigiam vero laudem, and spolia ampla refertis
Tuque, puerque tuus, magn^m and memorabile nomen:
Vna dolo diuum si femina victa duorum est.
Nec me adeo fallit, veritam te moenia nostra
Suspectas habuisse domos Carthaginis altae.
Sed quis erit modus? ^ut quo nunc certamine tanto?
Quin potius pacem aeternam, pactosque Hymenaeos
Exercemus? haba^, tota quod mente petisti,
Ardet amans Dido, traxitque per ossa suro^em.
Communem hunc ergo populum, paribusq regam^^
Auspicij, liceat Phrygio seruire marito,
Dotalesq tua Tyrios permittere dextra.
Olli (sensit enim simulata mente locutam,
Quo regnum Italiae Labycas auerteret ora^)
Sic contra est ingressa Venus, Quis talia demens
Abnuat? aut t^cum malit contendere bello?
Si modo quod memoras fa^ fortuna sequatur.
Sed satis incerta feror, si Iup^^^ vnam
Esse velit Tyrijs vrbem, Troiaq profectis,
Misceriue probet populos, aut foedera iungi.
Tu coniux: tibi fas animum tentare precando.
Perge: sequar, Tum sic excepit regia Juno.
Mecum erit iste labor, nunc qua ratione, quod instat,
Confieri posset, paucis, aduerte, docebo
Venatum Aeneas, vnaq miscrrima Dido
In nemus ire parant, vbi primos craftinus ortus
Extulerit Titan, radusq retexerit orbem.
Hu ego nigrantem commista grandine nimbum,
Dum trepidant ala, saltusque indagine cingunt,
De super infundam, and tonitrucaelum omne ciebo,
Diffugient comites, and nocte tegentur opaca.
Speluncam Dido, dux and Troianus eandem
Deuenient, adero, and tua si mihi certa voluntas,
Connubio tungam stabili, propriamque dicabo.
Hic Hymeneus erit. Non aduersata petenti
Annuit, atq dolu risit Cytherea repertis.
Oceanum interea surgens aurora reliquit
It portis, iubare exorto, delecta iuuentus:
Retia rara, plagae, lato venabula ferro:
Massylique ruunt equites, and odora canum vis.
Reginam thalamo cunctantem ad limina primi
Poenorum exspectant: ostroque insignis, and auro
Stat sonipes: ac frena ferox syumantia mandit.
Tandem progreditur, magna stipante caterna,
Sidoniam picto chlamydem circundata lymbo:
Cui pharetra ex auro, crines nodantur in aurum,
Aurea purpuream subnecti^ fibula vestem.
Nec non and Phrygij comites and laetus Iulus
Incedunt ipse ante alios pulcerrimus omnes
Infers se socium Aeneas, atque agmina iungit.
Qualis, vbi hibernam Lyciam, Xantique fluenta
Deserit, --
-- ac Delum maternam innisit Apollo:
Instauratque choros, mistique altaria circum
Cretesque, Dryopesque f^^munt, pictique Agathyrs^.
Ipse iugis Cynthi graditur, mollique fluentem
Fronde premit crinem fingens, atq implicat aura:
Tela sonant humeris, haud ille segnior ^bat
Aeneas: tantum egregio decus enitet ore.
Postquam altos ventum in montes, atq inuia lustra,
Eccefera saxi delectae vertice capra
Decurrere iugis. alia de p^rte patentes
Transmittunt cursis camp^s, atque agmina c^rui
Puluerulenta fuga glomerant, montesque relinquunt.
At puer Ascanius medijs in vallibus acri
Gaudet equo, iamque hos cursu, iam praterit illos
Spumantemque d^ripecora inter inertia votis
Optat aprum, aut fuluum descendere monte leonem.
Interea magno misceri murmr coelum
Incipit: insequitur commista grandine nimbus.
Et Tyrij comites passim, and Trotanae iuuentus.
Dardamusque nepos Vener^^ diuersa per agros
Tecta metupetiere: ruunt de montibus amnes,
Speluncam Dido, dux and Troianuseandem
Deueniunt prima and Tellus, and pronuba Juno
Dan^ signum, fulsere igne^, and conscius ather
Connubij, summoque vlalarunt vertice nympha.
Ille dies primus leti, orimusque malorum
Caussa fuit neque enin^ specie, famaut monetur,
Nec tam fartiuum Dido meditatur amorem:
Coniug^^^ vocat: hoc pratexit nomine culpam,
Extemplo Libya magnasit fama per vrbes,
Fama, malum, quo non aliud velocius vllum:
Mobilitate vrget, viresque acquirit eundo,
Parua metu primo, --
-- mox sese attollit in auras;
Ingroditurque solo, and caput inter nubila condit.
Illam terra parens, ira irritata deorum,
Extrema (vt perhibent) Ca^, Enceladoque sororem
Progenuit, pedibus eclerem, and pernicibus alis,
Monstrum horrendum, ingens: cui quot sunt corpore pluma,
Tot vigilos oculi subter, (mirabile dictu)
Tot lingua, totidem ora sonant; tot subrig it anres:
Nocte volat cali medio, t^rraque per vmbram,
Stridens, nec dulci declinat lumina somn^,
Luce sedet custos, aut summi culmine tecti,
Turribus aut altis, and magnas territat vrbes,
Tam ficti, prauique tenax, quam nuntia very.
Hac tum multiplici populos sermon replebat
Gaudens, and partier facta, atque infecti canebat:
Venisse Aeneam, Troiano a sanguine cretums
Cu^se pulcra viro dignetur iungere Dido.
Nunc hiemem inter se luxu, quam longa fouere,
Regnorum immemores, turpique cupidine captos,
Hac passim dea foeda virum diffundit in ora:
Protinus ad regem cursus detorquet Iarbam:
Incenditque animum dictis, atque aggeratiras.
Hic Ammone satus, rapta Garamantide nympha,
Templa Ioui centum latis immania regnis,
Centum aras posuit, vigilemque sacrauerat ignem,
Excubias diuum aternas, pecudumque cruore
Pingue solum, and varijs filorentia limina sertis.
Itque amens animi, and riamore accensus amare,
Dicitur ante ara^, media inter numina diuism,
Multa Iouem manibus supplex orasse supinis.
Jupiter omnipotens, cui nunc Maurisia pictis,
Gens epulata toris Lenaum libat honorem,
Adspicis hac? an te genitor, cum fulmina torques,
Nequidquam horremus? cacique in nubibus ignes
Terrificant animos, and inania murmura miscent?
Femina, qua nostris errant in finibus vrbem
Exiguam pretio posuit, eus litus arandum,
Cuique loci leges dedimus, co^^ubia nostra
Reppulit, ac dominum Aenean in regna recepit.
Et nunc ille Paris cum semiuiro comitatu
M^^nia mentum m^tra, crinemque madentem
Subnixus, rapto potitur: nos munera templis
Quippe tuu ferimus famamque fouemus inanem,
Talibus orantem dictis, arasque tenentem
Audijt omnipotens, oculosque ad moenia torsit
Regia, and oblitos fama melioris amantes.
Tunc sic Mercurium alloquitur, ac talia mandat.
Vade age, nate, voca Zephyros; and labere pennis,
Dard aniumque ducem, Tyria Carthagine qui nunc
Exfpectat, fatisque datas non respicit vrbes,
Alloquere, and coleres defer mea dicta per auras.
Non illum nobis genitrix pulcherrima talem
Promisit, Graiumque ideo bis vindicat armis;
Sed fore, qui grauidam imperijs, belloque frementem
Italiam regeret, genus alto a sanguine Teucri
Proderet, ac t^tum sub leges mitteret orbem.
Si nulla accendit tantarum gloria rerum,
Nec super ipse sua molitur land laborem:
Ascanione pater Romanas inuidet arce^?
Quid struit? aut qua spe inimica in gente moratur?
Nec prolem Ausoniam, and Lauinia respicit arua?
Nauiget, haec summa est: hic nostri huntius esto.
Dixerat: ille patris magni parere parabat
Imperio; and primum pedibus talaria nectit
Aucea: quae sublimem alis, sine aquora supra,
Sen terram, rapido pariter cum flamine portant.
Tum vngam capit, hac animas ille euocat Orco
Pallentes, alias sub tristia tartara mirtit:
Dat somnos, adimitque, and lumina morte refignat.
Illa fretus agit ventos, and turbida tranat
Nubila, iarnque volani apicem, and latera ardua ternit
Alantis dari, alum qui vertice fulcit;
Atlantis, cinctum assidue cui nubibus atris
Piniferum caput, and vento pulsatur, and imbri:
Nix humeros infusa tegit: tum flumina mento
Praecipitant senis, and glacie riget horrida barba.
Hic primum paribus nitens Cyllenius alis
Constitit: hinc toto praeceps se corpore ad vndas
Misit, aui similis, quae circum litora, circum
Piscosos scopulos humilis volat aeq^^ra iuxta.
Haud aliter terras inter, calum^^^ volabat,
Litus arenosum Libyae, ventosque secabat,
Materno veniens ab auo Cyllenia prole^.
Vt primum alatis tetigit magalia plantis:
Aeneam fundantem arces, ac tecta nouant^^
Conspicit, atque illi stellatus iaspide fulua
Ensis erat: Tyrioque ardebat muricelana
Demissa ex humeris: dives quae numera Dido
Fec^rat, and tenui telas discreuerat auro.
Contin^o inuadit. Tu nunc Carthagini^ alta
Fundamental^c^s, puleramque vxorius vrbem
Exstr^i^ ha^regni, rerumque oblite tuarum.
Ipse d^um tibi m^ claro demittit Olympo
Reg^at^r, calum and ter^as qui numine torquet:
Ips^ h^c far iub^ cel^res mandata per auras,
Quid struis? aut qua spe Libyc^^ teris etia terris?
Si te nulla ^ouet tantarum gloria rerum,
Nec super ipse tua mol^^s laud laborem:
As^^nium surg^ntem, and spe^ haredis Iuli
Respice; cui regnum Italia, Romanaque tellus
Deb^^^^, Fali Cylleneus ^re locutus,
Mortales visus medi^ serm^ne reliqu^t,
Et procul in ten^^^ ne ocul^ ^euartuit auram.
At ver^ AEneas aspectus obnu^tuit amens;
Arrectaqu^ ^or^^ero c^ma; and vox faucibus hasit.
Ardet abire fuga, dulcesque relinquere terras,
Attenitus tanto mo^itas, imperioque deorum.
H^n quid agat? quo nun^ reginam ambir^ furentem
Audeat affat^? qua prima exordia sumat?
Atque animum nunc huc celorem, nunc diuidit illuc,
In partesque rapit varias, ponq^^ omina versat.
Ha^ alternanti potior sententia visa est.
Mnesthea Sorgostumque vocat, for tamque Cl^anthum:
Classem aptent taciti; socio^ ad litera cogant;
Arma parent: and quae sit rebus caussa nouandis,
Dissimulent: sosa interea, quando optima Dido
Nesciat, and tantos rumpi non sparet amores,
T^^aturum aditus, and qua^ mollissima fandi
Tempora, qui rebus denter modus ocy^s ^mne^
Imperio lati parent, ac iussa fac^ssunt.
At regina d^l^s (quis fall^^ possit amantem?)
Prasensit, mo^^^que ^^^^p with primus futures,
Omnia tuta timens, eadem impia fama furenti
De tulit, armari classem, cursumque parari.
Sauit mops animi, tot amque incensa per vrbem
Bacchatur: qualis commotis excita sacris
Thyas, vbi audito stimulant Trieterica Baccho
Orgia, nocturnusque vocat clamore Cithaeron.
Tandem his Aeneam compellat vocibus vltro:
Dissimulare etiam sperasti perfide tantum
Posse nefas? tacitusque mea decedere terra?
Nec te noster amor, nec te data dextera quondam,
Nec moritura tenet crudeli funere Dido?
Quin etiam hiberno moliris sidere classem:
Et medijs properas aquilonibus ire per altum
Crudelis quid si non arua aliena, domosque
Ignotas peteres, and Troia antiqua maneret,
Trota per vndosum peteretur classibus aequor?
Mean fugis? per ego has lacrymas, dextramque tuam te,
Quando aliud mihi iam misera nihil ipsareliqui,
Fer connubia nostra, per inceptos hymenaos,
Si been quid de te merui, fuit aut tibi quicquam
Dulce meum; miserere domus labentis, and istam
Oro (si quis adhuc precibus locus) ex^^e ment^m,
Te propter Libycae gentes, Nomadumuqe tyran^^
Odere infensi Tyrij: te prapter eundem
Extinctus pudor, and, qua sola sidera odibam,
Fama prior, quid me moribundam de seris hospes?
Hoc solum nomen quontam de coniuge restat.
Quid moror? an mea Pygmalion dum moenia frat^r
Destruat? aut captam ducat Getulus Iarbas?
Salt^m si qua mihi de te suscepta fuisset
A^to fugam sobole^;
-- si quis mihi paruulus aula
Luderet Aeneas, qui te tantum ore referret:
Non equidem omnino capta, aut deserta viderer:
Diuerat, ille Ioui^ monitis immota tenebat
Lumina, and obnixus curam sub cord premebat:
Tandem pauca refert: Ego te, quae plurima fando
Enumerare vales, nunquam regina negabo
Promeritam: nec me meminisse pigebit El^sae.
Dum memoripse mei, dum spiritus hos reget artus.
Pro re pauca loquar. Nec ego hanc abscondere furt^
Speraui (ne finge) fugam: nec coniugis vnquam
Praetendi taedas, aut haec in foedera veni.
Me si fata mais paterentur ducere vitam
Auspicijs, and sponte mea componere curas:
Vrbem Troianam primum, dulcesque meorum
Reliquias colerem, and Priamitecta alta manerent,
Et recidiua manu posuissem Pergama victis.
Sed nunc Italiam magnam Grynaeus Apollo,
Italiam Lycia iussere capessere sortis.
Hic amor, hac patria est, site Carthaginis arces
Ph^^nissam, Lybicaeque adspectus dotinct vrbis:
Quae tandem, Ausonia Teuero^ considere terra,
Inuidia est? and nos fas extera quaerere regna.
Me patris Anchisa, quoties humentibus vmbris
Non operit terras, quoties astra ignea surgunt,
Admonet in somnis, and turbida terret imago:
Me puer Ascanius, capitisque iniuria cari,
Quem regno Hesperia fraudo, and fatalibus aruis,
Nunc etiam interpres dinum, Jove missus ab ipso,
(Test^r vtrumque caput) caleres mandata per auras
Detuli^:
-- ipse deum manife lo in lumine vidi
Intrantem muro^, vocemque his auribus hausi.
Define meque tuis incendere, taque querelis.
Italiam non sponte sequor.
Talia dicentem iam dudum auersa tu^tur,
Huc illuc voluens oculos, totumque pererrat,
Luminibus tacitis, and sic acce^sa profatur:
Nec tibi diua parens generis nec Dardanus auctor
Perfide, sed duris genuit te cautibus h^rrens
Caucasus, Hyrcanaque admorunt vbera tigres,
Nam quid dissimulo? aut quae me ad maiora reseruo?
Number fletu ingemuit nostro? number lumina stexit?
Number lacrymas victus dedit aut miseratus amantem est?
Quae quibus anteferam? iam iam nec maxima Juno,
Nec Saturnius haec oculis pater adspicit aequis.
Nusquam tuta fides, eiectum littore egentem
Excepi, and regni demens in part locaui:
Amissam classem, socios a morte reduxi.
Heu furijs incensa feror: tunc augur Apollo,
Nunc Lyciae sorts, nunc and Jove missus ab ipso
Interpres diuum fert horrida iussa per auras.
Scilicet is superis labor est, ea eura quietos
Soll^citat, neque te teneo, nequem dicta refello.
I, sequere Italiam ventis: pete regna per vndas:
Spero equidem medijs, si quid pia numina possunt,
Supplicia hausurum scopulis, and nomine Dido
Sape vocaturum: seq^^ratris ignibus absen^:
Et, cu o^ frigida mors anima seduxcrit artu^,
Omnibus vmbra locis adero: dabis improbe poena^.
Aud^am, and hac manes veniet mihi fama sub imos.
His medium dsctis sermonem abrumpit, and auras
Aegra fugit seque ex oculis auertit, and aufert,
Linquens multa metu cunctantem, and multa parantem
Dicere. suscipiunt ^amulae, collapsaque membra
Marme^e oreferunt thalamo, startisque reponunt.
At pius Aeneas, quanquam lenire dolentem
Solando cupit, and dictis auertere curas,
Multa Gemens, magnoque animum labefactus amore,
Iussa tamen diuum exsequitur, classemque reuisit.
Tum vero Teucri incumbunt, and littore c^lsas
Deducunt toto naues: natat vncta carma:
Frondentesque ferunt ramos, and robora silui^
In fabricata fuga studio.
Migranres cernas, totaque ex vrbe ruentes:
Ac veluti ingentem formicae farris aceruum
Cum populant, hyemis memores tectoque reponun t:
I e nigrum campis agmen pradamque per herbas
Conuectant colle angusto: pars grandia trudunt
Obnixe frumenta humeris, pars agmina cogunt,
Castigantque moras opere omnis semita feruet.
Quis tibi tunc Dido cernenti talia sensus?
Quosuc dabas gemitus? cum littora feruere late
Prospiceres arce ex summa, totumque videres
Misceri ante oculos, tantis clamoribus aquor?
Improbe amor, quid non mortalia pectora cogis?
Ire iterum in lacrimas, iterum tentare precand^
Cogitur, and supplex animos submittere amori,
Ne quid inexpertum frustra moritura relinquat,
Anna, vides toto properari littore cir cum:
Vndique conuenere: vocatiam carbasus auras
Puppibus and laeti nauta imposutre coronas.
Hunc ego si potui tantum sperare dolorem,
Et perferre, soror, potero: misera hoc tamen vnum
Exscquere, Anna mihi: solam nam perfidus ille
Te colere, arcanos etiam tibi credere sensus
Sola virimolles aditus, and tempora noras.
I soror, atque hostem supplex affare superbum,
Non ego cum Danais Trotanam excindere gente^s
Aulide turaui classemue ad Pergama misi,
Nec patris Anehisaeciner^s, manesuc reuelli.
Cur mea dicta negat duras dimittere in aures?
Quoruit? extremum hoc misera det munus ama^^,
Expectet facilemque fugam ventosque ferentes:
Non iam coniugium antiquum, quod prodidit ^re:
Nec pulchro vt Latio careat: regnumque relinquat.
Tempus inane peto, requiem spatiumq^e suror^,
Dum mea me victam docea: fortuna d^lore,
Extremam hanc oro veniam, (miserere sorori^)
Quam mihi cum dederis, cumulatam morte relinquam.
Talibus orabat, talesque miserrima fletus
Fertque, refertque soror, s^d nullis ille monetur
Fletibus, aut voces illas tract^bilis audit.
Fata obstant, placidasqueviri deus obstr^^t aures.
Ac veluti annosam valide cum robore querc^^
Alpini Borea nunc hinc uunc flatibus ill^n^
Eruere inter s^ ^^rtant, it stridor, and alte
Consternunt terram concusso stipite frondes:
Ipsa haret scopulis, and quantum vertice ad auras
Aethereas, tantum radice in tartara tendit
Haud secus assiduis hinc, atque hinc, vocibus hero^
Tunditur, and magno persentit pectore curas,
Men's immota manet, lacrymae voluuntur inanes.
Tum vero infelix fatis exterrita Dido
Mortem orat: taedet coeli conuexa tueri
Quo magis inceptum peragat lucemque relinquat
Vidit, thuricremis cum dona imponeret aris,
(Horrendum dictu) latices nigrescere sacros,
Fusaque in obscoenum se vertare vina cruorem,
Hoc visum n^lli, non ipsa affata sorori est.
Praeterea fuit in tectis de marmore templum,
Contugis antiqui, miro quod honor colebat,
Velleribus niueis, and festa fronde reuinctum.
Hinc exaudiri voces, and verba vocantis
Visa viri, nox cum terras obscura teneret.
Solaque culminibus serali carmine bubo
Saep^ queri, and longas in fletum ducere voces.
Multaque praeterea vatum praedicta priorum
Terribili monitu horrificant, agit ipse furentem
In somnis ferus Aeneas: semperque relinquit
Sola si^i, semper longam incomitata videt^^
Ire viam, and Tirios deserta quarere terra.
Eumenidura veluti demens videt agmina Pentheus,
Et solemn geminum, and duplices se ostendere Thebas:
Aut Agamemnonius scenis agitatus Orestes,
Armatam facibus matrem, and serpentibus atris
Cum fugit, vltriceque sedent in limine Dira.
Ergo, vbi concepi furias euicta dolor,
Decreuitque mori, tempus secum ipsa modumque.
Exigit, and moestan^ dictis aggressa sororem
Consilium vultu tegit, ac spem front serenat.
Inueni, germana, viam (gratare sorori)
Quae mihi reddat eum, veleo me soluat amantem.
Occani finem iuxta, solemque cadentem
Vltimus Aethiopum locus est vbi maximus Atlas
Axem humero torquet stellis ardentibus aptum.
Hinc mihi Massyla gentis monstrata sacerdot,
Hesperidum templi custos, epulasque draconi
Qua dabat, and sacros seruabat in arbore ramos,
Spargens humida mella soperiferumque papauer.
Haec si carminibus promittit soluere mentes,
Quas velit, ast alijs duras immittere curas,
Sistere aquam fluuijs, and vertere si era retro,
Nocturnosque ciet manes, mugire videbis
Sub pedibus torram, and descendere montibus orn^s:
Testor, cara, Deos, and te germana, tnumque
Dulce caput, magicas muitam accingier arts.
Tu secreta pyram tecto interiore sub auras
Erige and arma viri, thalamo qua fixa reliqu^
Impius,
-- exuuiusque omnes lectumqus iugalem,
Quo perij, super imponas, abolere nefandi
Cuncta viri monumenta iubet, monstratque sacerdos,
Hac effata si^et: pa^lor simul occupat or^,
Non tamen Anna nouis pratexere funera sacris
Germanam credit, nec tantos mente furores
Concipit aut grauiora timet quam morte Sichai.
Ergo iussa par^t.
At regina, pyra penetrali in sede sub auras
Erecta ingenti, tedis atque lice secta,
Intenditque locum sertis, and fronde coronat
Funerea: super exuuias, ensemque relictum,
Effigiemque toro locat, haud ignara futuri.
Stant arae circum, and crines effusa sacerdot
Tercentum tonat ore Deos, Herebu^mq Chaosq,
Tergeminamque Hecaten, tria virginis ora Diana.
Sparserat and latices simulatos fontis Aucrni,
Falcibus and messa ad lunam quaeruntur ahtnis
Pabentes herba nigri cum lacte veneni.
Quaeritur, and nascentis equi de font reuulsus,
Et matri praereptus amor.
Ipsa mola, manibusque pijt alteria iuxta,
Vn^m exuta pedem vinc^s, in vest recincta,
Testatur meritura deos, and conscia fati
Sidera, tum si quod non aequo foedere amantes
Curae numen habet, instumque memorque pracatur.
Nox erat, and placidum carpobant fessa soporem
Corpora per terras:
-- filuaeque and saua quicrant
Aequora: cum medio voluuntur sidera lapsis:
Cum tacet omis ager: pecudes picta que volu^res
Quaeque lacus late liquidos, quaeque aspera dumis
Rura tenent, somno posita sub nocte silenti
Lenibant curas, and corda oblita laborum.
At non infelix animi Phoenissa, nec vnquam
Soluitur in somnos, oculisue, aut pectore noctem
Accipit, ingeminant curae, rursusque resurgent
Sauit amor, magnoque irarum fluctuat aestu.
Sic adeo insistit, secumque ita cord volutat:
En quid agam? rursas ne procos irrisa priores
Experiar? Nomadumque petam connubia supplex,
Quos ego sum toties iam dedignata, maritos?
Iliacas igitur classes atque vltima Teucrum
Iussa sequar? quia ne auxilio iuuat ante leuatos?
Et been apud memores veteri stat gratia facti?
Quis me antem (fac velle) sinet, ratibusque superbis
Irrisam accipiet? nescis hen perdita, nec dum
Laomadonte a sentis periuria gentis?
Quid tum? sola fuga nauta^ comitabor onantes,
An Tyrijs, omnique manu stipata meorum
Insequar, and quos Sidonia vix vrbe reuelli,
Rursus agam pelago, and ventis dare vela iubebo
Quin morere, vt merita es, ferroque auerte dolorem,
Tu lacrymis euicta meis tu prima furentem
His germana malis oneras, atque obijcis hosti.
Non lieuit thalami expertem sine crimine vitam
Degere more fera?
-- tales nec tangere curas*
Non seruata fides, cineri promissa Sichaeo?
Tantos illa suo rumpebat pectore questus.
Aeneas celsa in puppt, tam certus eundi,
Carpebat somnos, rebus iam rete paratis.
H^ic se forma Dei vultu redeuntis eodem
Obtulit in somnis: ^ursusque ita visa monere est,
Omnia Mercurio similis vocemque, coloremque
Et crinesflanos and membra decora iuuenta:
Nate dea, potes hoc sub casis ducere somnos?
Nec, qua circunstent te deinde pericula, cernis
Demens? nec Zephyros audis spirare secundos?
Illa dolos, dirumque nefas in pectore versat.
Certa mori, varioque irarum fluctuat aestis.
Non fugis hinc praeceps dum praecipitare potestas?
Iam mare turbari trabibus, saeuasque videbis
Collucere faces, iam feruere litora flammis,
Si te his attigerit terris aurora morantem.
Eia age rumpe moras: varium, and mutabile semper
Foemina, sic fatus, nocti se imm^scuit atrae.
Tum vero Aeneas subitis exterritus vmbris,
Corripite somno corpus, sociosque fatigat:
Praecipites vigilate viri, and considite transtris:
Solu^te vela citi, deus athere missus ab alto
Festinare fugam, tortosque incidere funes,
Ecce iterum stimulat, sequimur, te sancte, deorum
Quisquis es, imperioque iterum paremus ouantes.
Adsis o placidusque iuues,
-- and fidera coelo
Dextra feras dixit, vaginaque eripit ensem
Fulmineum, strictoque serit retinacula ferro.
Idem omnes simul ardor habet, rapiuntque, ruuntque
Littora deseruere: lat et sub classibus aequor:
Adnixi torquent spumas, and caerula verrunt.
Et iam prima nouo spargebat lumine terras
Tithoni croceum linquens Aurora cubile.
Regina e speculis vt primum albescere lucem
Vidit, and aequatis classem procedere velis,
Litoraque, and vacuos sensit sine remige portus;
Terque quaterque manu pectus percussa decorum,
Flauantesque abscissa comas, pro Jupiter, ^bit
Hic, ait, and nostris illuserit aduena regnis?
Non arma expedient, totaque ex vrbe sequentur,
Diripientqui rates aij naualibus? ite,
Ferte citi flammas, date vela, impellite remos.
Quid loquor? aut vbi sum? quae mentem insania mutat?
Infelix Dido, nunc te fata impia tangunt.
Tum decuit, cum sceptra dabas. en dextra, fidesque,
Quem secum patrios aiunt portare penates,
Quem subijsse humeris confectum aetate parentem,
Non potui abreptum diuellere corpus, and vndis, Spargere?
-- non socios? non ipsum absumere ferro
Ascamum, patrijsque epulandum apponere mensis?
Verum anceps pugnae fueras fortuna, fuisset,
Quem metui moritura? faces in castra tulissem:
Implessemque foros flammis natumque patremque
Cum genere extinxem: memet super ipsa dedissem
Sol, qui terra tum flammis opera omnia lustras,
Tuque harum interpres curarum and conscia Juno,
Nocturnisque Hecatetriuijs vlutata per vrbes,
Et dirae vltrices, and dij morientis Elisae,
Accipite hac, meritumque malis auertite numen:
Et nostas audite preces si tangere portus
Infandum caput, ac terris adnare necesse est.
Et si fata Iouis poscunt: hic terminus haret.
At bello aduacis populi vexatus, and armis,
Finibus extortis, complexu analsus Iuli,
Auxilium imploret, vide atque indigna suerum
Funera, nec cum sub leges pacis iniquae
Tradiderit, regno, an optata luce fruatur,
Sed cadat antedem, mediaque inhumatus arena.
Haec precor, hanc vocem extremam cum sanguine fundo.
Tum vos o Tyrij stripem, and genus omne futurum
Exercete adijs, cinerique hac mittite nostro
Munera: nullus amor populis, nec foedera sunto.
Exoriare aliquis nostris ex ossibus vltor.
Quiface Dardantos ferioque sequare colonos,
Nunc olim quocunque dabunt se tempore vires,
Littora littoribus contraria fluctibus vndas
Imprecor,
-- arma armis pugnent ipsique n^potes,
Hac a^t, and parts animum versabat in omnes,
Inuisam quareus quum primum abrum pere lucem.
Tum brauiter Barcen nutricem affata Sichaei:
Namque suam patria antiqua ciuis ater habebat.
Annam cara mihi nutrix huc siste sororem:
Dic, corpus properet fluuiali spargere lympha:
Et pecudes secum, and monstrata piacula ducat.
Sic veniat tuque ipsa pia tege tempora vitta.
Sacra Ioui Stygio qua rite incepta paraui,
Perficere est animus, finemque imponere curi^,
Dardanijque, rogum capitis permittere flammae.
Sic ait: illa gradum studio celeraba^ anili.
Ac trepida, and coeptis immanibus effera Dido
Sanguineam voluens aciem, mac^lisque rementes
Interfusa genas, and pallida morte futura,
Interiera domus irrumpit limina and altos
Conscendit furibunda rogos, ensemque recludes
Dardanium, non hoc quasitum munus in vsus.
Hic postquam Iliacas vestes notumque cubile
Conspexit, paulum in lachrymis and mente morata,
Incubuitque toro dixitque nouissima verba:
Dulces ex^^iae, dum fata deusque sinebant,
Accipite hanc animam, meque his exsoluite curis,
Vini and quem dederat cursum fortuna peregi:
Et nunc magna mei sub terris ibit imago.
Vrbem praclaram statui;
-- mea mania vidi^
Vlta virum poenas inimico a fratre recepi.
Felix, hois nimium felix, si littera tantum
Nunquam Dardania terigissent nostra carina.
Dixit and os impressa toro, moriemur inul^ae?
Sed moriamur, ait: sic sic iuuat ire sub vmbra^.
Hauriat hunc oculis ignem crndelis ab alto
Dardanus, and nostra secum ferat omina mortis.
Dixerat: atque illam media inter talia ferro
Collapsam adspiciunt comites, ensemque cruore
Spummantem, sparsasque manus it clamor ad alta
Atria: concussam bacchatur fama per vrbem.
Lamentis gemituque, and foemineo, vlulatis
Tecta fremunt: resonat magnis plangoribus ather:
Non aliter, quam si immissis ruat hostibus omnis
Carthago, aut antiqua Tyros, flammaque furentes
Culmina perque hominum voluantur, verque deorum.
Audijt examinis, trepidoque ex territa cursis,
Vnguibus ora soror foedans, and pectora pugnis
Per medios ruit, ac morientem nomine clamat,
Hoc illud germana fuit? me fraud petebas?
Hoc rogus iste m^hi, hoc ignes, araequ^ parabant?
Quid primum deserta quera^? comitem ne sororem
Spreuisti moriens? eadem me ad fata vocasses:
Idem anibas ferro dolor, atque eadem hora tulisset.
His etiam struxi manibus, patriosque vocaui
Voce de est sic te vt posita crudelis abessem?
Extinxite, me que soror, populumque patresque
Sidomos, vrbemque tuam date,
-- vulnera lymphis
Abluam, and extremus si quis, super hallitus errat,
Ore legam, sic fata, gradus euaserat altos,
Simianimemque sinu germanam amplexa fouebat
Cum gemitis, atque atros ficcabat vest cruores.
Illa grauis oculos eonata attollere, rursus
Deficit: infinum stridet sub pectore vulnus.
Ter sese attollens, cubitoque innixa leuauit:
Ter reuolut a toro est, oculisque errantibus alto
Quaesiuit coelo lucem, ingomuitque reperta.
Tum Juno omnipotens longum miserata dolorem
Difficilesq^e obitus, Irim demisit olympo:
Qua luctantem animam, nexosque resolueret artus
Nam, quia nec fato, merita nec morte peribat,
Sed misera ante diem, subitoque accensa furore,
Nondum illi flauum Prosperpina vertice crinem
Abstulerat, Stygioque caput damnauerat O^co.
Ergo Iris croceis per coelum roscida p^nnis,
Mill trahens varios aduerso sole colores
Deuolat, and supra caput astitit hunc ego Diti
Sacrum iussa fero, teque isto corpore soluo,
Sic ait, and dextra crinem secat: omnis and vna
Dilapsus calor, atque in ventos vita recessit.
FINIS.

