The way home to Christ and truth leadinge from Antichrist and error, made
and set forth in the Latin tongue, by that famous and great clearke Vincent,
French man borne, above.xi. hundred years paste, for the comfort of all true
Christian men, against the most pernicious and detestable craft of heretics,
which in his time by all subtell ways, devised to obscure and deface the
doctrine and religion of the universal church. And now the same work is
englished, and by the Ouenes highness authorized to be set furthe for the
relief of diverse English men, which yet stand in doubt, whether they
may go to heaven in the peace and vnitte of Christ's universal church, or to
hell in the dissension and confusion of heretics.

AR 1693



W. Bect. 1856



To the most excellent and most virtuous lady and our most gracious
sovereign, Marie by the grace of God Queen of England, France, Naples,
Jerusalem and Irelande, Defendour of the faith, princess of Spaigne and
Sicilie, Archeduchesse of Austria, Duchess of Millaine, Burgundy and Braband,
Lou^tesse of Haspurge, Flaunders and Tyrole. Your Majesty's most faithful,
louinge and obedient subject John Proctor, wissheth all grace, long peace,
quiet raygue, from God the father, the son, and the holy Ghost.
WE have with our great harms long tried, nothing to be more perilous the^
wicked follye armed with princely authoritee, Blessed be the heavenly God,
most gracious Mary, we now savor what inestimable good thing is godly
wisdom, coupled with power imperial. The first needs not proffe, for all
have felt, and none can denay: I hother is now in ure, that words were vain
to declare, where deeds are present plentuouslye to show. What glory hereof
rises unto your majesty, I neither can express as I would, nor yet will as I
may, having experience of your graces nature, delighted to do the beast in all,
and least of al to hear of it again. Sparing therefore to praise, who^ none
but the wicked ca^ dispraise, I yet with other can not but rejoice, that so
high wisdom, so heavenly inclination is now (by Gods providence) matched
with semblable authority of high governance: that what Godly ways for the
maintenau^ce of Gods honor, and the wealth of this realm, your grace of
heavenly inclination has tofore wished, when ye could not require, of high
wisdom has thought right to be done, when ye lacked might to do: the same
hensfurthe your majesty (of right) may will, and of authority command: that
where as heretofore under men of courage more stout to do their will, then
godly devout to do things well, the truth of Gods word, and the zeal of
good works have detaied: so hereafter, under Mary a lady of he auenly
simplicity, ye lively spark of godly love may eftsoon kindle that was
extinct: the bright sterre of Euangelike light may shine, that was obscured:
the right vain of heavenly doctrine may appear, that was stopped up. If all
could that would, your highness should lack no helping hands to further
your majesty's godly purposes. Amongst them that have much good will, and
little power, I have always claimed to be one, and now for maintenau^ce of
that claim, I do most humbly beseech your highness to accept this little
work, which presently I present unto your grace, that being accepted and
authorized by your highness, it might find favor with other, that can not
but like what your wisdom has not mislyked.

Wherein I have expressed both my humble and loyal heart toward your
majesty, and also my vehement affection toward my natural countreemen, and
most earnest desire of their happy return home to truth, that have so long
straied from home in error. And for as much as many seem to stray, because
they know not their home, nor the way thither: I have devised for them a
perfect table, wherein our home is lyuelye set forth, and the way also thither.
Our home I call the catholic church, the true spousesse of Christ, our most
louinge mother. The way to this home is to follow her ordinances and laws.
This have I done, how ever the deed be liked with other, if your majesty
allow the intent of the doer, I have a great portion of my desire. The grace
and blessing of God be with your highness ever and ever. Amen.

Your highness true and faiethfull orator John Proctor.

THE PROLOGVE TO HIS DEER brethren, and natural country men of England.
IN this new and miraculous reign of merciful Mary our new and most
lawefull Queen and gouernesse, wherein we see so many good old orders newely
restored, and so many new erroneous novelties antiquated and made old, I have
had a vehement desire (dear brethren) to exhibit unto you some new gift and
token, thereby to witness the great gladness newly engendered in my heart of so
many new occasions. And amongst all other gifts that might commend the
gyuer, and advantage the receyuer, I find none either fitter for me to give,
or better for you to receive, or more agreeable for this present time, then if
I should renew some old treasure, and present you with some ancient Jewel,
the use whereof might both increase knowledge in you to discern the worthy
value of old and ancient Iewelles of late days not regarded, and expel also
from you blind and gross ignorance, to the utter defacinge of such new
fantastical pelfrie and counterfaite trashe, as latelye have been esteemed. I
am much deceived, but I have found such a Jewel for you, as for the
findinge I might have praise, and you pleasure in having: for the gyuinge I
might deserve commendation, and you receive consolation in the vsinge of it.
For what pleasure without Christ, what consolation can be had without the
truth of his heavenly word? There is one only way to Thriste, one only
mean to the truth of his word. This way who ever has trased, never missed
Christ. This mean who ever has observed was never seduced by falshode. This
way to Christ, this mean to truth, is the gift, which I purpose in this
new face of so new and happy world to give you. It is a Jewel so much
worth, as your souls health is worth. It is a treasure of so much value and
efficacy, as wherewith God is pleased, and heaven wo^ne. It is a talet of such
special property, as neither time can diminishe, nor violence deface, nor use
wear it. This way to Christ, this mean to truth, is by a general name
called, Ecclesia catholica, the catholyke Church: which is our mother, and we
her children. Without this mother, as there is no way to heaven where Christ
is ( Porta emm coeli est, Gene xxviii.
for she is the gate of heaven, whereby we must enter to Christ) so is there no
truth, i. Cimo.iii.
but what she allows. Columna enim and firmamentu veritatis est. For she is
the pillar and foundation of truth. None can suck the sweet milk of
Christ his comfortable word, but from her pappes. August. in erpositione
epistole Ioannis apostoli. q^ ca^atu.iii.
Matter enim est, cuius vbera sunt duo testamenta. For she is our mother, whose
two breasts are the.ii. testamentes of God. Wherefore to know her, is to know
Christ and truth. Between which there is no more difference, then is
betwixt the head and the body, the spouse and the spousesse: which as they
are by a necessary band of unity knitte together, so Christ, truth, and the
church are inseparatly conjoined. For neither can Christ be without truth,
nor truth without the church, with whom God the holy ghost does communicate
al truth. Wherefore to thend you shall not hensforth miss of Christ, ^e mistake
his truth, I have given you a worthy work in your natural language of famous
Vincent, priect sometime of Lyryn, which he penned above a.xi. T. years agone in
the Latin tongue: wherein you shall find the true and lively image of this
church, and also most certain and infallible rules, whereby to discern all
cloked falshode from the simple truth: diabolike sophistry from Euangelike
doctrine. I have given you this Jewel of a great zeal and affection: do not
you receive it unthankfully. How be it I grate not thanks for the geuinge,
but only acceptance of the gift. And how worthy it is to be accepted, how
necessary to be had, you shall sooner understand by the use thereof, than I by
words can express. Accept it therefore, for it is worthy, and follow the
counsel thereof, for it is necessary. What more necessary can be given the
siche, then sovereign medicine, whereby he may be recovered? What more
necessary can be given the worldling, being in danger to perish, then to
direct him in the wat to heaven, where he may be saved? What more necessary
for the drowned in sin, which brings bondage, then to trace him to grace,
that might set him free? What more necessary can be given him, whom the
flesh rules, the cause of corruption, then to acquaint him with the heavenly
spirit, the cause of sanctification? What more necessary can be given him
that is nouseled in ignorance, which made him blind, then to instruct him
with knowledge, whereby he may see? What more necessary to be given him that
is smolthered in heresye, which hilleth, then to show him the true religion,
whereby he may revive? Al these malavies, grieffes, soores, and discases in you,
Vincent, yea rather God that heavenly Physician by the ministry of this holy
Vincent shall remedy and cure, whilesthe shall eftsoon settle you in the sure
lap of our mother the catholic church, the comfortable leche of all
infirmities, the necessary nourse of al weakelynges, the most surest haven for
all stormebeaten to ariue unto. O dear brethren and friends it much pitieth
me, and I trust it now repeuteth you also, to consider how evil you have been
of late taught, how unnaturally you have been entreated, since ye left this
good and loving mother: how many diseases and infirmities have grown upon
you since your departing from this comfortable leche: how owgle and carren
leave ye are to see, since you changed this necessary nourse: with how great
tempestuous storms you have been beaten, since you first did loose from this
faithful haven. Woe worth that false harlet that has deceived you, I mean
that malignau^t and cursed church. It is she, that by her flatteringe means
and deceatefull allurementes has intised you to come from so sweet and amiable
mothers lap, into her whorishe arms: from church to church, I grant, but
not from like to like. From an heavenly church, to a malignaunt church, from a
louinge mother to a flatteryng harlote. From the condition of grace, to the
state of perdition. From the unity of christians, to division of Nerelikes.
From the light of pure knowledge, to the darkness of foul ignorance.

From the truth of antiquity, to the falshode of novelties. From faithful
beleuyng, to carnal reasonyng. From saving Christ, to deceyuing Antichrist.
Thus they agree together, that in all things they be utterly vulike. The one
is of God, and ledeth to Christ and truth. The Other is of the devil, and
leads to Antichrist and heresy. The one grounded in fay the subdueth reason,
the other led by reason confounds faith. The one believes reuerentlye what
reason can not comprehend, the other impudently alleges reason faith to
reprehende. Between the^ there is no amity, no semblaunce, no agreement, no
fellow ship: but continual war one against another. Nowbeit for as much as no
untruth can deceive, but by color of truth: no heretical poison can
beguyle, but when it is given in form of medicine, therefore this whorish
church labors by all means to resemble in utter show and countenance
the other good church: the rather to seduce the improuident, when her falshode
is cloked: the sooner to catch the simple, when her hook is covered. And this
is the matter, why diverse have been so greatly deceived of late, and diverse
again will be hereafter, if upon this warning they watch not, and by other
menues harms they beware not. For although this harlot, this deuillishe
Syuagege, purposes nothing else, but to incororate you to the devil
Antichrist, yet has she ever more in her mouth Christ, Christ. Though she
only laboreth to tumble you headlong into hell both body and soul, yet does
the continually babble of heaven: though she teaches nothing but heresy to
overthrow the ghospel, yet her tongue runs still of the gospel, as though
she hated heresye. Though she be whollye of the devil and nothing of Christ,
yet she pretends great familiarity to Christ oulie, as though she knew not
the devil. Though she lack no craft to subvert truth, yet truth, truth,
is ever her word, as though she lacked craft. O malicious harlot. O deceauable
feinde. O cruel stepdame. Come home come home, gentle brethren, to your loving
and tender mothers lay, which has fostered you from your youth, and leave
the arms of that cruelstepmother, which will not leave, if you leave not,
till she has strangled you. Come home to this leache, that she may heal you
of your foul leprie, wherewith this feinde has ifected you. Come home to this
sweet nourse, that you may suck from her breasts the wholesome food of your
souls health, and comfort: and leave the stinkinge carren wherewith this
whore feeds you. Come home, I say, to this calm and quiet port, where you
shall find rest and tranquillity of conscience, which the devil
coutinually tosseth and tumbleth in restles pains with the tempestuous storms
of heretical novelties. Who is our mother? Where is our home? No doubt the
universal church is our mother, her lap is our home. If you be not there at
home, you can not be at home with God. If you acknowledge not her to be your
mother, you may not acknowledge God to be your father. To this mother, Mary the
mother of her country calls you. To this home Vincent will lead you even by
the hand as it were. If you be not at home with this mother, there can be no
health in you, but all diseases: there can be no knowledge in you, but al
ignorance: there can be no hoope of life left in you, but assurednes of
death. Yea, ye can not be of God, but of the devil. Qui matrem ecclesiam
relinquit, August. in sym bolo ad Catechumenod. Libro. mi. cap. r.
quomodo est in Christo, qui in membris eius no^ est? Quomode est in Christo,
qni in corpore Christi non est?

Ne that leaves his mother ye church (says S. Austen) how may he be of
Christ, which is not of his members? Now may he be in Christ, which is not
in the body of Christ? The body of Christ is the church. If you will be
healthful, come home and have it: If you covet knowledge, come home and suck
it at your mothers breasts, in form and manner, as it shall please her and not
you. If you will have life, come home and bide at home with our louinge mother,
where death ne hell can preuail against you. If you will be of god, come home
and be incorporate into the body of God and man Jesus Christ: and then the
devil shall have no power over you. Do thus and you shall be assured to
inherit heaven, where that wicked harlot and her hareheades shall never come.
you shall doubtless possess the celestial Paradise, which that wicked
maistres and her minstrelles can never enter. You shall receive eternite, which
that heretical church and her chyckines shall never have. Their disobedience
and false belief shall tomble them together into hell: your true obedience and
faieth shall mount you to heaven. They as unfaithful rebels shall be
destitute of all heavenly grace, you as obedient and faithful children shall be
supported with the majesty of Angels. For them everlasting torments are
appointed, for you heavenly joys preparedeuer to e^dure. They shall perish
wicked with the wicked, you shall reign sanctified with saints. I fear not
but you that are at home wiltarie at home, for fear of so many dangers: and I
mistrust not but you that are from home will make have homeward, allured with
so many benefits: There is no doubt, if cloked craft begile you not, if
flattering fawninge of that deceiteful auoutresse hold you not, but that you
will make speed (as I said) to come home again that have straied from home so
long. But as at home with our mother there is no lack of truth, so that
harlot our cruel stepmother lacks no craft to entrap and entangle you, no
falsehood, no flatteringe to allure and entice you. Come unto me (says she) for
here is Christ, here is health, here is salvation. Thus the Ape can ruffle in
purple: thus the Ass can strowt in the Lions skin, thus the iarringe Iaye
can counterfeicte the pleasant note of the nightingale. But beware brethren,
be not deceived. It is and ever has been the practice of the devil and his
ministers by coulor of truth to persuade falsehood, under the cloak of good to
bring in all evil. Our true mother the true church is but one, and in all
respects but one only: one in one uniform use of one Baptism and
sacraments, one faith, one spirit. This mother, is not a mother of a few,
but of many: her power is not particular, but universal: as she is extended
through all the four parts of the earth, and her glory diffused in the whole
world. For of her it is said: Dabo tibi gentes haereditatem tua^, and
possessionem tuam terminos terrae. I will give the nations thine inheritance
and the extremities of the earth shall be thy possession. This our mother the
true church hates not light, loves not to lurk in corners, where she may
not be seen: but as her power has ever more been universal, so universally
she has been at all times aperte, plain, and manifest. For how can she be
obscure and hidden (says fainte Auste^) Quae obtinuit omnes gentes, and is
that city of which it is spoken: Non potest abscondi ciuitas super montem
constituta. The city cannot be hid which is set upon a mountain. Our lord
has set his tabernacle in ye son, says ye propher: his tabernacle is our
mother, ye catholic church says S. Auste^, which is set in the bright son
and not in the dark shade: which walks openly by day, and not preuilye by
night. Whose adversary the heretical church, is of a contrary nature. For
she neither is universal, nor at all times, but at some certain time, and in
some one certain place. And again she goes and comes preuilie, and in her
doings there is no unity, no certeintie at all. Her ministers are divided,
now they dreme one thing, and now an other: this day they like, to morrow
they mislike: one is against an other of them, even in the highest mysteries of
Christ his religion, Who list to consider their writings shall prove true that
I say. How be it experience of their doings, without readinge of their
books, might persuade us of England what they were, and wherehence they be,
that years past have been preachers and teachers here amongst us: that have
persecuted our true mother the universal church of Christ: and have set up
their lord Antichriste, and his heretical church. What orders, what form of
religion have they set forth sins their first reign, that shortly after they
altered not? Which three of them amougest them all, that agreed together in
their matters? No marueill, for the devil is their chief head, who^ they
serve: and he is full of lies, variaunce, division, and discord. And under him
their scholemaisters were, Hus, Luther, Zuinglius, Decolampadius, Bucer,
Melanethon, Tindall, Frythe, which in their doctrine agree not one with an
other. Such masters, such scholars come of them. And this division, this
vnco^stancie of doctrine, was a manifest token that they were not the children
of our true mother the catholic church, nor ministers of Christ, but the
children of the devil and ministers of Antichrist: yea very Autichristes. For
who soever says S. Austen is gone from the unity of the catholic church, he
is become Antichrist. Those Antichrists have borne a great stroke here now to
long time in England, in whom was no consta^cie, no stay, no stedfastues of
religion and doctrine. Howebeit they al agreed well in some things. They all
would be as proud, as headdy, as false and subtle, as the devil their
father, wherhence they came. They al would have wives, long berdes, and
finally no old truth, or fashions: but all new knackes and fancies, as their
scholemaisters lyked, Bucer. etc. of who^ they were taught. Yet would they
bear us in haud ye they were catholic christians. But how can ye be catholic
christiaus (says saint Austen in his treatise upon saint John his Epistle)
that do not communicate and agree to the unity of doctrine and faith, which is
received and used through all christianity? They would be counted true
preachers of the Gospel, Prophets, and Apostles: yet none of them can say as
Paul the Apostle said. Our exhortacion was not to bring you to error, nor to
vncieanes, neither was it with gyle: our conversation was not at any time with
flatteringe words, neither in cloked covetousness, neither sought we praise of
me^. Ye are witness and so is God, how holy and justly and unblameable we have
behaved our selves emouge you. This said S. Paul. What can our new Apostles
say? Out of all doubt the very contrary, as truly as ever S. Paul said the
other. But for fear of Hypocrisy they did all their good works in corners,
that me^ might not se them. Yet Christ said: Let your light shine before men,
that they may se your good works. But though they were not men of many good
works, yet had they many pretty Aualities, though I say it. For I may lyke^
them well to the beast called Camelopacdus: chiche being but one, resembles
yet many beasts, as by his neck, the horse: by his feet, the ox: by his
head, the Camel: by his spots in his skin, the Tygre. So these late
preachers in their stout countenance, they seemed warriers: in their light
apparel, courtiers: in their familiar talk, rybawdes: in their gesture,
wantons: in their living, ryotous: in the pulpyt, lying preachers: in their
books, spiteful railers. If they have not been such as I report them, then
show me what they were, and how much ye that have been their disciples and
schoters have profited under them, and by their example in godlynes of life, in
honesty of behavior, in charity toward your neighbors, sins ye first went
from your mother the church, and left the ancient orders and customs of
religion, and became gaye Gospellers after the gyse of your new teachers?
Behold your selves in the glass of your own consciences, and tell me truth.
Ye say, that they were godly teachers, and that through them ye have attained
to a great knowledge of Gods word. The more knowledge ye have ye more godly
ye ware of life. For where the true knowledge of Gods word is, there is the true
spirit of God, which evermore sterreth and moves man to live well, according
to his knowledge, and the pleasure of God, whose knowledge he does profess.
But in England I am perfect and none of you ca^ sai nay, and say truth: but
yt ye have grown in all wickedness, as ye have growe^ in this new religion, in
somuche that there was never such unthriftiness in servants, such
unnaturalness in children, such unruliness in subjects, such feircenes in
enemies, such unfaithfulness in friends, again such beastlynes of minds,
such disdainfulnes in hearts, finally such falsehood in promises, such
deceitfulnes in bargains, such gredy extortio^, such insatiable covetousness,
such itollerable pride, as therefore ye are beco^e a fable amongst al nations.
How say ye, is not this true? which of you can denaie it? And be these the
fruits of true knowledge? yea, do not these behauiours and ungodly manners of
you, declare manifestly that ye have of late years given your selves rather to
errors, then to truth: rather to have forsaken the catholic and pure faieth
of our mother the true church, and followed the fond fancies of a few ungodly
and false teachers, to the high displeasure of God? Will God think ye reform
his church if they were in error, or call his people to knowledge if they had
been in ignorance, by the ministers of the devil, by the preachers of
Antichrist? Or can ye sai that they be the ministers of God, that live so
ungodly: that they be the preachers of righteousness, whose deeds are so full
of unrighteousness: that in comparison of them, other whom ye called papists
might be saints for the honesty of their living, and sobre behauiours, as ye
your selves have said many times even in my hearing? Be not these worthy
Prelates, to be followed? have ye done a noble fete trow ye, to forsake the
universal unity of all christianity, to be at defiaunce with your loving
mother the catholic church, which has fostred you from your infancy, and
without whose help, furtherau^ce, and succor, ye cannot be saved: for to follow
such blind guides, such gross masters, as whose doctrine has brought you
in errors, to the high displeasure of God: whose example of unclean lyuinge
has led you into all wickedness, to your great ignominy, shame and rebuke
with all godly people? what good have they done in this realm, either by their
preachinge in words: or with their teaching by example? Have they not broken
many good and godly ordinances, and set up none? Have they not caused for
great concord and unity, great tumult and rebellious sedition? for godly
fasting, ryotous feasting? for devout praiyng, peuishe prating? for due
obedience, unlawful liberty? for peace, Gods plenty, and enough: war,
dearth and famine more then enough? I write and weep in my heart to considre,
what may be written of the wretched condition and state that our country has
been in of late years. Which of you al, yea which of your preachers, (whose
light should shine that the world should see it) which of them I say, has
not been as redye as the worst disposed of you all, to eat upon good friday or
any other vigill day, as soon the Pigge as the Pikerel, the Capon, as the
Carpe: the Chykin as the Cheuen? Notwithstanding the Magistrates of this realm
commanded, the wisdom of the whole world thought necessary, the universal
consent of Christ his church prescribed the contrary. What servant for the
most part has any of you all, that looks not to have his brekefast, his
dinner, and his supper, as well upon Christmas eve, as any other day, or else ye
must provide a new servant? Who can blame them? Are they not as they have
been used? Rather then ye would observe the order of fasting prescribed by the
church, ye would not stick at the beginning to give your servants one meal
more on the fasting day, then ye would on any other day. And where ye would
other days feed them with milk, butter and cheese only, on the fasting day,
they should be sure to have flesh. Yea and thought it a glory when ye had so
done, that ye had so well reformed your householde, from that popish fast:
calling all things popish that was godly. But what have ye gotten hereby?
Surely ye had never so little good service, and yet ye never paid more for it
then now. Ye had never such disobedient servants, and yet ye never cherished
them better then now. Why so? Before they were better taught then fed, and
of late they have been full fed and ill taught: Then were they obedient,
trusty and diligent, as they were taught: and now be they disobedient,
slouthful, and untrusty, as they be fed: then were they well taught workers,
and now ill fed porkers: then had ye diligent laborers, and now ye have
negligent loyterers. I speak as I hear your selves say that have them. Well,
will ye have a remedy? The^ begin where ye left: teach them better and feed
them less. And for praying, how it has decayed, which of you cannot bear
witness? Finallye what kind of wickedness is there that ye have not above
other, and what one virtue is there, that ye have not less then other, that
profess the contrary religion to you? One demanded of king Agesilans what
fruit and benefit the laws that Lycurgus made had brought unto the City of
Spart: marie quod he, Contemptum vitiorum, that is, the contempt of vices. But
whoo should require of me what fruit the innouatio^ of religion has brought
into this realm of England, I must needs say as I know, Contemptum
virtutum, the contempt of virtues and al godly living. If it be true
knowledge, that ye brag your selves to have of Gods word: came ye not to it
by the spirit of God? And does the spirit of God increase knowledge in you,
and decrease godliness that should be in you according to your knowledge? Is
godly zeal, is the fear of God, is holiness of life, is charitee toward
your neighbors wrought in your hearts without the knowledge of Christ his
true religion, or else with the knowledge thereof? If it be in the right
knowledge of worshippinge God, then of necessity must ye confess that before
this innovation you were in better state of knowledge, because your lives were
then more agreeable to knowledge: and that sins, ye have been erroniouslye
taught and deuillishelye seduced, because your deeds and doings have ever sins
been more and more ungodly and deuillishe. For God did never begin to plant a
doctrine unknown tofore, or renew a doctrine before neglected, and forgotten:
but by such as were godly and unspotted, as in deed expressed the strength and
virtue of their doctrine, in their life and behauiours. For as S. Ambrose
says, the words of teaching do vehemently move the hearts of the hearers,
when the life of the teacher is not dissonant. The^ is the authority of the
preacher firm, sure, and alewable, when he clencheth his sayings in the
minds of the hearers with the efficatie of godly works. For the just man in
his word and deed is allowed in his sayings, this is required in all preachers
and teachers commonly, how much more is it requisite in them that will
preach and teach a new unknown doctrine? and would repel and old known
and well grounded religion, to plant some new fangled inue^tion? If they were
moved by God, then no doubt God would also inspire them to do it orderly,
that is, according as him self did, and required other to do. He him self
(as is reported of him) Caepit faeere and docere. Began first to do, and then
to teach. And he instructing his preachers: said who soever breaks one of
these least commandments, and so teaches other, he shall be called the least
in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever observes and teaches the same shall be
called great in the kingdom of God. And S. Paul the worthy preacher of
Christ his truth, does testify of him self. I do chasten my body (says
he) and bring it into subjection, least peradventure while I preach to other,
I my self be made a reprobate. Surely if God would innouate or alter the
religion so long received, by reprobate men: then is he not the same that he
was, nor one with his promise. For when he first began to plant the doctrine of
his son Christ, he chose such ministers and preachers thereof, as for
integrity of life, and also for diverse miracles (effectual persuasions of
any thing that they should teach) were notable through all the world. But
our holy preachers beginning to plant a new religion, or (as they say) renew
an old doctrine this.xv. C. years neglected, lack both. They have neither
good conditions to authorize, ne miracles to confirm their sayings. O, you
will say unto me, though they lived not accordinglye, yet was their teachinge
good. I say they taught naughty and false doctrine. How prove I that?
because it is contrary to the faith received and taught by our mother the
universal church. But they brought the scriptures for them ye will fai. Yea so
did the devil, so did Arreus, Donate, Sabellius, and as many heretics as ever
were, to maintain their doctrine, yet was their doctrine heretical, and
blasphemous: and the scripture true and most true. But they alleged the
Doctors, and Fathers upon the scriptures. They did in deed, but in like sort
and manner as diverse were noted to allege Homers verses. (...) hedles, and
endless, for whatsoever they found in any of the fathers works, that might in
any respect seem in apparaunce to maintain their errors: the same would they
continually chat and charm on, allthoughe in deed it made either against them
and their errouious doctrine: or at least, nothing with them, if they had well
waied their works throughlye as they did not. But they were snatchers and
patchers only, and only snatched here and there a piece to patche up a botching
matter. I might well liken them to Apes for diverse qualities that were in them,
for as the Ape being neither apt to keep yt house, as does the mastie cur, nor
fit to bear burden, as can the horse: nor meet to turn and till the
ground, as can the Ox: she only flattereth, she only moves us to laughter
and pleasure, and with her folishe mockes and mowes makes us pleasant and
merry. So these new fangled preachers, for as much as they had not the grace
neither to keep home with their mother, the universal church: and with her to
watch and keep the wards that her enemies assault her not, neither to turn
and till the ground of man's soul, that it might be apt to receive yt good
feed of whete, which their mother would have sown: neither yet paciontlie
to bear the burden and loode of her motherlie correction, by fasting and
praiyng, and to suffer the cross of her spouse Christ, which she would have
leide upon their showlders: being unfit (I say) and unprofitable members to
these good purposes and uses. they became ministers of pleasure, liberty,
lyeence and ease, and they themselves knowrle dope in them all. Whose only
purpose was as Trasmus well notes in his epistle to Bylibaldus, Census, and
vxor, thryuing and wyuing. ergo in this point they be apishe. Again when so
ever they took upon them the handlinge of any good and weighty matter, their
handling of it was apishelie: for either they would rent and tear it into
pieces, and make it naught worth, orels by wrasting and wrething of it, they
would force the same to maintain their principal intent (wyuinge and
thriuynge) and this is apishe. Further as of evil comes good many times, so
of the^ came some good also. For we read that the wantonness, play, and
pastime that the Ape makes, drives away the Agew from the Lion. In like sort
the folly, the lyceutious liberty of these new fangled preachers have driven
away the careless security from the catholic sort, and have been occasion
that they have given them selves more earnestly to watch and ward for their
mothers right, which tofore lived as careless without fear of enemies: and
here in they were as profitable to ye catholic, as Apes to the Lion. Thus
though they would not abide to be papishe, yet were they still apishe. They
have lost but one letter of the name, but they lack an hundredth good
conditions of them, that be so named. They will say here unto me, now ye talk
at pleasure of us: but all this while why have not you amongst you confuted by
argument and learning our doctrine, if it were so evil? I say unto them, what
need any of us to confute your doctrine by argument, which the universal
church of Christ by consent, has long ago co^dempued for heresy? Tushe they
will say again, you could say nothing against it. How know ye yt, that when we
speak you will not understand us, or else your selves have so many words, that
ye will neither vouchesafe us time to speak, nor your selves leisure to here.
Ye are so full of words that ye cannot abide us to speak, and so full of
malice, that ye will not sauer of it, if it sound contrary to your opinion.
Ye are made like Porticus i^ Olympia, which was called Septiuoca, having seven
voices or seven soundes, because for one voice it would give many. So, you
were made Septiuoci for one word you will have the tellinge of seven score or
else the sprite would fume and be in a great heat: how be it, many times
and often we have confuted your doctrine, although you hitherto were not
coufuted, which could not be, for two causes: the one was because you were
become heretics, which will never be persuaded against their conceived
opinion, as Lucifer the heretic confessed of his disciples to S. Hierom. Vnum
ribi confiteor quia mores meorum apprime nom, facilius cos vinci posso quam
persuaderi. I confess this one thing to the, for as much as I do so well know
the nature of my disciples, that to dye for, they will not be persuaded, rather
will they by violent co^pulsion be vanquished. Next because ye are apishe as I
say. For as the Ape whippeth here and there, and never staiethe in one place,
likewise pour custom and manner is, so to sterte and whippe from place to
place, from matter to matter, from text to text, that it is not possible to
prevail against you in resoninge. It is an old saying and some what to true,
Frenzy, Heresy and Gelosie after that they have ones crepte into man, they
will never lightly out of him again. Blame me not if I be some what quick.
Your quick speed heretofore requires no less have, Yet am I not so quick
to touch you for your evil doings, which deserve no favor, as ye have been
over hasty here before to deprave us for such matters as were worthy praise
and commendation. If ye have taken pleasure in deprauing us, that offended not
take not now displeasure, to be reproved, for that ye have offended: ye have
many times spoke what ye ought not, and now nomaruell, if ye hear what ye
would not. Who has not both seen and hard in book, balet and play your
spurning and kycking, your croing and cryinge, your barkinge and bitinge
against the faiethfull beliuers and catholic preachers? and why? forsothe for
two causes. Let Diogenes tell the first and I will not stick to tell the next,
One asked Diogenes what was the cause, that some men would rather give their
alms to the creplte and lazar then to a Philosopher, marye quod he, because
they hope sooner to be a creple or lazar then to be a Philosopher, that is, a
lover of wisdom and truethe. Now why have ye so vehemently inueighed against
the true preachers of Christ, and the truth of his spousesse our mother the
church, and have extolled the false ministers of Antichrist and the ministry
of his harlot the malignant church? Speak Diogenes, speak. It is, because
they sooner hoope to be still the false ministers of Antichriste, then at any
time the faithful preachers of Christ: sooner to go to dwell in hell with the
devil for heresye: then to reign in heaven with god, for true religion. Well
said Diogenes, and by promise I must tell the next cause. I have readde of an
unskillful Painter, who having painted on a time in a table home lie and very
evil fauoredly, a company of croinge cocks, and being preuie of his own
ignorance, he commanded his hoye to drive out all the pultry out of the house
and that in no wise any liuelye Cock should come night the place, where ye
table with his painted cocks stood, least the beholder or byer by comparison
and collation of them together, might esely deprehende the gross and rude
ignorance of the Painter, and so hinder the vttraunce of his ware. So, beware
said our preachers beware of these papists, beware of their Sophistry,
harken not to them. Keep not company with them. Try, fie on the^ and let them
go. Wherefore? The painter has told the cause. They were privy of their own
wicked ignorance. For they feared, and I am out of doubt, that if ye had
truly conferred their doctrine and lives with the doctrine and lives of the
other good and godly teachers, which they called papists: if ye had quietly
and diligently with indifferency of mind wayed well what they have either
said in pulpit or written in books: ye had long agone perceived the blind
and gross ignorance of your guydes, Ye had eslie found out their treachery,
craft and falsehood: ye had soon tried that al their gaie painted wart, was
but bumling and fumbling peltrie, and not (as they made you believe) faithful
religion, but deceitful delusion, not witty writing, but wyly wresting of well
written truth, not truethfull preching, but rutheful brekinge of all christian
ordres, not right reformacion of things amiss, but denellishe deformation of
things that were well, and to be short not repairing, but impairing of the
catholic faith. Alas most dear countremen that ever ye should be so much
bewitched by that deuelishe harlot that for her whigge and whay ye should thus
leave the nourishinge milk of your louinge mothers breasts, for the durtie
poudle of her unclean pittes which brings death, ye should forsake the
clean fountain and well of your mother, where he^s springs the water of
life. O alas dear friends ye have greatly hasarded the wealth of your souls,
ye have heaped the burninge coals of vengeance upon your own headdes: ye have
utterly cast your selves away for ever, to be tormented body and soul
amongst the foul deuelles of hell in fire everlasting, if upon this calling
ye repent not, and make have homewarde into the bosom of your louinge mother.
Ye have been often called, and few of you have regarded. What pituous plages,
what marvelous miseries, have not you seen and most of you felt, sins ye left
the unity of the universal church? And were they not all as Prophets sent
amongst you to put you in remembrance that ye were from home, that ye were
out of the favor of god? What desperation has there been among you? how
many of you now of late years, have died desperate of Gods mercy? how
many have cast away themselves with their own violente hands? And was not
all this suffered to let you understand, that ye were become disobedient
children to your good mother? that ye were no longer members of that lively
body? can the child despair of the fathers mercy, as long as he is
obedient to the mother? Can he despair to be saved by Christ, that is a membre
of his body? no, no. Thus mercifullye by diverse means GOD bouchesafed to call
you home again into his dear spousesse lap, into your tender mothers arms.
But it has not moved your stony and stouborne hearts. Now again of his
mesureles mercy he calls you. And out of doubt this is the last call, this
is the last sound of the trumpet. If ye come not now home at this call, it
is to be feared, least he will exclude you out for ever, and you that would not
come upon so many callinges, shall be bidden go at one commandment Maledicti
in ignem aternum, accursed into fire everlasting. Ye have been called diversely
by diverse and marvelous plages, and yet ye come not. Now last of all he
calls you by a more gentle mean, by his true elect Marye our most noble and
godly Queen. Whom his inscrutable providence has preserved of a special
purpose no doubt, that by her he might restore his true church, of late years
miserably vexed. And by her last of all, call you home into the fold, that
have long straied as loost sheep. She remembringe therefore whose ministresse
she is, does not slack to execute her office. Clamat virgo, Angli, surgite,
sponsus adest. The faithful and heavenly virgin cries earnestlye unto you, O
my louinge subictes of England, O dear beloved people, arise arise, come and
accompany the spousesse of Christ our loving mother, for the spouse comes. If
ye be not of her train, if ye be not of her family, the Spouse will not know
you: the Spouse Christ will not admit you where he has to do. If ye be not
one with the spousesse, the spouse and you must needs be two. The spouse and
the spousesse shall be one in heaven, you and the devil shalde one in hell.
Wherefore arise, arise I sai. Come home come home. ytare so lovingly called. Who
calls you? god calls you. Whose vengeance you cannot escape, if you come
not, if this last call bring you not home. Your creator calls you, whose
wilis to save what he has made. The lord of mercy calls you, who by so many
ways lets not to seek the lost sheep, in whose recovery he more
reioyseth, then in the hauitige of ninety and nine.

Thus God, the creator, and lord of mercy most gently and lovingly calls
you. By whom? by many messengers, and now last of all by a famous Mary, whose
merits and mercy toward you all, might move you all to come: by an heavenly
maid, whose integrity of life and constancy of faith, ought to persuade you
al to come willingly: by a mighty Queen, whose authority might compel you
all, to come with syede. whether to come? home, in to your mothers lap, where
lacks no comfort, no consolation, no heavenly pleasure. With her, ye shall
have al, being ones made me^bres of him that is al i^ al. At home with her,
you shall have assurance of life, that caunot dye: of inheritance, that shall
not quail: of bliss that cannot end: eternally to continue in heaven with
God. If ye tarry still from home, what shall you have? out of al doubt, ye
shall be assured of bitter death, of perpetual servitude, of unspeakable
torments everlasting to endure in hell amongst deuilles. Tan niether so
great benefits persuade you to come home, neither so great displesures weary
you to wa^dre from home? were ye so lightly carried from home by the devil your
enemy, that ye might be lost: and are ye now so hardly perswated to turn,
when god your redeiner calls you, by so many louinge ways that ye might be
saved? Shall I call you me^ that wilfully ru^ne into confusion, which the
vntesonable beasts would not? Shall I call you christians that so often and so
lovingly called, choose rather to follow Antichrist to hell, then christ to
heaven? shall I call you English subjects, that so little regard the trumpet
of your sovereign Lady? Is it so hard to persuade men, (which should have
reason,) to choose rather life then death, rather pleasure then pain? Is it
so hard to persuade christians to follow rather God then the devil, rather to
reign in heaven then to suffer in hell? Is it so hard to pecswade English
hearts, to obey so noble a Queen, so godly a Mary, so heavenly a virgin,
calling you home in such loving wife, where ye may have rest and quietness,
that have been tossed with so many miseries? where ye may have remedy of so
many pestilent sores, and vlceres, wherewith your souls are infected? Come,
come, louinge country men. For the passion of Christ make have and come. Be
not slack in coming, that made so great have in goinge. Behold your louinge
mothers arms are open to receive you, her bosom vnlased* her breasts bare to
feed you with the sweet milk of true knowledge, although ye have vngentlie
delte with her in forsakinge her. Yet come I say and humbly submit your selves
unto her, and she will lovingly receive you. She will forget and forgive al
unkindness past, and she will deliver you from so many euilles, perilles, and
dangers, that ye are in. She can and will, and without her, there is no other
to be looked for, but utter confusion. If ye will not believe the truth uttered
in words, yet credit the effect expressed by example. When the raging waters
had overwhelmed the whole earth, and drowned man and beast and all that was,
who then was saved, but Noe and seven with him? What did the Arc prefigure
unto us? No doubt the catholic church of Christ, which does regenerate you
to God, and delivers all that abide in her from the peril and danger of hell
and the devil. Ad quam confugiunt omnes in omni pressura and in omni
tribulatione sua. Unto the Arc of which catholic church says saint Austen
al do resort for succor in all persecution, misery and trouble. Ye cannot
conceive dear friends the great comfort, consolation, and safegarde, that is
with in this church, because your headdes are so heuie with new fantassticall
errors. Ye are so drousie and so blind in the dead sleep of ignorance. But
if ye would awake out of that dead sleep and see the truth, then no doubt but
ye would think with me and say with waking Jacob. Vere hic est domus dci,
and porta coeli. id est. In deed this is the house of God, and the gate of
heaven. For be out of doubt, if ye he not of this house. ye cannot enter into
heaven, where God reigns. If ye keep not your selves within the Arc of this
universal church, ye cannot avoid destruction: Ye must needs perish body
and soul, Wherefore louinge friends, if you desire to be saved, and to reign
with Christ, be at home with his spousesse. If ye louge to inherit as the
children of our heavenly father, despice not the doctrine of our mother the
catholic church. If ye long to drink the lively water that springs into
everlasting life, resort home to the clear fountains of your kind mother
the church, and abandon the company of heretics. Leave their broken and
unclean cesterues, which can hold no water, but poudle and miere. For
brief, if ye desire to worship God rightly, and to walk in this true
religion according to his most holy will and pleasure, then stagger not to
embrace and follow the old religion, newlye recovered and set furthe by our
heavenly and virtuous maiden Queen. For be out of doubt there is nothing in
this religion, but what the scriptures of God have occasioned, the heavenly
spirit has suggested, our true mother the catholic church has authorized,
the holy and learned fathers of all Christendom have set forth, the consent
of many general counselles has confirmed, the long succession and
co^tinuaunce has approved to be most true sincere and perfect. O most dear
beloved friends be not ashamed to repent, wherein the Angels of heaven will
rejoice. Be not ashamed to arise that have so shamefully fallen. Be not ashamed
to come home to your mother the church, since she is not ashamed to receive
you. Think it not vileness to forsake the society of heretics, that ye may
be made the children of God. Think it no folly to twyne your selves out of
the arms of an harlot, which will gripe you to death, that ye may sit in
the lap of so tender a mother, which will cherishe you into life
everlasting. Well it is time I see to break of, for I have exceded the just
measure of a Preface. And yet am I loath to leave. Blame me not though I cannot
observe measure in my talk to you, toward whom my love and hearty affection
knows no mean. And though I am in doubt how you shall like my doings, yet
be ye out of all doubt I have done the same of a great zeal, and most
frendlye affection toward you all. And I protest before God I only seek
thereby your souls health. Neither have I written this to shame you, but as my
dear beloved brethren I warn you and call you into the feloweship of the
soonne of God Jesus Christ our lord. Wherein if I ought prevail, well is it
with me, but much better with you. Here I will leave and give place to holy
Vincent. Too whom I beseech you heartily give attentive ear, and willinge heart
to understand his counselles, and no doubt but ye shall be glad thereof. The
blessed God in perfect Trinity direct your hertes and ways.

The book
THE Scripture saiing and admonishinge: Demand of thy fathers, Deu.xxxi
and they will tell the: Enquire of thine au^cetours, and they will show the:
Likewise, Apply thine ears un to the words of the wise: Prouer.iii
Again, My son forget not my sayings, let thy heart keep my words: It
seems unto me that am of all the servants of God the very basest Pilgrim, a
matter well worth the travel, and like through Gods grace to profit very
much, if I should comprise together in writing all such godly, comfortable, and
wholesome precepts and counsels, as I have faithfullye received of the fathers,
concerning the true and catholyke faieth. A work no doubt right necessary
for mine own infirmity, having thereby prompte and redye, that might through
daily reading, repair and help the wekenes of my memory. Unto which
enterprice, not the fruit only of the self work has moved me, but also the
just consideration of time, and opportunity of place, have and do vehementlye
encourage me to attempt the same. Time.
Time I say, for time we see passes away irreuocablye, suatching with it man
and all human and worldly things. Wherefore sittinge it is, that we of time
catch also somewhat, that might in time advantage us into life lasting
beyond time. And at this time especially, when both a certain terrible
expectation of Gods fearful judgment, now imminent and approchinge very
nigh at hand, exactethe in us a more feruente study toward his religion:
and also the subteltie and craft of new fangled heretics needs now great
care, watch, and diligence.

The place I say, Place.
because sequestratinge and deuidynge me from the frequencie and haunt of
Cities and Towns, I have bestowed my self in an out small village, and in a
Monastery where, without great let or hinderaunce, that may be accomplished
which the Psalm speaks of: Vacate and uidete quoniam ego sum deus.

Moreover the consideration of my purpose agrieth hereto well. For whereas ones
I was tossed with diverse and boysteous waves of the secular traffyque, at
length Christ being my helper, I arrived unto the port of religion, a most
sure haven for all men: that there pullyng down the comb of pride and
vanity, and applying my self to please God with the sacrifice of Christian
humility, I might happelye avoid not only the wrekes and troubles of this
present life, but the inquencheable flames alsoo of the world hereafter.

But now I shall in the name our lord, set upon the matter purposed. That
is, to describe and set forth such good lessons, as by tradition are diriued,
by writtinge are left unto us from our auncetours and forefathers: desirynge
to be accepted rather as reporter thereof, then presuminge to seem author of
the same. And further, I shall observe this order in writting: not all, but of
all the most necessary matters to gather and rehearse, and that not in fine
and pyked phrase, but in facile and common speech: so that the most part may
seem rather signified, the^ explicated: rather slight lie touched, then
exactly discussed. I leave the florishinge, curious, and painted manner of
endicting to other, which either upon confidence of their wits, or respect
of duty or office, attempt the like enterprise. As for me, I intend nothing
else, but to provide unto my self, and for mine own singular use, a byll of
remembrance, as it were, agaiust oblivion: whereby memory moughte be helped,
which I feel now to decay in me. And yet I shall endeavor with Gods help
to amend, and daily enlarge the same: as my leisure and opportunity shall
serve, to recognize and recompt such things as I have learned. And this to
this end I say, that if these my treatise (which I make for my self only)
escape my hands, and hap to light into the hands of other: that then they
carpe not, or rashelye disprove any thing therein contained, whereof is
promised a reformation and amendment. Now therefore to come to the matter it
self) I have with great study and earnest diligence, many times sought, and
that of very many godly and learned men, how and by what certain and
general rule I might try and thoroughly discern the verity of the catholic
faith, from the falsehood of wicked heresye, the true preacher of Christ, from
the false minister of Antichriste. And I have received of them all, at all
times this one only answer: that whether I, A rule.
or any other man would perfitely know, and perceive the treachery,
falsehood,(...)

Wherefore it is very necessary for the auoydinge so great dangers of diverse
errors and doubts, that the line of the Prophetical and Apostolical
scripture, be drawn and directed along, according to the rule and exposition
of the catholic church. Likewise in the catholyke church we ought seriously
to regard and take heed, that we faithfully hold that, which is every where,
always, and of algenerally received, observed, and beliued: for that is
properly catholic: Catholic.
as by the Etimologie of the term (catholic) does appear, which
comprehendethe all universally. And this shall we do, Universality.
Auncientie. Consent.
if we ensue and follow the universality, the auncientie, and the consent of
the church. These three points, he must firmly hold that will be counted
catholic, and desires to continue in the faieth of the catholic church,
with out which there is no salvation. Of these three points I shall teach as
I have learned. And touching the first, we shall not miss to follow the
universality, if we heartily confess and acknowledge that faieth to be the
true christian faieth, which the universal Church throughoute the whole
world does confess and acknowledge. Touching the second, we shall
assuredlye follow the auncientie, if we stray not from the censures and
judgments of the ancient, holy, and catholic fathers. Touching the third,
we shall rightlye follow the consent and unity, if in that antiquity we admit,
embrace and allow the difinitions, judgments, and censures, of all or the
most part of the said holy fathers. Now what shall the catholic Christian
man do, if any one particle of the church, has deuidid if self from the
communion of the universal faith? What else should he do, but prefer the
health and safety of ye whole body, before the corrupt and pestiferous membre?
What if some new contagion invade the church, and labors to co^maculate and
corrupt, not a parcel only, but a whole congregation? Then let him cleue to
antiquity: which cannot be seduced by any craft of novelty. What if in the
self same antiquity, we shall try that two or three, yea whole cities and
pro uinces have erred? Then in any wise, he ought to prefer before the
rashenes, temeritie and ignorance of a few, yt decrees and determinations of
an universal counsel. What if no such decrees of any universal counsel can
be found in some case, as some such may befall? Then shall he diligently
confer, search, and considre the books and monumentes of the ancient
fathers of the church, and receive their judgments. Which, although they
were neither of one place, neither of one time, yet are one in the communion
and faieth of one catholic church. And what soever these sages with one
consent, manifestly have defended, written, and taught, the same ought he
believe without all doubt. For the better understanding of that which I have
said, I will set furthe the same one after an other by examples, and declare
the^ more at large, least whiles I study to be short, I sle^derly pass over
the weight of the matter. In the time of Donate that heretic, Donate.
of whom such as maintain his heresies be called Donatistes, what time a
great part of Affricke had tombled them selves headlong into the goulfe of the
pernicious errors of the said Donate: and forgettinge their religion and
profession, preferred the cursed and blasphemous temeritie of one vain man,
before the unity of the church: then (through Affricke) such as detested
that profane scisme, and adhered fast to the uniform consent of Christ's
universal church, they only of them all might be said unto their posterity
leauinge a special form how hereafter the wisdom of al universally, ought
more to be esteemed then the madness of a few singular persons, in any weighty
matter concerning our faieth.

Likewise what time the pestilent poison of the Arrians, Arrians.
had infected, not one portion, but almost the whole world: in somuche that in
manner all the bishops of the Latin church, partlye by force, partly by
craft circumuented, were wo^derouslie perplexed and amassed, what were best to
be done and followed in so great confusion of matters: Then whosoever was the
true worshipper and lover of God, the same was not infected with the skorfe of
that filthy contagion: but preferred the ancient faith, and unity of
Christ's universal church, before the new forged treachery and falsehood of
certain singular new fangled harebraines. And what calamity, how great
misery does ensue innovation of religion, and the bringing in of such
newefanglenes, contrary to the unity of the catholic church: it is most
clear and very evident, by that which followed in the time of these Arrians.
For then all kind of things both great and small went to wrack: affinities,
cognations, amities, houses, and families were divided, yea whole cities,
peoples, provinces, nations: And finally the whole Empire of Rome was
merueilouslye distourbed. For when that profane novelty of the Arrians, as it
were some Bellona or infernal fury (the Emperor himself being first
bewitched withal) had ones brought all the heads and nobles of the court in
subjection unto that new law: sessed not after to disturb, vex, and
confound all manner of things, both private and public, holy and profane:
without discrepaunce of good and badde, to disquiet and hurt whom she listed,
and how she liked. Then were wives violated, widows desolated, virgins
defloured, monasteries suppressed, clearks persecuted, deacons buffeted,
priests hated, the^ were gayles, prisons, and dongeons stuffed full of good
and godly men, of who^ some were banished from cities and towns, and compelled
among wild beasts, caves, and rocks, in deserts, in great need, famine,
and thirst to end their miserable life. Such misery does certainly ensue
and follow, whenever for the heavenly doctrine, human superstitions are
brought in: when well gounded antiquity, is undermined through wicked
novelty: when the orders and institutions of our elders, are violated: the
decrees of the fathers broken: the definitions of our auncetours neglected:
when the pernicious desire of newefangled curiosity, keeps not it self
within the commendable limits of the sacred and incorrupte antiquity. Some
perchance will think that I speak this of affection and hatred, that I bear
to innouations. Whosoever thinks so, let him at lest wise give credit to s.
Ambrose in this behalf, S. Ambrose
who in his second book unto Themperoure Gratian, deploringe and lamentinge
the cruel bitterness of that time writes, in this wise.

O almighty god we have now sufficiently purged and cleansed the slaughter of
thy confessors, the murder of thy ministers, the wickedness of so great
impiety, with our blood and with our destruction. Thou have now sufficiently
declared, that they cannot be saved, which have uiolated and broken thy
catholic faith. Likewise in the third book of the same work. Let us observe
therefore (says S. Ambrose) the precepts of thelders, let us beware through
presu^ptuous temeritie, to uiolate the seals of our inheritance. The fast
sealed book of the prophet, nor thy seniours, nor the powers, nor the
Angels, ne Archaungelles durst unseale. To Christ only was the prerogative
reserved to open the same. The book of Apostolic fathers, who of us dare open,
being sealed by so many confessors, and hallowed with the blood of so many
godly martyrs? They were holy confessors and martyrs, how may we dense
their faith, whose uictorie we commend? Yea playnelye (holy S. Ambrose) we
commend and greatly allow the^. For who is so mad, who so evil disposed, that
wishes not to trace and follow their steps, (all if he cannot overtake them)
whom no violence, no cruelty, no kind of death could terrify: whom no
allurementes of worldly felicity, no hope of life, no desire of liberty, no
flattery of frendshippe could withhold from the defense of the faieth which
their auncetours had? Whom I say our heavenly lord for their constancy in the
ancient faieth, judged worthy, by who^ his divine majesty might restore his
churches, being greuouslie mangled: revive and quicken up the spirits of well
disposed people, merueilouslye discomforted: set up and restore again the
holy order of his priesthood, being trod under foot: and by whom finally
his inscrutable providence might with the blood of so innocente martyrs,
cleanse the people being pitiouslye defiled with the stinkinge frothe of
dangerous heresies. And with the plentiful tears of so godly by shoppes,
wash clean away and utterly deface such newefangled, not properly
writi^ges, but rather wrestinges of well written verities. And so revoke
almoost the whole world from pestilent heresies, unto the most certain
truth of his word: from altering novelty, unto the sound and constante
auncientie: from newetangled fantasies, unto the approved judgment of his
catholic Church. But in this heavenly consta^cie, this is to be noted and
earnestly to be considered of us, that in the auncientie of the Church, they
defended not any one singular part, but the catholyke, that is to wit, the
universal faith universally received. Neither is it leefull to think, that
such and so many sage and learned fathers would with such constauncie
affirm, maintain and defend the dreaines of one or two persons, A rule.
or would for the fantastical conspiracy, as it were, of one small province
co^tende even to death. But they imbracinge and faithfullye ensuing the
decrees, censures, and definitions of all the ministers of the holy Church,
and of the apostolic verity, had rather to deliver their bodies unto most
cruel tourmentes, then to be delivered from the ancient belief: rather to be
overthrown by their enemies to death, the^ to give over their catholic faith:
whereby they should lose the hope of life at Gods hands. Thus losing al to win Christ, suffering themselves willingly to be overcome of al, that truth
might overcome by them: they have pourchaced unto their name such inestunable
glory, that they be most rightlye reputed and accounted, not only
confessors, but the princes and chief heads of all other confessors and
Martyrs.

Wherefore this divine and heavenly example of these blessed fathers, ought to
be a special president unto all and singular Catholic me^, worthy in
continual meditation to be recorded, who in manner of the seuenfolde
candelsticke, braushing wc the seue^fold light of the heavenly spirit, have
foreshowen unto all their posteritee, a very manifest and clear form, how
hereafter in all vprores of vain errors, the unadvised temeritie of
fantastical innovation ought to be repressed and utterly to be suppressed by
the authority of holy An tiquitie, and by the force of the universal consent
of Christ his church. This has not been strange among the fathers of the
Church. For evermore the holyer, the better disposed any have been, the more
ernest, prompt and ready he has been always to withstand new inventions.
Examples hereof are plenty. But to avoid tediousnes I will pass over many,
and only recite one, whereby it may be evident unto all, with how great care,
study, and contention the blessed succession of the Apostles have at all times
defended the integrity of ye religion once allowed and received, by the
consent of the universal Church. Agrippinus
So it was therefore that Agrippinus bishop of Carthage first of all other
thought good to be rebaptised, contrary to the canon and rule left by the
Apostles, contrary to the custom or order of the elders, contrary to the
general consent of the Clergy. Which presumption of his, raised up so much
mischief, that thereby was given not only matter of factious sacrylege to
Heretics, but also to certain catholics occasion of error.

How be it on every side each good man withstod it earnestly. Stephen.
But Stephen of honorable memory then bishop of Rome, with certain other
godly men most vehementlye of all other did resist that fantasye of
Agrippinus. And in an Epistle sent unto Affrike upon that occasion, he ordained
that nothing ought to be altered or renewed, but all things to be observed and
kept as they were by tradition left. For that holy and prudent father well
perceived, that there was not the true religion, where all things are not
received in like faith of the children, as they were left of the fathers:
where we be not led by religion, but we led religion whether we like. And this
is the property of christen sobrutie, and gravity not to devise new sects
and fashions for his posterity, but with all his power to observe the old and
wholesome laws received of antiquity. What was then the end of that business
raised by Agrippinus? Forsooth the usual and tofore observed, the ancient
custom was retained: the new devise utterly refused.

But ye will say perchance, Note.
that such men lack power and learning to defend their new devised
opinions. Yea they were so excellent in wit, so stowing in eloquence, and so
many in number: again they had so great likelyhode of truth, and brought so
many sentences of the scriptures for their purpose (but wrongfully
understood) that assuredlye they could by no means have been ouermated, had
not their matters quailed in them selves, as most untrue and contrary to the
will of God.

To be short, what shall I say of the decrees passed in the counsel kept by
certain in Africa. How did God favor the same? Were not all things therein
done, accounted as dreams, abolyshed as fables, abrogated and utterly refused
as untrue and contrary to the catholic faith? And O wonderful turn and
merueilous conversion. The first authors of the same opinion are reputed catho
like: and the folowers of the same are judged heretics.

The masters be absolved, and the disciples be condemned. The writers of the
books, out of which they falselye forged their opinion, are made the children
of the heavenly kingdom: and the auouchers burn in hell. For who is so mad
that doubts, but that so blessed light of al holy martyrs and bishops S.
Cyprian, S. Cyprian
and his fellowship, do raigne-euerlastinglye with Jesus Christ in heaven?
Again who is so deuellishe and wicked to denaye, that the Donatistes, and
other like heretics, that brag that they were led by the counsel and
authority of the said S. Cyprian to rebaptize, burn with their graundesyre
the devil euerlastinglye in hell? And surely it seems unto me that, that
counsel in Affrike was promulgate and setfurthe even by the providence and
will of God: thereby to detect and disclose the shamfull craft of such
hellyshe heretics, whose wicked fashion is (when they entende to patche up an
heresy in an other man's name) to induce the books of such ancient writers
(in that point darkly penned and leafte unto us) which for the obscurity and
darkness thereof, might serve as it were for the maintenau^ce of their
treachery, falshoode and heresy. And so they might seem not to be the first,
nor the only authors of such opinion. Whose wickedness in this poi^t. I judge
worthy double hatred.

First because they fear not to quaffe the poison of heresy, and to open the
gappe of damnable error unto other. Secondelye for that they slaunderouslye
renew the memory of holy men in such matter, and as it were with their
profane hand, do fan abroad into the air the ashes, which were well raked
up, reuiuinge that (not without diffamation) which were better to be buried in
perpetual silence. Herein they leappe not one inch from their graundsyre Cham.
Cham.
who not only vouchesafed not to cover the naked members of his natural father
Noe, Noe.
but also showed other of it to laughe at. Wherein he somuche transgressed the
reverence due to the parents, and so much thereby displeased God, that he and
his posterity were cursed for his fault. And his brethren blessed by the
mouth of God, who would neither see the nakedness of their reverend father,
neither permit other to se it. For turnig their backs toward him (as it is
written) they covered him. Which their fact does let us tunderstande, that
they did neither allow, ne yet be wraie the fault of the holy man their
father. And therefore they and their posterity were rewarded with the blessed
benediction of God. But now let us return to our purpose. We ought therefore I
say greatly to fear, and to dread the danger and punishemente of alteringe
the faieth, and violating the ancient religion. From which temerous
enterprise, as well the doctrine of ecclesiastical constitution does fear
us, as the censure of Apostolic authority does terrify us. It is well
known, how greatly, how severely, and with what vehemency blessed saint
Paul does inuaighe against such, as with marvelous lightness were allured
from him, by whom they were called into the grace of Christ and his true
Gospel: and had heaped unto them a number of masters according to their
desire and lust: turning away their care from the verity, geuinge themselfes
up to fables, having dampnation.

What were they that went from their first professed faith? Such as those
deceived, of who^ the same Apostle writes unto his brethren at Rome, saying.
To. xvi.
I beseech you brethren mark well them, which sow division and give
occasions of evil, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoid them. For such serve not Christ our lord, but their own bellies: and
with sweet preaching and flatteringe words, they deceive and seduce the hearts
of the innocent people: ii. Ty. iii.
which enter into houses and bring into bondage women laden with sin:
which women be led with diverse lusts, ever learning and never able to come
to the knowledge of the truth. They are men full of vain talk and deceivers,
which subvert all houses, and teach for lucre sake, such kind of doctrine,
as they ought not to teach. They be men of corrupt minds and lewd
corcerning the faith, proud hearted, and ignorant: yet do they busy them selves
in questions and contencio^s of words. (...) Ty. iiii.
They are destitute of the truth, iudginge gains to be holiness. Also they as
idle persons do learn to compass about houses. They be not only idle, but
also full of words, and very curious, speaking such things as they ought
not. which repelling a good conscience, have erred concerning the faith. whose
profane and vain talk avails much to impiety, and their speech crepeth
forth as the canker. But it is well that is written of them also in the
scripture. But they shall prevail no longer, ii. Tim. iii.
for their madness shall be made manifest unto all men, as theirs also was.

When therefore the like wanderinge from province to province, from town to
town, and cariyng with them sale errors about, had come also to the
Galathians: and when the Galathians after that they had heard of them, being
now as it were glutted and weried with ye truth, removing from the^ the
comfortable food of the Apostolic and Catholic doctrine, delited them selves
with the dragges and fylthes of that heretical novelty: S. Paul did so
execute his Apostolical authority, that with great severity he thus decreed.
Although (says he) either we, or an Angel from heaven, preaches unto you
any other gospel then we have preached, accursed be he. What is that, which
he says (although we)? Why does he not say rather although I? It is to say,
although Peter, Andrew or John also, and finally although the hole company of
ye Apostles preach unto you any other Gospel, the^ we have preached unto you
accursed be he or they. This is a fearful sentence, that for the affirming
and stablishynge of the first faith, he neither favors him self nor any
other of thapostles. But this is a small matter. He says further. Although an
Angel from heaven preach any other gospel the^ we have preached unto you,
accursed be he. It sufficed not blessed S. Paul, for the rete^tion of the faith
once taught and preached, to remember the nature of man's condition, unless he
had comprehended therein also the Angelical excellency. Foralthouh we (says
he) or an Angel from heaven. etc. Not because the holy and heavenly angels
can now syn. But this is his meaning. If it may be (says he) that which can
not be. Whosoever he be that shall attempt to change and alter the faith
once taught and received accursed be he. But S. Paul may seem to some
perchance, rather to have said this of some humane affection, then of any
godly counsel and consideration to hane decreed it. God forbid that we
should so think of S. Paul. For it follows, and the same he eftsoon does
inculcate very earnestlye with this iteration. As I have said tofore (says
he) I say now again, if any shall preach any other Gospel unto you, then
that which ye have received, accursed be he. He said not if any shall teach
other doctrine the^ such as ye have received blessed be he, let him be allowed
and received, but let hi be (says he) Anathema, that is to say let him be
separated, segregated and excluded as one accursed, lest the dangerous
inffection of one corrupt sheep, may poison and infect, ye sound flock of
Christ with his venomous permixtion and company. But some may say, that these
S. Paul's precepts were only given to ye Galathians, and to none other. Then
also it should follow that other things set forth in ye same epistle, were
commanded unto the Galathians only and to none other. As that. Si uiuimus
spiritu, spiritu ambus lemus. etc. that is: if we live by the spirit, let us
walk in the spirit. Let us not be made desierous of vain glory, provoking
one an other, enuiyng one an other. And so forth, as follows. But if this be
absurd to grant, and if al things there expressed by saint Paul, were
commanded unto all indifferentlye, then as well the counseil and warning
concerning faith, as those precepts of manners in like sort perteyne unto al.
And as it is not lawful for any person to provoke or envy one an other, so
it may not be lawful for any to allow and follow any other doctrine then
such as the Catholic church does universally preach: And if that, which
then was commanded (as, if any teach you other doctrine then such as has
been taught you, let him be accursed) be not now commanded, which there he
says in like sort. Dico autem, spiritu ambulate, et desiderium carnis non
perficietis. I say walk in the spirit, and fulfill not the lust and desire
of the fleashe.} But if it be wicked and also pernicious so to believe, then
necessarely it follows, that as these rules touching manners ought to be
observed of all ages, even so the other precepts concerning the holy fay the
are commanded unto all men of all ages: as that nothyuge ought to be innouated
or altered. Wherefore neither has it ben lawful, neither is it lawful at any
time, to teach other doctrine unto ye catholic christians, then has already
been allowed and received. Shall it the^ be lawful or no, to accurse them which
presume to inayntayne or teach any other doctrine, then that which has been
received, taught, and believed? Verily it has been ever lawful, it is always
lawful, it shall evermore be necessary and lawful. Then for as much as it is
so, is there any of such boldness, that dare teach any contrary doctrine to
that, which the universal Church has taught? Is there any of such
lightness, that is so mad to receive any other then that, which the church
has received? Yea, although S. Paul cry and cry again. Although (I sai)
that blessed vessel of election, that heavenly master of gentiles, that
soundinge trompet of apostles, that noble crier of the earth, and skylfull of
the heavens: although, I say, he do cry to al at all times, and every
where, never so much, never so often, never so vehementlye, accursed be he, that
teaches any new opinion, yet behold how these frogs, these wretched
gnattes, the Pelagians, Anabaptists, and other like heretics reclame still to
the contrary, and that to the catholics, saying. We being your authors,
leaders, and teachers, condemn that which ye have allowed, and allow that,
which ye have condemned. Away with your old faith, with your elders
institutions, your auncetours decrees, away with them all: and for them
receive and embrace (wotte ye what)? Verelye such gere, as not only may not be
avouched, but neither yet also refelled or named weout danger. Me thike I here
some say. Sir if no innouations may be admitted, how is it that many times
many excellent persons constituted and appointed in the church, are permitted
by the will of God, to setfurth new matters unto the people? This is a good
question, and worthy with much diligence, and at large to be considered.
Whereunto I shall not shape any answer of mine own wit, but use the
authority of the heavenly scripture, and cleave to the counsel and censure of
the holy church. Let us hear therefore godly Moses, let him declare unto us,
why learned men and such as for the gift of knowledge were called Prophets by
the Apostle, are permitted now and then, to bring forth new opinions and
sects, which the old testament calls under allegory: strange Gods,
because such new sects are no otherwise observed and favored of heretics,
the^ the Gentiles did observe and favor their Gods. This blessed Moses
therefore, writes in the Deuteronomie in this wise. Moses
If a Prophet shall rise among you, or any shall say, that he has seen a dreme,
that is to wit, a master constitute in the church, whom the hearers believe to
teach by some revelation: what then? And shall (says Moses) foresaie asigne,
or portent, and it shall happen as he has spoken: This is meaned no doubt by a
master of so great knowledge, as might seem to his disciples and hearers, not
only to foreknow mean and humain things, but also such matters as are above
man, much like were (as their disciples brag of them) Valentinus, Donatus,
Apollinaris, and other of the same here. It follows in Moses. And shall say
unto you: go we and let us follow strange Gods, which you know not and let
us serve them. what be these strange Gods, but only strange errors, Which
thou know not: that are new, not heard of before? Let us serve them. What
is that? Let us believe and follow them. What then? Thou shall not hear (says
Moses) The words of that Prophet or dreamer. And wherefore I pray you? Is
not that forbidden to be taught, which is forbidden to be heard? May not the
hearing thereof be suffered, the teachinge whereof is not forbidden? Because
(says Moses) the lord your GOD tempts you, that it may be manifest
whether ye love him or not, with all your heart, and with all your soul. It is
manifest and clear as the day to what end the providence of God does some
times permit certain masters and ce^sors of his chucrh to err, and in their
erringe to imagine and teach fresh ware, new toys contrary to the ancient
custom of the catholic church. It is (says Moses) that thereby the Lord
your GOD may tempte you. And doubtless this is a great temptation: when he
whom thou iudgest a Prophet, whom thou estemest a disciple of Prophets, whom
thou think a true and faiethfull teacher of verity, whom thou do embrace
with all reverence, does sodeinlye slip into dangerous error, and privily
teaches falsehood, which thou can not easelye deprehende, that art led
with the foreiudgemente of the ancient censure: and hardlye may thou
condemn them, in whom affection has blinded the.

Hear perchance some requires, that I explane these things avouched in the
words of holy Moses, by some ecclesiastical examples. It is a just request,
and unworthy to be neglected. What temptation was that, trow ye, when that
unhappy Nestorius sodainlye of a sheep being made a woulfe, ^estorius.
began to rent and tear the flock of Christ? Yea when even they, whose
blood he sucked, yet believed him to be a sheep, whereby they were the redier
pray unto him. For who would not hardlye believe, that he were in error, whom
they saw elected and chosen with so great judgment of the temporal
Empire, so greatly favored and reverenced of the spiritual clergy: who with
much commendation of holy men, with great favor of the people, was daily
celebrated, and did openly preach and teach the holy scriptures, and so
earnestly confuted the dangerous and pestilent errors of the Jews and
Gentiles? Who would not think but this were a right fellow, and that he
taught, preached and thought ryghtlye in all points? For to the end he might
make away for his heresy to take place, he inueighed earnestly against the
blasphemies of all other heresies. But this is it that Moses said. The lord
your GOD tempts you, if you love him or nor. And to let pass Nestorius in
whom always moore admiration was, the^ profitte: greater fame then experience:
whom in the conceit of the multitude rather the favor and fancy of men had
made great, the^ ye grace of god, let us recite other, which being of great
knowledge and diligence, were therefore no small temptation unto the catholyke
folk. As amongst the Hungarians was one Photinus, Photinus.
that tempted the congregation of Syrma. Who afterward that he was admitted
into the holy order of priesthood, and had there ministered a while, as a true
catholic man: suddenly (as that false prophet or Dreamer whom Moses speaks
of) he began to persuade the people of God committed unto him, to follow
strange Gods. That is to say strange opinions, which they knew not
before. And as that is common, so is this very pernicious, when to the setting
forth of such strange errors, there lack no color of schools, no apparel of
Rhetoric, no help of knowledge, as this Photinus lacked not. For he was a man by wit able to do as much as any: in all kind of knowledge
excellent: for pleasant and sweet pronuntiation inferior to none. Who
copiously and weyghtely disputed and wrote in both tongues, as is manifest by
his books, which he made and penned as well in the Greek tongue as also the
laten tongue. But happily the flock of Christ committed unto him, being very
vigilant and warye, for and concerning the catholic faith, remembered
quickly the watch word given tofore by Moses: and although they wondered at
the eloquence of their Prophet, and Pastor: yet were they well warye of the
te^ptacion. For whom they before followed as the belweather of their flock: now
they avoid and fly from him as a rauenyng wolf.

Likewise the example not of Photinus only, Photinus. Apollinaris
but of Apollinaris also, may well teach us what great peril ensues of the
ecclesiastical temptacion: and so warn and provoke us, with the more earnest
diligence to observe, hold, and follow the catholycke faith universally
taught and received. For this Apollinaris had with such fetches so entangled
his hearers, with such insoluble arguments, and so combred their wits: that
thauthoritie of the church leading them one way, the custom and practice of
their preacher drawing them another way, they were al amassed and in doubt
what they might stand to, and which way they might take, and follow. Neither
was Appollinaris such one, as might easlye be contempned. Yea, he was so
worthy a man, and of such estimation, as in most things might very
quickly be credited. For who was more excellent in finesse of wit then he?
Who worthy either for diligence or knowledge to be conferred with him? How
many heresies in how many volumes he has expressed, how many errors
contrary and iniutious to the faith he has confuted, I need not declare. That
most noble work contayninge thirty books in number, may suffice for the
declaration thereof, wherein he confou^deth mightelye the frantike brablinges and
fond cauillatio^s of Porphyrie, with a great heap of proffes. It were a
tedious business to recite all the works that he made: wherein he showed him
self to be so excellent a clerk, as might worthelye be thought equal to the
chief builders of Christ his church: had he not through profane lust of
heretical novelty, ymagined that new fangled error, wherewith as with the
poison of a running Leprie, so defiled he the rest of his doings, with from
the^cefurth his doctrine was thought and accounted rather to be ecclesiastical
temptation, then spiritual edification. Here it may be required at my hands,
that I declare their heresies, whom I have above remembered for heretics, that
is: the heresies of Nestorius, Apollinaris, and Photinus. How be it this
appertains not to the purpose, which now is in hand. For my purpose is not
to recite all their errors, but to produce the examples of a few, whereby
that may be evidently and clearly demonstrated unto you, which Moses
says: that if at any time any master of the Clergy, yea, and he even a
Prophet in expoundinge the mysteries of the Prophets, attempteth to bring any
new opinion into the church, ye may know that the providence of God, then
suffered you to be tempted. I shall not let, notwithstanding, in discurse
briefly to disclose the errors of the before said men. And I will first begin
with Photinus. Whose sect is this. Photinus.
He says that God is but a single and solitarye person, and that he must be
confessed after the manner of the Jews. He denaieth the Trinity and thinks
to be no person either of the son or of the holy ghost. He affirms Christ to
be only man, and that he took his beginning of Marye. And this he teaches
veheme^tlye, that we ought to confess the only person of God the father,
and wurshyppe Christ as man only. This was the heresy that Photinus
mayntained.

Apollinaris braggeth, that in the unity of the Trinity he does consent with
us, Apollinaris heresy.
and yet the same he blasphemeth with his erroneous profession touching the
incarnation of Christ. For he says, that in the fles he of our Savior, either
the soul of man was not at all, or at leastwise such one as lacked
understanding and reason. Moreover he say de that Christ received not flesh of
the blessed virgin Mary, but that he came from heaven into the virgin. And
being wauerynge and doubtful what he might certaynlye at all times auowche, he
some times affirmed, the flesh of Christ to be coeternall with God the word,
some times to be made of the divinity of the word. For he would never confess
two substaunces to be in Christ, one divine another human: the one received
of God his father, the other of Mary his mother. But he supposed that the
nature of the word was divided: as though a part thereof remained still in God,
and a part also was turned into flesh. Insomuche that where as the verity
says, one Christ to be of two natures, he being adversary to truth,
affirms two substaunces to be made of one divinity of Christ. And this was
the error of Apollinaris.

Nestorius contrary to Apolinaris, whiles he feineth to distinct two natures
in Christ, Suddenly does introduce two persons, and so deuillishlye imagines
to be two Sons of God, two Christ's, the one God, the other man, the one
begotten of the father, the other begotten of the mother. And for this cause he
affirms that holy Marye ought not to be called the mother of God, but the
mother of Christ. For because of her was borne, not that Christ which is god,
but he yt was man. And if any man think that in his books he writes one
Christ and preaches one person of Christ, let him not lightly credit him. For
he does it upon purpose to deceive, that by good he may persuade evil, as
Thappostle says. Per bonum mihi operatus est mortem, That is to say. By that
which was good he has wroght unto me death. Undoubtedly this was his
opinion, that Christ was borne very man, and not yet sociated in the unity of
person unto the word: but that afterward the person of the word descended into
him. And although Christ now be assu^pted, and sits in the glory of god,
yet says he, between him and other me^ was no difference. For man he was only,
and so now remains. These be the blasphemies that Nestorius, Apollinaris, and
Photinus as mad dogs have barked against the catholic faieth, taught and
received in the universal Church. Which truly and syncerely iudginge of God
the father and our savior the son, blasphemeth not, either in the mystery
of the trinity, either in the incarnation of Christ. For she honoreth both
one divinity in the fullness of a Trinity, and the equality of the Trinity
in one and the same majesty. She also confesses one Jesus Christ, not two:
and the same one Christ, to be both God and man. Again in that one Christ to
be one person and two substa^ces or natures: two natures or substau^ces,
because the word of God is not mutable, that it in part or in all might be
converted into flesh, neither two persons but one person. Least in
professinge two sons, she might seem to worship a quaternitie and not a
Trinity. But it shall be good to declare and enucleate the same somewhat more
expresselye and distinctly. Understand therefore, that in God is one only
substance and three persons: in Christ are two natures and one only person.
In the Trinity are mo persons, but not mo natures: in our savior mo natures
but not mo persons. Why so? Because in the Trinite there is one person of the
Father, another person of the Son, an other of the holy Ghost: and yet of
the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, there is one only and the same
nature and no mo. Even so in our savior Christ there be mo natures, as one
of the divinity, an other of the humanity: yet not two persons. For the
deity is not one person, and the humanity an other person: but both is one
only and the same Christ, one only and the same son of God. And of one
only and the same Christ, and the son of God, one only and the same person
is, and no mo. As in man the flesh is one thing, and the soul an other
thing: yet is it but one and the same man, the flesh and the soul. In Peter
or Paul the soul is one thing and the flesh an other thing: yet are there
not two Peter's the soul and the flesh, or the soul one Paul and the flesh
and other Paul, but one and the same Peter, one and the same Paul subsisting
of ii. sundry natures: the one of ye soul, the other of ye body. In like manner
in one and the same Christ be two natures, but the one divine, and the other
human: the one of God the Father, the other of Marye virgin the mother: the
one coequall and coeterne unto the father, the other temporal and less then the
Father: the one consubstauntiall to the Father, the other consubstantial to the
mother. Yet is but one and the same Christ in both substaunces: and not one
Christ God, an other Christ man: not one increate, an other create: not one
impassible, an other passible: not one equal to the father, an other less
then the Father: not one of the father, an other of the mother: but one only
and the same Christ is God and man: the same both create and increate, the
same incommutable and impassible, the same was also commutable and passible,
the same equal and inferior to the father: the same begotten of the Father
before all worlds, the same borne in the world of his mother, perfect God and
perfect man: being God he is in full divinity: being man he is in full
humanity. Having perfect soul, and perfect flesh, perfect mind and
perfect understanding. There are in Christ therefore the word, soul, and
flesh: but all three one Christ, one son of God, one savior, one our
redemer, one not in corruptible confusion of the deity and humanity together,
but in a most perfect, miraculous and singular unity of person. Neither does
that conjunction convert and chaung them one into an other, as the Arrians
dream: but rather in one Christ both natures are placed, that the singularity
of one and the same person still remaininge in Christ, the propriety also of
each nature abides for ever, that at any time god neither begins to be the
body, neither cease to be the body To the better understanding hereof, the
just consideration of man's state shall easelye induce us. For we know that
not in this present world only, but also in the world to come, every man
shall consist of body and soul. Yet shall not the body at any time be
converted into the soul, or ye soul into the body, but each manne made to
live without end: in man necessarelye the difference of both substaunces
shall remain without end for ever.

Even so in Christ the property of both natures remain for ever, and yet in
one unity of person. But where as I name often times the person, and say
that God the person is made man, it is to be feared, least some mistake us to
say that GOD the word has taken upon him our nature and substance, by
only imitacion of the action: and that he was here conuersaunt, not as man in
deed, but as a counterfayte person of man. As in stage plays we see, where
one man resembles sodaynlye diverse persons, and yet is he none of them all.
For as often as we would express the imitation of another man's trade or
office, in doing thereof we so use the diligence of other, that they not
withstandinge which resemble and represent, are not those that are resembled
and represe^ted. As for example: when the stage Player plays the Priest or
King, it follows not that he is either priest or King. Therefore, for the act
or part ceasyng, the person also cease, which he did usurp. God forbid
we Christians should use any such abominable and pestilent mockerye in the
incarnation of his son Christ god and man. Let this madness and fantasy be
left unto the Manicheis the preachers of dreams. Manicheis
The catholic faith confesses the word of God so to be made man, that he
receives truly and manifestlye all that ours is, not deceyuably and
coulerablye. And that he executes all things that were humayne, not as
though he imitated a strange part, but rather as properlye his own, he
verelye and truly being the self same whose person he did represent. As we
our selves also in that we speak, we understand, we live, we be: we do not
herein imitate men, but we are men in deed. Neither were Peter and John (to
name them chieflye above all other) men by imitation, but by being. In like
sort God the word in taking and having fleashe, in speaking, doing, and
sufferyng in the fleashe without corruption, not withstanding his nature,
vouchesafed to do and per form all this, not to the end that he might imitate,
counterfayte, or resemble a perfect man, but because he was in deed and
verelye subsisted perfect man. Therefore as the soul knit unto the flesh,
neither yet turned into the flesh, does not imitate man, but is man: and man
not by simulation, but by substance, so the word God without any conversion
of any part of him, in coming and confoundyng him self to man, is made man,
not by imitation but by subsistynge. He therefore that will be of God must
confess the ineffable word of God, in the incarnation of his son Christ,
and acknowledge one and the same Christ to be verelye and perfectlye God,
verelye and perfectlye man in one unity of one person, which unity of
person was compacte and perfected not after the virgin was delivered, but
even in the womb of the virgin. And we ought diligently to be ware that we
imagine not, Christ to be two, because of his two natures: whom we must
confess to be one only, and ever one. One in his conception, and one after.
One in his birth, and one after. One in the time of his baptism, and one ever
after, Unto who^ being but one, (and yet both God and man, by reason of that
unity of person) both the properties of God are attributed to man, and the
properties of man ascribed to God.

And therefore it is written in the scriptures, John. vi.
that the son of man came down from heaven, and the Lord of Majesty was
crucified in earth. In consideration of this unity of person, the Church
says and believes very catholikely, that God the word was borne of the
virgin. The denial whereof is detestable, impious, and wicked. Then for
as much as it is so, god defend that any man should go about to defraude the
blessed virgin Marie of the privileges of the heavenly grace, as from her
special honor. For sheis by a certain singular gift of our lord and God, most
truly and most worthily to be confessed, (...), that is to say: the mother of
god. How be it, she is not so ye mother of God as that impious heresy does
surmise, which affirms yt she must be said the mother of god by only
appellation, because she brought forth him a man, which afterward was made
God. As we use to say a Priests mother, or a Bishops mother: not in bringynge
forth a Priest or a Bishop, but betyng him a man, which afterward is made
Priest or Bishop. But holy Mary I say is not called the mother of God after
that sort, but rather (as before I said) because in the blessed womb that
holy mysterye was wrought. And by reason of a certain singular and one only
unity of person, as the word is flesh in flesh, so man is God. But now let
us return home, and briefly recompte such things as we have said
touching the heresies tofore remembered: to thend that by the iteration thereof,
the memory may be helped, and the matters more fullye perceived and better
borne away.

Accursed therefore be Photinus not receiving the fullness of the Trinity, and
preaching Christ to be a solitary and only man. Accursed be Apollinaris
affirming in Christ the corruption of divinity converted, and deniynge the
propriety of perfect humanity. Accursed be Nestorius denayinge God to be
borne of the virgin, affirming two Christ's, and persuading to be a
quaternitie contrary to the faith and belief of the Trinity. And blessed is
the catholic church which does honor one God in fullness of Trinity,
Catholic Church.
and also equality of Trinity in one divinity: that neither the singularity
of substance confoundethe the propriety of persons, neither the distinction
of the Trinity, does separate the unity of the deity. Blessed (I say) is
the church, which believes that in Christ be two true and perfect natures,
and but one person, that neither the division of natures divides the unity of
his person, nor the unity of the person co^fou^deth the difference of the
natures. Blessed (I say) is the Church, which humbly confesses, that
Christ manne was not united to God after his nativity, but in the chaste
womb of his mother: to the end she might acknowledge him to be now, and ever
more to have been. Blessed is the Church, which understands God to be made
man, not by conversion of nature, but by consideration of person, and such
person as is subsisting, and ever permanent. Blessed is the Church, which
teaches this unity of person to have such force, virtue, and might, that by
that unity she ascribes in wonderful and ineffable mystery, as well the
proprieties unto manne, as the human qualities to God. For in respect of
that unite of person, she denies not, but that man, as concerning GOD,
descended from heaven, and believes that God, as concerning man, was made in
the earth, suffered, and was crucified. In respect of that unity she
confesses that man is the son of God, and God the son of Marye the virgin.
Thus much of this matter: the weighte whereof requires an exact treatise But
in this present place, it is sufficient to touch by the way brieflye, which
by Gods leave I purpose hereafter moore plentuouslye to discuss at an other
time. Now let us proceed as we began. I said before and now I say again,
that in the Church of God, the temptation of the people, is the error of the
master or teacher. And so much greater is the temptation, the greater knowledge
of him is that erreth. As we declared, first by thauthoritie of the scriptures,
next by ecclesiastical examples, in the rehearsal and allegation of such as at
the beginning were este med catholic in faieth, and sound in doctrine: at
length not withstanding either fell into some other sect, or divised some new
of their own brains. Verily it is a great matter profitable to be known,
very necessary to be often recorded, and worthy by diverse examples
continually to be illustrated, and driven into every man's heart: how that
all catholic men at all times, have thought themselves bound to receive the
teachers within the church, and not forsake the faith of the Church with the
teachers being in error.

But where as I am able to bring forth many in this kind of te^pting, yet I
suppose none to be compared with Origenes teptacion, Origenes.
in whom were so many excellent, singular, and merueilous gifts, that he was
as it were a mark for every man to gase and wonder at. Whose sentence,
judgment, and opinion in all matters, all men judged most worthy to be
embraced. And no merueill. For if the life gives any authority to man, no
doubt he did lead a very perfect, holy, and continent life, in much
patience, and suffering. If the stock and parentage: who more noble then he,
which was sprung of that honorable house, that first was bewtified with
blessed Martyrdom? Who afterward for Christ his sake not only forsakinge
his natural father, but leauyng also all his goods and substance, somuche
proffeted amongst the hard straightes of holy poverty, that many times and
often he was sharply handled, for co^fes sing the name of our Lord. Add
thereto, that so great was his knowledge in all kind of literature, matched
with such finenes of wit, powdered with such pleasant deliuerau^ce of his
words, that he was thought pierelesse without fellow. The high magnificence
of whose absolute knowledge was such, that few or none were thought to
approach. His pronunciatio^ and vtteraunce so sweet, that from his lyppes not
words, but honey might have seemed to flow. What matters seminge never so hard,
has not he with force of disputation made smoth, and clear? What things
seminge very hard to be done, has not he made to appear easy by his own
example? But some will think that he persuaded his assertions by subteltie of
argument only. Yea there was not one of the Church that used mo examples out
of the holy scriptures, then he did in any work that he made, as he made
very many. And that no thing might be lacking in him that either could
increase his knowledge, or enlarge his estimation, he atteined the full
perfection of age. And in his time he had so many disciples, whom effectually
both by continual instruction of doctrine, and effectual example of manners
he had so framed that of him, and as it were out of his bosom issued
innumerable Doctors, Ministers, Confessors, and Martyrs.

Finally in how great admiration, glory, and favor, he was with all men, who
can express? unto whom diverse godly men from all parts swarmed, whom the
Christians honored, as a Prophet. The Philosophers reverenced as a master.
Whom for the worthiness of his heavenly wisdom, not only men of private
condition, but also themperiall state honored. Record of histories, which
report that the mother of Alexander the Emperor, sent for him to learn at his
mouth heavenly wisdom, where of he had a special grace, and she a burning
desire. The same histories also report unto us the testimonye of an epistle,
which he endicted with the majesty of christian prelacie, and sent it unto
Philippe the emperor, Philippe.
who first was made christian of the Romayne Princes. Touching the incredible
knowledge expressed in that epistle, if any accept not the christian testimonye
at my report, at least wise let him receive the gentle confession upon the
testimonye of profane Philosophers.

For that impious and wicked man Porphyrius does confess, Porphyrius.
that by the sound of his fame, he was styred to travel as far as Alexandria,
being in manner yet but a boy: and that he there saw Origines, well stepped in
age: but such one, of such majesty, as who had builded in him self a tower of
all knowledge. No doubt he was a man full of worthiness. Al whose most worthy
qualities I could not rehearse in a day: no not the least part of them. And
they all do pertayne not only unto the glory of religion, but also unto the
greatness of the temptation. For who would either suspect such a man, of so
excellent wit, so great knowledge, and of so wonderful grace? Or would not
rather use that sentence, that I had lever err with Origent, hen to think
truth with other?

What needs many words? It came to this pass, that ye most dangerous
temptation of so notable a person, so great a master, so hiegh a prophet,
allured very many from ye integrite of their faith. Wherefore the same Origin,
whilst he more insolentlye abuses ye grace of God, whilst he ouermuche
trusts to his own wit and judgment, and slenderlye regards the ancient
simplicity, and presumyng to be more wise then other, does contemn the
traditions of the church and the precepts of thelders. He at length takes
upon him to interpretate and expound certain parts of the scriptures after a
new guyse. Whereby he has also deserved, that of him it should be said: Si
sura rexerit in medio tui Propheta non audias verba illius prophetae, quia tent
at uos dominus deus uester, vtrum diligatis eum an non. That is to say: If
there arise among you a Prophet, thou shalt not hear the voice of that
Prophet, because the Lord your God tempts you whether you love him or not.
Doubtless it is not only a temptacion, but a very great temptacion, when he
on whom the congregation of Christ does wholly stai, unto who^ the church
leneth, allured by the admiration of his wit, knowledge, eloquence,
conversation, and grace (which were all wonderful in him) does sodaynlye
traduce the same (nothing fearinge or suspectynge) from the ancient religion
into new prophanities. But some man will say, that the books of Origin are
corrupted. I do not withstand that. Yea, I would that Origens books were
corrupt rather then Origin him self. And that his books are corrupted, diverse
as well of the catholykes, as heretics have firmed. How be it this it is that
we ought now to attend, that if not Origin him self, yet the books put forth
in his name were a great temptacio^. Which scatterynge full of foul
blasphemies, were read and received for his, and not for any other man's. In so
much that al be it in conceyuynge any error, it was not the mind of Origin:
yet to the persuasion of error, the authority of Origin may seem much to
prevail.

The like may be spoken of Tertullian, Tertullian
a man no less notable and famous amongst the Latins, then was Origin
amongst the Greeks. For what could be more excellent then this man? Who more
exercised in the holy scriptures, and in all other humayne letters then he?
Whose breast was farced up with a most plenteous variety of all manner of
knowledge.

There was no sect of Philosophers, no part of their studies, which he had not
sought, and faithfully placed in ye treasurye of remembrance. He so far
excelled in gravity and vehemency of wit, that he has not at any time
almost purposed to withstand or overthrow any controversy, which either by
finesse of wit or by wayghte of arguments he archiued not.

The praise of whose oration who can express? Which was interlased with so
great necessity of reason, that it did impell and enforce to his opinion,
such as otherwise he could not induce and persuade. In which almost how many
words, so many sentences be. And how many sentences, so many victories. A
great many can record this, and specially Marciones, Apelles, Praxee,
Hermogenes, the Jews, the Gentiles, and the detestable heretics called
Gnostici. Whose blasphemies he has in great and large volumes defaced, and as
it were with the violent stroke of percinge lightninge, clean overthrown. And
yet eue^ this Tertullia^ after al these godly practices, not stedfastlye
cleuing unto ye faithful shore of the catholic truth, ye universal and
ancient faith, being more eloque^t, then happy, more pregna^t in wit, then
constant in faith, forgetting as it were him self and his former profession, did
at length (as the blessed confessor Hillary in a certain place does write of
him (saying) Tertullia^ tracing and following error, has pluckte away
authority from his probable writings. And he also has been in the Church a
great tempracion. But I shall spare to speak any more of this man. Only this
shall I remember, that forasmuch as he maintained the newfangled furies of
Montanus, being raised in the Church contrary to Moses precepte, and
affirmed those mad dreams of new doctrine devised by worse then mad women, to
be true prophesies: he therefore has deserved, that of him and his writings
it should be said. If a Prophet shall rise among you, you shall not herke^ to
the words of that prophet. Wherefore? Because, says Moses, the lord your
god te^pteth you, whether you love him or not. By these and other the like so
many and so great examples, we may euidentlye perceive, and by the laws of
Deuteronomie more clearly see and understand, that if at any time any
ecclesiastical prelate orlearned man shall err from the catholic faith in
any point, that then the heavenly providence does suffer the same to tempte
and prove us thereby, whether, we love God or not in all our heart, and in all
our soul. Wherefore seeing it is so, he then is a true and perfect catholic
man, which loves the truth of god, which loves the church the mystical
body of Christ, which estemeth no singular man's authority, wit, or
judgment, knowledge, or eloquence, above the true religion of Christ: which
prefers not the affection, love, or frendeship of any singular person,
before the universal and catholic faith. But despising all those things,
does abide permanent, and stable in faith, and resolves with him self to
receive, hold, and believe which he knows the catholic Church universally
and continually to have received, holde^ and beliued. And what ever new
doctrine at any time after, he shall perceive to be brought in by any one,
either besides, or above, or contrary and repugnant to that which the
catholic fathers have in consent agreid upon, he adiudgeth the same to
pertain, not to religion, but unto temptation only: according to the
wholesome doctrine of blessed S. Paul, expressed in the first epistle unto the
Corrinthians. Oportet hreses esse, ut probatimanifesti fiant in uobis, That is
to say. Heresies must be, to the end, that the proved may be made manifest
among you. As if he had said, the authors of heresies be not by and by rooted
out, but permitted for the time by God, that every man being proved, may be
made manifest, and euidentlye to appear how steadfast, faithful, and sure
lover he is, of the catholic faith. And in deed as often as any novelty rises
up, the^ esely is the good corn tried by his weighte, and the chafe by his
lightness. Then the good corn abides within the floor, notwithstanding any
puff of novelty. And the chafe is therewith lightly pufte out, having not
the substance of good corn to keep it within the floor of the catholic
unity. For the^ we see how some take their leave, and shake hands for ever:
some other hang houerynge in the air, and keep them aloufe, both fearing to
depart, and ashamed to return, being wounded and half dead, and half alive.
For why? They have received such quantity of the poison, as neither kills,
ne can be digested: neither forces to dye, ne suffers to live. Ah most
wretched and miserable condition. In what restles cares are their hearts
broyled trow ye? Now they will, now they nil: one while they are violently
plucked, with the raised error, where the wind of novelty dryueth: another
while reuersed upon them selves as contrary waves, they do relide and beat
against the walls of their own conscience. Now with foul hardy
presu^ption, they approve that, which seems uncertain: now through
causeless fear, they dread and fear to confess such things as are most
certain: being al uncertain which way to god or come, what to desire and what
to avoid, what to hold, or what to let pass. Which affliction of so doubtful
and wavering heart, is no doubt, the remedy and medicine of Gods mercy
toward them, if they be wise. For being without the most surest port of
the catholic faieth, they are shaken, beaten, and almost slain with the
violente storms of sondrye thoughts: to the end, that they put down the
sails of proud mind, which they had hoyssed alofte, and unadvisedly had
spreed to the winds of novelty: and that they ariue again home ward, into
the quiet and calm haven of their good and peaceable mother the church, where
they might drink the streemes of lyuelye and springing waters: that they
unlearn well, which they learned not well: and to provoke them to forget with
speed, that which they received in over great have. And of the whole doctrine
of the church, what can be comprehended in their understanding, and reason to
understand the same, and learn it by reason: and what is above their capacitee
of reason, that same firmelye to believe. This being thus, reuoluynge and many
times recordynge the same with my self, I cannot sufficientlye wondre at the
great madness of certain men, the great impiety of blinded minds, and
finallye the great lust and desire to err, that some have: that they cannot
be contented with the ancient belief taught and received universally in the
church, but must seek daily new gere.

Evermore coveting to alter and innouate the religion, either by adding some
thing that is new, or by pullinge away part of that which was old. As
though the religion of the church were not an heavenly decree, but an
earthly institucion, which otherwise can not be perfect, without daily
emendation, yea rather reprehe^sion of the same: the divine Oracles criyng to
the contrary. Ne transferas terminos quos posuerunt patres tui. that is to
sai: beware thou go not beyond the bonds, which thy auncetours have set.
Again. Super iudica^tem ne iudices. That is to say: Judge not thou of, or upon
him that has judged. Likewise. Scindente^sepem mordebit eu^ serpe^s. Which is
in our tongue. The serpent will stinge him that breaks or cutteth the hedge.
Whereby is meant that ye devil which is figured by ye serpent in ye scripture,
will poison and stinge him to death, that presumes to break the hedge of the
catholic faith, and contemns the unity of Christ his universal church.
Hereto belongs the worthy counsel of S. Paul, wherewith as with a certain
spiritual sword all detestable novelties of cursed heresies are, and at all
times have been cut of, and shall be to the worlds end. O Timothe (says he)
keep that doctrine which was left unto thee, and avoid all profane
novelties of words and terms. Beware of oppositions and obiectio^s of false
named science, which certain promisyng have erred concerning the faith. What
can be more vehemently spoken against new innouations, contrary to ye ancient
order of ye universal church the^ this? yet behold the indurate hearts, the
shameless impude^cie, the stiff and outrageous pertinacie, of diverse, whom
neither the great weight of so manifest scriptures can move to yield, nor the
weyghtie importance of so high authorities can force to retire, ne yet so
terrible threatenynges of high vengeance can persuade to repent.

O Timothe (says S. Paul) avoid profane novelties of words and voices. He
says not antiquities and auncienties. But thereby shows what on the other
side he should follow. For he says not, Avoid the old ancient and
received terms, phrases, and sentences: but newfangled gere, and profane
novelties. Then if novelty is to be avoided, antiquity ought to be admitted:
if novelty be profane, then is auncientie holy and divine. Avoid also
(says he) and resist oppositions, and objections of knowledge falselye so
called. That is objections made by heretics, against the received order of the
catholic church, upon knowledge (as they would lyghtlye persuade). But it is
not so, says S. Paul. It is falsely called knowledge. The knowledge of
Heretics is gross ignorance, their brightness is mere dymnesse. Their
light, is hellishe darkness. Yet would they so disgyse and color them, that
in apparaunce they might seem the self same things. which promisyng says
S. Paul, they have fallen from the faith. What have they promised? Surely I
wot not what new and unknown doctrine. For ye shall here some say unto you.
The very form of wordesth heretics use.
O ye fools and selye poor souls, which commonly are called catholic, come
ye unto us say they, and learn of us the true faith, which none knows
besides us, which has been hidden from you this many hundred years: and is
now of late reveled and shown unto a few of us. But learn it of us priuelye
and secretlye, and you shall find great pleasure therein. And when ye have
learned it at our hands, teach it other also, but priuelye in corners, that
the world hear it not, and that the Church know it not.

For they can not bear it, because it is given but to a few to understand,
and receive the secret of so great mystery. I pray you be not these the
very words of that abominable and deceytefull harlot, spoken of in the
pronerbes of Solomon? Which does allure to come unto her, such as pass by the
way going in their iourneye, saying: He that is vnwisest of you al, let him
come to me? And the simple she intiseth also, saying: Panes occultos libenter
attingite, et aquam dulcemfurtim bibite. That is to say: Come and eat gladlye
the loves which are hidden, and drink privily a sweet pleasant water. These
are the flattering and deceyuable words of that false and wicked harlot the
church of Antichrist.

But it is worth the labor to trauerse more at large the words of S. Paul.
O Timothe, says he, keep that which is left unto the, avoiding profane
novelties of words. O, is an exclamation as well of prescience, as also of
charity. For he aforesawe the errors to come, and before hand was careful
how to avoid them. He speaks unto Timothe. Who is now Timothe? But either
ye universal church generally, or the whole body of the rulers specially.
For both them selves ought to have the sound and perfect knowledge of Gods
religion, and also to teach the same to other. What is meaned by that.
Deposita custodi. Keep that which is left unto the. Keep, says saynct
Paul, because of fylchynge thieves, and enuyous adversaries.

Least they when men be at rest, should sow their zizan and Cocle upon that
good seed of Wheat, which the son of man had sown before in his feelde.
Keep that which was left unto thee, says the Apostle. What was that?
Forsothe that which was credited and committed unto thee, and not that which
was devised by thee. The religion which thou haste received, and not which
thou of thy self haste imagined: a matter not of wit, but of doctrine: not of
private usurpation, but of public tradition, brought unto the from thine
auncetours, not brought fnrthe by the for thy successors. Whereof thou ought
not to be an author, but keeper: not an institutour, but follower. Hold
assuredly, says S. Paul, save and keep the inuiolate and pure talent of the
catholic faieth, committed unto the. Exchange not, but what thou have
received, hold that still and deliver that same unto other. Thou have received
gold, yield gold again. I will not that thou render either impudentlye lead,
or craftily coper for good gold: restore in value and substance gold in deed,
and not that which glistereth and has a show like to gold and yet is none.
O Timothe, O thou priest, thou doctor, preacher, or expou^der of scriptures,
if the gift of God has made the a fit instrument thereunto in wit,
doctrine, and exercise, be thou Beselehel the workman of the spiritual
tabernacle. Cut and grave workemanly the precious Gemmes of the heavenly
doctrine. Coapt, set, and apply them faithfully. Adorn, deck and set the^
forth wisely. Add with the uttermost of thy power shyning, grace, and beauty.
Through the, and thine expositions, let it be perceived more clearelye, which
before was dark, and yet believed faithfully. Through the and thy frauel, let
the posterity rejoice in the understanding of that, which tofore the
antiquity did worship, and not understand. But yet teach the same things,
which thou have learned, and none other: that, when thou speak newely, yet
thou speak not new matters. Here some will say. What, shall there be no
increase had of religion in the church of Christe-Yes, what else? Who is so
injurious both to God and man, that would not so? But increase I would should
be, and not decrease: a confirmation, not alteration: renouatio^ of religion,
not innovation. For each thing receives increase, and is properly increased,
which is amplified and enlarged, in it self remaining one thing
notwithstanding, and the same still. But unto permutation, alteration, or
innovation it belongs that something in substance be altered and converted
from one into an other. Wherefore I gladly admit and allow the increase of
religion, that is: I will and I think meet that the church do increase,
grow, and prospere in all ages and at all times, very much in knowledge,
understanding and wisdom. But in one only kind, sense, and understanding.
Let the religion of souls imitate the consideration of the bodies. For
although the bodies in process of years are enlarged in their members, yet do
they remain the same bodies, that they were. There is much difference between
the flower of youth, and the ripenes of age. Yet be they made, old, which
were before young. That, all if of one and the same man the stature and habit
does alter and vary as time tunneth, yet the same nature, substance, and
person is still. Tender and small are the members of young infantes: strong
and great are the limbs of growe^ men. Yet al one in every of them, and as
many. The infant has as many parts, as has the man. And if there be any
thing that shows not it self, but in the ripe time of age: the same
notwithstanding was in the consideration or dissposition of the sede, so that
no new thing afterward appears in man, being stepped in years, which fofore
was not hidden in him being but a child. Wherefore there is no doubt but this
is the laweful and right rule of proffeting: this is the most perfect and
goodliest order of growing and increasing, if the number bre of years, the course
of age, the process of time, do resemble and always show the same parts,
and forms in the aged. which the wisdom of the creator had tofore formed in
them being little ones. Now if the shape or form of man, be afterward turned
and altered into any other figure unlike it self: or if the just number of the
parts and members be either diminished, or increased, then of necessity the
body must either perish, or become mo^struous, or at leest wise be greatly
wekened. Even so sitting and meet it is, that the Christian riligion be
increased, and dilated according to the like order and manner. That is to wit:
religion ought to be strengthened in years, dilated in times, auau^ced in age:
but so, that it remain evermore one, and the same, uncorrupted, unaltered in
the measures of all her parts: and as it were in all her propre members,
senses, and qualities, full, sound and perfitte: neither admitting any
permutatio^ in the substance, ne suffering any damage in the proprieties, nor
allowing any variety in the set diffinitions, sentences, or censures. As for
example. Our forefathers have sown in this ecclesiastical agricolation, the
clean seed of whetie faieth. It were surely very unsitting, and unjust, if
we their posterity should choose cockle for whete, and admit the counterfeit
and deceitefull error of the one, for the german and natural verity of the
other. Rather right and consequent it is, to the end no discrepance or
contrariety be found between the first and the last, that of the increase of
whetie institution, we reap the croppe of whety doctrine. That when any part
of these good seeds sown by our auncetours, shall by access of time spring
and blade up, the same by us be cherished, maintained, and defended unto the
most desired harvest: not altring or chau^ging any part thereof, either in
quality or in substance: although we add beauty, fame and distictio^ thereto.
For god defed, that ye rosy pla^tes of their catho like determination, should
be converted into branbles and thorns. God defend that in the spiritual
Paradise of the pleasant graftes of Cyunamome, vicious raye or darnel should
spring: of the wholesome slyppes of balsamum, pernicious wolbane should issue.
Whatsoever therefore the ancient fathers, ye faith full laborours in this
Agricolation and husbandry of Christ his church, have sowed and planted, mete
it is that the same by us thyr children and successors be diligently and
faythfullye tylled, garnished, and observed: that the same do prosper,
increase and augment: the same do still flower, and sede, and atteyne to
perfect ripenes. For decent and fit it is, that the ancient precepts,
rules, and lessons, concerning the christian religion, in process of time be
fined, polished, and confirmed. But a curssed and a destetable deed it is, to
detruncate, mangle, or violate them, or any part of them. It is lawefull that
through our diligence, industry, and labor, ye ancient preside^ces of our
fathers do receive euidencie, light, distinction. But it is also necessary,
that they still retain their ancient fullness, integrity, and propriety. For
if this licentious liberty of impious fraud, shall be permitted to alter and
change the ancient censures of the universal church: I am afraid to say,
how great danger should ensue of breaking and abolishyng the amiable concord
of Christ his uniform religion, within short time. For any one part of the
catholic institution, being once broken and abdicate, the Leprisie will so
crepe from part to part, that at length the whole will be the least part, and
utterly refused. Again if they begin to myngie new tryckes, with old and
ancient laws: strange and forayne devises, with accustomed and familiar
precepts: profane fantasies, with sacred and holy ceremonies: no doubt it
will grow to such a custom in the whole, that ever after it will be the
practice of every light brain, to alter and put down old religion, and to
set up new fangled toys, devised by their own wit. In so much that nothing
shall be left in the church unspotted, untouched, undefiled: but where the
church heretofore has been esteemed and accounted the precious vesture of
chaste and incorrupt verity: from hencefurth it may be rekened the sincke of
impious and foul errors. But God of his mefureles mercy forbid any such
detestable enterprise to enter into the minds of his people. But let it be, as
it has been always, and still is, the furious and peuish practice of the
wicked, impious, and cursed. Let the church of Christ evermore be as it has
been ever, and shall be for ever, the diligent, warye, and faithful keeper of
such determinations, decrees, and ordinances as have been left by our
auncetours, and universally received in consent and unity. This true and
faithful church permits nothing, diminishes nothing, adds nothing,
cutteth not away necessaries, and supplieth superfluities: omitteth not her
own, and usurps that which pertayneth not unto her. But with all diligence
studieth to preserve, maintain and continewe such doctrine, as has
descended unto her from the ancient fathers by general consent. And what has
been left unto her only begone, and not settled: the same she endeuoreth to
publishe, fine, and stablishe. What has been fully expressed, and thoroughly
resolved: the same to co^solidate, confirm, and assure. What has been
confirmed, and ratified: the same faythfullye to keep, follow, and believe. For
what has the church purposed at any time, by the decrees of general
counsailles, but that such things should afterward more diligently be
observed, which before were simply believed? And that, which tofore was but
slackly taught, should afterward be preached more in stantlye? This I say at
al times and nothing else, the church being vexed with the furious novelties of
wicked herelikes, has purposed to do in the decrees of her counseylles, that
such doctrine as was received by tradition only from the auncetours, might be
assigned and sealed hensforth unto the posterity by scripture, co^prising in
little writing a great weight of matters. And many times for the better
understanding of them, utters and expresses the old sense and meaning of
our faith, in new terms newly devised, for the plain opening of such
matters, as might otherwise apeare obscure But let us return to ye apostle S.
Paul. He says: Depositum custodi. Keep that which was left unto the,
auoidynge profane novelties of words. avoid says he, and hate as a viper, as
a scorpio^, as a venomous cockatrice, least they hurt thee, not only with
their touching, but also with their sight, and pestilent brethe. What is it, to
avoid? Forsothe not once to eat or drink with the^ Avoid, says S. Paul.
What? If any says he, comes unto you, and brings not with him this
doctrine. What doctrine? The catholycke and universal doctrine, which has
remained one and the same by all succession of ages, through incorrupt
tradition of verite, and shall remain to the worlds end, whosoever say nay.
What then? Do not receive him, says S. Paul, into thy house, neither shalt
thou say unto him, aue God speed. For he that says unto him, God speed, or
all hayle, he does communicate with his wickedness. He says profane nonelties
of words. What is profane? Verily that which is neither God! ye nor goodly:
all whory, and nothing holy: that which straieth without the borders and
bounds of the catholyke Church, which is the temple of God. He says,
Profane novelties of words or voices. What is that? No doubt novelties of
words, opinions, censures, sects, contrary to antiquity, repugnaunte to the
ancient faieth of the universal church. For if such novelties be received,
such innouations admitted, the^ of necessity must the faieth of the holy
fathers be greatly stained: then must all faiethfull of all ages, all holy
and chaste fathers, all contment and godly virgins, all clerks, levites, and
priests: theu must so many thowsande of confessors, so great hosts of
martyrs, so innumerable multitude of cities, of peoples, of Isla^des, and
provinces, so many thowsande kings, and nations. Finally in manner the whole
world being incorporate unto our heed Christ through the catholyke faieth,
must of necessity (I say) be indged all this while so many hundredth years, to
have been ignorant, to have erred, and blasphemed God: and not to have known
what they should believe. Profane novelties of words (says Paul) avoid.
Why avoid? Because it was never the custom and property of catholyke men,
but only of heretics, to receive and follow the^. And in deed what heresy
has there been, that spronge not up under a singular, and certain name, in a
singular, and certain both time and place? Who ever forged any heresies, but
that he first divided him self from the consent of the universality, and
auncie^tie of ye catholic church? Whoo ever presumed so great force of
frewill, that he thought it sufficient to work all good actions without the
help of Gods grace, before that profane heretic Pelagius? Whoo ever
denaied all mankind to be bound in the offe^se of Adam his preuaricatio^
before Celestius the prodigious disciple of that monstrous master Pelagius.

Who ever durst either to divide the unity of the blessed trinity, before
that cursed Arrius? or confound the Trinity of the ineffable unity before
wicked Sabellius?

Who ever said, before that most cruel Nouatianus, that GOD would rather
have the death of a sinner, then that he should return and live?

Who ever before Simon Magus (of whom that old goulfe of filthes even unto
Priscillianus by continual and privy succession have issued) dursie say God
our creator to be the author of evil: that is, of our wicked, impious, and
abominable deeds? For he affirms that God has created such a nature in man,
that by a certain propre motion and impulse of necessary will, he neither can
ne will any thing else, but sin: for being exagitate, and in flamed with the
furies of al vices, he is pluct and pulled through insatiable desire, into al
kind of iniquity. There be inumerable examples of this sort, which I omit
for breuities sake: by which it is clearly and manifestly declared, that this
has been, as it were, a solemn vow ever moore among heretics, to set up
profane novelties, and to neglecte the orders of auncietie. And by oppositions
of doctrine falselye termed, to hasarde the catholyke faith. Of the other side,
this evermore has been the property of the catholics, to keep, maintain,
and save all such godly orders and constitutions delivered and left of the
holy fathers, and to condemn utterly all profane novelties according to the
counsel of S. Paul. Who earnestly warns, if any shall preach unto you any
other doctrine, the^ ye have received, accurse him. Here perchance some will
say unto me: do not such as ye call heretics use the scriptures? And can the
scriptures lie? Surely the scriptures lie not. Yet lyinge heretics abuse the
testimony of the scriptures, yea and very vehemently. For ye shall se them
fly through every volume and part thereof, through all the books of Moy
ses, of the kings, through all the Psalms, the Apostles, gospelles, and
Prophets. Wheresoever, and with whomsoever they talk, being at home or a
broad: whether they preach, or write: be they at feast, or in the streets,
scripture droppeth out of their mouths as thick as hayle from heaven. They
bring not one jot of their own, but the same is shadowed with scripture
terms. Read who list the works of Paulus, Samosatenus, or Priscillianus,
Eunomius, Iouinianus, and all other heretics, that ever have been, or hereafter
shall be. And ye shall find an infinite heap of examples: yea ye shall se not
one leaf in all their books almoost, but it is painted and set as thick with
quotations and notes in the margente, of sentences as well of tholde as the
new testamente, as possybly the margente can hold.

Yet are they detestable heretics. Of whom we ought so much the more to
beware, and fear: the more privily they lurk under ye bowers of divine
scriptures. For they know well, that their treachery, and filthes and ill
stenches, could not quickly please, if they were nakedlye and simply brethed
forth. And therefore they all besprincle the^ with the swet spices, as it were,
of the heavenly doctrine, that he which could quickly deprehende the human
error, might not yet sodeinlye contempne the divine testimonies. And
therefore they practice, as they do, which willing too give unto children
some bitter drink, do first anoynte the lip or brimme of the cup with
honey or some other pleasant thing, that the simple and unwary age should not
fear the bitterness, having before tasted the swetenes.

Even so do these Heretics, which do color and paynte before hand their
evil seeds and pestilent syruppes with the terms and titles of singular
medicines: to the end that none should suspecte poison, when he has readde
before wrytren remedy or medicine. Of these heretics our Savior warns us to
take heed. Attendite a falsis prophetis. Beware from false Prophets, which
come unto you in shepes clothing, but within they be rauenyng wolves. What is
meant by shepes apparel or clothinge, but the sentences of the Prophets and
Apostles?

Who be the rauenyng wolves, but mad and furious heretics, which always
vex and invade the foldes of the church, and to the vttermoste of their might,
rent and devour the innocent flock of Christ? But to the end they may more
craftelye stele upon the vnwarye sheep, they put of the countenance and
vesture of wolves, and shroude them selves all in phrases and sentences of the
scriptures, as with flices of wolle: inwardlye notwithstanding they continewe
most cruel and ravening wolves. They do thus, that the simple sheep might not
fear the cruel dent of their bloody teethe, when they shall before feel and
see the soft and wollye flice. But what says our Savior. Exfructibus little
cognoscetis eos. Ye shall know them by their works. That is: when they
begin to expound and interpretate the sentences and textes of holy
scripture, which tofore they brought: then that bitterness, that fylthy
stenche sauoreth: then that ravening woddenes is felt: the^ that new poiso^
droppeth forth: then do these profane novelties show the^ selves: then may
thou see the hedge broken, the bounds and limits of the fathers ouerrun, then
may thou see the catholic faith mangled, and cut, the ecclesiastical
doctrine rent and torn.

These be they which the Apostle Paul speaks of in the second to ye
Corinthians saying. Nam eiusmodi Pseudoapostoli operarij suhdoli transfigurant
se in apostolos Christi. For such false Apostles (says S. Paul) subtel and
craftye workers, do transsigure them selves into the Apostles of Christ. What
did S. Paul mean thereby? Nothinges else, but as the. Apostles of Christ did
bring furthe the testimonies of holy scripture, even so do these false
Apostles. And as they alleged the authorities of the Psalms, the same do
these allege: as they used the sentences of the Prophets, so do these false
Apostles. There is no part of Gods scripture, but these false Apostles do
allege and bring furthe, even as the true Apostles of Christ did.

And in this sort they transfigure them selves into the Apostles of Christ.
But when they come unto the diverse and unlike expositions of these sentences,
which they alyke bring forth and allege, then is it manifest which be the
true Apostles, and which be the false Apostles. Then does it appear who be
the simple, and who be the craftye: who be the godly, and who be the wicked.
Then are the true Prophets discerned from the false Prophets.

And no marvel (says the Apostle) for the Devil him self does transform
him self into an angel of light. No great matter is it then, if his ministers
be transfourmed like the ministers of ryghteousnes.

Therefore according to S. Paul his doctrine, as often as either false
Apostles, or false Prophets, or false teachers do bring the sentences of
divine law, therewith falselye understood, to maintain their errors: there
is no doubt but that they follow the craftye and subtle ways of their head
Satan. For he knows that there is no way to that. As when he would stablish
an error, to present the same with thauthoritie of holy Scripture. O, but
some will say. How can ye prove, that the Devil is wont to use the
testimonies of holy scriptures? It is proved sufficientlye to him that reads
the Gospel, where it is written. Then the Devil took our Lord, our Savior,
and set him upon the pinnacle of the temple, and said unto him. If thou be
the son of God, cast thy self down from this pinnacle. For it is written:
that he has given in commandment to his Angels of the, that they keep
thee in all thy ways: they shall bear the up in their hands, that thy foot
tryppe not at any stone. What would he stycke to do to other selye poor
creatures, that thus assaulted the Creator him self, the Lord of Majesty,
with the testimonies of the scripture? If thou be the son of God (says he)
tumble thy self down, for it is written. etc.

O surely the doctrine of this place is diligently to be noted and be marked
of us, which lets us to understand, that as often as we shall see any to
allege and produce the testimonies of the scriptures against the faith and
religion believed and received in the universal Church, that then we need not
doubt, but that the Devil by them works his old feite. For as the head
spoke to the head, so now the members speak unto the members: that is, the
members of the Devil, to the members of GOD, the wicked to the godly, the
false perjured to the faithful, the heretics to the catholic. But what
says the Devil? If thou be the son of GOD, tumble thy self down. That is
to say. Will thou be the child of God? Will thou possess the inheritance of
the kingdom of god? Then tumble thy self down. that is, dispatche the from
the tradition and doctrine of this high set church: tumble thy self headlong
down from the pinnacle of the universal faith. And if ye ask any of the
heretics thus perswadinge, how he proves, by what authority he teaches,
that ye ought to tumble your selves from the universal and ancient faieth of
the catholic Church, scriptum est enim, for it is written, says he, and by
and by ye shall hear him power out a thowsande testimonies, examples, and
authorities embeseled out of the law, psalms, Apostles and Prophets, by
which authorities after a new and wicked manner expounded, the sely soul is
tumbled headlonge from the tower of catho like truth, down into the dungeon
of blasphemous heresy. And hereto all heretics add wonderful promises,
whereby they entrap the simple and unwary after a merueious fashion. For they
dare promise and teach, that in their Church, that is, in the co^uenticle
of their communion, a great and special, yea plainly, a certain parciall
grace of God is: in so much that as many as be of their congregation, do flow
with all necessaries, and are plentuously provided for, by the only
dispensation of God, although they seek not, knock not, and ask not for it.
And that they be borne up by the Angels of heaven that their foot ones
stumble not against any stone: that is to say, that they cannot offend or go
amiss though they would. But some will say, if the testimonies, sentences, and
promises of the scripture are used of the devil and his ministers, of whom
some be false Prophets, some false Apostles, some be false teachers, and they
all heretics: what then shall the catholic men and the children of our mother
the Church do? By what mean shall they discern the verity in the holy
scriptures, from the falsehood of such heretics? No doubt they must do, as
at the beginning I admonished. They must do as other godly and learned me^
have done before them, and as they have taught us to do that follow them.
What is that? They must interpretate, understand and expound the scriptures
of God according to the traditions orders and rules of the catholic Church:
wherein they must also necessarilye observe and follow the universality,
antiquity, and consent of the catholic and apostolic church. And when so
ever a part against the universality, novelty against auncientie, the
dissension of a few shall rebel against the universal consent of all or
the most part of christians: then prefer and esteem the integrity of the
universality, before the corruption of a part. And in the same universality,
the religion of antiquity, before the profane novelty: again in that
antiquity, before the temeritie of one or a few, prefer chieflye the
general decrees of an universal counsel: and if none such be, then follow
the consent and censure of such as have tofore taught and ruled in the
church of god. Which if we diligently, soberly and faiethfully observe, it
shall be easy inoughe for us to discern or deprehende from time to time all
pestilent errors, of al sorts of heretics. Here now consequent it is, that I
by example, do demonstrate how and in what wise, the profane novelties of
heretics may be both deprehended and also condemned by the censures and
sentences of the aunciente fathers, concordinge and agreing together. How be it
we ought to inuestigate and follow the aunciente consent of the holy
fathers, not in every small question of the scriptures, but only and chiefly
in the rule of faith: neither at all times all kind of heresies are this ways
to be impugned, but only new and fresh heresies, as soon as they put up
their heads. That before they have falsyfied the presidences of the ancient
faieth, they may be put of their purpose, by the straightnes of the time, and
before they may have leisure to goo about to corrupt and viciate the works of
our elders with their venime creping moore at large. But old and inueterate
heresies cannot be overthrown after this sort, because in long tracte of
times they have gotten better occasion to incroche upon truth. Wherefore such
old heresies must be ever convinced by the only authority of the scripture,
or else avoided, and detested, being already tofore convinced and condemned by
universal counsel of the catholic writers. Wherefore as soon as any new
profane error begins to pepe up, and the author thereof imbeseleth for the
defense of the same certain sentences out of the scripture, which he falsely
and craftily does expou^de, by and by must ye gather together ye exposition of
the fathers upon those places, which were produced for the defense of the
error. Whereby, that new profane error may be with out long circumstau^ce
bewraied and without any delay condemned. But the exposition of such
fathers only are to be conferred which living, teaching, and abidinge holily,
wisely, and constantly in the faieth and catholyke communion, have merited
either to dye in Christ faiethfullye, either for Christ to be slain happily.
Unto whom notwithstanding we ought so far furthe to give credit, as they
consent and agree together. And whatsoever they together have manifestlye
firmelye and fayethfullye received, taught and delivered unto us: the same may
we receive, believe and follow, as most certain true and perfect doctrine. And
whatsoever any man, be he Bishop or Prelate, be he Confessor or Martyr, be
he never so holy, never so well learned, shall presume to maintain and teach
any thing, contrary to the consent, opinion and censure of these fathers, we
ought to account the same heresy and amongst the privy and private sects
which are divided from the authority of the common, public and general
sentence. Let us not with high danger of everlasting salvation after the
curssed custom of hellishe heretics, forsake the ancient verite of the
universal doctrine, and follow the new errors of one or a few. The holy and
catholic consent of which godly fathers, least any should temerouslye
judge to be neglected, hark what S. Paul says unto the Corinthians. ii.
Cor.xij.
God (says he) has constitute cettayne in the church, first apostles, of
whom he was one: next Prophets, what one we read in the Acts that Agabus
was: thirdlye teachers, which we call Tractatores, Treaters or Writers, which
Paul him self calls also prophets sometime, because by them and through
their diligence the mysteries of the Prophets are opened unto the people:

Those therefore thus dispensed and constitute by the providence of God by times
and places, whosoever shall despice, or contemn, agreynge and consenting
together in any matter of Christ his catholic religion, let him know that he
contemns not man but God. And that no man should divide him self from the
southsaying unity of these fathers, S. Paul earnestlye desires, saying: I
beseech you brethren, that ye all speak one thing and the same, and that
there be amongst you no dissension. Be ye perfect and knit together in one and
the same sense, in one and the same sentence. And if any shall divide him
self from the communion of the Catholic sentence, he shall hear that of S.
Paul. He is not God of dissension, but of peace. That is to say, he is not
the God of him which shrinketh from the unite of consent, but of such as abide
constaunt in the peace of consent with other As I teach you (says he) in all
congregatio^s of the saints. That is, of the Catholic, which therefore are
called saints, because they persist consiaunte in the communion of faith. And
if any one would so much arrogate unto him self, as though he only were to
be heard, and credited before all other, S. Paul to his reprofe says thus:
Came the word of God from you, or came it into you only? But least this
should seem to be spoken upon small consideration, he adds further. If any
man seems to be a Prophet or spiritual, let him know those things which I
do write unto you: because they are the commandments of the Lord. Which
commandments, he that is counted a Prophet or spiritual, that is to say: a
master of spiritual matters, does not with earnest study of equality and
unity observe: that either prefers his own opinion before others or in any
point goes from the judgment of the universal consent. The commandment
hereof who knows not (says S. Paul) shall not be known. That is to say:
whosoever either does not learn which he knows not, or being known does
contemn: the same man shall not be known. That is, he shall be counted unworthy
on whom amongst other united in fay the and knitte in christian humility,
the heavenly mercy may be extended. And what thing worsse? What evil more
bitter can be devised then this? And yet according to this Apostolycke
commination we see the same has chanced unto Julian Pelagian, who either
neglected to incorporate him self to the mind and sentence of other fathers,
or presumed to excorporate him self, that tofore was one of them.

But now time it is, that according to my promise, I declare by example when
and how the sentences of ye holy fathers may be gathered together, that by them
the rule of Ecclesiastical faith might be assured and confirmed, according
as by decree and authority of counsel is set furthe.

And to do this, fytte and necessary it is, that I do eftsoons revoke, what
tofore was said. I said at the beginning, that this evermore was, and still
is the custom of Catholic and true beleuers, to approve the true faith by
two ways. First by the authority of divine Scripture.

Secondlye by tradition of the catholyke Church. Not because the Scripture
suffices not, or plentuously contains not all things necessary: but
because every man expounding the same according to their own fantasies, do
often times conceive diverse errors, and strange opinions, centrary to the
intent of ye holy scriptures. And therefore it is necessary that ye
intelligence and understanding of the heaueuly scripture, be directed
according to one uniform rule of the ecclesiastical judgment, especially in
those questions on which the foundation of the whole catholic doctrine does
stay. We said moreover, that we ought to consider in the church the consent
as well of the universality as also of antiquity. Least we be broken of from
the integrity of unity, into some profane error: or least we be tumbled from
the religion of auncientie headlong into novelties of unknown heresy. I have
said also, that in the same antiquity of the church we ought vehementlye and
studiously to observe two things, unto which each man must cleue fast, yt will
not be an heretic. The first is, if any thing in the antiquity of the
church has been decreed by all catholic teachers and holy fathers, and
has been setfurth by authority of universal counsel. Next, if there hap to
arise any new question, which is not decided by general counsel, that then
every good man ought to have recourse unto the ancient writers, which are
known to have steadfastly perseuered in the unity of the catholic communion
and faieth. And whatsoever they in one mind and consent have received and
taught, the same we ought to judge and accept, as most sincere, pure, and
catholic doctrine. And that this might not seem to be spoken rather of my
own head, then by authority ecclesiastical, I have drawn to example the
godly counsel kept in Afia at Ephesus, Bassus and Antiochus, two noble
persons then being consulles. In which counsel, a motion being made for
orders and rules to be devised for the stablishinge of the faieth, it seemed
unto all the fathers there assembled, which were about C C. in number, a
thing very catholic, right faiethfull, and most be to be done, lest any
profane novelty should by chance crepe in, contrary to their godly
purpose, as to fore in the counsel kept at Arimine in Italy, to bring furthe
the sentences, censures, and opinions of the holy fathers, of which some were
Martyrs, some were Confessors: and al were and consta^tly remained catholic
priests, true and faiethful teachers. And according to their mind, consent,
and decree well and devoutly considered, the religion of christian faieth might
be confirmed, and the blasphemy of prophan novelty condemned. This thus
done, of right that wicked Nestorius was condemned as an heretic, injurious
to the catholic auncientye, and blessed Cyrillus was pronounced catholic,
consenting and agreeable unto the holy antiquity. And for the better warrant
of the matter, I learned the names of the same fathers, although I have
forgotten their order, according to whose censure and judgment, both such
sentences as then were co^trouerted, were expounded, and also the rule of the
divine doctrine stablished. Which fathers here to rehearse by name, I think it
not superfluous. For thereby shall my memory be confirmed. Wherefore these were
they, whose wrytinges are recited, being either judges, or witnesses in that
counsel. S. Peter Bishop of Alexandria, a very excellent teacher, and most
blessed Martyr. Holy Athanasius, high prelate of the same city, a right
faithful preacher, and most worthy confessor. Holy Theophilus, Bishop also
of the same city, a man for his faieth, life, and knowledge very famous. Whom
succeeded Cyrill, a father of much reverence. To these holy fathers and godly
Bishops of our City and province add those shining beams of Cappadocia, as
saint Gregory, Bishop and confessor of Nazianse. S. Basil, Bishop and
co^fessor of Caesarea, Cappadocia and other. S. Gregory also bishop of Nice, a
man for his faith, conversation, integrity, and wisdom most worthy to be,
as he was, brother to holy Basil. All these were Greeks. Amongst the
Latins also were many, that by their judgment allowed the matters passed in
that counsel: as S. Felix martyr, and S. Iulie Bishops of Rome.

Likewise blessed S. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage and martyr. Holy saint
Ambrose Bishop of Mediolanu^. These were they, which were in the counsel of
Ephesus, as judges, witnesses, Masters, and Counselors: whose doctrine that
blessed Synod faiethfullye embraced: and folowinge their counsel, beleuinge
their testimony, obeinge their judgment, have syncerely, truly, and
faiethfullye pronounced of matters concerning faieth. These fathers were but
ten in number. A greater number might have been called thereto, but there
was no necessity: because as the time served, the matters consisted not in
the multitude of witnesses: and noman doubted, but all other catholic men
thought and believed as these ten did. After all these things, I also added
S. Cyrill his sentence. Which is contained in the eccle siasticall gestes. For
what time the Epistle of holy Capreolus, Bishop of Carthage was readen, who
intended and desired nothing else, but that the holy antiquity might be
defended, and wicked novelty anulled, and utterly refused, then S. Cyrill
pronounced and defined in form as follows. And this Epistle (said he) of
the reverend and most godly father Capreolus Bishop of Carthage, shall be
regestred in the book of our gestes and decrees, concerning the faieth, whose
sentence is so plain. For he will that the sentences, and decrees of the
ancient faieth be confirmed, and stablished: and that new found fancies and
inventions be reproved and conde^pned, as both superfluous and wicked. Hereto
all the Bishops gave their consent, al wholly agreed thereupon, all together
with one voice wished the same. Whereto gave they their consent? What was it,
that they in one voice together wished? Verily, that such doctrine, as was of
old taught and received, should be evermore allowed and embraced: and what of
late days was newely devised, should for ever be refused. After which
things, I was for my part brought into a very great admiration of their
doings, and could not sufficientlye, as me thought, commend the wonderful
humility and godly devotion of so great clerks and holy men. For although
they were such and so many, endued with such excellent knowledge, with such
inestimable judgment, that each and every of them might have frelye
questioned in any matter of the ancient faith: and again, their assembly
and congregation together might seem to encourage, and imbolden the same new
matters of their own heads devised to decree and set furthe: yet would they
innouate nothing: but by all manner means cared, that no doctrine should be
delivered un to their posterity, but such as they had received of the
forefathers. Thus did these fathers not only for the good disosition of
things at that present tune, but also to leave example to such as should
follow them, what they should do in like case. That they ought with all their
study to honor the ancient faith, and not devise new: to maintain such
religion, as they had received, and not to set forth what of their own brains
was devised.

I inueighed also agayust the most wicked and pestilent presumption of
deuillishe Nestorius, who bragged of him self, that he first and only of all
other understood the scriptures rightlye, and that all other before his time
wandered in ignorance and error, as many as ener had taught or written upon
the scriptures: as all Priests, Bishops, Matyrs Eonfessours, that either
have expounded the scriptures, or given credit to others expositions upon the
same. And who finallye affirmed, the whole church even now to be in blindness
and error, and ever to have been, which now followed, and at all times had
followed, as it seemed unto him ignorant, blind, and erroneous doctors and
teachers. And although to have said thus much, might seem sufficient to
overthrow and utterly to deface all profane novelties, yet for the better
furnishynge up of the matter, I have adiected two authorities of the Apostolic
See.

The one of Xistus Bishop of Rome. The other of his predecessor S.
Celestine, which here I shall recount. Holy Xistus in the epistle which he
wrote unto the Bishop of Antioche, concerning Nestorius matter, says thus.
For as much as there is but one faith according to the Apostle, which now
most evidently has obtained what ought to be taught: let us believe that, and
let us firmelye hold what we ought to believe. Now what that is that ought
to be taught and believed, he in his progress does after declare. Let no
novelty be received (says he) and no credit be given unto it hensfurth.
Because nothing ought to be added unto auncientie. The manifest and well
known faieth and credulity of our elders, be it troubled with no permixtion
of myer. Thus wrote Xistus and very Apostolic: commending the faith of our
auncetours with the terms of perspicuite, and describynge profane novelties
by permirtion of mier. Holy Celestine in manner and sentence like, confirmed
the same in the Epistle which he sent unto the priests and preachers in
France, blaming them for their silence, whereby they seemed to give over the
ancient faith, and suffered profane novelties to arise, and says. Merito
nos causa respicit, si silentio foueamus errorem etc. The matter touches us}
(says he) if we by silence do norishe and uphold an error. Let such
therefore be punished, neither let it be lawful for such to speak what they
list.

Here some man may perhaps doubt, who be they which he forbids to talk
at pleasure, and to speak what they list. Whether it be meant by the preachers
of the ancient doctrine, or by the deuisers of fantastical novelties. Let holy
Celestine him self say, and dissolve this doubt, in whom it follows,
desinat si ita res est. If the matter be so (says he) that is to wit, if it
be so, as diverse have blamed your provinces and cities, for that ye through
your dangerous dissimulynge, and hurtful silence, cause them to consent unto
certain novelties: If it be so (says he) let novelty cesse to vex and
disturb holy anncientie.

This was the sentence of blessed Celestine, which tended not to distroye the
ancient religion, but to extirpe and banishe al new inventions contrary to
the catholic and old tradition of our forefathers. Wherefore such as contemn
and wythstande the religion taught and set forth by the apostolic and
catholic decrees, what else do they, but prefer their own fond fansy and
iumlyng judgment before the just sentence and sound judgment of so many
godly fathers and holy martyrs? First they harken not to S. Celestine, who
decreed, vt desmeret nouitas incessere vetustatem. That is that novelty
should cesse to vex and disturb the auncientie. They also laugh to skorne
the wise counsel of holy Xistus, who decreed in this wise. Nihil vltra liceat
nouitati quia nihil addi conuenit vetustati. They neglecte likewise the
statutes of blessed Cyril, who honorablye allowed, and commended the godly
zeal of reverent Capreolus, for that he, by his Epistle desired the aunciente
lessons and decrees concerning religion, to be confirmed, and al new contrary
inventions to be condemned. They do in like sort tread under foot all the
decrees, laws, and statutes made and agreed upon in the Synod kept at
Ephesus: whereunto all the holy Bishops of the East part assembled, and there
with one voice, consent, and mind authorized, and confirmed all such
doctrine, as by the elders was delivered: and condemned Nestorius as an
heretic, for that he impugned the ancient belief, and would have brought in
new novelties.

The consent of which fathers in that counsel, and so in other general
counselles, the consent of other also, stablishing the catholic religion, who
ever neglects: whom else does he neglecte and despise, but the holy ghost by
whose inspiration their hearts were ruled, and the true catholic Church,
which they maintened, and the masters of the same, the Prophets and
Apostles, whom they followed? And expreslye he speaks against S. Paul his
doctrine, who says. O Timothee depositum custodi etc. That is, O Timothe keep
that which was left unto the, auoidinge profane novelties of words. And in
an other place: he says to the same sense. If any shall show unto you any
other doctrine than that ye have received, accursed be he. Now if the
apostolic counselles, and the ecclesiastical decrees, by which in holy
consent of universality and auncientie all heretics hetherunto have been
condemned, and the catholic religion mainteyned, are in no wise to be
contemned and despised: then shall it be necessary for all such as desire to
be coumpted the legitimate children of our mother the catholic Church,
firmly to cleue, adhere, and stick sure to the unspotted faieth of our holy
auncetours: and utterly derest, abhor, and persecute al wicked novelties of
profane men, that in any point resist the universal religion received.

Finis.
Imprynted at London by Robert Caly within the precinct of the late dissolved
house of the graye Freers, now converted to an Hospital, called Christ's
Hospital *

The.xxij. day of Detober *

1554.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


