An Epistle to the Faithful, necessary for all the children of God: espe
cially in these dangerous days.

Written by Master Peter Viret in French, and englished by F. H. Esquier.

Imprinted at London for Tobie Smith, dwelling in Paul's Church yard, at the
sign of the Crane. 1582.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
Having long since perused a Treatise, written in French by M. Peter Vyret,
which was dedicated by him, to the faithful: and having for my private
exercise translated the same, I little thought to have sent it abroad, but
showing it to some godly, whose judgments I craved, both of the matter, and
tra^slatio^, they doubted not to give great commendation of the one, and it
pleased them to set down their allowance of the other, and withal persuaded
me, the matter to be very profitable, for these our times, and that by many
reasons: whereupon I became so encouraged, as (considering the argument to be
so apt and fit for this age) I would not keep back this so fruitful a
treatise from the view of my country men, but have adventured to publish the
same in english, how rudely soever it be translated. And now (Madam) having
been long debtor to your Ladyshippe, for your many honorable favors
extended toward me, and having long desired to yield some token of
thankfulness; since I can no way deserve or recompense the least part of your
goodness, I am bold to present unto your honor these first fruits of my
labors, which is the translation of this little treaty; and therefore humbly
do pray you it may pass under your protection: the author whereof, was well
known to some godly learned yet living amongst us, to be a godly, zealous, and
learned preacher in France, and many ways a man of rare gifts. The matter is
a christian counsel and direction, how the professors of the Gospel should
behave and keep themselves from being stained, or defiled with the
superstitions of Poperye, be they never so conversant amongst such as
profess the same: So that I cannot doubt, but that this little treatise will
have good acceptance with all the Godly, and well disposed, both in respect
of the Author, and the matter. But for my self, who have taken upon me to
be the translatour* I may iustlye doubt it can hardelye deserve allowance,
both because my skyll is short to translate with iudegement, and my style too
base to have the handling of so good a work: yet being emboldened by the
allowance of some, that have already seen it, and hoping to be fauourablye
judged of by all, that hereafter shall peruse it, and trusting of your honors
well accepting of this my labor, be it never so simplye performed; I doubt
not to put it to the printe, and presume to dedicate the same to your
Ladishippe. Accept it (good Madam) in liewe of a better present: And license
me, in this preface (only purposed to your self) to speak somewhat in a
geueralitie to others. I find by experience that Satan's shifts increase
daily, either to make us flat enemies to religion, or cold friends: for even
amongst those, which brag greatly of the Gospel, and will defy him, that
shall call him Papist, and will join with Gods people in hearing of the word,
and receiving the Sacraments, even amongst these there be some, (I say)
which are so far short from true feeling of religion, that they reserve to
them selves a religion for all companies, and can easily make shift to live in
all ages: and these men would feign persuade them selves, that there is such a
conueniencie between religion and superstition, between the Gospel and
Popery, that they may hold both: they would feign make themselves to believe,
that the dissent between papists and us, which do profess the Gospel of
Christ, is only about certain ceremonies, the vanity of which opinion, is so
largely confuted by sundry well learned: that I need not to stand thereupon.
But to you, whom the Lord has seasoned by a better spirit, then to profess
for fashions sake, let me speak boldly without offense. If you have well
weighed and considered what thraldom your selves, or your brethren were in,
when Papists did bear stroke: and had the guiding of this common wealth at
their will; you cannot but tell your selves how little favor the zealous
professor found, whose share it was to receive al sharpnes and severity, that
could be devised: and then how can you forget to be thankful unto God for this
our present tranquillity, and peaceable profession of his Gospel, and for our
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, his especial and principal instrument
thereof: by whom as the chief means, we have been delivered from superstition
and Popery, and have been brought to taste how sweet the Lord Jesus is, in the
voice of his gospel, a blessing unspeakable, and such as few of our
neighbors have attained unto in like measure, for what nation can be named,
that ever so long together enjoyed such quietness as England? which shows
Gods blessing to have followed us most graciously in our government: and what
country or nation in the world can be showed to have the doctrine of the
Gospel, taught generally and by authority, with more soundnes and sincerity,
then in England: which argues the great mercy, and favor of God towords us,
in daily teaching his prophets to speak, that his truth may sound in the ears
of all that will willingly hear it. But have we this by desert: or can we
challenge it before other nations: no, no: but if we learn not to use our peace
whilst we have it, and to take profit by this doctrine of salvation whilst
we enjoy it, and show our selves daily and hourly thankful for the same, our
peace shall be taken from us when we least look for it; and this Gospel will
be given unto a nation that shall bring forth the fruits thereof. Let us
therefore look about us in time, lest we learn to late. Our well settled peace
in these days of our godly Prince Edward the sixth, with the joyful liberty
of professing Christ his Gospel, which under him, we then enjoyed, adding
hereunto the sudden and lamentable alteration, which succeeded his happy
government by his unlooked for cutting of; might sufficiently warn us. We can
have no color to challenge this our peace and preaching of the Gospel in any
certayntie, which both we enjoy only by the merciful goodness of our good
God, who in his favor and love has allotted both unto us for our good, if
with thankfulness we receive them; and can learn to use them, to our
profit: If otherwise we abuse them, he can and will in his displeasure for
our sins take them from us, turning peace into war, and the light of his
Gospel into the darkness of superstition and poperye. If we will but enter
into consideration with our selves, and weigh the state of our neighbors and
brethren in Flaunders, and France; whom the Lord, has long kept under the
cross of affliction and perfecution, and withal indifferently compare our
offenses with theirs; we shall easily see the zeal of England and to religion
far colder, the obedience to the Gospel far shorter, al sin generally much
more abounading. Why then should we look for the continuance of these
blessings without ame^dme^t. If we will enter into our own consciences and
truly examine our selves, whether we have been rightly pinched and grieved at
the misery of our brother Joseph: whether we have sighed and mourned before
the Lord for Isreal's calamity: we shall find that self love has borne so
great a swaye in every of us all; that we have been little, or nothing touched
with the churches misery. How then can we look to escape the just judgment
of God, for so horrible faults and defectes: Lastly, if we consider
throughlye, how mercifullye the Lord has dealte with us in this time of our
peace: wherein the Gospel of our God has had his free passage, and the
preaching thereof in many places (by Gods mercies) been most plentifully
performed, and weyghe with all, how thankefully we have received the same, and
what profit we have reaped thereby: we shall the most of us (I fear me) find
our selves so far short in either, that rather we may feel in our selves
just cause to accuse our selves, for neglecting, contemning, and misusing the
graces of God, offered unto us in this his holy Gospel. For that we have
neither learned diligently, nor believed soundly, nor embraced thankfully, nor
worshipped religiously, nor confessed freely and consta^tly, nor obeyed
sincerely, nor adua^ced zealously the will and truth of our God, revealed unto
us in the preaching of the Gospel. But as I accuse not all, so as an advise to
all, I say with the Apostle. Let him that thinks he does stand, take heed he
fall not. And because we have no inheritance, or such assurance of this our
peace, but that it is to be turned into war and persecution, when the Lord
our God thinks good: let us not follow the beastly rule of the pampered
Epicures, who say to themselves, Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas.
But let us hearken unto the wholesome counsel of the Apostle Peter. Let us
hence forward learn to live, as much time as remains in the flesh, not 1.
Pet. 4.
after the lusts of men, but after the will of God. For it is sufficient. etc.
For surely in following the lewd fancies of flesh and blood, we do tread the
path to death, and walk the ready way to destruction. But if we strive to
mortifye the lusts, and deeds of the flesh, we are led by a right line,
dyrecting us to the true life: that never shall have end. Therefore whilst we
enjoy the benefit of this our peace, let us apply our selves to the practicing
of that in show we profess, and let us labor to grow in knowledge, that we
may be able to discern the spirits and to give a reason of our faith with
judgment and understanding: So shall our peace be greatly profitable unto us,
and we thereby better prepared to abide with patience, what the Lord by
persecution shall lay upon us. It was not allowed for a good Plea, that the
Scribes and pharisees should challenge themselves to be the children of Abraham:
for that (as our Savior Christ charge them) they did not the works of their
father Abraham, but of their father the Devil. No more can it be accepted at
our hands to challenge the title of christianity, to say we profess Christ
his Gospel, unless we bring forth fruits answerable to so high a calling.
For as Chrysostom says. Non Christi nomen solum christianum facit, sed
Christi veritas, quia in nomine Christi multi ambulant in veritate au, tem eius
pauci. And there is no man truly termed a christian, but he that strives to
go as near to Christ in his life and conversation, as he ca^. Our well selted
peace, must needs avail us much, if we use it, and our selves in it to the
glorifying of our God: for to this end only is our peace preserved to us. But
if in this time of our peace, we will live deliciously, walk wantonly, sleep
in sin, and wallow in all manner of sensuality, we shall surely become false
prophets to our selves, and whilst we persuade our selves of a pleas at peace,
behold present destruction. The Israelites groned long under the burden of
cruel Pharaoh, who seeing them multiplye and increase daily in number of
persons, and wealth of substance, he endeavored and put in practice, both by
tyranny and cruel slaverye to oppress them. But the Lord loking mercifully
upon his people, delivered them out of the tyrants hands, and plagued their
enemies in most sundry and strange sorts, and in the end most miraculously made
one self sa^e place a passage for the delivery of his children, and pit of
destruction to their enemies pursuing them. Yet see the ingratitude of man's
heart, they were no sooner delivered, but they immediately forget so great a
benefit, and fell to murmuring, grudging, and repining against their GOD, who
so graciously had wrought their deliverance. I will not apply this, but leave
every man to his own conscience to consider in himself, whether he has been
sufficiently thankful, for our merciful and miraculous deliverance out of
that popish persecution, practiced against Gods people, in the time of Queen
Marye. Or rather, whether that (Gods great blessing and benefit therein being
forgotten) we have not through ambition, conetousnes, or carnal security,
been so drowned in worldly cares, that we have murmured, grudged, and repined
against GOD and his ministers, as the Israelites did: which being true (as it
can hardly be denied) we must look to be trained up with the Israelites in a
new school. For when prosperity and peace could not make them to know him,
in yielding due reverence and obedience to him, He visited the^ with sharp
rods and plagues, that by his correction he might draw them to seek to him
for remedy against his scourges, and earnestly to repent them for their
rebellion and wickedness against him. And this did the Lord of love to his
chosen children, that they might not still wallow with wicked worldlinges in
all licentiousnes of evil. There be some of that vain and wicked opinion, who
when they cannot couple the Gospel of Christ, and Poperye together in the
couples of their conceit, as they would do, then they fall to another bare and
bad s^ift, persuading themselves that they may worship God according to the
manner of the countries, that they are in, and yet be good Gospellers still, not
remembering that confession of Christ, and outward acknowledgement of his truth
(a special part of his worship and our service du to him) is required of us.
For they are the words of our Savior Christ, that we must confess him before
me^: And who knows not, that men cannot see into our hearts, therefore with
our mouths we must confess him. Notable also is that, which the spirit of God
sets down by Paul to the Corinthians. Our bodies (says 1. Cor. 6.
he) are the temples of the holy Ghost, and we are not our own, for we are
dearelye bought, therefore we must glorify God in our bodies, and in our
spirits, for they are gods. Whereby it appears, that the Lord has such and
interest and right in us, and over us; that no half service ca^ plese him, but
he must have us whole, and he will be wholly served by us. Therefore they, that
in any respect refuse to confess Christ before men, do bewray them selves to
be either faithless, or very fainte in faith: and let them urge never so much,
that with their inward man they serve god, and carry a love to Christ his truth,
they shall find it is no good plea in divinity, neither will it prove good
before God at the general day of account: when all flesh must appear before
the just judge, to give a reckoning of their stewardeship. As for those to whom
the name of God seems strange, and are loath to hear of any religion, they
are not unlike to Epicures, of whom it is written: that when he saw great
contentions amongst the philosophers touching God, he did take (as he
thought) a shorter way, and flatly denied God. Of which kind of men I wish
withal my heart, there were not over many amongst us. It is a dangerous
thing, when men become deriders and mockers of the word, and will scoff and
taunt at such as in reverent regard thereof, seek to walk according to the
prescript rule, set down by the same: for from them, by little and little, all
sense and taste of truth is taken, and they go on in degrees of ungodliness so
far, until they show themselves to be such, as do hate the truth, and then
are they given over to fulfill their lusts, making their bellye their GOD,
bestowing their whole life in their own fylthie and fleshly pleasure: for they
live to serve no other God indeed, and so at length there is with the^ no
truth, no religion, no God, but they make a mock of all religion and truth,
and are given up to believe lies, and to follow vanities, and nothing else. And
thus in fine they beco^e so bold, that they deny God, yea they be so cunning in
the devils crafe, that they do reason against God, and openly profess that
Christ his truth is but a fable, as this day gives fearful examples of too
many: The Lord our God refourm the^, and show them the light of his
countenance, and be merciful unto them. And so with grief to think that
there should be any such, I leave them. As for you, who^ the Lord has so
seasoned by his spirit, that you have learned to be a law to your selves, and
do endeuourithat one and the self same word, might both teach and rule you,
although they give you bynames for so doing: be not difmayed, but hold on your
course, and be it so far from you, to think your selves pure, and learn to
have such a lively sense, and feeling of this festering fore of sin, eating
us to eternal destruction, if our Physician Christ, put not to his help to
heal the same by the blood of his passion, as that you acknowledge with the
Prophet, all your righteousness to be like a stained cloth, and to this end
labor in your selves, and persuade it in others to go on still, and to be
climing up from step to step, toward the mark of perfection set before us: not
thinking it sufficient to begin well, and there to stay, nor to go and grow
forward for a time, and the^ to stand still, but we must know that perseuera^ce
has the promise, for he that perseuereth to the end, he shall be saved. This
then being the settled persuasion of all that truly fear the Lord, let not
their course be hindered, neither in their course let them be discouraged, but
carrying in themselves the testimony of a good conscience, that they have in
the^ selves a desire to increase daily from faith to faith, from knowledge to
knowledge, from godliness to godliness, until they become perfect men in
Christ Jesus: let them know it is their glory to bear reproach for good
dealing. See that none of you (says the Apostle) suffer as a murderer, as a
thief, as an evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's matters, but if
any man suffer as a Christian etc. 1. Pet. 4.
This is the portion of Gods people, to suffer for well doing; and of this we
ought not to be ashamed, but for this we must glorify God: neither is this the
uttermost of our trial, to be evil spoken of, but we are like to taste the
smart of a more sharp school: Our sins provoke it, Gods justice does
threaten it, and I see not how we should avoid it. Let us learn therefore to be
well provided against the day of trial. And surely if we profess, as we seem,
or carry that sincere zeal, as we ought, we have cast our reckoning, we know
the price, and therefore will endeavor to provide for payment. Crux comes
Euangely: is an old rule, and he is a very delicate, or rather faintehearted
soldier, that looks to over come with out fighting: or to win victory
without contending: and how can he fight, that is unprepared to the battle? or
contend for victory, that is unprovided? And to be armed at all points, This
lesson well learned, will teach us that, Tota vita Christiani hominss, si
secundum Euangelium uiuat, est crux atque martyrium. Let not your hearts be
troubled therefore, neither fear, and let your patient mynds be known unto
all men, for the Lord is at hand. It is notably said of a learned Father, that
tribulation and trouble is to a just man, as the file to the yro^, the furnace
to the gold, the bridle to the horse, and the whippe to the Ass. The fyle, as
it is commonly seen, makes iron the brighter, the fyery furnace makes gold
the more glorious, the bridle withholdeth the headdy horse, that he go not
whither him lists, the whippe keeps the dull Ass in such awe, that he dare
not but go on. And this does affliction to every true Christian. Let us not be
dismayed therefore, though our peace be taken from us, and persecution come in
place: For to us that have a sure testimony sealed up in our consciences, that
we are Gods children, it shall turn to great good, being sure that our
heavenly father will lay no more upon us, the^ he will make us well able to
bear. We see by experience, that where the Prince or chief Magistrate
favors the profession of the Gospel, the most part will be Gospellers. But
like experience has taught us, when times of trial have come upon them, what
time seruers some have showed themselves. But to such, our god comes not as
a correcting father, but as a destroying judge. For obedience to the Lord God,
and the profession of his truth, is not tied to the pleasure of Princes. He
that confesses me before men, I will confess him before my father in heaven.
But he that denies me. etc. And we must learn to say with the Apostle Paul.
If I seek to please men, I am not the servant of Christ. It is an old saying
and a true. All is not Gold that glistereth, but the fiery furnace will soon try
it. Every piece of iron that we see, is not perfect and sound iron, for
sometimes it is eaten through with the canker; and this, when the file comes
upon it, is easily known. Wheat and chafe lie mingled together in one barn,
til a gale of wind come, and blow them in sunder, and then they appear both
plainly what they are: let us acquaint our selves with our good GOD by
continual and hearty prayer, that by his goodness we may be prepared against
the day of his visitation, to abide what in mercy he shall think good to lay
upon us. The fearefulnes of flesh and blood is such, and the delight thereof in
worldly prosperity so great, that adversity is not easily borne. Imprisonment
is accounted painful, but it is more painful to enjoy liberty upon evil
conditions. The prisons are thought loathsome and unsavory, but yet not more
loathsome, then the sweetest houses, where the fear of God is wanting. It is
grievous to man to be solitary and alone, yet better is it to be so, then in
company with the wicked. It touches us very near to loose living and goods,
but it shall be found to touch nearer to loose the favor and grace of God. We
use it as a common speech, that life is sweet, but most sweet and pleasant is
it to loose this life, full of mortal miseries, to find and enjoy the life
full of eternal joys. We are loath to leave our friends, wife, and children,
but we must beware, that in abiding with them we stay not in the displeasure
of our God. These trials must needs come upon us, and whosoever lives to it,
is like to taste of the^. But be of good cheer, Whom the Lord loves, he
chastises, even to this end, that he might call them to remember their
sins, and so run by repentance to him and ask mercy: and then he might
pardon and forgive them, in respect whereof we are not to lament, but to praise
the Lord, not to be dismaide, but to be comforted, that our God will vouchsafe
to offer us his cross: whereby he seeks to train us up to the place of
endless joy and comfort. It is an assurance laid up unto us, that if we
suffer, we shall reign. If we confess him before men in earth, he will
confess us before his father in heaven. If we be not ashamed of his Gospel
here, he will not be ashamed of us at the last day. Remember the words of our
savior Christ in the. 5. of Matthew. Blessed are they that suffer persecution
for righteousness sake, for theires is the kingdom of heaven. Call to mind
that which Paul says in the 8. to the Romans. The afflictions of this life,
are not to be compared to the joys of the life prepared for you. Wherefore
seeing that even in the cross we behold and see the mercy of our God, which
is more sweet, and to be set by then any mucke or pelf of this world, yea
much more then is life it self. Let us keep on our course, Let us walk
before our God in simplicity of heart, knowing this, that not a heir of head
can perish without the will of our heavenly father, neither can any man, or
devil be able to attempt any thing, much less to do any thing to us, without
the sufferance of the Almighty: And when leave is granted, they shall go no
further then he will. Wherefore casting all our care upon the Lord, who cares
sufficiently for us: Let us lay aside all fear, and only study, whilst we
live hear, to please him, and to keep our consciences clean from the
pollutions of this present age, that both our mind and tongue, our life and
belief may be answerable to each other, and that for ever the word of truth
may be a light to lighten our steps in the path of true holiness. The Lord in
the riches of his mercy impart unto us all, such portion of his holy spirit,
that when the time of our trial shall come, and that the wind of persecution
shall blow upon us, we may be found pure gold, made clearer by the furnace,
and perfect iron, bryghtened by the fyle, and good Wheat, severed from the
light chafe, and so constantly continue Christ his faithful soldiers, and
servants to our lives end. And thus (Madam) have I dedicated to your self
particulerly a translated treatise, as a pledge of my reverend love I bear
you: and to others, generally a long and rude Epistle with it. Your self I
trust will accept my simple travail therein, and take it in good part: and
others, I hope, to whose hands this Epistle and treatise shall come, will make
favorable construction thereof, and will bear with all defectes therein,
whatsoever. My desire was to warn and encourage, which how weakly soever it
be performed, I trust it shall no whit hinder, but rather further to so
necessary a meditation, that obtained, I have my desire: beseeching God to open
our eyes, that we may see our deserts, and thereby know our perils, and knowing
the same, may labor to meet the Lord by repentance, before he come: whether
it be for a time to scourge us in justice, or to perform the last time of his
coming in judgment, to every one, the portion allotted unto him for his hire,
from the beginning: which time of his coming, the Lord hasten to perform and
fulfill for his electes sake.

Amen.
Grace, mercy, and peace, from God our Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
I Was very glad (dear brethren) when I understood how God of his goodness and
mercy, had visited you to ye grace of the holy Gospel, and to the knowledge
of his truth: and thereby to the communion of his son Jesus Christ, who is
the treasure of all ages, for this is a treasure containing immortal riches,
wherein lies all our blessedness and felicity: this is an inestimable
benefit, and the greatest we could receive of God. Wherefore we have good
cause to give him thanks for the same continually, to the intent, that by our
ingratitude, we may not provoke him to anger against us, nor stir him up, or
move him to take from us the talent which he has given us: for we may well say
of our selves, that which David said of himself, and of all the people of God.
The Lord has not thus done to all nations, neither has he manifested to
them his judgments. When a king takes some one into his service, and gives
him some honorable office in his Court, we think it a great honor unto him
which is called to such a promotion, and esteem him greatly beholding and
bound to the King. Let us then think what cause we have to glorify and
magnify GOD our father, seeing that we see he is come to elect and choose us
from amongst all other, not only to be his servants, but also to be his
children, and to be kings and heirs of his kingdom: and that he leaves a
great number of others that be wyser, richer, and that bear a greater show
then we, to put the treasures of his grace into so poor vessels of earth as
we be; so vile, so base, so weak, so frail and brittle.

And therefore we ought greatly to fear Sect.
to abuse this great goodness of GOD toward us, and the gifts which we have
received of him: we must take good heed we hyde them not in the earth, as the
slothful and unfaithful servant did hide his talent, but as the other good
and faithful servants did, we must put them to some use, to the intent they
may bring forth fruit to their Master and Lord, who to this end has pu^
them into our hands: for why does GOD call us into his service, but to serve
him: why does GOD communicate his graces unto us, but that we should employe
them to his honor and glory, and to the edifiyng of his Church: how can we
be Gods servants and remain idle in his house and do nothing: but (which is
worse) how will he suffer us there, if in steed of serving Christ Jesus; we
serve Antichrist and the Devil his adversaries: Let us therefore remember yt
which the Lord says: To him that has, it shall be given, and to him that has
nothing, it shall be taken from him even that he has.

We see this by experience before our eyes every day to come to pass: we
see Sect.
how GOD increases his graces toward them which use them as they ought, and
how on the contrary he depriueth them thereof which abuse them: and how he
gives them up into a reprobate sense, for when they knew GOD, they glorified
him not as God, but gave the honor which apperteyneth to him only, to
creatures and Idols. Wherefore we ought not to marvel if we see many to who^
God has given some knowledge of truth, which become (godles) and mockers of
holy scriptures, and to become as dogs to eat that which they once vomited,
and as swyne to wallowe themselves in the mire and filthe, out of the which God
had drawn them, we cannot doubt, but such a curse is the most horrible and
most fearful judgment of God, which can come to man, it is the judgment
which he is wont to execute upon the ungrateful, and contemners of his word,
and blasphemers of his graces: therefore let us take heed that we neither
dally of him nor with him: let us hearken how the Apostle warns us, let us
not abuse our selves, for God can neither be deluded nor mocked.

And therefore let us learn to walk with Sect.
him in all fear, honor, and reverence, let us make our profit of his severe
judgment, which he sets before our eyes as in a glass, when he
punishes so sharply those which after they had known him, have forsaken him,
and despised his word: let us beware we esteem not lightly any thing that
he has commanded or forbidden, but let us fear to offend him in any thing
whatsoever, either in omitting that which he has commanded us to do, or in
doing that which he has forbidden.

Let us look more to the authority of the Sect.
Law maker, and to his will, then to the naked law: and let us judge thereof
according to his will and not according to our own, let us consider with our
selves, that we cannot transgress the left commandment that ever he gave
without despising his majesty and authority: For if we regard not his
commandments, we declare manifestly thereby, that we fear him not, but that
we dally with him, as though we held him in our sleeue to do with him as
pleases us: or else we give to understand, that we will correct him, as not well
advised, and as though he had failed either in commanding, or forbidding
things unworthy to be commanded or forbidden. Ought this arroga^cy and
presumption, and despising of god his authority to be esteemed a small fault: Is
it not greater then high treason: seeing that the Majesty and authority of God
passes all authority and excellency of man? What less punishment then, can
he deserve then death and eternal damnation, if God will condemn him according
to the rigor of his judgment:

And therefore my brethren, we must take Sect. Seducing of himself.
good heed, that we deceive not our selves, or that we suffer not our selves
to be easilye seduced by others, which may be among us, for many do boast of
the knowledge of God, which notwithstanding make no great conscience to do
contrary to his will in all things, which are of no small importance, which
notwithstanding seem to them very small, because they persuade themselves so,
and that they judge thereof according to their own affection. But if they did
judge of them, according to the judgment of ye spirit of God, they should know
yt they are very unpleasant and detestable before God, and of that nature, that
there is nothing that he does more abhor and detest, nor that he has
punished more grievously at al times: It is not a small matter to provoke God
to anger, and we cannot more provoke him, then by Idolatry and superstition,
which is the fountain of all other evils, and a sin which does estrange and
draw us wholly from God.

Let us not abuse our selves, for it may seem to us that the things which we
do Sect.
to keep us in league with the children of this world, are not of great
importance. Let us beware that Satan draw us not from obeying the
commandment of GOD by the deceaueablenes of our flesh, as he withdrew Adam by
the means of Eve, after that by his Genesis 3.
lie she was seduced, he thought with himself it was no great fault, to eat
of the fruit of a Tree, but it was very great, since GOD had forbidden it, as
experience taught it afterward: for by this transgression all the lynage of
man was destroyed and all creatures were made subject to Curse.

Let us never suffer therefore ye word of God Sect. To hold the word fast.
to be snatched out of our hands whatsoever reason, or whatsoever color or
cloak flesh can allege unto us: let us be as warye as we would be to
fall into the fire, to draw back from this word, and to abandon it, one only
step. For we need not go far aside to miss the way, to set us
altogether out of the way, and when one is once fallen out of the way, the
further he goes on, the further he wandreth and multiplyeth error upon
error: so that after it is very hard for him to find his right way, and to
come thither, whether he purposed. Wherefore to avoid the falling into the
bottom of the depth of sin, let us get us away out of hand from the
banks, least we plunge our selves in deeper then we think for, and that there
come not some wave which suddenly will set upon us, and in wray and plunge us in
such sort among the waves, that we can never get out, but remain there all
together drowned.

If we will well fly sin, let us keep us as far from it, as we can, and
take heed Sect.
not only to touch it, but also to come near it, for it is so infectious a
plague, and so stinking and dangerous a poison, that although one The manner to
fly sin.
keep himself back from it so far as is possible, yet can he not avoid,
but that he shall be infected and corrupted therewith. A man cannot have so
small acquaintance therewith, but that Acquaintance wc sin.
immediately it will be turned into over great familiarity and boldness, and then
into a custom, which cannot be shaken off: as we see it by experience in all
sorts of sin. And to know these more plainly, let us take one example
which may serve us for all the rest, and which shall be very agreeable to the
matter, we have in hand; let us consider by what way a harlot comes to the
last step of infamye and abomination: she slippeth not, nor slideth away
like an eale as a common harlot at the first day, but first she begins to
wander a little out of the bonds of modesty, shamefastnes, and honesty, which
ought to be in a woman that is virtuous and full of the fear of God: she
delights to hear and speak dishonest and infamous words, and to sing
filthy and wicked songs: she takes pleasure in daunces, and to be conversant
amongst lusty youths, and feeds her eyes with their gesture and
cou^tenances, and her ears to hear their amorous and lascivious talk: after
she has once abandoned her eyes and ears, she is no longer whole and chaste.
For we cannot think that woman truly chaste, which is not so in heart and
mind, and in all parts and members of her body, they that know what
honesty and chastity is, will judge hereof in this sort, for they cannot
call things, but by their name: but they which take pleasure in such pastimes,
as harlots, and such other worldlings, carnal folks, and curtizans, which can
disguise and change the names of things, will not call these lascivious love
tricks wicked wantonness, but civility and courtesy, notwithstanding
whatsoever name, me^ give to ye thing, yet shall it be always, what it is, and
shall not change the nature, for the alteration and change of names: seeing
then the eyes and ears are already won, the other parts are not very sure:
after these follow other dalianees as tickings or toyings, which defile the
body yet somewhat more and more enflameth to whoredom: when chastity is once
violated so far, it will go hard, if in short space it perish not
altogether, and that whoredom follow not incontinently thereupon,
notwithstanding at the beginning there will be some shamefastness, which will
keep it secret: but after by process of time and long custom, this
shamefastness will fall by little and little, so that the secret harlot will
become altogether impudent without any shame at al, or fear of God or man. As
much may we say of all other sins: for it is all one reason: By little
steps a man comes to the heap and depth of sin: But I have willingly
taken the example of whoredom, because it is most like unto idolatry.

There is then no less danger, but that as Sect.
much will happen unto us, if we yield the least thing in the world to
idolatry and superstition: for by the one we come to the other, if for fear of
grieuing our flesh and to deprive it of the pleasures it delights in, we go
about to flatter it, and begin somewhat to give it the bridle, it is in
great hazard that it will take the bitte in the teeth, and that having the
bridle at will, it will take a course, wherein we can neither stop it nor draw
it from thence when we would: If we suffer it to go to daunsings, to enter
into brothell houses, to keep company to dance and pass the time with
baudes, whores, and harlots, hardly shall it return chaste without some loss
of the chastity it ought to have. Then to enter into idols temples, to be
conversant and communicate with Idolaters, and to behold their iuglings, and
to be there assistant with them, and to dance the same dance that they do,
what is it else, the^ to enter into the brothel houses of Satan and to be
acquainted with Baudes and Harlots: which commit fornication with strange
Gods.

If a man desire to have his wife chaste both in body and mind, and cannot
love her if she Sect.
has given away her love and settled her heart upon another, or that she has
yielded or permitted him (I say) not her whole body, but only her mouth to
kiss her, or her neck, or arms to embrace her: Think we that Jesus Christ
desires not his spouse to be much more pure both in body and mind: Think, we
that he can abide that we should dedicate our heart to any other than to him:
Think we that he delights, that we should make this body a member of an
harlot, a temple of Idols, and of the Devil, and a brothell house of Satan,
whereof Jesus is the head, and which he has consecrated and sanctified as a
sovereign bishop, to be the temple of God and dwelling house of the holy
Ghost: Think we that he can abide that we should come every day in his sight,
and humble our selves before the strumpet of Babylon and do reverence to Baal,
and kiss strange gods, and pollute al ye members of our body through such
fornicatio^s and adulteries: We may perceive it by that which is written in the
Law. Thou shall have none other Gods before me, nor in my presence. Thou shall
do no homage nor reverence to Images. He does not forbid us only to settle
our hearts thereon, But that we should not bow down or make any sign of
honor or reverence to them at al: The husband, who that after he has
reconciled his wife to him, should see her frequent the house of the adulterer
that seduced her, and see her every day in his arms kissing her, embracing
her, and dallying with her, what account could be make of her, but that she is
a false, impudent, and desperate strumpet: And if she were an honest woman
should she not abhor, even to see him or his house, or to hear talk of him:
Ought she not to fear (if she were not too impudent or over much ungrateful)
to cast her eyes toward him, whether it were in presence or absence of her
husband: Ought she not to fear to provoke him against her, and to give
occasion as well to him as to all others, to have some evil opinion and
suspicion of her, which might redound to the dishonesting, and defaming as well
of her as of her husband.

Ought we not to content our selves to have Sect.
lived so long and beue conversant in the brothel house of Satan, and to have
continued in our fornications and adulteries; but that we must return thither
again every day and every hour, as though of set purpose we had determined
to provoke ye Lord to jealousy and to anger, making our members servants to
all filthiness, uncleanness, idolatry and superstition: how is it possible
that we should acknowledge ye great grace and mercy, yt God has bestowed on
us, in withdrawing us out of this sincke full of blasphemies and abominations,
in steed of rejecting us and casting us of, as an Adulteress which has
violated and broken her faith to her husband, and that we make so light account
to be conversant always with our old companions, and to serve them, with so
great dishonor to our true Spouse Jesus Christ.

Wherefore I greatly marvel that such kind of spirits are to be found
amongst those Sect.
which will have the names to follow the gospel, and to be counted of the
number of Disciples of Christ Jesus, which dare yet maintain that the
faithful and those to whom God has revealed the truth of his Gospel may
communicate with idolaters and superstitious persons, in their idolatries, and
superstitions, and be partaker, of the tables of Devils, whereunto we cannot
approach without overthrowing the table of Christ Jesus: I tremble when I heart
that such speeches pass, from the mouths of those which boast themselves of
the Gospel, and so much the more, for that so boldly, they dare give that
council to others: for their opinions are so far contrary to truth, and so
strange to any good Christian heart, that it were better such men had never
heard speak of Christ Jesus nor his religion.

I know not what Gospel or Scripture Sect.
they have studied, nor how they dare so openly gainsay the spirit of God:
which pronounces so plainly that there is no agreement 2. 10. 6. Ephe. 6.
with light and darkness, with Christ and belial, with the temple of God and the
temple of Idols. To what end exhorts he the faithful There is no agreement
between Christ and Beliall.
by his holy Apostle, not to carry and draw yt yoke among Infidels, and not to
communicate any kind of way with the unfruitful works of darkness: but
commands rather to reprove and condemn them. I know well from what school,
this divinity proceeds, not from the school of the spirit of God: from the
school of the flesh which likes not well to come out of Egypt, and to
renounce the pleasures and delights thereof: therefore it seeks coulor in
the holy scriptures to cloak and cover her infirmity, because it dare not
openly gainesaye the word of God, whereby it is overcome.

I have heard and examined some reasons Sect.
and arguments, whereby those (whom such doctrine pleases) go about to
confirm and approve it: but they are too frivolous and weak, and sufficiently
overthrow themselves, if one behold them narrowly. I know well that such
Delicate Christians.
reasons are forged in some men's brain, flat contrary to Moses: for they
delight too much in Pharaos court, which it grieueth them much to forsake, to
be conversant in the desert with the people of God: They have not yet learned
to prefer with Moses the approbries, pouerties, and miseries, nor the nails
and thorns of Jesus Christ, before the temporal Jewels, treasures and
delights of Egypt; they are constrained by virtue of the truth, to
acknowledge that the superstition and idolatry wherein they have lived, is
damnable: wherefore they are forced and constrained in conscience to condemn
it, which willingly they do, when they may without danger: but because they
will suffer nothing for truth, and yet they dare not condemn it nor reject
it, but will be counted amongst the faithful for good men, and for favorers
and defendours thereof, and not for blasphemers and persecutors: they travail
as much as they may to find some cloak in the word of GOD, to cover and hide
their to great infirmity of their faith, and the fornications which the flesh
commits every day with strange Gods.

Such poor blind souls should do much Sect.
better to acknowledge and confess their misery and incredulity, desiring
pardon and mercy of God whom they offend, then to defend and flatter them
selves in it: they ought to content themselves, to offend God many other ways,
and not to abuse in such sort ye holy scriptures, nor blaspheme the holy Ghost,
in corrupting them, and wresting them to make them serve their own affection,
and to build thereby, entertain and establish idolatry and iniquity: which
ought by them wholly to be beaten down and destroyed: It is easy to be
perceived, that such Christians have never yet truly understood the grounds,
rudiments, and principles of the Christians religion: for they will be the
disciples of Christ Jesus, without renouncing themselves, and without carrying
their cross after him, which is impossible. For the master has (...) the
scholar is not above his master, nor (...) ^^^uant Mat. 10. John. 13. Luke 14.
above his Lord, it ought to suffice (...) ^^sciples and servants to be as
their ma^^er is. And therefore he that will be my scholar, he must renounce
him self, carry his cross every day upon his shoulders, and follow me, he
that hates not, (that is as he expounds it in another place) he that loves
his father or mother, Mat. 1^. 16.
brethren, sisters, or wife, or children, or house and possessions more then
me, he is not worthy to be with me, nor to be my disciple. Wherefore it were
much better for these Doctors to learn, then to teach, they ought rather to
pray to God that he would strengthen them to confess and sanctify his holy
name, the^ to take such boldness upon the^ to deny him, and to endeavor to draw
others into ye like error.

We see by expertence, the fruit that comes Sect.
out of this pernicious doctrine, and into what pit it draws them at length,
which thereby will paynt themselves a Christ after their own fantasy, far
contrary unto him that said unto such a Disciple as they would be. The foxes
have holes, and the birds of heaven their nestes: But the Son of man has
not Mat. 9.
whereon to lay his head. But these men will have castles and palaces, and
will live in the courts of princes. And because such think it too sharp to
rub and eat the ears of corn with Jesus Christ as his Disciples did, and
desire to find the ta^^e laid, they make no great conscience to bow the knee
to Baall, and after that once they have accustomed themselves to that, they
take no heed, but that by little and little, the knowledge of god which they
had received, and that little measure of faith which perhaps they had,
begins to wax cold, and altogether to be extinguished, and after that they
fall into such despising of God and his word, that they are much worse, the^
they which never knew God.

Wherefore we must take heed, of that Sect. Transfiguration of Satan. 2.
Cor. 11.
same subtle (Satan) who can so well transfourme him self into an angel of
light, to make the truth of God to serve our affections, and to change it into
a lie and blasphemy: when Satan knows that there is any fear of God, and
any knowledge of truth in us, and yt we do any thing reverence ye holy
scriptures, he armeth him self to fight against us by the^, Mat. 4.
and he alleges them to us, as he did to Christ Jesus when he tempted him.
Luke 4.


This Satan is very dangerous, who takes the staff of the word of God, to
beat us withal, wherewith he ought to beaten: and therewith he gives us
dangerous wounds. The first is, that he moves us to blaspheme God. The
second is, (which is made worse) that he makes us to believe and think that
it is not wickedly done, but that it is lawful for us to do so, at the least,
it is a small sin and amongst the lest that we can commit; and which is more,
to the intent we should not perish aone in our errors, he pricketh us
forward, to entise others to do the like. And to the end he may be more
covert and less known, to give a better cloak to these reasons, he lays
straight before us Naaman the Sirian, or Nicodemus, or Saint Paul, which
applies him self to all, and who made himself a Jew amongst 1. Cor. 9.
Sect.
Jews, and a gentyle amongst gentyles.

I doubt not but these reasons seem fair and pleasant to the flesh, and that
it loves such proctors and advocates which will so excuse and Proctors and
advocates of the flesh.
justify it: but it must take heed that they use her not as advocates and
proctors, those are without conscience and without the fear of God, and which
have no other God but Gold and silver: and have no regard, so they have money:
such proctors and advocates will make the^ believe, whose cause they defend,
that their matter is good, although it be the worst and falsest that may be:
for every man easily believes yt which he desires, and that which pleases
him, and he has affection unto: and therefore M. advocate knowing ye affection
of man abuses him to his profit and gain, and to the hurt of the pore
contender: for if he would tell him at the first, yt he had an evil cause, he
would stay from pleading, if he were wise, and would pursue that cause no
more, but would do that which were right and reason, and so the advocate
should gain nothing: Or if he were an obstinate person, and affectioned above
measure to his cause and against his party, he would be vexed and angry
against his advocate, and would judge him ignorant and scant cunning in his
art for telling him truth: And therefore would go seek another more to his
liking; for it is the nature of man to judge all things according to his
affection and for his advantage. If thou speak to his fancy thou shall be the
learned man in the world: but if thou be contrary to his opinion, thou
shall be but a beast, and haste lost immediately all thy learning: and therefore
our flesh will have advocates to defend their cause well, and to allow what
she desires: and seeing it has such a desire, she shall no more lack such
fellows as she desires, then the same proctors which take pleasure in
contention, spending their money, loosing their time, and consuming their
bodies and souls in strife and debate.

But what profit shall they have to cast away Sect.
and destroy them selves: for the sentence shall not be given by the advocate
and proctor, nor according to their desire, but by the judge and such as shall
please him: and when M. Advocate shall see that the cause of his Client goes
evil, whom he has always kept in good hope till the last cast, he will
shake him of well enough and leave him in the mire wherein he has plunged him:
for he has his reckoning, he has fished in a troubled water, he has plucked
the bird, he has the feathers and the fat, and cares no more for the cause:
and therefore let us take good heed, that we delight not in such defenders and
advocates: for there may be enough found, which to please us and be in our
favor, and well accounted of; will flatter us, and tell us pleasant things:
we prove it true in many bellies, which have found such taste in the
Kitchen of Egypt; that they think them selves utterly lost, so soon as they
have lost the sight of the smoke. But when we shall appear before the
judgment of God, the disputation shall not there be decided, nor the cause
there judged by their reasons, nor according to their sentence, but by the just
judgment of God which is always in truth.

And therefore let us count them more dear, Sect. Let us flee flatterers and
Parasites.
which speak simply and roundly unto us according to the truth of God, then
those which flatter and seduce us, to please us, and keep themselves mor at
ease; for in this divine court and in these last appeals, sentences shall not
there be weyed in the balance of carnal sense, and humane reason, but in the
balance of Gods word, which shall not be understood, according to our
fantasy, but according to the will of the spirit of God: then both Clients and
advocates shall find them selves as much astonished the one as the other: and the
one shall not ease then the case of the other, for they both shall be
sufficiently troubled each one with his own cause, the plaintiff shall not
there be only in danger as in the courts and judgments of men, but if he be
condemned, the proctor and advocates shall be subject to the same condemnation
with him, and more grievous; for if the hearer be condemned, because he has
taken pleasure to hear and follow evil council, much more grievously shall
the counselor be punished, who has had more regard to satisfy his
covetousness, and affection of a poor ignorant soul, then the word of God: for
he has settled him, and confirmed him in error, whom he ought to have
wtdrawen from error, and to have led him into a better way by his good council.

Why do not these councillors as well allege other places of holy
scripture, which Sect.
be repugnant to the affection of man, as they allege those whereby they
seek to please it: for it is not needful now to travel much to find
cloking to our flesh, to arm it against truth, to furnish it with armor, and
to put the sword into her hand to fight against it: for she is but too cunning
by nature to and bold and hasty to fight against her own salvation, and to
advance her own destruction: wherefore she has herein more need of a bridle
then a spur.

This Satan, that endeavors himself so Sect.
much to embolden the flesh, to defile it self in Idolatry and superstition,
is not very hastye to allege unto it, Abraham and all the Patriarchs and
Prophets, who in what place so ever they be found, although they have been
couersant oftentimes among the Pagans and Idolaters, yet were they never
partakers of their Idolatry, but also made public confession of their
religion, and of the true GOD whom they served. Satan and his advocates yt
serve him, will know nothing of all that, they pass it over lightly without
making any mention thereof: they have no care to rehearse the examples of the
faith and constancy of the Hebrewe children, or of Daniell: whereof the one
did choose rather to be cast into the furnace of Nabuchadnazar, the^ to worship
his image and Dan. 3.
to do honor and reverence to his Idol of gold. The other desired rather to
be cast into the den and throat of ye lions, then to remain only three Dan. 7.
days without praying to God, and without making open confession of him. They
can also Examples of the Apostles and martirs.
well dessemble the example of the Apostles and Martyrs, and of so many of the
good faithful, which have better liked to endure the most grievous torments
that Tyrants could imagine, then only to do reverence to an image, or put a
little insense upon the fire before an Idol: if they had known how, or would
have dessembled and halted on both feet, and have served God and Baal, they
had never suffered any thing for Christ Jesus, their blood had not been shed
for the testimony of the truth, and the Church of Jesus Christ had had no
Martyrs.

I marvel what new christianity such men Sect.
will bring us, and to what end they think Jesus Christ has said: who so
denies me before Mat. 10. Mar. 8.
men, I will deny him before my father and his angels. Who so is ashamed of me
and my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, I will be ashamed of
him before my father which is in heaven, and before his holy angels. He yt is
not afraid to leese his soul, yt is to say, his life for my sake shall find
it: he that confesses me before men, I will confess and acknowledge Mat. 16.
Ioh. 12.
him before my father which is in heaven.

We see plainly by these words, that Jesus Sect. The faith of a Christian.
Christ is not contented with a vain and dead faith, that man imagines
himself to have, but requires a true and lively faith, which must be so
rooted in the heart that it must bring forth her boughs and fruits outward,
and what are these principal fruits, but that we make profession of Jesus
Christ as well in words The fruits of faith.
as works: but what else requires the Lord of us, but only this sacrifice
of praise; when the Prophets do prophecy of the church of our Lord Jesus
Christ, what difference set they between it and other religions, and between
her sacrifice and those of the Sinagogue? what is the principal point whereby
she may be known and separated from others, but the sacrifice of praise?
whereby I understand here all that the faithful says or does is to ye glory
and praise of God: for although that prayer be sometimes called especially by
that name, yet the signification thereof stretches farther, and comprehends
other things that apperteine to the divine service: for the faithful man does
not his works whatsoever they be, to be justified by them, or to merit by
means of the^, the kingdom of heaven, for it is already merits and purchased
for him, not by his merit but by the merit of Jesus: and before he was
incorporated into the Church of Jesus Christ, he was justified by faith in
him: for he was made unto us of God, Justice, Wisdom, Sanctification, and
redemption, the principal end: the^ of the works of the faithful is to praise
God, and to give him laud and thanks for all his benefits, after the example
of Angels, to whom by Jesus Christ he is associated and conjoined, which never
cease to praise God in all things: And yet do they it not to merit Paradise
thereby, whereof they have already ye fruitio^: but because God is their
sovereign goodness, and also man's, and that they are created to that end, as
we are: and therefore when Jesus Christ exhorts his disciples to good works,
and to make their light shine by them before men, he says not to the end, that
by them you may be justified, or merit Paradise: but to the Mat. 5.
end that men may see them and glorify your father which is in heaven.

Seeing the^ it is the property of the church Sect. The work of ye church.
to offer incessantly to God this sacrifice of praise, how can she without
that, be the church of Jesus Christ? Wherefore has the Apostle said, if thou
confess the Lord with thy mouth, To. 10. Faith and confession.
and believe in thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved: for man believes in the heart to justification, and confesses with
mouth to salvation. He requires faith above all things, without the which all
To. 14. Heb. 11.
is but hypocrisy, sin, and abomination: but he requires also confession
of the mouth, and the outward testimony of this inward faith, to serve to the
glory of God, and the edification of our neighbor: we see how he joins the
confession of mouth with faith in heart; because they are things inseparable,
as the soul and life, the fire and his brightness, the Son and his light, the
body and his shadow: for if faith be in heart, there is no doubt, but that
Jesus Christ dwells there by faith: as Saint Ephesians. 2.
Paul witnesses. If Jesus Christ dwells there, he is not then without his
holy Spirit. But for this cause are we called the temple of God, because God
by his holy spirit dwells in us. And therefore the Apostle says again, yt he
which has not the spirit of Christ, is not of Christ, and cannot be acounted
for a Christian. 1 Cor. 6. Sect. Romans ^.


Seeing it is thus, how is it possible if God dwell in the heart, that the
devil should be in ye tongue, in ye mouth, in ye hands, and in the other
members, which all take life from the heart, and are Iam. 2.
al guided and governed thereby: S. James speaking of ye tongue says, yt out of
one spring cannot come sweet and bitter water, yet this will make us believe
the contrary, to the end that that may be verefied in them, which is said
in the same place: out of one mouth proceeds blessing and cursing, by the
tongue we bless God the father, and by the same we curse men, which are made
to the Image of God. But that which worst is, we deny and blaspheme him, with
the tongue and mouth, which he gave us to glorify and confess him: and we
make of our members, which should be the weapons of Justice and holiness, the
weapons of unrighteousness and iniquity. Jesus Christ says that out of the
abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks; And that the good Mat. 12.
man out of the good treasure of his heart, utters good things, and the
wicked man utters evil things. Wherefore by the same reasons Jesus Christ
conuinceth the Scribes and Mat. 12.
Pharisees of the malice and peruersenes of their hearts, and by their own
words, saying, thou shall be justified, (that is to say) known to be such as
thou art, and be declared just or unjust, condemned or absolved by thy doings
and sayings. For if they had had Jesus Christ in their hearts, they had not had
Beelzebub in their mouths: for as Saint Paul witnesses, No man can say the
Lord Jesus, but by the spirit of God, no man speaking by the holy Ghost, can
call Jesus 1. Cor. 12. Sect.
execrable, nor speak evil of him, nor blaspheme him.

Wherefore for a full conclusion, if we will of right be counted Christians
before God, and before his elect and his Church, it is necessary to lay this
foundation: that as it is requisite to have a true faith planted in heart to be
incorporated in him and his Church, so must we confess him, otherwise what
else is our faith, but a dream, a fantasy, and a foolish imagination of our
own brain: but the faith of a christian, is not only as a speculatiue
knowledge without falling to actio^, and putting nothing to effect: for it can
be in no place without showing it self, it fares so with it; as Jeremy
witnesses, that he has proved it in the word of God, which he willingly
sometimes have kept in, seeing (as seems to him) that it profited not much,
when he uttered it, but that it was had in scorn, and he set him self in
displeasure and danger of death amongst the wicked, which were hardened more
and more: therefore he said, I will make no more mention of the Lord and will
The virtue of the word of God and of faith.
speak no more in his name. Then his word was in my heart as a burning
fire, shut up in my bones, and I failed, and was weery with forbearing that I
could stay no more. He can not resist the spirit of God, for the zeal that he
has to the glory of God enflameth him so, that he cannot hold his peace.
Seeing then that the word of God is so vehement a fire, whereby faith is
enflamed, how is it possible, but ye fla^e, light, and heat, or at the least
some little smoke will show forth? for when as faith is almost wholly
extinguished, and yet there remains some little spark is it not possible, but
yt it will cast some little smoke, as ye flax and bra^ds with yet smoke, whilst
there is yet a little fire, or has been lately.

I say not this to favor and stir up more a Sect.
sort of rash and raging spirits, which without any wit or discretion will
counterfeit to be zealous professors of the Gospel, and will speak of all
matters, and cry out against Idols without measure, and without seeking
occasions and considering circumstances, which seem to edification, but serve
only to trouble the weak, and to put them in danger which truly fear God:
and to coulor their fury and madness, they allege the zeal of ye Prophets and
Apostles, and the feruentnes of the spirit, which they cannot keep in: wherein
they declare themselves rather to resemble that glorious Elihu the Buzite, who
was one of the comforters or rather discomforters of Job, then to Hieremy
Anatathite, for they use the same talk, and say as he does. I am full of
words, and the spirit within me, constrains me. Behold my stomach is as the
wine, which has no vent, and is as new vessels, ye break. I will speak
therefore and breath my self. They are like to new wines, with have not yet
wrought, and cannot be contained within ye vessels, but it breaks the^ or else
must have ve^t.

But as the spirit of God cannot be Idle in Sect.
man's heart, so does it not enforce man beyond the bonds of Christian
modesty: he aloweth not the zeal without spiritual knowledge and wisdom:
therefore the Apostle says, the spirits of the prophets are subject to ye
prophets, as he Romans 10. 1. Cor. 14. Act. 9. 13. 19. 21. Act. 17.
himself has showed it by experience, for although he were excellent in all
the gifts of god above others, nevertheless he always submitted him self to
the judgment of ye church, and never despised the counsel of his brethren, as
it appears in yt which was done in yt church of Damas, Antioche, Jerusalem,
and Ephesus, and when he was in ye town of Athe^s tarying for Silas and
Timotheus, his spirit was stirred up in himself, seeing the town so much given
to idolatry: wherefore he disputed in ye assembly with ye Jews, and with those
that feared God, and every day in the marked and public places, with those with by
chance came unto him: but he cried not out in the streets like a mad man: he
cried not against the Idols without reason, he ran not into the temples to
break and beat them down: also he went not to do reverence unto them, and
was wary enough to give any sign either in deed or word whereby any might
judge that he had them in honor or any estimation: he made no conscience
to enter into the temples, and to behold their Altars and Idols; but he went
not thither with ye Idolaters, when they made their sacrifices to please them,
and for fear of offending the Athenians: but contrariwise, he went thither to
find occasion to draw them from their Idolatry and superstition, which he
condemned by his public testimony, but not without great reason and christian
wisdom and modesty.

So then as I cannot allow these envious, Sect.
frantike, and offensive persons: so will I not condemn all those which show
not the like zeal as Saint Paul did: for I know where one may find such:
but I speak especially against those wise spirits which fear so greatly to
fall into any danger, for the name of Jesus Christ, that they govern
themselves so warily, that they suffer not to pass from the^ any little shadow
of smoke, whereby one may judge yt there is not one only spark of faith in
their hearts, for they fear so much, that any should know that there is any
fire of the Gospel in them, that they endeavor by all means to put it out, and
govern themselves in such sort, that none of good judgment can account them
other then for enemies of Jesus Christ.

Jesus Christ taught no such lesson to his Sect.
Disciples: it is necessary if we will follow them, to obey that the Lord
commands us by his Prophets. Come out of Babylon, flee from Esa. 41.
the Chaldeans, depart ye, go out from thence, touch no unclean thing, go
out of the midst of her, be ye clean, ye that bear the vessels of the Lord,
fly out from the midst of Babylon, Ier. 51.
and deliver every man his soul. Think we that these exhortations are in
vain, and that the holy Ghost bids so often to go out with out cause? Let
us consider what earnestnes he uses, and if any think that such exhortations
pertain not to us, let him hearke^ to that which the holy Apostle says, after
he has declared to the faithful, that there is no agreement between the
faithful and the infidel. Wherefore depart from the midst of them, and
separate your selves from them, says the Lord, and touch not any defiled
thing, and I will receive you, and be your father, and you shall be my sons
and daughters. Seeing then we have express commandment to go out of Babylon,
and to separate our selves from Infidels, either we must do it, or confess
that we resist the will of God, and that we offend him, we cannot resist the
exposition that the holy Ghost proposes so plainly. The sum is to
understand it well, and to know what manner of departure and separation this
ought to be, and then to put it in execution.

We may go out from Babylon, and separate Sect.
our selves from Infidels, three manner of ways. The first is, in body only,
having the heart joined with them, The second is, in spirit only, having the
body joined with them. The third is, having the body and spirit both together.
This last departure and separation is the surest for it is very hard, and
almost impossible to live amongst the Babylonians and Egyptians, without being
defiled with their abominations, or put our selves in danger of their sword: It
is very hard to ye flesh to put it self in danger of the sword for confession
of ye truth, if ye virtue of ye spirit of God change it not, and unless it do
such violence to it self to forget and forsake it self, which cannot be
without a singular gift of God. On the other side, to participate and consent
to the abominations of Idolaters, and to please God, are things too far
contrary, and which cannot agree together: wherefore the Lord has not without
cause withdrawn his people from Egypt and from Babylon, and forbidden that
they should make any aliance, neither by marriage, nor any other kind of way,
with Pagans and Idolaters, which were their neighbors, Exo. 34. Deu. 7.
knowing it is very hard to touch pitch without being defiled therewith, and to
be conversant Eccl. 13.
among thorns without being pricked.

But I know well that the flesh can replye Sect.
against this council. First that many cannot go out though they would: Then
there is fear of loosing their earthly goods, and delights, and pleasures of
the world, which must be forsaken; and the love, study, and care of
housholdes and families which are committed to our charge: I am not ignorant
what temptation this may be: And therefore I would not co^strain al those which
have knowledge of ye truth, to go from their lands and countries to carry
themselves into places, where it is lawful to serve God in liberty of the
spirit, or condemn the^ altogether, and cast the^ off as unworthy to be
disciples of Jesus Christ, and to be counted for brethren, and christians, if
they did it not: for I know well the departure would be very hard to many, and
that it were impossible in this time to find a country of liberty which were
able to receive so great a number of people as God has showed mercy to, and
wherein there were earthly goods sufficient to nourish and entertain the^, if
god of his grace would not cause ma^na to rain down as Exo. 16.
he did in ye desert: yet if it shall please ye Lord to give such strength to
those who^ he has visited by his grace, to depart amongst Idolaters to make
their abode there, where there is no constraint to commit idolatry, there is
no country so strait nor so scarcely victuales nor yet so evil provided of
worldly goods, which he cannot enlarge and make able to receive all those,
which will come thither, and furnish them with whatsoever is necessary for them.

He could as easily find means to do this Sect.
as he did to give so commodious an habitation, and so apt a lodging, and place
to Noah and al Genesis 7. Noah's ark.
his family, and to all the beasts which entered in with him into his Arc,
within so weak a vessel, and which according to man's reason, was nothing able
to receive so many creaturs with victuals necessary for the^. Who made the Arc
so well able to receive, so stable, and so strong? who made the victuals which
were therein, to increase and multiply, but only faith? If then we shut our
eyes as Noah did, to follow the Lord, we shall always find the arc large
enough, and sufficiently provided. The Lord whom we seek and are willing to
serve, has sufficiently declared unto us since the creation of the world, what
care he had over us, even to provide for us in all our necessities: For before
he had created man, he prepared his lodging for him thoroughly garnished, not
only for things which were necessary for him, but for all things that he could
desire, to the end that nothing might be wanting to him, whereby he might take
his full pleasure upon earth, wherein he would place him. Then if this good God
has so prepared this lodging for man before he placed him in the world, and
would not create him until he had first created the heaven and earth, the Sea,
and all things contained therein, to serve him: Think we that he has not now
as great care over us, as he had then, and that he cannot as well prepare us
dwelling places, wheresoever it pleases him to direct us, when it pleases him
to draw us out of a captivity, and furnish them with all things necessary
for us? Who provided for the children of Israel, when they went out of Egypt?
Who made them inheritors of the land of their enemies?

We cannot and the worst fall, find a country Sect.
more barre^, the^ the desert of the Israelites, after they departed out of the
fruitful land of Egypt: but if many of the Israelites, being already
acquainted with the Babylonians, liked rather to tarry in Babylon, yea, after
they had leave to return into their own country, the^ to leave their
possessions and delights yt they had there, to return to Jerusalem; how many
Successors think we they may have at this day amongst us? And therefore I
know I should profit nothing to exhort al to go out. Moreover it were to
small purpose to separate our selves corporally from Idolatry, and to withdraw
our bodies from Egypt, if withal we withdraw not the heart and mind,
renouncing the manners and fashions of the Egyptians: for it is all one in what
soil soever we be, if we carry the leaven of Egypt with us, for it were much
better to be a true Israelite, and to worship God purely in the land of Egypt,
then to be an Egyptian and Idolater in the desert, or in the land of Chanaan,
and there to worship the golden calves, and to take thought for the leekes, the
onions, the flesh, the fish, and the pottes of Egypt, it were better to call
upon the name of God in Egypt, and patiently to abide the tyranny of Pharaoh,
then to be from thence and murmr against God, and blaspheme him, as these old
Idolaters, Isralites by name, and Egyptians in deed, having the body without,
and the heart in Egypt: as at this day it falls out in many. We have known
some, that have boldly gone out of Egypt, as the monks go out of the world,
They forsake the lands, the countries, the towns and the people of the world
and of Egypt, but they forsake neither the world nor Egypt, but carry it
always with them. They do in deed put off their garments, and put on other:
But they put not off their monkery and the old man, to put on the new man. They
cannot change their old Egyptian, and Egyptian skin. They cannot forget
Sodom and Gomorrhe, nor put the hand to the Plough, without looking back as
Lots wise did.

Many of these are not counted to return into Egypt, but do their endeavor
to Sect.
draw others back thither, and to keep them there still, as the ^^ies, which
were sent to spy out the land of Chanaan: we are not ignorant of the reports
which some make of countries here about, we deny not but there are great
faults and great imperfections in many, which boast themselves of the Gospel:
but we would also that these delicate Israelites did understand, that in going
out of Egypt they must pass the Sea, and through the desert, before they come
to the land of Chanaan: and yt flesh shall not find there all that it
desires. It must first bear and suffer much, and enter into great dangers?
these delicate christians ought to think yt they go from among men, to live
amongst other men, and not among angels: for if we will find out angels and
live among the^, we must go seek them in Paradise, and not in this corruptible
earth.

Yet what vice or imperfection soever there be Sect.
in them, which be gone out of Egypt, and are in a country of liberty, yet
this good they have moreover and besides, which is not small: that it is
lawful for all them (to whom GOD has given such grace) to be good men, which
they may be without danger of their life, which is not lawful every where: for
the greatest fault that is at this day in the world, and the greatest danger
is to be a good man, and to be desirous to live in the fear of God: if there
be Egyptians mingled among the Israelites, yea though ye number be great, yet
is it no small benefit of God to have liberty to hear his word, and to serve
him according to the same without fear and molestation of Pharaoh.

Wherefore I judge it most safety for them, Sect.
which are yet in Egypt, to go out from thence altogether both corporally and
spiritually if it possible, and if they have any good opportunity to do so:
but I advise them not to depart thence in body; if the heart renounce not the
same altogether, it were better the body should remain there together with
the heart, then to do as many do, which are come to these parts, and have
begun to murmr, when as they have not found (not water as the Israelites in
the desert:) But Malmesey, or Ipocrys, Quails, Partriges, and a covered table:
there come many which give us great and horrible offenses, and commit execrable
villainies unworthy, not only for Christians, but for Turks and Paganes: and
then they complain of the hardness and barbarousnes of the people, which they
have found here, and slander the land wherein God is glorified. If they have
found the people hard and stiffnecked, they have made them worse unto us, and
more obstinate by their offenses; and then to excuse the^ selves they lay the
burden on others.

I say not this that I would excuse the Sect.
ingratitude, and barbarousnes amongst us, which does greatly displease me. I
will not deny, but that there is little fear of God, faith, charity, and
amendment of life in many, which gives cause of offense even to the best
sort: that which I said, I say to this end, that those which are well minded
should not lightly believe all evil reports, and should not refuse through
them to go out of Egypt, if GOD grant them opportunity: and let them not
cast their eye upon them, for they have not received the Gospel for their
sakes, but that they should have a regard to Jesus Christ whom they serve, who
will not offend them, if they be his disciples: for even as the good cannot
altogether eschew the evil, but that they shall find of them in every
place, if they depart not out of the world: even so those which have the fear
of God cannot be there where Christ is purely preached, but they shall find
their like, at the least, the wicked that be there cannot hinder them from
being good and serving of God, if they have a desire thereto: which they
cannot be suffered to do there, where it is heresy and a greater offense,
then murder to confess Jesus Christ, as it behooves a good Christian.

Wherefore I think as I have already Sect.
said, that this departure out of Babylon, which is done both in body and
soul, is the most sure and happy. For it is no small good to be co^uersant with
the faithful at their public prayers and preaching of the word of God, and
at the partaking of the Sacraments; as we may easily know by the great desire
that David had, to see the ark of the Lord, and to praise him in his holy
hill, and his tabernacle, with his chosen people. Why does he lament so much
for the tabernacles of the Lord? Yea, why does he cry with so great
affection, O Lord how amyable are thy tabernacles? what love is it that I bear
to them? he was a prophet, he was not constrained to commit Idolatry: what
grief susteyneth he, when as he is pursued by his enemies, and is separated
from the church of God bodily? although he could not be separated spiritually?
for he was better there being in the house of Achis, then Saul and all his
enemies, which were bodily in the midst of the common weal and Church of
Israel: yet how does it grieve him, that he cannot praise God in the place
that he has chosen with his people? although he ceased not to praise him
always where he was, and sing Psalms unto him? But he was not ignorant what
favor and goodness God shows toward his people, when they are assembled
in his name: he had had sufficiently tried, how the virtue of the holy Ghost
does show forth it self in these holy assemblies, and in this body of Jesus
Christ united together with his members corporally and spiritually, to glorify
him all with one heart and voice: why do the poor captives of Babylon so
much lament Jerusalem, but because they feel what a plague it is to be so
oppressed by tyranny, that men cannot have any good form of a Church, nor
yet serve God according to his policy and ordinances, nor make public
confession and profession thereof as the faithful desire.

But because it is hard for all men to be able Sect.
to come to his felicity, to depart wholly this day out of Egypt and Babylon
both corporally and spiritually to live in liberty: yet at the least it is
necessary to depart thence in heart and mind, if they cannot get thence in
body: and how can this departure and separation be, if we keep not our selves
from the filthiness and abominations of this world; for that it is the true
religion, as Saint James witnesses. He that lives amongst the Idolaters and
communicates not with their Idolatries and sins, he is much better separated
from them, then he that is conversant with the Godly, and has his heart
replenished with superstition and hypocrisy, for this separation is made by
the holy Ghost; who separateth the elect and children of God, from the wicked
and reprobate, and sanctifies and dedicateth them to serve for his honor and
glory, for this cause y^ christians are called saints, and confess ye holy
universal Church. Seeing then that the Church is holy, and that it is nothing
else but the assembly and company of the faithful, it follows necessarily
that all the faithful, which are the members whereof this body consists, and
that this company assembled and made be holy: for this cause we call it also
the communion of Saints. And S. Paul writing to the faithful which have
received the Gospel, he saluteth them, and called them Saints, as it
appears in all his Epistles: for what cause then are they called Saints, but
because they are separated from all profane uses, and that they are drawn
away from the service of the Devil, the world, and the flesh; and that they
are wholly dedicated, consecrated, and sanctified to god to serve him only? for
ye scripture calls ye thing holy, which is secluded from all other use, and
which is nothing but to the service of God, and therefore the Lord called his
people Leui. 19. 1. Pet. 1.
Israel, the holy people, and commanded them to sanctify them selves, saying
be ye holy, for I am holy.

For this cause he has separated and divided them from all other people, and
has given Sect.
them laws, ordinances, and ceremonies, clean unlike to all other people, to
keep them better in his service, to this end yt they might not be defiled nor
polluted with the superstitions, Idolatries, and abominations of others:
wherefore he has endeavored by all means to draw them from all company and
acquaintance with Idolaters, which might any way induce them to worship some
other besides him self, or in other sort then he had commanded: if it were
all one, and that it were no sin to be in company with Idolaters, and to
communicate with them in their sacrifices and abominations, what need was
there that God should give a Law? to what purpose has he so charged the
people of Israel with ceremonies, if it were lawful for them to use al
indifferently as they lifted? why did Moses study all that he could, (being
thereto appointed of god) to ordain the^ ceremonies ^lat dissona^t and
contrary to al their neighbors about them, and all the Pagans and Idolaters? It
was for nothing else, but that first ye Lord would foresee by this way, yt they
should have no acquaintance and familiarity with them in that which concerned
the service of God, nor any similitude, whereby they might be induced to follow
them or obey them, with such an opinion of false Gods as the Pagans have. Then
to the end it should not seem they did like unto them, and that yt, which they
did to the honor of their God, was done to the honor of strange Gods: or yt
it might not seem, that thereby they did allow their manner of dealing: so
far is it yt God would permit it to be lawful for the people of Israel to
communicate with the blasphemies, sacriledges, and abominations of Idolaters;
that he would not suffer them only to have any agreement with the^ in
ceremonies, and in their manner of doings with the^: he would not suffer them to
have so much as in the outward things, even those which otherwise might have
been indifferent and lawful: why did he forbid this so sharply, but for the
causes above said, and to keep his people always y^ better without wa^dering
from his service.

Wherefore if we will be accounted Gods people, Sect. The office of Gods people.
we must be holy both in body and soul, and witness by our words and works, yt
we are his children, and that ye works of ye wicked displease us, or at the
least yt we allow them not: for when ye Apostle forbids us to be partakers
of the works of darkness, and commands us rather to reprove the^, he does
sufficiently show us, yt we cannot be children of light, if we do not wholly
renounce darkness, and yt we cannot be separated from Idolaters and Infidels, if
we co^fourme our selves to their manners, their works, and conversation. And
therefore for a man to boast himself to be faithful, and outwardly to allow
idolatry, and to give good cou^tena^ce to idolatries are things with cannot
agree together in a true servant of god. Let us not think our selves excused
before god, Sect.
nor in ye conscience of those with are faithful indeed in saying: I know well
enough, what my heart is, what cou^tena^ce soever I carry, or what godly show
soever I make, yet put I no trust neither have I any devotion in Idols, but I
worship ye only God in my heart, it is better yet to do thus, then to
persecute the truth, and for a man to show himself an open enemy unto God.
But yet it is impossible that the heart should be free from Idolatry, when all the body is defiled, and does reverence unto strange Gods, and to the enemy of
God: what good heart soever a subject can bear to his prince, yet could not
the prince bear it, that he should do homage to another, and that he should
carry weapon against his natural prince. Men say commonly that he ye swears by
art, for swears him self by art; we ought not to think that the heart
remains unsworn, if the tongue forswear it self; for we must understand the
oath according to the meaning of him that gives it, and not after the meaning
of him that receives it. And when we are partakers of the ceremonies,
sacrifices and Sacraments, whether they be of the faithful or infidels, we
bind our selves and swear unto that religion, by which we communicate with
them.

We have then trimly said that our meaning is far other, for God allows no
Sophistry: he cannot call things by but their name: fraud and deceit is
somewhat more honest amongst men, then manifest theft, yet is it accounted
before God for theft in deed, what name so ever men give it: wherefore let us
not think that by our goodly shows, our Idolatry is so excused, that it is
not Idolatrye, and a true kind of renouncing Christ Jesus: although it seem to
us somewhat more alowable, then to deny him openly. S. Peter denied Christ with
his mouth, he said, he was none of his, and do we make any more of him? what
speech do our works utter else but the same of S. Peter? where unto tends our
Idolatries and outward hipocrysies? but to let Infidels understand that we are
not the Disciples of Christ Jesus, and that we know neither him nor his Gospel.

To reply, that we do it not with the heart, but Sect.
the heart is far otherwise: So was even the heart of S. Peter: it grieved
him greatly to deny Christ Jesus, but the infirmity of ye flesh and fear of
death overcame the christian constancy, which ought to have been in him, yet
can we not excuse him, but that he sinned greatly, and we are less to be
excused then he: for he denied not Jesus Christ for fear of loosing his
worldly goods, or for any light cause as we customablie do, but for fear of
death, he went not to present him self willingly to renounce him as we do, he
went not to the Bishops houses, nor to the high Priests of the Law to please
them, or other of the Jews; or to make them believe he was of their company,
or that he had no acquaintance or familiarity with Jesus, as they do, which
frequent the temples of Idols; he went thither to stand faithfully unto him, as
he had promised, and for ye love and affection he bare to him, yet was he
caught: and seeing how his master was handled amongst the murderers, and
veiwing the place where he was, fearing death, which was manifestly before his
face, and was overcome by the infirmity of his flesh: for he was so troubled
yt he knew not what he said or did, for that he saw not Jesus Christ then,
but as a poor miserable creature, forsaken of al men, for he had not yet such
knowledge of his divinity, nor had not received the holy Ghost so abundantly as
he had after.

But we that confess Jesus Christ to be set Sect.
at the right hand of God his father, above al ye heavens, we tarry not till our
adversary urge us and press upon us, and yt tyrants constrain us to renounce
him, but imediatly of our own accord, and voluntarily we go to ye assemblies of
Idolaters to the same purpose, knowing well that we must needs dishonor Jesus
Christ with them: and how much ye more they mark and behold us, so much ye
more we show our selves plentiful in all kinds of blasphemies and Idolatries.
There is not so small an Idol wheru^to we do not reverence, whereunto we do not
bow the knee, fearing to be accounted true scholars of Christ Jesus.

The ancient christians did so lightly esteem Sect.
these matters as we do, but they thought it so vile, so detestable, and
unworthy a thing for a christian, that hardly they would account the^ for
brethren and christians, which had not been constant in the torments, and
which liked better to forsake and forswear Christ Jesus, then to suffer death,
at the least those; which accounted their life more dear to them then the
glory of Jesus Christ, hardly could they ever be received into the ministry
of the Gospel: yet was it sufficient to the Idolaters and Infidels, that those
whom they persecuted for christians, should make only the least show only in
the world to allow their doings, and to honor their Idols by outward tokens:
they cared not what the heart was, so that they might only draw one word
from their mouths, or cause them to show forth some gesture, which they
might draw to their advantage to boast that they had made them to abjure.

But the flesh will reply, that if it should do otherwise, Sect.
it should put it self in danger of being persecuted, and to cause others to be
persecuted, and should stir up great offenses. Near are goodly reasons of man's
wisdom, and very fit for the flesh, and the school from whence they
proceed, I am in company of Adulterers, which go into a brothell house and
fearing to offend them, I enter in with them to keep them company. But some
will reply again that the Brothell house, and Idols temple is not al one,
but much worse: for what is Idolatry and superstition else, but adultery and
fornication with strange gods, and ye temples of Idols, what are they else but
brothel houses of Satan? wherein we violate the faith promised to our Lord
Jesus Christ, and wherein we give our selves over as whooremongers and
adulterers unto strange Gods, and to the Devil as to our lovers? I know not
how we may speak this more ciuilly, if we will not correct the speech,
which the spirit of GOD has uttered by his Prophets, which commonly use these
Exo. 16.
kind of speeches, when they preach against the Idolatrye of the children of
Israel.

But a man may yet reply. Although the body be there, yet we consent not in
heart, and yet we avoid offense and persecution. Dina the daughter of Jacob,
whom the Son of the king of Sichem ravished, consented not in heart to the
wickedness of the adulterer, yet was she not altogether without fault, she was
for all that corrupted and counted for an harlot; for if she had remained in
her fathers house without wandering abroad to go see the daughters of the
country, she might have avoided that great inconvenience, whereby she fell
into great dishonor and was cause of great evil.

Which of us all would be content, if his wife Sect.
after she had yielded her body to an adulterer, should make him this
answer, saying: although he had his pleasure of me, yet was it against my
will; but because I saw my self amongst adulterers, fearing to be spoiled, and
that they would cut my Purse, or take away my Gown or my Kercheife, I
consented to their will, but I did it unwillingly, to avoid that they might
do me no displeasure, and for the fear I had to offend and anger them. Had
not the husband good cause to say, what had thou to do in the brothels
house? why wentest thou thither? had not it been better for thee to have lost
all yt thou had, all thy Iewelles, thy raiment, yea, thy life, then thy
chastity and soul, and to offend God; who commands us to choose rather to
dye, the^ to break his commandment, and violate ye faith and loyalty, which
thou had promised to thy husband.

As for that which some alleadg also concerning offense. Such disputers show
well that Sect.
they understand not, or will not understand what an offense signifies. For
after that manner that they would avoid offense, they declare that they
understand by offense, the disfavor that one may have of men for that he does,
and the displeasure they may have thereby: but if we mark well in what sense
the name of offense is taken in the holy scriptures, we shall find it
signifies nothing else, but all hinderance, that we may give to our brother by
our evil example to make him stumble and wander out of ye right way of
salvation, or that we may take of others: for if we will take all that for
offense, which men will be displeased at, we can never serve God as we ought to
do. For as S. Paul says: If we should please men, we could not Gala. 1.
be the servants of God. The offense then which we ought to fear, it is all
let that we may put either to our salvation, or to the salvation of our
brother. If the^ I enter into ye brothel house Mat. 18.
with whoremongers, and fearing to offend them commit wickedness amongst them, I
give two offenses in steed of avoiding one. First, in that by my dissimulation
or agreement, I allow iniquity, and in allowing it, yield my self pertaker
thereof and faulty: for those sin not only, which commit a wicked act, but
those which in any sort consent thereto and allow it, and after ye fort such a
one is an offense to himself; whereby he shows not to have well understood
and considered that which Jesus Christ says. If thy eye, thy hand, or thy
foot offend thee: that is to Mat. 5.
say. If there be any thing which hinders thy salvation, seeing it ought to
be as dear and as precious and necessary as thine eyes, thy hand, or thy
feet, cut and pull away all that, and loose it rather then wholly to perish.
Further he is offense to ye wicked, whom he does more confirm in their
iniquity, for insteede of reprehending of the^ to draw the^ out of ye same,
they defend themselves by him, and by him take occasion to approve it. Thirdly
he offends the faithful, and chiefly ye weak: for when they see him in ye
brothel house and with Idolaters, although his heart be far otherwise, the^
he shows himself outwardly: yet they yt see him and consider his outward
works they are troubled therewith in conscience, and are led by his example,
either to do the like, thinking yt to be well done, or to account him for a
wicked person, and so they cannot but but to be offended either one way or
other, for a man cannot judge of my heart according to my fancy, but he will
judge thereof according to his own, and according to the testimony, I give
him by my works: And whatsoever I think, I cannot bind my neighbor to my
thought, and cannot enforce him to judge otherwise then he sees. And to think
me a sheep when he sees me clothed in a Wolfes skin.

For this cause S. Paul admonishes us, Sect. 8. These. ^.
that we should not only keep our selves from evil, but from all show and
appearance of evil. Also for that cause he reproved ye Corinthians, who did
eat flesh offered unto Idols, although the thing were indifferent of it self,
and of it self was not evil, as is Idolatry, which in no sort can be good:
for we cannot commit it, but we must deny Jesus Christ. S. Paul reproved not
the Corinthians, for having sacrificed in the Idol temples with Idolaters, for
that was to intolerable for a Christian; but he reprooueth them only, for
that they bought in the shambles, and did eat at the tables of Idolaters the
flesh that had been offered to Idols; It is almost, as if now we should buy
the candles of that good Saint, not to offer them up to Idols, but to light us,
as if we should light our selves by others, or as if we should buy bread
hallowed by the Priests, or of their hallowed candles, to serve our turn in
the house like others without any superstition, or as if we should go banquet at
a friar house, prepared for the honor of some Saint, with the other friars,
and yet not do it for any devotion we bare to the Saint: the Corinthians did
it not for devotion, nor for any confidence they had in the Idols, nor yet to
make the Idolaters believe, that they did any thing honor or reverence them,
that they might the better be amongst them they did not that for any religion,
nor as a Divine service, but they did it to serve their necessities of their
bodies, and as a civil thing: wherefore as touching them selves, and their
own conscience, they sinned not before God, nor against the first table, if
there were no other respect but to them only, but because their work became
offense to their neighbors, they sinned against their neighbor, and against
the second table, and by consequent against the first table: against Jesus
Christ, and against God, who will that we should serve to his glory, and to
the charity of our neighbor, which is joined therewith.

These then offended not God in using their christian liberty, knowinge that
that flesh did not differ from the other, seeing they nothing esteemed the
Idol. But they offended him in that they abused this liberty to the offense
of the simple, the ignorant, and the weak, whom they enforced to do things
contrary to their conscience: for among the Christians, which were at
Corinthus, there were some of them more ignorant then others: And therefore
they were not all yet well resolved in the matter of Christian liberty; for
there were, which made conscience, to eat flesh that had been offered to
Idols: because they had learned by the Gospel, that Idols, and the service to
Idols, was forbidden of God, and it seemed unto them, that since the service of
Idols was so displeasing to God, then they might in no wise use that, which
was once consecrated to Idols. It was the like case, as if now we should
make conscience to use the goods of the church, and other things which were
dedicated by our Ancestors to Idols and their temples: for although idols
displease God, it follows not therefore that I cannot apply to better use,
that, which the ignorant and Idolaters have abused about Idols; and therefore
those which had more understanding of christian liberty, among the
Corinthians, made no conscience to use those things which were offered unto
Idols: for they did it not for honor to the Idols, nor for any opinion they
had in the Idols; for they knew well that the Idol was nothing, but in the
imagination of him yt thought it somewhat: wherefore the Idol was nothing to
the^ which had this understanding, and were delivered from the errors and
foolish opinion and imagination of Idolaters, and therefore the Idol, nor ye
foolish conceit, yt Idolaters had of their idols, could not let the faithful
from using the good creatures of God, but the ignorant which among ye
christians understood not that point so well as others. And therefore it seemed
to them, they could not use any thing that had been dedicated to Idols: but
they should testify they did some reverence to the Idols, and serve them:
wherefore they made conscience thereof, and did eat of that flesh in doubt, by
reason of their ignorance. This doubt and ignorance is ye infirmity, which S.
Paul speaks of in this place, but when these ignorant saw others eat of ye
flesh they were moved by their example to eat thereof as well as they, with
this doubt and scruple of conscience, wherein they offended God: for seeing they
doubted, there was no faith, but there was contempt of God, seeing they did it
against their conscience, what ignorance soever there were: And therefore S.
Paul reproves them that were the cause thereof.

Moreover, wherefore did S. Paul reprove Sect.
S. Peter in Antioch before all that were present, for that he dissembled to
eat flesh with the Gentiles, when he saw the Jews enter which came from
Jerusalem: to eat flesh and not to eat is a thing indifferent: and therefore
S. Peter made it no conscience to eat flesh with the Gentiles, but fearing to
offend the Jews which were weak, and which understood not yet that liberty,
he withdrew him self from the table seeming not to eat: wherefore S. Paul
reproved him openly, although S. Peter did the same to a good intent, and for
fear to offend, for in thinking to avoid the offending of the Jews, he
offended the Gentiles with an offense much more dangerous: for insteede of
withdrawing the Jews from their Iudaisme, he enduced the gentiles to play the
Jews by his example, and troubled their conscience.

Then let us consider if the holy Apostle Sect.
could not allow in these things indifferent, that the faithful should use
their liberty with good conscience, as touching them selves, if thereby they
have given any cause of offense to the weak to confirm them in any
superstition, or to stir them up to do any thing against their conscience,
how he would permit that those, which went them selves to be of the faithful
should offend God, and their neighbor in things which are not indifferent,
but altogether contrary to the commandment of God, and much more execrable
then one would think as he manifestly shows: for he has rather forbidden in
his Law Idolatry, and the honor and reverence, which is done to Images then
he has done murder and adultery.

Then if Saint Paul has reproved and Sect.
condemned the Corinthians, who by their knowledge and example in abusing their
liberty licenciously have given occasion to the ignorant to eat flesh
sacrificed unto Idols with scruple and doubt of conscience: what would he say
of those, which give not only occasion to others to honor and reverence Idols
against their conscience, but do lead them to do so, both by their doctrine
and example? For to eat flesh then offered to Idols, as if one should eat
other flesh, without having other opinion of Idols then the faithful have,
was not sin in it self, to him that used it in that sort, but it was sin
to the ignorant and weak christians: which understood not as yet their
liberty, who did eat thereof not to such intent as Idolaters, which did eat
thereof for honor to their idols but did eat thereof with scruple of of
conscience fearing thereby to offend God. There was then no sin in the usage
of ye thing, as in it self, but yt themselves brought thereto by their
ignorance, and the doubt in conscience they did put therein; for seeing they
thought that flesh and meat unclean and defiled, although of it self, it
were pure and clean to the faithful, which accounted it so, yet to them, was
it polluted and unclean, for it was not purified to them by the word of God,
without the which every thing is unclean to us: seeing they were not yet well
assured thereby, that they might eat thereof without offending God, seeing that
assurance did fail them, which they could not have, but by the word of God: it
follows that that they did, was not done in faith, and consequently that it
was sin: for what soever is done without faith is sin, and what soever is
done without steadfast assurance of the word of GOD, with doubt of conscience,
is done without faith: wherefore following the doctrine of S. Paul, we cannot
deny, but that is sin: for the faithful ought to do nothing, nor take any
thing in hand, whereof he is not plainly resolved and assured by the word of
God, otherwise he sins: and therefore those, which knowing the liberty
they had to eat of that flesh, flesh, were cause by their example, that the
others did eat thereof with that doubt they had therein, they were cause that
these sinned in that: they which had the knowledge of their liberty, had not
sinned, if that they had not in that point been an offense to the others: yt
is, if they had not emboldened them to eat against their conscience of that
meat, whereof they stood in doubt: but those, that do encourage others to
communicate with Idolaters, they do much worse without comparison, for that
Idolatry, which they commit, cannot be accounted as a thing indifferent,
neither to them that have knowledge nor to the ignorant, neither do I think,
that a man, who has the knowledge of the gospel, how little so ever it be, can
communicate there without scruple of conscience: those the^ which induce them
thither, are they not offensive to them?

And if these outward adorations and hypocrisies Sect.
were indifferent, and lawful for Christians to use, the children of the
hebrews and Daniell also had been very rash and obstinate Fools, if to save
their lives, they would not have feigned to obey the kings commandment, as
others did, to allege against this, that we are then bound to confess Jesus
Christ manifestly, when we are required, or constrained to deny him, or
confess him by some evident sign, as they were constrained, but that
otherwise we may dissemble the matter, especially when we are not known nor
marked therein: I know not what sure foundation these reasons may have, If we
be bound to confess Jesus Christ being in danger of life: I cannot understand
how it can be lawful for us to deny him being far from danger.

But how can it be lawful for us to offend Sect.
the faithful, and to nourish and establish the faithful in the error of
idolatry for fear of troubling and offending the infidels; whom we cannot in
better sort offend, then in cherishing and confirming them in their
superstitions and abuses. It seems to me that this fear of offending, is
like to the charity of some Anabaptists, which have been of opinion, that it
was not lawful for a Christian Magistrate, by justice to put all those to
death or any other offendour, because Jesus Christ has forbidden us to revenge
evil; and for that he has commanded all christians to suffer all injuries
patiently, this is a strange charity: the shepherd for pity and compassion
he takes on the Wolfes, he dare not hunt them from his flock, but suffers
them to devour his sheep, and takes more pity of the poor wolves then of
his sheep; and to be charitable toward the wolves, will be more cruel to
the sheep then the wolves themselves.

But when all shall be well examined, I Sect.
fear much, that the disease of our flesh proceeds not so much from fear
that it has of offense, as for fear of death: wherefore without seeking
reasons any further to prove this, I ask but the testimony of conscience, of
those which love rather to cloak their infirmity with his veil of fear they
have to offend, then flatly to confess it. I ask then in conscience if they
were out of danger and in such liberty that they durst boldly confess that
they understand, whether for fear of offense they durst not speak of Jesus
Christ, and whether they would join themselves with Idolaters and keep them
company in all their sacrifices and ceremonies? It is most certain they
would not, or else were they very evil instructed in the doctrine of Christ.

I deny not, but there are some things, wherein we might bear with the weak,
and wherein Sect.
we ought to be well advised to take from them all just cause of offense. If
the question be, whether I should eat flesh or not eat. I may well use my
liberty, if by eating I know I may alienate and drive any poor ignorant man
from the Gospel, and in abstayning, may draw him to the knowledge of the
Gospel, surely I ought to absteyne, and to have more regard to the edyfying of
him, then to my liberty, considering that the Apostle says, knowledge puffs
up, and charity does edyfie: for God has not forbidden me to eat flesh, or
to abstain some days, rather then others, but has left that to my choice on
condition, that I do all things to his honor and glory, and to the edyfiyng
of my neighbor.

But when question arises of any thing, Sect.
which God has expressly commanded or forbidden, we must no longer there
deliberate, or take counsel, or dispute whether we must do it or no? For it
rests no longer in our power nor our judgment: for the council, is already
taken, either we must do it, or determine to make war with God, and it is
most certain that God has expressly forbidden, and with grievous
threatenings; that we should not honor nor worship images nor strange Gods, nor
yet bow to them, nor do any homage to them, nor to be partaker of the table
of Devils, neither by hypocrisy, nor of purpose: wherefore we ought to beware
thereof, if that we fear to incur the displeasure of indignation of almighty
God, and rather to choose the bodily death: or if we have done otherwise, we
must crave mercy and pardon of God with tears and weeping, as Peter did.

I know well that some wise men, which take upon them to teach others, and
confess Sect.
Jesus Christ privately, but deny him openly, tell the faithful that if they
dissemble not, they should put themselves in great danger and others with them,
and could no longer serve in the church, but should leave it in great trouble.
It seems that such men will govern the Church by their wisdom, and not
leave it to be governed of God by his providence: do we think we can find a
Jesus Christ whom we may serve without Cross, without persecution, and without
thorns? Think we to find a Jesus Christ so delicate and soft as Ueluet?
where shall we find that the holy Apostles and true disciples of Christ Jesus
have consented to or allowed, either in word or deed, the idolatry and
abomination of the Pagans, to avoid dangers and persecutions for fear to
trouble the churches? in deed such were ye Apostles of circumscio^, who did
greatly molest and trouble S. Gal. 5. Phi. 1. 3.
Paul, for they endeavored to please men, because they were enemies to ye
cross, which they would not bear as S. Paul did.

After the judgment of these men S. Paul was a great troubler of the church,
for through out all places where he was, he was persecuted always, driven
away, banished, or imprisoned, because of him and the doctrine that he
preached many good and faithful men have been in danger to those, both bodies
and goods, and many have been put to death, and many towns and countries moved
and troubled. If S. Paul would have dissembled, supported and approved their
errors, abuses, and superstitions of Jews and Gentiles, without speaking so
plainly, and reproouing and condemning them so openly, both in word and
deed: he might well have avoided all those inconveniences: shall we then
condemn him, as indiscreet, rash, arrogant, and one that were mad? but if he
had done otherwise, and if he had pleased men, he had not been the servant of
Jesus Christ, he had been a traitor to Gal. 1.
his church, if for his own bodily ease, and to procure the same to others he
had hidden the truth of God.

This great Apostle ought in deed to have feared Sect.
as much yt the church should find lack of him, if any harm should come to him,
as of any of us, for there had been far greater loss, yet did not that
hinder him from executing his office, according to the charge given him: he will
not appoint rules and limits to God, but he follows the rules and limits
yt God has left unto him, committing him self, and al things else to his
providence: for he knows, that all days and all the heirs of our head are
counted, and that nothing shall befall unto us, but by the ordinance of God,
who win determine nothing but to his glory and our salvation: if he will that we
suffer and dye for his name, our bounds, our troubles, yea our death shall do
better service perhaps to his Church, then our life; if he call us out of this
world, he will send others into his harnest, if men be not altogether
unworthy thereof? If it please him that we live and serve longer in his
church, he is mighty and wise enough to keep us by such means, as shall please
him without our dreaming and inuenting means contrary to his will: wherefore as we
ought not to te^pt God, nor procure harm or danger to our selves, so ought we
not for fear thereof, seek strange means, nor do that he has forbidden,
and to agree with Idolaters.

But some will reply hereupon. Why then did S. Paul write that he made him
self the Sect.
servant to all, and that to the Jews he was a Jew, and to the Gentiles a
Gentile: Let us Mat. 16.
take heed we iniuirie not the Apostle, and make of him a viser to cover our
flesh, and to transfourme our Satan into an angel of light, who goes about to
withdraw us from our office, as Peter would have perverted Jesus Christ: that
which S. Paul did, he did it to win all to Jesus Christ: and that which we
do, and would cover our selves by the example of S. Paul, serves to leese
and turn away all men from Jesus Christ. Think we that S. Paul did so
accommodate himself to others, that he played the thief with thieves, the
whoremonger with whoremongers, the drinkard with drunkards, and the idolater
with idolaters? And when he was in Ephesus, Cyprus, and Athens went he with
idolaters to do reverence and offer sacrifices to Diana, Uenus, and to Minerua,
to Jupiter, and to Neptune, or to any other Idol? did he not reprove and
condemn idolatry through al places where he came? was not that the cause, why
the Infidels stirred up so great troubles and persecutions against him?

Why then did he enter into the church to Sect. Act. 21. Act. 18. 19.
purify himself? why made he a vow and shaued his head? why did he
circumcise Timothy? there is great difference between that, which S. Paul did,
and that we would allow by his example: for they with ceremonies were commanded
of God, and therefore was it lawful to edyfiyng, according to the christian
liberty, until that Jesus Christ was fully manifested, and that the Jews were
perfectly advertised of ye christian liberty, and of the abrogating of their
ceremonies: wherefore the disciples did yield themselves to them for a time in
these outward things, and therefore have they used the ceremonies, as things
indifferent to them, which attributed no merit unto them, but did it to draw
the Jews to a greater knowledge, and finally to withdraw them from all such
observations.

With the Gentiles in like sort S. Paul did Sect.
well agree, as touching their civil and pollitike laws, and their other
indifferent kinds of dealing, which did nothing touch the conscience: but we
read not that he yielded himself to the^ at any time in their false religion
and idolatry, for he could not do it without offe^ding god, seeing that yt
idolatry was forbidden and condemned of God, as yt also which is now amongst
the Papists: for it is invented of men against the commandment of God, it
has nothing like to the jewish ceremonies, at that time observed of the
Apostles, but it is like altogether to ye idolatry of Pagans and to ye iudaisme
ye now is amongst ye Jews, who^ he cannot follow without denying Jesus Christ
after this great manifestation which we have received of him.

And although S. Paul did bear with the Sect. Gal. 4. Gal. 2. Act. 16.
Jews for a time, yet when he understood that some of them confirmed them
selves in superstition, and that they desired these ceremonies as necessary to
salvation, he cried out against them, and condemned them openly; and when he
saw some false brethren come to epsy out his liberty, he would not circumcise
Titus, as he had done Timothy, but thought ye circu^sicion damnable, which
notwithstanding he had used before, but yet as a thing indifferent: for the
occasions and circumstances did wholly differ.

Now let us consider how those are like to S. Paul, which will cover their
Idolatry by his example, when S. Paul knows that yt he does in things
lawful for a time, confirms the superstitions in their error, and that they
require the thing which he accounted as newter, as necessary to salvation, he
will no longer bear with them, but condemns them openly: and when of purpose
any come to epsy him, of purpose he rejects to them, without fearing to
offend either the false brethren, or the Infidels: for these are the offenses
of the Pharisees, which are not given them, but they take them of themselves.
Contrariwise our hypocrites, and dissemblers in things expressly forbidden of
God, full of blasphemy and sacrilege, which the Idolaters account to be
necessary for salvation, they will please them in it, and feign themselves like
unto them; and how much ye more they are marked of them, so much more they
blaspheme: they carye so good countenance and counterfeite the papist so well,
that they pass all the rest in Idolatry, to the end they may be accounted
for good christians, that is, for perfect Idolaters; such as they are, which
watch them, so that no man can suspect or think otherwise of them.

Wherefore to allege that in the sacrifices Sect.
of Idolaters, the supper of Jesus Christ is there celebrated, it is too much
to blaspheme Christ Jesus. If S. Paul have written to those which did eat
flesh sacrificed to Idols, without worshipping the Idols, that they are
partakers of the tables of Devils in so doing: and that they cannot be
partakers thereof, and of 2. Cor. ^.
the table of Jesus Christ both together. What would he say of those, which will
join the table and supper of Jesus Christ with the table of Devils, and with
the sacrifices wherein Jesus Christ is flatly denied and blasphemed? such
sacrifices are commanded or forbidden of GOD, if they be of GOD we ought 2.
Cor. 6.
to be such as they that follow them, if they be against God, how can we
join Christ and beliall.

Some reply again upon this and say, wherefore Sect.
then does S. Paul write, I will that men pray in every place, lifting up pure
hands without wrath or dissentio^, seeing he wills yt the faithful man pray
in every place generally without exception, it follows then that it is
lawful for him to pray in the temples of Idols, so that he pray to God, and
not to the Idols. We need not make any other answer upon this replye* but
that which is already made, if there were nothing but the offense that might
arise thereof, the cause is sufficient to condemn him which should go thither
to make prayer, seeing he has places enough else for that purpose, without
choosing or accounting of that place, more then another: for if he desire to
call upon and to honor God, he may do that in his house, and enter into his
Chamber according to the council of Jesus Christ, and pray to thy heavenly
father in secret, who sees him as well as if he were in an open place, and he
will reward him openly. If he desire to pray openly to be seen of men, and to
Mat. 6.
receive praise therefore, as the Scribes and Pharisees, he has received his
reward alredie with them, he witnesses thereby, that he is not the true
Disciple of Jesus Christ, but that he seeks his own glory, not the glory of
GOD; if he be desirous and willing to gloryfie GOD before men, to stir them
up by his example to do the like, or to confess him, and to make protestation
and profession of his faith before all men: he must go into the assemblies of
the faithful wherein God is sanctified, not to those of Idolaters where GOD is
blasphemed, or if he will confess him amongst Idolaters, he must do it
rather in showing him self to despise their assemblies, and that GOD cannot
there be honored, but by doing honor in the place dedicated and consecrated
to the devil, declaring thereby, that he thinks that GOD may then be
honored.

And if there were no more, but Sect.
that which Saint Paul adds lifting up pure hands, he declares
suffisufficiently that men cannot do that in a place, where there is any spark
of Idolatry and superstition. For how can he lift up his hands pure unto
God, who has polluted and defiled the^ by idolatry? for when God requires
pure hands, he shows plainly that he will have both ye heart and the body
pure and clean, without any spot or pollution: and we cannot deny but he is
subject to such pollutions and spots, which does homages to the Devil, and
dishonors God in that point, and kills and murdereth Exodus 3.
the soul and conscience of his brother, and becomes guilty of his blood,
which shall be required at his hands, the which he has polluted and defiled
therewith.

And therefore this place cannot serve them, Sect.
but to condemn them the more. For S. Paul pretends not by these words to
induce the faithful to frequent the assemblies of Idolatries, and there to
make their prayers and supplications, but rather to withdraw them from it,
giving them to understand thereby: that they ought not to take care where to
pray, thought they have no material temple, for they them^^^^^^ are ye true
temple of god: wherefore in what 1. Cor. 6. Ephe, 2.
^^^^e soever they be, Jesus Christ dwells by faith in their heart, and so
they are always in the temple of God: wherefore God no less hears their
prayers, then theirs which worshipped him in the temple of Jerusalem, which
Ioh. 12.
ought now to have been abolished, to the end that Jesus Christ the true
spiritual temple might only have place amongst the christians and faithful:
and therefore after that S. Paul has made mention of the christian
assemblies, and has exhorted Timothy to make 1. Tim. 2.
prayers for all estates, and for all kind of men; he says after, that the
same must be done in every place, to the intent the faithful may understand,
they are not tied to the observation of the Jews, nor to their Temple, and
therefore are they much less to the temple of Idolaters.

There is yet another place which they will have to serve their turn, because
S. Paul Sect.
says. If any brother have an infidel to his wife and she consent to dwell
with him: Let him not forsake her. And the woman that has an 1. Cor. ^.
Infidel to her husband, and he be content to dwell with her: Let her not
forsake him, for the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the believing wife,
and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the believing husband, otherwise your
children were polluted and unclean, but now are they holy. They will conclude
by this, yt if it be lawful for the faithful to dwell with his infidel wife,
and to use her, and to be served of her, that by the same reason, they may
also use the ceremonies and manners of doing, which are amongst the
superstitious and Idolaters. For if they be polluted and defiled to the
Infidels, yet are they not so to them, but are clean and holy, for to the
clean, are all things clean, but to the unclean and Infidelles, all things
are Tit. 1 ^.
unclean. They say further, that even as the Apostle will that the party
faithful forsake not the Infidel, if she consent to dwell with him, because
the husband or the wife being faithful know not whether they can win the
party unfaithful, so they know not whether GOD by their mean will win and
call back the poor blind and ignorant.

I am greatly ashamed when I see the Sect.
Christians dallye in this sort with the word of GOD, and draw it so
violently by the hair, to make it serve for their blasphemy: what agreement
is there between the party infidel and the Idols, If Saint Paul had said
that of a Whore or Whooremonger, and had allowed that the faithful man might
dwell with an Harlot, and use her in whooredome, although she were an Infidel;
if she would carry with him, or a whooremonger with a Christian woman, their
argument and comparison had some coulor, but the Apostle speaks in this place
of such as are joined by lawful marriage, for marriage is of such authority,
and so fast and indissoluble, that God will not that it should be broken or
violated, nor that ye husband or ye wife separate themselves one from another,
although one of them should stricke obstinately in infidelity, if that the
party unfaithful would not hinder the faithful to do his duty to God: for
if the husband would not suffer his wife with him, except she would forsake
Jesus Christ, but that he would drive her away and forsake her, if she would
not so do to consent to his infidelity and idolatry: in such a case S. Paul
will not y^ the wife be subject to ye husband, or ye husband tied to ye wife, he
allows in such a case, that the faithful forsake rather the infidel, then
God, and that he suffer her to depart from him, rather then to suffer himself
separated from Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 7.
For in such cases it is fit to practice ye which Christ Jesus has said. He
that leaves not father and mother, brother, sister, wife, and children,
goods, possessions, for my sake, he is not worthy of me.

But if the infidel suffer the faithful Sect.
to live in his liberty and religion, then the holy Apostle, will that he
bear with the Infidel and not to reject her nor forsake her therefore: and
that for two causes. First to show what honor we owe unto the holy ordinances
of God, and in what reputation we ought to have the holy marriage. Secondly,
because there is yet some hope of winning the infidel, for although the wife
of the christian be yet a Papist, or Infidel, and Idolater, yet if in other
things she do the office of an obedient wife toward her husband, if she
be a good huswife and do govern his family well, and rendereth unto him the
duty and reverence she owes unto him, he ought to keep her: since God has
given her unto him, and joined her with him? For although she be an Infidel,
yet her infidelity cannot hurt her faithful husband, if he be not partaker
thereof, his faith can not be made void by the infidelity and Idolatry of his
wife, whilst he perseuereth therein, and allows not the infidelity and
Idolatry of his wife, but reprooueth her, and endeavors to correct her as
much as he can: yet the Apostle will not that the faithful party should
communicate with the infidelity and Idolatry of the other in hope to win
her, for it were a sle^der gain to loose two, in steed of winning one, but will
that the faithful party keep it self pure and clean, and separate it self
rather then to consent to that.

And therefore this place is flat contrary unto Sect.
them that allege it for their defense. for if Saint Paul, does permit the
faithful party to choose rather to be separated, then to consent to the
infidelity and idolatry of the other, which is, one body, one flesh and blood
with her: how can he allow that we should consent to idolatry, to dwell
with those which have not the third part of such conjunction with us, as the
husband and the wife have together? If God, who has commanded that the man
should leave father and mother, and cleave and join to his wife, will yt man
forsake her rather, the^ to deny his word, how can he like we should commit
such Sacrileges, to keep our selves still amongst those, which are nothing in
comparison to us, or touch us very little; for what signifies these words else:
If the infidel go his way 1. Cor. 7.
and depart, let him go: for the brother or ye sister are not subject in such
matters? What else does this mean, but that if the infidel do her duty in
the rest, and if there be no disagreement but for religion, that there can be
no separation for that, for else it were doubtful. For many husbands under
color of the Gospel, would forsake their wives, and many wives their
husbands, and one knows not whether the party faithful can bring the other
to the knowledge of the truth, wherein there is yet more hope that a man may
profit with a Papist, then with a Paga^, as they were in the time of Saint
Paul. For in the action of religion there is more agreement between the
faithful and the papists, then there was at yt time between ye faithful and
the Pagans: but if the party Infidel be so perverse, yt it is not possible to
dwell with it without forsaking Jesus Christ, the bond wherewith we are tied to
it, ought to be stronger.

Although then that the party Infidel displease Sect.
God, because of her infidelity, yet does it not follow thereby, that I may
not use it in that for which God has given it unto me, and according to his
order that he has set among men as well as with any other creature of god, as
with the Magistrate, the Prince, and the father being infidels: for if God have
given me a Magistrate, or a Prince that is an Infidel, I may use him as
touching his office without offense to God, for although he be an Infidel
and displeases God therein, yet his office cease not to be of God: and
therefore I may use him to the honor of God, in all things that concern the
office of a true Magistrate, so that I consent not, or agree to his Idolatry.
For although that he through his infidelity cannot please God in his own
person, yet to me which use him according to the ordinance of God, he is holy.
In this manner Saint Paul did use the Burgesses of Rome, and did appeal before
the Emperor, and used the Pagan Magistrates to defend his cause in that they
were Ministers of God: but he did never therefore allow the Idolatry of Rome,
nor consented to any thing that was against God, so the faithful man may use
his unfaithful wife: if he be to marry, he does evil, if he take her to
wife, whom he knows to be an infidel, but if he have her alredie, before he
know the truth, and she will not receive the truth with him, he may use her
not withstanding as his wife, for although she be evil and polluted before
God as touching her self, yet is she sanctified to the use of the faithful,
Job. 1.
for seeing all belongs to God, the faithful man may use all yt belongs to
God; as his own, because he is the child of God, and for 1. Cor. 13.
that all the treasures of God belongs unto him, for all is ours.

But the Infidel cannot use any thing whatsoever Sect.
it is without sinning and offending God, there is nothing so clean, which he
polluteth not: for seeing he is defiled, and is not purified nor cleansed by
faith in Jesus Christ; All things are unclean to him, and he polluteth all
things: seeing that by faith, he is not the child of God, he cannot use the
goods and creatures of God, but as a thief, usurping that which nothing
apperteineth to him: for as all things are clean to the clean, so on the
contrary, every thing is unclean to them that are defiled and Infidels, or
that have not a pure conscience, but are separated from all good works. And
therefore although the wife be faithful, if the husband be an Infidel, yet
the wife, although in her self she be holy and sanctified unto God, yet she
is profane and polluted to the husband, as touching his use, for seeing he
is none of the children of God, he is not worthy to have his creatures serve
him. Wherefore he does injury both to the Creator, and creature, when he
makes her to serve him, and he will not serve the Creator, who has (...) her
to his use, and to whom that creature serves: contrariwise, if the wife be
faithful, although the husband be an Infidel, yet the husband who in
himself is polluted and dedicated to the Devil; yet is he notwithstanding
holy unto her, and sanctified as to her use, that is, she may use him as her
husband in that which concerns the estate and office of marriage without
offense to God. The unfaithful husband is as well sanctified unto her, as the
bread 1. Tim. 4.
which she eats, and as other things which she uses with giving of thanks.

Also the father that is an infidel is sanctified Sect.
to the faithful child^, and the children of the faithful and unfaithful are
holy, because of the faithful, and though the children should be infidels,
yet the party faithful might use them in that which is due to the child, by
the father and mother, without offense to God, as well as we may use a horse or
an ass, according to their nature, although they be not men, nor have not
faith: for we serve our selves with them, as the good creatures of God, in that
whereunto they are created.

But we must always beware, that we abuse not the creatures, and that we
pervert not Sect.
the use of them, for although it be lawful for me to use my wife, if she be
an infidel, as touching the state of marriage, yet is it not lawful for me to
use an other woman in whoredom, although she be a Christian: for whoredom is
Exodus 20. Math. 7.
not ordained of God, as holy matrimony is, but forbidden and condemned, and
therefore as religion cannot separate marriage, if marriage hinder not, nor
take away the religion, so religion cannot make whoredom good, but whoredom
does break and violate the religion.

We ought to think even so of idolatry: Sect.
for although it be lawful for me, to use the same corn and bread for my
nourishment, which idolaters use for theirs, and also of the same wood that
they warm them selves with, to nourishe and warm me as they do, yet is it
not lawful for me to use bread and wine, that they have consecrated in the
table of devils, and of which they have made an Idol: nor likewise of their
wood in that manner that they use it to idolatry, for they put it to an other
use, then it was ordained of God, and they pervert the order of his creatures,
and therefore they abuse them; And so is it no longer use, but abuse, sin,
and a detestable fault: for the idol can in no sort be sanctified to God,
seeing thereby he is dishonored; It can please him no more, then the harlot
which altogether resists his will.

And therefore those which make such allegations, may well consider what
violence they do Sect.
unto the scriptures, and whether they speak well to ye purpose, to compare
the idols consecrated to ye devil, to the holy marriage, and to the lawful use
of the good creature of God: for no man can use the idolles to good in that
manner that they are ordered amongst the idolaters. These men that make such
comparisons, put me in mind of ye whoremongers, which say, when any reprooueth
the^ of whoredom, why then did God make women but to serve man's turn? It is
true that God has made woman to serve man to his glory, but he has not
created her that man should abuse her, and should dishonor and blaspheme God
by her: and therefore he has limited unto him, the use of her, and how he
ought to serve him self by her, and wherein money is created of God, and
likewise corn and wine, yet is there a mean in using of it: there is in this
an order amongst men, so that I use of mine own authority money, which God
has put into the hands of another, and if I take it for my self, without his
will and consent, and by other means the^ God has appointed, I am a thief.
Also if I use a woman as my wife out of marriage, I abuse ye creature of God,
and am a whoremonger, if it be so of the good creatures of God, what ought it
to be of ye ceremonies, superstitions, and invented idols of the devil,
against the commandment of God? how can they be holy to me? how can I
please God in corrupting his creatures and perverting his orders?

I am not ignorant of the other replications Sect.
and objections that men have accustomed to make, to pervert all the arguments
and reasons heretofore alleged, to confirm our opinion. It seems to them
which are of the contrary opinion, yt they have confuted al ye strongest
arguments, yt we can allege touching this matter, and that they have wholly
won the field, in that they make them selves believe there is great
difference between them and these examples, which we use to beat down their
opinion: they further always abuse them selves, that it seems to them, that
the sacrifices of Idolaters, with whom they are conversant, how impure so
ever they be, yet are not offered, but to the honor of the true God (whom they
confess with us) not to the honor of strange gods: And therefore it seems
to them, there is great difference between these sacrifices, and those of the
pagans. Sect.


They are very ignorant, if they think there was never people nor nation,
which thought to worship and honor any other then the true God, the Scripture
condemns not simply the pagans and idolaters for worshipping any thing but
God, and having served the devil in steed of him, but because that going
about to serve God after their own fancy, and not according to his word, in
steed of serving God, they have served the devil gods that they have forged
of their own brain, their intent was good to have served the true God, but
because it was not directed according to his word, and they imagined God after
their own fancy, and measured him after their affection; the holy ghost
condemns them, and calls them a people without a God, and says their gods
are devils.

What difference then is there between the Sect. Ephe. 2. Psalm. 95.
Israelites and the Pagans? why is that god whom the Israelites serve, taken
for the true God, and those of the Gentiles, for Idols, Devils, and false gods?
there is no other reason, but that because the Israelites serve God according
to his law, and receive him as he presents and manifests himself to them,
and do not disguise him as they list, neither put they other garments on him
then he has taken to himself: and therefore he is to them the true God, but
because the Pagans and Idolaters would color and disguise him by their
inventions, ceremonies, and superstitions after their own fancy, and would
have that to be good to him, which seemed good to them, and would subject him
to their laws, where they ought to be subject to his, they have wholly lost
him.

Seeing then that they seek God by other Sect.
means, then those by which he will be known and honored, they cannot find
him: but in steed of God, who has made them, they find out gods that they
themselves have made, by the imagination of their own understanding, for God
cannot be other then he is: wherefore if we attribute that unto him, which
apperteyneth not to him, or take that from him, which appertains to him, he
cease not in his essence and majesty to be always God, but unto us, he is
no more God, but is changed to us into the idol which our affections has
forged unto us, but the idol which we have feigned to our selves, cannot be
God: wherefore we have already altered him into a devil, which ought to be
God unto us, seeing we would order him according to our pleasure.

Let us now consider, if there be any other difference Sect.
between those which follow the truth of the Gospel, and the others which
will serve God after men's traditions, the^ this, whereof we speak: what is
there that lets us from being at agreement with the^, but this difference?
for we confess al one God, one Jesus Christ, one Gospel, and like articles of
the faith, and yet is there as great difference between the one and the other,
as between heaven and earth: for seeing God is served in vain by the
doctrines and commandments of men, it follows necessarily, Esai. 29. Mat.
15.
that those which serve him otherwise then he has commanded, serve him not:
it must needs be then, that they serve a God, who is not God in deed, but
only in imagination, for although they confess God with the mouth, yet they
deny him in works. Those then Tit. 1.
which are acquainted with them, and do as they do, wherein do they differ
from them, but that some are more ignorant then others? and therefore less to
be excused: for it is good reason, yt the servant which knows his masters
will and does it not, should be more grievously punished, then he that neither
knows it, nor does it.

The others, because they have not the true Sect.
knowledge of God, do dedicate their bodies and souls to their half gods:
Thou yt have ye knowledge of God, and know how he will be served, thou will
part stakes with him, thou will make the parts, and distribute the^ as thou
list: thou say thou give ye heart and ye soul to God: and who shall have
the body, the devil? God has no parting with the devil, he will have the body
and the soul wholly, or else he will have neither, if he had not promised life
eternal, but to the soul, and that he would only glorify it, and leave the
body in corruption and damnation, there were some more color to serve God with
ye heart and soul, and his adversary with the body, but seeing he will
glorify both the one and the other, and that he has sanctified them to dwell
in them, and to transform them to his image: how is it 1. Cor. 13. 2. Cor. 3.
Romans 8.
possible that the soul should carry the mark and image of God, and the
body the image of the devil? how is it possible, that a man who is but one
should be divided into two, that he may well serve two masters, without
offending the one or the other? Jesus Christ has said it is impossible to
serve well two masters. If it be not possible to serve God and riches, how can
Mat. 6.
we serve God and Idols, and the devil in them?

But least perhaps it seem that these Sect.
reasons be not sufficient, and that there is nothing like between the papists
and the pagans: let us take a more evident example. What other difference was
there betwixt Judah and Israel, after yt Jeroboam had made the golden calves,
but that which is between us and our adversaries, all of them did boast to
be the people of God, the sons of Abraham, and to have received the law of
the Lord by Moses: The Israelites did know their calves of gold, and their
images of Baal were not gods, but they kept them for a remembrance of GOD,
and to honor him by them: they had no other opinion then the Christians have
of theyrs, they did not understand, that they had forsaken God to serve an
other. The prophets have not yet refused to accuse them to have forsaken God,
to serve strange Gods, and to threaten them with his judgment. Did Helias
allow the doing of those which served Baal, in time of the great persecution
which Iesabel put in practice against the faithful? And the seven thousand,
which God has reserved to himself, are they only praised in that they did not
honor Baal with the heart? are they not expressly praised in that he bowed not
the knee to him, and did him no homage, honor, nor reverence, and that they
kept their bodies without being polluted and defiled amongst others with the
sacrilidges and abominations of Baal?

We have no reasons which the Idolaters in this time cannot bring for their
defense, they Sect.
could allege that the people, which served Baal, were not Pagans, but their
own brethren brought up one religion, on law, and one faith with them: we
have no color for to set out our Images and our gods, whether they be of
gold, silver, wood, stones, bread or meat, which they had not to color Baal,
and the Io. 3.
golden Calves, and especially the brazen Serpent. For that Image had much more
reason and greater show then all ours, and so and his adversary with the
body, but seeing he will glorify both the one and the other, and that he has
sanctified them to dwell in them, and to transform them to his image: how is
it 1. Cor. 13. 2. Cor. 3. Romans 8.
possible that the soul should carry the mark and image of God, and the
body the image of the devil? how is it possible, that a man who is but one
should be divided into two, that he may well serve two masters, without
offending the one or the other? Jesus Christ has said it is impossible to
serve well two masters. If it be not possible to serve God and riches, how can
Mat. 6.
we serve God and Idols, and the devil in them?

But least perhaps it seem that these Sect.
reasons be not sufficient, and that there is nothing like between the papists
and the pagans: let us take a more evident example. What other difference was
there betwixt Judah and Israel, after yt Jeroboam had made the golden calves,
but that which is between us and our adversaries, all of them did boast to
be the people of God, the sons of Abraham, and to have received the law of
the Lord by Moses: The Israelites did know their calves of gold, and their
images of Baal were not gods, but they kept them for a remembrance of GOD,
and to honor him by them: they had no other opinion then the Christians have
of theyrs, they did not understand, that they had forsaken God to serve an
other. The prophets have not yet refused to accuse them to have forsaken God,
to serve strange Gods, and to threaten them with his judgment. Did Helias
allow the doing of those which served Baal, in time of the great persecution
which Iesabel put in practice against the faithful? And the seven thousand,
which God has reserved to himself, are they only praised in that they did not
honor Baal with the heart? are they not expressly praised in that he bowed not
the knee to him, and did him no homage, honor, nor reverence, and that they
kept their bodies without being polluted and defiled amongst others with the
sacrilidges and abominations of Baal?

We have no reasons which the Idolaters Sect.
in this time cannot bring for their defense, they could allege that the
people, which served Baal, were not Pagans, but their own brethren brought up
one religion, on law, and one faith with them: we have no color for to set
out our Images and our gods, whether they be of gold, silver, wood, stones,
bread or meat, which they had not to color Baal, and the Io. 3.
golden Calves, and especially the brazen Serpent. For that Image had much more
reason and greater show then all ours, and so much more dangerous was it: if
we may speak of the persecutions, and of the fear of Tyrants, I doubt not, but
it was cruel, and more cruel in Helias time then in ours. Heliah says not
without cause, they have killed thy Prophets ^. Reg. 19.
and there is none left, but I, whom they seek to the death.

But I marvel at those, which will make themselves a buckler of Abdas, Achas
his steward, Sect.
saying, he was one of the faithful fearing God, and yet was servant to Achab
and that perverse Iesabell: Wherefore it is not like that he can tarry in
their service without serving of Baal, as they did at the least in outward
show: this reason is but a vain thought and an imagination and presumption of
man's understanding: for there is not one word in all the history, no not one
syllable, by which they can prove this Imagination; but rather altogether the
contrary: and would to GOD that those which will arm them selves with this
example, had as good a mind and affection to hide the poor persecuted, and to
succoure them in their necessity, as Abdias had, and showed in deed to the
prophets and faithful of his time: and though Abdias had done that which they
presume and imagine, it follows not therefore that he was allowed of God, no
more then other sins of the saints.saints. Sect.


But behold, yet an other reply, which seems not apparent, if it be so
dangerous a thing 4. Reg. 5.
and so contrary to the will of God to be partaker of ye ceremonies and
sacrifices of the papists, why did Elizeus answer Naaman the Assyrian, go thy
way in peace? After that Naaman said unto him, when my Lord shall enter into
the temple of Remmon to worship, and shall leave upon my hand, and on my
shoulder, pray the Lord that he will pardon me thy servant for this thing, if I
worship in the temple of Remmo^, when I shall worship in the same place:
Elizeus makes no difficulty to suffer him so to do, he condemmeth it not, as
a damnable thing that he should enter into the temples of idols with the Pagans,
and that he should be present at their sacrifice, so that he worship God in his
heart, why shall we then be rather forbidden, to communicate in like sort with
those yt are Christians as we are, then Naaman with the paga^s, who were in deed
enemies to god?

This example shall serve us no more then yt of S. Paul: it might serve your
turn if you were like to Naaman, and if to do service unto any, to whom you
were bound in ye sight of God, you should go with the^ in yt sort, yt Naaman kept
company with his lord. For he went not thither to commit idolatry, as he did, or
to allow his idolatry, but to serve him as a servant, in his necessities?
Wherefore we must understand, that, to worship, is often taken in scripture to
bow, and do reverence by outward signs and gestures, as we do to kings and
Princes, the Idolaters to their Idols, and the faithful also to God, when as
by outward gestures and signs they will declare the humility of their heart,
and the reverence they bear to God: but Naaman requires not to be suffered
to kneel and do reverence before the God Remmon: and to worship
notwithstanding the true God in his heart, to declare by outward signs, that
he bears reverence to the God Remmon, to please the king as they do, which
by outward gestures do worship the host and Images, and yet say their heart is
not there, but that by it they worship Jesus Christ in heaven, and the father
in spirit and truth.

Naaman speaks not of that adoration as Sect.
touching himself; but only of the reverence he ought to show in serving the
king, when he would kneel or bow down before Remmon. For seeing he must
be in the service of his Prince, and stay him when he leaned upon him, the
king could not bow, but that Naaman also was inclined to bow that the king
might leave upon him: But Naaman did it not for Remmon as the king did, nor to
make the king believe that he honored Remmon, as he did, fearing to displease
him, but he did it not only to serve his Prince according to his duty, for
before he agreed to that he promised, and witnessed openly that he would do
no sacrifice to the strange gods, but to the living God: seeing that he
promised so, we must not doubt but that he kept his promise: and it is most
certain, that in the estate and dignity wherein he was, he could not tarry
any long time without sacrificing to the Idols as others did: but it would have
been perceived; but he would that every one should know and understand, that
he had in his heart: there is no doubt but that for this cause he demanded of
Elizeus, two mules charged with the earth of Israel, to take with him into the
land of Syria, to bear witness and make public confession that he believed
not, nor worshipped any other then God of Israel, and that he had his divine
service aparte, and separated from that of the other Syrians, who were
Idolaters.

And although he did all things, and that he had Sect.
far better cause then those which would defend their Idolatry by his
example, yet does he not so much justify his works, as they do, but he
requires the Prophet, to the end he should pray to God for him, that he
would not impute that as a sin to him: wherein he shows well that there
was some infirmity in him, and that he fears there should be some fault in
that work, which the Prophet rather bears with all, then allows, yea
although that before he had done other things enough to confess his faith
before men: And if we consider well the words of Naaman, he confesses very
manifestly that he thinks there is sin, in yt he says, he must do, seeing
he wills the Prophet to pray for him, that it may not be imputed to him, for
if there be no fault, there is no need of prayer nor pardon, and Elizeus
says not the contrary to him, yt it is not sin at all, but he will not
press him overmuch in the confession he made of the name of God: and therefore
he lets him go, and gives him to understand, he will do yt which Naaman
requires of him: that is, that he will pray for him, and bids him fare
well: wherefore although it were so, that Elizeus had borne with some great
fault in Naaman, who was yet a nouice, and newely come to the religion, and
was come from amongst the Pagans, it follows not therefore that we which are
Christians, and have received a greater knowledge of truth confirmed by the
death of Jesus Christ, and so many martyrs, ought to draw this particular
example to a general consequent, and to set it against so many places of holy
scripture: which forbid all Idolatry and all show of denying Jesus Christ.

If we testify publikelie our faith, and if we confess we attribute nothing
to the Idols, but Sect.
that we go to the assemblies of Idolaters to serve our father or some other,
to whom we are bound, not in Idolatry, but in that which may concern our
office: the example of Naaman might give us some further color for our former
confession, and the public witnessing of our faith, would glorify God, and
condemn the Idolaters, and strengthen the faithful, and would take away all
cause of offending the good, and would leave no matter to the Idolaters wherein
to glorify: but the cause why we go, it is to do far contrary, it is to
cover us, and not to uncover us.

Yet notwithstanding, if we should do as Sect.
Naaman did, yet ought we no more to justify our selves, then he; but we
ought to ask pardon of God for it, as he did. And if Naama^ were afraid to
offend God by yt act, although he had a goodly cloak to excuse himself, I
ashamed of those with are quite contrary to him, yt they dare so assuredly defend
their work as if there were no sin in it. And to make their matter better,
after they had red yt which was written against their opinion, and seen
themselves bereft of that weapon, which they took from the example of Naaman
to defend their cause, they sought another starting hole, wherein there is
slender foundation: they have imagined, that when Naaman made y^ confession to
Elizeus, which was spoken of before, yt it is very like he was alone, and that
he said it not before all the company which was with him, they prove their
imagination by this, that it is the custom of great Lords to speak in a
Majesty of their affairs, and in the absence of their servants, rather then
in their presence. Wherefore they cause the^ to depart, and for better
confirmation hereof, they allege yt when Geazi, ran after Naaman, yt Naaman
descended out of his chariot, and that he came before him. Wherefore they
conclude, yt he spoke to him apart, and in absence of his servants, and that
he might well do as much to Elizeus, when he used that talk with him, whereof
the holy scripture makes mention.

This is the sophistry, whereby some will now Sect.
adays make this example of force to help an evil cause: but I know not to
what end it may serve them, but to show that those which are so seen in
speculation to imagine these starting holes, know well what they have to do,
and that it seems they are desirous to find some cloak in scriptures, to
cover their matter, and that they would gladly make the spirit of God, which
speaks in his holy scriptures, to think that he would speak and understand
things as they would have it: For as for the first, all their reason is
grounded but upon imagination, which it is as easy to disprove as to allow:
but of things of so great importance, we must not judge upon presumptio^s and
imaginatio^s. Moreover the scripture does manifestly witness, yt he promised and
confessed he would serve none other God, but ye Lord, and would declare it by
sacrifices, and by outward confession, and public testimony, and to give this
testimony, he desired these two mules charged with the earth of Israel, as his
words do manifestly witness. For to what purpose should yt earth serve him,
more then the earth of Syria, but to this end? then we have no cause to doubt,
but that yt matter is easy, as he has purposed and demanded it: For yt, which
the prophet answered him after ye manner which the Hebrwes use in their
salutations, when they bid a man farewell, saying to him, go in peace, ought
not yt only to be reserved to ye last speech, that Naama^ used touching his
worshipping in the Temple of Remmon, but to all his former words wherein the
Prophet consents to him? The matter then is plain, that his confession was
not secret, but public, and therefore his example serves to no end for
them, which content them selves to have confessed Jesus Christ in secret
before a few, and blaspheme him publicly.

It is easy to understand all these things: Sect.
but we seek these cloking and starting holes, because we will not be
unfurnished. And what is ye cause, if we should discover our selves, we should
yield our selves all unto death, and should be murderers of our selves? But
those which are out of this danger may babble at their ease: our life costeth
them little, I know some use such speech, but yet their life is dearer to us,
then they think for: we are no less afraid to put them in danger then
themselves: for we are not out of prison without being mindful of them, and
feeling ye afflictions of our brethren as if we were there our selves: and
therefore it is more safe to follow the judgments of those which are out of
danger, the^ those which are in it, it is very hard yt the sick man should be
a good Phisitio^ to himself: but he has need of another, for it is doubtful,
he would rather make the medicine serve his affections, the^ rule his
affections by ye art of Physic, for sickness desires to entertain it
self, and wills always that is contrary unto it: the sick man also
believes rather the physicians which accord unto his will, then they that
gain say it: It is very hard also that a man should be a good judge of his
own cause, for hardly could he avoid, but his affections would carry him
away, and hinder him from seeing the right and giving good judgment; wherefore
it is requisite to seek judges which be not overmuch affectioned to the
matter, and do not judge at randon according to their fancy, but be of good
conscience with out looking to the affection of any but to God only, and to
right and equity.

And therefore my brethren, consider whether Sect.
I speak of mine own head, or whether I bring my mind, or the mind of God: If
I speak any other then ye word of god, my reasons ought not to move you nor
trouble you, but you ought to let the^ pass, as vain and frivolous: If I
offer unto you ye counsel of god, you have no cause to be angry, or to
complain yt we are too sharp and our judgment is too hard: for would you that
we should change ye meaning of god, and should belie him? I have understood ye
complaints and the attestations yt some make, to cause us to bethink our selves
what we write of these matters. They say, and it is true, yt the controversy
and matter is not of the shadow of an Ass, or ye wool of a goat, (as the
old Proverb is) but of that they account most dear in this world, that is,
of a thing for which we must forsake our country, our wife, our dear
children, our goods, and all yt ever we may have delight and pleasure in this
world, yea to the loosing of our life, and running straight upon death; and I
deny not but these things are very sharp and hard to flesh: wherefore I
cannot think thereof without great compassion of these, which are in such a
straight: but what should we do there? we ought to think it more strange and
fearful to forsake Jesus Christ, the heavenly habitation, and the eternal
felicity, then these transitory things, which without that we must once
forsake.

We would gladly find some way to support Sect.
the infirmity of flesh in this case, and to please it a little in these great
temptations. For it may be, if we were in the same danger, whether we should be
more weak and frail, more strong and constant, then those whom we prove, God
knows, who gives strength and constancy to whom it pleases him, without
whom we all are nothing: but I dispute not now what constancy or inconstancy
might be in me or some other, and what we should do in such a case: I dispute
what ought to be done in such a case, and what we owe to God, as far as I can
judge by ye scriptures; for to flatter our selves, and to lie against the truth
of God, we shall gain nothing: for all our colors and excuses, although they
please our flesh, shall nothing avail us in the judgment of God, if they
have no foundation in his word, which we must not corrupt and pervert to make
it serve our affections, and to allow our infirmity and incredulity as good.

What then have we to do? Did not Nichodemus go to Jesus Christ in the
night? durst Sect. Ioh. 3.
he confess him publicly? is he therefore condemned? As I cannot altogether
excuse Nichodemus: as though he had not at yt time some incredulity and
infirmity in him, so I wish that if we have not more faith and constancy
then he, that we be not worse, but at the least like unto him. Saint John did
not write in the commendation of the chief of Jerusalem, that Ioh. 2.
they did believe in Jesus Christ, but that they durst not confess him,
because they feared to be cast out of the Synagogue, and that they loved more
the praise of men, then the praise of God. If Nichodemus went to Jesus Christ
by night, yet did he not blaspheme him, and deny him by day. If at the first
he confessed him not openly, and maynteyned his cause publicly, yet did he not
consent to his death, nor suffered for Luke 23. Ioh. 9. Ioh. 7.
his part that any should do him harm or displeasure, but he always
maynteyned his cause in that he could: he declares him self with Joseph of
Arimathea to be one of his disciples, Mat. 27. Luke 13. Ioh. 19.
when all his disciples forsook him, he made public confession of him in the
greatest danger he cold be in: And when he had more cause of fear and offense
then ever he had, they demanded the body of Pilate to bury it.

Would God that we had many such Nichodemians Sect.
y^ wereso fearful, that they would show them selves always at need: for
they should be more worthy praise, then a company of rash heads, which play
the hardy men at the beginning, and make great shows, but they fail at need,
and for a thing of nothing deny and blaspheme the Gospel, and would not lose
one heir of their head for it: or then a company of wise men of the world, who
will cover themselves with the example of Nichodemus: and in a counsel or
company of adversaries, they durst not open their mouth to utter one word in
favor of the truth: Nichodemus did far otherwise, how fearful soever he
had been before: but these men will consent rather to the death of the
innocent, and if it be needful, they will condemn them themselves, for fear
of being suspected. Neither Nichodemus, nor Joseph of Arimathea would have
done that for their life, no not a good Pagan, which had any love to Justice
and equity: yet is this the order of many which will arm themselves with
Nichodemus, but such men might have better occasion to allege the example of
Pilate in their behalf, and to acco^panie themselves with him: for they take
more of him then of Nichodemus.

So then, as I cannot condemn the true Nichodemians, although that faith and
constancy Sect.
is not such in them, as it is to be required in a true Christian: so can I not
allow those, which in all things agree with the Idolaters, and renounce Jesus
Christ without any stay, and then will excuse and defend themselves that it is
lawful for them, and that they do not against the word of God: there is
enough of one evil, without adding two. It suffices once to have blasphemed
Jesus Christ, without blaspheming him again, in affirming that blasphemy is
not blasphemy, and in going about to induce others to blaspheme him with us,
that we may have mo companions with us to cover our wickedness.

Were it not rather the duty of a good christian, Sect. Psalm. 136. Exo. 16.
Act. 15.
to confess his infirmity and sin, and weep with ye captives of Babylon
and Egypt, the^ to defend his evil, and to lie unto the spirit of God with
Ananias and Sacharia? do we not see the subtlety of the flesh? whence
comes these delays and excuses, but of this flesh? which is so delicate,
that it cannot suffer the thorns of Jesus Christ, and so glorious, that it
cannot suffer to be reproved and condemned, and therefore must she forge her
self a new Jesus Christ, that he may not diminishe any of her pleasures and
delights, nor her glory and arrogancy, but may entertayne both the one and the
other, with her carnal Jesus Christ which he has feigned to her self: for
the flesh is altogether contrary to Saint Paul, who will not glory in any
thing, but in the cross of Christ Jesus, and in his tribulations and
infirmities. But he abhors and detesteth them: for she has not well noted
the lesson, that our Savior Christ gave to his disciples, as it has been
already said, who so will be my disciple, he must carry his cross every day
and follow me: then he adds a comparison, to teach us how we ought to
prefer our selves to his service, he instructs us to do like a wise
prince, who before he give his defy unto his enemy, and join battle with
him, he examineth his force and riches, to know whether he be strong enough
to resist him, to the intent he be not shamed and confounded: if after he have
begone, he be constrained to leave all and fly, or yield him self to his
enemy: he will also, that we take example of the wise builder, who before he
begin his building, he reckons whether he shall have money and stuff
enough to furnishe him therein, that after he has laid the foundation, he be
not constrained to cease off, and to leave his enterprise, and in the end be
mocked.

By this he gives us to understand, that if Sect.
we will fight under his banner, and lay hand to the buylding of his house,
we must prepare our selves to work, not to rest, and to fight, not to sleep,
and to receive blows, rather then benefits: also he gives us to understand,
that in beginning, we must prepare our selves to go forward, and that we must
not forsake his banner, nor our captain when we hear the larom sounded, and
the assault is given, we must not do like the cowardly Souldyers, who will kill
all as they sit at table, but when they come to the business to give blows,
they are ye first that fiye away, and cause others to be afraid, and go hyde
them selves. If we be truly faithful, it is necessary that we confess Jesus
Christ openly, and that we die rather as the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs
did, then to forsake him, and commit Idolatry, superstition, or any act that
has any appearance of it.

If Jesus Christ had once many such champions, which would be prodigal of
themselves and lives, with so holy a prodigality, as they were, Antichrist
would soon be overthrown, Jesus Christ should shortly reign over all the
earth, or death would diminishe and kill more of our enemies, then the death of
Sampson killed of the Philistians: we see what happened in the Iud. 27.
times of the Apostles and Martyrs; if they had been so dainty as we are, and
had been so fearful of their skin, the religion of Christ had not been so
much increased in so small a time: Luke 18.
but it is hard especially in our time, wherein faith almost fails upon
earth, according to the prophecy of our Savior Christ, to find men of such
faith and constancy.

What remedy is there then herein, if we can Sect.
not come to this high degree, and to this christian persecution of the
martyrs, and if we dare not openly confess Jesus Christ with the danger of
our life, and we feel not in our selves such constancy to suffer death for
his name; let us come at the least to the next degree, let us be secret
scholars with Nichodemus, and Joseph of Arimathea: And if we show not our
selves so openly, yet at the least, let us do no dishonor to Jesus Christ, nor
consent unto his adversaries in partaking at the table of devils, and if we
find our selves weaker the^ Nichodemus, and if we for fear of loosing our
goods, our estimation and lives, we be constrained too much to dissemble, and
to communicate with Idolaters; yet at the least, let us not justify, but
condemn our selves in yt wherein we fail, let us acknowledge our over great
infirmity, and the over burning love that we bear to our selves, and to the
goods and dignities of this world, more the^ to Jesus Christ and his word, let
us acknowledge in what evil and bondage we are, let us confess that it is a
punishment and judgment of God upon us, because of our sins, as it was upon
the people of Israel in Egypt and Babylon, let us pray to God that he will
increase our faith to overcome our infirmity, and let us confess our faults
and sins unto him, and ask him pardon and mercy for the same: let us weep
and wail under this heavy burden, and under this great tyranny of
Antichrist which presses us so sore: let us ask aid, succor, and deliverance
at his hands, rather then to excuse and justify our selves, and so much to
please our selves, and he will see our tears, and hear our sighs and
groans, by which he will be moved to pity and compassion, for to deliver and
succor us, as he was moved by the like of the people of Israel.

But in ye mean time, those which remain in Sect.
such misery, so ouerco^e by ye infirmity of their flesh, yt they are
constrained to communicate with idolaters, what excuse can they have, seeing
they know well they do evil, do they not sin against the holy Ghost? this
is a question that some will make, and a doubt that tormenteth many consciences:
if al sins, that we commit, knowing that we do evil, were sin against the
holy ghost, we should commit few ye were not sin against ye holy ghost: ye
adultery and murder of David, and the denial, blasphemy, and perjury of Saint
Peter, should be sins against the holy ghost, for they were not ignorant
that that was forbidden of God, but it is an other thing to sin of certain
malice, and in despite of God, and in contempt of his word, and to sin
through ignorance, or through infirmity of the flesh, which displeases us,
and we cannot overcome it.

But we must not so far stretch out this skin Sect.
of man's infirmity, yt we will wholly cover and defend our selves, and by it
give our selves, to understand yt sin is not sin: for in stead of lessoning
the sin, we may aggrauate it, and may well make it irremissible, as the
sin unto death, for there is no great difference between the hypocrites, and
the contemners and mockers of God, and between the blasphemers, which sin
against the holy ghost; they are almost cosen germans: we see also by
experience that from one of the degrees man falls into the other, for many of
those which become Atheistes and Epicures, and men without God, which have at
the first had some knowledge of the truth and now blaspheme it, they are
fallen into these pits by degrees: for they have feigned to themselves a Jesus
Christ after their own fancy without amending their life, and without any
repentance, they have dallied with him, and have made it an art to blaspheme
him: wherefore they have altogether lost him, and God with him, whom without
him we cannot have: And therefore sin is no more to them sin, nor
blasphemy blasphemy: for Jesus Christ, is no more to them Jesus Christ, nor
God, to them God.

Let us learn to fear the Lord by others Sect.
loss, and to flee such curse and fury of God: let us beware that seeing Jesus
Christ has driven that wicked spirit out of our body, that, wherewith he
threatens the Jews, befall not unto us, that is, that he return not thither
with seven others worse then the first, and that the latter things be not
worse then the first, for it follows not, if all sins be not sins unto
death, and as great and as wicked the one as the other, that yet they be not
sins sufficient to bring us to eternal damnation, if God of his mercy took
not pity of us, and did pardon them unto us, let us not think that we are
not bound to acknowledge and confess them, and to pray every day. O heavenly
father forgive us our sins, enter not into judgment with thy servant,
reprove us not, nor correct us in thine anger and fury, lead not us into
temptation, but deliver us from evil.

I condemn not David nor S. Peter as Sect.
touching their persons, nor the Israelites which worshipped the Images of
Nabuchodonozer, in such sort as I condemn them for reprobates: but I allow not
therefore ye murder of David, nor ye denial of S. Peter, nor the idolatry of
the Israelites, but do condemn them as sins, grievous and greatly
displeasing to God, and worthy of eternal death, if God of his grace had not
pardoned them. Yet because the persons acknowledged their faults, and asked
him mercy for the same, their sin was not imputed unto them: I have also like
hope that the Lord will take pity and compassion on the poor, faithful,
weak, and fearful, which are constrained to carry the yoke of Antichrist, and
that he will strengthen them more, so that they acknowledge themselves weak,
and sinners as they are, and that they think not themselves to be S. Paul's,
where they are not yet worthy to be accounted good Nicodemians, that they
delight not themselves in their errors, that they call not the table of Devils
the Supper of Jesus Christ, but that they be grieved to be in that captivity,
and to offend, and to see God daily offended, that they avoid idolatry as
much as they can, and that they hate and derest it with all their heart,
without saying evil is good, or light is darkness: for God curses such men by
his Prophet; but those which esteem so much idolatry, and allow it, and
induce others thereto, they have not well considered the words of the prophet,
nor well thought of the malediction of God, whereunto they yield themselves
faulty.

This is, well beloved brethren, that which I Sect.
would write unto you at this time, not to trouble and torment further the
poor, weak, and afflicted consciences, but to abate the pride and presumption
of the flesh, and the proud, and foolish, which feel not their evil, but will
maintain it as good; hitherto tends my meaning that you may follow rather
the council of the spirit of God and his word, then the council of the
flesh and worldly wisdom. Wherefore I pray you take all in good part, and
consider rather with what heart I write unto you, the speech of words. Think
it not of arrogancy or presumption, if I have taken in hand to write unto them
whom I never saw, and which may be more perfect, and understand these things
better then my self? For I have not done it without cause, but at ye request of
many good men, which have entreated me thereto, I done have it also because yt
many pore troubled consciences have often asked council of me in such matters:
and therefore I durst not refuse so just and reasonable a matter, seeing I am
debtor to all my brethren; for I have thought I might serve every one which had
need of my instruction, and that in so doing I should give a testimony of my
faith to others, which are more strong and learned, and that I should stir
them up better to satisfy such questions and troubles in conscience according
to the grace that God has given them, far greater then to me, as already
some have done long ago, and may yet more amply, to whom I am not worthy to be
compared; If also I cannot satisfy all men, I shall nothing marvel at it,
but I should marvel at the contrary; for I know well my ability, and how
hard the matter is, further although I have been tedious, yet have I not taken
in hand to write all that I might well say touching this matter, for it would
require a more ample and easy treatise, but I have endeavored to touch
generally the principal points, which first came to my mind, offering my
self always to be ready to employ my self according to the talent that I
have received of God, to satisfy you more at large, both in these and al
things else, wherein I may serve you, so far as God shall give me grace: if
my council be a little over hard to the flesh, think yet that it is
faithful, and such as I would take for my self: if I would not go against
my own conscience according to the knowledge I have received of the truth,
whereunto I had rather give true and faithful witness, then to lie unto you and
seduce you to please you, and to betray the truth of God: to whom you shall
pray for me, and the Church in these parts, even as we pray for you being
mindeful of your afflictions and perseoutions, as if we were there our selves.

In the mean time, my dear brethren, walk Sect.
in all fear and reverence of God, in all humility of the spirit, and in all
christian modesty, waiting for your redemption: Let your light so shine before
me^, that they may see your good works, your heavenly father may be glorified,
and that you may shut up the mouths of your adversaries: admonish one another
with all ge^tlenes, correct al blasphemies, vices, and imperfections, which
reign yet in the midst of us, yt through you the name of God be not
blasphemed amongst the Infidels, call upon God, and he will raise you up,
glorify him, and he will glorify you, humble your selves, and he will exalt
you, exhort one another, and wax not cold, be not weary of well doing resist
not those that walk well, but support the weak, encorage them that faint,
prick them forward that cease off, and those that run well, that they may
run better, faint not till you have obtained the price, and the God of peace
shall comfort you and strengthen you to the end, and will not suffer you to be
tempted further then you be able to bear: but will give good issue, to all
your temptations and troubles, to the glory of his holy name, and salvation of
our own souls: to whom only be all honor and glory, now and for ever.

Amen.

