

LONDON, Printed for Leonard Becket, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Temple near the Church, 1611.

A VERY CHRISTIAN, LEARNED, and brief Discourse, concerning the true, ancient,
and Catholic Faith, against all wicked vp-start Heresies: Serving very
profitably for a Preservative against the profane Novelties of Papists,
Anabaptists, Arrians, Brownists, and all other Sectaries.

First composed by Vincentius Lirinensis in Latin, about twelve hundredth
years ago.

And now faithfully translated into English, and illustrated with certain
Marginall Notes.

By THOMAS TVKE.

Imprinted at London for Leonard Becket, and are to be sold at his shop in the
Inner Temple. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful, Sir JOHN LEVENTHORPE knight, and to the right
virtuous Lady Ioanna, his wife, all happiness earthly and heavenly.
RIght Worshipful, great is the perverseness of Man's nature, as may appear
by the multitude of errors, and false religions, of the which the world is now
sick even unto death. For the Jew has his, the Turk his, the Indians
theirs, the Papist his: yea and almost every man is ready to turn his fansy
into faith (so common is this kind of Alchymie) and to make doctrines of his
own devises; so fond we are by reason of self-love, and the blindness of our
minds.

But (as Eli said) this is not well. For there is but one true Religion, and as
In Natiu. Dom. Ser. 4. Nisi vna est, fides non est.
Leo says, Faith is either One, or None. Now because there are so many
religions in the world, therefore some will be of none, but stand as it were
amazed, not knowing what course to take, like the Eccles. 10. 15.
fool, that Solomon speaks of, which knows not the way into the City. It
behooues us therefore seeing such variety of professions to look before we
leap, and to sound the waters before we hoyse up our sails (for heaven is no
harbor for heretics, no common Inn for all kinds of Travelers) I mean
before all to consult with the written word of God, the oracle of truth, the
ground of faith, a Psalm. 119. 105.
lantern to our feet, and a light unto our path, and is 2. Tim. 3. 16
profitable to teach, to convince, to correct and instruct in righteousness,
that the man of God maybe absolute. Hear (says S. Aug. ep. 48. Audi dicit
Dominus, non dicit Don^^ etc.
Austin) Thus says the Lord: not, thus says, Donatus, or Rogatus, or
Vincentius, or Hilary, or Austin, but, Thus says the Lord. Is. 8. 20.
To the Law, and to the Testimony (says Esaias:) if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them. By the Scripture God
speaks his whole will, says Per Scripturam Deus loquitur omne, quod vult.
Moral. l. 16. c. 16.
Gregory. If therefore men would in the true fear of God and lowliness of
spirit desire divine direction, and attend unto the word, undoubtedly they
should see their way before them, and could not be so transported of Impostors,
as they use to be. For Psalm. 25. 9. 12. 14.
them that be meek, will he guide in judgment, and teach the humble his way.
What man is he, that fears the Lord? Him will he teach the way, which he
shall choose. The secret of the Lord is revealed to them, that fear him; and
his covenant, to give them understanding. And as our Savior speaks, Ioh. 16.
23.
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you. So then,
if we will not give ear unto Man, but unto God, if we will not trust unto our
own wings, but seek for aid of him, we may boldly expect assistance of him
according to his word. And because to begin a course well is nothing, unless a
man continue constant in it; therefore it behoues us to cleave fast unto the
faith, avoiding all impostures of Heretics whatsoever. For the furtherance
hereof, this Treatise was first written in Latin above a thousand years ago,
by a learned and godly Frenchman, whose authority is nothing less to be
respected for his Monasticke kind of living, considering that our modern
Monks have almost nothing of Antiquity besides their name. And for the same
purpose we have turned it into English, desiring the Almighty to bedew the
same with the blessing of his grace. My labor I account as due to the Church
in general, and abundantly deserved of you both in particular: if therefore
you shall accept it, I shall have my full desire.

The God of heaven and earth preserve you by his grace, that after this life on
Earth ye may be presented to Jesus Christ to live in heaven with him in
eternal glory.

Amen.
London S. Clem. April 14. 1611. Your Worships in Christ Jesus to be
commanded, Thomas Tuke.

To The Reader.
THERE are three sorts of men, for who^ I have translated this little book.
The first are they, that hear their fathers instruction, and despise not the
government of their mother: whom I desire God upon my knees to keep free from
the poison, and perverseness of all Heretics, and Schismatickes whatsoever.
The second are they, that are misled by Romish Impostors into many gross and
novel errors, such as the Scriptures and ancient Doctors utterly condemn, as
may easily be seen by viewing sundry works of diverse learned men amongst us,
either written, or turned into English. The chiefest cause of of whose erring,
partly consists in an incredible credit, which they give unto their Teachers,
and partly in their own wonderful ignorance of the holy Scriptures, which
might inlighten their eyes, and inform their judgments. It is written of
Naash, that he would make a covenant with the men of Iabesh Gilead upon
condition 1. Sam. 11. 2.
that he might thrust out all their right eyes: even so surely the Devil
delights in nothing more, then in putting out men's eyes, and in captiuating
their understanding (which is as the right eye of the soul) that being
blinded, he may lead them at his pleasure. But if it would please them to
search the Scriptures John. 5. 39.
(as Christ exhorts) and to consider of the Catholic doctrine of the
ancient Church even to the times, wherein this our Author lived, I doubt not,
but that the scales of ignorance would fall from their eyes, and that those
mists would be soon dispersed, which Satan casts before them. The third are
such, as are not much offended at the doctrines of the Church, but condemn her
government, and stumble at her Ceremonies, which yet are neither indecent, nor
superstitious, or numerous, and such as neither Gods word forbids, nor any
approved Church in the Christian world condemns, as they are commanded by
this Church, and entertained.

Now see here what strange conceits and doctrines are devised, and defended
of them, such as have no foot-step in the Scripture, no fellowship with
Antiquity, 1. It is affirmed that The true and right government of the
Christian Churches is a certain Democratie. 2. That a provincial Church is
Contrary to the testament of Christ. Hereupon Henry Jacob in an Epistle
prefixed to a book lately printed at Leyden, labors for a Separation. 3. That
humane ceremonies being once abused, cannot be purged but by utter abolishion.
4. That Indeed Christ lay at the Pass. but that he did so at the last Supper,
the Scripture says not.
it is out of all doubt, that Christ sat or lay at his last Supper: or thus,
that it is not only possible or probable, but certain that he used a table
gesture at that his last Supper. 5. That because Christ used a table gesture;
therefore it is unlawful for us to use any other then a table gesture. 6 That
to receive the bread and wine kneeling is unlawful, is Idolatry. Kneeling at
Communion, as it is required of the Church of England, lawful.
Which me thinks is very strange. For what is the Idol? we kneel not unto
the Elements, but unto God, in testimony of reverence and humbleness of
spirit. Secondly if we Must receive the Sacrament with reverence and humility
of heart (as who dare gainsay?) the^ undoubtedly we May receive it with a
reverend and humble gesture. Thirdly, if our kneeling be idolatry, then are we
idolaters (as if oppression be theft, and oppressors are Thieves: if to take
the Cure of souls, and to take no Care of souls be murder, then they, that
take the Cure of souls, and take no Care of souls are Murderers) yea and
resolute Idolaters: for we do not only kneel, but stand to defend it, and we
practice it daily, yea and charge them with ignorance that do condemn it as
unlawful. Now what will follow? If we be idolaters, then they must not eat with
us. If any, (says S. Paul) that is called 1. Cor. 5, 11.
a brother, be an Idolater, with such one eat not. And again, If we be
Idolaters, how dare they communicate with us? What? with Idolaters? Either
therefore these conceits must be for saken, or else I see not how we can but
swarm with Iacobites. But I am persuaded better things of many of them: such
as accompany Salvation, and tend not to Separation. A. Fuluius once said to his
son: Ego te non Catilmae aduersus patria^, sed patriae aduer sus Caulinam
gonui.
I begat thee not for Catiline against thy Country, but for thy Country against
Catiline: so may I say, they were not begotten by the Gospel, for Johnson, for
Jacob, for any turbulent and phantasticke Doctor against the Church, but for
the Church against them. And be they well assured that this slight stuff will
shrink when it comes to wetting, this counterfeit coin will not endure
trial. The greatness of men, their learning, their godliness, are no
arguments to move us to receive their own conceits for doctrines. No, an
Angel must not be heard against the truth. But me thinks I hear some Quest.
man say, How may I be resolved in this difference of opinions? what shall I
do to find out the truth? I answer. First give diligent An.
care to the voice of God in the Scriptures: what it says, that receive,
though it cross thee never so much, and where it has no tongue, have thou no
care. Do not first entertain a conceit, and then look out Scripture to draw it
by the hair to thee. Secondly, be not ouercaried with any preiudicate opinion
of thine Opposite: neither let the reverend conceit of thy Teacher, that has
taught thee such a doctrine, cover thine eye from beholding reason: and do not
think that, because he is a good man, therefore all must needs be good,
that he has taught thee; or that his doctrines are sounder the^ another man's,
because his life is better. Thirdly, be not proud, or selfeconceited, For Iam.
4. 6.
God resists the proud. God and Pride (says Bernard) cannot dwell together
in the same heart, which could not dwell in the same heaven. And the History of
the Church shows that Arrius of very pride fell into wicked and open heresy.
But the Lord 1. Pet 5. 5. Psalm. 25. 9.
gives grace to the humble, and teaches him his way. If ye ask (says
Augustine) what is the first step in the way of truth? I answer Humility. If
ye ask what is the second? I say Humility, If ye ask, what is the third? I
say the same, Humility. fourthly, pray earnestly with David that God would be
pleased to Psalm. 119. 34. 66.
Give thee understanding, and to teach thee good indgement and knowledge.
Finally, be not easily persuaded to believe Doctrines specially against the
unanimous consent of a true Church, which neither the ancient acknowledged,
neither are allowed by any present approved Church, but are the conceits of
some particular persons. In one word, I pray thee diligently to read this
Treatise over. For it teaches how to continue in the faith, against all the
frauds and fallacies of Imposters. It is not great, but good: learned, though
but little: and as sweet to them, that are intelligent, as short. The Lord
bless it to thee, and give thee an understanding head, and an obedient heart.

April. 14. 1611. Thine in Christ, THOMAS TVKE.

A TREATISE, OR Disputation of VINCENTIVS So called of Lerme, or Lerina, an
Island in the Mediterranea^ sea, where he lived.
LIRINENSIS, for the Antiquity of the Catholic faith, against the profane
Novelties of all Heresies.
The Preface.
FORASMVCH as the Scripture speaks, and warnes us thus; Deuteronomy 32. 7
Ask thy Fathers, and they will show thee thine Elders and they will tell
thece. And again, Pro. 22. 17. and 3. 1.
Apply thine ear to the words of the wise. In like manner also, My Son, forget
not these sayings, and let thine heart keep my words? It seems to me This
word signifies a pilgrim, or stranger: a word befitting al Christian men: and
under this name our Author puts forth his Book, concealing his own proper
name, least the Adversary should reject the work for the workemans sake. Or it
may be a read peregrin, a pilgrim or a stranger.
Peregrinus, the least of all the servants of God, that it will not be a little
profitable, through the Lords assistance, if I shall set down those things in
writing, which I have faithfully received of the holy Fathers; sure I am, very
necessary for mine own infirmity, seeing I may have in readiness, whereby the
weakness of my memory may be relieved with continual reading. Unto which
task, not only the benefit of the work does move me, but the consideration
also of time, and the opportunity of Place. The time; for seeing all things are
carried away therewith, it behooves us also to catch something therefrom
again, which may further unto eternal life: especially because the
expectation of Gods terrible judgment requires the studies of Religion, and
the subtilty of novel Heretics, asks much care and diligence. The Place
also, because avoiding the throngs and multitudes that are in Cities, we live
in a little Village more remote, and are there inclostred in a Monastery, where
without great distraction we may do that, which the Psalmist sings of; Be still
and Psalm. 46. 10.
know that I am God. But indeed the reason of our purpose is agreeable
thereunto, as who, because we have some while been tossed with diverse and
grievous troubles of a secular warfare, have at the length through the favor
of Christ hidden us within the haven of Religion, most faithful always unto
all: that there the blasts of vanity and pride being laid down, and appeasing
God By, not For: the Ancients knew no merits, but Christ's, They preached mercy,
not merit.
by the sacrifice of Christian humility, we might escape, not only the
Ship-wracks of the life present, but the flames also of the future.

But now will I in the That is with the help of God, for to do a thing in the
name of God, is either to do it to Gods glory: or by his power and authority:
or else, as here, by his grace, or with confidence of his assistance, as ^ Psa.
20. 5.
name of the Lord, set upon this business; to wit, set down in writing, the
things that have been delivered from our Elders, and committed to our keeping,
intending to be a faithful Relator of them, and not presuming to be their
Author. Neither mean I to set down all, but to touch those only, that are
necessary: and that not in any polished and curious style, but in a plain and
familiar speech, that the most of them may seem to be pointed at rather then
unfolded. Let them write delicately and with accuratenesse, that are led
thereunto through confidence of their wit, or by reason of their office: but
for me it shall be sufficient, that I have prepared a Remembrancer for my
self, to help my memory, or rather to prevent my forgetfulness, the which
yet I will endeavor through the Lords assistance to mend, and perfect daily,
by reuoluing and calling to mind the things that I have Not which himself has
forged upon the anuill of his own wit.
learned. And this I have said before hand, that if happily ought of ours shall
come into the hands of the He means especially such as are Saints not in
respect, of grace only, but of place, as Bishops and other Ministers, whose
office is holy.
Saints, they would reprehend nothing therein rashly, which they may see by
promise yet to be amended.

CHAP. 1.
INquiring therefore oftentimes with great care and very singular diligence, of
very many excellent men, both for holiness and learning, how I might by some
certain, and as it were general and regular way, discern the truth of the
Catholic faith, from the falsehood of wicked heresies, I received this
answer always from them all almost; That if either I, or any other would
find out the wiles of vpstart Heretics, and escape their That is their deceit
full reasons, whereby they seek to catch and entangle men.
snares, and continue sound and whole in a sound faith, he must fortify his
faith through the Lords assistance with a twofold fence; namely first with the
authority of Gods word: and then also with the tradition of the Catholic
Church.

CHAP. 2.
HEre, it may be some man will ask; Seeing the Canon of the Scriptures is
perfect, and that it is abundantly sufficient of it self to all things, what
need is there that the authority of the Churches understanding Quest.
should be joined thereunto? Surely, because al me^ do not after one manner
understand Ans.
the holy Scripture, according to the height thereof; but diverse men interpret
the sentences thereof diversely, that there may seem to be as many meanings
thereof almost, as men. For Nouatian expounds it one way, Photinus another way,
Sabellius thus, Donatus otherwise, Arrius, Eunomius, Macedonius other ways,
Appollinaris and Priscillianus by themselves, Iouinianus, Pelagius, Celestius
another way, and finally, Nestorius has a sense by himself, And therefore by
reason of so great deceipts, and windings of so different errors, it is very
necessary that a man should interpret the Prophets and Apostles according as
the Catholic Church does understand them.

CHAP. 3.
IN like manner, even in the Catholic Church we must have a special regard,
that we hold that which is, Every where believed always and of all: for this
is truly and properly Catholic (as the very force and reason of the name
declares) which comprehends al things truly universally. Now this we shall
do, if we follow Universality, Antiquity and Consent. And we shall follow
Universality thus, namely if we do confess this one faith to be true, which
the whole Church through out the world confesses. We shall follow Antiquity,
if by no means we reject those interpretations, which we know to have been
used and esteemed of our holy Elders and Forefathers. And Consent in like sort
also, if ever in Antiquity we follow the determinations and judgments of all,
or surely of almost all Priests and Doctors.

CHAP. 4.
What then shall a Christian Quest.
Catholic do, if some few members of the Church shall cut themselves from the
fellowship of the Catholic Faith? Surely what else, but prefer the
soundness of Ans.
the whole body before a noysom and corrupt member? And what Quest.
if some new contagion shall endeavor the corruption, not of some small part of
the Church only, but even of the whole body thereof also? In like manner then
he shall be Ans.
careful to cleave fast unto Antiquity, which cannot now wholly be seduced by
any novel deceit. And what if even Quest.
in Antiquity it self the error of two or three, or of a City, or of some
Province be found out? Then his whole care shall Ans.
be to prefer the decrees of the Universal Church, universally of old
maintained, to the rashness or ignorance (if any such be) of some few persons.
But what if some such thing break out, Quest.
where nothing of that nature may be found? Then shall he Ans.
compare the sentences and opinions of the Fathers together, and take Counsel
of them: of those Fathers or Elders (I mean) Or especial, duntaxat.
only, which though they lived not in one age and place, did yet continue in
the fellowship and faith of one Catholic Church, and were laudable Teachers:
and whatsoever he shall perceive that not one or two alone, but that all alike
with one and the same consent did openly, commonly, and constantly hold, write
and teach, let him know that the same of him also is without any scruple to be
believed. But that those things, which we say may be made more plain, they
are each of them to be cleared by examples, and to be a little more enlarged,
least through affectation of too much breuity, the weight of things be not
perceived, by reason of passing so swiftly over them in our speech.

CHAP. 5.
IN the time of Donatus, from whom sprang the Donatists, when as a great part
of Aphrica had thrown themselves headlong into his furious errors, and when
unmindful of their honor, religion and profession, they did prefer the
sacrilegious headines of one man to the Church of Christ, then those Africans
could of them all alone be safe within the sanctuaries of the Catholic faith,
which having that wicked Schism in detestation, adjoined themselves to all the
Churches of the world; leaving in truth a notable pattern to them that should
come after, namely how, and that also well, the soundness of all might be
preferred before the fury of one, or but a few.

CHAP. 6.
IN like manner, when as the poison of the Arrians had now corrupted not some
few, but almost all the world, so as that well near all the Latini sermonis,
that spoke the Latin tongue.
Latin Bishops being deceived, partly by force and partly by fraud, knew not
well, by reason of a certain kind of blindness, which had invaded their
understandings, what course they were best to follow, when things were so
confused: then whosoever was a true Lover and worshipper of Christ, the same by
making more account of the ancient-faith, the^ of nouel-falshood, was preserved
from all infections of that contagious doctrine. The danger in truth of which
time has abundantly showed what great calamity the bringing in of that
vpstart doctrine caused. For then were shaken not small things only, but even
the greatest also. For not only alliances, kindreds, friendships, and houses
were dissolved, but also Cities, People, Provinces, Nations, yea, and the whole
Roman Empire was utterly shaken, and put out of order. For when that profane
novelty of the Arrians, as a certain Bellona, and Furia were two heathen god
desses: the one was over war, the other was the mother of fury.
Bellona or Furia, had first captiuated the He means Constantius or Valens, or
both: who were Arrians both.
Emperor, and then brought all the Or principal Courtiers.
chiefest about him under new laws, it ceased not afterward to trouble and
disorder all things, private and public, facred and profane, and to have no
regard of that, which was good and true, but whomsoever it listed, to smite
them down, as from some place on high. Then were wives defiled, widows robbed,
Virgins deflowred, Monasteries demolished, Cleargy-men disturbed, Levites
beaten, Priests banished, prisons, gaoles and mines filled with the Antiquity
acknowledges men living to be Saints: and not dead men only, as some do,
Saints: the greatest part of whom being driven out of Cities forbidden to
them, and exiled, were even broken and consumed with nakedness, hunger, and
thirst, amongst deserts, dens, wild beasts and rocks. But all these things did
they for no other cause befall, but even because the superstitions of man's
inventions were taught for heavenly doctrine, because well-grounded antiquity
was vedermined by wicked nouelty, because the ordinances of the Elders were
violated, because the decrees of the Fathers were repealed, because the
determinations of the Ancient were disanulled, and for that the lust of profane
and vpstart curiosity contained not it self within the most Heretics break
from their teachers, exorbitate, and go an whoring after the idols of their
own brains.
chaste limits of sacred and vncorrupt Antiquity?

CHAP. 7.
But (it will be thought) perhaps we feign these things through hatred of
nouelty and love of Antiquity. Whosoever judges this, let him give credit at
the least to blessed Ambrose, who in his second book to the Emperor, Gratian,
himself bewailing the bitterness of the time, says: But now, almighty God,
quoth In sine cap. vlt.
he, we have been sufficiently punished by our own destruction and bloodshed
for the slaughters of the Confessors, the banishments of the Priests, and for
such wicked villainy. It is clear enough that they, which violated the faith,
cannot be safe. In like manner, in the third book of the same work: Let us,
therefore keep (says he) the commandments of the Elders, that we be not
bold through uncivil rashness to break the seals, that are hereditary.
Neither the Elders, nor the Power, nor the Angels, nor Archangels durst open
that sealed book of prophecy: the prerogative of explaning that Reu. 5. 3. 5.
was reserved for Christ alone. Which of us dares unseal the That is, the holy
Scriptures: so called, because it is given them to keep, and teach: I mean
Ministets, which book is then said to be unsealed in our Authors sense, when it
is violated and corrupted.
Sacerdoticall Book, sealed of Confessors, and consecrated now with the
martyrdom of many? which they, that have been compelled to unseal it, yet
afterward have sealed, when the fraud was condemned: they that durst not
violate it, were Confessors and Martyrs. How can we deny their faith, whose
victory we do extol? We praise them I say, O venerable Ambrose, we praise
them indeed, and praising we wonder at them. For who is he, that is so mad,
who though he be not able to overtake them, yet would not wish to follow, whom
no violence has driven from defending of the faith of the Elders? Not
threatenings, not flatterings, not life, not death, not the palace, not
Sergeants, not the Emperor, not the Empire, not men, not devils, Whom (I say)
the Lord, for their constant embracing of holy Antiquity, deemed meet for so
great an office, as by them to repair Churches ruinated, to quicken spiritual
people extinguished, to put on the Crowns of Priests, that were dejected, to
deface (a fountain of unfeigned tears being infused from heaven into the
Bishops) those wicked (I say) not letters, but litures (blots or dashes) of
novel impiety, and finally, to call back now almost all the world being
stricken with the tempest of sudden heresy: (I say to call it back) to the
ancient faith, from vp-start falsehood: unto ancient soundness, from furious
and unsound newness, and to the ancient light, from the blindness of nouelty.

CHAP. 8.
But in this certain Divine virtue of Confessions, that we are also even most
of all to mark, that then in the very Antiquity of the Church, they undertook
the defense, not of some part; but of the whole body. For it was not lawful for
me^ so great, and of such quality, to mantaine with so great contention and
endeavor, the straggling and selfe-thwarting conjectures of one or two, or to
strive for the rash consent of some little Province: but following the decrees
and determinations of Apostolic and Catholic truth, made by all the That
is, the Ministers of the Gospel: so called, because they did offer the people
to God, as a sacrifice: killing their flesh with the Word, as with a
sacrifycing Knife.
Priests of the holy Church, they choosed rather to betray themselves, then the
faith which was held of old universally. Whereby they obtained also so great a
degree of glory, as that they were rightly and worthily counted not Confessors
only, but the Principal of Confessors also. It behooves therefore all true
Catholics incessantly to meditate on this notable, and indeed divine ensample
of those same blessed men: who shining like the He alludes to the Candlestick
in Exodus 25.
seven headed Candlestick, with the seuenfold light of the holy Spirit, have
showed their posterity a most evident way, how the boldness of profane
nouelty may in all the vain bablings of errors be Or overthrown, quasht,
stayed, broken, c^nteratur.
hence forth cooled with the authority of sacred Antiquity.

CHAP. 9.
NEither is this a new thing truly: for this custom was always used in the
Church, that the more any man flourished in religion, the more ready he was to
withstand novel devices. The world is full of such examples. But, for breuity
sake, we will make choice of some one, and this especially from the
Apostolic Sea. In times past therefore Agrippinus, of venerable memory,
Bishop of Carthage, held rebaptization first of all men, against the Canon of
the Word, against the Rule of the Uniuersall Church, against the judgment of
all his Fellow-priests, against the Or against the custom and ordin ances
contra morem and instituta.
manner and customs of the Elders. The which presumption caused so great a
mischief, as that it ministered a form of sacrilege, not only to all
heretics, but gave occasion of error to some Catholics also. When as all
men therefore every where upon the nouelty of the thing cried out against it,
and all the Priests on every side, did every one endeavor to resist it, then
Pope Stephen, of happy memory, Bishop of the Apostolic See, with the rest of
his Fellows, but yet above the rest withstood it; deeming it, as I suppose, a
thing beseeming, if he did excel all the rest as much by devout affection to
the faith, as he did surpass them by the authority of place. Finally, in an
Epistle which was sent into Africa, the Apud Cypri. Lib. 2. Ep. 7.
said Stephen ordained in these words: That nothing should be renewed, but
that which is delivered. For that holy and wise man knew, that piety does
nothing else allow of, but that all things should with the same faithfulness
be retained for the Children, with the which they were received of the
Fathers, and that we ought to follow religion, not which way we would lead it,
but rather by that way it would lead us, and that that is the property of
Christian modesty and gravity for men not to deliver their own devices to
them, that so come after, but to keep the things received of their Elders.
What therefore was the issue then of all the matter? Surely what else, but
that, which was usual, and accustomed? Antiquity namely retained, and nouelty
exploded.

CHAP. 10.
But peradventure then that Object.
new devise was destitute of means to defend and bear it out. Yea verily,
there was for it so Ans.
great acutenes of wit, so great abundance of eloquence, so great a number of
maintainers, so great likelihood of truth, so many Oracles of Gods word, but
indeed after a new and naughty manner understood, that me thought all that
conspiracy could by no means be destroyed, unless that self same undertaken,
defended, and commended profession of nouelty, had forsaken the alone cause of
so great an enterprise.

To conclude, what force had that Affrican Council or Decree? Truly none,
through the gift of God: but all things were abolished, made void, and trodden
under foot, as dreams, as fables, as things superfluous.

CHAP. 11.
AND o the wonderful change of things! The Authors of the same opinion are
accounted Catholics: but the Followers are judged Heretics. The Masters
are absolved, the Scholars are condemned. The writers of the books shall be
the children of the Kingdom, but Hell shall receive the Defenders. For who
would doubt that most blessed Cyprian, the Light of all the Saints, both
Bishops and Martyrs, together with the rest of his fellows, shall reign
eternally with Christ? Or who on the contrary is so sacrilegious, as to deny
that the Donatists, and those other pestilent wretches, which do brag that
they rebaptize by the authority of that Council, shall burn for ever with the
Devil? Which judgment truly to me seems to be promulged of God, for their
craftiness especially, who when they go about to forge an heresy under
another bodies name, do commonly lay hold of the writings of some ancient man
something too covertly set out, which in respect of their darkness, do as it
were, serve for their own opinion: that that, which, I know not what, they do
bring forth, they may seem to think, neither first, nor all-alone. Whose
wickedness I judge worthy double hatred: either therefore, because they are not
afraid to proffer the poison of heresy unto others: or therefore also, because
they do with a wicked hand blow up, and winnow the memory of every holy man,
like ashes now raked up, and diffame those things with a revived opinion, which
ought in silence to be buried; altogether following the foote-steps of their
father Cham, who not only neglected to cover the nakedness of venerable Noah,
but told it also to the rest, that it might be mocked. Whereby he did so
grievously sin against child-like piety, as that his very posterity became
obnoxious to the curses of his sin: those brethren being blessed, and far
unlike, who would neither distaine the nakedness of their reverend father with
their own eyes, nor have it lie open unto other men's, but covered him, as it
is written, with their faces backward: which is neither to approve, nor
disclose Genesis 9.
the error of the holy man: and therefore are they blessed in their posterity.
But let us return unto our purpose.

CHAP. 12.
WE should therefore greatly fear the grievous sin of changing the By faith
is not meant, the gift of faith, but the doctrine: not by which, but which we
do believe.
Faith, and of stairing Religion: from the which wickedness we are deterred,
not only by the discipline of Ecclesiastical Constitution, but also by the
censure of Apostolical authority. For all men know how gravely, how severely,
and how earnestly the blessed Gal. 1.
Apostle Paul inueigheth against some, that were too soon through their own
lightness, translated from him, who had called them to the grace of Christ,
unto another Gospel, which is not another: who had heaped to themselves
Teachers after their own 2. Tim. 4.
desires, turning their ears from the truth, and turning themselves to fables,
having damnation, 1. Tim. 5.
because they have broken the first faith. Who were by them deceived, of whom
the same Apostle writes to the Roman brethren: Now I beseech you Romans 16. 17
brethren, mark them, that cause dissentions and offenses otherwise then the
doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. For such serve not the Lord
Christ, but their own belly: and by fair speeches, and flattering seduce the
hearts of the simple: which enter into houses, and lead captive 2. Tim. 3. 6.
silly women laden with sins and led with sundry lusts, ever learning, and
never coming to the knowledge of the truth, Tit. 1. 10. 11
Uaine-talkers, and Seducers, which subvert whole houses, teaching things which
they should not, for filthy Lucre sake. Men of corrupt minds 2. Tim. 3. 8.
Reprobate concerning the faith: proud, and knowing nothing: but 1. Tim. 6. 4, ^
doting about questions, and strife of words, destitute of the truth, imagining
that gain is godliness. Likewise also being idle 1. Tim. 5. 13
they learn to go about from house to house, yea they are also bablers, and
busibodies, speaking things, they ought not. Who 1. Tim. 1. 19
repelling a good conscience, as concerning faith, have made ship-wracke. Whose
profane bablings further much unto impiety, and their 2. Tim. 2. 17
word fretteth like a canker. And it fitteth well which is also written of
them: 2 Timothy 3. 9
But they shall prevail no further: for their madness shall be manifest unto
all, as theirs also was. When therefore some such wandering up and down
Countries and Cities, and carrying about their He alludes to Pedlars that go up
and down to sell their Wares.
Pedlary errors, had come also to the Galatians: and when as the Galatians
having heard the^, being now affected with a certain loathing of the truth,
and casting up the Manna of Apostolic and Catholic doctrine, delighted
themselves in the filthiness of heretical nouelty, the Apostle did so
exercise his Apostolical authority, as that with all severity he did decree:
But though either we (says he) or an Angel from Gal. 1. 8.
Heaven preach unto you otherwise then we have preached, let him be accursed.
What is that which he says, But though we? Why does he not rather say, But
Quest.
though I? The meaning hereof Answer.
is this: Though Peter, though Andrew, though John: Lastly, though the whole
company of Apostles should preach to you otherwise, then we have preached, Let
him be accursed. A terrible Curse, that to maintain the constant embracing of
the first He means not Faith, whereby we do believe, but which we do believe,
that is, the doctrine of Faith, which was once for ever delivered to the
Saints, as in Iud. 3.
faith, he neither spared himself, nor the rest of his Fellowapostles. Yet
this is but little, Although (says he) an Angel should from heaven preach
unto you, otherwise then we have preached, let him be accursed. It sufficed
not for the keeping of the faith, once delivered to have mentioned the nature
of Man, unless he had comprehended also the excellency of Angels. Though We
(says he) or an Angel from heaven. Not because the holy and heavenly Angels
can now offend: but this is his meaning: If also (says he) that should be,
which cannot be, Whosoever he be, that shall assay to change the faith, that
was once delivered, let him be accursed.

CHAP. 13.
But he spoke, it may be, Object.
these things without due regard, and uttered them in an humane passion rather,
the^ decreed them with Divine reason. Far be it from him, for he goes on,
and presses Sol.
this same point with a very earnest repetition: As we have Gal. 1. ^.
said before, quoth he, so say I now again, If any preach unto you otherwise,
then that ye have received, let him be accursed. He said not: If any preach
unto you besides that which ye have received, let him be blessed, praised and
entertained: but let him be, quoth he, accursed, that is separated, put from
the flock and excluded, least the cursed contagion of one Sheep should corrupt
the harmless flock of Christ, by a Or infectious, contagious.
venomous mixture with them. Yea, but perhaps these precepts belong only to the
Galatians. Then these Object.
things also are commanded to Sol.
the Galatians only, which are mentioned in the same Epistle after: such as
are these; If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit, let us
not be desirous of Gal 2. 25. 26.
vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another: and the rest. Which
if it be against sense, and if they be commanded unto all alike, it stands
with good reason that, as these commandments concerning manners, so those also
concerning faith should equally belong to all.

CHAP. 14.
ANd as no man may provoke, or envy one another, so no man may receive ought
besides that, which the Catholic Church does always preach. or else perhaps
Object.
it was at that time enjoined: that if any did preach otherwise, then was
already preached, he should be accursed: but not at this time there is no
such commandment. Then that also, which he likewise Sol:
speaks in the same Epistle, And I say, walk in the Spirit, and Gal. 5. 16.
ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh, was at that time only commanded,
and is not now enjoined. But if it be both impious and pernicious so to think,
it does necessarily follow that, as these things ought to be observed of all
ages, so those things which are decreed concerning the keeping of the faith
without alteration, are commanded also to all ages. To preach any thing
therefore to Christian There are now two sorts of Catholics, Christian, and
Antichristian, the former are real, the other (as the Jesuits) are nominall
and titular.
Catholics besides that, which they have received, was never lawful, is no
where lawful, and never shall be lawful: and to accurse them, which preach
any thing besides that, which was once received, has been ever behoouefull,
is every where behoouefull, and shall always be behoouefull: Which things
seeing they thus stand, is there any man either so bold, as to preach
otherwise, then has been preached in the Church, or so light as to receive
otherwise, then that he has received of the Church? Let him cry, and cry
again, and again, let him in his letters cry both unto all, and always, and
every where, He alludeth to that in Act. 9. 15.
even that vessel of election, that teacher of the Gentiles, that Apostolic
Trumpet, that Preacher of Men, and who knew the will of God, That if any one
preach a new doctrine he shall be accursed, On the contrary also certain
Frogs, and Gnats, and Flies, that shall perish, such as are the Pelagians, cry
out against him, and that unto Catholics. We, say they, being Authors,
Leaders, and interpreters, Condemn ye those things, which ye did hold, hold
ye those things, which ye did condemn, Reject ye the ancient faith, the
Fathers ordinances, and those things which the Elders have committed to your
trust and Receive ye, What things I pray you? I tremble to speak them: for
they are so insolent, that me thinks they This he says to show the
abhominablenes of their errors.
cannot be without some vile offense affirmed, no nor intruth so much as
refelled.

CHAP. 15.
But some man will say. Wherefore then does God Quest.
very often suffer certain excellent persons in the Church to broach new
matters unto Catholics? It is a good question, and worthy to be diligently and
Ans.
largely answered. Which yet we must make answer to, not of our own head, but
by the authority of Gods word, and by the instruction of an Ecclesiastical
Teacher. Let us therefore hear holy Moses, and let him teach us, wherefore
learned men, and such as by reason of the grace of knowledge be called also
Prophets of the Apostle, are sometimes permitted to publish new doctrines,
which the old Testament uses allegorically to call Strange Gods; to wit,
because Heretics worship their own opinions, as the Gentiles do their gods.
Blessed Moses therefore in Deuteronomy writes; Deuteronomy. 13. 1. 2'
If there arise among you a Prophet, or which says he has seen a vision:
that is to say, a Teacher constituted in the Church, who is thought of his
Scholars and Hearers to teach by some revelation. What follows? And shall
give thee a Sign or Wonder, and the Sign or Wonder, which he has spoken of
shall come to pass. Doubtless some great, I know not what, Teacher is
understood, and endued with such knowledge, as who may seem to his own
followers not only to know things, that are within the reach of man, but also
to foreknow things, which are above him, such almost as Ualentinus, Donatus,
Photinus, Appollinaris, and the rest of that rabble, were by their Disciples
crakt of to have been. But what follows, And shall say, quoth Moses? unto
thee, Deuteronomy. 13. 2.
Let us go and follow after other gods, which thou know not, and let us
serve them. What are those strange Gods but strange errors, which thou have
not known, that is to say, new, and not-heard-of? And let us serve them, that
is, let us believe the^, follow the^. But what says he last of all? Deuteronomy. 13.
3.
Thou shall not hearken, quoth he, unto that Prophet, or dreamer of dreams,
And why, I pray thee, does not God Or inhibit, hinder, let.
prohibit that to be taught, which he does forbid to be received? Because,
says he, the Lord your God proves you, that it might appear whether you
love the Lord your God, withal your heart, and withal your soul. The reason
is cleerer then the light, why the providence of God does sometimes suffer
certain Teachers of the Churches to broach some new doctrines: that the Lord
your God, quoth he, might try ye. And indeed it is no small temptation, when
as he, whom thou countest a Prophet, the Disciple of the Prophets, and a
teacher and defender of the truth, and whom thou do exceedingly reverence and
love, Shall on the sudden closely bring in some hurtful errors, which thou
art neither able quickly to perceive, as long as thou art led by a fore-stalled
judgment, concerning his old maisterlike authority: neither do thou easily
think it lawful, to condemn them, whilst thou art hindered by thine affection
toward thine ancient Master Or teacher.
.

CHAP. 16.
HEre some man may, perhaps desire that those things, which are in the words of
holy Moses affirmed, may be by some Ecclesiastical Ensamples cleared. The
desire is just, and not long to be put off. For that we may begin with the
nearest, and those, that are manifest: what a temptation was that of late
suppose we, when as that wretch Nestorius, being suddenly turned from a Sheep
to a Wolf, had begun to rend the Flock of Christ? At False teachers are
called Wolves, because they bite and devour the Sheep of Christ with their
wicked errors: and like Wolves they are not of the Sheepeheards feeding, but
his foes.
which time the very same persons, whom he did tear: for a great part of them
as yet did verily think him to be a sheep, and therefore lay the more open to
his teeth. For who would easily imagine him to err, whom he saw chosen with
such judgment of the Empire, and so highly favored of the Priests? Who being
continually honored with the great love of the Saints, and very great good
will of the people, did openly preach the word of God, and confute also the
hurtful errors of Jews, and Gentiles. By the which means I pray you, would
he not perssade any man that hid doctrines, preaching, and judgment were
right and sound? Who to make way for his one heresy inueighed against the
blasphemies of all heresies. But this was that, which Moses says; The Lord
your God proves you, whether ye love him or no. And that we may pass by
Nestorius, in whom there was always more wonderment then profit, and more
fame then experience: whom the favor of men, rather then of God, had for a
while advanced in the opinion of the common people: let us rather speak of
those, who having profited well and being full of industry became no small
temptation to Catholic men.

As in Hungary, in the memory of our Ancesters He was Bishop of the Sirmitan
Church: But a Galatian borne: skillful in the Greek and Latin tongues: he
fostered a blasphemous error against Christ: and being a man of good parts
otherwise, overthrew himself with pride, (a moath that frets the cushion in
which it bred) as some Ancients say.
Photinus is said to have tempted the Church of Sirmion. Where whe^as with the
great liking of al me^ he was called unto the priesthood, and had executed his
office for a time, like a Catholic, suddenly, like that evil Prophet, or
Dreamer, which Moses speaks of, he began to persuade the people of God,
committed to his trust, to follow after strange gods, that is to say, strange
errors, which before they knew not. But this is usual, and that dangerous,
because he was furnished with no mean helps to so great a wickedness. For
he had a good wit, and he was an excellent Scholar, and very eloquent, or
powerful in speech; able in both languages to dispute and write eloquently and
substantially: as appears by the monuments of his books, which he has
written, partly in Greek, and partly in Latin. But it was well, that the
Sheep of Christ committed to him, being very watchful and wary for the
Catholic Faith, had quick regard to the words of Moses, who did forewarne
them, and that, although they did admire the eloquence of their Prophet and
Pastor, yet notwithstanding, they were not ignorant of the temptation. For who^
before they followed as the Such an one is every godly and orthodoxall Bishop,
and Pastor: who goes before his fellows the Sheep of Christ in life and
doctrine, ringging the word of God in their ears: and being at the control of
the chief Shepherd, as well as the meanest in the flock.
Bel-weather of the Flock, even him they fled from afterward, as from a
Wolf, Neither do we come to know the peril of this Ecclesiastical
temptation by the example of Photinus, but of Apollinaris also, and are thereby
also admonished to the more diligent keeping of the faith, which is to be kept.
For he made his hearers to have much a do, and brought them into great
straites. For whereas the authority of the Church drew them one way, the
custom or conversation and acquaintance of their Master drew them back
another way: and so wagging, and wavering betwixt both, they see not which way
they should rather choose. But it may be he was a man, that might easily be
contemned. Yea verily, he was so worthy a man, and so qualified, as that he
might in the most things be too soon believed. For who surpast him in acutenes
of wit, practice, and in Schollership? How many heresies he has ouerthrown in
many volumes, how many errors contrary to the faith he has confuted, that
most excellent and very huge work, consisting of no less then thirty books,
does witness, wherein he has with a great mass of arguments confounded the
furious cauils of Porphiry. It is too long to recko^ up all his works, for the
which he might intruth be matched, with the chiefest builders of the Church,
had he not through that wicked lust of heretical Humility is the nurse of
verity, pride and curiosity be the founders of heresy.
curiosity found out what nouelty I wot not, by the which he might both defile
all his labors, as with the mixture of a certain leprosy, and should have
his doctrine said to be not so much an edification, as an Ecclesiastical
tentation. Here perhaps some may require at my hands, that I would show them
the heresies of these men, of whom we spoke before; to wit, Nestorius,
Apollinaris, and Photinus. But this is nothing to the matter; which now we are
in hand with. For our purpose is not to set down the errors of all, but to
show the examples of a few, whereby that may evidently and plainly be cleared,
which Moses speaks: Namely that, if at any time any Ecclesiastical Teacher,
and he a Prophet by reason of interpreting the mysteries of the Prophets, shall
attempt to bring in some new point of doctrine into the Church of God, the
Divine providence does suffer it to be done, that We might be proved.

CHAP. 17.
IT will not therefore be amise by way of digression briefly to show the
opinions of the forenamed heretics, that is, Photinus, Apollinaris, and
Nestorius. This is then the doctrine of Photinus: that God is single and alone,
and to be confessed after a Judicial manner: he says that there are not full
three persons, neither does he think, that there is any person of the Christ
is called the Word: because he is begotten of the Father, as words are of the
mind: and because he shows his Fathers mind unto us.
Word or Son of God, or any of the Holy Ghost: he does also say that Christ is
a mere man only, to whom he ascribes a beginning from Mary: and this he
teaches by all means for a doctrine, That we ought to worship only, the
person of God the Father, and only Christ the Man. These things therefore held
Photinus. Apollinaris also does as it were glory that he does consent unto the
unity truly of the Trinity, and that with perfect soundnes of faith: but he
does by open profession blaspheme against the Incarnation of the Lord. For he
says, that the soul of a man was either not at all in the flesh of our
Savior, or else surely that there was such a one, as wanted understanding and
reason. Yea and he said, that the very flesh of our Lord was not of the flesh
of the holy Virgin Mary, but that it came down from heaven into the Virgin:
and always staggering and doubting, he said sometimes that it was coeternall
with the God, the Word, sometimes that it was made of the Divinity of the Word.
For he would not that two substances should be in Christ, one Divine, and
another Humane, one of a father, the other of a mother: but he immagined that
the nature of the Word was divided, as though a part thereof remained in God,
and the other had been turned into the flesh: that, whereas the truth says,
that of two substances there is one Christ, he being opposite to the truth
might affirm that of one Divinity of Christ, there are two substances. These
then are the errors of Apollinaris.

Now Nestorius being sick of a contrary disease to Apollinaris, whiles he
makes fare, as if he did distinguish two substances in Christ, all on the
sudden he brings in two persons: and with incredible wickedness will have two
Sons of God, two Christ's: One of them God, the other Man: one that is begotten
of a Father, the other generated of a Mother: and therefore he does affirm
that holy Mary is not to be called the Non The^t ocos^sed Christoto^os.
Mother of God, but the Mother of Christ: to wit, because of her came not
Christ, who is God, but he, which was man. If so be that any man think, that
he says in his letters, that Christ is one, and that he speaks of one person
of Christ, let him not easily give credit to him. For either he has devised
this shift through his skill to deceive, that by good things he might the more
easily persuade men also unto evil: as the Apostle says: It wrought death
Romans 7. 13.
unto me by that, which was good. Either therefore (as we said before) to the
end that he might deceive, he does in some places of his writings glory that
he does believe on Christ, and one person of Christ: or else surely he says
that two persons now after the Virgins deliverance did so meet and knit in one
Christ, that yet he holds there were two Christ's at the time of her conceptio^
or delivering, and a little afterward. And whereas intruth Christ was at the
first borne an Lo the fond conceit of this heretic! The Colt ruins if he have
the reins.
ordinary and mere man, and not yet partaker of the unity of the person of God
the Word, afterward the person of the Word assuming him descended into him.
And although now being assumed he do remain in the glory of God, yet it seems
to him that for some space there was no difference betwixt him, and other me^.

CHAP. 18.
THese things therefore Nestorius, Apollinaris, and Photinus like Not rage but
zeal makes him thus to speak. A dog will bawle and bite: a mad dog will not
stick to bite his master, and that which he should not; and such are false
teachers.
mad dogs do bark against the Catholic faith; Photinus by not confessing
the Trinity: Appollinaris in saying that the nature of the Word is conuertible,
and not acknowledging two substances in Christ, and by denying either the whole
soul of Christ, or at the least, the mind and reason in the soul, and by
affirming that the Word of God was in stead thereof: and Nestorius, by
auouching either that there are always two Christ's, or that there were two
some while. But the Catholic Church judging rightly both of God and of our
Savior, blasphemeth neither against the mystery of the Trinity, nor against
the Incarnation of Christ. For it worshippeth both one Divinity in a perfect
Trinity, and the equality of the Trinity in one and the same Majesty, and
acknowledges one Jesus Christ, not two, and that same is both God and Man. It
believes indeed that there is one person In him, but two substances: it
believes there are two substances, but one person; two substances, because,
the Word of God is not changeable, that it should be turned into flesh: and one
person, least by professing two Sons, it may seem to worship a Quaternity (or
Four) and not a Trinity, or Three.

CHAP. 19.
But it is worth our labor to lay open this point with diligence more
distinctly, and more plainly. In God there is one substance, but three persons.
In Christ there be two substances, but one person. In the Trinity there is
Alius and alius, non aliud and aliud.
distinction of persons, but no diversity of nature. In our Savior there is
diversity of nature, but no difference of person. How is there Quest.
in the Trinity distinction of persons, but no difference of nature? Namely,
because there is Ans.
one person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the holy Ghost:
but yet the nature of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, is
not diverse, but one and the same. How is there in our Savior Quest.
difference of natures, but not of person? Surely because there is one
substance of the Divinity, and Ans.
another of the Humanity: but yet the Godhead and Manhead are not two persons,
but one and the same Christ, one and the same Son of God, and one and the
same person of one and the same Christ, and Son of God. As in a man the Flesh
is one nature, and the Soul another: but the soul and the flesh is one and
the same man. In Peter and Paul the soul is one nature, and the flesh another:
but yet the flesh and soul are not two Peter's, neither is the soul one Paul,
and the flesh another Paul; but one and the same Peter, and one and the same
Paul, subsisting of the double and diverse nature of the soul and of the body.
So then in one and the same Christ there are two substances: but one is divine,
the other is humane: one of the Father God, the other of the Mother, the
Virgin: one coeternall and equal to the Father, the other consubstantiall to
the Mother: yet one and the same Christ, in both the substance. There is not
therefore one Christ God, and another Man: not one uncreated, and another
created: not one that cannot suffer, and another, that can suffer: not one
equal to the Father, another lesser then the Father, another of the mother: But
one and the same Christ is God and Man: the same is uncreated, and created: the
same could not be changed, and could not suffer, the same was changed, and did
suffer: the same is equal to the Father, and inferior: the same was begotten
of the Father before time, and the same is borne of his Mother in time: perfect
God, and perfect Man: in God is the sovereign Divinity, in Man the whole
Humanity: I say the whole Humanity, which comprehends both the Soul and the
Flesh: yea true flesh, our flesh, and the mothers flesh: a soul also endued
with understanding, furnished with judgment and reason. There is therefore in
Christ, the Word, a Soul, and Flesh: but all this is one Christ, one Son of
God, and one Savior and Redeemer of us. And one, not by I wot not what
corruptible confusion of the Godhead and Man-head, but by a certain entire
and singular unity of person. For that conjunction does not convert and change
the one into the other (which is an error proper to the Arrians) but has so
conjoined both the natures in one, that the singularity, or unity of one and
the same person abiding always in Christ the property of either nature
remains also for ever: so that verily the body does never at any time begin
to be God, nor cease at any time to be a body: which is also made manifest by
an example of an humane case. For neither for the present only, but for the
future also, every man shall consist of body and soul: yet neither shall the
body ever be changed into the soul, or the soul into the body: but every man
being to continue ever, the difference of both the substances shall continue
for ever in every man: even so in Christ also the property of both the
substances is to be retained of them both for ever, but yet the unity of the
person being preserved safe.

CHAP. 20.
But whereas we do often name this word Person, and say that God in person
was made man, we must greatly fear, that we do not seem to say this, That
God the word did only by the resemblance of action take upon him those things,
that appertain to us, and that he wrought whatsoever belonged to the
conversation of a man, as it were in show, and not as a true Man: as is wont to
be done on the stages, where one man does suddenly represent many persons, of
the which himself is none. For as often as there is made a resemblance of
another man's action, the duties and deeds of others are so done, as that yet
these men, that act them, are not the very same men, whom they do act, or
counterfeit. For, that we may for illustration sake use the ensamples of things
secular, and which are used of the Manichees, whenas a Tragical Player does
counterfeit a Priest, or a King, he is neither a Priest, nor a King: for the
action ceasing, those things also cease together, which that person had
represented.

But from us far be this cursed and wicked mockery. Let this madness be the
Manichees, who being fantastical Preachers, affirm that the Son of God,
who is God, was not a man truly and substancially, but that he resembled man
by a certain imaginary act and conversation. But the Catholic faith does so
say that the Word of God was made Man, that he took upon him our nature and
properties, not deceitfully, and in show, but truly, and lively: and that he
did not resemble those things, which belong to the nature of man, as not his
own, but that he did sustain them rather, as being his own: and that he
was altogether also the very thing, which he did resemble. Even as we our
selves also in that we speak, understand, live, and subsist, we do not
represent men, but we are men. For neither Peter and John (that we may
especially speak of them) were men by imitating, but by subsisting. In like
manner Paul did not counterfeit an Apostle, or resemble Paul: but he was an
Apostle, and Paul indeed: Even so also God the Word by assuming and having the
flesh, and by speaking, doing, and suffering by the flesh, yet without any
corruption of his nature, vouchsafed verily to perform this, that he might
not resemble or counterfeit a perfect man, but exhibit, that he might not
seem, or be thought to be a true man, but that he might subsist, and be one
indeed. Therefore as the soul united to the flesh, but yet not turned into
flesh, does not resemble a man, but is a man, and is a man not in show, but in
substance: so also the Word God by uniting himself unto man without any
conversion of himself was made man not by confusion, not by imitation, but by
subsisting. Let us therefore utterly reject all conceit of that person, which
is usurped by counterfeiting, and resembling: where always one thing is, and
another thing is counterfeited: where he that does act or represent, is never
he whom he does act. For far be it from us to think, that God the Word has
taken upon him the person of man in this deceiptfull manner: but rather so, as
that his substance continuing unchangeable, and by taking upon him the nature
of a perfect man, he might himself be flesh, a man, the person of a man: not
counterfeit, but true: not by resemblance, but in substance. To conclude, not
such a one as cease with the action, or representatio^, but which always
abides in the substance. This unity therefore of person in Christ, was not
made and perfected after the Virgin had brought him forth, but in the very
womb of the Uirgin.

CHAP. 21.
FOr we must be very wary that we do confess, that Christ not only is one:
but also that he was always one: because it is intolerable blasphemy, though
thou should grant him to be one (person) now, yet to avouch that he was
sometime not one, but two; to wit, one after the time of his Baptism, but two
at the time of his Birth. Which exceeding great sacrilege surely we shall not
be able otherwise to avoid, but by confessing that man was united to God in the
unity of person, not at his ascension, or resurrection, or Baptism: but even
now in his mother, even in the womb, yea, even in the very conception of the
Virgin: by reason of which unity of person those things, that are proper unto
God, are indifferently and in common given to him being man, and those things,
that are proper to the flesh, are ascribed unto God. For thence it is that the
holy Scriptures say, both that the Son of Man came down from heaven, and
that the Lord of glory was crucified upon earth. Thence also it is that,
because the flesh of the Lord was made, because the flesh of the Lord was
created, the very word of God is said to be made, the wisdom of God is said
to be filled, the Or thus, and is according to knowledge said to be created:
even as in, etc
Science or knowledge of God is said to be created: even as in respect of
foreknowledge his hands and his Psalm. 22. 16.
feet are said to be peirced. In regard, I say, of this unity of person that
also has by reason of the like mystery proceeded, that because the Flesh of
the word was borne of his Uirgin-mother, that therefore God the word himself
should be most catholickly believed to be borne of the Virgin, and most
wickedly denied. Which things seeing they thus are, God forbid that any man
should go about to deprive holy Mary of the privileges of divine favor, as a
special glory. For she is through a certain singular benefit of our Lord and
God, and her own Son, to be most truly and most happily confessed the Dei
non Deitatis: of God, not of the God head: for so he had no mother.
Mother of God. But she is not so the mother of God, as a certain wicked
heresy surmiseth, which affirms that she is to be said to be the mother of
God in name only, as who forsooth did bring forth that man, which was
afterward made God; as we call one the mother of a Priest, or the mother of a
Bishop, not because she did bring forth one, that was at his very birth a
Priest or Bishop, but for that she brought one forth, that was afterward made
a Priest or Bishop. She was holy not by generation, but by regeneration: her
Son, that took flesh of her, gave grace to her.
Holy Mary is not, I say, so to be called the mother of God: but therefore
rather, because, as has been said before, that holy mystery was accomplished
even in her sacred womb, since by reason of a certain singular and
individual unity of person, as the Word in the flesh is flesh, so man in God
is God.

CHAP. 22.
But now according to those things, which have been briefly said before
concerning the foresaid heresies, and the Catholic faith; let us for the
refreshing of memory make a briefer and shorter rehearsal: to the end verily,
both that being repeated they might be better understood, and that being
pressed they might more surely be remembered. Accursed therefore be Photinus for
not acknowledging three distinct persons, and for affirming Christ to be no
more then a bare man. Accursed be Apollinaris, that affirms the corruption of
the Divinity changed in Christ, and denies the property of a perfect manhead.
Accursed be Nestorius, which denies that God was borne of the Virgin, and
affirms there are two Christ's, and rejecting the faith of the Trinity,
brings in amongst us a quaternity. But blessed be the Catholic Church,
which worshippeth one God in a perfect Trinity, and the equality also of the
Trinity in one Divinity: so as that neither the singularity of the substance
confounds the property of the persons nor the distinction of the Trinity
separate the unity of the Deity. Blessed, I say, be the Church, which
believes that there are two true and perfect substances in Christ, but yet one
person of Christ: so that neither the distinction of the natures divides the
unity of the person, nor the unity of the person confounds the difference of
the substances. Blessed, I say, be the Church, which that it might acknowledge
that Christ both is and was ever one, confesses that man was united to God,
not after his birth, but now even in the mothers womb. Blessed, I say, be the
Church, which understands that God was made man, not by the conversion of
nature, but in regard of person; person, I say, not counterfeit and transient,
but substantial and permanent. I say, blessed be the Church, which affirms
that this unity of person is so effectual, as that by reason thereof the
things of God are by a wonderful and unspeakable mystery ascribed unto man,
and the things of man ascribed unto God. For, because of that unity it does
not deny that man descended from heaven in respect of the Godhead, and has
believed, that God was made upon earth, that he suffered, and was crucified in
regard of the Manhead. To conclude, by reason of that unity she does
acknowledge Man to be the Son of God, and God to be the Son of the Virgin.
Holy therefore and venerable, blessed and inviolable, and to that celestial
praising, performed of the Angels, altogether comparable be this confession,
which glorifies God with a threefold sanctification. For therefore it does
especially Or preach.
tell and glory of the unity of Christ, least the mystery of the Trinity
should exceed. Be these things spoken by way of digressing, else where (if God
shall please) they are more largely to be treated of, and unfolded. Let us now
return unto our purpose.

CHAP. 23.
WE said therefore before, that in the Church of God the Teachers error was
the peoples temptation: and that the tentation was so much the greater, by how
the the learneder he was, that did err. Which we taught first by the authority
of Scripture, and then by Ecclesiastical examples; to wit, by reckoning up
them, that though they were for a time accounted sound in the faith, yet at the
last did either fall into the sect of some other, or else devised an heresy of
their own. A matter doubtless of great moment, and both commodious to learn,
and necessary to be thought of and remembered, the which we ought diligently to
illustrate and inculcate with the multitude of ensamples: that all Catholics
for the most part may know, That they ought with the Church to receive
teachers, and not that they should with teachers forsake the faith, that the
Church embraces.

But in my conceit, though we might reckon up a number in this kind of
tempting, yet was there almost none, that was so great a temptation, as was
Origin: in whom there were many things so excellent, so singular, and so
admirable, that any man might easily judge At the first sight, before matters
were scanned.
at first that all his assertions were to be believed. For if the life does win
authority, his industry, his chastity, patience and sufferance was not small:
if either kindred or learning, Who more noble then he, who at the first was
borne in that He was the son of Leonides, who dyed a Martyr under Seuerus.
family, which was made illustrious by Martyrdom? And afterward having for
Christ lost not his father only, but all his substance also, he did profit so
much within the straites of holy poverty, he did often, as they say, sustain
afflictions for confessing the For his fathers goods were consiscated to
Seuerus. He calls his poverty Holy: because it befell him by tyranny for religion
sake.
Lord. Neither indeed were these things only in him, all which might
afterward prove a tentation: but he had also such a notable wit, so profound,
so acute, and so fine, that he did much and far surpass almost all: and so
great was the skill of this notable man in all knowledge and learning, as that
there were but few things in divine philosophy, and of humane it may be almost
none, which he did not thoroughly understand. Who when he had atteined to the
learning Cuius scientiae um Graeel encederent.
of the Greeks, he gave himself, also to the study of the Hebrew.

But why should I speak of eloquence? whose speech was so pleasant, so
delectable, and so sweet, that not words me thinks so much, as honey seemed to
flow out of his mouth. What incredible things did he bolt out and clear by the
force of disputation? What things seeming hard to be done, did not he make that
they should seem most easy? But he woue Object.
his assertions, it may be, only with the knots of arguments. Yea doubtless
there was never Sol.
any Teacher, which used more examples or proofs of holy writ. But he wrote, I
believe, Object.
but little. No man writ more: Sol.
that I think all his works cannot only not be read over, but indeed not so
much as found. And who also, that he might not want any help to knowledge, was
furnished with ripeness of age. But perhaps he Object.
was not very happy in Disciples. Who ever more happy? For out of his bosom
sprang innumerable Teachers, an infinity of Priests, Confessors and Martyers.
And now what man is able to conceive in what admiration, in what renown and
grace he was in with all men? What man a little more devout then ordinary did
not with speed resort unto him from the farthest quarters of the world? What
Christian did not reverence him almost as a Prophet, what Philosopher honored
him not as a Master? And how reverend he was accounted, not only among
private men, but even of the chiefest in the Empire, the Stories do declare,
which say that he was sent for by the Mammaa.
mother of Alexander the Emperor, intruth because of heavenly wisdom, which
also he did much affect and love. But the epistles also of the same man bear
witness, which he wrote by the authority of Christian Teacher to Emperor Philip,
who was the first Christian of all the Roman Princes. Concerning whose
incredible knowledge, if any man believe not a Christian testimony, we being
the relators, let him at the lest receive a Pagan confession, the Philosophers
being the witnesses. For that wicked Porphicie says that being moved with his
fame, he went, being in a manner but a boy, to Alexandria, and that he saw him
there being now an old man: but indeed so notably qualified, as one that had
attained to the height of all learning. The day would sooner fail me, then I
shall be able to touch even the smallest part of those excellent things, which
were in that man: which notwithstanding did not only perteine to the glory of
religion, but also to the greatness of temptation. For what man among a
thousand would easily cast off from him a man of such an excellent wit, so
great a scholar, and of so great account, and not rather use that sentence, So
Cicero of Plato l. 1. Tusc. quaest.
That he had rather err with Origin, then judge truly with other men? But what
should I make many words? It so fell out, that not some humane, but (as the
event declared) a too dangerous temptation made by so great a person, so great
a Teacher, so great a Prophet, did draw very many from the soundness of the
Faith. Wherefore this Origin so great and so well qualified, whiles he does
insolently abuse the grace of God, whiles he makes too much of his own wit, and
thinks so well of himself, whiles he conte^neth the ancient simplicity of
Christian religion, whiles he presumes he is wiser then all men, and whiles
that contemning the traditions of the Church, and the He means their
authority.
maisterships of the Elders he does after a new manner expound certain places
of the Scriptures, he has deserved that it should be said unto the Church of
God concerning him also; If there arise among you a Prophet. And a little
after, Deuteronomy. 13. 1.
Thou shall not, quoth he, listen to the words of that Prophet. And again,
Because the Lord your God, says he, tries you, whether ye will love him, or
no. It was indeed not only a temptation, but even a great temptation to remove
the Church, being Or committed, delivered, addicted, bent.
given unto him, and depending upon him, and through wondering at his wit,
learning, eloquence, conversation and reputation suspecting him not, nor
fearing him (to remove the Church, I say) all upon the sudden by little and
little from the ancient Religion to novel profaneness.

But some man will say that the books of Origin S. Jerome thinks not so: vide
Epis. ad Panimachium, et Oceanum.
are corrupted. I gain say it not, but had rather too it were so. For that is
both delivered and written of some, not only Catholics, but also Heretics.
But that is it, which now we are to mark, that although he himself be not,
yet the books, which are publiked under his name, are a great temptation,
which being pestered with many wounds of blasphemies are both read and
embraced, not as other men's, but as his own: so that although Origin did not
conceive the error, yet Origens authority may seem powerful to persuade the
error.

CHAP. 24.
But Tertullians condition also is even the same. For as he among the Greeks,
so this man among the Latins is without doubt to be reputed the chiefest of
all our men. For who more learned then this man? who more exercised in
divinity, and in humanity? For verily he did with a certain admirable capacity
of understanding, understand and compass al Philosophy, and all the sects of
the Philosophers, the authors and abettours of the sects, and all their
doctrines, and all manner of stories and studies. And did he not excel for a
wit so grave and vehement, as that he propounded almost nothing to himself to
vanquish, which he did not either break into with acuteness, or strike out
with weightinesse.

Moreover, who can express the praises of his speech? which was replenished
with such, I wot not what, urgent arguments, as that whom he could not
persuade, he forced to consent unto him: whose sentences were almost as many as
words: and as many victories as Or conceits and opinions. sensus.
reasons. This knew the Martionists, Apelles, the Praxeans, Hermogenes, the
Jews, Gentiles, Gnostickes, and the rest, whose blasphemies he overthrew with
his manifold and great volumes, as with certain lightenings. And yet this man
also, I say, this Tertullian being unmindful of the Catholic doctrine, that
is, the universal and ancient faith, and much more eloquent, the^ happy,
changing his judgment afterward wrought that at last, which the blessed
Confessor Hilarie writes of him in a certain place; By the error (quoth he)
which he fell afterward into, he made the works, which he wrote well, to
loose their reputation. And he himself was also a great temptation in the
Church. But of him I will say no more. This thing I will only mention, that,
because he did against the commandment of Moses affirm that the new
braine-sicke doctrines of Montanus arising in the Church, and that those mad
conceits of He means Priscilla, and Maximil a, two Montanists.
mad women, even the dreams of an vpstart doctrine, were true prophecies, he
did deserve that it should be said of him also and of his writings; If a
Prophet shall arise among you. And again. Thou shall not hear the words of
that Prophet. Why so? Because, says he, the Lord your God tries you, Deuteronomy.
13. 3.
whether you will love him, or not. By these therefore so many, and so great
examples in the Church, and by the rest of that nature, we ought evidently to
mark, and to know more clearly then the light, that if ever any teacher in
the Church shall wander from the faith, the providence of God does Not cause,
but suffer.
suffer it to be done for our trial to prove, whether we love the Lord our God
with all our heart, and with all our soul, or no.

CHAP. 25.
Which things, seeing they so stand, he is a true and right Catholic, who
loves the truth of God, the Church, the body of Christ, and who preferres
nothing to Gods Religion, nothing to the Catholic faith, not the authority,
not the love, not the wit, not the eloquence, nor the philosophy of any man:
but contemning all these things, and abiding firm and steadfast in the faith,
does judge that, whatsoever he shall understand to be universally held of old
of the Catholic Church, himself should hold and believe alone: but
whatsoever novel and strange doctrine he shall perceive to be privily
brought in after by any one besides, or against the judgment of all the
Saints, he knows that it belongs not to religion, but rather to tentation.
And is also especially by the speeches of the blessed Apostle Paul instructed:
for this is that, which he writes in his first Epistle to the Corinthes:
There must be, says he, heresies even among you, that they, which are
approved among you, might be known. As if he should say; for this cause the
Authors of heresies are not presently rooted out by God, that they, which are
approved, might be seen: that is, that it might appear, how sure, faithful
and constant a lover of the Catholic faith every man is. And in truth, when
every nouelty comes up, the weightinesse of the Corn, and the lightness of
the Chafe is presently perceived: at which time that is easily shaken from the
Floor, which was held with no weight within the Floor. For some do forthwith
fly quite away, but others being only driven out, do both fear to perish,
and blush to return, being wounded, half dead, and half alive: as haiung
drunk such a quantity of poison, as neither killed them, nor was digested, as
would neither make them dye, nor suffer them to live. Oh miserable condition,
with what waves of care, with what whirlwinds are they tossed! For sometimes,
which way the wind shall drive the^, they are carried with a violent error:
sometimes returning to themselves, they are beaten back like contrary waves:
sometimes by rash presumption they allow of those things, which seem
uncertain: sometimes also through a reasonlesse fear they are afraid of those
things, that are certain: being uncertain which way to go, which way to
return: what to follow, what to fly, what to hold, what to let go. Which
affliction verily of a doubting and wavering heart is the medicine of Gods mercy
toward them, if they would be wise. For therefore are they tossed, beaten, and
almost killed with sundry tempests of thoughts, out of the most A quie^t haven
indeed: for out of this harbor men are either tossed upon the waves of error,
or swallowed up.
quiet haven of the Catholic faith, that they might let down the sails of a
proud spirit spread out on high, which they did wickedly spread open to the
winds of novelties, and that they might retire and keep themselves within the
most faithful station of their gentle and good mother, and first vomit up
those bitter and troubled waters of errors, that they might be able For a
vessel is not capable of wine, till the water or dregs, that filled be emptied
out.
afterward to drink of the streams of living and springing water. Let them
unlearn that well, which they did not well to learn: and let them receive by
the universal doctrine of the Church, what may be understood: and what may
not, let them believe.

CHAP. 26.
WHich things seeing that they are thus, reuoluing and recounting the same
things oftentimes, I cannot sufficiently wonder that the madness of some men,
that the ungodliness of their blinded understanding, and lastly, that their lust
of erring is so great, that they are not contented with the rule of believing,
which of old was once delivered and received, but that they do daily hunt after
change of novelties, and ever delight to put some new matter to religion, to
change and take away: as though it were not an heavenly doctrine, which
suffices to have been once revealed, but an earthly institution, which could
not otherwise be perfited, but by continual correction, or rather
reprehension: albeit the Oracles of God cry out; Thou shall not remove the Pro.
22. 28.
ancient bounds, which thy Fathers have set: And, Thou shall not judge above,
or more then the Eccles. 8. 17.
Judge: And again, He that Ecc. 10. 8.
breaks the hedge, a Serpent shall bite him: And that of the Apostle,
wherewith all the wicked novelties of all heresies are often cut in pieces, as
with a certain spiritual sword, and are always to be dismembered; O 1. Tim.
6. 20. 21.
Timotheus, keep that which is committed to thee, and avoid profane
Cainophonias, sieve Cenephonias.
novelties of words, or vain bablings, and oppositions of knowledge falsely so
called: which while some professed, they have erred about the Faith. And for
all this are there some found of such a marble forehead, so impudent without
all shame, and of such an adamant like obstinacy, as which would not yield to
such heavenly speeches of so great importance? which would not faint under such
heavy weights? which would not be broken in pieces with such mighty hammers?
finally, which would not be bruised with so great lightnings? Avoid, quoth he,
profane novelties of words. He did say Antiquities, he said not old: Yea he
does plainly show, what should follow on the contrary, For if Nouelty must be
avoided, then Antiquity is to be maintained. And if Nouelty be profane, then
Antiquity is sacred. And oppositions, quoth he, of knowledge salsly so named. A
false name indeed is used among the doctrines of heretics, that ignorance
might be colored with the name of knowledge, and mystinesse with the name of
cleerenesse, and darkness with the name of light. Which, quoth he, while some
professed, they have erred concerning the faith. What was that, which whiles
they did profess, they fell away, but a new, I wot not what, and unknown
doctrine? For you might hear some of them say: Come, O ye foolish and
wretched men, who are commonly called Catholics, and learn the true faith,
which none, but we, does understand, which many bypast ages has been
concealed, but was of late revealed and disclosed: but learn ye by stealth,
and secretly, for it shall delight you. And in like manner, when ye have
learned it, teach it closly, least the world do hear it, least the Church
take knowledge of it. For it is granted but to a few to conceive the secret of
so great a mystery. Are not these the words of that Harlot, which in the
Proverbs of Solomon calls them that pass by the way, which go right on
their way? Who so is, quoth she, the simplest Pron. 9. 15. 16.
among you, let him turn into me. And the^ that, are void of sense, she
exhorts, saying: do ye gladly touch hidden bread, and drink ye sweet water
Furtim.
by stealth. And what follows? But he knows not, quoth he, how that
Terrigenae.
Earthlings do perish at her house. And who are those earthly men? Let the
Apostle declare, even they, says he, which have (...).
erred about the faith.

CHAP. 27.
But it is worth the labor diligently to entreat of all that place of the
Apostle. 1 Timothy 6. 20.
O Timotheus, says he, keep that, which is committed to thee, avoiding
profane novelties of words. O: this exclamation betokens, both foreknowledge,
and charity also: for he did Foresee the errors, that were to be, for the
which he was also Grieved aforehand. Who is Timotheus now at this day? but
either the Universal Church, or specially the whole company of Priests or
Bishops, who should either have themselves, or instill and teach unto others
the whole knowledge of Divine worship. But what means this, keep that, which
is committed to thee? Keep it, says he, for fear of Thieves, for fear of
enemies: least, whiles men do sleep, they should sow their darnall upon that
good seed of wheat, which the Son of man had sown in his Field. Keep,
quoth he, that which is committed to thee. What is that, which was Committed?
That is to say, that wherewithal thou art put in trust, not that which thou
have devised; that, which thou have received, not that, which thou have
invented: a matter not of wit, but of doctrine: not of private usurpation, but
of public tradition: a thing, that was brought unto thee, and not which
comes from thee: as in which thou must not be an Author, but a Keeper: not
an Ordainer, but a Follower: not a leader, but one that is led. Keep, says he,
that which is committed: keep the Talent of the Catholic Faith, inuiolated
and uncorrupted. That which is committed to thy trust, let it remain in thy
possession, let it be delivered of thee. Thou have received Gold, repay Gold: I
will not that thou should bring me one thing for another: I would not that
instead of gold thou should either impudently put lead, or deceitfully
brass: I respect not the color of the gold, but the nature surely. O
Timotheus, O Priest, O Treatiser, O Teacher, if the gift of God shall make thee
fit, be thou for wit, exercise, and doctrine a Bezaleel of Exodus 36. 1.
the spiritual Temple, in grave the precious gemmes of Divine doctrine, fit
them faithfully, adorn them discretly, add luster, favor and comeliness. Let
that be through thine exposition understood more clearly, which was before
believed more obscurely. Let the posterity rejoice that that was understood by
the means of thee, which antiquity before did reverence being not understood:
the same things which thou have learned, do thou teach so, that, although thou
speak Or after a new fashion: Noue, non noua.
newly, yet not new things.

CHAP. 28.
But it may be some man says: what? shall there then be Quest.
no progress made of religion in the Church of Christ? Let there be made
verily, and as Ans.
much as may be. For who is he, that is so spiteful to men, and so hateful to
God, as that goes about to prohibit that? But yet let it be so, that it may be
indeed a proceeding, and not a changing, of the Faith. For that is to To
proceed or make progress.
profit, that every thing be increased in it self: but that is changing,
when a thing is altered from one thing to another. It behooves therefore, that
the understanding, knowledge, and wisdom, as well of each as of all, as well
of one man as of the whole Church should by the degrees of ages and times
increase, and profit much and greatly: but yet in their own kind only: to
wit, in the same doctrine, in the same sense, and in the same judgment.

CHAP. 29.
LEt the religion of souls resemble the state and nature of bodies, which
although in the process of years they declare and finish their proportions
and degrees, yet do they continue still the same, which they were at first.
There is much difference betwixt the flower of Childhood, and the ripeness of
Old Age: but yet the very self-same men become old, which had been young: that
albeit the very state and quality of one and the same man be altered, yet is
he nevertheless one and the same nature, one and the selfsame person. The
members of sucking children are small, but of young men great: yet are they the
very selfsame. As many as are the joints of little ones, so many are there of
men: and if those be any which come forth in riper years, they be now already
planted in the nature of the seed: so that no new thing comes out in old men
after, which did not now before lie within them hid in their childhood.

Whence it is manifest, that this is the lawful and right Rule of profiting,
that this is the certain and most excellent order of increasing: if so be that
the number and degrees of age do always discover those parts and forms, when
we are greater, or elder, which the wisdom of our Creator did form before,
when we were little. If that the shape of man should afterward be changed
into the shape of another kind, or if at the least wise the number of the
members should be increased or decreased, the whole body must of necessity
either perish, or become monstrous, or at the least be weakened. So also it is
fitting that the doctrine of Christian religion should follow these rules or
fashions of increasing: namely, that it should be strengthened by years,
enlarged by time, and extolled with age: but yet remain incorrupted and pure,
and be complete and perfect in all the measures of her parts, and in all her
own members, as it were, and senses: as which more over admits no change,
no loss of property, nor indureth any variety of definition.

CHAP. 30.
FOr examhle sake: our Elders sowed of old the Wheaten seeds of the faith in
this Corn field of the Church: it is unjust, and unbeseeming, that we their
Posterity instead of the natural and true Wheat, should make choice of the
Cockle of error put into the room thereof. But this rather is right and
agreeable, that the beginnings and the endings being correspondent to each
other, we should reap and enjoy of the increasings of a wheaten institution
the fruit or grain also of wheaten doctrine: that whenas something out of those
beginnings of the seeds is by process of time shot up, it may now both
Laetetur, be manured: for laetamen is manure, which being laid on the ground,
does make it flourish. Pallad. lib. 1. uses this word: In laetandis, inquit
arboribus crs tes facicmus.
flourish, and be trimmed up by husbanding: yet so as that nothing of the
property of the sprout be changed: though form, shape, and distinction be
added, that yet the nature of every kind abide the same. For God forbid, that
those rosy plants of Catholic judgment should be turned into Thistles and
Thorns. Far be it, I say, that in this spiritual Paradise Darnell and
Woolfe-bane should all upon the sudden come from the sets and shootes of
Cynnamon and Balm. Whatsoever therefore is faithfully sown of the Fathers in
the Church, which is Gods 2. Cor. 3. 9.
Husbandry, it behooves that by the labor of the children the very same
should be husbanded and looked unto: it is fitting that the very same should
flourish and ripen, that the same should grow, and come to perfection. For it
is lawful that those ancient doctrines of heavenly Philosophy, should in
process of time be exactly handled, trimmed, and polished but it is unlawful
that they should be changed, it is unlawful to mangle and to maime them. They
may lawfully receive clearenesse, light, and distinction: but it is needful
that they should retain fullness, soundness, and property.

CHAP. 31.
FOr if this licentiousness of wicked deceit be once permitted, I tremble to
utter what great danger may ensue of rooting out, and abolishing of religion.
For when any part of the Catholic doctrine shall be rejected, others also,
and others after them, one after another, will now as it were by custom and
law be rejected and done away. Moreover also, when the parts are each of them
severely rejected, what will follow at the last, but that the whole should in
like manner be refused? Yea, and contrariwise, if novelties shall begin to be
mingled with ancient doctrines, and foreign with domestical, and profane with
sacred, it cannot be but that this fashion will spread it self over all, that
nothing in the Church will hereafter be left untouched, nothing sound, nothing
uncorrupted: but that the An error stiffly maintained is a filthy harlot.
Stews of wicked and filthy errors should afterward be there, where there
was aforetime the Sanctuary of the chaste and undefiled truth. But let godly
devotion drive this wickedness from men's minds, and let this rather be the
fury of the wicked.

CHAP. 32.
But the Church of Christ, being a diligent and wary Keeper of the Doctrines,
that are committed to her, does alter nothing in them at any time, diminishes
nothing, adds nothing: she cuts not off things, that are necessary, she ads
not things superfluous, she loses not her own, she vsurps not strangers: but
this one thing she studies with all diligence, namely, that by handling the
ancient doctrines faithfully and discreetly, she might perfect and polish those,
if any, that have been shaped and begun of old: and if any be already perfectly
declared and made manifest, that she might confirm and strengthen them: and
that, if any be now confirmed and defined, she might conserve and keep them.
To conclude, what else did she ever labor by the Decrees of Councels, then
that the selfsame thing, which was Or barely.
simply believed before, might more carefully be believed after? that the very
same thing, which was more slackly preached before, might be more diligently
preached after? that the very same thing, which was more carelessly kept before,
might more carefully be husbanded after?

This thing, I say, she has aimed at always, and at nothing else, being
stirred up with the novelties of Heretics. The Catholic Church be the
decrees of her Counsels has done nothing, but that, what she had received
before of the Elders only by tradition, she might moreover set the same thing
down in handwriting for those also, that should come after: comprehending a
great deal of matter in a few words, and commonly expressing the thing by some
convenient new term for the clearenes of understanding, and not for any new
meaning of the Faith.

CHAP. 33.
But let us return unto the Apostle: O Timotheus, says he, keep that, which
is committed 1. Tim. 6. 20.
to thee, avoiding the profane novelties of words: Avoid them says he, as a
Viper, as a Scorpion, as a Cockatrice: that they may not smite thee, not only
by touching, but by sight also, and by breathing. What is it 1. Cor. 5. 11.
to avoid? Not to eat meat with such an one. What means this, Avoid thou?
If there come any unto you, says Saint John, and bring not this doctrine. 2.
Ioh. 10.
What doctrine means he, but the Catholic and universal, which both
continues by an uncorrupted tradition of the truth one and the same throughout
all succeeding ages, and shall continue for ever and for ever, without end? But
what follows? Do not, quoth he, receive him to house, neither bid 2. Ioh. 11.
ye him God speed. For he, that bids him, God speed, is partaker of his
evil deeds. Profane novelties of words, says Paul. What is profane? Such as
are altogether void of holiness and Porro, five procul a sano
religion: utterly strange from the bosom of the Church, which is the temple
of God. Profane novelties of words, says he: novelties of words, that is, of
doctrines, Or opinion concerning things or matters.
things, opinions: which novelties are contrary to antientnesse, to antiquity.

Which if they should be received, it cannot be, but that the Faith of the
blessed Fathers should be violated either all, or for a great part thereof at
least: it must needs be, that all the faithful of all ages, all the Saints,
all the chaste Or the continent, the virgins.
the continent virgins, that all the Clergy, Levites, and Priests, that so
many thousands of Confessors, so great armies of Martyrs, so great an assembly
and multitude of cities and people, that so many Islands, Provinces, Kings,
Nations, kingdoms, countries, and finally, that now almost all the world, being
incorporated into Christ the Head by the Catholic faith, it must needs be, I
say, that all these aforesaid, should be said to have been ignorant for so
long continuance of time, to have erred, to have blasphemed, and not to have
known what they should believe.

CHAP. 34.
Avoid, says he, profane novelties of words: which to receive and follow was
never the property of Catholics, but always of Heretics. And in truth,
what heresy was there ever, which did not spring up under a certain name, in
a certain place, and at a certain time? Who ever brought up heresies, but
which first separated himself from the viuersall and ancient consent of the
Catholic Church? Which that it was so, examples show most clearly. For who
ever before that profane Pelagius presumed that the power of Free Will was so
great, that he did not think that the grace of God was necessary to help it
in good thngs in every act? Who ever before Celestus his prodigious discipline
denied that all mankind was guilty of Adams transgression? Who before
sacrilegious Arrius dared to divide the unity of the Trinity, who durst
confound the Trinity of unity before wicked Sabellius. Who before most cruel
Nauatianus affirmed that God was cruel, for that he had rather the death of
him, that dies, then that he should return and live? Who before Simon the
Magitian, whom the Apostle Acts 8. 21.
cursed, from whom that whirle-poole of filthinesses flowed by a continual and
hidden succession, even unto Priscilianus the last and hindermost, (who I say,
before that Simon) durst affirm that God the Creator is the author of evils,
that is, of our abominable acts, impieties, and wicked enormities? For he did
avouch, that God himself did with his own hands create the nature of men so,
as that by reason of a certain proper motion, or impulsion of a certain
necessary will, it could do nothing else, it could will nothing else, but
commit sin: because it being chafed and inflamed with the furies of all vices,
it is carried by an insatiable desire, into all the gulfes or whirlepits of
dishonest and filthy facts. Innumerable examples there are of the like nature,
which for breuity sake we pretermit: by all which yet we have evidently and
clearly enough showed, that this with almost all heresies, is solemn, as it
were, and That is, Heretics count is a Law, and make it as a Trade.
according to Law, to delight always in profane novelties, to contemn the
ordinances of Antiquity, and through oppositions of knowledge, falsely so
termed, to make ship-wracke from the faith. On the contrary also, this is
almost proper unto Catholics to keep those things, Or which the holy Fathers
left in their custody, Diposit^ patrum.
which were left in the custody of the holy Fathers, and were committed to
them, and to condemn profane novelties, and, as the Apostle said, and said
again: If any shall Gal. 1. 9.
preach otherwise then that which was received, to Anathematize or curse him.

CHAP. 35.
Here some man perhaps may ask, whether Heretics Quest.
also do use the testimonies of the holy Scripture. Indeed Ans.
they use the^, and in truth with vehemence: for you may see the^ fly through
all and every book of the word of God, through the books of Moses, and of the
Kings, through the Psalms, Apostles, Gospels, Prophets. For whether it be
amongst their own Followers, or with others: whether privately, or publicly:
whether in Sermons, or in Books: whether at Banquets, or in the streets: they
never almost utter any thing of their own, which they labor not also to
shadow with their words of the Scripture. Read the pamphlets of Paulus
Samosatenus, of Priscillian, Eunomius, Iouinian, and the rest of those So he
calls pestilent, and pernicious Teachers: whose errors are as plague-soares,
rotten and infectious.
Plagues: you may see an infinite mass of examples, that no page welneere
escapes, which is not painted and colored with the sentences of the Old, or New
Testament. But they be so much the rather to be taken heed of, and feared,
by how much the more closely they lurk under the shadows of Gods word: For
they know, that their stinking errors would not quikly be pleasing almost
unto any man, if they should be vented barely, and as they are in their own
nature: and therefore they bespice them (as it were) with the word of God, that
he, which would easily despise the error of man, might not easily contemn the
Oracles of God. They do therefore, as those are wont, which being to give some
bitter potions to children for to drink, do first rub their mouths about
with honey: that the silly little ones, having before felt the sweetness,
might not be afraid of the bitterness. Which thing they also are careful of,
which set the names of medicines upon ill herbs and hurtful Or drugs.
syrrops: that almost no body would suspect poison, where he read a remedy
written over.

CHAP. 36.
FInally, our Savior also cried out for the same thing. Beware ye of false
Prophets, Math. 7. 15.
which in sheep clothing come unto you: but inwardly they are ravening
Wolves. What is sheep clothing, but the sentences of the Prophets and
Apostles, which they with a certain sheepe-like sincerity have wouen as
certain fleeces for that immaculate Lamb, which takes away the sins of the
world? Who are ravening Wolves, but the savage and ravening opinions or
conceits of heretics, which always annoy the Foldes of the Church, and rend
assunder the Flock of Christ, on what part soever they are able. But that they
may steal more slily upon the unwary sheep, retaining still their woluish
cruelty they lay aside their shape of a Wolf, and wrap themselves within the
sentences of the holy Scriptures, as it were, within certain Sheepe-skinnes:
that when a body has felt before the softness of the wool, he might not be
afraid of the bitings of the teeth. But what says our Savior? Ye shall know
Math. 7. 16.
them by their fruits. That is, when they shall begin not only now to utter
those sayings, but also to expound them: nor as yet to crack of them only, but
also to interpret them: then that bitterness, the^ the soreness, and
madness is perceived, then this new devised poison will be breathed out, then
are profane novelties disclosed, then may ye see the bounds of the Fathers to
be removed, the Catholic faith to be then but chered, and the doctrine of the
Church torn in pieces.

CHAP. 37.
SVch were they, whom the Apostle Paul reproves in his second Epistle to the
Corinthes, saying: For such false 2 Cor. 11. 13.
Apostles, says he, are crafty, workmen, transforming themselves into
Apostles of Christ. What means this transforming themselves into the Apostles
of Christ? The Apostles alleged examples of the Or word
Law of God, and so did they: The Apostles cited the authorities of the
Psalms, and so did they: the Apostles produced the sayings of the Prophets,
even so did they too, not a jot the less. But when they had begun to expound
those sentences diversely, which they had alike alleged: then were the simple
Apostles discerned from the subtle Apostles, the sincere from the
counterfeite, the right from the perverse, and finally, the true from the
false. And no wonder, quoth he: For verse. 14. 15.
Satan himself transformeth himself into an Angel of light: it is no great
thing therefore, though his Ministers be transformed as Ministers of
righteousness. Therefore by the Apostle Paul's doctrine, so often as ever
either false Apostles, or false Prophets, or false Teachers all edge the
sentences of Gods word, with the which being understood amiss, they seek to
maintain their own errors, there is no doubt but that they follow the crafty
devises of their Author: which he would never without doubt devise, but that
he knows, that there is no way at all more ready to deceive, then that, where
the deceit of a wicked error is underhand introduced, There the authority of
Divine sentences should be pretended.

But some man will say: how Quest.
is it proved, that the Devil is wont to use proofs of holy Scripture?

Let him read the Gospels, An.
in the which it is written; Then the Devil took him, that is, the Mat. 4. 5.
Luke 4. 9. Psalm. 91. 11.
Lord and Savior: and set him upon a pinnacle of the Temple, and said unto him,
If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: For it is written, that he
has given his Angels charge over thee (to keep thee These words are not in
the Gospel, though in the Psalm.
in all thy ways:) and with their hands they shall lift thee up, least it may
be thou should dash thy foot against a stone. What will this Fiend do to
silly men, that set upon the Lord of glory with testimonies of Scripture. If,
quoth he, thou be the Son of God cast thy self down. Why so? For, says he,
it is written, The doctrine of this place is to be diligently marked, and
retained of us, that, when we shall see some allege the words of the Apostles
or Prophets, against the Catholic Faith, we should in no wise doubt:
considering such a remarkable example of Evangelical authority, that the
Devil speaks by them. For as then the That is, the Devil to Jesus, and
Heretics to true Catholics.
Head spoke to the Head, so now also the Members speak unto the Members: to
wit, the members of the Devil, to the members of Christ, the unfaithful to
the faithful, the sacrilegious to the religious* finally, Heretics to
Catholics. But what I pray you, says he? If, quoth he, thou be the Son
of God, cast thy self down. That is to say, thou will be the Son of God, and
wilt receive the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, Cast thy self down:
that is, throw thy self off from the doctrine and tradition of this high
Church, which is also counted the Temple of God. 1, Tim. 3. 15.


And if any man should ask some heretic which persuades him to do thus: How
do thou prove, upon what ground do thou teach, that I ought to forsake the
universal and ancient faith of the Catholic Church? He would presently
answer: For it is written. And forthwith he prepares a multitude of
testimonies, examples, and authorities, from the Law, from the Psalms, from
the Apostles, from the Prophets, through the which being after a new and
naughty manner interpreted, the unhappy soul might be plunged headlong into
the gulf of heresy. And now with those promises following the heretics are
wont to deceive unwary men. For they presume to promise and to teach. That in
their Church, that is, in the conuenticle of their communion, there is a great,
and special, and in truth a certain personal grace of God, so as that they,
whosoever they be, that are of their company, without any labor, without any
study, without any travel, though they neither seek, nor ask, nor knock,
are yet for all that so ordered by God, that being lifted up in the hands of
Angels, that is, being preserved by Angelical protection, they can never dash
their foot against a stone, that is, they can never be scandalized, or
offended.

CHAP. 38.
But some man does say; If Quest.
the Devil and his Disciples do use Divine speeches, sentences, and promises,
amongst whose Disciples some are Fals-apostles, and False-prophets, and
False-teachers, and all of them generally heretics: what shall Catholic men,
and the Children of the Church our Mother, do? How shall they discern the
truth in the holy Scriptures from falsehood?

Surely they shall have special Ans.
care to do this, which we have in writing set down in the beginning of this
advertisement to have been delivered unto us by holy and learned men: namely,
that they do interpret the holy Scriptures according to the traditions of the
universal Church, and by the rules of Catholic doctrine: wherein also it is
necessary that they follow the universality, antiquity and consent of the
Catholic and Apostolic Church. And if at any time a part shall rebel
against the whole, if nouelty shall thwart antiquity, if the dissension of one,
or of some few erroneous persons, shall cross the consent of all, or surely of
the greatest number of Catholics, let them prefer the soundness of the
whole to the corruptnesse of a part: in the which same universal body, let
them make more account of religious antiquity, then of profane nouelty: and in
like manner in the same antiquity, let them first and foremost, before all
things prefer the general decrees, if there be any, of an universal
counsel, unto the rashness of one, or of some very few. Then secondly, if
that be not, let them follow, which is the next thing to it, the judgments of
many and great Teachers, that are agreeable one unto another: the which being
faithfully, soberly, and carefully observed by the Lords assistance, we shall
easily perceive all the hurtful errors of the heretics, which rise up.

CHAP. 39.
HEre now I see it meet, that I should show by examples, how the profane
novelties of Heretics may be both found out, and condemned, when the
judgments of ancient Teachers, agreeing one with another, are produced and
compared. Which ancient consent of the holy Fathers we should with great
labor search out and follow, yet not in all the petty questions of Gods word,
but only, at the leastwise especially, in the rule of faith. But neither are
heresies always, nor all of them thus to be impugned, but those only that are
new and fresh: namely when as they do first arise, before they falsify the
Rules of the ancient faith, whiles they be let with the straitness of the
time it self, and before that, the poison spreading it self farther about,
they do attempt to corrupt the writings of the Elders. But heresies that have
gathered much ground, and are waxen old, must not this way be assailed, because
that by reason of long continuance of time, they have had opportunity offered
them, a great while to He is said to steal the truth, which writhes the
Scriptures to his own opinion or error, perverting their meaning.
steal the truth. And therefore it behooves us either to confute those more
ancient wicked Schisms or Heresies by no means, but by the sole authority of
the Scriptures, if need be, or else verily to avoid them, being now of old
confuted and condemned by the general Councels of Catholic Priests. Therefore
so soon as the rottenness of every wicked error begins to break out, and
to steal for the defense of it self certain sentences of Gods word, and to
expound them falsely and deceitfully: the sentences or judgments of the Elders
are presently to be gathered together for to interpret the Or Scriptures.
Canon, by the which that novel, and therefore profane opinion, whatsoever it
be which shall start up, may without any coil presently be descried, and
without any retractation condemned. But the judgments of those Fathers only
are to be compared together, which living, teaching and continuing, holily,
wisely, and constantly in the Catholic Faith and Fellowship, obtained either
to dye faithfully in Christ, or to be slain happily for Christ. Whom to
notwithstanding we must give credit with this condition, that, that be
accounted vndoubedly true, certain, and sure, whatsoever either all of them,
or the most, have manifestly, commonly, and constantly with one and the same
meaning, as in a certain unanimous Council of Teachers, confirmed and
established by receiving, holding and delivering it. But whatsoever any man
shall conceit or think otherwise then all men, or else contrary to all men,
though he be (o) holy and learned, though For the person does not commend the
faith, but faith the person.
he be a Bishop, though he be a Confessor and Martyr, let it be put apart
from the authority of the commune, public and general judgment, amongst
proper, hidden and private opinions: and let us not with very great hazard of
our souls, after the wicked fashion of Heretics, and Schismatiques, follow
the novel error of one man, forsaking the truth of Catholic doctrine.

CHAP. 40.
THE holy and Catholic consent of which blessed Fathers, least any man should
unadvisedly, it may be, think for to contemn, the Apostle says in the first
epistle to the Corinthians: And God indeed has ordained some in the Church:
1. Cor. 12. 28.
as first Apostles, of which rank he himself was one: secondly Prophets, as
we read in the Acts of the Apostles that Agabus was: thirdly Teachers, Acts
11. 27. 28.
which are now called Treatizers, Tractators, which by this same Apostle are
sometimes called Prophets, because they open the mysteries of the Prophets to
the people. Whosoever therefore does contemn these men, being set by God in
sundry ages and places in the Church of God, whiles in the name of Christ they
do determine or judge some one thing according to the meaning of the Catholic
doctrine, he does not contemn Man, but God. And from whom, that no man should
dissent, whiles with one consent they speak the truth, the same Apostle does
very earnestly desire, saying: Now I beseech you, Brethren, 1. Cor. 1. 10.
that ye All speak one thing, and that there be no Schisms or dissentions
among you: but be ye knit together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.
If so be that any man shall go from their commune judgment, he shall hear
what the same Apostle says; God is not the God of 1. Cor. 14. 33.
dissension, but of peace: that is to say, he is not his God, which departs
from them, that do jointly consent unto the truth, but theirs, that continue
peacably consenting with them: as, says he, I teach in all the Churches of the
Saints, that is, of the Catholics: which Churches are therefore holy, because
they abide in the fellowship of the faith. And least any perhaps, the rest
being unregarded, should arrogate to be heard himself alone, and that he
alone should be believed, he says a little after: Came the word of God out
from you? either Uers. 36.
came it unto you only? And least this should as it were for fashion sake be
received, he has added, saying, If any man think Verse. 37.
himself to be a Prophet, or Spiritual, that is, a teacher of spiritual
things, let him be with all diligence a lover of equality and unity: that in
truth he do neither prefer his own opinions to the rest, and that he go not
from the judgments of all. The commandments of which things he which knows
not, says Uers. 38.
he: that is, he which either learnes them not being unknown, or which
contemnes them being known, he shall not be known, that is, he shall be
counted unworthy to be by God respected among them, that are knit together in
the faith, and made equal by humility: then which evil I wot not whether any
ca^ be thought to be more grievous. Which yet we see to have befallen, as the
Apostle threatened, that Pelagian Iulianus, who either neglected to agree in
judgment with his Fellows, or else presumed to divide himself from them.

But it is now time, that we should produce that example promised, wherein and
after what manner the judgments of the Fathers are gathered together, that by
them the Rule of ecclesiastical faith might be established by the decree and
authority of a Council. Which that it may be done more handsomely, let this be
the end now of this Advertisement: that we may begin the rest of the things
that follow with another beginning. The second Advertisement has fallen
between, neither has any thing more thereof remained, then the last parcel,
that is, only a brief rehearsal of that, which has been more largely
handled, which is also added after.

CHAP. 41.
THe which things seeing they thus stand, it is now time, that we should
rehearse the sum of those things in the end of this second Advertisement,
which have been spoken of in these two. We have said before that this has ever
been, and is also at this day the custom of Catholics to prove the true
says these two ways: First, by the authority of Gods word: Secondly, by the
tradition of the Catholic Church: not because the word alone is not sufficient
of it self for all matters, but because many, whiles they expound the
Scriptures, as they list themselves, they conceive sundry opinions, and errors.
And therefore that it is necessary, that the interpretation of the heavenly
Scripture should be directed by the alone Rule of Ecclesiastical judgment or
understanding: especially, in those questions at least, on which the grounds of
all the Catholic doctrine are laid. In like manner we have said, that we
should again have regard in the Church her-selfe unto the consent of All in
general, and also of Antiquity, least we should either be broken off from the
whole body (of the Church) being united and coupled together, and so become
Schismatickes, or else be cast headlong from the ancient religion into novel
heresies. We have also said, that in the very antiquity of the Church, two
certain things are earnestly and carefully to be observed, to which all, that
would not be Heretics, should thoroughly cleave: first, if any thing has been
of ancient time decreed of all the Priests of the Catholic Church by the
authority of a general Council: secondly, if any strange question should
arise, when that in no wise might be found, that recourse should be had to the
judgments of the holy Fathers, of those only, which in their times and places
containing all of them in the unity of fellowship and of the Faith, were
commendable Teachers. And that, whatsoever they should be found to have held
with one meaning and consent, that it should without any scruple be judged of
the Church to be true and Catholic.

CHAP. 42.
VVHich-least we should seem to set abroach through our own presumption
rather, then by Ecclesiastical authority, we have used the example of an holy
Council, which was held almost three years since at Ephesus in Asia, those
most excellent men Bassus and Antiochus being Consuls. Where when there was
dispute about the confirming of the Rules of Faith, least perhaps any profane
novelty should steal in there after the manner of the (o) Ariminian Which
received Ualens the Arrian, having before condemned him.
Councels unfaithful dealing, this seemed to all the Priests, which had come
thither to the number almost of two hundredth, to be a thing most Catholic,
most commodious, and best to be done, that the judgments of the holy Fathers
should be brought forth and showed, of whom it should be manifest that some
were Martyrs, others Confessors, but that all had been and had continued
Catholic Priests: that so by their consent and decree the religion of the
ancient doctrine might well and solemnly be confirmed, and the blasphemy of
wicked nouelty condemned. Which when it was so done, then was that foresaid
Nestorius judged contrary to Catholic Antiquity, but blessed Cyril to consent
Ad verb. to sacred Antiquity.
unto it. And that the truth of those things might in no wise be called into
question, we have also showed the names and number (though we had forgotten the
rank) of those Fathers according to whose order therein concording and
unanimous judgment both the sentences of holy Writ were expounded, and the
rule of divine doctrine established. Whom for the strengthening of our memory
it is not superfluous here also to recite.

These therefore are the men, whose writings, either as of Judges, or as it
were of Witnesses, were in that Council showed and recited; S. Peter of
Perhaps it should be read Bishop of Alex. for the Comma is wanting in some
books.
Alexandria, a Bishop, a most excellent Teacher, and a most blessed Martyr: S.
Athanasius, a Prelate of the same City, a most faithful Teacher, and a most
worthy Confessor: Saint Theophilus, a Bishop of the same City too, a man very
famous for his religion, life, and learning, whom worthy Cyril did succeed, who
does at this time make the Church of Alexandria famous. And least it should
perhaps be thought to be the doctrine of one City and Province, there were
joined also those Lights of Cappadocia, S. Gregory Bishop and Confessor of
Nazianzum: S. Basil, Bishop and Confessor of Caesarea in Cappadocia: as also
the other S. Gregory Bishop of Nysse, and for his faith, conversation,
uprightness, and wisdom, a man most worthy of his brother Basil. But that it
might be proved that not Greece alone, or that the East only, but that the
Weasterne and Latin world was always also of that judgment, certain
Epistles also were there read, written to certain men by Saint Foelix, a
Martyr, and S. Julius, Bishops of the City of Rome. And that not only the head
of the world, but that the sides also might give testimony to that judgment,
there was taken from the South most blessed Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, and a
Martyr; and from the North Saint Ambrose, Bishop of Millaine. All these Ad
verb. of the sacred number of the Decalogue.
ten therefore were at Ephesus produced as Teachers, Counselors, Witnesses and
Judges: whose doctrine, counsel, witness and judgment that blessed Synod
mainteining, following, crediting, and obeying, did readily, discreetly and
impartially give sentence concerning the Rules of Faith. Although a far
greater number of Elders might have been joined to these, yet it was not
needful: because it was not sitting that the time allotted for that business
should be taken up and spent with producing of a multitude of Witnesses, and
for that every man is persuaded that those ten did differ nothing in a manner in
judgment from all their other fellows.

After all which things we have also annexed the holy judgment of Cyril, which
things are contained in the ecclesiastical acts. For after that the Epistle of
S. Capreolus, Bishop of Carthage was read, who labored and entreated no other
thing, but that Novelty being convinced Antiquity might be believed, Bishop
Cyril spoke and defined to the same effect: the which it seems not unfitting
for the matter in hand here also to interpose.

For he says in the end of the Acts; And this Epistle which was read, quoth
he, of the reverend and very religious Bishop of Carthage, Capreolus, shall be
faithfully recorded, whose judgment is manifest: for he would have the
doctrines of the ancient faith confirmed, but novel conceits, and such as are
superfluously devised, and wickedly published, to be rejected, and condemned.
All the Bishops cried together in sign of approbation; These are the words of
us all, we do all affirm these things, this is the wish of us all. And what, I
pray you, were the words and the wishes of all, but that That should be
embraced, which was anciently delivered, and that That should be banished,
which was newly devised? After which things we wondered at and told of the great
humility and holiness of that Council, and what a number of Priests there
were, the greater part welneere being Metropolitanes, of such knowledge, and so
well learned, as that almost all of them were able to dispute of doctrines.
Whom when the Congregation being assembled all together might seem to
encourage, to undertake and to determine something of themselves, yet would
they give nothing, presume nothing, arrogate nothing to themselves at all: but
by all means provided, that they might not deliver any thing to their
posterity, which they themselves had not received of their Fathers, and that
they might not only order the matter well for the present, but give example
also to them, that should suceede, that they also might embrace the doctrines
of sacred Antiquity, and condemn the devises of profane Nouelty. We
inueighed also against the wicked presumption of Nestorius, because he boasted
that he did first and only understand the holy Scripture, and that all those
whatsoever were ignorant of it, which being teachers before him had handled the
Oracles of God; to wit, all Priests, all Confessors and Martyrs: some of which
had explained Gods word, and others had consented or given credit to the
Explainers of it: and lastly, because he did affirm that the whole Church does
now err, and that it has always erred, That is, the whole Church.
which, as to him seemed, had both always followed, and did (now) follow
ignorant and erroneous Teachers.

CHAP. 43.
ALl which things, though they cannot plentifully and abundantly suffice to
ouerwhelme and extinguish all profane novelties, yet least any thing should
seem to be lacking, where there is such plenty of proof to clear this
point, we have in the last place added a double authority of the Apostlicke
See; namely one of the holy Pope, or For Papa, Pope, is Fatheria name of old
given to other Bishops, the^ the Roman.
Father Xistus, who like a reverend man does at this present advance the Church
of Rome: and the other of his Predecessor of blessed memory Pope Calestine,
whose authorities we have deemed needful here also to interpose. Pope Xistus
then says in an Epistle, which he sent to the Bishop of Antioch, about the
cause of Nestorius. Therefore, quoth he, because as the Apostle says, there is
one Faith, which has evidently Ephesians. 4. 5.
prevailed, let us hold those things that are to be believed, and let us
believe those things that are to be held. At the length he shows the
things, that are to be held and believed, and says; Let no liberty (quoth
he) be given at all to Nouelty, because it is fitting that nothing should be
added to Antiquity. Let the manifest faith and credulity of the Elders be
troubled with no mixture of All corrupt co^ceits of men are no better then mud,
or mine: they are foul and filthy: and therefore to be shunned of such as
would not be desiled.
mire. Speeches altogether Apostolical, in that he adornes the credulity or
faith of the Elders, by comparing it to the Light, for the manifestnesse or
clearenesse of it, and describes novel profanities, (or profane novelties) by
likening them to the mixture of mire. But Pope Caelestine also deals in the
like manner, and is of the same judgment. For he says in an Epistle which he
sent to the French Ministers, reproving their conniuencie, because they Or
forsaking the ancient Religion through silence.
letting the ancient faith to be injured through their silence, did suffer
profane novelties to start up. Justly, quoth he, the matter concerns us, if
we shall nourish an error with holding our peace. Let such men therefore be
rebuked, let them not have liberty of speech at such their pleasure. Some man
here may Quest.
peradventure doubt, who those may be, whom he forbids that they should have
liberty to speak what they list, whether the Preachers of Antiquity, or the
Deuisers of Nouelty. Let him speak himself, and answer the doubting of the
Ans.
Readers. For it follows: Let Nouelty cease, says he, if the case stand
thus, that is, if it be so, that some accuse your Cities and Provinces to me,
because you make them to give consent to certain Novelties through your
dangerous winking at them. Let Nouelty therefore cease, says he, if the
matter stand so, to invade and incroach upon Antiquity. This then was the
blessed judgment of blessed Celestine, not that Antiquity should cease to
overthrow Nouelty, but rather that Nouelty should cease to gather ground upon,
and invade Antiquity.

Which Apostolic and Catholic decrees whosoever does gainesay, he must
needs first of al triumph over the memory of Saint Celestine, who determined
that Nouelty should cease to vex and invade Antiquity: and in the second place
scorn the decrees of holy Xystus, who judged that no liberty at all should be
granted to Nouelty, because it is meet that nothing should be added to
Antiquity: yea and contemn the determinatio^s of blessed Cyprian, who did
greatly extol the zeal of reverend Capreolus, because he desired that the
doctrines of the ancient Faith should be confirmed: and that novel devises
should be condemned: and despise the Counsel of Ephesus also, that is, the
judgments of the holy Bishops almost of all the East, whom it pleased by Gods
direction to determine that the Posterity should believe no other thing, but
that That is, which the holy Fathers agreeing in Christ held of old before.
which the sacred and in Christ unanimous Antiquity of the holy Fathers had
held, and who also with their cries and exclamations witnessed with one
consent, that these are the words of all, that they did all wish this, that
they were all of this judgment: that as almost all Heretics before
Nestorius, despising Antiquity, and desending nouelty should be condemned, even
so Nestorius himself also should be condemned as an author of Nouelty, and an
impugner of Antiquity, whose consent being inspired by an holy gift and of
heavenly grace to whom it is displeasing. What else does follow, but that he
should affirm that the wickedness of Nestorius was not justly condemned, and
lastly also contemn the whole Church of Christ and his Teachers, Apostles, and
Prophets; but yet especially the Apostle Paul, as certain filth or
offscourings? Her, because she never departed from the religion of the says
once delivered unto her to be husbanded and carefully looked unto: and Him,
because he has written; O Timotheus keep that which is committed unto 1. Tim.
^.
thee, avoiding profane novelties of words: And also, If any one shall Gal. 1.
preach unto you otherwise then that ye have received, let him be accursed. If
so be that neither Apostolical ordinances, nor Ecclesiastical decrees be to
be broken, by the which according to the sacred consent of the universal and
ancient Church all Heretics always, and last of all Pelagius, Celestius, and
Nestorius have been justly and worthily condemned, it is necessealy doubtless
for all Catholics hereafter, which study to show themselves the lawful
Children of the Church their He that has not the Church for his mother, has
not God for his father, nor Christ for his brother.
Mother, that they should stick and cleave unto, and dye in the holy faith of
the holy Fathers: and that they should detest, abhor, inueigh against, and
persecute the profane Novelties of profane persons. These are well nigh the
things, which being more largely handled in the two Aduertisments are
co^tracted as a recapitulation ought to be, that my memory, for the helping
whereof we have done these things, might be both Or mended, and repaired.
refreshed by being continually put in mind, and not oppressed with
weariness, caused by long discourses.

Trin-vni Deo Gloria.

FINIS.


LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, for LEONARD BECKET, and are to be sold at
his Shop, near the Church, in the Inner Temple. 1611.


