THEE FIRST FOUR BOOKS OF VIRGIL HIS AENEIS TRANSLAted intoo English heroical
verse by Richard Stanyhurst, with oother Poetical diuises theretoo annexed.

Imprinted at Leiden in Holland by John Pates.

Anno M.D.LXXXII.

TOO THEE RIGHT HONORABLE MY VERY LOOVING BROOTHER THEE LORD BARON OF
DVNSANYE.
WHat deep and rare poynctes of hydden secrets Virgil has sealde up in his
twelve books of Aeneis, may easelye appear too such reaching wyts, as bend
their endewours, too thee unfolding thereof; not only by gnibling upon thee
owtward ryne of a supposed history, but also by groaping thee pyth, that is
shrind up within thee barck and body of so exquisit and singular a discourse.
For where as thee chief praise of a writer consists in thee enterlacing of
pleasure with profit: our author has so wiselye alayed thee one with thee
oother, as thee shallow reader may be delighted with a smooth tale, and thee
diuing searcher may be adua^taged by sowning a pretiouse treatise. And certes
this preheminencye of writing is chieflye (if we respect our old latin
Poets) too be affurded too Virgil in this wurck, and too Ovid in his
Metamorphosis. As for Ennius, Horace, Iuuenal, Persius and thee rablement of
such cheat Poets, their dooinges are, for favor of antiquitye, rather to
be patiently allowed, thean highlye regarded. Such leauinges as we have of
Ennius his ragged verses are nothing current, but sauoure soomwhat nappy of
thee spigget, as one that was neauer accustomed too strike up thee drum, and
too cry, in blazing martial exploytes, alarm, but when he were haulfe
tipsye, ac Horace records. Thee oother three, over this that their Verses in
camfering wise run harshe and rough, perform nothing in matter, but biting
quippes, taunting Darcklye certain men of state, that lived in their age, be
sprinckling their inuectiues with soom moral precepts, aunswerable too thee
capacitye of eurie weak brain. But our Virgil not conten^ with such meigre
stuff, does labor, in telling, as yt were a Cantorburye tale, too ferret
out thee secrets of Nature, with words so fitlye coucht, with verses so
smoothlye slyckte, with sentences so featlye orderd, with orations so neatlie
burnisht, with similitudes so aptly applied, with eeche decorum so duly
observed, as in truth he has in right purchased too him self thee name of a
surpassing poet, thee fame of an od oratoure, and thee admiration of a profound
philosopher. Having therefore (mi good lord) taken upon me too execute soom
part of master Askam his will, who, in his goulden pamphlet, entitled thee
Schoolemayster, does wish thee University students too apply their wits
in bewtifying our English language with heroical verses: I heeld no Latinist
so fit, too geeue thee onset on, as Virgil, who for his peerless style, and
machlesse stuff, does bear thee prick and price among al thee Roman Poets.
How beyt I have here haulf a guesh, that two sorts of carpers will seem too
spurn at this mine entreprise. Thee one utterly ignorant, thee oother
meanelye letterd. Thee ignorant will imagine, that thee passage was nothing
craggye, in as much as M. Phaere has broken thee ice before me: Thee meaner
clarcks will suppose, my trauail in these heroical verses too carrye no great
difficulty, in that yt lay in my choice, too make what word I would short or
long, having no English writer before me in this kind of poetrye with whose
squire I should leauel my syllables. Too shape therefore an answer too thee
first, I say, they are altogether in a wrong box: considering that such
words, as fit M Phaer, may be very unapt for me, which they would confess,
if their skill were, so much as spare, in these verses. Further more I stand
so nicelie on my pantofles that way, as if I could, yeet I would not run on
thee skore with M. Phaer, or ennie oother, by borrowing his terms in so
copious and fluent a language, as our English tongue is. And in good sooth
although thee gentleman has translated Virgil in too English rythme with such
surpassing excellency, as a very few (in my conceit) for pyekt and lofty
words can burd him, none, I am well assured, ouergoe him: yeet he has rather
dubled, then defalckt oght of my pains, by reason that in co^ferring his
translation with mine, I was forced, too weed out from my verses such choice
words, as were forestald by him: unless they were so feeling, as oothers
could not countreuaile their signification: In which case yt were no reason,
too sequester my pen from their acquaintance, considering, that as M. Phaer
was not thee first founrder, so he may not be accou^pted thee only owner of
such terms. Truly I am so far from embeazling his travails, as that for thee
honor of thee English, I durst undertake, too run over these books
again, and too geeue them a new liuerie in such different wise, as they
should not let with M. Phaer his badges, ne yeet be clad with this apparraile,
wherewith at this present they coo^ forth atyred. Which I speak not of
vanity, too enhaunce my coonning, but of mere verity, too advance thee
riches of our speech. More over in soo^ poinctes of greatest price, where
thee matter, as yt were, does bleed, I was moved too shun M. Phaer his
enterpretation, and clinge more near too thee meaning of mine authoure, in
slising thee husk and cracking thee shel, too bestow thee kernel upon thee
wyttye and enquisitiue reader. I could lay down here sundry examples, were
yt not I should be thought over curious, by prying out a pimple in a bent: but
a few shall suffice. In thee fourth book, Virgil deciphering thee force of
Mercurye among oother properties writes thus. Dat somnos adimitque, and lumina
morte resignat. M. Phaer does English yt in this wise. And sleeps therewyth
he geeues and takes, and men from death defendes. Mine enterpretation is this:
He causes sleeping and bars, by death eyelyd vphasping. This is cleene
contrary too M. Phaer. He writes, that Mercurye defends from death, I
write that yt procures death, which (under his correction) does more annere
too the author his mind, and too natures woorcking. For if Mercurye did not
slay before yt did salve, and procurd sleeping ear yt caused waking, Nature
in her operations would be founderd, thee fat were in thee fire, thee marcket
were mard. Too like effect Chauncer brings, in thee ^ift book, Troilus thus
mourning. Thee owl eeke, which that hight Ascaphylo,
Has after me shright al these nights two:
And God Mercury, now of me woeful wreche
Thee soul gyde, and when thee list, yt feche.
Again Virgil in diverse places inuesteth Juno with this epitheton, Saturnia,
M. Phaer ouerpasseth yt, as if yt were an idle word shuffled in by thee
authoure too dam up thee chappes of yawning verses. I neauer, too my
remembrance, omitted yt, as in deed a term that carries meat in his mouth,
and so emphatical, as thee ouerslipping of yt were in effect thee chocking of
thee poet his discourse, in such hauking wise, ac if he were throtled with
the chincoughe. And too inculcat that clause thee better, where thee marriadge
is made in thee fourth book beetweene Dido and Aeneas, I ad in my verse,
Watrye Juno, Although mijne author vsd not thee epitheton, Watrye, but only
made mention of earth, air, and fyere: yeet I am well assured, that word
thoroughly conceived of an heedeful student may geeue him such light, as may
ease him of six moonethes travail: which were well spent, if that Wedlock were
well understood. Thus Virgil in his Aeneis, and Ovid in his Metamorphosis are so
tickle in soom places, as they rather crave a construction than a translation.
But yt may be here after (if God will grace my proceedings) I shall be
occasioned, in my Fin Couleidos, too unlace more, of these mysteries. Which
book I must be many years breedinge: but if yt be thoroughly effected, I
stand in hoape, yt will fall out too be gratum opus, not Agricolis, but
Philosophis.

Now too coom too them, that guesh my travail too be easy, by reason of thee
liberty I had in English words (for as I can not divine upon such books,
that happlye rouke in students mewes, so I trust, I offer no man injury, if I
assume too my self thee maydenhed of al wurcks, that has been before this
time, in print, too my knowlegde, diuulged in this kind of verse) I will not
greatly wrangle with them therein: yeet this much they are too consider, that
as thee first applinyg of a word may ease me in thee first place, so perhaps,
when I am occasioned too use thee self same word else where, I may be as much
hyndered, as at thee beginning I was furthred. For example. In thee first verse
of Virgil, I make, season, long in an oother place yt woulsteede me percase
more, if I made yt short: and yeet I am now tied too use yt as long. So that
the advantage that way is not very great. But as for thee general facilitiee,
this much I dare warrant young beginners, that when they shall have soom firm
footing in this kind of Poetry, which by a little payneful exercise may be
purchased, they shall find as easy a vein in thee English, as in thee Latin
verses, ye and much more easy than in the English rythmes. Touching mine own
trial, this much I will discoouer. Thee three first books I translated by
startes, as my leisure and pleasure would serve me. In thee fourth book I did
task my self, and persued thee matter soomwhat hoatlie. M. Phaer took too thee
making of that book fifteen days. I hudled up mine in ten. Wherein I coouet
no praise, but rather do crave par don. Forelyke as forelittring biches whelp
blind puppies, so I may be perhaps entwighted of more haste then good speed,
as Sir Tho mas More in like case gybeth at one that made vaunt of certain pild
verses clowted up extrumpere.

Hos quid te scripsisse mones ex tempore versus?
Nam liber hoc loquitur, te reticente, tuus.
But too leave that too thee veredict of oothers (wherein I crave thee good
lyking of thee curteouse, and skorne thee controlment of thee currish, as those
that usually reprehend most, and yeet can amend least) thee ods beetweene
verses and rythme is very great. For in thee one every foot, every word,
every syllable, yea every letter is too be observed: in thee oother thee last
word is only too be heeded: As is very liuelye expressed by thee lawyer in
empaneling a iurye. Johannes Doa: M. Kytchin. in Coun^eete page 51. A.
Richardus Roa: Johannes Miles: Thomas Giles: Johannes Den: Willielmus Fen:
Willielmus Neile: Johannes Sneile: Johannes Hye: Thomas Pie: Richardus Leake:
Johannes Peake.
Happlye such curious makers, as your lordship is, will account this but rythme
dogrel: but we may suite yt with a more civil word, by terming yt, rythme
peale meal, yt rowles so roundlye in thee hyrer his ears. And are there not
diverse skauingers of draftye poetrye in this our age, that bast their papers
with smearie larde savoring al too geather of thee frynig pan? What Tom Towly
is so simple, that will not attempt, too be a rithmoure? If your Lordship stand
in doubt thereof, what thinck you of thee thickskyn, that made this for a fare
well for his mystresse upon his departure from Abingtowne? Abingtowne,
Abingtowne God be with thee:
For thou haste a steeple like a dagger sheathe.
And an oother in thee praise not of a steeple, but of a dagger. When al is
goane but thee black scabbard,
Well faer thee haft with thee duggeon dagger.
Thee therd (for I will present your lordship with a leshe) in thee commendacion
of bacon. He is not a king, that wears satin,
But he is a king, that eats bacon.
Have not these men made a fair speak? If they had put in Mighty Joue, and
Gods in thee plural number, and Venus with Cupide thee blind Boy, al had been
in thee nick, thee rythme had been of a right stamp. For a few such stiches
boch up our new fasshion makers. Provided not wythstanding always that
Artaxerxes, al be yt he be spurgalde, being so much gallopt, be placed in
thee dedicatorye epistle receiving a cup of water of a swayne, or else al is
not wurth a bean. Good God what a frye of such wooden rythmours does swarm
in stacioners shops, who neauer enstructed in any grammar school, not atayning
too thee paringes of thee Latin or Greek tongue, yeet like blind bayards rush
on forward, fostring their vain conceits with such ouerweening filly
follyes, as they reck not too be condemned of thee learned for ignorant, so
they be commended of thee ignorant for learned. Thee reddyest way therefore
too flap these droanes from thee sweet senting hiues of Poetrye, is for thee
learned too apply them selves wholye (if they be delighted with that vein)
too thee true making of verses in such wise as thee Greeks and Latins, thee
fathers of knowledge, have done; and too leave too these doltish coystrels
their rude rythming and balducktoom ballads. Too thee sturring therefore of
thee riper, and thee encouraging of thee younger gentlemen of our Universities
I have taken soo^ pains that way, which I thought good too beetake too your
lordship his patronage, being of yt self oother wise so tender, as happly yt
might scant endure thee typpe of a frumping phillippe. And thus omitting al
oother ceremonial compleme^toes beetweene your lordship and me, I commit you
and your proceedinges too thee garding and guiding of thee almighty. From
Leiden in Holland thee last of June. 1582.

Your Lordship his loving broother Richard Stanyhurst.

TOO THEE LEARNED READER.
IN thee observation of qua^titees of syllables, soom happlye will be so
stieflie tied too thee ordinances of thee Latins, as what shall seem too
swerve from their maxims, they will not stick too skore up for errors. In
which resolution such curious Priscianistes do attribute greater prerogative
too thee Latin tongue, than reason will affurd, and less liberty too our
language, than nature may permit. For in as much as thee Lati^s have not been
authors of these verses, but traced in thee steps of thee Greeks, why should
we with thee stringes of thee Latin rules cramp our tongue, more than the
Latins do fetter their speech, as yt were, with thee chains of thee greek
precepts. Also that nature will not permit us too fashion our words in all
poinctes correspondent too thee Latinistes may easily appear in such terms
as we borrow of them. For exemple: Thee first of, Breuiter, is short, thee
first of, briefly, with us must be long. Likewise, sonans, is short, yeet,
sowning, in English must be long: and much more if yt were, Sounding, as thee
ignorant generaly, but falslye do write; nay, that where at I wonder more,
thee learned trip their pe^nes at this stoane, in so much as M. Phaer in thee
very first verse of Virgil mistaketh thee word, Yeet sound and sown differ
as much in English, as solidus and sonus in Latin. Also in thee midest of a
word we differ soo^tymes from thee Romans. As in Latin we pronounce, Orator,
Auditor, Magister long: in English, Ora^toure, Audo^toure, Magistrate, short.
Likewise we pronounce, Praepa^ro, Co^pa^ro, short in Latin, and, prepared and
compared long in English. Again thee infallibelist rule that thee Latins have
for thee quatitye of middle syllables is this. Penultima acuta producitur, vt
virtutis; penultima grauata corripitur, vt sangui^nis. Honor in English, is
short, as with thee Latins: yeet dishonor must be long by thee formoure
maxim: which is contrary too an oother ground of thee Latins, whereby they
prescribe, that thee primative and deriuatiue thee simple and compound be of
one quantitye. But that rule of al oothers must be aba^doned from thee English,
oother wise al words in effect should be abriged. Moother, I make long. Yeet
grau^dmother must be short. Buckler, is long; yeet swashbuckler is short. And
albeyt that word be long by positio^, yeet doubtless thee natural dialect of
English will not allow of that rule in middle syllables, but yt must be of
force with us excepted, where thee natural pronuntiation will so have yt. For
ootherwise we should bannish a number of good and necessary words from our
verses; as M. Gabriel Haruye (if I mystake not thee gentleman his name) has
very well observed in one of his familiar letters: where he lays down
diverse words straying from thee Latin precepts, as Majesty, Royaltye,
Honesty, etc. And soothly, too my seeming, if thee conjunction, And, were made
common in English, yt were not amiss, although yt be long by position: For
thee Romans are greatly aduantaged by their words, Et, Que, Quoque, Atque:
which were they disioincted from thee Latin poetry, many good verses would be
rauelde and dismembered, that now carry a good grace among them, having their
ioynctes knit with these copulative sinnewes. But too rip up further thee
peculiar propretye of our English, let us listen too Tullye his judgment,
wherein though he seem very peremptory, yeet, with his favor, he misheth
thee cushe^. Thus in his book, entitled Orator, he writes. Ipsa natura,
quasi modularetur hominum oratione^, in omni verbo posuit acutam vocem, nec vna
plus, nec a postrema syllaba citra tertiam. In this saying Tullye observes
three poinctes. First, that by course of Nature every word has an acce^t.
Next, one only: lastly, that thee said acce^t must be on thee last syllable,
as prope, or on thee last saluing one, as Virtutis, or at thee furthest on thee
therd syllable, as Omnipote^s. Yeet this rule takes no such infallible effect
with us, although Tully makes yt natural, who by thee skyl of thee Greek and
Latin did aim at oother languages too him unknown, and therefore is too be
borne wythal. As, Peremtorie, is a word of four syllables, and yeet thee
accent is in thee first. So Secundarie, ordinary, Matrimony, Patrimony,
Planetarie, imperative, Cosmographie, ortography, with many like. For although
thee ignorant pronounce, Imperative, Cosmographie, Ortography, geeuing thee
accent too thee therd syllable, yeet that is not thee true English
pronuntiation. Now put case thee cantel of thee Latin verse (Sapiens
dominabitur astris) were thus Englished: Planetary woorckinges thee wismans
virtue represseth: albeyt thee middle of planeta be long with thee Romans,
yeet I would not make yt scrupulus, too shorten yt in English, by reason thee
natural pronou^tatio^ would have yt so. For thee final eende of a verse is to
please thee ear, which must needs be thee vmpyre of thee word, and
according too that weight our syllables must be poysed. Wherefor sith thee
poets theymselues aduouch, Tu nihil inuita facies, dicesue Minerua. That
nothing may be done or spoake^ against nature, and that Art is also bound too
shape yt self by all imitation too Nature: we must request these grammatical
Precisians, that as every country has his peculiar law, so they permit every
language too use his particular loare. For my part I purpose not too beat on
every childish tittle, that concerns Prosodia, neither do I undertake too
chalck out any lines or rules too oothers, but too lay down too thee reader
his view thee course I took in this my travail. Such words as proceed from
thee Latin, and be not altered by our English, in them I observe thee
quantity of thee Latin. As Honest, Honor: a few I excepted, as thee first of
appeered, adventure, aproched I make short, although they are long in Latin: as
Appareo, Aduenio, Appropinquo: for which and percase a few such words I must
crave pardon of thee courteous reader. For ootherwise yt were like enough that
soom grammatical pullet, hacht in Dispater his sachel, would stand clocking
aganyst me, as though he had found an horse nest, in laynig that down for a
falt, that perhaps I do know better then he. Yeet in these diriuations of
terms I would not be doomde by every reaching herrault, that in roaming wise
will attempt too fetch thee petit degree of woods, I know not from what
auncetoure. As I make thee first of River short. A Wrangler may imagine yt
should be long, by reason of Riuus, of which yt seems too be derived. And
yeet forsooth riuus is but a brook, and not a river. Likewise soom English
words may be read in soom places long, in soom short, as skyeward, seaward,
searowme. Thee difference thereof grows because they are but compound words
that may be with good sense sunderd: and thee last of Sea, and sky beenig
common breeds that diversity. Also thee self same word may varye because
of thee signification. Thee first of Felon for a thief I make long, but when
yt signifies thee disease, so named, I hold yt better too make yt short.
Again a word that is short being divided, may be long in an oother place
contracted. As thee first of, Leaves, if you divide yt in two syllables, I make
short, if you contract yt too one syllabe I make yt long. So thee first in
Craving is long, and thee therd person of thee verb, too wit, Craves, may seem
short, where the next word following begins with a vocal, yet yt is long by
contraction: and so diverse like words are too be taken. And truly such
nice observations that Grammarians do prescribe are not by thee choysest
poets alvvayes so preciselye put in execution: as in this our author I have
by thee vvaymarckt. In thee fore front of thee first book he makes thee
first of Lauinum long. In thee same book he uses yt for short. Likewise
does he vary thee first of Sichoeus. So in thee therd book thee midest of
Cyclopes soomtyme is made long, soomtyme short. And in the same book thee
conjunction, Que, is long. As Liminaque laurusque Dei totusque moueri. And in
thee fourth: Cretesque Driopesque ferunt, pictique Agathyrsi: Also thee first
of Italia is long: yeet in thee therd book Italus is short: as: Has autem
terras, Italique hanc littoris oram.

Touching the termination of syllables, I made a prosodia too my self squaring
soomvvhat from thee Latin: in this wise.

A finita communia. B. D. T. Breuia: yeet these words that eende like
diptho^ges are common: as mouth, south, etc. C common. E common: if yt be
short, I write yt vsualy with a single E. as the, me if long with two, as
thee me. although I would not vvish thee quantity of syllables too depend so
much upon thee gaze of thee eye, as thee censure of thee ear. F. breuia. G.
breuia: soomtyme long by positio^ where D may be enterserted, as passage is
short, but if you make yt long, passadge with, D. would be written, albeyt,
as I said right now, thee ear not ortographie must decyde thee quantitye, as
near as is possible. I. common. K. common. L. breuia, praeter Hebraea, vt
Michael, Gaebriel. N. Breuia, yeet words eending in diptho^gvvise would be
common, as plain, feign, swayne. O. common, praeter o longu^. P. Breu. R.
Breu. except words eending like dipthonges that may be common, as your,
our, hour, sour, succor, etc. As and Es common. Is breu. Os common. Us
breu. V. common. As for M. yt is either long by position, or else clipped, if thee
next word begin with a vocal: as fame, name: for albeyt. E. be thee last
letter, that must not salve. M. from accurtation, because in thee ear M is
thee last letter, and E does noght else but lenghe^ and mollifye thee
pronountiatio^. As for. I. Y. VV. in as much as they are moungrels, soomtyme
consona^tes, soomtyme vocals, where they further I do not reject them,
where they hinder, I do not greatly weight them. As thee middle of
following I make short, not vvythstanding thee VV: and lykvvise thee first of
power. But where a co^sona^t immediately follovveth thee VV, I make yt alvvayes
long as fowling. This much I thought good too acquaynt thee gentle reader
vvythal, rather too discoouer, with what private precepts I have embayed my
verses, theu too publish a directorye too thee learned who in their trauayls
may franckly use their own discretion, vvythovvt my direction.

THE FIRST BOOK OF VIRGIL HIS AENEIS.
I That in old season with reeds oten harmonye whistled
My rural sonnet; from forest flitted (I) forced
Thee sulcki^g swincker thee soil, thoghe craggie, to sunder.
A labor and a travail too plowswayns hertelye welcoo^.
Now ma^hod and garbroyls I chaunt, and martial horror.
I blaze thee captain first from Troy cittye repairing,
Like wandering pilgrim too famosed Italy trudging,
And coast of Lauyn: soust with tempestuus hurlwynd,
On land and sailing, b^ Gods predestinat order:
But chief through Iunoes long fostred deadlye reuengment.
Martyred in battayls, ere town could statelye be builded,
Or Gods theare settled: thence flitted thee Latin of spring,
Thee root of old Alban: thence was Rome peereles inhaunced.
My muse show the reason, what grudge or what furye kendled
Of Gods thee Princess, through so cursd mischeuus hatred,
With sharp sundry perils too tugge so famus a captain.
Such festred rancoure do Sayncts celestial harbor?
A long buylt city theare stood, Carth ago so named,
From the mouth of Tybris, from land eke of Italye seauerd,
Possessed with Tyrians, in streingh and riches abounding,
Theare Juno, thee Princes her Empire wholye repoysed,
Her Samos owtcasting, here she did her armonye settle,
And warlick chariots, here chiefly her ioylitye reigned.
This town she labored too make thee gorgeus empress,
Of towns and regions, her drift if destenye furthred.
But this her hole meaning a southsayd mystery let
That from thee Trojans should branch a lineal of spring,
Which would thee Tyrian turrets quite batter a sunder,
And Libye land likewise with warlick victory conquoure.
Thus loa bye continuance thee naues of fortun ar altered.
This Juno fearing, and old broyls bluddye recounting,
Vsd by her Greek fauorits, that Trojan cittye repressed,
Her rancour canckred she can not let to remember,
And Paris his scorning judgment does burn in her entrayls.
She pouts, that Ganymed by Jove too skitop is hoysed.
She bears that kindred, that sept unmerciful hatred.
With these coals kendled she soght al possibil engines
In surging billows too touze thee coompanie Trojan.
All the frushe and leauings of Greeks, of wrathful Achilles.
Through this wide roaming thee Trojans Italy mishing
Full many year wandered, still crossed with destenye backward.
Such trauail in planting thee Romans auncetrye claymed.
Tward Sicil Isle scantly thee Trojan nauye did enter,
And the sea salt foaming with brave flantadoe did harrow,
When that Juno Godesse thee fuid most deadlye reuoluing
Thus to her self mumbled: shall I leave my purpose vnaunswerd?
Or shall I this Trojan too seize thus on Italye suffer?
Forsooth I stand let by fats: and clarcklye recounted.
As though that Pallas could not be fullye revenged,
Thee Greekfleete scorching, thee Greekish coompanye drowning:
And for on his faulty practice, for madness of Ajax?
This Queen wyld lightninges from clouds of Iuppiter hurling
Down swasht their navy, thee swelling surges vphaling.
Thee pacient panting she thumpt and launst with a fyrebolt,
And wythal his carcass on rockish pinnacle hanged.
And shall I then Juno, of Saints al thee Princes abiding,
Both the wife and sister too peerless Iuppiter holden,
In so great a season with one od pild country be warring?
If this gear cotton, what wigh a will yield to mine aulters
Bright honor and Sacrifice, with rits my person adoring?
Thus she frying fretted, thus deeply plunged in anger
Aeolian kingdoom she raught; where blusterus huzing
Of wynds in Prison thee great king Aeolus hampreth.
These flaws their cabbans with stur snar iarrye do ransack,
Greedelye desyring too rang: king Aelous, highly
In castle settled, their strief does pacify wisely.
But for this managing, a great hurly burlye the wyndblasts
Would keep on al mayneseas and lands with woonderus humbling.
Thee father almighty this mischief warelye doubting
Mewd up these reuelers coupt in strong dungeon hillish,
And a king he placed, through whose Maiestical Empire
These blasts rouse forward, or back by his regal apoinctment.
Too this princelye regent her suit lady Juno thus opned.
Aeolus (in so much as of mankind the Emperor heaunlye
And father of thee Gods too thee the auctoritye signed
Too swage seas surging, or raise by blusterus huffling)
Thee water of Tyrrhen my foes with nauye do trauerse:
Troy town with tamd gods too land ek of Italy bringing.
Yield to the wynds passadge, duck down their fleet with a tempest,
Or ships wide scatter, with fluds that company swallow.
Nymphs do I keep fourteen for peerless bewtye renowned,
Of these thee paragon, for fayrenesse, Deiopeia
Too the in fast wedlock will I knit, thye wife only remaining;
Thy pheere most faithful through eendles season abiding,
Thee father of fair brats, for this thy curtesye, making.
This labor is needelesse (dear Queen) king Aeolus aunsward.
Thy mind to accomplish my bounden duitye requires.
For my mace and kingdoom through thy fast freendship I gained.
Through thy freendlye travail me does king Iuppiter algats
Tender: by thye labor with Gods at bancket I solace.
Thou madst me in tempest and blusturs loftelye ruling.
This said: with poyncted flatchet thee mountan he broached
Rush do the winds forward through perst chinck narrolye whizling;
Thee land turmoyling with blast and terribil huzing.
They skud too the seaward, from deep profunditie raking
Too the sky thee surges, the east west contrary do struggle
And southwind ruffling: on coast thee chauft flud is hurled.
Crash do the rent tacklings; thee men raise an horribil owtcrye.
Thee clouds snach gloomming from sight of Coompanie Trojan
Both Light and welken: thee night does shaddo the passadge.
Thee skies do thunder, thee lightnings riflye do flush flash,
Noght breeds them coomfort, eeche thing mortalitye threatens.
Aeneas (his lyms with sharp cold chillye benumbed)
Does groan, then to skyward his claspt hands heauelye lifting,
Thus spoke: O Trojans, o thrice most nobil or happy
That before eune the parents with byckring martial ended
Your lives at townewals: of Greeks o woorthye the strongest
Stout Diomed: bye the filds of Troy what fortun unhappy
Me fenst from falling with thy fierce slaughterus handstroke
Wheare lies strong Hector slaughtred by manful Achilles.
Wheare stout Serpedon does rest, where gauntlet or helmet
In water of Simois, with souldours carcases harbor.
This kyrye sad solfing, thee northen bluster aproching
Thee sayls tears tag rag, to the sky thee waves vphoysing.
The oars are cleene splintred, the helm is from ruther vnhafted
Their ships too larboord do nod, seas monsterus haunt them.
In typs of billows soom ships with danger ar hanging.
Soom synck too bottoms, sulcking thee surges asunder:
Thee sands are mounted: thee southwynd merciles eager
Three gallant vessels on rocks gnawne craggye reposed,
(These rancks the Italian dwellers do nominat altars)
Likewise three vessels the east blast full mightelye whelmed
In sands quick souping (a sight to be deepelye bewailed)
One ship that Lycius did shroud with faithful Orontes
In sight of captain was swasht with a roysterus heapeflud.
Down the pilot tumbleth with plash round soommoned headlong.
Thrice the grauel thumping in whirkpoole plunged is hooueld
Soom wights vpfloating on raisd sea with armor apeered.
In foame froth picturs, with Trojan treasur, ar vpborne.
Also where Ilionus was shipped, where manful Achates
And what vessel Abas possessed and aged Alethes
Were bulcht by billows and boarde by forcibil entrye:
Thee storm did conquoure, thee ships scant weaklye resisted.
These unruly revels, and rifrafs wholye disordred,
As broyl unexpected, thee sea king Neptun awaked.
Sturd with these motions, his pleasing pallet vpheauing
He noted Aeneas his touzdtost nauye to wander,
And sees thee Trojans with seas and rain water heaped,
This spightful pageaunt of his own syb Juno remembering,
Thee wynds he summond: and wroth words statelye thus used.
What syrs? your boldness does your gentilitie warrant?
Dare ye loa, cursed baretours, in this my Segnorie regal,
Too raise such raks iaks on seas, and danger vnorderd?
Well syrs: but tempest I will first pacify raging.
Be sure, this practice will I nick in a freendlye memento.
Pack hence doggye rakhels, tell your king, from me, this errand.
Of seas thee managing was neauer allotted his empire.
That charge me touches: but he may streth monsterus hildens,
Your kennels, good syrs: let your king Aeolus hautye
Execut his ruling in your deep dungeon hardlye.
Thus said, at a twinkling thee swelling surges he calmed
Thee clouds he scatterd, and clear beams sunnye recalled.
Cymothoe and Triton on steep rock settled ar haling
Thee ships from danger: with forck king Neptun is ayding.
He balcks thee quick sands, and fluds does mollefye sweetly,
He glyds on the seafroth, with wheales of gould wagon, easy.
In mydst of the pepil much like to a mutenye raised
Where barcks like bandogs thee raskal multitud angry,
Now stoans and fyrebrands flundge out, furye weap on awardeth:
In this blooddye riot they soom grauet haplye beholding
Of geason pietee, do throng and greedelye listen.
He tames with sugared speeches their boysterus anger.
In likewise Neptun thee God, no sooner apeered
In coche: when billows their swelling ranckor abated.
Thee weather hackt Trojans to the next shore speedely posting
On Libye coast lighted: where they their nauye reposed.
Theare stands far stretching a nouke vplandish: an Island
Theare seat, with crabknob skrude stoans has framed an haven.
This creek with running passadge thee channel inhaunteth.
Here do lie wide scatterd and theare cliues loftelye steaming,
And a brace of menacing ragd rocks skymounted abides.
Under having cabbans, where seas do flitter in arches.
With woods and thickets close coucht they be clothed al upward.
Acel or a cabban by nature formed, is under,
Fresh bubling fountayns and stoanseats craved ar inward:
Of Nymphs thee Nunry, wheere sea tossed nauye remaining
Needs not too grapple thee sands with flooke of an anchor.
Hither has Aeneas with seaun ships gladlye repaired.
On sands from vessels does skippe thee coompanye cheereful,
Pruning their bodyees, that seas erst terribil harmed.
First on flint smiting soom sparcklinges sprinkled Achates,
In spunck or tinder thee quick fire he kindly received.
With sprigs dry wythered thee flame was noourrished aptly.
Forth do they lay vittayls, with storm disseasoned heavy.
Their corn in quernstoans thye do grind and toste yt on embers
In the while Aeneas too rock crept loftye, beholding
In the sea far stretching if that knight Antheus haplye,
Were frusht, or remanent of Trojan nauye were hulling:
Or Capis, or the armours high picht of manlye Caicus.
No ships thence he scried, but three stags sturdye were under
Near the seacost gating, them slot thee clusterus heerdflock
In green frith browsing: still he stands and snatcheth his arrows
And bowbent sharply, from kind and faithful Achates:
Chief stags vpbearing croches high from the antlier hauted
On trees stronglye fraying, with shaft he stabd to the noombles
Through fels and trenches thee chase thee coompanye tracked,
Their blades they brandisht, and keen prages goared in entrayls
Of stags seun migty; with ships thee number is eeuened.
With this good venery to the road thee captayn aproched
And to his companions thee killed stags equalye sorted.
With wine their venison was swyld, that Nobil Acestes
In shore Trinacrian bestowd with liberal offer.
These pipes Aeneas then among thee coompany broched
And with these speeches their minds thus he cherrished hautlye
O dear companions (for we erst have tasted of hardness)
Brawnd with worse venturs, thee mighty God also shall eend this.
Through Sicil his raging wyld frets and rumbolo rustling
On peers you sailed, through Cyclops dangerus helcaue.
On with a fresh courradge, and bace thoghts fearful abandon.
Of peril escaped much shall thee vearye remembrance
Tickle us in telling: through such sharp changeable hazards
And doubtful dangers, our course tward Italye bending,
We must rush forward: our seat theare destenye pitcheth.
Theare must thee kingdoom with Trojan fame be revived.
Stand ye to your tacklings: and wayt for prosperus eendings.
Thus did he speak manly, with great cares heauely laden,
His grief deep squatting hoap he yields with phisnomye cheereful.
They do plye their commons, like quick and greedye repastours
Thee stags vpbreaking they slit to the dulcet or inchepyn.
Soom do slise out collops on spits yeet quirilye trembling,
Soom do set on caldrons, oothers do kendel a bauen.
With food they summond their force: and coucht in a meddow
Their panch with venison they franck and quaffye carousing,
When famine had parted, the tabils eeke wholye removed,
They their lost feloes with long talck greedye required.
With fear good coomfort mingling: if so haplye they lived,
Or that their lives thee tempest bitter had eended.
But chiefly Aeneas did wayle for manful Orontes
And for knight Amicus, thee fats ek al heavy reuoluing
Of Lycus and of sturdye Gyan, with woorthye Cloanthus.
Now the eende near streched; from seat when Iuppiter heunly
Thee seas, thee regions and eeche place worldly beholding,
On Lybye land lastly fixed his celestial eyesight.
And thus as he mused, with tears Venus heavy beblubberd
Pressed forth in presence, and whimpring framed her errand.
O God most pusiaunt, whose mighty auctoritye lasting
Ruls gods, and mankind skeareth with thunderus humbling:
What syn has Aeneas, my brat, committed against the?
What do the poor Trojans? who with fell boucherye slaghterd
For bending passadge to the promised Italye, therefore
No worldly corner can them securitye warrant.
You to me full promised, ear that years sundry were eended,
That Roman famely should spring from the auncetrye Trojan,
By whom thee worldly coompas should wholye be ruled.
Wherefor (mighty father) what does thy phansye thus alter?
I took soom coomfort, when Troy was latelye repressed,
With futur hap coming, past fortun unhappy requiting.
And yeet these wretched vagabunds hard destenye scourges
When shall (Prince pusiant) these dangers dryrye be canceld?
Antenor was habil, from Grekish coompanye slincking,
Too pass through Greceland saulfly to Lyburnical empire.
Also to thee fontayn welspring of woorthye Timauus.
Where through nine channels with mountayns murmerus hurring
Rough the sea floas forward, thee land with snarnoise enhaunting
Here notwithstanding this founder builded a cittye,
That Padua is cleaped, too linnadge Trojan allotted.
And arms of Troy town bearing: there he saulflie does harbor.
We that are of kindred too the, and have shrind in Olympus,
Our ships are whelmed through ons implacabil anger.
(A pitiful reckning) we are touzd, and from Italye feazed.
Is this your daughters ritche dowry? her stablished empire?
Thee prince of mankind, father of Gods, mirrelye simpring
Lyk when he thee tempest with cheereful phisnomye calmeth,
Bust his prittye parat prating, and mildlye thus aunswerd.
Fear ye not (o darling) on thy side destenye runs.
Thee Roman townewals thou shall see loftelye raised,
And thy sun Aeneas his glittring glory to luster.
This much I determyn, my mind no party shall alter,
Thy child Aeneas (for since such care the does anguish,
Thee fates close coouerd I will to the playnelye set open)
Thy sun, I say, valiant shall foster in Italy garboyls,
Strong and sturddye pepil with wars and victory trampling.
Theare shall he buyld cittyes, and theare laws civil enacting,
Until three summars shall coompas his hudge Lauyn empire:
And, the Rutils conquourd, three wynters stormye be glyding.
But thy sun Ascanius, which is eeke surnamed Iulus,
(Ilus he was termed, whilst stood the great Ilian empire)
He shall be the regent, until years thirtye be flitted,
From the Lauin kingdoom the state and thee chiefty remoouing:
And with thick bulwarck shall he fence thee rempired Alba.
Here three hundred wynters shall reign knight Hector his offspring.
By Mars fyrye fatherd twyns till the Queen Ilia gender;
Romulus in forest of wulues dugge nurrished eager
Shall take thee regiment, and town walls statelye shall vpraise
Of Rome, thee Romans of his owne-name, Romulus, highting.
This rule thus fixed no time shall limit, or hazard:
Endless I do grant yt: nay further Juno fell hearted,
Thee seas, thee regions, thee skies so spightfulye moyling,
Shall cut of al quarrels, and with me newlye shall enter
In leage with Romans, and gownesept charelye tender.
These thus ar established. Theare shall cum a season herafter,
When thee said famely shall crush Greeks segnorye thoroughly.
Thee Trojan Caesar shall spire fro this auncetrye regal,
His rule too Garamants, too stars his glory rebounding
Julius of valerus princely surnamed Iulus.
Thou shall him settle, with his east spoils fraighted, in heunseat,
Whom with relligious good vows shall magnifye diverse
Thee world shall be quiet, then shall broyls bluddye be finnisht.
Then plain sound dealing with laws of woorthye Quirinus
And Remus, his broother, thee Roman cittye shall order.
Thee gates of warfare will then be mannacled hardly
With steel bunch chain knob, clingd, knurd, and narrolye lincked.
Here within al storming shall Mars be settled on armoure
With brass knots hundred crumpled; with sweld furor haggish
Like bandog grinning, with gnash tusk greedelye snarring.
Thus said: he forth posted (by May borne) Mercurye downward
That new buylt Carthage should house thee Trojan asemblye.
He flitters swiftly with wings full fledgye beplumed
On Libye land seizing: there he soon perfourmeth his erraund.
Thee Moors are sweetened by Gods forwarned apoinctement,
But chief of al Dido, thee Queen, was wroght to the Trojans.
But the good Aeneas in night with care great awaked
With Phoebus rising vpgot, too ferret al vncooth
Nouks of strange country, in what coast his nauye does harbor?
If men, or if sauadge wyld beasts there in only do pasture.
For there he no tillagde did find: thus was he resolved.
And what he discoouerd, too tell to the coompanye flatly.
His ships he kenneld near forest under an angle
Of rock deep dented, shaded with thickleaued arbours.
He walcks on private with noane but faithful Achates
Darts two forth bringing with sharp steel forcibil headed.
In the myd of forest as he gads, his moother aprocheth,
In weed eke in visage like a Spartan virgin in armor
Or like to Herpalicee, sweeft Queen, steeds strong ouerambling,
Which does in her running surpas thee swift flud of Hebrus.
She bare on her shoulders her bow bent aptlye like huntresse;
Down to the wynd tracing trayld her discheaueled hearlocks;
Tuckt to the knee naked: thus first she forged her errand.
Ho syrs, perceaud you soom maiden coompany straggling,
Of my dear sisters with quiver closelye begyrded
Rearing with shoutcry soom boar, soom sanglier ougly?
So Venus: and to Venus thee soon thus turned his answer.
We hard of no showting, too sight no sister apered.
o to the, fair Virgin, what term may rightlye be fitted?
Thy tongue, thy visadge no mortal frayltye resembles.
Thart, No doubt, a Godesse, too Phoebus sister, or arcted
Too Nymphs in kynred: to the lasting glory be granted.
Smooth this craggye trauayl: tell what celestial harbor
Coompaseth our persons: these men, this country we know not.
Us to this od corner thee wynd tempestuus hurled.
This fist shall sacrifice great flocks on thy sacred altars.
Then Venus: I daigne not my self wurth such honor heunly.
Of Tyrian virgins too wear thus a quiver is used.
And to go thus thynly with wrapped up purpil atyred.
Thou see large Afric, thee Moors, and Town of Agenor,
Thee Libye land marckmears: a country manful in armoure.
In this coast Dido, from her broother flitted, is empress.
Tedius in telling and long were the iniurye total:
Chief poyncts I purpose too touch with summarye shortness.
Her spouse Sichaeus was namd, too no man unequal
In lands, her dandling with fervent passion hoatly.
Her father in wedlock took to him this virgin unharmed.
But then her own broother was by right settled in empire,
Pygmalion named; thee sinck and puddil of hateful
And furiouse cutthrots: he murthred selly Sichoeus,
With gould love blinded iump at thee consecrat altars.
Of sisters freendship reckning; thee murder he whusted,
His syb in her mourning with long coynd forgerye feeding.
But loa, the proper image of corpse vntumbed apeered
In dream too Dido; with pale wan phisnomye staring.
His breast he vncloased, thee wound, and bluddyful altars.
Thence to flit he wild her, not long in country remaining,
Tward her costlye viadge his wief to hyd treasur he poincted,
Where the unknown ingots of gould and silver abounded.
Dido so well fornisht too flee with coompanye posteth.
Such folck as the tyrant pursude with vengeabil hatred,
Or feared his regiment in thronging cluster asembled.
They snach such vessels that then were rigd to be sailing
Pigmalions riches was shipped, that pinchepeny boucher.
And of this valiant attempt a woomman is authresse.
Theare they were enshoared, wheare thou shall shortly se townwals.
And city vpsoaring of new Carthago to skytoppe.
Thee plat they purchased, that place first Byrsa they cleaped
And so much as a bulhyd could coompas craftelye getting.
But syrs, whence coom you? what wights? or too what abiding
Country do you purpose too pass? Thee capteyn amazed,
And sobs deep fetching, with sight full sadlye thus aunswerd.
O gay Godesse lustringe if I made to the largelye recital,
Or that of our troubles you would to the summarye listen,
Thee night thee sunbeams would shroud in clasped Olympus.
We coom from Troytowne (of Troyseat if haplye the rumoure
Your ears has tinckled) late a tempest boysterus haggard
Our ships to Libye land with rough extremity tilted.
I am kind Aeneas, from foes thee snatcher of housgods
Stowd in my vessels: in skies my glory does harbor.
Land I seek Italian: from Jove my pettegrye buddeth.
I made from Troytowne with vessels twentye to seaward,
My dam mighty Godesse gyding, I my destenye tracked.
Rackt with sour blustering seaun ships ar scantlye recoouerd
I like a poor pilgrim through desert angle of Afric
Wander, thrust from Asian regions and fortunat Europ.
Here Venus embarring his tale thus sweetlye replied.
What wight thwart, doubtless thee gods al greatly do tender
Thy state, near Tyrian city so lucklye to iumble.
Hence take thy passadge, to the Queens court princelye be trudging.
Theare thy coompanions with battred nauye be landed,
With flaws crushed ruffling, with north blast canuased hurring.
Thus stand thy recknings, unless me mine augurye fails.
Marckloa, se well yoonder swans twelve in coompany flusshing
And the skytip percing, enchast with a murtherus eagel
Swift do fle too landward, on ground al pressed tobe seized.
As these birds feazed, their wyngs with ^olitye flapping,
Sweep the sky, with gladness their creaking harmonye gagling,
Eunso thye companions, or now with saulftye be shoared,
Or, void of al danger, their ships are grappled at anchor.
Speedelye be packing, keep on hardlye the plain beaten highway.
This said she turned with rose color heaunlye beglittred.
Her locks like Nectar perfumes sweet melloe relinquisht.
Her train sy^ flagging like wide spread Conopye trayled.
Her whisk showed Deity, he finding his moother, in anger
Chauffing; thee fugitive with these words sharplye reproved.
What do ye mean (moother) with an elf show, vaynelye thus often
Your soon too iuggle? why our hands both claspe we not hardly?
Why do we not plainly good speeches mutual utter?
Tward city trauayling thus he blames her forgerye masked.
But Venus enshrowds them with a thick fog palpabil ayrye,
Unseen of eeche person by sleight inuisibil armed:
Least soom their passadge with curious article hyndring
Would learn, whence they trauayld? Too what coast ar they repayring?
She to her loftye Paphos with gladness myrrye returns:
Wheare stands her temple with an hundred consecrat altars;
Smoking with the encense; the loa pauement senteth of herbflowrs.
In thee mean season they do pass directlye to towneward
They trip too mountayns high typ, thee cittye but under
Marcking; thee castles and turrets statelye beholding.
Aeneas woondreth; where dorps and cottages erst stood,
For to se such sturring, such stuff, such gorgeus handwoorck.
Thee Moors drudge roundly; soom walls are loftelye raising;
Soom mount high castles; soom stoans down tumble al headlong;
Soom mearefurth platfoorms, for buylding curious houses;
Soom do choose the Senate, sound laws and order enacting;
Soom frame play theaters; soom deepelye dig harborus havens;
Soom for great palaces do slise from quarrye the chapters.
Like bees in summar season, through rustical hamlets
That flirt in soonbeams, and toil with mutterus humbling.
When they do forth carry their young swarm fledggie to gathring:
Or cells ar farcing with dulce and delicat hoonnye:
Or porters burdens vnloads, or clustred in heerdswarme
Feaze away thee droane bees with sting, from maunger, or hiuecot,
Thee labor hot sweltreth: thee combs time flowrye be sprinckleth.
O wights most blessed, whose walls be thus happelye touring
Aeneas vttred: thee town top sharplye beholding.
He throngs in shryne clowd (a strange and meruelus order)
Through crowds of the pepil, not seen, nor marcked of annye.
In towns myd center theare sprouted a groauecrop, in arbours
Green weed thick shaded, wheare Moors from surge water angry
Parted, a good token did find: for Juno, the Princess,
Theare the pate, in digging, of an horse intractabil vttred.
Thee wise diuined, by this prognosticat horshead,
That Moors wide conquest should gain with vittayl abundant.
Here to Juno Godesse thee Princess Dido did offer
A fair buylt temple, with treasure ritchlye replennisht.
Thee stayrs brassye grises stately presented, here also
Thee beams with brazed copper were costlye bepounced.
And gates with the metal do creake in shrilbated harshing.
In this green frithcops a new sight newly repressed
Long fearful dangers: Aeneas freshlye begins
For to raise his courradge: his sharp aduersitye treading,
For whilst in temple corners he gogled his eyesight
Waiting for Dido; the stat of thee cittye beholding,
Whilst craftmens coonning he marckt with wonder amazed,
He spied on suddeyn thee conflicts Trojan al ordered,
And that their bickrings al soyls have coompased earthly.
He sees Atrides, Priamus, to both hurtful Achilles.
Fast he stood: and trickling did speak: what nouke (sir Achates)
In World what region do not our toyls liuelye remember?
Loa the, se king Priamus; soom crooms of glory be resting.
Soom tears this monument and soom compassion asks.
Pluck up a good curradge? this fame soom saulftye will offer.
Thus said, his heart throbbing with vain dead pictur he feeds;
Groan sighs deep reaching with tears his liars full he blubbred.
He sees with baretours Troy walls environed hardly:
Here Greeks swiftlye fleing, them Troiyouths coompanye crushing.
Theare gad thee Trojans:in coach runs helmed Achilles.
He weeps also, seeing flags whit, with Rhesus his holding
In sleep, whom napping, Tydides blooddye betrayed,
His fierce steeds leading to the camp, er al hungrye they grased
On Trojan pasturs, or Xanth stream gredelye bibled.
Troilus he marcked running, deuested of armor:
A lucklesse stripling, not a match too coape with Achilles:
With steeds he is swinged, down picht in his hudge wagon emptye,
Thee rayns yeet griping: his neck and locks fall a sweeping
Thee ground, his lance staff thee dust top turuye does harrow.
In thee mean season Troy dames too temple aproched
Of fretting Pallas, with locks vntressed al hanging,
With grief meeklye praying, with breast knocks humblye requesting.
Thee Gods hard louring to the ground her phisnomye drowped.
Theare thrice about Troy walls with spite knight Hector is haled.
For gould his carcass was sold by the broker Achilles.
Here sighs and sobbing from breast up he mightelye rooted,
Thus too see the wagon, thee spoil, the unfortunate ending
Of dear companion, thee like cars also do sting him,
For to se king Priamus, with his hands owtstreched, unarmed.
Himself he marcked combynd with Greekish asemblye.
He noted Indye pepil, with swart black Memnon his army.
Theare wear Amazonical woommen with targat, an haulfmoone
Lykning, conducted by frantic Penthesilea,
No swarms or trouping horsemen can apale the virago,
Her dug with platted gould rybband girded about her.
A baratresse, daring with men, though a maid, to be buckling.
Whilst prince Aeneas these picturs woonderus heeded,
And eeche pane throghly with steadfast phisnomye marcked,
Too church Queen Dido, thee pearl of bewtye, repaired:
Of lively yoonckers with a galland coompanye guarded.
In Cynthus forest much lyk too swift flud of Eurot
Where Nymphs a thousand do frisk with Princelye Diana.
On back her quiver she bears, and highlye the remnaunt
Of Nymphs surpasing with talright quantitye mounting.
Too se this, her spirit with secret gladness abounds.
Such was Dido ioying, so she with regalitye passed,
With Princely presence thee wurcking coompanye cheering.
In the gate of the Godesse she syts, near temple his arches
In chair stately throned, with clustring garrison armed.
She frams firmlye statuts, and task wurcks equalye parts.
Or toyls too pioners by drawcut lotterye sorteth.
Now sees Aeneas with a crowding sudden asemblye
Antheus and also Sergestus, doughtye Cloanthus,
And oother Trojans with rough seas stormye besweltred,
Too soil unacquainted by tempest horriblye pelted.
He stands astonyed, so woondreth lykwise Achates:
For to shak hands freendly fear bars, now gladness on haleth.
But the case vnwytted them lets, thearfor they resolved,
With darck clowd shaded, too learn their formor auentur,
Wheare ride their vessels? why they coom? what cause is of hastening?
For they the picked choisemen did cul from nauye, requesting
Mercy, to the temple trotting with meruelus houling.
When they were in presence, of pleading pardon afurded,
Then the brave Ilionus thus stout deliured his errand.
O Queen most pusiaunt, too whom king Iuppiter heunly
Too raise a new city, by rare felicitye, granted,
And to rule a country, with scepter of equitye, sturdy:
We caytiefe Trojans, with storms ventositye mangled,
Do crave thee (Princess) from flams our nauye to guerdon.
Yield pytye, grant mercy; flowrs of gentilitye pardon.
For we hither sayld not, thee Moors with an army to vanquish;
Or from their region with prede too gather an heardflock.
Such valerus coorradge rarely men conquered haunteth.
Theare stands a region, by Greek bards Hesperye named,
A well known country, for strong and plentiful holden,
Theare dwelt th'Oenotrians; but in our adge Italye cleaped,
So namd of captayn: too this brave country we minded
Too bend our journey.
But with a flaw suddeyn chauffing stormbringer Orion,
Spurnt us too the waters then sootherne swashruter huffling
Flundge us on high shelueflats, to the rocks us he buffeted after.
Here then a poor remnaunt in this thy segnorye landed.
What fell beastlye pepil rest here? such barbarus vsadge
What soil wyld fosters? On sands they renounce us an harbor.
They do bid us battayl, fro the shore thee coompanye pusshing.
If ye do skorne mankind, and eeche wight mortal his harming,
Let Gods sharp Justice in soom sort yeet be remembered,
Our king Aeneas us ruld, who for equitye rightful
Every man owtpassed, for feats and martial armoure.
If this prince matchless no mortal destenye daunted,
But yet is in breathing, from tempest saulflye recoouerd:
First begin a freendshippe, for he will make fullye requital.
In Sicil eek region fair towneships sundry be settled:
In that od Isle reigns, from Troyblud spirted, Acestes.
Grant forth thy warrant in docks our nauye toe settle:
Grant plancks from forest too clowt our battered inlecks,
That we our king meeting may pass tward Italye sailing.
If Libye seas raging the liefe of this captayn have eended,
If no good coomfort does rest of nobil Iulus:
Suffer us at least wise, with iagged nauye retyring
To Sicil our passadge too bend, too famus Acestes.
This speech had Ilionus: that song his coompanye chaunted.
Brieflye then here Dido, with down cast phisnomye, parled.
Rest ye quiet, Trojans, your thoghts from danger abandon.
In great sundry peryls, my state set rawlye me streineth
Too keep thus the seacoast with ward and garrison heedeful.
Who do not Aeneas, or Trojan cittye remember?
Their valor and courradge, their fyrebrand glorius onsets?
We Moors, like dullards, are not so wytles abiding,
Nor Phebe from our city does so far sunder his horses.
If ye be determynd, too sail to old Italye Saturn,
Or to Sicil backward to the king, right nobil, Acestes,
I Will ye man, esquipping your ships with furniture aptlye.
Or will you soiourne in this my feminin empire?
In town you denisons I do make: let nauye be docked.
Trojans and Tyrians I will with one equitye measure.
Would God your captayn with sootherne blastpuf inhurled
Here made his arriual; but a watch tward mouth of each haven
Speedelye shall he placed, your chieftayn woorthye to ferret:
Wheather he through forest does range, or wandreth in hamlets.
This princelye promise boldning both manful Achates
And father Aeneas, thee clowd with greedines eager
Too cleave they coouet: to Aeneas thus first said Achates.
Thou sun of heunlye Godesse, how stands thy phansye resolved?
Thou see al cock sure, thy fleet, thy coompanye salued.
One ship is only absent, that in our sight sanckt to the bottom.
Thy moothers prophecy to the remnaunt fitlye does answer.
Scant had he thus spoken, when clowd them drossye relinquisht,
And from earthly thickness, too thinness vannished ayerye.
Theare stud up Aeneas, with glittring beautye redowning.
Godlyke in his feauture: for his heunly moother amended
His bush with trimming, his sight was yoouthlye bepurpled:
His look sweet simpred, much like to the pullished iuerye
By crafts hand burnisht: or with Phoebe silver enameld:
Or touch stoane brazed with deep gould purelye refined.
He then unexpected to the Queen thus brauelye replied.
Here do I stand present, whom you so gladlye required,
Aeneas Trojan from storms defalcked of Afric.
Of trauayl of Trojans, O Queen, thee succeres only.
We crooms of Trojans with land and seafurye moyled,
Of wealth dispoyled, like plodding stormebeaten haglers
From native country, from city exiled abiding,
For these thy benifits too make like freendlye requital
I may not, Dido: nay the routs of progenye Trojan
Through wild world scatterd, can not make worthy repayment.
Thee Gods (if Deitee worcks of wights godly regards,
If right be reigning, if virtue is too be rewarded)
Yield to the like kyndnesse, What world, what vertuus heunly
Both father and moother gave breath to so peereles a daughter.
Whilst hills cast shaddows, whilt streams to the seas be reuoluing,
Whilst stars ar twinkling in the orbs of fixed Olympus,
Thy fame with thine honor shall be by eternitye blazed
To what coast I trauayl: These speeches duytiful vttred
He shaks Ilionus with righthand, also Serestus
With lefthand, so doughtye Gian, so doughtye Cloanthus.
First was Queen Dido with a sight thus sudden apaled,
Next with his hard venturs, and thus she rendered her answer.
Thou sun of hautye Godesse, what crooked dangerus hazards
Pursu thy person? what seas thee terribil hither
Have flounst? And art thou Aeneas mighty, begotten
Of thy sire Anchises, and of Venus at Simo fountain?
I saw king Teucer whillon too Sidon aproching
Expulst fro his regions, his right with might too recover,
And with aid of Belus: then my sire Belus in Island
Of Cyprus reigned, that land with victory may string
From that time forward I knew thee Trojan auenturs,
Thee name of thee city, what kings succeeded in empire.
Enne thee very enemy thee Trojans glory did utter.
And from their linnadge right he derived his offspring.
Whearefor, friend Trojans, with draw your selves to mye lodgings.
Me the lyk hard venturs erst, and aduersitye suffering
In this new kingdoom good fortun lastly reposed,
My self erst flighted to reliue thee flicted I learned.
Thus she discoursed: to palaice forth statelye she leads
Thee prince Aeneas; when service godly was eended.
Thee whilst to his navy she caused twentye fat oxen
Straight to be conueighed, with an hundred bristeled hudgebrawns,
Of sheep like number with lambs: gods mighty rewarding.
But the inner lodgings were with regalitye trimmed.
In mydst of chaumber thee room for bancket is apted,
Thee walls are clothed with massy and purpuled arras,
Of plate great cuphoords, thee gould embossed in anticque
Patterns, her linnadge by long fetched pettegre trayling
Of syers thee bedrol with native country recorded.
Then the good Aeneas (for carcking natural eggeth
Thee mind of the parent) to the vessels posted Achates,
This to tell Ascanius, conducting him to the cittye.
Thee sire in his darlings good success chieflye rejoices.
Lykwise he commanded too bring from nauye the presents
Snacht from Troy ransackt, with gould frets ritchlye bedawbed.
Also the roabe pretiouse colored like saufred Achantus:
Which plad vested Helen, from Greece when to Troy she flitted:
Her weeds of wedlock, that her baut dam Leda did offer,
Of price a rare present: also thee scepter he willed
Of the fair Ilionce to be brought: this fayrye was eldest
Of Priamus daughters, this mace too carrye she woonted:
Thee pearl and gould crowns too bring with garganet heavy.
With this charge vttred to the vessels hastened Achates.
But Venus in musing with caers intoxicat hudling
New sleights fresh forgeth: the face of trim prittye Cupido
Too chang with iuggling, whereby be too Dido resorting
In place of Ascanius, with gyfts might carrye the Princess
Too braynesick loouefits, to her boans fire smouldered huffling.
For Venus haulf doubts thee Moors sly treacherus handling:
Juno her rormenteth: by night this terror her haunteth.
This reason her sturring thus spoke she to cocknye Cupido.
My sweet choice bulcking, my force and my power only,
My baby despising thee bolts of Iuppiter angrye;
Of the request I refuge, with meek submission humbled.
Thou know Aeneas, by broothers birth to the lincked,
Through seas to have wandered by Iunoes merciles hattred:
Thou know thee venturs: my grief thy heart often has anguisht.
Dido enterteigneth this guest with curtesye civil.
Yeet do I still fear me these fair Iunonical harbors.
In straw thear lurcketh soom pad: yeet will she be sturring.
Thearefor her endewours with counter craftinis hinder.
Inflame thee Princess with looues affection earnest
That mye sun Aeneas with me she chieflye may dandle.
This drift too coompasse let this my loare be well heeded.
At the fathers sending thee boy to the cittye repayreth.
(Delicat Ascanius, whose forward succes I tender)
With many rich presents from Troyflams narrolye escaped.
This child fast sleeping will I lodge in loftye Cythera,
Else on hill Idalium in seat sacred he shall be reposed.
Least that he this stratagem should find, or woorck wylye founder.
Thou shall his visadge for a nights space fitlye resemble.
Thee gay boy kindlye playing, thee known lads phisnomye taking:
That when Queen Dido shall col the, and smacklye bebasse thee,
When quaffing wynebols, when bancquets deyntye be served,
When she shall embrace thee, when lyplicks sweetlye she fastneth;
That then thou be suer, too plant thy poisoned hot love.
Too moothers counsayl thee fyrye Cupido does harcken
Of puts he his feathers, favoring with gatetrip Julus.
But Venus enfuseth sweet sleep to the party resembled,
Too woods Idalian thee child nice cocknyed heauing
In seat of her boosom: near senting delicat herbflowrs
Of precious. Maioram, with shade most temperat housed.
But now thee changling with gyfts does trudge to the cyttye
On to the court posting: his gyde was trustful Achates.
When that he too chaumber, most stately decked, aproched
Dido sat on beadsteed with curtens gorgeus hanged.
Then father Aeneas with Trojan cluster asembled:
On palet of scarlet they were for cossherye settled.
Thee waiting servant rich basins massye do carrye
Also wyping towels: maunchets sum in pantrye do basket
Fiftye busy damsels with charge of buttrye be tangled
With flame eke relligiouse too fire thee consecrat aultars.
Maidens, manseruaunts, of each is there numbered an hundred,
That with princelye viand the tabils al francklye do furnish.
Thee Tyrian lordings too Court most freshlyeer sorted.
On neeld wroght carpets these guestes were al vsshered aptly.
Aeneas presents they marck, they do gaze at Iulus.
His face goodlye roset, with speaking forgerye feigned.
They do look at mantel, with roabs of saffrod Achanthus:
To futur harm lotted: but chiefllye the princes unhappy
Is not with gazing contented fullye, but eauer
She does eye thee presents: thee mopsy her phantasye lurcheth.
On father Aeneas his neck thee dandiprat hangs.
And to his great lyking his sire supposed be gayneth.
He Is kips too Dido: thee Queen with curtesye cheereful
Accepts thee princox: soomtyme she him claspeth in arms.
Poor soul not wytting what great God her he atlye besieges.
But this prittye peacock, his dames charge flilye remembering,
First of al attempteth too raze from phansye Sichaus.
With quick love living fro the dead the affection haling:
Too new flamd liking her mind, erst rustye, reducing.
When fare was finnisht the tabils eeke stately removed
Hudge bols thick they placed, with garlands crowned the they mazars.
All the palaice ringeth with stamp, a mutterus humming
Tinckleth through the entryes: the tapers eeke kendled ar hanging
From gold wyre glittring: thee night with brightness is owted.
Here thee Queen wylled that a massiue gould cup, abounding
With stoans coucht precious, should be presented; her own hands
Thee goulden goblet with spirt wine nappye replennisht.
This cup king Belus with her old syers former al used.
Thee rout kept a silence, these speeches Dido did utter.
Iuppiter (of guest folcks thee stay thwart truly reported)
Grant that this present Tyrian with Trojan asemblye
May breed good fortune to our friends and kynred here after.
Let make sport Bacchus, with good lady Juno, be present.
And ye, my friend Tyrians, thee Trojan coompanye frollick
Thus said, with sipping in vessel nycelye she dipped.
She charge Bicias: at a blow he lustelye swapping,
Thee wine fresh spuming with a draught swild up to the bottom.
Thee remnant lordings him pledge: Then curled Ioppas
Twangd on his harp golden, what he whillon learned of Atlas.
How the moon is trauersd; how planet soonnye reuolueth,
He chaunts: how mankind, how beasts do carrye their offspring.
How floods be engendered, so how fire, celestial Arcture,
Thee rainebreede seunstars, with both the Trionical orders.
Why the sun at westward so tymely in winter is housed.
And why the night seasons in summer swiftlye be posting.
Thee Moors hands clapping, thee Trojans, plaudite, flapped.
But with sundry motive demands Queen Dido the night space
Strecht, then unhappy being with looues sweet poison atached,
Very much of Priamus demanding and much of Hector.
Also how thee darling of bright Aurora was armed?
How Diameds horses were shapt? how strong was Achilles?
Nay guest, quod the lady, decipher from the beginning
Thee Greekish falsehood, with thy own sharp venterus hazards.
For now seun summers ar spent, sense thy trauayl hardy
On land and sailing, lyk pilgrim, causd the to wander.
Finis libri primi.
THEE SECVND BOOK OF VIRGIL HIS AENEIS.
With tentiue lystning eeche wight was settled in harckning.
Thus father Aeneas chronicled from lofty bed hautye.
You me bid, O Princess, too scarrify a festered old soar
How that thee Trojans wear pressed by Grecian army.
Whose fatal misery my sight has wytnesed heavy:
In which sharp byckring my self, as party, remained.
What ruter of Dolopans wear so cruel hearted in harckning,
What cursed Myrmidones, what karne of canckred Ulysses
That void of al weeping could ear so mortal an hazard?
And now with moisture thee night from welken is hastening:
And stars too slnmber do stur men's natural humors.
How be yt (Princelye Regent) if that thy affection earnest
Thy mind enflameth, too learn our fatal auentures,
Thee toyls of Trojans, and last in fortunat affray:
Though my queazy stomach that bluddy recital abhors,
And tears with trilling shall bayne my phisnomye deeply:
Yeet thyn hot affected desire shall gayn the rehearsal.
Thee Greekish captayns with wars and destenye mated.
Fetching from Pallas soom wise celestial engyn,
Framd a steed of timber, steaming lyk mounten in hudgnesse.
A vow for passadge they faynde, and Brute so reported.
In this od hudge ambry they ramd a number of hardye
Tough knights, thick farcing thee ribs with clustered armoure.
In sight is Tenedos of Troy; thee famosed Island;
Whilst Priamus floorisht, a seat with riches abounding.
But now for shipping a rough and dangerus harbor.
Theare lurckt these minions in sort most secret abiding.
Al we then had deemed, to Grace that the army retired
Thearefor thee Trojans their longborne sadnis abandon:
Thee gates vncloased they skud with a lively vagare,
Thee tents of the enymyes marcking, and desolat haven.
Here foght thee Dolopans, theare stoutly encountered Achilles,
Here rode thee nauye: theare bat tayls bluddye wear offered.
Soom do look on dismal present of loftye Minerua.
Also they gaze woondring at the horse his meruelus hudgnesse
And first exhorts thee Trojans seallye Tymetes
Too bring thee monument in too thee cittye; then after
For to place in stately castle thee monsterus Idol.
Wheather he meant treasons, or so stood destenye Trojan.
But Capys and oothers diuing more deeply to bottom,
Warelye suspecting in gyfts thee treacherye Greekish,
Did wish thee wooden monster wear drowned, or harbourd
In scorching fyrebrands: or ribs too spatter a sunder.
Thee wavering Commons in kym kam sects ar haled.
First then among oothers, with no small coompanye guarded
Laocoon storming from Princely castle is hastening,
And a far of beloing: what fond fantastical harebrayne
Madness has enchaunted your wits, you town smen unhappy?
Ween you (blind hodipecks) thee Greekish nauye returned?
Or that their presents want craft? Is subtle Ulysses
So soon for gotten? My lief for an haulf penye (Trojans)
Either here ar couching soom troops of Greekish asemblye,
Or to crush our bulwarcks this woorck is forged, al houses
For to prye surmounting thee town: soom practis or oother
Here lurcks of coonning: trust not this treacherus ensign:
And for a full reckning, I lyk not barrel or hearing.
Thee Greeks bestowing their presents Greekish I fear me.
Thus said: he stout rested, with his chaapt staf speedelye running
Strong the steed he charge, thee planckrybs manfuly riuing.
Then the jade, hit, shiuered, thee vauts haulf shrillye rebounded
With clush clash buzing, with droomming clattered humming.
Had Gods or fortun no such course destenye knedded:
Or that al our senses wear not so bluntlye benumbed
Thear slight and stratagems had been discoouered easlye,
Now Troy with Priamus castle most statelye remaining.
But loa, the mean season, with shouting clamorus hallow
Of Troy town the shepheerds a yoncker mannacled haling
Present too Priamus: this guest full slylye did offer
Him self for captive, thearby too coompas his heasting,
And Trojan city to his Greekish country men open.
A brass bold merchaunt in causes dangerus hardye.
In doubtful matters thus stands he flattlye resolved,
Or to cog: or certain for knauerye to purchase a Tyburne.
Thee Trojan striplings crowding do cluster about him:
Soom view thee captive, soom frumping quillites utter.
Now lysten lordings, too Greekish coosinage harcken,
And of one od subtle stratagem, most treacherus handling Consteral.
For when this princox in mydst of throng stood unarmed,
Heedelye thee Trojans marcking with phisnomye staring:
Oh, quod he, what region shall shroud me villenus owtcast?
Whearto shall I take me forlorn unfortunate hoaplost?
From Greekish country do I stand quit bannished: also
Thee wrath hot of Trojans my blood now fierclye requires.
Thus with a sob sighing our mynds with mercy relenting
Greedelye we coouet, too learn his kindred, his errand,
His state, eke his meaning, his mind, his fortun, his hazard.
Then the squyre emboldned dreadles thus coined an answer.
King: my faith I plight here, to relate thee veritye soothlye.
I may not, I will not deny my Greecian of spring.
Though Sinon a caytiefe by fortun scuruye be framed
A liar him neauer may she make, nor cogger dishonest.
If that, king pusiaunt, ye have herd erst haplye reported
Thee name of thee famous Palamedes greatly renowned:
Thee Greeks this captain with villenus iniurye murdered:
Him they lying charged with treasons falslye, for hyndring
Forfooth their warfars: him dead now dolfulye mourn they:
Too serve this worthy, to him nearly in kindred alyed,
My father vnwelthy me sent, then a prittye page, hither.
Whilst he stood in kyngdoom cocksure, whilst counsel auayled,
Then we were of reckning; our feats wear duelye regarded.
But when my coosen was snapt by wicked Ulysses,
(A storye far published, no gloasing fabil I twattle)
With choloricque fretting I dumpt, and ranckled in anguish:
My tongue not charming with fuming fustian anger
Playnelye with out cloaking, I vowed to be kindlye revenged,
Eauery if I backward too native country returned.
And thus with menacing lyp threats I purchased hatred.
Hence grew my crosbars, hence always after Ulysses
With new forgd treasons me, his foa, too terrefye coouets.
Ofthe gave out rumors, he fabled sundry reports,
Me to trap in matters of state, with forgerye knauish.
His malice he fostred, till that priest Calchas he gained.
But loa, to what purpose do I chat such ianglerye trim trams?
What needs this ^yngring? sith Greeks ye hold equal in hatred,
Sith this eke herd, serves, speed forth your blooddye reuengment.
So ye may full pleasure thee Greeks, and profit Ulysses.
Thee les he forth pratled, thee more we longed in harcking,
Too learn all the reasons, no Greekish villenye doubting,
Thee rest chil shiuering he with heart delivered hollow.
Thee Greeks their passadge very often determined homward.
And clooyd with byckring these wars they thought to relinquish.
Would God yt had fallen so: yet yt had so truly; but often
South wynds with winter storming their iournye did hinder.
Also of late season, when the horse was finnished holy
Thee skies loud rumbled with ringing thunderus hurring.
With weather astonyed, with such storms geason agrysed,
We sent Euripilus too sacred Apollo for answer.
Too soon he this messadge ruful from the oracle vttred.
Thee wynds with bloodshed were swagd, with slaughter of hallowd
Virgin, to Troy ward when first you bended a na^ye,
Your viage also hoamward a slaughter blooddye requires.
Thee wynd puff blustering no blood but Greecian asks.
When knight Euripilus this messadge crooked had opned,
Then we were al daunted, with trembling fearful atached,
What Greek for sacrafice thee God demanded Apollo.
Shortly the priest Calchas was brought by the shrewdwyt Ulysses,
And now soar laboreth, too know what person is asked.
Diverse did propchecy forth with my destenye final.
That this new practice from my old foes treacherye sprauleth.
Thee priest twice five days thee case with secreacye seals.
He maks it scrupulous forsooth with blooddye rehearsal
Of tongue, too sacrifice a wight: him pressed Ulysses
This not with standing, with long importunat urging,
Of purpose Calchas me wretch too the altar apoincted.
Thearto the rest yielded; for what them private had anguisht,
On me they soon settled with publicque joyful agreement.
With posting passadge thee day most dismal aproched,
Thee fruits al be ready, garland to mye temple is apted,
My escape I deny not, my flight from prison I knowledge,
Thee woas and the myry foul bogs for an harborye taking
Until they to seaward had packt, and sails had hoysed.
Now shall I wayle, poor soul, from native country removed,
Of father accoumpting my self, of children al hoaplesse.
Whose giltlesse slaughter be my flight is like to be coompast.
Thee do I crave, Priamus, by Gods almightye supernal
(If truth, if unfeigned good faith does floorish among men)
For to spare a wretched fugitive thus touzed in hatred.
We thawde with weeping do pardon francklye the villeyn.
In person Priamus forth with commanded his yrons
For to be disioyncted, these words eke gratius adding.
What wight th'wart, stranger, no Greekish country remember.
Thou shall be a Trojan; yet in one doubt truly resolve me.
What means this burly shapte horse? What person is author?
For what relligion? what drift? what martial engyn?
This said: my yooncker with Greekish treacherye lessond,
Too stars up mounting both his hands vnmannacled, aunswerd.
You fires perpetual with rits unspotted abiding,
Too you for witness do I call: you mystical altars,
You swoords I fled from, that I woare, you consecrat headbands,
I do hold yt lawful, to reveal thee mysterye Greekish,
Too scorn their persons, to blab their secrecye private.
What law canbynd me, to be true to so wicked a country?
So that you, Trojans, in promised mercy be constant,
If truth I shall manifest, if gifts be largelye requited.
Thee Greeks assurance in Pallas whoalye remained
And with her assistaunce their were shouldered always.
But sith Tydides, eke of euels thee founder Ulysses
Attempted lewdly fro the church to imbeazel an holy
Pattern of Pallas, thee keepers filthelye quelling,
Then they the sacred image with brude fifth blooddye profaned,
Thee virgins garlands with contempt impius handling:
Sith they that attempted, thee Greekish succes abated
And there hoap albackward did drag: thee virgin eke angrye.
And her wrath the Godesse with signs most sensibil opned.
Scant was this pattern of Pallas settled among us
When flams of fiery flasshing most terribil hissed:
It sweat with chauffing: three times (to to strange to be spoken)
From ground yt mounted, both lance and targat eke holding.
Through seas priest Calchas, to retire back hastelye, wishes
For that against Trojans thee Greeks do vaynelye bear armoure.
Till that with the Godesse theymselues too Greece be returned.
Which they performed. Now that they sailed ar hoameward
They puruey weapons and Gods too pacifye purpose,
And to return hastly: thus Calchas eeche plat has ordered.
They framd this monument to appease celestial anger
Of the Godesse Pallas, the prophet that practis apoincted.
Howbeyt, Priest Calchas would have the horse lifted in hudgnesse,
Lest you, thee Trojans, through gats should carrye the present.
And so to be shielded yet again with patronage anticque.
If you with violence this gift too scatter had happened,
Graund heaps of mischief (Which Gods on the author his hertroote
First set (I do pray them) should Trojan cittye replennish.
And if this rellick by you to the cittye were haled,
Then, loa, the stout Trojans in wars should glory triumphing,
We to ye, like bondslaues, our selves for vanquished offering.
With this gay glosing of a stinking perjured hangman
We were al inueigled, with wringd tears nicetye blended.
Those whom Tydides, whom Lauissoean Achilles
And al their warlick vessels, in number a thousand,
In ten years respit could not with victory vanquish.
But marck what foloed: what chance and luck cruel happened
Iump with this cogging, our mynds and senses apaling.
As priest Laocoon by lot to Neptun apoyncted.
A bull for sacrifice full sizde did slaughter at altars,
Then, loa ye, from Tenedos through standing deep flud apeased
(I shiuer in telling) two serpents monsterus ouglye
Plasht the water sulcking to the shore most hastelye swinging.
Whose breasts vpsteaming, and manes blood speckled inhaunced
High the sea surmounted, thee rest in smooth flud is hydden
Their tayls with croompled knot twisting swashlye they wrigled.
Thee water is rowsed, they do frisk with flownse to the shore ward,
Thee land with staring eyes bluddy and fiery beholding:
Their fangs in lapping they stroke with brandished hot tongs.
Alwe fle from sacrifice with sight so grisled afrighted.
They charg Laocoon, but first they raght to the sucklings,
His two young children with circle poisoned hooking.
Them they do chew, renting their members tender a sunder.
In vain Laocoon the assault like a stickler apeasing
Is to sone embayed with wrapping girdle ycoompast,
His midil embracing with wig wag circuled hooping,
His neck eke chayning with tayls, him in quantitye topping,
He with his hands labored their knots too squise, but al hoaples
He strives: his temples with black swart poison aroyncted.
He freams, and skrawling to the sky brays terribil hoyseth.
Much like as a fat bull beloeth, that settled on altar
Half killed escapes thee missing boucherus hatchet.
But these blooddye dragons too sacred temple aproched
Under feet lurcking and shield of mighty Minerua.
A fear then general men's mated senses atached.
We judge Laocoon to be justly and woorthelye punnisht,
For that he rash charged with lance thee mystical idol.
Straight to place in city this image, too pacifye swiftly
Thee Gods offended, they do cry.
Down we beat our rampires, our town walls gapwyd ar opned.
Al we fall a woorcking, thee wheels we prop with a number
Of beams and sliders, thee neck with cabil is hooped.
Through walls down razed we draw thee mischeuus engyn,
Full bagd with weapons: sonnets are carroled hymnish
By lads and maidens, the roap ons to tip hertelye longing.
Hit slids, and menaceth futur hurt in cittye reposed.
O Gods, O country, o Troywals stronglye be rampyerd
Four times this monument at townegats staggred in entering,
Four times with the armor close coucht thee paunch belly classhed.
How be yt, blind bayards we plod on with frenzy bedusked,
And in thee castle we do pitch this monster unhappy.
By Gods commaundment thee troth Cassandra revealed,
Neauer in her prophecyes by the Trojans seallye believed.
We for a last farewell do deck through cittye the temples.
Thee whilst night darcknesse right after soonset aproched,
With shadow clowding earth, heun, and treachery Greekish.
Thee Greeks that glyded through walls, al softlye be whusted.
Then the Phalanx Greekish did sail with nauye well ordered
From Tenedos: shinings of moon most freendlye do gyde them.
To the shore acquaynted they do shooue: fire of admiral hoysed,
Straight Sinon, assured by Gods and destenye wrongful,
Thee stuf paunch closet from lincking ioynctlye releaseth.
Thee doors discloased, by roaps thee coompanye slided.
Tisandrus, Sthenelus captayns, hard herted Ulysses.
And Athamas, next also Thoas forth ishued hastlye.
Also Neoptolemus, but of oothers chieflye Machaon.
Down Menelaus is holpt, of the engyn forger Epeus.
Our men ar assaulted, with sleep, with druncknes asotted.
Thee watch they murthred, thee gats set eke open, a cluster
Of their companions they let in, thee coompanye lincketh.
Then was yt a season, when slumber sweetlye betaketh
Eech mortal person by wont and natural order.
I, loa, then in sleeping, to my seeming sorroful Hector
Pressed forth in presence, and salt tears dolfulye showred.
Harryed in steedyocks as of erst, black bluddye to visadge
With dust al powdered, with filthood dustye bedagled.
His feet ar up swelling with raynes of bridil ybroached.
Woa me God, how greatly was he changed from that od Hector,
Too Troy that whillon did turn with spoils of Achilles,
Or that with wyld fire thee Greekish nauye beskorched.
His berd was sloottish, thee blood, thick cluttred, his hears staynd.
Those wounds wide bearing, that he near thee cittye received.
I then, as I deemed by mine own will, thearto not asked,
Wept, in this manner to him speeches sorroful vttring.
O star of al Trojans, of town thee prosperus holder,
What lets thee lingered? from what far country, sir Hector,
Long loockt for coomst thou? so that after dangerus hazards,
And diverse burials of friends, of kindred, of oothers
We tossed now do se thee. By what chance filthye thy visadge
Is thus disfigured? These wounds why mortal apeere they?
He little accoumpted this fond and vanitye childish,
But sighs vpplucking from breast full deepelye, thus aunswerd.
Thou soon of holy Godesse, from flame thy carcas abandon.
Thee foes have conquered, Troytowne is fired of al sides.
Too city and Priamus lief enough Gods destenye granted.
If that thee Trojans hand strokes could fortefye manful,
This fiste, Greeks hacking, that fensiue service had eended.
Too the recommendeth Troy town their consecrat housgods.
Take these for the pilots of fats, by their aid seek a cittye.
Which stately town walls by thee shall stronglye be founded,
Through large seas passadge when thou shall wander hereafter.
Thus said: thee garland, me thought, and Vesta the mighty
From altars down fetching, thee fires eternal he quenched.
Thee whilst in city there roard a changabil howling,
Still the noise increases (yea though that very far inward
My father Anchises his court was settled in arbours)
Thee skrich rings mounting, increast is the horror of armoure,
From sleep I broad waked, to top hastly of turret I posted,
And to the shril yerning with tentiue greedines harckned.
Much like as in corn shocks sindged with blasterus hurling
Of South wynd whizeling: or when from mounten a rumbling
Flud raks up foorrows, ripe corn, and tillage of oxen.
Down tears yt wynd falls, and thick woods sturdelye tumbleth.
Thee crack rack crashing the vnwytting pastor amazeth.
Now Greeks most plainly their craft, long hammered, opned.
Vulcan has, in flaming, quit burnt, by his furnitur heating,
The house of Deiphobus, then next his neighbor his housframe
Vcalegon kendleth, Thee strand flams fyrye do brighten.
Thee towns men roared, thee trump taratantara ratled.
Thus then I distracted, with all ^^^^ning, ran to mye weapons,
Too shock in coombats, or guard with coompanye castles
Me my will on spurreth, thus wrath, thus phrensye me byddeth.
And to dye with byckring I took for a glorius empress.
But see: priest Pantbus of town and sacred Apollo
Panthus Otriades thee Greekish boucherye scaping,
Heeld in his hands holy rellicques, Gods conquered, also
His young prittye nephew, to the strandward speedelye trotting.
What news, sir Panthus? what forte were best to be fenced?
Scant said I these speeches, when words to me dolful he rendered.
Woorthye Sir, our last hour is coom, too late to be mourned.
We were in old season Trojans, Troy cittye was, also
Thee Trojan glory floorisht: now Iuppiter hardened
Has the state of Trojans subverted wholye. The pertlyke
Greeks thee flamd city with ruthlesse victory ransack.
Their steed has vpvomited from gorge a surfeit of armdmen.
Falls Sinon advanced, with fire, consumes al houses,
And flouts us kindly: thee gats ar cramd with an army.
Such troops as neauer too city Trojan aneered.
Soom stop al od corners, no nouke, no passage unarmed.
They brandish weapons sharp edgde, to slaghter apoincted.
In first encounter thee watch to to weaklye resisted.
With words of Panthus, and with Gods herried order
Kendled, I run forward too rush through thicket of armoure,
Wheare shouts vpclymbing most rise, wheare is heart sad Erynnis.
Theare leags as feloes Ripheus strong, Iphitus hardy.
By moonshyne roaming Hipanis, so sir Dymas eager
Flanck forth our vaunt guard: next cooms thee lustye Chroroebus
Soon to Prince Mygdon, who then not lucklye repaired
Too Troy: with lyking of mad Cassandra bewitched:
Soon to king Priamus by law: thus he lawfather helping,
His pheers wood prophecyes not at all the yooncker unhappy
Herd.
This band of Trojans thus ioynctly assembled, I framed
This speech: Stout gallants, brave youths, and coompanye manful,
If ye be determynd too sinck in martial hazards,
Too lyms, to carcass you see what fortun is offered.
Al things goa backward: thee Gods have flatlye renounst us.
Our state that whillon preserud: thee cittye to rescue,
Cleene burnt, were fruictles: let us hardlye be slaughtred in armor
Yamde men have one saulfty, not in hoap to settil a saulftye.
These words their valiant courradge do scarrifye deeply,
Like ravening woolf dams vpsoackt and gaunted in hunger,
That range in clowd shade: their whelps near starued ar eager
And expect vdders with dry iaws: so do we iustle:
We keep thee midpath with darcknesse nightye beueyled
Lord, bye whose heunly vttrau^ce may that nights blood be recou^ted?
Or match thee misery with counteruay labil howling?
The old town falls to ruin, that summers sundry was empress.
Thee streets and kennels are with slain carcases heaped:
Every house, eech temple with ruful slaughter abounds.
And yeet thee Trojans are not men vanquished only:
Sparcks of an old courradge to the conquourd freshlye be turning.
Thee Greekish victours not in eeche stroke shotfre remained.
Loud was thee yelling, great fears and murder of al sides.
Of Greeks thee first man with a gallant coompanye guarded
Fronted us, Androgeos, for friends us simplye believing.
In gentil manner thus he soon discoursed, unasked.
Have forward feloes: what means this luskish aproching?
You drawlach loytrers are scant from nauye repayring,
When your companions with spoils of cittye be laden.
He said: eke on suddeyn (for he was not freendlye lik aunswerd)
He spyed his person with Trojan coompanye wheeled,
Thence did he shrinck backward, his words al softlye repressing.
Like when as a trauayler thee snake with brambel ycoouerd
Vnwytting squiseth, with chance so sudden amazed,
Speedelye whips backward from woorme, with poisoned anger
Vpsweld. Androgeos lykwise most gastlye reculed.
We charge thee minions with round and compased armoure.
In streets unknown they do fall, with terror apaled.
Our first encounter by fortun lucklye was aided.
This success cheering and fleashing lustye Choraebus,
Thus spoke he: Dear sociats, sith we have this prosperus onset,
Now let us on forward, as luck and destenye gydeth.
And let us our targets exchange, and Greecian armor
Al clap on our bodies, marching with Greecian ensign.
Craft or doughtye manhod what nice wight in foa requires?
Thee Greeks shall furnish weapons. This spoken, an helmet
Of knight Androgeos glistring on pallet he pitcheth.
He took eke his target, then in hand his fawchon he griped.
Thee like did Ripheus, Dymas, and thee youthful asembly.
With new raght weapons eeche wight is newlye refreshed.
Too Greeks we linckt us, by Gods direction helped.
In night shade darcknesse with foes we skyrmished eft soons,
And with hot assalting too Limbo we plunged a number.
Soom run to vessels too strondward swiftlye retyring
Soom clymb their steeds womb, freight with perplexitye dastard,
Oh, Labor is fruictlesse, which Gods and destenye frustrat.
Lo ye; the wood virgin, with locks vnbroyded is haled
Cassandra, and trayled from temple of holy Minerua.
In vayn her eyes flamed too seat celestial heauing:
Her wrists eke tender with cord wear mannacled hardlye.
This sight foul freighted with woodful phrensye Choroebus
He runs too rescu, lyk a bedlem desperate, headlong.
We the man hot foloed, we coapt with Greekish asemblye.
Now be we peale pelted from tops of barbican hautye
Maynelye with our own men by stoans down rouled among us.
This dolye chance gald us, with blood, with slaghter abounding,
For that thee townsmen knew not this chaffar of armoure.
Thee Greeks al furious, too see Cassandra recoouerd,
Did band too geather: but chief thee courraged Ajax
And both the Atridans, thee stout Deloponian army.
Like wrestling meet winds with blast contrarius huzing,
East, weast and Southwynd, with pufroare mightelye ramping,
Hudge trees down trample: theare with God Neptun awaked
Thee seas with chauffing and strecht mace merciles hoyseth.
Also such old enymyes: policy that former aflighted
And coucht in corners, with a vengaunce freshlye retired,
And first discoouerd thee shields and treacherye feigned.
Our speech eke and gybbrish their guesh did fortefye soothlye.
Down cooms thee country: wheare first thee sturdye Choroebus
By sir Peneleus was slain, near consecrat altar
Of the Godesse Pallas: Ripheus like villenye suffered.
A man too pietee, to justice whoalye relying.
So Gods ordained thee chance. Lo our coompanye slaughtred
Both Dymas and Hypanis: nor thy devotion holy
Could salve thee Panthus, nor crown of blissed Apollo.
You boans of Trojans and houses flamed I witness,
In this last byckring I shrunck no danger or hazard,
With Greeks encountering: and if so fath bad apoincted,
My fist deserved my deeath. From thence we be tumbled
Iphitus and Pelias iump with me. But Iphitus aged
Dragd, and eke Pelias sore maymd with wound of Ulysses.
To Priamus castle thee shout does us hastelye carrye:
Here was hot assaulting, as though no skyrmish had else wheare
Been, ne yet a subject Trojan through cittye wear harmed.
Thus we se Mars furiouse, thus Greeks every harbory scaling,
Up fretting the pilers, warding long wymbeled entryes.
They clinge thee scalinges too walls, and under a sowgard
They clymb, in lefthand, with shields, tools fellye rebating,
With righthands grapling thee tops of turret ar holden.
In valiant coombat thee Trojans sturdye resisted.
They pashe thee pallets of Greeks, and rumble a muster
Of torn razte turrets, and for defensibil armoure
Thee Greeks with rold stoans in last extremity crusshed.
And rich gylt rafters, thee badge, thee glorius ensign
Of blood, thee Trojans are straynd too scatter in hurling.
Soom bands of Trojans with weapons naked in entryes
Rank close too geather, thee Greeks most manlye repealing.
We with all encoraged wear sturd too fortefye castle
Of poor king Priamus, bringing fresh streingth to the vanquished.
Theare stood an od corner from vulgar company singled,
A posterne secret, to the castle Princelye belonging
Andromachee the woeful that passage traced had often
Private, whilst Priamus kingdoom with saulftye remained,
Too graundsyre leading her young chield Astyanacta.
Too the typ of turrets I ran, wheare feeblye the Trojans
Cleene tyrde, the asaultours with weak force vaynely repulsed.
Theare was a toure standing on a rock, that in altitud euened
Thee stars, too seming (whence al thee Trojan asemblye
Was wont thee Greek fleet to behold, and customed army)
We that disioyncted; from stoans thee timber a sunder
We tearde, thee ioyncturs unknit, with an horribil hurring
Pat falls thee turret, thee Greeks with crash swash yt heapeth.
Their rowme supply oothers; no kind of weapon is absent,
Nor stoans, nor boans.
Theare stood ek al furiouse with wrath dan Pyrrhus in entrye
With brandisht weapons ruffling, in brasshaped armoure.
Much like the out peaking from weeds of poisoned adder,
Whom nauil of boorrows in wynters season has harbourd.
His slougth uncasing, him self now youthfulye bleacheth,
His tail smoog thirling, slyke breast to Titan vpheauing.
With toonge three forcked forth spirts fire freshlye regendred.
Theare foght Sir Periphas, and coachman of old of Achilles
Automedon named, soomtyme that guided his horses.
With these stout captayns thee youth of Scyria marched,
They do pres on forward, up fire to the rafter is hurled.
In person Pyrrhus with fast wroght twibbil in handling
Down beats with pealing thee doors, and post metal heaueth,
Hudge beams he brusteth, strong bars fast ioyncted he renteth.
A broad gap yawning with these great pusshes is opned,
Where with thee chambers ar plain discoouered in ward.
Now Priamus parlours, with long antiquitye nobled,
Too the soa stand open, with large far gallerye stretched.
Stronglye the first entry thee Trojans guarded in armoure.
But the inner lodgins did shrille with clamorus howting,
Too skies swift climbing was sent thee terribil owtcrye.
Then shiuering moothers through court do wander agasted,
Thee posts fast colling, the pilers most hertelye bussing.
With father his courradge his might dan Pyrrhus enhaunceth,
No man, no mortar can his onset forcibil hinder.
With rip rap bouncing thee ram to the chapter is hurled,
Posts al and parlours up from foundation heauing.
Pyks make thee passadge: and top syd turuye be turned
Al thee Princelye thrasholds; thee Trojans roundlye be murthred.
No place or od corners of Greekish souldor ar emptye.
Not so great a ruffling the river strong flasshye reteyneth
Through the breach out spurging, eke against bancks sturdely shogging
It brayeth in snorting, through towns through country removing
Both stabil and oxen. There I saw in boucherye bathed
Fyrye Neoptolemus, both breatherne lyncked Atridans.
And Hecuba old Princess did I see, with number, an hundred
Law daughters: Priamus with blood defiled his own fire,
That with his own traueling too Gods he settled on altars.
Fiftye nephew striplings, and lemmans fiftye reteynd he.
Now thee statelye pilers with gould of Barbarye fretted
Are razde. Wheare flaming does cease, thear Greeks do make hauock.
Happlye what eende Priamus did make, now will be required.
His foes old Priamus through court and cittye beholding
On rusty shoulders sloa clapped his unusual armoure,
And bootelesse morglay to his sides he belted unable.
His lif amydst the enymyes with foyne too finnish he myndeth.
In medil of the palaice to skies broad al open an altar
Stood with green laurel, through long antiquitye, shaded.
Now to this hold Hecuba, and her daughters mourneful asembled
In vain for succoure gryping their mystical idols.
Like dooues in tempest clinging fast closlye together.
When she shaw Priamus yoouthlyk surcharged in armoure
She said: What madness thee leads, unfortunate husband,
With thief mayls massiue to be clogd? Now whither I pray the?
Our state eke and persons may not thus weaklye be shielded.
No though my darling were present, courraged Hector.
Here pitch thy fortress: let trust be reposed in altar:
This shall us al succor, or we will ioynctlye be murthred.
This said; her old husband in sacred seat she reposed.
But se ye, from Pyrrhus scaping thee yoithlye Polytes,
Soon too king Priamus, through thrusting forcibil armoure
Rusht by long entreys, thee passadge blooddye begoaring.
Him quick dan Pyrrhus pursuing greedelye reatcheth.
With the push and poaking of lance he perceth his entrayls.
In sight of thee soarye parents he fell to the ground ward.
And liefe with the gushing bloodshed to the Gods he released.
When that king Priamus did see this boucherye beastlye,
Though that he were posting in fatal iournye to deaths door
Yeet this quick choleric challenge he could not abandon.
Now for this tyrany, thee Gods (so that equitye reigns
And the loare of justice) take, I pray them, rightlye reuengment.
In father his presence with spightful villenye cancred,
Thee soon that murthrest, my sight with, boucherye stayning.
Not so the right valiant (whose soon thwart feigned) Achilles
Was to his foa Priamus, but laws of martial arms
Tendering, did render too tumb thee carcas of Hector.
And me to my kingdoom both gently and truly returned.
The old man thus bawling, in streingth cleene weakened, here hurled
His dart at Pyrrhus from the anmoure feeblye rebounding,
In bos of his target with flagging weakness yt hangs.
Why then, quod Pyrrhus, thou shall be speedelye posted
Too coast infernal, thear let my exployts be reported.
My father advertise, that I was full truly begotten,
Baselye Neoptolemus was borne, that carrye for errand.
This said, poor Priamus with force from the altar is haled,
And then sir Pyrrhus with left hand grapled his hoarelocks,
In the blud him ducking of his own soon, sellye Polytes.
His blad he with thrusting in his old dwynd carcas vphilted.
This was Prince Priamus last end and desteny final,
Who saw thee Trojans vanquished, thee cittye repressed:
Empror of hudge Asia, erst ruling with dignitye regal,
In shore now namelesse doothly like a trunchon al headless.
This when I perceived, with sensibil horror atached,
My father Anchises here with do I call to remembrance,
Whilst I beheld Priamus thus gasping, my sire his adgemate,
I bear eke in memory my wiefe left soalye Creusa.
And my house dispoyled, then I thinck on my soon Iulus.
In this wise musing mine eye glaunst to my coompanye fensiue,
I do spy no Trojan, for soom tyerde, tumbled al headlong
Too ground, and diverse were burnt with purposed offer.
Thus then I left naked, by vestaes temple abiding
False Helen, in lurcking manner close settled, I marcked.
Thee flaming brightness from sight does darcknes abandon.
This minion doubting thee Trojans blooddye reuengment,
And also fearing thee Greekish fyrie requital,
Thee bane of us Trojans, of Greeks thee make bate Erinnys,
Formd her in a corner sneaking detested of altars.
With choler inflaming I rest al restles in anger,
With the death of the lady to requit my country repressed.
To Mycen, or Spartans and shall she be saulfly returned?
And after conquest as Queen with glory to floorish?
Her father, her palaces shall she se, her children, her husband?
With the knot of Trojan matrons to her service allotted?
Slain lies king 'Priamus: thee Trojan cittye beskorched.
Thee shoars of Dardan for her often with bloodshed abounded.
No suer, I may not such an horribil iniurye cancel.
For to kill a woonman though no great glory be gleamed,
Though valor and al honor from such weak victory flitteth,
Yeet to slay this fyrebrand, of al hurly burlye the foundresse,
Must be commended. My mind eke further is eased
If that of our slaughters I shall be partlye revenged.
And as I thus muttred, with roysting phrensye betraynted
My moother, the Godesse (who was accustomed algats
Ear this time present to be dusk) most brimlye did offer
Her self to visadge, thee night with brightness avoiding.
Eeune lyk as her deitee to the Saints does luster in heunblisse.
She claspt my righthand, her sweet rose parlye thus adding.
Soon to what od purpose thus mean ye to ruffle in anger?
What maks you furious? Will you care charye relinquish
Of me your moother? Too post with speedines hoamward
Too father Anchises were best: if seallye Creusa
Or the lad Ascanius from murder saulflye be breathing.
Them Greeks assalting had killed, or turned in ashes
Had not my deitee their streingth over highlye resisted.
Not thee Greekish Helen (whose sight thy passion angrye
Enkendleth) not fautye Paris this cittye represseth.
This ruin ordained thee Gods and destenye froward.
Look (for I thee moisture whear with, now mortal, is hyndred
Thy sight, do bannish, thee darcknesse clowdye remoouing.
See, that you do follow your moothers destinat order,
What she the commands to observe, preciselye remember)
Here loa, whear heaps hudgy thou see disioyncted a sunder
And stoans dismembered from stoans, smooke foggye bedusted,
Thee walls God Neptune, with mace threeforcked, vphurleth,
And cleene their ioyncturs from deep foundation heaueth.
And the Godesse Juno full freight with pooysoned envy
Thee gates strong warding, forth from the nauye the Greek foas
Does whoup, straight belted with steel.
In tops of turrets see wheare Tritonia Pallas
Is set, thee Trojans killing with Gorgon his eyesight.
Thee father of deitee thee Greeks does mightelye courradge:
Through his procurement thee Gods thee cittye dishable.
Flee, fle, my sweet darling, let toyls be finnished hastly.
Thou shall be shielded with my protection always.
I will not fail thee to time thou saulflye be settled.
This said, with darcksoom night shade quite clowdye she vannisht.
Grislye faces frouncing, eke against Troy leaged in hatred
Of Saints sour deitees did I see.
Then did I marck plainly thee castle of Ilion vplayd,
And Trojan buyldings quit topsy turuye removed.
Much lykon a mountayn thee tree dry wythered oaken
Sliest by the clown Coridon rusticks with twibbil, or hatchet.
Then the tree deep minced, far chopped does terrifye swinckers,
With menacing becking thee branches palsye before time,
Until with sowghing yt grunts, as wounded in hacking.
Al leingth with rounsefal, from stock vntruncked, yt harssheth.
With Gods assistaunce down from thee turret I lighted,
Mye tools make passadge through flame and hostilitye Greekish.
Too father Anchises old house thus saulflye retired,
Forth with I did purpose from thence too desolat hiltops
My sire too carry, but as I this matter had vttred,
Too live now longer, Troy burnt, he flatlye reneaged;
Or to dwell as bannisht. But, he said, you lustye iunentus
In years and carcass prime, quick and liuelye remaining
Flee you.
If Gods omnipotent my lief too linger had ordered
They would these lodgings have fenst. Suffices yt also
That Trojans misery did I live too testifye mourneful.
Good syrs, be packing, let my corpse here be reposed.
My fist shall purchase my death, my foa mercy will offer
For thee bootye fishing. Of grave to be voyded is harmless.
Long my liefe I pampred, too Gods celestial yrksoom,
Sith king of mankind, father of diuinitye total,
With thundering lightnings, my carcass stronglye beblasted.
These words expressing in one heast he stieflye remained
Round fell I too weeping, with my spouse soarye Creusa,
With my soon Ascanius, with all eke thee sorroful household.
Him we al desired too tame this desperate owtrage,
Our final slaghter not with such follye to purchase.
He rested wylful lyk a wayward obstinat oldgrey.
I then alarm shouted, too die did I verelye purpose,
For now what counsayl, what course may rightlye be taken?
What? father Anchises, hold you my duitye so sclender,
Too slip from Troy town, and here you soole to relinquish?
From the fathers sermons shall such fond patcherye flicker?
If Gods eternal thee last disseuered offal
Of Troy determyn too burn, if you father also
Your self too murder, too root your progenye purpose,
Catch that catch may be, thee street gate to slaghter is open.
From killing Priamus, dan Pyrrhus shortly will hither,
Thee soon fast bye the sire; thee sire that murthred at altars.
Wasd for this (moother) that me through danger unharmed
You led, now my enymyes to behold too riffle in house seat?
And my soon Ascanius, my sire, my seallye Creusa
For to se deep bathed, grooueling in bloods of each oother?
Nay then I beeshrew me: make ye have syrs: bring me mine armoure.
Now for a last farewell do I take me to Greekish asembly.
Soom Greeks shall find yt bitter, before al we be slaghtred.
I girt my weapons to my side, my tergat I settled
On lift hand so rushing to the streets I posted in anger.
But my feet embracing my pheere me in the entrye retained.
Too father owtraging thee soon she tendered Iulus.
If to dye you purpose, take us also in coompanye with you.
If through experience soom trust ye do settel in armoure
First guard this dwelling, wheare rests thee childish Iulus,
Wheare father is seated, where your spouse named, is harbourd.
These words out showting, with her howling the house she reple^nisht
But look, on a suddeyn what chance most woonderus happened
Tweene father and moother thee young boy settled Julus,
A certain lightning on his headtop glistered harmless.
His crisp locks frizeling, his temples prittelye stroaking.
Here with all in trembling with speed we ruffled his hearebush,
With water attempting thee flame too mortifye sacred.
But father Anchises, mounting his sight to the skyward,
Both the hands vplifting, hertly thus his orison vttred.
Iuppiter omnipotent (if that prayer annye the bends)
Us pitye, thy servant, if eke oght our godliness asks,
Grant (father) assiistaunce this mirracle happy to stablish.
Scant had he this finnisht, when that, with sudden, a thundering
In the sky did rumble, forth with their flamed a blazing
Star, streams out shooting, yielding of cleerenes abundaunce.
We noted yt glyding from tops of mansion houseplace.
Lastly the star sincking in woods wide of Ida was hydden,
Right the way forth poincting. Thee wood with brightness appears.
Eech path was fulsoom with sent of sulphurus orpyn.
My father here conquered, himself up lustelye lifted.
With the Godhead parling, he the star crinital adoreth.
Now, quod he, no lingering, let us hence, I am pressed to be packing.
Saulfe my prittye nephew, you Gods of country, my linnadge.
You do manadge Troy town; this is eke your prosperus omen.
Now, my soon, on forward, thy sire is pressed hastlye to track thee.
Thus said he. Thee flaming to the townewals more nere aproched,
And the flash of burning with skorching speedines hasted.
Well father in Gods name, mount on my shoulder, I pray you.
This labor is pleasant, to me t'ys not payneful or yrcksoom.
What luck shall betyde us, we will be in destenye partners,
Or good hap, or froward: and let my young lad Julus
Next be my companion, my wief may softlye pace after.
Syrs, you thee servant, slack not my words to remember.
A tumb to Troy town and moldy tempil aneereth
Vowed to the godly Ceres, a ciper by the church seat abides
By our old progeniotours long time deuoutlye regarded.
From diverse corners to that hewt we will make asemblye.
Gripe, father, our country deitees; se ye warelye keep them.
For since I with byckrings embrewd so blooddye my fingers,
I may not, I dare not pollute Gods heaunlye, with handling,
Until I with fountayn me wash.
When that I these speeches delivered, I twisted a wallet
On my broad shoulders, my nape did I settle eke under,
With lion his yellow darck skyn my carcass I cased.
My father on shouldeers I set, my young lad Julus
I lead with righthand, tripping with pit pat unequal,
My wiefe cooms after, through cross blind allye we iumble.
And I that in forenight was with no weapon agasted,
And litel esteemed thee swarms of Greekish asemblye
Now shiuer at shaddows, eeche pipling puf does amaze me.
For young companion, for bedred burden abashed.
Danger al escaping to the gats I saulflye repaired.
Yeet not with standing a trampling sudden of hot foot
Soldours us chased, to my thincking; my father also
Casting eye backward cried out, soon flee, they do track us.
I do se their brandisht tergats, and brasshapen harneise.
Now was I from policy fore cast with terror amooued,
For whilst I wandered through streets and passages vncooth,
My wief departed, my coomfort hertye Creusa.
If death her had goared, she behynd if weerye remained,
Or strayed in foloing, I knew not truly: but after
Unseen she rested, nor backward skewd I mine eyesight,
Ingraue of holy Ceres till that my burden I lighted.
For she was missing, when al our good coompanye clustred.
With soon, with famely, with me she kept not apoinctment.
Too Gods, too creaturs I belcht out blasphemye bawling.
For to me what mischief could chance in cittye more hurtful.
My father Anchises, my chield I took to my servant,
And Gods of Trojans were coucht in custodye secret.
I to the town turned close clad with burnished armoure,
I was determind fully, too ventur al hazards,
Al Troy too trauerse, too suffer danger al happening.
First did I coom backward to the walls, from whence I removed,
Too the gat I posted by night, and carefulye dogging
Thee way with light flams, eeche crooked corner I ransackt.
Both with nightye silence was I quayld and greatly with horror.
Thence did I trudge hoamward, too learn if she haplye returned.
But theare wear the enymyes with thronging cluster asembled.
Thee fire here on fretting with blaze too rafter is heaued.
Thee flams surmounting tenements do whize to the skyward.
I ran too Priamus razd court, at castle I gazed,
In cells and temple, that of old too Juno was apted.
As keeper Phoenix was made, with ruthles Ulysses
Of booty and pillage. Theere Trojan treasur is hurded,
That flames escaped, thear stood the rich halloed altars.
Theare massiue gould cups be laid, theare wardrob abundant
Of roabs most pretiouse, thear ar eke young children in order
With cold heart moothers, for Greekish victory quaking,
Settled on al sides.
I stoutly emboldned with night shade raised an howting,
With mournful belling I namde expreslye, Creusa.
In vain with sobbing was often that od echo repeated.
In this guise frantyck as I ran through cittye with howling
I noted on suddeyn the goast of very Creusa,
And her woonted image, to me known, mad her elfish aparance.
Here with I was daunted, my hear stard, and speechles I stutted.
Then to me thus speaking, my carck in search she removed.
This labor, o husband, too no great purpose avails,
For this hap is chanced bye the Gods prefixed apoinctment.
Hence yt is unlawful with you too carrye Creusa.
That trauayl is shortened by the king of sacred Olympus.
Thou must with surges be bangd and pilgrimage yrcksoom.
In land Hesperian thou shall be saulflye received,
Wheare glydes through cornefilds, with streaming secrecye, Tybris.
Theare do lie great kingdooms, and Queen most Princelye be spoken
For the, mye kind husband for me grief therefore abandon.
Now me the Myrmidones for captive prisoner hold not,
Nor stern snuff Dolopans, and Greekish matron I serve not,
Of Venus in wedlock thee daughter.
Of Gods thee moother me in this my country reteyneth.
Fare ye well, o husband, our young babye charely tender.
This said, she vannisht, and though that I sadlye required,
Too confer further, yeet she too tarrye renounced.
Thryce did I theare coouet, to col, to clasp her in arms.
Thryce then thee spirit my catching swiftlye refused.
Much lyk to a pufwynd, or nap that vannished hastlye.
Thee twylight twinckled, forth I to my coompanye posted.
Whear soon I perceived with wonder a multitud hudgye.
Of men with woomen too this layre newlye repaired.
Thee yoonger Trojans, thee meaner wretched asemblye
Round to me did cluster, with purse and person abiding
Pressed, through surgye waters with me too seek there auenturs.
Lucifer owtpeaking in tips of mounted hill Ida
On draws thee dawning. Thee Greeks with custodye watchful,
Warded thee towngats, hoap here of no succor abides.
I shrunck, and my father to the crown of mounten I lifted.
Finis libri secundi.
THEE THIRD BOOK OF VIRGIL HIS AENEIS.
WHen giltlesse Asian kingdoom stern destenye quasshed,
With Priamus country when squysd was the Ilian empire,
When Troy was razed, quight from foundation hoysed:
Forth to run exiled, too seek soom foreign auentures,
By Gods we are warned. We rigd our nauye flat under
Haut hill of Antander, not far from mounten of Ida.
Then we were uncertain too what saulf soil to betake us.
Men to us thick crowded: scant was prime summer aproched,
When father Anchises to the seas thee coompanye charged.
I, salt tears shedding, my native country relinquisht,
Thee roads and plat fourms where Troy stood: sad to the seaward
With my companions and with my young son Julus
With Gods, mighty patrons, my course and passage I bended.
A large wyld region theare stands, Mauortia cleaped,
Thracia sum term yt: theare raignd thee bluddye Lycurgus:
Thee Trojan leage seat, with fastened freendship abiding
Whilst fortune floated. With cross blast thither I sailed,
On shore eke I founded town walls, by destenye lucklesse:
Of my name, Aeneidans dwellers, theare settled, I named.
Too Venus and the sacred remnaunt of thee holy triumphaunts
I framed a sacrifice, the begun wurck lucklye toe prosper,
And toe Jove omnipotent a bull near seaside I slaughtred.
A tumb theare rested by chance close shaded al upward
With twigs thick crumpled, with myrtel mossye thear edging.
I drew near, mynding too root fro cel earthye the thicket,
With thee slips greenish too deck thee new shaped altars.
I viewd with wundring a grisly monsterus hazard.
For the tree supplanted, that first fro the root seat is haled,
With drop drop trilling of swart blud filtred abundance.
Thee ground black steyning: then forth with a quiuerish horror
My ioyncts child ransacks, my blud with terror apaling.
At the secund pulling, when an oother wicker is up plucked.
Thearbye the whole matter forth with more deepelye to ferret,
From that stub likewise forth spirt drops bluddelye stilling.
With this hap entangled, thee sweet Nymphs rural I woorshipt,
And God Mars the Regent of that soil crabbed adoring,
Too turn too goodness this sight and merciles omen.
But when I thee third time with grype more fiercelye did offer,
Ny knees fast pitching on sands, too pluck up an oother:
(What? shall I chat further? from speech shall secrecye bar me?)
From pits deep bottoom does skritche a woonderus howling,
With playnts most pitiful to our ears thus sadlye rebounding.
Woorthye sir Aeneas, why with this boutcherye tear you
A cytiefe forlorn? Extend your mercy to dead folck.
Foul not your sacred hands: you rack no forrener owtcast,
You rent a Trojan: these drops from shrubs do not issue.
Oh, flee this Canibal country, this coouet us Island.
I am namd sir Polydor: with darts fell nailed here under
I lodge: which thicket thus grown me terriblye stingeth.
I stud al astonyed, my hear starde, and speechles I rested.
This Polydor whillon with pure gould mightelye laden,
Preeuelye by Priamus, thee Trojan rector unhappy,
Too king Treicius was sent, to be charelye noozeld.
But when this gardein perceu'd the aduersitye Trojan,
And that their city thee Grecian army besieged*
He leaves thee conquourd, and clingd to the party triumphant.
Al trust fowlye breaking, thee poor Polydorus is headless
Through wicked murder, thee gould thee traitor up hurdeth.
What feat or endeavors of gould thou consecrat hungar
Men's mynds constrainst not with wyels or virtue to coompasse.
When that I took courradge, when pangs al fearful I bannisht,
I told thee chiefteyns, and namelye mye good father adged
This strange adventure, their judgments also requyring.
Swiftlye they determind too flee from a country so wicked,
Paltocks Inn leaving, too wrinche thee nauye too southward.
For polydor we framd an obit: we tumbled in heapwise
Of stoans a cluster, with black weed the altar is hanged,
With tree swartye Cipers: Troy dames with customed vsadge
Trol round, down tracing with their discheaueled hearlocks.
We pourd mylck luke warm foaming, and blud sacred after.
With main noise lifted to the slain soul lastly we shouted.
When soft gale sootherne and calm seas saulftye did offer,
My mates lancht forward their fleet, from shore we be glyding,
Thee roads, thee country, thee towns fro our nauye be gadding.
In the myd of the searowme theare stands a plentiful Island
Too thee dame of myrmayds, too Neptune Princelye relying.
This was roundlye bayed (for so the Jove heunlye did order)
With Mycone, and eke with Giarus, two famosed Islands.
Theare resting habitants no wynd flaws stormye regarded.
Too this I Will I sailed, we saulflye did harbor in haven.
When we were al landed, we the cittye of Phoebus adored.
King Anius, king of the habitants, and priest of Apollo,
Crowned with fresh garland, with laurels consecrat headband,
Glad met us, also knowing Anchises adged, his old friend.
Theare we shake hands kyndly, forth with we are settled in hostrye.
In the old buylt tempil thus thee God Phoebus I woorshipt.
Soom bye place of resting grant us, most sacred Apollo,
Yield walls too us weary, soom stock, soom town for abiding,
Saulue the secund Troy town, thee scraaps of wrathful Achilles,
Of Greeks thee rellicks; by what king shall we be ruled?
What man is our captain? Too what soil worldly to journey,
Thou do command us? where shall we be lastly reposed?
Show father a prophecy; pour down thye good oracle heunly.
Scant had I thus spoken, when seats al quiuered about us.
Thee doors, thee laurel, thee mount with terribil earth quake
Do totter shiuering, with rumbling mutterus echo.
Then to us squat grooueling in this wise the oracle aunswerd.
You brawnd hard Trojans, what soil your auncetrye seized
First of al old countries, to the same you shall be reduced.
Track out your moother, whom long antiquytye granted.
With seed of Aeneas shall coompasse earthlye be ruled.
His soons soons and soons from their brave progenye springing.
Thus God Apollo cried: but we with an unison owtcrye,
And with iollye tumult, where should that cittye be settled
Straight ways demanded, what place God Phoebus apoincted,
My father Anchises up al old antiquitye ripping,
Hear me, quod he, lordinges, learn the expectation hoaped.
Thee Creet I Will in my dseas does stand too Iuppiter hallowd:
Theare mount I Would rests, thee spring of progenye Trojan.
A fruictful kingdoam, with towns in number an hundred.
Hence our progenitour (so I fail not in historye told me)
Surnamed Teucrus first came too Rhetean Island.
Theare picht he his kingdoom, for then Troy cittye was vnbuylt,
And castles stood not, the habitans in vallye remained.
Theare dwelt dame Cybele in forest of desolat Ida.
And moon wise Coribants on brass their od harmonye tinckling.
Thence cooms trustye silence vsd in sollemnitye sacred.
And two stately lions this fine dams gilt wagon haled.
Wisely let us thearefor too Gods direction harcken:
Let wynds be swadged forth with, too Candye be packing.
Short is thee passadge (so that our God Iuppiter help us)
In three days sailing we shall too Candye be puffed.
This discourse eended, too the altars holy returning,
A Bull too Neptune, with a bull too golden Apollo,
He likewise slaughtred too roaring winter a blackbeast,
But to the sweet west wynd a best whit lillye was offered.
Theare flees a rumoure, that king of Candye relinquisht
His seat, that the Island is left unfurnished holy.
We left Ortigian country, with nauye we passed
By mounts of Nazon too skincking Bacchus allotted.
From thence we trauayled to the greenedeckt gaylye Donysa:
To Oleoron, too lillye Paron, to the Cyclades also
Dispersd and scatterd, and near creeks sundry we sailed.
Thee thick skyn mariners shouted with sudden agreement.
My maats assented to bend too Candye the passadge.
Thee wynd puffed forward with sweet gale freelye the nauye:
At loingth by sailing on land of Candye we lighted.
First then at our landing town walls I there hastelye founded.
Pergamea I called yt, that name they gladlye received.
By me they were counsayld too buyld up sumptuus houses.
Also bye this season too docks our nauye was haled.
Thee youth too wedlock and tylladge thriftelye clustred.
Both laws and tenements I framed. But straight on a suddein
A plagye boch ranged, with foul contagion ayrye
Both bodies festring and fruict trees plentiful harming.
A year too dismal. For sweet lief swiftlye was eended,
Thee fields cleene fruictlesse thee dogstar Sirius heated.
Thee flours wax withred, thee soil fruicts plentye renegeth.
My father exhorted too turn too sacred Apollo,
For toe crave our pardon, when should this iournye be finnisht,
Or trauail expyred, by what means might we be furthred.
Thee night his mantel does spread: with slumber is holden
Each living creature, then my holy domestical housgods,
In last nights fyrebroyls, that from Troy skorched I saulued,
In glistred shyning in a dream toe me made thear aparaunce.
Iump at thee wyndoors, where moonshyne brimlye did enter.
Thus to me they parled, shredding of sorroful anguish.
Sir, to ye what sooth say to record does purpose Apollo;
Here that he discharges: we be sent too signify his errand
We skapte from Troybrands bye thye courradge manfulye shielded
And bye thye good guiding through seaplash stormye we marched.
We thee same pilgrims will yield to thye progenye glory,
And rule too city. Let town walls mighty be raised
Straight by the for mighty persons: let no reason hold thee
From flight: this country must be forsaken: Apollo
Meant not, in his prophecy, thy course too Candye to further.
Theare stands a region, by Greeks yt is Hesperye named,
A stout old country, with plenty fertile abounding.
Theare dwelt the Aenotrians, but now by the coompanye younger
Of thee first captayn valiant, yt is Italye termed:
Our seat thear rests: theare borne was Dardanus adged,
And father Jasius: from whence our auncetrye sprouted.
Wherefor in all gladness to thine old sire certifye tidings:
Skud to soil Italian, from Candye the Juppiter haleth.
With these Gods gingling, with sight most geason apaled,
(For to mye full seeming with slumber I was not atached
I knew their tucktlocks, I knew their phisnomye present
A cold sweat saltish through my ioynctes fiercely did enter)
From my bed I started: to the sky with meeknes I lifted
My hands deuoutlye praying, then too my fortunat housgods
I framd a sacrifice: next with joy tickled I posted
Too my sire Anchises: and told thee matter in order.
He noted his stumbling to have coom from the auncetrye doubtful,
And dubil acceptaunce of syers to have fostred his error.
O my son Aeneas, with Trojan destenye toughned,
Thee self same prophecy too me Cassandra recited:
Now call I too memory that she this country remembered,
Often at Hesperian regions, and Italye glauncing.
But to soil Hesperian that Troymen should be removed,
What wight coniecturde? who would Cassandra then harcken?
Accept we therefore this course, and credit Apollo.
Thus said: we assented to his lore with cheereful obeysaunce.
We leave Creete country; and our sayls vnwrapped vphoysing,
With wooden vessel thee rough seas deepelye we furrowe.
When we fro land harbors too main seas gyddye did enter
Voyded of al coast sight with wild fluds roundlye bebayed,
A watrye clowd gloomming, full abooue me clampred, apeered,
A sharp storm menacing, from sight beams soonnye rejecting:
Thee flaws with rumbling, thee wroght fluds angrye do iumble:
Up swel thee surges, in chauffe sea plasshye we tumble:
With the rayn, is day light through darcknesse moystye be wrapped,
And thundering light bolts from torneclowds fyrye be flasshing.
We do mis our passadge through fell fluds boysterus erring,
Our pilot eke, Palinure, through dymnesse clowdye be dusked*
In poinccts of coompasse does stray with palpabil error.
Three days in darcknesse from bright beams soonny repealed,
And three nights parted from lightning starrye we wandered.
Thee fourth day foloing thee shore, near settled, apeered
And hills vppeaking; and smoke swift steamd to the skyward.
Our sayls are stricken, we roa forth with speedines hastye,
And the sea by our mariners with the oars cleene canted is harrowd
On shoars of strophades from storm escaped I landed,
For those plats Strophades in languadge Greekish ar highted,
With the sea coucht Islands. Where foul bird foggye Celoeno
And Harpy is nestled: sense franckling Phines his housroume
From them was sunderd, and fragments plentye removed.
No plage more perilous, no monster grislye more ouglye,
No stigian vengaunce like too these carmoran haggards.
These fouls like maidens are pynde with phisnomye palish;
With ramd cramd garbadge, their gorges draftye be gulled,
With tallants prowling, their face wan withred in hunger,
With famine vpsoaken.
When tward these Islands our ships we settled in haven,
Near, we viewd, grasing herds of big franckye fat oxen,
And goats eke cropping careless, not guarded of heerdman.
We rusht with weapons, part of thee bootye we lotted
First to Jove. On banck syds our selves with food we reposed.
But loa with a suddeyn flusshing thee gulligut harpeys
From mountayns flitter, with gagling whirlerye flapping
Their wings: forth the viand fro tabils al greedelye snatching,
With fulsoom savor, with stinking poisoned ordure
Thee ground they smeared, theartoo skriches harshye reioyning.
Then we set all the tabils, and fyrde our mystical altars
Under a rock arched, with trees thick coouered over.
At the secund sitting from parcels sundry repaired
This coouirauenouse, and swift with a desperate onset,
They gripte in tallants the meat and forth spourged a stinking
Foul carrayne sauoure: then I wild thee coompanye present,
Too take their weapons, and fight with mischeuus howlets.
My will at a beckning is done, they do run to there armoure
In grass their flachets, and tergats warelye pitching.
But when at a thurd flight these fowls to the coompanye neered,
With shril brass trumpet Misenus sowned alarm.
Our men marched forward, and fierce gave a martial uncouth
Charge, these strange vulturs with skirmish bluddye to master.
But strokes their feathers pearsd not, nor carcases harmed:
And toe sky they soared, thee victals clammye behynd them,
They do leave haulf mangled with sent unsavory bepoudred.
On the typ of rockish turret stood gastlye Celoeno
Unlucky prophetess; and thus she recounted her errand.
And now Sir Trojans, will you for slaughter of oxen
And for all our own good wage war with sellye poor harpeys?
And us from kingdoom bannish? Then take me this errand:
And what I shall prophecy with tentiue listenes harcken,
What Jove too Phoebus, too me also what vttred Apollo.
I the chief hell fyrebrand of fell furye mischeuus holden
Will now discoouer thee self same mysterye told me.
Italye you long for, to the land eke of Italye saulflye
You shall be guided with winds, and settled in haven.
Yeet not with standing ere conquered cittye be rampyrde,
For this your trespass you shall be so gaunted in hunger,
That your smeary tabils you wylmost greedelye swallow.
Thus she said: and forward to the wood she flickered hastlye.
At this hap our feloes with fearful phantasye daunted,
Stood still al astonished with cold blud, like gelu, quiuering.
They do quayl in courradge, and with no martial armoure,
But by there holy prayers they do practice peaceful atoanement.
If godesesse, if byrds stinking, or bugs they resembled.
But father Anchises his palms from strond plat inhauncing
On Gods heunlye cries, to there hest with duitye relying:
Gods, quod he, this messadge turn you to a prosperus omen.
Cancel these menacing soothings, thee godly reserving.
Thus said: swift we weyed the anchors, and sails vphoysed,
With northen bluster through foam seas speedelye flitting,
As the gale and the pilot with steering skillful us haleth.
In midil of the sea deep we saw thee wooddye Zacynthos,
Dulichium, Samee, with cragged Neritos hard stond.
We fle the rocks of Ithack, and coast of Princelye Laertes,
Also we the birth place detest of flinted Ulysses.
Thee mount Leucates with thick clouds gloommye bedawbed
Up peaks to the viewing, with fearful poinct of Apollo.
Theare we were enshoared quight tyrde, and on to the borrough
As we gad, our vessels vpdrawne are grapled at anchor.
Theare we being landed saulfly through fortun vnhoaped,
Too Jove we sacrifice, sundry hosts are flamed on altars,
And Trojan pastymes we practice in Actean Island.
Soom feloes naked with larding smearye bebasted,
With wrestling gambalds for price, for maystrye do struggle
Myrrye for escaping thee towns and Grecian hamlets,
Through their deadly foes their passage luckye recounting:
Thee whilst fair Phoebus thee years course roundlye reuolued,
And seas, with north blast and winter frostye, be roughned:
A brazen hudge tergat, that Abans erst fenced in armoure,
On post I nailed, thee clingde shield this posye bears.
This Sign AEneas From Grekish Conqueror Haled.
I gave commaundment fro the port to the ships to be packing.
My maats skum the sea froth there in oars strong cherelye dipping.
Thee Pheacan turrets forth with from sight we relinquish.
We coast Epeirus, thence we touch Chaon his haven.
And to the great borough of But throt statelye we skudded.
Here, loa, through our hyring a report incredibil, uncouth,
Glides, that Prince Helenus, by Trojan lineal of spring
Soon too king Priamus, this Greekish country reteyneth.
Thee pheere possessing and crown of Pyrrhus his empire,
Also that Andromachee does bed with a country man husband.
These news me mazing, my mind was greedelye whetned,
Too parle with the Regent, too learn this meruelus happening.
I stepped from the haven, leaving my nauye behynd me.
Happelye that season soom banckets costlye, with oother
Lamenting presents (in shade to the cittye reioyning
Near water of Simois both deeply and warelye sliding)
Andromachee framed to the dust, on tumb eke of Hector
Calling with burial yelling, that al emptye remained:
With green turf circled; from thence right on she repaired,
For cause of further mourning, too consecrat altars.
When she did espy me posting, and Troiecal armoure
Too too gyddye viewd, with vnordinat extasis hamperd,
Down she fell on suddeyn, thee cold too carcas aprocheth:
She sowns, and after long pausing thus she said elflyke.
Is thye true plain visadge with true shape natural offered?
Imp of a statelye Godesse bringst thou to me verelye tidings?
Art thou yeet living? or the if light worldly relinquisht,
Tell me where is my hnsband, my sweeting delicat Hector?
Thus said: al in blubbring she floath, with clamorus howling
Thee place she tinckled: but I through pangs uncouth vnhabled,
With stutting stamering at leingth thus fumbled an answer.
I do live, I assure thee, though dangers sundry me taynted,
Doubtye not, a changling ye se none.
Lord what good fortune thee lack of pristinat husband
Has toe thye contentment with new match luckye relieved?
Possesses Pyrrhus thee spouse of famosed Hector?
Down she smote her visadge, to me thus full smoothlye replying.
O Priamus daughter, thee virgin Princelye, thrice happy
Thou that by thye foes near Troy walls slaughtered have been.
By this hap escaping thee filth of lottarye carnal.
Too couche not mounting of master vanquisher hoatspur.
But we, by cross passadge from flamed country removed,
Thee pride of a stripling and ymp of wrathful Achilles
Have borne with thraldoom, with sharp captiuitye fetterd,
He to fine Hermionee, for Greeks a bootye to peerless,
Daughter too Queen Helen, fast and hot phantasye bended.
Me his nyefe to his servant Helenus full firmelye betroathed.
But yeet unexpected with ialosye kendled Orestes
For los of his beadmate, did take too tardye my master,
Him by his syers altars killing with skarboro warning.
When fro Neoptolemus thee vital spirit abated
This part was to Helenus by wylled parcerye lotted:
Chaonian countries of Trojan Chaon ycleaped:
This town Troy city, this castle eke Ilion highting.
But to the what passadge thee winds and fortun allotted?
Or what great deity tossed thee to our desolat angel?
How faers Ascanius? does he live, and breathful abides?
Whom to the now Troy town.
Does the los of moother to the chielde bring sorreful anguish?
Are sparcks of courradge in this young progeny kendled
By father Aeneas, with his uncle martial Hector?
These toys she pratled mourning, griefs newlye refreshing
Thee whilst king Helenus, with a crowding coompanye guarded,
From town to us buskling us as his friends freendlye bewelcomd.
Us to his new city with curtesye cheereful he leads;
With tears rief trickling saucing eeche question asked,
I march on forward: and young Troy finelye resembling
Thee big huge old monument, and new brook Zanthus I knowledge.
With the petit townegats favoring thee principal old ports.
Also mye companions in country cittye be frollickt:
In toe the very palaice thee Prince them wholye receaueth.
With whip cat bowling they kept a myrry carousing,
Thee goulden mazurs up skynckt for a bon viage hoysing.
There we did al soiourne two days: then a prosperus hizling
Of south blast, puffing on sails does summon us onward.
Too thee Princely prophet thus I spoke, him freendlye requesting.
O sacred Trojan, thee light of misterye darckned,
Of Gods thee spooks mate, thee truchman of hallod Apollo:
By the God enstructed by stars for to ominat eeche thing,
By flight and chirping byrds too prognosticat aptlye:
Pour forth thy prophecy (for too me prosperus hazards
Eeche sound relligion foretold, me to Italye posting,
Only on displeasaunt foul shapte byrd, the Harpye Celaeno
(Forwarns much mischief too coom with dangerus hunger)
In these stormye perils too what saulf port shall I take me?
King Helenus slaughtring, with wont accustomed heyfers,
Peace craves of the Godhead, from front thee label vnhanging,
Me, by the hand, trembling he leads to thye mysterye (Phoebus)
Thee priest this prophecy from Gods direction opned.
Thou soon of holy Venus (for thou art by settled apoinctment
Of Gods mighty power to exployts most doughtye reserved.
Thus thy fate established does rest, so thye fortun is ordered)
Of poincts sundry will I to the shape but a curtal abridgment,
Too the eende in thye trauayl thou may the more heedlye be lessond,
And pass to Italian region, thus shortly rehersing
Piece meal prittye parings: for, too tell a summarye total,
Thee fat's king Helenus do bar, with Juno the Saturn.
Wheare thou supposest therefore, that here Italye fast by
Does stand, and myndest too sail with speed to that haven:
With draw thy judgment from that gross cosmical error.
Italy is hence parted by long cross dangerus inpaths.
In flud Trinacrian thy great oars must deeplye be bathed,
And the sea rough wurcking must eeke with nauye be trauerst,
And Circes Island se ye must with Limbo lake hellish:
Ere ye shall in saulf land of a nobil cittye be founder.
Glaunce I will at certain tokens, be ye watch full in harckning.
When ye shall in secret with care near fresh water happen,
Too spy bye thee banck syeds a strange sow mightelye sized,
Coompased al roundly with sucklings thirtye to number,
White, with lillye colors fair dect, she shall be reposed
On ground, dug dieting her mylckwhit farroed hoglings.
Here shall cease thye labors: here shall thy cittye be builded.
Fear not thee manging fort old of burdseat in hunger,
Thee fats thee passage shall smooth, yea goulden Apollo,
If ye will him summon, shall be too the forth ready coomming.
But this near settled country (that of Italy is holden
Parcel) see ye shun yt: for theare Greeks yreful ar harbourd.
Here the man of Locrus mounted steep statelye the townwals.
And fields of Salent with trouping clustered army
Lyctius Idomeneus does keep: so duke Meliboeus
Holds thee prittye Petil round coompast strong bye Philoctect.
Also when in saulfty from seas thy nauye shall harbor,
When rites relligious thou vowest on new shaped altars,
With purple vesture be decked, with purpil eke hooded,
Least that in aduauncing thee Gods with fyrye cole heating,
Soom dismal visadge forth peake thee mysterye marring.
Thou with thy feloes observe this customed order.
And bye thye posterytee let these rites duelye be foostred.
With winds near to Sicil when that thy nauye shall enter,
And strayts shall be opned near craggy vnweildye Pelorus,
With lifth and sailing to the lift side country be packing:
What stands on right side both land and channel abandon.
These shoars were sundred by the plash breach, fame so does utter,
(So things transitory by lengthned season ar eaten)
For when these countries were grapled ioinctlye to geather,
Swift the sea with plasshing rusht in, towns terreblye drenching,
Italye disioyncting with short streicts from Sicil Island,
Scylla does on right side rough stand, and deadlye Charybdis
On left hand swells with broad iaws greedelye galping,
In to gut vpsouping three times thee flash water angrye,
From paunch also spuing toe the sky the plash hastlye received.
But Scylla in cabbans with sneaking treacherye lurcketh,
Close and slilye spying, too flirt thee nauye to rock bane.
A man in her visadge, then a virgin fair she resembles
Down to her gastlye nauel, like a whale from thee belie seeming.
Monsterus, unseemly, then a tail like a dolphin is added
Iumbled up of sauadge fell woulfs, with grislye lol hanging.
It will be saulfer too pass thee country Pachynus,
With leisure lingering, and far streicts crabbye to circle,
Than to be surprised by Scylla in dungeon hellish.
Whear curs barck bawling, with yolp yalpe snarrye rebounding.
Also if king Helenus be now for a truprophet holden,
If faith be resiaunt, if troth to him grants Apollo:
Thou soon of heunlye Godesse, this poinct I chieflye shall utter,
And beside al warnings est soons yt must be repeated:
Let Iunoes deitee with duitye be woorshiped humble.
Unto her frame thy prayers, let mystresse might ye be vanquished
With meekned presents, and then like a conqueror happy
From land Trinacrian thou shall be to Italye posted.
When ye in this passadge too Cumas cittye shall enter,
And lake with rumbling forest of sacred Auerna,
A braynsick prophetess se ye shall, whom dungeon holds
In ground deep riueted, future haps and destenye chaunting.
But yeet al her prophecyes in green leaves nicelye be scribled,
In these slipprye leaves what sooth thee virgin auerreth,
She frams in Poetry: her verses in dungeon howsing.
They keep rancks ordered, with array first settled abiding:
But when on a suddeyn thee doors winds blastye do batter,
And these leaves greenish with whisking lightlye be scatterd,
Neauer does she labor to revoke her flittered issue,
Or to place in cabban, their floane lyms freshlye reioyning.
Thus they fle, detesting thee lodge of giddye Sibylla:
Here for a spirt linger, no good opportunitye scaping.
(Al though thee to seaward thy posting coompanye calls,
And winds vaunce fully thy sayls with prosperus buffing)
Post to this prophetess, let her help and sooth be required.
She will geeue notice to the straight of al Italye dwellers:
How thou wiselye trauayls shall shun, shall manfulye suffer.
Theare she will enstruct thee, thy passadge fortunat ayding.
These be such od caueats, as I to the freendlye can utter.
Forth: and with thy valor let Trojan glory be mounted.
When this Princely prophet this counsayl faithful had eended,
He wyls that presents of gould, full weightelye poysing,
Be brought to our vessels, and therewith eke iuorye pullisht:
Plentye great of silver with plate most sumptuus adding.
And a shirt mayled with gould, with acrested up helmet.
Latelye Neoptolemus possessed this martial armoure.
My father Anchises rich presents also receaueth.
Horses eke and captayns are sent.
And oars to our vessels be brought and weapon abundante.
Thee whilst Anchises wyls that thee nauye be launched,
Least that in our loytring our passadge lucky were hindered.
Him prophet of Phoebus does treat with dignitye peerless.
Anchises, whom statelye Venus tak's woorthye for husband,
Thee charge of deitee, now twice from Troy ruin haled,
Italye see yoonder: thither with nauye be squdding.
How beyt these parcels in sailing must be refused;
Seek the far and distant country declard of Apollo.
Fare ye well, happy parent of a soon so worthy; what oght else
Should I say? what maks me this gale so fortunat hinder?
Also good Andromachee, with last departur al heavy,
Presented vestures of gould most ritchlye bebroyded.
And my lad Ascanius with a Trojan mantel adorning,
Weau'd wurcks thwackt with honor, to her gifts this parlye she li^cketh.
Take, myeboy, these tokens by mine own hands finnished holy.
Let these of Andromachee thee good will testifye lasting.
Cherrish these presents by the pheere to the tendered of Hector.
O next Astianax thee type by me chieflye belooued,
In visadge, looking, eke in hands thee fullye resembling.
Who had been, if he lived, for years now youthlye thine equal.
I for a long farewell this sonnet sorroful vttred.
Rest ye still here blessed, that now your fortun have eended:
We to future mischief from formoure danger ar hurled.
You rest in fre quiet, thee seas you need not vpharrow.
You reck not, to travail, that back goes, Italye serching.
Here the image of Zanthus ye behold, and prittye Troy builded
By your Princelye labors, and too this new shaped engyn
Thee Gods send fortune, fro assaults too fortifye Greekish.
If that I too Tybris with near but country shall enter,
And that I shall fortune to behold thee town by me founded:
Italye with the Epeire, too both king Dardanus author,
Shall be knit in freendship, making of two pepil one Troy.
This leage eke of feloship shall be manteyned of issue.
Forth we goa too the seaward, we sail bye Ceraunia swiftly.
Wheare too ioynctlye mearing a cantel of Italye neereth.
Thee whilste thee sunbeams are maskt, hyls darcklye be muffled:
We be put hard ioygning to the boosom of country required.
Our selfs we cherisht, our members slumber atached.
Not yeet was mydnight ouerhyed, when that Palinurus,
From bed nimblye flees, too se in what quarter yt huffeth:
How stands thee wind blast, with listening tentiue he marcketh,
Thee lights starrye noting in globe celestial hanging:
Thee seun stars stormy, twice told thee plowstar, eke Arcture,
Also sad Orion, with goulden flachet, in armoure.
When that he perceived, thee coast to be clear, then he summond
Our men too ship board, thee camp we swiftlye removed.
Forth we take our passadge, our sails full winged up hoysting.
Thee stars are darckned, glittring Aurora reshined.
We do se swart mountayns, we do gaze eke at Italye dymmed.
Italye loa yoonder, first, Italye, showted Achated.
Italye land naming, likewise thee coompanye greeted.
Then father Anchises a goold boul massye becrowning,
With wine brym charged, thee Gods celestial hayleth,
In ship thus speaking.
You Gods, of sailing, of land stats might ye remaining,
Grant to us mild passadge, and tempest mollifye roughning.
Sweet gales are breathing, and port near seated apeereth:
In the typ of mountain thee temple of hautye Minerua
Glad we spy: thee mariners strike sails, and roa to the shoareward.
The haven from the eastcoast, in bowewise, crooked apereth.
Thee rocks sternelye facing with salt fluds spumye be drumming.
Down the road is lurcking, yeet two peers loftye run upward
From stoans like turrets: fro the shore thee tempil auoydeth.
Here for a first omen four fair steeds snow whit I marcked,
Thee pasture shredding in fields: this country does offer,
Quod father Anchises, garboyls, so do signifye war steeds.
Yeet stay: the self horses in waynes erst ioinctlye were hooked,
Al yoked, and matchlyke teamed with common agreement.
This loa, quod he brings firm hoape sor peaceable vsadge.
Then we honored Pallas, that granted a luckye beginning:
Also before the altars our heads with purpil ar hooded,
In Troy rites, Helenus faithful direction holding.
And with settled honor thee Greekish Juno we woorshipt.
Here we do not linger; thee vowed sollemnitye finnisht,
Up we gad, out spredding our sayls and make to the seaward:
Al creeks mistrustful with Greekish country refusing.
Hercules his dwelling (if brute be truly reported)
We se, Tarent named, to which heunlye Lacinia fronteth,
And Caulons castles we do spy, with Scylla the wreckmake.
Then far of vplandish we do view thee fird Sicil Aetna.
And a seabelch grounting on rough rocks rapfulve frapping
Was hard; with ramping bounce clapping near to the seacoast
Fierce the waters ruffle, thee sands with wrought flud ar hoysed.
Quod father Anchises, here loa that scuruye Charybdis.
These stoans king Helenus, these ragd rocks rustye fore vttred.
Hence hye, mye dear feloes, duck the oars, and stick to the tacklings.
Thus said he, then swiftly this his heast thee coompanye practice.
First thee pilot Palinure thee steerd ship wrigs to the lifthand.
Right so to thee same board thee masters al wrye the vessels.
Up we fle too skyward with wild fluds haut ye, then under
We duck too bottom with waves contrary repressed.
Thus thrice in our diuing thee rocks most horribly roared:
And thrice in our mounting to the stars thee surges us heaued.
Thee winds and soonbeams us, poor souls weerye, refused,
And to soil of Cyclops with wandering iournye we roamed.
A large road fenced from rough ventositye blustering.
But near ioynctlye brayeth with rufflerye rumboled Aetna.
Soomtyme out yt balcketh from bulck clouds grimlye bedymmed.
Like fyerd pitche skorching, or flash flame sulphurus heating:
Flownce to the stars towering thee fire, like a pellet, is hurled,
Ragd rocks up raking: and guts of mounten yrented
From root up he iogleth: stoans hudge slag molten he rowseth:
With route snort grumbling, in bottom flash furye kendling.
Men say that Enceladus with bolt haulf blasted here harbrouth,
Dingd with this squising and massiue burden of Aetna,
Which pres on him nailed from broached chymnye still heateth.
As often as the giant his broyld syds croompeled altreth,
So often Sicil al shiuereth, there with flaks smoakye be sparckled.
That night in forest to us pouke bugs gastlye be tendered.
Thee cause we find not, for noise fantastical offered.
Thee stars imparted no light, thee welken is heavy:
And the moon enshryned with closet clowdye remained.
Thee morning brightness does luster in east seat Eous,
And night shade moysturs glittring Aurora repealeth.
When that on a suddeyn we behold a windbeaten hard shrimp,
With lanck wan visadge, with rags iags patcherye clowted;
His fists too the skyward rearing: here we stood amazed.
A meigre lean rake with a long berd goatlyke; aparrayld
In shrub weeds thorny: by his birth a Grecian holden.
One that too Troy broyls whillon from his country repaired.
When the skrag had marcked far a loof thee Trojan atyring,
And Trojan weapons, in steps he stutted, apaled:
And fixed his footing, at leingth with desperate offer
Too the shore he neered, these speeches merciful vttring.
By stars I crave you, by the air, by the celical household,
Hoyse me hence (O Trojans) too sum oother country me whirrye.
Playnelye to speak algats, for a Greek my self I do knowledge,
And that I too Troy town with purposed emnitye sailed.
If this my trespass now claymeth duelye reuengment
Plunge me deep in the waters, and lodge me in Neptun his harbor.
If men's hands slay me, such mannish slaughter I wish for.
Thus said he, down kneeling, and our feet mournefuly clasping.
Then we him desired first too discoouer his offspring,
After too manifest this his hard and destenye bitter.
My father Anchises gave his hand to the wretch on a suddeyn,
And with all a pardon, with saulfe protection, offered.
Thee captive, shaking of fear, too parlye thus entered.
Borne I was in the Itacan country, mate of haples Ulysses,
Named Achoemenides, my sire also called Adamastus,
A good honest poor man (would we in that penurye lasted)
Sent me toe your Troywars, at last my coompanye skared
From this country cruel, did posting leave me behind them,
In Cyclops kennel, thee laystow dirtye, the foul den.
In this grislye palaice, in form and quantitye mighty,
Palpable and groaping darcknesse with murder abounds.
He does in all mischief surpass, he mounts to the sky top.
(All the heunly feloship from the earth such a monster abandon)
Hard he is too be viewed, too se him no person abides.
Thee blud with the entrayls of men, by him slaughtred, he gnaweth.
And of my feloes I saw that a couple he grapled
On ground sow grooueling, and them with villenye crusshed,
At flint hard dasshing, thee goare blood spowteth of eeche side,
And swyms in the thrashold, I saw flesh bluddye toe slauer,
When the cob had maunged the gobets foul garbaged haulfe quick.
Yeet got he not shotfree, this butcherye quighted Ulysses:
In which doughtye peril the Ithacan most wiselye bethoght him.
For the unsavory rakhel with collops bludred yfrancked,
With chuffe chafe wynesops like a gourd bourrachoe replennisht,
His nodil in crossewise wresting down droups to the growndward,
In belche galp vometing with dead sleep snortye the collops,
Raw with wine soused, we do pray toe supernal asemblye,
Round with all embaying thee muffe maffe loller; eke hastlye
With tool sharp poincted we boarde and perced his oane light,
That stood in his lowering front gloommish malleted only.
Like Greekish tergat glistring, or Phoebus his horebeams.
Thus the death of feloes on a lout we gladlye revenged.
But se ye flee caytiefs, hy ye hence, cut swiftlye the cables.
Pack fro the shore.
For such as in prison thee great Polyphemus is holden,
His sheepflocks foddring, from dugs mylck thriftelye squising,
Thee like here in mountayns do randge in number an hundred,
That he cursd Cyclopes in naming usual highted.
Thee moon three seasons her passadge orbical eended
Sense I here in forest and cabbans gastlye did harbor,
With bestes fell saluadge: and in caves stoany: Cyclopes
Daily I se, their trampling and yelling hellish abhorring.
My self I dieted with sloas, and thinlye with haw thorns,
With mast, and with roots of eeche herb I swadgde my great hunger.
I pryed al quarters, and first this nauye to shore ward
Swift, I scryed, sailing too which my self I remitted,
Of what condition, what country so eauer yt had been.
Now it is sufficient that I skape fro this horribil Island.
Me rather extinguish with soom blud murder or oother.
Scant had he thus spoaken: when that from mountenus hill top
Al we see the giaunt, with his hole flock lowbylyke hagling.
Namde the shepeherd Polyphem, to the well known sea syd aproching.
A foul fog monster, great swad, deprived of eyesight.
His fists and stalcking are propt with trunck of a pynetree.
His flock him do follow, this charge him chieflye rejoices.
In grief al his coomfort on neck his whistle is hanged.
When that too the seasyde thee swayne Longolius hobbled,
He rinst in the water thee dross from his late bored eyelyd.
His tusk grimlye gnashing, in seas far waltred, he groyleth:
Scantly do the water surmounting reach toe the shoulders.
But we being feared, from that coast hastlye removed,
And with us embarcked thee Greekish suitur, as amplye
His due request merited, we chopped of softlye the cables.
Swift we sweep the seafroth with nimble lustilad oar striefe.
Thee noise he perceived, then he turning warelye lists.
But when he considerd, that we prevented his handling,
And that from foloing our ships thee fluds hye reuockt him,
Loud the lowbye brayed with belling monsterus echo:
Thee water he shakes, with his out cries Italye trembles.
And with a thick thundering thee fyerde fordge Aetna rebounded.
Then runs from mountayns and woods thee rownseual helswarme
Of Cyclopan lurdens to the shoars in coompanye clustring.
Far we se them distaunt: us grimly and vaynely beholding.
Up to the sky reatching, thee breetherne swish swash of Aetna.
A folck moaste fulsoom, for sight most fitlye resembling
Trees of loftye cipers, with thickened multitud oakroas:
Or Jove's great forest, or woods of mighty Diana.
Fear thear us enforced with posting speedines headlong
Too swap of our cables, and fall to the seas at adventure.
But yeet king Helenus tump twixt Scylla and the Charybdis
For to sail us monished, with no great dangerus hazard.
Yeet we were ons minded, backward thee nauye to master.
Here loa behold Boreas from bouch of north blo Pelorus
Our ships full charge, thee quick rocks stoanye we passed:
And great Pantagia, and Megarus with Tapsus his island.
These soyls fore wandered to our men were truly related
By poor Achoemenides, mate too thee luckles Ulysses.
Face too country Sicil theare stands a dangerus Island
Plemmyrium stormy, but yt old past auncetrye cleaped
Ortygia: Alpheus, men say, thee great flud of Elis
Under seabottoms this passadge ferreted, and now
Swift fro Arethusa going meets in fluds of Sicil Island.
That country deitee, though wild, we woorshiped, and thence
We sayld and trauayled to the coast of fertile Elorus.
Then we grate on rockrayes and bancks of stoanye Pachynus,
And Camarina river, to remove by destenye barred.
Also we through passed thee fields of statelye Gelous.
And thee mighty water, by custoom great Gela named.
Thence strong buylt Agragas his huge high walls loftelye vaunceth,
That steeds courrageous with racebrood plentiful offered.
And with like sailing we pass thee wooddye Selinis:
And deep gulfs syncking of blind Lilybeia rockish.
After too Drepanus bad road not luckye we sailed.
Here loa being escaped from rough tempestuus huffling,
My father Anchises, in cares my accustomed helper,
I loose: o my father, will you forsake me, thus eending
My toyls and my trauayls, why then did I master al hazards?
Nor propheting Helenus, when he foretold dangerus hard haps
Forspake this burial mourning, nor filthye Celoeno.
This was last my labor, thee knot claspt of mine auentures.
From thence God me shoou'd too this your gratius empire.
Thus father Aeneas soly toe the coompanye listening
His long dryrye viadge, and Gods set destenye chaunted.
At leingth kept he silence, with finnished historye resting.
Finis libri tertij.
THEE FOVRTH BOOK OF VIRGIL HIS AENEIS.
But the Queen in mean while with carks qua^dare deep anguisht,
Her wound fed by Venus, with firebayt smoldred is hooked.
Thee wights doughtye manhood leagd with gentilytye nobil,
His words fitlye placed, with his heunly phisnomye pleasing,
March through her heart mustring, al in her breast deepelye she printeth.
These carcking cratchets her sleeping natural hinder.
Thee next day foloing Phoebus did clarifye brightlye
Thee world with luster, watrye shaads Aurora removed,
When to her dear sister, with words, haulf gyddye she raueth.
Sister An, I merueyle, what dreams me terrefye napping,
What newcoom trauayler, what guest in my harborye lighted?
How brave he does court yt? what strength and coorrage he carries?
I believe yt certain (ne yet hold I yt vaynelye reported)
That fro the great linnadge of Gods his pettegre shoots.
Fear shows pitfle crauens: good God, what destenye wayward
Has the man endured? what bickrings bitter he passed?
Had not I foresnaffled my mind by votarye promise,
Not toe yoke in wedlock too no wight earthlye mye person,
When my first feloship by murder beastlye was eended,
Had not I such daliaunce, such pipling bed gle renounced,
Haplye this oane faulty trespass might bring me toe bending.
An (toe the my meaning and mind I do playnelye set open)
Sense the death of my husband, too wit, the Sichoeus unhappy,
Sense mye cruel broother defilde the domestical altars:
Only this od gallant has bowd my phansye toe lyking,
And my love has gained: thee skorcht step of old fire I sauoure.
But first with vengaunce let the earth me swallo toe bottom,
Or father omnipotent with lightnings dyng me toe lymbo,
And to Erebus shading darcknesse, too dungeon hellish,
Ear that I shall thye statutes ( o shamefast chastitye) cancel.
He, that first me yoked for wiefe, did carrye my first love,
Hardlye let him shroud yt, close claspt in grave let yt harbor.
When she thus had spoaken, with tears her breast she replennisht.
Then said An ( o sister, than light more dearly belooued)
Will ye still in pining your youthful ioylitye stiefle?
Will ye not have children, nor sweet Venus happy rewarding's?
Ween ye that our lyking a scalp of a charuel In heedeth?
Grant, erst that noe woer could catch your phansye to wedlock,
Nor Lybye land lordinges, ne by Tire despised I arbas,
Nor many stat's lofty, that rest in plentiful Afric:
Will ye still endeavor with pleased love vaynelye to iustle?
Will ye be forgetting in what cursed country ye soiourne?
Here towns of Getuls do stand, a nation hardye,
Here ye sit embayed with Moors, with Syrtis vnhowsed.
Theare pepil of Barcey through soale wyld barrenes harbor.
What shall I tell further, what broyle Tyrus angrye does hammer,
What threats your broother thunders.
I thinck, that the Godhead, with Junoes prosperus ayding,
Thee Trojan vessels too this your segnorye pelted.
Loa what a fair city shall mount, what stablished empire
By this great wedlock: with might of the unity Trojan.
How far shall be fleing thee glory renowned of Afric.
Of Gods crave pardon, then, when your service is eended,
Your new guest frollick, his stay let forgerye linger,
Til winters lowering be past, and rain make Orion.
Til they rig al vessels, until time stormye be swaged.
With these words flaming her breast was kendled in hot love:
She graunts to her tottring mind hoape, shame bashful avoiding.
First to the church gad they, rest and peace meekelye requesting,
In sacrifice killing, by wont accustomed, hogrels:
First to Ceres makelaw, too Phoebus, then to Lyoeus:
Chieflye to Queen Juno, that wedlocks unity knitteth.
Thee bol in hand firmly Queen Dido, the bewtiful, holding,
Pourd yt a mydst both the horns peaking of lillye white heyfer.
Soomtyme to the altars, distant, of Gods she resorteth:
And makes fresh sacrifice, the catal, new slaughtered, heeding.
She weens her fortune by guts, hoate smoakye, to conster.
o the superstitions of beldam trumperye sooth says.
Now what avail temples, or vows, whilst deepelye the flamd fire
Kendleth in her marrow, whilst wound in breast cel is aching.
Dido, the wretch, burns, near mad through cittye she stalketh:
Much like a doa wounded too death, not marcked of heerdman,
His dart sharp headed through forest Cassian hurling,
On the doa iump lighteh by soom chance medlye: the weapon,
Thee body sore ranckling does stur thee dear to the frithward,
Or to falow straining, in corpse thee deadlye staf hangs.
Often about thee walls Aeneas slilye she trayneth:
Too wealth Sidonian poincting, too cittye nere eended.
Her bye tale out hauking amyd often her parlye she chocketh.
Soomtyme she inuites them too deynty bancquet in eeuening:
Now fresh again craving of Trojan toil the recital,
From lyps of Chronicler with blincking listenes hanging.
When they be departed, when light of mooneshine is housed,
And stars down gliding at due time of slumber ar aiming,
Restles aloane sobbing on left benche soalye she sytteth:
Her self not present she both hyers and sees the man absent.
Or the slip Ascanius (for saint thee shrinecase adoring)
She cols for the father: with busse to lenifye loouefits.
Thee towrs new founded mount not, thee coompanye youthful
Surcease from warfeats, there toyls no swincker in haven;
Nor mason in bulwarck: wurcks interrupted ar hanging.
And walls hudge menacing, thee sky top in altitud eeuening.
When the plage of pacient thee spouse of Iuppiter heeded,
And noe report wandering thee love furye kendled abated,
Thus toe Venus turning spoke thee Saturnical empress.
A praise of high reckning, eke a catch to be greatly renowned
You with your pricket purchased, loa the victory famous:
With two Gods packing one woomman sellye to coosen.
Well did I know, mistress, that you my great harborye feared,
Mightelye mistrusting thee seats of Carthage, hye mounted.
When shall, Hoa, be shouted? too what drift feed we this anger?
Why be we not forward these mat's too marrye to geather
And a leage eternal conclude? thy long wish is hested.
Dido with hertlyking does burn, her boans furye fretteth.
Let these sundry pepils theare for be lincked in one loare.
Also let our Dido veil her heart too bedfeloe Trojan:
And Tyrian kingdooms to the shall, for dowrye, be granted.
Then to her (for wisely she found thee treacherye feined
Too fetch too Tyrians the great empire of Italye woorcking)
Thus Venus her speeches did bend. What niddipol hare brain
Would scorn this covenant? would with thee gladlye be iarring?
If so this happy travail shall so be with happiness aided.
But fates me stamering do make, if Iuppiter holds
Best, that the Tyrians and Trojan progenye couple,
That they be conioigned, that both they freendlye be leaged.
You to him be spoused: thee troth with pillotoy ferret.
On before, and I follow. Too this lady Juno replied.
That labor I warrant. Now by what craftinis are we
Too wurck this stratagem: marck well, for I brieflye will open.
Thee Prince Aeneas and eke Queen Dido the poor soul
For to hunt in forest too morro be fullye resolved,
So soon as in east coaste with bright beams Titan apeereth.
Then will I round coompasse with clowd grim foggye these hunters.
When they shall in thickets thee coouert maynelye be drawing.
All the sky shall rustle with thumping thunderus hurring.
Thee men I will scatter, they shall be in darcknes al hooueld.
Dido and thee Trojan captain shall iumble in one den.
If with his my travail thy mind and phansye be meeting
Then will I thee wedlock with firm affinitye fasten:
This shall be the bryde hymn. To the drift Venus, vttred, agreed,
Smoothlye with all simpring, too groape such treacherus handling.
Thee whilst thee dawning Aurora fro the Ocean hastened,
And the May fresh yoonckers to the gates do make there asemblye
With nets and catch toyls, and hunt spears plentiful yrond:
With the hounds quick senting, with pricking galloper horsman.
Long for thee Princess thee Moors gentilitye waited,
As yet in her pincking not pranckt with trinckerye trinckets:
As they stood attending thee whilst her trapt genet hautye
Decked with ritche scarlet, with gould stood furniture hanging,
Praunseth on al startling, and on byt gingled he chaumpeth.
At leingth forth she flees with swarming coompanye circled,
In cloak Sidonical with rich dye brightlye besprinckled.
Her locks are broyded with gould, her quiver is hanging
Backward: with gould tache thee vesture purple is holden.
Thee band of Trojans likewise, with wanton Iulus
Do march on forward: but of al thee Lucifer heunlye
In bewty Aeneas himself to the coompanye rancketh.
Like when as hard frozen Lycia and Zanth floods be relinquisht
By Pheebe, to Delos, his native contrye seat, hastening.
He poinctes a dawnsing, forth with thee rustical hoblobs
Of Cretes, of Dryopes, and payncted clowns Agathyrsi
Do fetch their gambalds hopping near consecrat altars.
He trips on Zanthus mountayn, with delicat hearelocks
Trayling: with green shrubs and pure gould neatly becrampound
His shafts on shoulder rattle: the like hautye resemblaunce
Carried Aeneas with glistring coomlines heunlye.
When they toe thee mountayns and too layrs uncouth aproched,
Then, loa, behold ye, breaking thee goats do trip fro the rocktops
Near toe the plain: the heard dear does stray from mounten vnharbourd.
Thee chase is ensued with passadge dustye bepowdred.
But the lad Ascanius, with praunsing courser hye mounted,
Does manage in valley, now them, now these ouerambling.
He scorns these rascal tame games, but a sounder of hogsteers,
Or thee brownye lion too stalck fro the mounten he wishes.
Thee whilst in the sky seat great bouncing rumbelo thundering
Ratleth: down pouring too sleete thick hayle knob is added.
Thee Tyrian feloship with yoouthful Trojan asemblye
And Venus hautye nephew do run too sundry set houses.
Hudge fluds lowdlye freaming from mountayns loftye be trowlling,
Dido and thee Trojan captain do iumble in one den.
Then the earth crau's the banes, theare too watrye Juno, the chaplayne,
Seams up thee bedmatch, the fire and air testify wedlock.
And Nymphs in mountayns high typ do squeak, bullelo, yearning.
That day cross and dismal was cause of mischief al after,
And bane of her killing; her fame for slight she regarded.
No more does she labor too mask her Phansye with hudwinck,
With thee name of wedlock her carnal leacherye cloaking,
Straight through towns Lybical this fame with an infamye rangeth.
Fame the groyl vngentil, then whom none swifter is extant;
Limber in her whisking: her streingth in iournye she trebbleth;
First like a shrimp squatting for fear, then boldlye she roameth
On ground proud letting: she soars up nimblye toe skyward;
The earth, her dame, chauffing with graund Gods celical anger,
Litterd this leueret, the syb, as men sundry rehearsed,
Too the giant Coeus, sister to swad Encelad holden.
Forth she quicklye galops, with wingflight swallolke hastening.
A foul fog pack paunch: what feathers plumye she bears,
So many squint eyebals she keeps (a relation uncouth)
So many tongues clapper, with her ears and lip labor eeuened.
In the dead of nighttyme to the skies she flickereth, howling
Through the earth shade skipping, her sight from slumber amoouing.
Whilst the sun is shyning the bagage close lodges in housroofs,
Or tops of turrets, with fear towns loftye she frighteth.
As ready forgde fittons, as true tales vaynelye toe twattle.
Thee pepil in iangling this raynebeaten harlotrye filled:
Meerelye forth chatting feats past, and feats not atempted.
That the duke Aeneas from Trojans auncetrye sprouting,
In Lybye coast landed, with whom fair Dido, the Princess,
Her person barterd, and that they both be resolved,
Thee winter season too wast in leacherye wanton.
Retchles of her kingdoom, with rutting bitcherye sauted.
This that pratpye cadesse labored too trumpet in eeche place.
Forth she flees posting to the kingly rector Iarbas.
With the brute enflaming his mind she does huddle on anger.
Soon to the Prince Ammon, Garamans thee fayrye, bye rapesnacht,
His moother named; this king too Iuppiter heunly
Temples twice fifty did buyld, like number of altars,
With fire continual these seats too consecrat using,
With the blud of sacrifice floating, with delicat herbflowrs.
Netled with these brackye nouels as wild as a march hare
In the myd of the Idols (men tell) near furnished altars,
These words, vplifting both his hands, he toe Iuppiter vttred.
Juppiter almighty, whom men Maurusian, eating
On the tabils vernisht, with cuprit's magnifye dulye:
Eyest thou this filthood? shall we, father heunlye, be careless
Of thy claps thundering? or when fires glimrye be listed
In clouds grim gloomming with bounce do terrifye worldlings?
A coy tyb, as vagabund in this my segnorye wandering,
That the plat of Carthage from me by coosinage hooked,
T'whom gave I fair tilladge, and eeke laws needful enacted,
Has scornd my wedlock: Aeneas lord she reteyneth.
Now this smocktoy Paris with berdlesse coompanye waited,
With Greekish coronet, with falling woommanish hearelocks
Like fiest hound mylcksop trimd up, thee victory catches.
And we beat the bushes, thee still with woorship adoring.
Only for our service soom praised vanitye gleaming.
Thee prayer of playntiefe, grappling thee consecrat altars,
Iuppiter hard; forth with to, the court he whirled his eyesight,
And viewd these bedmat's no sound reputation heeding.
With words imperial thus he speaks and Mercurye charge.
Flee my sun, and busk on, let sweet winds swiftlye be soommond,
And toe the duke Trojan, that vaynelye in Carthage abides,
Thee towns neglecting, that to him set destenye lotteth,
These words deliver, from me to him carrye this errand.
His paragon moother to us framd a promise of hudgger
Accoumpt and reckning, then he now perfourmeth, upon that
Hoape future expected, from Troy flam's twice she reliu'd him.
Too me she did promise, that he should be the emperor hautye,
That would, with bickring, fierce martial Italye vanquish:
Thee Trojan famely with wide spread glory reviving:
And globe of alregions with laws right equitye bridle.
Too feats so valiant if that no glory does have him,
Or to him thee catching of fame so woorthye be toil soom:
Shall, by sire, Ascanius from Roman cittye be loytred?
What does he forge: wherefore will he rest in country so freendlesse?
Why the Lauin regions, and stock he so slilye reputeth?
Thee sea let him trauerse: this is al: to him signifye this much.
Jove said: eke he the fathers command to accomplisse apoincteth.
First of al his woorcking too his feet shoes goulden he knitteth,
By which he with wind blast ruffling often flittereth upward,
Wheather he land regions or rough seas surgye does harrow.
His rod next he handles: by which from the helly Bocardo
Touzt tossed souls he freeth: diverse to the prison he plungeth.
He causes sleeping and bars: bye death eyelyd vphasping.
With the rod eke he sheareth thee winds, and scatters high clouds.
As thus he did flicker, thee top with sideryb of Atlas
He sees, that proppeth, with crown, the supernal Olympus,
Atlas, whose pallet with pynetrees plentiful hooueld,
In grim clouds darckned, with showrs and windpuf is haunted.
Thee snoa whit his shoulders does cloth, fluds mighty be rolling
From the chyn oldlye riueld, his beard with frost hoare is hardened.
First on this mounteyn thee winged Mercury lighted:
From thence too the waters his course he bended al headlong.
Much like a byrd nestled near shoars or desolat hilrocks:
Not to the sky maynely, but near sea meanelye she flickreth.
So with a mean passadge twixt sky and sea Mercurye slideth
To Lyby coast sandy; thee sharp wynds speedelye shauing,
Mercurye thee Cyllen, bye the mount Cyllene begotten.
On Lyby land tenements with winged feet when he lighted,
He spyed Aeneas new castles thriftelye founding,
And howsrowms altring: he woare then a gorgeus hanger
With iaspar yellow: he shynde with mantel ypurpled,
From shoulders trayling: this brave roabe Dido, the rich Queen,
Soalye with her handwurck did weaue: with gould wyre yt heaping.
Mercurye thus greets him: Now sir; you wholye be careful
Too found new Carthage, with your brave bedfelo sotted
You buyld a cittye, your own state slilye regarding.
Now to the God sentmee from shining brightned Olympus,
The God of all the godheads, managing heune and places earthlye,
He gave commandment, too thee too carrye this erraund.
What do ye forge? wherefore thus vaynely in land Lybye mitche you?
Too feats full valiant if that no glory does egg the,
Or toe the thee catching of fame so woorthye be toil soom,
Cast care on Ascanius rising, of the heyrs of Iulus.
Tw'hom the stat Italian with Roman cittye belongs.
When this round message thee Cyllen Mercurye whisperd,
In myd of his parling from gazing mortal he shrincketh:
From lookers eyesight too thinnes he vannished ayrye.
But the duke Aeneas with sight so geason agasted,
His bush starck staring with fear, cleene speecheles abyded.
He to fle soar longs, this sweet soil straight to relinquish,
By Gods imperial monishing auctoritye warned.
Here but alas he myred what course may be warelye taken;
How shall he too Princess, with looues hot phrensye retained,
Break this cold messadge? what words shall shape the beginning.
From thee poast toe piler with thought his rackt wit he tosseth.
Now to this od stratagem, now too that counseyl alying.
After long mooting, this course for better he deemed.
Mnestheus he called, Sergest and manlye Cloanthus,
For to rig in secret their ships, and coompanye summon,
With weaponsready: Thee cause also of changabil hastening
Deepelye toe dissemble: when eke opportunitye served,
Whilst no breche of freendship thee good lady `Dido remembers,
And due place of speaking sweetly with season is offered,
They would their passadge close steal. Thee knights agreed,
With will most forward, to haste on too iournye resolved.
How beyt thee Princess (what wyle can iuggle a loouer?)
Found out this cogging: in thought what first she reuolued
That toe do they minded: things standing saulflye she fears.
Fame, the blab uncivil, fosters her phansye reciting,
That the fleet is strongly furnished, their passage apoincted.
Deuoyd of al counsel scolding through cittye she ploddeth.
Mutch like Dame Thyas with great sollemnitye sturred
Of Bacchus third years feasting, when quaftyde aproacheth,
And showts in nighttyme do ringe in loftye Cithoeron.
At last she Aeneas thus, not provoked, asaulteth.
And thoghst thou, faythlesse coystrel, so smoothlye to shadow
Thy packing practice? from my soil priuelye slincking?
Shall not my lyking, ne yet erst faith plighted in handclaspe,
Nor Didoes burial from this cross journey withold the?
Further; in a winters sour storm must nauye be launched?
Mind'st thou with northen bluster thee main sea to trauerse
Thou cruel heart haggard? what? if hence too country the passage
Thou took'st not stranged: suppose Troy cittye remained:
Through the sea fierce swelling would thou to Troy cittye be packi^g?
Shunst thou my presence? By these tear's, and bye thye righthand
(Sense that I, poor caytiefe, noght else to mye self do relinquish)
By the knot of wedlock, by looues sollemnitye sealed,
If that I deserved too fore soom kindness, or ennye
Part of my person to the whillon pleasur a furded
To my state empayring let yeet soom mercy be tenderd.
I do crave (if toe prayers as yeet soom nouke be reserved)
Beat down thy purpose, thy mind from iournye reclayming.
For thy sake in Lybical regions and in Nemod hateful
I live: my Tyrian subjects pursue me with anger.
For thy sake I stained whillon my chastitye spotless:
And honor old battered, to the sky with glory me lifting.
And now, guest, wheather do ye skud from deaths fit of hostace?
That term must I borowe, sith I dare not call the mine husband.
Why do I breath longer? shall I live til cittye mye broother
Pigmalion ransack? or too time I be prisoner holden
By thee Getul Jarb? if yeet soom progenye from me
Had crawld, by the fatherd, if a cockney-dandiprat hopthumb,
Prittye lad Aeneas, in my court, wantoned, ere thou
Took'st this filthye fleing, that thee with phisnomye lyckned,
Ine then had reckned my self for desolat owtcaste.
She said: he persisting too do what Iuppiter heasted,
Sturd not an eye, graueling in his heart his sorroful anguish.
At length thus briefly did he parle: I may not, I will not
Deny thy beneficts full as amply, as can be recounted,
Unto me deliu'red: so long shall I Dido remember,
Whilst I my self mind shall: whilst lyms with spirit (...) orderd.
Brieflye for a weighty matter few words I will v^^er.
Neauer I foremynded (let not me falslye be threpped)
For toe slip in secret by flight: ne yet eauer I thralled
My self too wedlock: I toe no such chapmenhed harckned.
If toe mye mind private my fatal fortun agreed,
If so that al sorrows iump with my phansye were eended,
Then should be chiefly bye me Trojan cittye redressed,
And kinreds rellieques woorshipt: then should be renewed
Thee court of Priamus: yea though that victory razed
These monuments, yet again by me they should be repaired.
But now to Italian kingdooms us sends Apollo,
And us to Italian regions set destenye warns.
Theare rests our lyking: there eke our wished country remains.
If ye be delighted, too see new Carthage up hoouering,
And a Moore in Morish city your phansye ye settle:
Why so may not Trojans their course to good Italye coompasse?
What reason embars them, soom forreyn country to ferret?
Of father Anchises thee goast and grislye resemblaunce,
When the day does vannish, when lights eke starrye be twinkling,
In sleep me monisheth, with visadge buggish he fears.
And my sun Ascanius me pricks, by me rightlye belooued:
Whom from the Italian regions toe toe long I do linger.
Latelye toe me posted from Jove thee truch sprit, or herrald
Of Gods (thee deityes this sooth too wytnes I summon)
He did, in expressed command, to me message his erraund.
I saw most lively, when that near town wall he lighted;
In this ear he towted thee speech. Cease therefore, I pray you,
Me to tear, and also your self, with drirye rehersals.
Italye not willing I seek.
Whilst he thus in pleading did dwell, she surlye beheeld him:
Here she does her visadge, thear skew, eeche member in inchmeale
In long mummye silence limming: then shrewdlye she scoldeth.
No Gods is thye parent, nor th'wart of Dardanus offspring,
Thou periurde fay toure: but amydst rocks, Caucasus haggish
Bred the, with a tigers sour milck unseasoned, vdderd.
What shall I dissemble? what poincts more weightye reserve I?
At my tears showring did he sigh? did he winck with his eyelyd?
Ons did he weep vanquished? did he yield ons mercy toe loouemate?
What shall I first utter? will I not graund Juno with hastening,
Nor thee father Saturn with his eyes bent rightlye behold this?
Faith quite is exiled: fro the shore late a runnagat hedgebrat,
A tarbreeche quystroune did I take, with phrensye betrasshed
I placed in kingdoom, both ships and coompanye gracing.
Woa to me thus stamping, such braynsick foolerye belching.
Marck the speak, I pray you, well coucht: Now sothtel Apollo,
Now Lycian fortuns, from very Iuppiter heunlye
A menacing message, by the Gods ambassador, vttred.
Foorsooth; this thye viadge with care Saints celical heapeth,
Their brayns unquieted with this baldare be buzing.
I stay not thye body, ne on baw vaw tromperye descant.
Pack toe soil Italian: cross thee seas: fish for a kingdoom.
Verily, in hoape rest I (if Gods may take duelye reuengment)
With gagd rocks coompast, then vaynely, Dido, reciting,
Thou shall be punnisht. I Will with fire swartish hop after.
When death has untwined my soul from carcas his holding,
I will, as hobgoblin, foloa thee: thou shall be soar handled:
I shall hyre, I doubt not, thy pangs in lymbo related.
Her talck in the mydel, with this last parlye, she throtled.
And from his sight parted, with tortours queazye disorderd.
Him she left daunted with fear, words duitiful harming.
For to reply. The lady sowning mayds carrye to smooth bed
Of marble glittring, on beers her softlye reposing.
But the good Aeneas (al though that he cooueted hertlye,
For to swage her malady, with words to qualifye sorrows)
In groans deep scalding, his kindmynd sindged in hot love,
Yeet the will of the Godheads foloing, too nauye returns.
Thee Trojan mariners now drudge: their fleet they do lavnch forth:
And vessels, calcked with roasen smearye, be floating.
Up they trus oars boughed with plancks vnfinnished, hastening
From thence their passadge.
Now to the strond may ye see from town thee multitude hopping.
Much lyk when pismers their corn in granar ar hurding,
Careful of a winter nipping, in barns they bepiling.
Thee blackgarde marching does wurck, in path way, there harvest.
Part of these laborers on shoulders carrye the burdens
Of shocks: soom grangers with goade iads restye be pricking,
And spur on ants luskish. with swinck eeche corner abounds.
But toe the, poor Dido, this sight so skearye beholding,
What feeling creeps? what sobbing sorroful here sigh
In thy corpse hized, when from tower, loftelye mounted,
Thou saw thee bancksydes coouerd, and right to thine eyesight
Thou saw seas ringing with cheering clamorus hayssayle?
Scuruye love, in pacients what moods thou mightelye forcest.
Now she is constrained, too formoure tears toe be turning.
With suit freshlye praying, too love she tendereth hommage.
No mean unattempted, ne vnsoght, ear that she dye, leaving.
Sister An, in cluster you see thee coompanye swarming
On the shore in flockmeale: for wind their sails ar hoysted.
On stern thee mariners have settled meerelye garlands.
If that I foremynded this grief so mischeuus happened,
Then should I, sister, moderat this sorroful hazard.
Yeet good An, I pray thee, do me wretch this pleasure in one thing.
For the chief of woomen this break now naughtye regarded,
Chieflye to the he wounted to recount his priuitye secret.
His daps and sweetening good moods to the soalye were opned.
Post to him (good sister) toe mye proud foa tell ye this erraund.
I did not ransack, with Greeks conspiracye, Troytowne.
Nor yet against Trojans send I envy vessel apoincted.
Nor father Anchises boans crushed I, ne scattred his ashes.
What reason him leads to my suite too boombas his hyring?
Wheather is he flitting? To his leefe pheere grant he this one boon,
Too stay for a better passadge, for a prosperus hufgale.
I claim no old wedlock, that he fowly and falslye betrayed.
Nor that he thee regiment do loose of his Italye kingdooms.
I crave a vain respit, but a spirt toe mye phrensye relenting,
Til my fate has schoold me too mourn my destenye drowping,
These I crave in pardon for last (yield mercy to sister)
Which when you tender, toe mye death that shall be requighted.
In this wise she prayed: such tears her sister unhappy
Does to and fro carry: but he with no tearedrop is altered:
Nor to vain entreatings with listening tractable harckneth.
Thee fat's are pugnant, God, his ears quight stifned in hardness.
Much like as in forest a long set dottrel, or oaktree,
With northen blusters too parts contrayrye retossed:
Thee winds scold struggling, the threshing thick crush crash is owtborne,
Thee boughs frap whuarring, when stem with blastbob is hacked:
Yeet the tree stands sturdy: for as yt toe the skytyp is haunced,
So far is yt crampornd with root deep dibled at helgat's:
So this courragious gallant with clustered erraunds
Is cloyed and stinging sharp car's in breast do lie thrilling.
His mind vnuariant does stand, tears vaynelye do gutter.
Dido the poor Princess gauld with such destenye cutting,
Crau's mortal passadge: too look toe the sky she repyneth.
And toe put her purpose forward, this light toe relinquish,
When she the gift sacrifice with the incense burned on altars
(Grislye to be spoaken) thee moisture swartlye was altered:
And the wine, in pouring, like blood black sootish apeered.
This too no creature, no, not to her sister is opned.
Further eke in the palaice a chapel fair marbil abides,
Vowed to her first husband, which cel she woorshiped highlye.
With whit lillye fleses, with garland greenish adorned:
Here to her full seeming she did hyre thee clamor of elfish
Goast of her old husband, her forth to his coompanye wafting,
When the earth with thee shaads of night was darcklye bemuffled.
Also on thee turrets the skrich howl, like fetchliefe y settled,
Her burial roundel does ruck, and cruncketh in howling.
Sundry such od prophecyes, many such prognosticat omens,
In foretyme coined, their threatenings terrible vtterd.
Yea cruel Aeneas in dream to her seems apeering,
Her furious chasing: her self left also, she deemed,
Post aloan, and soaly from woonted coompanye singled,
Too trauayl a journey toe toe long, and that she returns,
Too seek her own Tyrians, through cragged passages vncooth.
Much like when Pentheus thee troops fell of hellish asemblye,
And two soons shyning, and two Thebs vaynely beholds.
Or like as, in skaffold theaters, is touzed Orestes
From his dame gastlye fleeing, with flam's and poisoned adders:
Or black scaalde serpents, and when that in entrye he settled
Sour feends grimlye gnashing, ramping with grislye reuengment.
When she thus in raging did swel: when plunged in anguish,
For to dye she minded, the mean and thee season apoincted,
These forged speeches to her sister sorroful vttring,
She shrowds her purpose, false hoape with phisnomye seigning.
Sister, an od by knack have I found (now rest ye triumphaunt)
Either this gadling shall swiftlye to me be returned,
Or fro this hot love ^its I shall be shortly retrayted.
Where the sun is woonted too set, near the Ocean cending,
Thee last poinct farthest of dwellers Aethiop: Atlas
Mighty in this region bolsters thee starred Olympus.
From thence came a maid priest, in soil Massyla begotten,
Seixten of Hesperides Sinagog, this sorceres used,
For too cram the dragon: she, on trees, slips consecrat heeded.
Hoonnye liquid sprinckling and breed sleep wild popye strawing.
For to fre mynds, snared with love, this Margerye voucheth,
Whom she will, and oothers with loouetraps stronglye to fetter.
Also to stay the rivers, and back globs starrye returning.
In night too cooniure spirits: theare shall ye se (sister)
Thee ground right under too groan, trees big to fall headlong.
Thee Gods too witness, so thee, dear sister, I likewise
Call, bye thye sweet pallet, me this hard extremity forces
For to put in practisemagical feats, sorcerye charming.
Wherefor in all secret let logs of timber, in inner
Court, with speed, be reked, thee sky with loftines bitting.
Also se, that thither you bring thee martial armoure,
That the peasaunt left here, with all his misfortuned ensigns.
Theare bed must he placed, thee wedlock bed, where I, poor wretch,
Al my bane have purchaste: these rit's thee Cooniures asks,
Too burn al monuments of this cursd villenus hoap loast.
This said straight a silence she keep's: her phisnomye paleth.
And yet An had nothing deemed that Dido, the sister,
Preparde these burials to her self, she no such furye casts.
Or that worse mischief might be to her sister aproching,
Then when she mourned the death of spouse soarye, Sichoeus.
Theare for her encheason she purueys.
But the Queen, as timber was brought, and piled in order,
And holme logs cleaued with cressets mounted ar added:
With twisted garland and leau's, spread greenlye, she garnisht
Thee place of her burial: there his armours al she reposed.
On the bed his picture she set, full plarnely bethincking,
What would be the sequel. There about stand consecrat altars:
With which eke embayed, the she priest, vntressed in hear locks,
Hundreds of the Godheds thrice told al giddylye calls:
She cries on the Erebus darcknesse and on Chaos hoch poch.
And the tripildam Hecatee, with three faced angrye Diana.
She pours eeke the liquours untruly of founten Auernus.
Also by thee moon shine young buds scant spirted a boon ground,
Are soght too be loped with a brassye sieth also the poison
Cole black commixed with mylck: enquyrye was eke made,
For to snip, in the foaling, from front of fillye the knapknob
That the mare al greedy does snap.
Her self with presents standing near the halloed altars,
Naked in her oane foot, with frock unlaced aparrayld;
Calls at her parting on Gods: and destenye wytting
Thee stars: too the Godhead, with meek submission, hartlye
She prays: if deitee with no loare rightlye regadeth
Thee slip of al faythlesse break leages, that unequalye looued.
Near toe dead of midnight yt drew, when member of eeche thing
Quick, and fore labored was, with sweet slumber, atached.
Thee woods are noyselesse, thee seas late stormye be calmed.
Thee stars from the sky top with glyding slippry be shooting:
Thee fields and the catal be mum: most queintlye bedecked
Fair sowls, close lurcking in lak's, or shrouded in hard bed
Of thorny thickets, through rural country be napping,
In the silent nightyme, from thought their daytoyl amoouing.
But the poor vnresting Dido could catch no such happy
Season, too be quiet, she sleeples is only remaining.
Now routs of carcking troubles, with sighs, be resorting:
Soomtyme fits tickling of her old love in hertroote ar itching.
Then fresh on a suddeyn she frets, and warpeth in anger.
And bayted in tugging skirmish then thus the bethoght her,
What shall I do therefore? shall I now, lyk a cast away milckmadge,
On mye woers formoure be fawning: Too Nemod emprour
Now shall I meek be suing, often by me coylye refused?
Therefore I must swiftly too Trojan nauye be trudging,
Theare me toe bynd prentise, their will, lyk a gally slave, heeding.
And reason I trauayled too them, that, by me so shielded,
My formoure beneficts defrayde so kindelye requited.
Well, well: grant I trauayld, who would me suffer? or of them
What man, in his vessel, proud borne, would carrye me scorned?
And alas o selly woomman: yeet must ye be lessond
Thee freaks, thee fickle promise, thee periurye Trojan?
What then? with my fleeing shall I track their nauye triumphing?
Or shall I pursu them with strong and furnished army?
And my pepil subject, that I brought from Sidon in hazard
Of liefe, too the sea ward with danger shall they be pressed?
Nay, nay, thye self slaughter: thy bad lief unhappy death asks.
Thou, thou, decre sister, with my tears woommanish anguisht,
With my frenzy moved, to my foa dydst cast me full open.
Might not I my lief time, lust fleshly and sinful avoiding.
Spend lyk an vnreasoned wild beast, and such care abandont
I kept no promise to the boans of godly Stchoeus.
Such playnts and quarrels in burnt breast stronglye she crusshed.
Now the good Aeneas embarckt in vessel of hudgnesse,
Certain of his passadge, did sleep; things duelye well orderd.
Then toe the same captain valiant, in slumber, apeered
Thee self same visadge, that face, that phisnomye bearing
In color, in speaking, thee self same Mercurye likning,
Forseene in his goulden fine locks, and youthlye resemblaunce
Thus thee wight sleeping with a newcoom message he greeteth.
Thou sun of heunlye Godesse, dare thou to slumber in hazards?
See ye, o madman, what dangers sundry betyde you?
Heir ye not, in listening, thee western fortunat huffling?
She coyn's cursd dangers, and mischiefs forgeth on anuyl.
Too dye she stands resolut: she stormeth sweltred in anger.
Will ye not haste swiftly, whilst leasur is offered of hastening?
Perdye ye shall shortly perceive, thee seas toe be coouerd,
With boats, and flaming fire worcks toe be flasshed of eeche side
Thee shoars, if dawning in this fell country shall hold you.
On loa, cut of loytring, a wind fane changabil huf puff
Always is a wooman. Thus said, through nightfog be vannisht.
Then the duke Aeneas, with shadow sudden agrysed,
Vpstarts from flugish sleeping and coompanye waketh.
My men arise swiftyly: to the tacklings speedelye stick ye:
Hoise sayl's with posting: for a God from celical heunseats
Sent, toe fle commands us; likewise toe cut hastlye the cabels.
Loa yet again spurs he. We rely toe thyn hautye behestings
Who th'wart, mighty Godhead; thus again toe thy will we be forward.
Send thye pliaunt servants thye good aid, let stars of Olympus
Lucky assist the viadge: thus he said: then naked his edgd sword
Brandisht from the scabard he drew: thee cabil he swappeth.
Al they the like post haste did make, with scarboro scrabbling.
From the shore out sail they: thee sea with great fleet is hooueld.
Fluds they rake up spuming, with keele froth fomye they furrow.
Thee next day foloing lustring Aurora lay shymring,
Her saffrond mattresse leaving to her bedfelo Tithon.
Thee Queen, when the daylight his shining brightness afurded,
Peeps from loftye beacons, and sailing nauye beholds.
Thee stronds and the havens of vessels emptye she marcketh.
Thrice, nay she four seasons on fair breast mightily bouncing,
And her hear out rooting yellow: God Iuppiter, ogh lord:
Quod she, shall he escape thus? shall a stranger give me the slampam?
With such departure my regal segnorye frumping?
Shall not al our subjects pursu with clamorus hu cry?
With my fleet boat foloing shall not their nauye be burned?
On men; alarm; fyrebrands se ye take; sayls hoyse; roa ye swiftly
What chat I fool? What place me does hold? What phrensye me witcheth?
O Forlorn Dido, now now wrawd destenye grubs the.
This spite should be plied, when thou thy auctoritye yeeldedst.
Marck the faith and kindness, that he shows, who is soothlye reported
Too carry his rellicques and country domestical house gods,
And to clap on shoulders his bedred graueporer old sire.
Could not I with my power both have backed and minced eke inchemeale
Thee coystrels carcass, next in the sea deepelye toe drenche yt?
Could not I then murder, with sword, his coompanye straggling?
Yea the lad Ascanius well I might have slaughtered, after
At tabil of the father too set thee chield to be maunged.
Thee chance in battle, ye will hold, is doubtful: I grant yt.
What man had I feared, toe dye pressed? I had flamed of eechesyde
Theare tents and navy, thee child, and thee father eending.
Yea the race extirping: my self had I walloed on them.
O sun in heaune hye beaming, who behold'st full woorckes al earthlye:
Of these drirye dolours eeke thou Queen Juno the searchresse,
And Gods hauty Hecatee, that dooest wights terrifye nightlye
In pathways traueling, ye bug hags sierce set to reuengments,
You Gods al mustring to the eende of wretched Elisa,
Ear this; I do crave you: for sin's due torture amoouing.
Lysten too my Prayers. If this false traitor in haven
Of force must be placed, toe the land if destenye fling him,
If facts of the Godheds so will: their will be don hardly.
Yet let thee rascal with soldiers doughtye be lugged,
Spoiled of his weapons, wandering like a bannished owtlaw:
Haalde from the embracing of his only belooued Iulus:
And to beg his succoure: too see thee funeral eendinges
Wretched of his kynred: likewise when be shall be relying
Too streict conditions of peace, to unlawful agreement:
In wished Princelye quiet let not thee cullion harbor:
But before his fixed death time let his eende be cut hastlye,
In nauel of quick sands his corpse vntumbed abiding.
These poincts humblye crave I, with blood this last will I stablish.
And you my Tyrian subjects, this linnage here after
Pursue with hate bitter, this gift se ye grant toe mine ashes.
Let no love or lyking, no faith nor leage be between you,
Let there one od captain from my boans rustye be springing,
With fire eke and weapons thee caytiefs Trojan auenging:
Now; then; at eeche season; what so ear streingth mighty shall happen,
Let shore be too shoars, let seas contrary toe seas stand,
And to armours, armours I do pray, let progenye bicker.
She said; eke her vexte mind she tossed and tumbled in eeche side,
From thee light unsauerye to flit, with gredines, asking.
She speaks too Barsen thee nurse of seallye Sichoeus
(For then her own mylckdame in birth soil was breathles abiding)
Good nurse take the travail, too bring my sister An hither.
With the waters streaming let her hoale corpse hastlye be cleansed.
Thee beasts bring she with her, with them thee forenoted offerings.
Thus let her haste hither: let they pate godly be coouerd.
Too the God infernal what rits bye me be ready, forth with
For to end I purpose, my troubles wholye to finnish
And toe put in fire brands this Trojan pedlerye trush trash.
This said: she trots on sneyling, lyk a tooth shaken old hagge.
But Dido affrighted stift also in her obstinat onset,
Her bluddy eyes wheeling, her liars with swart spot ydusked,
And eke al her visage waning with murder aproching,
Too the inner quadrant runs, then madlye she scaleth
Thee top of her banefyors, his sword she grappleth in handling;
I say the sword brandisht, toe such a wild part not apoincted.
When she the weeds Trojan did marck, and sport breder old bed:
In tears salt blubbring, in musing stiddye remaining,
She fell on her mattresse: these words for a farewell awarding.
O my sweet old leauings, whilst me good destenye suffered,
And God of his goodness you me too pleasure allowed,
Take ye mye faint spirit, me from these troubles abandon,
I liu'de and the trauayl, granted by fortun, I traced:
Also my goast shortly too pits of lymboe shall hobble.
A city I founded stately, thee walls did I see raysd.
And the death of my husband on freendlesse broother I venged.
Blessed had I rested, ye thrice most blessed, if only
In these my regions to Trojan vessel had anchord.
Thus she said, and thrusting in couche her phisnomye cheerelesse,
But shall I die sheep like, not taking kindlye reuengment?
Yea will I die, quod she, what? so? yea, so will I pack hence.
Let the cruel Trojan, this flame from main sea beholding,
His panch now satiat, with this my destenye fatal.
Thus she said; and falling on blade with desperate offer,
Her damsels viewd her: thee sword al bluddye begoared,
And hands out spreadding they beheeld; thee raisd cry does echo
In the palaice: Rumor thee death through cittye does utter.
With sighs, with yelling, with skrich, with woommanish howling,
Thee rafters rattle: with shouts thee perst sky reboundeth.
With no les hudge bawling, than if al Carthago were enterd
By the enymy riffling, with flaming flasshye toe scorch al
Thee roofs of tenements, of Gods thee consecrat howses.
Forth runs her sister, these news unfortunate hyring,
With nails her visadge skratching, and mightilyerapping
Her breast with thumping frap knocks, throughrout she does enter,
And the dying sister, with roaring, lowdlye she named.
Was this, dear sister, your drift? therefore ye begyld me?
And for these bancquets made I fires, and halloed altars?
What shall I first mourn now, poor caytief, desolat owtwayle?
In this your parting your sisters coompanye skornd you?
Had ye toe that blood shot me bid: we both, with one edgtoole,
And eke in one moment, our passadge fatal had ended.
This labor endurd I toe this end? waste therefore I called
On Gods, from thye dying sharp pangs to be, wretch cruel absent.
The and my self have I quight forlorn, thee nation hautye
Of Sidon, thy worthy pepil, thy town brave I batterd.
Speedelye bring me water, thee green wound swiftlye toe souple;
And if in her carcass soom wind yeet softlye be breathing,
With lip I will nurse yt: thus said she climd toe the woodpile,
Claspt in her arms bracing thee panting murtheres haulfquick,
With grunt wide gasping: thee blackned gellyeblud,hardening,
She skums with napkings; she would have lifted her eyebal,
Feeble again weixing she droups; thee deadlye push yrcks her.
Thrice she did endeavor, too mount and rest on her elbow;
Thrice to her bed sliding she quayls, with whirlygig eyesight
Up to the sky staring, with belling skrichcrye she roareth,
When she the desired soonbeams with faint eye received.
Then Juno omnipotent long pangs, with mercy beholding,
And this her hard passadge; did send, from propped Olympus,
Thee lustring raynebow, from corpse thee spirit avoiding,
With rustling coombat buckling, with slain body iustling.
For where as her parture noe due death, nor destenye caused,
But before her season thee wretch through phrensye was ended,
Her locks gould yellow therefore Proserpina would not
Shave from her whit pallet, ne her ding too damnable Orcus.
Than loa the fair Raynebow saffronlyke feathered, hoou'ring
With thousand gay colors, by the soon contrary reshyning,
From the sky down flickring, on her head most ioyfulye standing,
Thus said: I do Gods heast, from corpse thy spirit I sunder.
Straight, with all, her fair locks with right hand speedelye snipped:
Forth with her heat fading, her liefe too windpuf avoided.
FINIS. Deo Gratias. Opus december dierum.
HERE AFTER ENSVE CERTAIN PSALMS OF David, translated in too English,
according to thee observation of thee Latin verses.
AS thee Latinists have diverse kinds of verses besides the Heroiacal: so our
English will easelye admyt them, although in thee one language or oother they
sown not al so pleasinglie too the ear (by whose balance thee rolling of thee
verse is too be gaged) as the sole heroical, or the heroical and thee elegical
enterlaced one with the oother. I have made proof of the Jambical verse in
thee translation of thee first Psalm of David, making bold with thee courteous
reader, too acquaynt him there with.

THEE FIRST PSALM OF DAVID, named in Latin, Beatus vir, translated in too
English Iambical verse.
1
THat wight is happy and gracious,
That tracks noe wicked coompanye;
Nor stands in il men's segnorye;
In chair ne sits of pestilence.
2
But in the sound law of the lord
His mind, or heast is resiaunt:
And on the said law meditat's,
With hourlye contemplation.
3
That man resembles verelye
The graffe bye river situat;
Yielding abundant plentines
Of fruict, in harvest seasoned.
4
With heunlye joyce still nurrished
His leaf bye no means vannisheth;
What thing his heart endeavors,
Is prosperously accomplished.
5
Not so the sinful creaturs,
Not so there acts are prosperous;
But like the sand, or chaffye dust,
That wynddye pufs fro ground do blow.
6
Therefore in hour judicial,
The ungodly shall vnhaunst remain;
And shall be from the coompanye
Of holy men quit sundered.
7
Because the lord preciselye knows
The godly path of goastlye men;
The fleshlye trace of filthye deeds
Shall then be cleene extinguished.
TOo my seeming (wheather I am carried too that conceit by the unacquainted
nooueltye, or the meigernesse of this kind of verse) the Iambical quantitye
relisheth so^ what vnfauorlye in our language, being in truth not al too
geather of thee toothsoomest in thee Latin. Thee Hexametre entermingled with
the Pentametre doothe carrye a good grace in the English, as also among thee
Latins: in which kind I have endeavored thee translation of thee secund Psalm.

THEE SECVND PSALM, QVARE fremuerunt gentes, translated in too English
Heroical and Elegiacal verse.
1
With franticque madness why frets thee multitud heathen?
And to vayn attemptings what furye sturs the pepil?
2
Al thee worldly Regents, in clustred coompanye, crowded,
For toe tread and trample Christ with his holy godhead.
3
Break we there hard fetters, we that be in Christian household,
Also from our persons pluck we there yrnye yokes.
4
He skorns their woorcking, that dwells in blessed Olympus:
And at thiere brainsick trumperye follye flireth.
5
Then shall he speak too those in his hard implacabil anger,
And shall turmoyle them, then, with his heavy furye.
6
I reign and do govern, as king, by the lord his apoinctment,
Of mount holy Si^n; his will eke heunlye preaching.
7
Thee father has spoaken: thou art my deerelye begotten;
This day thy person for my great issue breding.
8
Too me frame thye prayers, eke of ethnicks the heir will I make the,
Also toe thy seisin wide places earthlye give I.
9
With the rod hard steeled thou shall their villenye trample;
Like potters pypkin naghtye men easlye breaking.
10
You that are earthlye Regents, Judges terrestrial harcken,
With the loare of virtue warelye too be scholed.
11
Too God your service with fearful duitye be take ye;
With trembling gladness yield to that highness honor.
12
Learn well your lessons, least that God ruffle in anger,
And fro the right straggling, with furye snacht, ye perish.
13
When with swift posting his dangerus anger aprocheth,
They shall be blessed which in his help be placed.
IN thee secund verse I translate, Christ with his heunlye Godhead, and yeet
thee Latin renneth, aduersus dominum and aduersus Christumeius Wherein I offer
no violence too thee mind and meaning of thee Prophet. For his drift in this
Psalm tends too thee reclayming of earthlye potentats from thee vain
enterprice they take in hand, in thee suppressing of Christ his kingdoo^: which
by two means has been attempted. Thee one when our Saluioure was here in
thee earth, whom thee Jews and gentiles crucified: thee oother after his
Ascension, when his elect wear and now are daily persecuted by thee
miscreaunts, which persecution Christ does accoumpt his own, Act. 9. 4.
as when he challenged Saul, he demanded why he did persecute him:
accoumpting thee persecution of his members too be his own. And to thee like
purpose thee apostels apply this Psalm in thee 4. of the Acts. Actor. 4. 25
Now thee Prophet unfolds thee vanitye of thee Jews and gentiles in
conspiring too geather too surprice thee regiment of Christ, in that he is
God, and that he is the eternal Soon of thee father, Matt. 28. 18.
too whom al power is geeuen in heaven and earth, as well with justice too crushe
thee reprobat, as with mercy too salve thee elect. Therefore yt stands with
thee meaning of thee Prophet, too aduouch thee empugning of Christ, too be the
impugning of God, in that he is both God and man: God of thee substance of his
father begotten before thee worlds, Athan. in Symb.
and man of thee substance of his moother borne in thee world. And that thee
soo^ was before al worlds begotten of thee father is playnelye notified in thee
seventh verse, where thee father says too thee soon, this day I have begotten
thee: signifiing, by this day, Eternitye: in which generation is neither time
too coo^, nor time past, nor any changeable season, but always thee self same
immutable eternitye too be considered. And therefore in thee 12. verse, thee
Prophet lays down an exhortation too these men of state, not only not too
band against Christ, but also too submit theymselues too his loare, as too
God, who would have his soon honored: which verse I have translated according
too thee vulgar edition, apprehendite disciplinam, where with thee Greek text,
(...), and also the Chaldye interpretoure agrees, as Petrus Galatinus has
observed: Petrus Galat. de arch. Catho. Very. lib. 3. cap. 6.
yeet thee Hebrew Nas ku bar, or Nassecu Bar, may be too more aduantadge of us
Christans, and too thee confusion of thee Jews ootherwise translated. S.
Hierom turns yt, Hierony, in Psalm. 2.
adore purely, or adore thee soon, which approoueth thee deitye of Christ:
Felix translateth yt, kiss thee soon, or embrace thee soon: wherein also the
prerogative of Christ is manifested. For by thee kissing of thee soon is
signified thee embracing of his power and doctrine: which has been delivered
from thee mouth of thee almightye too his servants by thee hands of his
'Prophets and Apostles. And therefore thee ancient Talmudistes expound, in
this wife, that of thee Canticles, Canti. 1. 1.
Osculetur me osculo oris sui, let him kiss me with thee kiss of his own
mouth: that is, let thee Messiah, who is the soo^ of God, Exodi 4. 10.
instruct me with his own mouth. Let not Moses be sent, Esai. 6. 5.
who is tongue tied; nor Esaias, that acknowlegeth his lips too be polluted,
Ierem, 1. 6.
Nor Ieremye, that said he could not speak; but let thee very soon of God,
who is thee fathers wisdoom and force coom, and with his mouth lesson and
enstruct me. So that al beyt thee word (Bar) may emport soomtyme learning,
soomtyme corn, soo^tyme that which is pure or eleene, yet eftsoo^s yt
notifieth a su^ne. As Barptolomeus, if we respect the etymologye of thee word,
signifies thee soon of Ptolomeus, Barnabas, thee soon of a Prophet, as is
learnedly expounded by S. Hierom in his apologye against Ruffinus. Hieron. in
apologi. cont. Ruffin. cap. 5
But too return too our English verses, I have attempted thee translation of
thee third Psalm in thee Asclepiad kind: which also, in my phantasye, is not
also pleasant in thee English: but that I refer too thee judgment of thee
reader.

THEE THIRD PSALM, NAMED, Domine, quid multiplicati sunt, translated in too
English Asclepiad verse.
1
LOrd, my drirye foes why do (they) multiplye?
Me for too ruinat sundry be coouetous.
2
Him shields not the godhead, sundry say too mye soul.
3
Thou Art, lord most vigilant, wholye mye succorer,
And in the al mye staying shall be still harbored:
Tw'art my most valiant victory glorious.
4
To our lord loud I cried: from holy place herd he me.
5
In grave new buried fast have I slumbered.
I rose too liefe again through God his hollines.
6
I fear not furious multitud infinite,
With coompasse laboring, my body for toe catch.
Rise Lord omnipotent, help me, mye champion.
7
Lord, thy clear radiaunt righteus equitye
Has squisd al mye foes, falslye me ransaking.
8
Our Lord participats saulftye with happiness:
With gifts, heunlye Godhead, thy pepil amplye bliss.
But of al these bace and foot verses (so I term al sauluing thee Heroical
and Elegiacal) thee Saphick, too my seeming, has thee prehemynencye, which
kind I have assayed in thee paraphrastical translation of thee fourth Psalm.

THEE FOVRTH PSALM, NAMED, Cum inuocarem, paraphrasticalye translated in too
English Saphick verse.
1
WHen that I called, with an humbil owtcrye,
Thee God of Justice, meriting mye saulftye,
In many dangers mye weak heart upholding
Swiftlye did hyre me.
2
Therefore al fresly, like one often enured
With thye great goodness, yet again do crave thee,
Mercy too render, with all eeke toe grant me
Gratius harckning.
3
Wherefore of mankind ye that are begotten,
What space and season do ye catch for hardness,
Vanitee loouing, toe toe fondlye searching
Trumperye falsehood.
4
Know ye for certain, that our heunlye rectoure
His sacred darling specialye choosed:
And the lord therefore, when I pray, will harcken
Too mye requesting.
5
For syn expyred se ye rest in anger,
And future trespass, with all haste, abandon:
When that in secret ye be fleashlye tickled,
Run toe repentance.
6
Righteous incense sacrifice here after
In God, our guider, your hole hoape reposing.
Fondlye do diverse say, what hautye great lord
Us does inhable.
7
Thy star of goodness in us is reshining,
Sound reason granting, with all heunlye coomfort:
With these budge presents toe mine heart afurding
Gladness abundant.
8
Theare wheat and vineyards, that are haplye sprouting,
And oil, in plenty toe the store cel hurded,
With pride, and glory to the stars inhaunceth
Worldly men huffing.
9
Though that I see not, with a carnal eysight,
Thee blis and glory, that in heun is harbourd:
Yeet with hoape stand I, toe be theare reposed,
And toe be resting.
10
By reason that thou, my God heunlye, set ledst
Me, thye poor servant, in hoape, and that highlye:
Too be partaker with all heunlye dwellers
Of thye blis happy.
A PRAYER TOO THEE TRINITYE.
TRinitee blessed, deitee coeqnal,
Unity sacred, God one eeke in essence,
Yield toe thy servant, pitifullye calling
Merciful hyring.
Vertuus living did I long relinquish,
Thy will and precepts miserablye scorning,
Grant toe me, sinful pacient, repenting,
Helthful amendment.
Blessed I judge him, that in heart is healed:
Cursed I know him, that in health is harmed:
Thy physic therefore, toe me, wretch unhappy,
Send, mye Redeemer.
Glory too God, thee father, and his only
Soon, the protectoure of us earthlye sinners,
Thee sacred spirit, laborers refreshing,
Still be renowned. Amen.
HERE AFTER ENSVE certain Poetical Conceits.
A divise made by Virgil, or rather by soom oother upon a River so hard frozen,
that waynes did pass over yt: varyed sundry ways, for commendacion, as yt
should seem, of the Latin tongue, and thee same varietye dubled in thee
English.
1
QVa tatis egit iter, iuncto boue, plaustra trahuntur;
Postquam tristis hyems frigore vinxit aquas.
2
Sustinet vnda rotam, patulae modo peruia puppi:
Vt concreta gelu marmoris instar habet.
3
Quas modo plaustra premunt vndas, ratis ante secabat:
Postquam brumali diriguere gelu.
4
Vnda rotam patitur, celerem nunc passa carinam:
In glaciem solidam versus vt amnis abit.
5
Quae solita est far vnda rates, fit peruia plaustris:
Vt stetit in glaciem marmore versa nouo.
6
Semita fit plaustro, qua puppis adunca cucurrit:
Postquam frigoribus bruma coegitaquas.
7
Orbita signar iter, modo qua cauus alueus exit:
Strinxit aquas tenues vt glacialis hyems.
8
Amnis iter plaustro dat, qui dedit ante carinae:
Duruit vt ventis vnda, fit apta rotis.
9
Plaustra boues ducunt, qua remis acta carina est:
Postquam diriguit crassus in amne liquor.
10
Vnda capax ratium plaustris iter algida praebet:
Frigoribus saeuis vt stetit amnis iners.
11
Plaustra viam carpunt, qua puppes ire solebant:
Frigidus vt Boreas obstupefecit aquas.
THEE SAME ENGLISHED.
1
WHeare ships sayld, the wagons are now drawn stronglye with oxen:
For that thee season frostye did hold the water.
2
Theare the wagon runs, wheare whillon vessel has bulled:
For that thee marbil frostye made hard the river.
3
Theare placed is the wagon, wheare boats road grapled at anchour:
When that a could winter thee water hastye stayed.
4
Now the car is trayled, wheare barges latelye repaired:
When that cold Boreas chillye did hold the river.
5
Where ships have trauayled, theare now cars sundry be tracing:
When nipping winter thee river hardlye stoped.
6
Theare the coch is running, wheare latelye the nauye remained:
When that the northen frostye gale hemd the river.
7
Now the naue has passage, wheare keele was latelye reposed:
By reason of wynters frost, that has hyd the water.
8
Thee water up the wagons does prop, that vessel has harbourd:
Because that the river frostines y sye tied.
9
Now the wagon rowleth, wheare ligturs hulled in haven:
When that a frost knitting stronglye witheeld the river.
10
Wheare the ship erst sailed, the cart his passage on holds:
When thee frostye weather thee water hardlye glued.
11
Now the wayn is propped, whear to erst thee gallye resorted:
For that thee winters hoare glue reteynd the water.
SO MANY TIMES IS THE LATIN varyed, and yeet as many times more for the
honor of thee English.
1
THeare chariots do travail, wheare late the great argosye sailed:
By reason of the river knit with a frostye soder.
2
Wheare the great hulck floated, theare now thee cartwheele is hagling:
Thee water hard curded with the chil ysye rinet.
3
Where skut's forth lau^ched, theare now thee great wayn is entered:
When the river frized by reason of the weather.
4
Wheare rowed erst mariners, theare now godye carman abides,
Thee flud, congealed stifllye, relats the reason.
5
Now the place of sailing is turned to a carter his entrye,
This change thee winters chillines hoarye bredeth.
6
Now wayns and chariots are drawn, wheare nauye did harrow:
This new found passadge frostines hoarye shaped.
7
Wheare barcks have passed, with cart's that parcel is haunted:
From woonted moisture for that ice heeld the water.
8
Wheare stems have trauersd, there have oxen traced in headstal:
By reason yse knitting thee water heeld froe floing.
9
Wheare the fly boat coasted, theare cart wheels clustred ar hobling
This new strange passadge winter his hoarnes habled.
10
Erst the flud, vpbearing thee ship, now the cartwheele vpholdeth.
When water is ioygned firmlye with hoarye weather.
11
Whear ruther steered, thee goad theare poaked has oxen:
Thee winters coldness thee river hardlye roching.
Thee description of Liparen, expressed by Virgil in thee eight book of his
Aeneis, in which place, thee Poet played, as yt wear, his price, by aduauncing
at full thee loftines of his vein: done in too English by thee translatoure for
his last farewell too thee said Virgil.
TW'ard Sicil is seated, toe the welken loftelye peaking,
A soil, ycleapt Liparen, from whence, with flownce furye slinging,
Stoans, and burlye bulets, like tamponds, maynelye be to wring.
Under is a kennel, wheare Chymneys fyrye be scorching
Of Cyclopan tosters, with rent rocks chamferye sharded,
Loud dub a dub tabering with frapping rip rap of Aetna.
Theare strokes stronglye threshing, yawl forth groans, stamped on anuyl.
In the den are drumming gads of steel, parch fulye sparckling;
And flam's fierclye glowing from furnace flasshye be whisking.
Vulcan his hoate fordgharth, namde eeke thee Vulcian Island.
Down from the heunlye palace trauayled thee fyrye God hither.
In this cave the rakehels yrne bars, big bulcked, ar hamring.
Brotes, and Steropes, with baerlym swartye Pyracmon.
These three were vpbotching, not shapte, but partlye well onward,
A clapping fyerbolt (such as often, with rownce robel hobble,
Jove toe the ground clattreth) but yeet not finnished holy.
Three showers wringlye wrythen glimring, and forceblye sowcing;
Three watrye clouds shymring toe the craft they rampyred hizing,
Three wheru's fyerd glystring, with Soutwynds rufflered huffling.
Now do they raise ghastly lyghtnings, now grislye reboundings
Of ruff raffe roaring, men's herts with terror agrysing.
With peale meal ramping, with thwick thwack sturdelye thundering.
Their labor hot they follow: toe the flame fits gyreful awarding.
And in an od corner, for Mars they be sternfulye flayling
Hudge spoaks and chariots, by the which thee surlye God, angerd,
Hastye men enrageth, too wrath towns bat'ful on eggeth.
And they be fresh forging toe the netled Pallas an armoure,
With gould ritchlye shrined, wheare scaals be full horriblye clincked
Of scrawling serpents, with sculcks of poisoned adders.
In breast of the Godesse Gorgon was cocketed hardlye,
With nodil vnioyncted, by death, light vital amoouing.
Void ye fro these flamfews, quoa the God, set a part the begun wurck.
THEE LOOVER LONG SOGHT Unto by his free^d, at last repayreth too her
presence: and after a fevv meetinges smelling thee drift of thee moother,
which erst he did forcast, too te^d too the preferring of her daughter in
marriadge, refrayneth the gentle vvomans coompanye, though eftsoons too thee
contrary solicited, as one vnvvylling too marry at al, and very loath too
mar so courteous a dame: and therefore, for thee preservation of her honor, and
too avoid the encou^braunce of love, he curbeth affection with discretion,
and thus descanteth on the plain song.
VNtoe this hard passadge (good God) what phrensye did hale me?
From thye quiet service my self too slau'rye betaking.
Vntoe the lure smoothly, with faynd solemnitye, trained.
Five moonths full she plied: means made: dreams sundry related.
If we met in walcking, what scarlet blush she resembled?
Her color often altreth: with loou's hot palsye she trembles.
Back goth her eye glauncing: a sigh herd; moods chaungabil vttred.
I little accoumpted, God knows, thee curtesye proferd.
Still did I keep backward, what I find, tym's sundry forvttring.
For toe love a stranger, scarce seen, what sound reason eggs her?
But reason in loouepangs who seeks? a wooman eke hates,
Or loou's extreemely: no mean, no measure is extant.
At length won bye prayer to her lodge my passage I bended;
Lumps of love promised, nothing performed in earnest.
Forgerye thee pandar: thee messadge mockrye: the moother
Thee knot of all the lying, thee virgin faultles is only.
But shall I love the lady, so as Petrarck Laura regarded?
In paper her dandling? her person neauer atayning
Such sport fits the Poets, whom rauing phantasye sotteth.
I do wake, I dream not: noe such ynckhorne vanitye feeds me.
Thee body, not shadow: no words, but wurckes I coouet.
Marriage is profred: that yoke thee loouer abhors.
And toe mar a virgin, to a friend such curtesye tendering,
Were not a practice honest, not a preede toe be greatly recounted.
Thee rinet of freendship, virtue, such treacherye damneth.
What man of ennye reason with villenye virtue requyteth.
Rest the quiet therefore: flee from these dangerus hard rocks,
Whereto love often leads, with storms thee passage is haunted.
Great trauaylin the sueing, thee profred curtesye skorned.
If she coye, that kendleth thee fondling loouer his onset:
Greedelye we coouet, that was to us flatlye refused.
Queynt of a kiss publicque, lewd lust with nicitye masking.
Such woomens negatiues for a yielding, yea Sir, ar holden.
What does auayl, minion, this slight and treacherye cogging.
Cleave toe the sound Cast, flee from thee patcherye Caute.
Then fresh again prays he, percase thee suitur is eared.
Well: the woer gayneth the required victory. What then?
Is the trauayl finnisht? are pleasurs only then hoouering?
Nay: then thy misery, thine hell eeke theare takes his entrance.
Now thye sleep is scanted, now stinging ielosye fretteth.
Dame Venus and kingdooms can no riualitye suffer.
Her favor he gained with a beck: that burns in entrayls.
Who deems yt wisdoom with glass too rampyre a Bulwarck?
Men say, that a changing of pasture makes a fat calfe.
A Calf yt makes; toe the fat let a grasier annswere.
That will a way, who can hold? such challeng therefore abandon.
Robbrye toe be purchase, soom term eeke leacherye solace.
She kept no promise: that would be a quarrel in earnest.
Now wars proclaimed, peace again now freshlye renewed.
Now these suspicions, now that surmises ar opned.
Now beldam Brokresse must be with moonnye rewarded.
Veritye detesting, noght else but vanitye babbling.
This gown your love mate, that kyrtil costlye she craves,
This pearl, that diamond, this massiue garganet asking.
Noght may ye forsake her: that would be felonye deemed.
Ielosye thee person, thee purse eeke penurye pincheth.
Is this an heun, trow you? fro that heun Gods mercy wythold me.
Pleasure is unpleasant that purchases heavy repentance.
In so much as therefore this great vexation haunteth
Al such as are loouers, and wished bootye do coompasse:
I do renounce flatly thee field, such victory skorning,
Too mye fredoom formere my self from slauerye reclayming.
AN ENDEVOVRED DESCRIPtion of his Mystresse.
NAture in her woorcking soomtyme does pinche like a niggard,
Disfiguring creatures, lyms with deformitye dusking.
This man is unioyncted, that swad like a monster aby death;
She limps in the going, this slut with a cammoysed hancks nose,
And as a Cow wasted plods on, with an head like a lutecase.
These faults fond Hodipecks impute too Nature, as if she
Too frame were not habil gems with rare dignitye lustring.
Wherefore in aduisment laboring too cancel al old blots,
And toe make a pattern of price, thee maystrye toe pubblish:
For toe shape a peerlesse paragon she minded, asembling
Her force and cunning: for a spirt lands sundry refusing,
And with all her woorckmat's trauayling she lights in Holland,
Round too the Hage posting, to the world Marye matchles auauncing.
In body fine fewterd, a brave Brownnetta; well handed;
Her stature is coomly; not an ynch toe superfluus holding;
Gratius in visage; with a quick eye prittelye glauncing;
Her lips like corral rudye, with teeth lillye whit eeuened.
Young in age, in manners and nurture sage she remains;
Bashful in her speaking; not rash, but watchful in answer;
Her look's, her simpring, her words with curtesye sweetning;
Kind and also modest; lyking with chastitye lyncking;
And in all her gesturs observing coomlye Decorum.
But toe what eend labor I, me toe press with burden of Aetna:
Thee stars too number, poincts plainly vncounctabil opning.
Whust: not a word: a silence such a task impossibil asks.
Her virtue meriteth more praise, than parlye can utter.
HIS DEVISE WRITTEN in his mystresses book.
HAga Hollandorum vario splendore refulget;
Solis in hac lumen sola Maria tenet.
THEE SAME ENGLISHED.
THee fine Hage excels with lusturs sundry reshyning,
Thee Sun has his brightness in Marye solye placed.
THREE ESPECIAL GIFTS, wherein his mystresse excels.
THree poincts my mystresse with passing dignitye garnish.
Coomlynes of person thee first rank rightlye reteigneth:
Curtesye keeps the Secund: thee third row Chastitye claymeth:
For so fair a Paragon, with booxom deboynar vsadge;
And so pure a Virgin, with so rare virtue bedecked:
Sundry may well wish for. Marye must be the Principal holden.
OF A CRAKING CVTTER, extracted out of Sir Thomas Moore his Latin Epigrams.
LInckt was in wedlock a loftye Thrasonical huf snuff:
In gate al on typstau's stalcking, in phisnomye daring.
This cutter valiant in warfare soght his adventure.
Thee whilst his minion, with carnal wantones itching,
Chooste for a friend secret no worse, then a country lob heerd swayne.
A pray for a paragon: but what? thee knurrye knob oak tree,
Though craggyin griping, in strength surpasses a smooth slip.
When Thraso from bickrings, not bluddye, returned is homeward,
Of this hap aduertisde, with frantic iellosye taynted,
He seeks in thee fields, with swift enquirye, the riual.
Stay vagabund raskal (so he spoke when he spyde the lob heerd hyne
Thee clown stout stands with a leshe of bulleted hard stoans;
Then Thraso with naked flatchet, with thunderus owtcrye
Said: thou scuruye peasaunt, my wiefe the have, villen, abused.
My bed defiled: like a breaklooue mak'bat adultrer.
All this I deny not, quoa the clown: and what then: I pray thee?
Do thou confess yt? Thraso said: bye the blessed a semblye
Of the heunly sociats, had thou thy knauerye reneaged,
This mye blade in thye body should be with speedines hasted.
OF A TEMPEST QVAYLING certain passengers borrowed of thee same Sir Thomas Moore.
THeare rose in sailing a rough tempestuus owtrage,
With watrye plash bouncing, thee ribs of giddyeship hitting.
Thee mariners fearing, al hoap eeke of salftye rejecting,
Said: that a bad living eke a bad death rightlye required.
All that are in passadge to a munck father holy, resorted,
Who was eke embarcked, to him their confession opning.
Howbeyt thee stormy ruffling is no whit abated;
But thee rough billows the ship toe toe terriblye charged.
Twish, what wonder is yt, quod one of thee coompanye, chauffing,
If that thee vessel with weight most sinful is heavy.
Duck we the munck therefore, that al our falts wholye received,
Hastlye let him toe the seas our syns and villenye carrye.
Al they be contented, thee munck they spedelye plunged:
Ceast was thee tempest, if truth be truly related.
Hereby we be scholed, what poyse sin ponderus holds,
That with an hudge and weightye balas surchargeth a vessel.
HESPERVS HIS CONFESSION, written in Latin by the Said Sir Thomas Moore.
HEsperus his faulty liuelood too call toe recounting
Mynding, too be shriuen with wont accustomed hastened.
When that he told plainly, what crym's most sinful he practisd,
Yeet thee goastlye father laboring more deepelye toe ransack
His formere living; by distinct article asked
Eu'rye syn, and naming by peecemeal curious each fault,
At leingth demanded, wheather, with sorcerye blinded,
Erst he belief yielded toe the bugs infernal? here aunswerd
Hesperus: holy father, do ye thinck me so madlye bewitched
Too believe in the devils? I tell you truly, toe great payn's
Still I take enduring, in God yeet scantlye believing.
OF TYNDARVS, THAT FRVMped a gentlewoman for having a long nose, delivered by
the former author in Latin.
TYndarus attempting too kis a fair less with a long nose,
Would needs be finish, with bitter frumperye taunting.
In vayn I do coouet my lips too linck toe thye sweet lips,
Thy nose, as a stickler, toe toe long us parts a sunder.
Here the maid al bashful, the vnsau'ry saucines heeding:
With choler oppressed, thus shrewdlye toe Tyndarus aunswerd,
Sith mye nose owtpeaking, good sir, your liplabor hinders,
Hardlye ye may kiss me, where no such gnomon apeereth.
SIR THOMAS MOORE HIS receipt for a strong breath translated out of his Latin
Epigrames.
FIrst for a strong sauoure stinking, a leeke may be taken:
That sent too bannish, thee best is an Onion eaten.
And toe repeal lykwise that sauoure, garlik is holsoom.
If that these simples will not thee filthod abandon,
Arose, or else nothing that drafty infirmitye cures.
HERE AFTER ENSVE Certain Epitaphes framed as well in Latin as English
AN EPITAPH DEVISED UPON thee death of thee right honorable James earl of
Ormond and Ossorye, who deceased at Elye house in Holborne about thee year
1546. thee xviij. of October, and lies buried in S. Thomas Acres church,
Extracted out of thee third book of thee Historye of Ireland.
COr patriae fixum viuens, iam redditur illi
Post mortem, patriae quae peracerba venit.
Non sine cord valet mortalis viuere quisquam;
Vix tua gens vita permanet absque tua.
Quae licet infoelix extincto cord fruatur,
Attamen optato viuere cord nequit.
Ergo quid haec faciat? quem re non possit amorem,
Cordi vttam charo reddere cord velit.
THis earl was a goodlye and personable man: full of honor, which was not only
lodged inwardly in his mind, but also he bare yt owtwardlye in countenance.
As franck and as liberal as his calling required. A deep and a far reatching
head. In a good quarrel rather stout then stubborn, bearing him self with no
less courage, when he resisted, than with honorable discretion where he
yielded. A favorer of peace, no furtherer of war, as one that preferred unlawful
quietness before upright troubles, being notwyth standing of as great
wisdoom in thee one, as of valor in thee oother. An earnest and zealous
vpholder of his country, in all attemptes rather respectig thee publicque
weal, than his private gain. Wherebye he bound his cou^trye so greatly unto
him, that Ireland might with good cause wish, that either he had neauer been
borne, or else that he had neauer deceased, so yt were lawful, too crave him
immortal, that by course of nature was framed mortal. And too give sufficient
proof of thee entyre affection he bare his country, and of thee zealouse care
he did cast thereon, he beetoke in his death bed his soul too God, his
carcass too Christian burial, and his heart too his country, declaring
thereby, that where his mind was settled in his liefe, his heart should be
theare entumbed after his death. Which was according too his will accomplished.
For his heart was conueighed in too Ireland, and lies engraued in thee chore of
thee cathedral church in Kilkennye, where his aucetours, for thee more part,
are buried. Upon which kind legacye thee abooue written Epitaph was devised.

UPON THEE DEATH OF THEE lord of thee out Isles of Scotland: of whom mention is
made in thee third book of thee Histor. of Ireland.
Vique manuque mea patriae dum redditur exsul,
Exsul in externa cogor and ipse mori.
THis noble man assisting thee earl of Lennox eended his lief at Howth
presently upon his arriual, and was with great solemnity buried in S. Patrick
his church at Dublin: circa Annum Domini M. D. XLIII.

UPON THEE DEATH OF HIS father, James Stanyhurst Esquyer, who deceased at
Dublyn Anno 1573. xxvij. of December, aetatis LI.
VIta breuis, mors sancta fuit (pater optime) visa:
Vita timenda malis, mors redamanda bonis.
Vrbs est orba sopho; legum rectore tribunal;
Causidicoque cliens; atque parente puer.
Plurima proferrem, sed me prohibere videtur
Pingere vera dolor, fingere falsa pudor.
Non opus est falsis, sed quae sunt vera loquenda,
Non mea penna noter, buccina fama sonet.
Hoc scripsisse satis; talem, quandoque, parentem
Est habuisse decus, sed caruisse dolor.
Filius haec dubitans talem vix comperit vsquam
Vllus in orb patrem, nullus in vrbe parem.
Mortuus ergo, pater, poteris been viuus haberi,
Viuis enim mundo nomine, mente deo.
UPON THEE DEATH OF his father in law Sir Christofer Barnewal knight.
LAeta tibi, sed moesta tuis mors accidit ista:
Regna dat alta tibi, damna dat ampla tuis.
Laetus est in coelis vllo sine fine triumphans,
Moestus at in terris dives inopsque iacent.
Nam sapiente caret dieus, qui parta gubernet,
Nec, qui det misero munera, pauper habet.
Te generipse caret, viduae, te rustica turba,
Atque vrbana cohors te (Soceralme) caret
Non est digna viro talis respublica tanto,
Nam sanctos seeds non nisi sancta decet.
Mira loquor, sed vera loquor, non ficta reuoluo,
Si maiora loquar, nil nisi vera loquar.
Mortuus es? nobis hoc crimina nostra dederunt.
Mortuus es? virtus hoc tibi sacra dedit.
Viuus es in coelo, dedit hoc tibi gratia Christi,
Viuus vt in mundo sis, tibi fama dabit.
CHristophorus Barnewallus, vir equestris ordinis, vetere ac illustri familia
procreatus, cum esset admodu^ adolescens ad clarissimam Oxoniensem Academiam a
praestantissimis parentibus missus sum erat eloquentiae atque philosophiae
studiosus. Quae cum magno studio curaque disceret; Londinum profectus est, vbi
in hospitium Graiense cooptatus cognitionem Britannici iuris been laudabilem
erat consecutus. Cum vero non multum a tanti operis perfectione abesset,
optimus and amantissimus eius pater hoc interim spacio (anima a corpore semota
and disclusa) hinc demigrauit. Quo audito, Christophorus se statim in patriam,
cum omniu^ applausu, contulit, atque ibi patrimonium suum, quod ei iam tum
satis amplum pater reqliquerat, summa aequabilitate ac recta conscientia, sine
vllius offensione amplificauit. Mira erat vitae eius integritas; praedicabilis
erga deum sanctitas; admirabilis in patriam pietas. Nulla vero in tota regione
erat hospitalitas, quae vix posset cum illius hospitalitate conferri. Sapientia
praeditus profecto singulari. In vrbe gratia, ruri auctoritate florebat. Vir
erat vt corpore, ita valetudine plaerunque imbecillior, natura mitissimus, in
iniurijs ferendis patientissimus, in repellendis fortissimus, in repub.
defendenda acerrimus. Nono Calend. Augusti ex itinere in febrim incidit, cuius
dolor paucis post diebus, cum totius reipub. eiulatu ac lamentatione,
consumtus est: annos natus 42. Anno Domini 1575.

UPON THEE DEATH OF HIS wief Genet, daughter too Sir Christofer Barnewal
knight, who deceased, at Knight his bridge,, of Chieldbyrth Anno 1579. August
xxvj aetatis xix. and lies entered at Chelsye.
MOrs tua quanta tuis moeroris vulnera fixit,
Multorum gemitus, me reticente, sonant.
Nobilis ortus erat, tua clare vita peracta,
Corpore pulchra satis, moribus alma sacris.
Heu mihi, sed subito sublata haec dona fuerunt,
In teneris annis dum mihi dona dabas.
Quam dederas natae vitam, tibi nata negauit,
Quam dederas lucem, luce (Genetta) cares.
Qualis erat matter sola breuitate relicta
Vitae) sit talis nata relicta precor.
Quos iunxit mundo, Christus coniungat Olympo,
Vt thorus vnus erat, sic thronus vnus erit.
UPON THEE DEATH OF THEE right honorable and his most dear coose^, thee lord
Baron of Louth, who was trayterouslye murthred by Mackmaughoun, an Irish
Lording, about thee year 1577.
THus loa, thine have (coosen) bred waste too cittye, toe country.
Thee bearbrat boucher thy corpse with villenye mangled.
Not by his manlye valor, but through thy desperate offer.
As the liefe is lasting too such, as in arms ar heedye,
Eun so death is posting too those, that in armor ar headye.
Haulf penye, far better then an housful cluster of angels,
Although habil, would not fro thye danger deadlye be parted.
Whom lief combyned, death could not scatter a sunder.
Such is thee fastness of foster brootherhod Irish.
Though Sydny and Deluyn thee murder partlye revenged:
A loss so pretiouse may not be fullye requited.
Thee death of a thousand Maghouns is unequal amendment.
Thee nobles may not but a death so bluddye remember,
Thee Plunckets will not from mind such boutcherye bannish.
Thy Lady, thy kindred do miss thy freendship aprooued;
Thee cittee mourns the lack of a counsalor holsoom;
And thee country month thee want of a zealus vpholder;
Virtue eeke lamenteth thee lack of an holy repentaunt.
How beyt dame Virtue thy goodness kindlye rewards,
In memory thin honor, thy soul eeke in glory reposing.
UPON THEE DEATH OF THEE right honorable thee Lord Girald fitz Girald L. Baron
of Offalye, who deceased at S. Albans in thee year 1580. thee last of June,
thee xxj. year of his adge.
SOomtyme liu'lye Girald in grave now liu'les is harbourd.
A matchless gallant, in birth and auncetrye nobil.
His nobil linnadge Kyldaer with Mountegue warrants.
Proper in his person, with gyfts so him nature adorned.
In valor and in honor well known too no man unequal.
And a true sound subject, to his Prince most faithful abiding.
These not with standing his liefe too to hastelye vannisht.
Nipt were thee blossooms, ear fruictful season aproched.
Wherefor his acquayntaunce his death so vntymelye bewayleth.
Maynoth lamenteth, Kilka and Rathangan ar howling.
Nay rather is mated bye this hard hap desolat Ireland.
Such claps of batter that seally unfortunate Island.
O that I thy praises could well decipher in order,
Like Homer or Virgil, like Geffray Chauncer in English:
Then would thy Stanyhurst in pen be liberal holden.
Thee poet is barrayn, for praise rich matter is offered.
Here percase carpers will twight his iollitye youthful.
Strong reason vnstrayned that weak objection aunswers.
He must be peerlesse who in young years faults abides.
Such byrds flee seldoom, such black swans scantyle be floating.
In world of mischief who finds such glorius angels?
Soom stars pass oothers; al perls do not equalye luster.
Thee soundest wheat corn with chaffy filthod is husked.
What shall I say further, this loare diuinitye tells;
Vertuus he lived, through grace that vertuus eended.
What may be then better, than a godly and gratius vpshot?
Too God in all pietee, too Prince in duty remaining.
Whearefor (woorthye Girald) sith thy eend was hertye repentance,
Thy soul God gladdeth with sancts in blessed Olympus,
Though tumbd be carcass in town of martyred Alban.
THis noble man, if we respect thee gifts that God planted in him, was
doubtless full of good parts. Of disposition kind and loouing, easelye moved,
and as soon appeased; apt too al manner of actiuitye, cooueting in eeche
laudable enterprice not only too be commendable, but also surpassing. In wit
quick and pregnaunt, and of good forecast, namely as far as his years would
bear: yeet soomwhat wantonly geeuen, where too Youth, Nobilitee and lewd
coompanye did carrye him, the one sturring, thee oother warranting, thee third
easelye trayning a man of deeper judgment too such fond phantasyes, if by his
God his gracious guerdon he be not thee stronger guarded. But a little before
his death he beecame such a changling, as he did not only purchase thee
commendacion of strangers, but also bred admiration in his friends, who
greatly rejoiced, too see so penitent and godly an alteration from vice to
virtue. In which time finding his conscience deepelye gauld with thee
owtragious oaths he used too thunder out in gamening, he made a few verses,
as yt were his cygnea oration: which, not so much for thee meeter, as thee
matter, I thinck good, too be diuulged verbatim, as I found them, after his
decease, scribled with his own hand. And if thee reader hap too stumble at
thee understanding of any staff, let yt be sufficient, that thee maker his
meaning was good.

A PENITENT SONNET WRITten by thee Lord Girald a little before his death.
BY loss in play men often forget
Thee duit ye they do owe,
Too him that did bestow thee same,
And thou sands millions more.
I loathe too see them swear and stare,
When they the main have lost;
Forgetting al thee byes, that wear
With God and holy goast
By wounds and nails they thinck too wyn,
But truly yt is not so:
For all thayre frets and fumes in syn,
They mooniles must goa.
Theare is no wight that vsd yt more,
Then he that wrote this verse;
Who cries, peccaui, now therefore
His oaths his heart do perce.
Therefore example take by me,
That curse thee lucklesse time,
That cauer dice mine eyes did see,
Which bred in me this crime.
Pardon me for that is past,
I will offend no more:
In this most vile and sinful cast,
Which I will still abhore.
AN EPITAPH ENTITVLED Commune Defunctorum, such as our unlearned Rythmours
accustomablye make upon thee death of every Tom Tyler, as if yt were a last for
every one his foot, in which thee quantitees of syllables are not too be
heeded.
COom toe me, you muses, and thou most chieflye, Minerua,
And ye that are dwellers in dens of darckned Auerna:
Help mye pen in writing, a death most soarye reciting,
Of the good old Topas, soon too thee mighty sir Atlas.
For grauitee the Cato, for wit Mars, Bacchus, Apollo:
Scipio for warfare, for gentyl curtesye Caesar.
Agreat Alexander, with a long whit neck like a gaunder.
In yeer's a Nestor, for wars a martial Hector,
Hannibal and Pompey, with Tristram, Gallahad, Orckney:
Hercules in coasting, a Vulcan mightelye toasting.
In wisdoom Solomon, for streingth and currage a Sampson.
For justice Radamanthus: in equitye woorthye Lycurgus.
And not a Thersites, but he was a subtle Ulysses.
In learning Socrates, in faithful freendship Achates.
Yea, though he stand namelesse, he was in prowes Achilles.
A Damon (...).
^
^
(...) Ripplye.
(...) Alcon,
(...) Arafornes,
(...) good soon of Atlas?
(...) ^oe ye slay thee fair lady Thisbee.
A Sara for goodness, a great Bellona for hudgnesse.
For myldensse Anna, for chastitye godly Susanna.
Hester in a good shift, a Judith stout at a dead lift.
Also Iulietta, with Dido, rich Cleopatra.
With sundry namelesse, and woomen more many blameless.
Is not he well guarded, thee wooman richlye rewarded?
AN EPITAPH WRITTEN BY SIR Thomas More upon thee death of Henrye Abyngdon, one
of thee gentlemen of thee chapel: which devise thee author was feign too put
in meeter, by reason thee party that requested his travail, did not like of a
very proper Epitaph that was first framd, because yt ran not in rythme, as
may appear at full in his Latin Epigrammes: where upon Sir Thomas More shapte
these verses ensuing, with which thee suppliant was exceedinglye satisfied, as
if thee author had hit thee nail on the head.
HIc iacet Henricus, semper pictatis amicus:
Nomen Abyngdon erat, si quis sua nomina quaerat:
Wellis hic ecclesia fuerat succentor in alma,
Regis and in bella cantor fuit ipse capella.
Milibus in mill cantor fuit optimus ille.
Praeter and haec ista fuit optimus orgaquenista.
Nunc igitur Christ, quoniam tibi seruijit iste,
Semper in orb soli da sibi regna poli.
Thee same though not verbatim construed, yeet in effect thus may (...) ^yd not
very prec^^^^^ (...)

Here lies old Henry, no (...)
Surnamd Abyngdon, to a^ (...)
Clerck he was in wellis, where ting^^ (...)
Also in thee chapel he was not counpted (...)
And such a loud singer, in a thousand not such a ringer.
And with a concordance, a man most skilful in organce.
Now God I crave duly: sense this man saru'd the so truly,
Henrye place in kingdoom,, that is also named Abyngdon.
FINIS.
JOHN PATES PRINTER too thee courteous reader.
I Am too crave thy patience and pains (good reader) in bearing with such
faults as have escapte in printing; and in correcting as well such as are laid
down here too thy view, as al oother whereat thou shall hap too stumble in
perusing this treatise. Thee nooueltye of imprinting English in these parts,
and thee absence of thee author from perusing soom proofs could not choose but
beede errors. But for thee abridging of thy travail I will lay down such
faults as are at this present found too be of greatest importau^ce. And as
for thee wrong placing of an V for an N, or an N for an V, and in printing two
EE for one E, or one for two, and for thee mispoyncting of periods; thee
correction of these I must be forced for this time too refer too thye
friendlye pains.

FAVLTES. CORRECTION. In thee dedicatorye epistle. Page 1. lin. 4. Endevvours,
read, lin. 22. ac. Endeavors. as. Page 3. lin. 32. cook in soom copyes. book.
(...) (...) been. (...) (...) (...) (...) pan. (...) (...) Reader. (...) (...)
(...) ^^tography. (...) ^aying. (...) ^eeing. (...) missing. lin. ^^ ^ang.
^^^dge. Page 17. lin. 6. sanckt. ^anck. lin. 25. vvilde. vvyde. Page 19. lin.
22. Endevvours. endeavors. Page 23. lin. 29. with hischaapt staf, with chaapt
staf. Page 25. lin. 1. choloricque. Cholericque. lin. 33. sacrifice. sacrifice.
Page 36. lin. 22. shavv Priamus savv Priamus. Page 38. lin. 13. vvoonman.
vvooman. Page 41. lin. 13. assijstaunce Assistau^ce. lin. 36. progeniotours.
progenitors. Page 54. lin. 26. desolat angel. desolat angel. Page 60. lin. 18.
fyrd Sicil. fyerd Sicil. Page 63. lin. 36. A folck moaste. A folck moate. 1.
acoo^panye Page 106. lin. 24. Faults abides. Faultles abides.

Imprinted at Leiden in Holland by John Pates. Anno M.DLXXXII.


