April 4. The proceeding of the Parliament, being this day related to the
King, by the Counselors of the Commons House of Parliament.
HIS Majesty upon the report made, expressed great contentment that it gave
him; not valewing the Money given, comparable to the hearts showed in the way
of the Gift: For although his great occasions of State did require more Money
then at this time was given; yet now he made account he could not lack since
he had their loves; and that this day, he thought that he had gained more
Reputation in Christendom, then if he had won many Battles; Saying
further, (according to his Speech the first day of the Parliament,) That they
might easily make him in love with Parliaments, (now he professed he was so:)
And that we should find the fruits of it by calling us often together, and to
secure further fears, and create future confidence, he assured us that we
should enjoy as great imunitie and freedom in his time, as ever we possessed or
had under the Reign of any the best Kings of this Realm.

The Duke of BVCKINGHAM his Speech to his Majesty on Friday being the 4tsh. of
April, 1628.
SIR,
ME thinks I now behold you a great King; For love is greater then Majesty.
Opinion that your People loved you not had almost lost you in the opinion of
the World: but this day makes you appear as you are, A glorious King loved at
home, and now to be feared abroad. This falling out so happily, I beseech you
give me leave to be an humble Suitor unto your Majesty. First, for my self,
that I who have had the honor to be your Favorite, may now give up my title
unto them, they to be your Favorite, and I to be your Servant. My second
suit is, that they having all done so well, you will account of them all as
one, a Body of many members, but all of one Heart. Opinion might have made them
differ, but Affection did move them all to join with like love in this great
Gift: for proportion it being less then your occasions may ask, yet it is
more then ever Subjects did give in so short a time: Nor am I persuaded it will
rest there, for this is but as an earnest of their affections, to let you see,
and the world know what Subjects you have, that when your Honor and the good
of the State is engaged, and Aid asked in the ordinary way of Parliament, you
cannot want. This is not a gift of five Subsidies alone, but the opening of a
Mine of Subsidies which lies in their hearts. This good beginning has wrought
already these effects, they have taken your heart, drawn from you a
declaration that you will love Parliaments. And again, this will be met, I
make no question, with such respect, that their demands will be just, dutiful
and moderate: For they that know thus to give, know what is fit to ask: then
cannot your Majesty do less then outgoe their demands or else you do less
then your self, or them: For your Message begat trust, their trust and your
promise must then beget performance. This being done, then shall I with a glad
heart hold this work as well ended as now begun, and then shall I hope that
Parliaments shall be made hereafter so frequent, by the effects and good use of
them, as shall have this further benefit, to deter from approaching your
ears those Proiectors and Inducers of Innovation, as disturbers both of Church
and Commonwealth. Now Sir, to open my heart and to ease my grief, please you
to pardon me a word more. I must confess I have long lived in pain, Sleep
has given me no rest, Favors and Fortunes no content, much have been my
secret sorrows to be thought the man of Separation, and that divided the King
from his people, and them from him; but I hope it shall appear, they were some
mistaken minds, that would have made me the evil Spirit that walked between
a good Master and a loyal People for ill offices. Whereas by your Majesty's
favor, I shall ever endeavor to approve my self a good Spirit breathing
nothing but the best of services unto them all. Therefore this day I account
more blessed unto me then my birth, to see my self able to serve them, to see
you brought in love with Parliaments, to see a Parliament express such love to
you. Love them I beseech you, and God so love me and mine, as I joy to see this
day.


