ships and smiling fish scene

A Continued October 2. IOVRNALL Of all the Proceedings of the Duke of
Buckingham, in the Isle of Ree.

Containing these particulars.
The manner of releeuing the Fort by six Shallops about a month since. The
now state of the Fort, with the taking of some of the Governors Messengers who
were swimming to the Maine with Letters, and were afterward executed. The
coming of the French Kings brother before Rochel, with the building of a new
Fort. A sally made by the Rochellers upon the French, where many of the French
were slain. The great preparation of the King of France, the King of Spain,
and the Arch-Dutches, to relieve the Fort with 60. sail of Ships. The death of
Sir John Burrowes. The death of the Governor Thorax his Brother, who was
slain that night. An attempt of the French, with 12. Barks to relieve the
Fort, where of six were taken. A message sent from the Governor Monsieur
Thorax to the Duke, and the success thereof. The killing of two French men in
their own trenches, by an Irish Soldier.
With many other particulars.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed by A. M. for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Eagle and Child in Britains Bursse. 1627.

THE IOVRNALL CONTINVED TO THIS DAY.
Continued to the 2. of October.
Our Army under the Conduct of his Illustrious Excellency, the Duke of
Buckingham, lies as yet before the Fort of Saint Martins in the I Will of Ree,
which they have entrenched round about, except upon the North side where it is
environed with the Sea, yet that passage is so blockt up by our Ships,
Pinnaces, and Long boats, that it is a matter difficult, if not altogether
impossible, (as matters stands now) to put any Provision of Victuals into the
Citadell. For since that six Shalloppes of the Enemies, about a month since,
brought some relief (though small to the besiedged) by the benefit of a
seasonable night, and by the conniuence (as it was doubted) of some Dutch who
came to the Island for Salt, and lay betwixt us and the maine. But now all hope
of succor is debarred that way, by running two of our warlike Ships on ground,
close under the Fort, upon the Auenue of the water Port, and by the diligence
and vigilance of the rest of the Fleet, who leave no course unattempted, which
Art or industry can propose for the finishing of this great work, upon which
the honor of our Nation liyes so much engaged.

So that besides the ordinary night and day watches observed carefully by the
Seamen, diverse long Boats well furnished with Musketeers and Mariners round
it about the Island all the night long, who have intercepted three French
Soldiers of the Fort, that by swimming thought to recover the maine with the
Governors Letters

The Contents of these Letters implied: That their want within were great, that
the Soldiers began to Mutenie, and that without speedy relief they could hold
out no longer.

The Messengers who sought to convey them being apprehended, were hanged in
sight of the Fort, with the Letters about their necks. Neither did the
importunity of these aduertisements want cause, for as it appears by the
testimony of diverse fugitives, and by the evidence of sundry probable
circumstances, the besieged are so much distressed for want of necessaries,
that although their Infantery be of the Regiment of Champaigne (which is held
to be one of the brauest of all France) and though there are diverse resolute
Caualiers within it (the relics of those troops, which at their first
landing, were defeated by the English) yet want begins to make them loose both
courage and obedience, and to demean themselves in a mutinous and insolent
manner toward the Governor, who knowing well the truth and justice of their
pretentions, gives them good words, and bids them be confident of sudden
relief. But words and wind feeds not the belly, as honor heates not the
toes: so that their discontents remain as great as their necsssities are
pressing. The violent inforcement whereof makes them ruune away by troops ten
and twenty in a company, and causes others to adventure themselves desperately
out of their Works, to gather Grapes, which grow betwixt the Fort, and our
approches, many of whom are fetched off by our Muskatiers, and slain with the
meat sticking in their mouths.

Those within are allowed a small proportion of horseflesh, and six and fifty
Peace a day.

The King of France his Brother is come down within a league of Rochell, with
an Army of 11. thousand strong, both Horse and Foot: he brings six brass
Pieces with him from Paris, with great store of Munition, and sundry materials
fit for the building of a Fort, the foundation whereof the French have already
laid opposite unto that Fort, which was built on the North-West side of the
Town, in the year 1522. yet the Rochellers being confident of their own
strength, and of the English succors (which are ready to assist them upon all
occasions) resolve to endure all extremes, rather then to put their necks
under the yoke, or to fail in the course of their former resolutions.

Those of Rochell, the Enemies lying near, sent out twenty common Soldiers on
horseback clothed in scarlet coats, and Armed after the manner of the French
Gentlemen. The show of this supposed salley, caused some principal Caualiers
of the Kings side to issue out of their Works, of purpose to encounter them.
But they retiring, and the others pursuing, they fell into an Ambush of 50.
Muskatiers purposely laid by the Rochellers, where diverse of them were slain,
amongst whom were two men of quality: for the recovering of one of whose bodies
there happened a great Conflict, in which diverse of the French were slaughtered.

Although the ground about the Fort be hard to work in, yet all difficulties
being surmounted, our men have drawn their approaches from the maine
intrenchment (which lies between Saint Martins Town and the Fort) within
less then Pistol shot of the utmost Counterskarfe, and that upon two several
ways or Auenues, whereof one is directed from the Battery, and the other from
the Redoubt.

Our Cannoniers have dismounted all their Ordnance, except two sling Pieces,
but of these they are able to make little use, for want of Bullets: in
fourteen days they have made but one great Shot upon our Quarter, which was
but an exchanged Bullet, shot first from one of our Pieces.

But to supply this defect (though with a feeble means) they shoot and throw
many stones from their Works, with which our men are so well acquainted, that
it causes as little terror as it does danger.

Our Army keeps quatter with the French on land, for all those who are taken
prisoners, or run out of the Fort, after a days restraint or two are dismissed,
and sent into the maine with means of transportation and conduct. But of late
no quarter is kept with them who are aken at Sea, because it appeared by the
confession of some who were taken by our Boats upon the 19. of the last
month, that they are to confident and presumtiue upon the Dukes mercy. His
Excellency lies in the Town of Saint Martins, not far from the Market
place, attentively watching all fair opportunities, whose care and vigilancie
we hope that God will bless with good success. Monsieur Subuisa is in the
Town of Rochell, to confirm the Inhabitants with his presence and counsel.

The besieged have not been ssacke in their duties, for besides their
continual plying us with their vollyes of great and small shot, they have
attempted to undermine one of our Batteries, but this Design of theirs was
frustrated by a Countermine of ours, which wrought such effects, that they were
beaten out of their own Mine after some resistance.

They are so much distressed for want of shot, that wanting Lead and Iron,
they are feign to melt all their Pewter and Tin, of which they make Bullets.
But this shot shatters like Hayle, and does less hurt by far then the other.

His Excellence is very sparing of his men, as well knowing that walls of
bones are far stronger then those of earth and stones, and resolves by
following the president of Vanden Berke at Gulicke, and of Spinola at Breda to
starne the besieged, or else to bring them to reason.

Upon the Intercourse of some messages, his Grace has employed Mr. Aishburnham
(a Gentleman of his, lately arrived in England) upon occasions of special
business, twice or thrice unto the Governor Thorax.

Upon his coming to the utmost Sentinel, and the remonstrance of his
employment, his eyes were blindfolded, and in this manner (because he should
not discover their Works) he was conducted to receive his audience.

The French give out, that if we do not depart the sooner, they will cause us
to do it by maine force, being confident of those aids which are promised
them from the King of Spain, and the Archdutchesse, which together with their
own Ships, will make a Fleet of threescore sail, as they reckon in their
large account. But I think this bragging of theirs will turn merely into a
French vapor, much show and little action. Howsoever they are sure to find a
stout opposition, and a brave resistance.

Sir William Courtney, a Soldier of great conduct and experience, and Colonel
of one of the English Regiments, was shot with a Musket from the Fort upon the
belly, but the Buller lighting upon some money in a little pocket, lost his
force, and did no farther hurt.

Upon Wednesday being the twelfth of September, that Honorable and valiant
Knight Sir John Burrowes, Colonel General of the English Infanterie under his
Excellency the Duke of Buckingham, being careful for the direction and suruay
of all our Works, came up from his Quarters in the afternoon, to give orders
for the lniing out of a new Intrenchment, and as he came off from the Works
with some other Commanders, he was unfortunately shot in the belly through the
guts, about five of the clock in the evening, with a Musket, which wound
proved mortal: for within four or five hours after he gave up the ghost, to
the exceeding grief of all the Army, but specially of the Duke of Buckingham,
who coming to visit him before his death, shed many passionate tears to
express his grief, due to the remembrance of so worthy a person. He showed a
great deal of constancy, resolution, and religion at his death, as he had in
the whole course and passage of his life. His body was opened and enbalmed, and
sent into England with Mr, Aishburnham, who brought it to Plymouth on Monday,
being the 24. of September, from whence it is coming about to Potesmouth, to
be transported thence unto Westminster, where it is to receive the Sepulchrall
rites of an Honorable interment.

Our Soldiers, but especially those of his Regiment were so much provoked with
this unexpected accident, that in revenge thereof they powered diverse vollyes of
small and great shot upon the French, with the storm whereof the Governors
brother was slain, and some other men of quality.

On the Wednesday following Sir John Burrowes death, the French from the maine
sought to relieve the Fort with twelve Barks laden with victuals and Muni^ion,
but they were intercepted by our sea Watch, and six of them taken, and all the
Victuals and Provision brought in to our Magazin; the other fix were driven
back unto the Maine, but if the other Shallops that got in before, were no
better stored then these, as in all likelihood they were not, there was not
Victuals enough to serve them 14 days.

The Prisoners being demanded how they durst hazard themselves so boldly upon
this attempt, answered, that they did it upon confidence of the Dukes mercy,
which they thought would not fail them if they were surprised. But to prevent
this, and to hinder the like presumption, in others our Soldiers put them all
to the sword, before they received any other orders from his Excellency.

Monsieur Thorax the Governor of the Fort, sent to his Excellence the Duke of
Buckingham to entreat him to give leave that he might send a Messenger to his
Master the French King, which was granted by his Excellence, upon condition
that he would undertake that he might send a servant of his safely thorough
France for England: this being agreed on both sides, his Excellence dispatched
Master Ashburneham, a Gentleman of his Chamber, to go along with the
Governors servant; but when they came to Paris, the French never respecting
the noble favor done unto them by his Excellence: but contrary to all
expectation, would not give leave that Mr. Aishburneham should pass any
further, but to return back to the Island: the Governors man that came back
with him, his Excellence caused all his Letters to be taken from him, and
keeps him prisoner in the Army.

The 2600. English and Irish under the command of Sir Ralph Bingley, and Sir
Pierce Crosseby, are arrived safely in the Island: since whose coming there
happened a memorable accident, by the mistake of two Soldiers of those
troops: who coming up into our approaches, went from thence ignorantly into
the Enemies trenches, lying close unto our Works, where they being discovered
by the French Sentinel Perdieu, he shot one of them dead with his Musket. The
suruiuing Irishman to revenge his Fellows death, drew out his skeane, and
slew the French man, and being shot at (but mist) by another French Muskatier,
he killed him likewise, and leaping out of the Trenches, into which he had
engaged himself unadvisedly, he came off clear, and without any hurt at all.

The end of the Journall.
Upon the death of that noble Knight, Sir John Burrowes.
IF honor, virtue, and the glorious face
Of noble actions could prolong the race
Of man's appointed days, then had thy Fate
Not made the Court and Camp disconsolate
Renowned Burrowes; Sir John Burrowes got much honor at the siege of Ostend
and Frankendale, and at the taking of Bell Sconce by the Busse, where the
Marquess of Beluille, a brave Italian Colonel was slain.
then Ostendes report,
Frankendales last siege, and that surprised Fort
Where Beluilles Marquess fell, had stopped the Knife
Of fatal Atropos, and made thy life
Immortal like thy actions: but no merit
Which lives within man's best deserving spirit
Can repeal Deaths decrees, for all must die,
Slain by the Shafts of dire mortality.
Thus did the Funeral pile great Pompey burn,
And Caesar's corpse filled the sepulchrall Vrne.
And thus brave Burrowes sleeps in Honors bed,
Who dying lives, entombed, unburied;
Worthy Foes worth to have suruiu'd that death,
Which robbed him of his valor breathing breath.

