A very familiare and fruiteful exposition of the.xii. Articles of the
christian faieth contained in the common creed, called the Apostles Creed,
made in dialoges, wherein thou moiste learn al things necessary to be
believed* Compiled by Peter viret a french man and translated in to english



Peter Viret unto the faithful reader grace and peace from our Lord Jesus
Christ.
About three or four years past at the desire of certain good persons I had
enterprysed to write a certain familiar exposicio^ upon the creed of the
Apostles, containing the articles of the faith and christian religion. And
upon the prayer of our Lord Jesus Christ. And likewise upon the
commandments, which be the sum of all the law of God, following this
purpose, I have already begone to write upon the creed and that for diverse
causes, for notwythstandynge that diverse men of knowledge have alredie traueled
about this mattier, as well in the laten, as in the french: yet nevertheless I
do considre that the darkness of error and ignorance has been so great upon
the earth that it is very hard and dificulte unto the poor, blind, and
ignoraunte to comprehe^de the truth of God, and know the darkness in the
which they have been, and yet be, althought that they which desy2re to
aduau^ce the glory of God, do infourme them selves, by all means to draw
them unto the understanding and knoweledge of his word. Yet I do see every
day we confess all with the mougth one self faith and religion, and
nevertheless the greatest part of them which wylbe holden for christians, deny
by their works that which they confess with their mouths, for this cause
have I right wyllyngly taken the payue to declare sumthinge more largli, and
familiarly, the creed of the Apostles then other have done, which have written
before me, for to show by lively reasons unto the supersticious christians,
and Idolatours, how they do and believe all contrary to the faith which with
their mouths they confess, to the end they may learn to believe with the
heart that which they confess with their mouths and that the Lord with good
right do not reprove the^ of that, the which he did accuse the hypocrites which
were among the old people of Israel, sayynge, these people honor me with
their lips, and draw nere unto me with their mouths but their hertes be very
far from me, and therefore do they honor me in vain, teaching the doctrines
and commandments of men.

And to avoyde this reprove, I have wyllynglye given occasion the better to
considre the sense and understanding of the words of this confession, and by
the same to show the errors and abuses, by the which the christianity is al
corrupted to be pourged and made clean, and because that they will not, or ca^
not take the leisure to read the holy scriptures, or else have not the
understanding to comprehend them, I have wyllyngly showed unto the simple and
ignoraunte people, that if they haddenone other scripture, but the confession
of the faith, the which they do use every day in their creed they have
inoughe to make the^ inexcusable before God, and to learn to know the
errors, and false opinions in the which they have be holde^, in case they did
well understand that which they do confess.

These be the principal causes, that has moved me to make this trectise, the
which has line long time among my writings, because I did abide to have had
leisure to have made an end of the rest, the which I was willing to have
set forth in this same treatise. Nevertheless in as much as this is all ready
finished, and that there is so much time gotten it does seem unto me not to be
evil to set forward that which did serve to no purpose in my study for to
edify and enstructe always more and more the pore ignorauntes unto the which
I have most principal regard if I shall know that my labor, and this manner
of procedynge may profitte unto any, I shall when it shall please God to give
me time and opportunity proceade and set forth the rest.

In this first dialoge is showed how the Sovereign goodness and felicity of
man lies in the knowledge of God, and in the Justification by ye faith in Jesus
christ.
The names of the two speakers.

Phylype.

Nathanaell.

PHyllype. I can not inoughe maruayle when I do considre the nature and
condition of men.


Nathanael. Wherefore say thou that?


Phylip- Because that I do se that all me^ have one desire and one self will
and mind, yet nevertheless there is nothing more contrary then the desires and
wylles of men after such sort that with great difficulty may be found two
that be of one self accord.


Nathanaell. How can that be possible to be found among men as thou do
say? for thou haste holden me two arguments the Contrariety and unity of
humayne affections.
which be contrary and repungnaunt the one to the other, for how can men
be all of one self will and of a contrary will, and all of one accord being al
in discord.


Phy. I think thou do not doubt of the diversity and co^trarietie of
affections wills and humayne opinions, for there is nothing more euidente,
wherefore it suffiseth me to show unto the the unity of the desires and wylles
that is between them.


Natha. When thou haste proved me that, I shall hold the other for all together
proved, for the daily experience does bear wytnes hereof.


Phy. I will that thy self be Judge of the cause, wherefore I do ask the if
there be any man upon the earth which does not desire and has not a great
will to be rich The common desire of alm^
to come to honor to live in pleasure and rest and to be very happy.


Natha. in that there is no doubt.


Phy. Mine entente is already proved for thou doeste se the unity of the hertes
that is betwe^ them.


Natha. It is true but from whense then comes that contrariety: or how can
that proceed of that unity?


Phy. All the fault does come of this, that although al do pretend unto one
self end, nevertheless they can not learn the cunning nor the way to come
unto it.


Natha. Thou will then say that the will is in all men, but the power and the
mean does fail them.


Phy. We se the thing at our eye.


Natha. And what is the cause.


Phy. The hardness and ignorance of the humayne understanding for one estemeth
him rich and very happy that has great treasures of gold, silver, perles, and
precious Men's opinions of the souerning goodness.
stones, and that has his garners houses and sellers well filled, which has
goodli clothing and may be very sumptuous and po^piously appareled which is
possessor of great co^treys lands and lordshipes,


Na. There is nothing in all the world that me^ esteem so much as that which
thou speak of. And that after such sort that every one would have that.


Phy. And therefore of this accord comes this great discord that is among
men for The rote of ^issencion a^onge men.
because that all would have it, and do not care how so they may obtain it,
one takeyng one way and means, and an other takes an other way clean
contrary, wherefore it is impossible that one should not de wrong and
Iniurye to an other, and from thense does spring no small envious hatredes,
enmites and dissentions.


Na. The thing is even as thou say.


Phy. Admytte that a man had obtained all this, might he therefore think him
self very happy.


Nata. None can be truli taken for happi in this mortal life, which is
altogether full of miseries, and in the which the most rich be the most
miserable and wreched for they have more thought care, trouble, and anoyaunces,
and be in more greater dangers the^ any other, and it is most often seen that,
that which they have, is no more theyrs, the^ that which they have not, for
because them selves most often either dare not, or can not use them but let us
take the case that they should receive certain commodities of them in this
life. Yet be they assured that all their riches shall fail them at their neade
and greatest necessity, for they shall not bear them with them, nor yet shall
they deliver the^ from death nor from the Iudgmente of God but shall leave
them to such as shall never run them thank, but shall bring them unto ruin
and shall have as much pain and misery in the spending, as they had in the
gatherynge.


Phy. That thou haste said is very common and clear, but I do consydre an
other thing that is, that man for all these things has not here so much
occasion to glory in him self, or to think him self very happy as The
beasts are more happy the^ carnal men.
the brute beasts, for they have all this better then man, and have mo
voluptuous pleasures in this world then he, if we do esteem voluptuous
pleasures the carnal pleasures of this world, the philosophors esteemed him
rich which was content.

Then according to this diffinition the beasts be rycher then men, for they
be content with that they have. But man is never content, no though he had
the heaven and the earth, to what purpose serves him then his gold and
silver? the beasts have none nor care not for it, nor yet have no need of it
And if we must esteem him rich and happy that has abundaunce we must give
that honor unto the earth the which has more then all men in the world. And
to the which they must come to beg it making it courtlye courtelye with
long travail and great diligence in tyllage who then ought to be esteemed
most rich? The earth that gives all or the men that receive of her.


Nathanaell. He that gives is more happy and rich the^ he that takes for the
one apperteyneth unto great princes and Lords, and the other unto wreches and
fylbelyes. But now adays we have no regard unto that rule but do esteem it
more happy to take then to give. And therefore they be esteemed most rich and
happy that most receives of the earth.


Phy. And yet by this rekeninge shall the beasts be rycher then men, for take
the most riches that thou wylt and give unto him meddowes, pastors, and
vines, Castles, houses, and palaces, and all that his heart can desire. What
has he yet more then the beasts? For if thou will say lodgings they have
all their repayres, some to Caves other to busshes, and other to their ^eastes,
where they take all sleep and rest in much more quietness the^ men, and much
better contented then men be with their habitations, And it we must speak
of lands and possessions the beasts have it without limities or borders, for
they have the hills, and valeis forestes, and plains, the air and waters, at
their commaundeme^te, with less trouble pain and labor then man, for
though man have great meadows yet eases he no hey, and though he have
great fyldes and viniyardes, yet can he eat but his fylle, and can have but
his life, no more then the beasts of the fylde, which surmounteth manne in
felicity, in as much as they get their lynynges with more corporal pleasures.
If we shall come to apparel there is no comparison, for of necessity the
Beasts must clothe men, which should be all naked, except they did borowe
their apparel of them, and did clothe them silues with their skynes hear, and
woolles there is no difference but that men have more travail to clothe them
selves because they be not content with the gifts and worckes of nature, as
the beasts be, but will be disguysed and counterfayte news by their arts and
occupations, but not without great sweat.

And when they have done all that they ca^ possible do, yet can they not exceade
or surmounte the works of nature that be in the beasts and flowers in the
fylde, for there is neither courtyer nor lady, nor damsel that is better
painted, nor so well dressed or appareled, as a rose, a lylye, or as the lest
flower that the earth brings forth, nor as the marternes, Ostriges, Pecokes,
and other such like Beasts and fowls, and yet do they much glory when they
may be decked and trimned with their hear skins and feathers.


Nathanaell. Yea and yet bye them very dear.


Phy, Thou may the^ well know what is the misery of man, even in the the same
wherein he does esteem his most greatest felicity to lie. Thou may also
understand how that of this evil opinion does spring so many other, the
which do put such troubles between men and does bring them in such franiseis
that they can not hold them selves with in the limits of nature, but do
rather worse then the brute beasts, and yet with all their travail can not
have so much rest and voluptuous pleasures as they. Wherefore I do conclude
that if man were not borne unto other Beatitude and Felicity then does lie in
riches and worldly pleasures, that he were in far worsse condition then the
brute beasts and that he should be much more happy to be a swyne, a snayle, a
fyshe, a bird, or some other kind of beasts then to be a man.


Nata. I am of thine opinion and am much abashed that the christians do not
well know and considre this, and how that they run so mad after these
goods of the earth and worldely lusts: seeing that the panymes and heathen
even by the natural light given them of God have well known and have
condemned the Epicures, which put the sovereign goodness of man in
voluptuousnes.


Phy. And yet they which did condemn the Epicures albeit they had a better
opinion then they, yet could not they them selves Epicures.
find the pathe and right way for to come unto this sovereign goodness, unto
the which they did pretend to conducte and lead other for some of them did
Judge that this sovereign goodness could not be but in him that was fullye
endued with the gooddes of fortune of the body and of the soul, which to
find in any one man it were very hard. And by this doctrine the prophettes
Three kinds of godnesse.
Apostles, and true children of God should not be very happy and blessed, and
the doctrine of Jesus Christ should not be true, which does pronounce happy and
blessed, the poor in spirit, the aflicted and persecuted for ryghtuousnes
sake, and they which have honger thriste, and which weep and morn.


Na. Therefore there be other that have put Math. v. Luke. vi.
the sovereign goodness of man in virtue.


Phy. Those have well perceived and felt the inconveniences which I have
before touched, but for all that they could not hytt the whytte, for they did
never well understand what was the true virtue that might lead unto that
sovereign goodness, and with great pain did they only atteine unto the
shadow and could not find the very right way The sovereign goodness of
men.
to lead them for they did always leave a man unto him self, the which can
in no wise find that same soueraygne goodness, except he go out of him self.


Natha. where will thou then that he shall seek it.


Phylippe. Out of him self and of al creatures.


Nata. Thou will the^ that he go seek it in God.


Phyly. In whom should he find it but in him, in who^ not only it is but is
him self that same soueraygne goodness, for thou do know well that man is
infasiable and that he can never be content and satisfied except he have all
And though he had the heaven and the earth the sea, and all that is contained
in them, yet should he not be satisfied and filled. For he should not thereby
have al, for he can not have al except he have God to who^ al things perteyne
and be his own, in the which only he may be satisfied and perfect
according to the testimony of the prophet saying, then Psalm. xvi.
shall I be filled when thy glory appears for without him what may we find,
but unhappiness, sin, Death, malediction, damnation and hell.


Nata. I believe that now thou have hit the white, but the hardeste is yet to
do for it does not suffice to know unto what plac and end we ought to go, nor
yet in what haven or port we desire to arrive, except we know the mean way
to come unto it, wherefore I desire much that if thou know it that thou will
teach it me.


Phy. It is necessary that he know it that should teach it unto other, and
there is none that can know it but he that has been there and gone the Journey.


Natha. There is the^ no living man that can know it,


Phy. And therefore must we have recourse The way to come to soueraynge
goodness.
unto God, which will give us a guide to lead us and has all ready given
us one which can never go out of the way, that is Jesus Christ his sun
our Soueraygne master which is come down from heaven for to learn us the
way, and bring us thither, Mat. xxiii. xi.
for as he him self witnesses that none can ascend up into heaven, but he
that is come John. iii. John. ix. John. i. The lader of Jacob. Gene. xxviii.
down from heaven, namely the son of man that is in heaven, none can come
unto my father but b^me, I am the gate the door, the wai the truth and the
lyte, he is the true ladder that Jacob saw standing upon the earth and
reached up to heaven. The angels of God goinge up and down upon it, and the
Lord god leaninge upon it, but for to make us the way shorter, playner, and
more esie he has brought Deuteronomy. iii. Romans i.
us the heavens with him self, and that same soueraygne goodness in such
sort, that we need not to pas the seas nor the mountains, nor to go any long
way or Journey to come unto it, and neade not to go out of our selves, Ephe.
iiii. Colo. iii. Math. iii. Luke. xvii.
but of our old adam, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, and the
kingdom of God is within us, we have the word near us and in our mouths if
we can know it.


Na. How ^he^


Phy. The master which is descended from heaven, and that sovereign doctor
which the celestial father has sent unto us does teach us this science in
two words saying. This is the life everlasting. That they do knowledge the
one only true God, and him who^e he has sent Jesus Christ.


Na. Then will ^noledge of God.
then by that conclud that the sovereign goodness of man, and his true
felicity and beatitude, and the mean to unite and knyte all me^ in one self
heart, and one very will is to know God by Jesus Christ his son.


Phy. Thou concludest very well.


Nata. If there need none other thing at the least, all the christians should
be very happy for they do all know God and Jesus Christ their Savior, but
it is nevertheless maruayle that there is so little unity among them, seeing
they have all that knoweledge.


Phy. If they had that knoweledge without doubt they should be al of one accord
and should be very happy and blessed, but there be very few that has that
knowledge as it should be had.


Nata. Is there the^. ii. sorts, to know God?


Phy. Even as there is two sorts to believe. Two sorts to know and believe God.
For to believe in God, and know God, comes all to one. Saint James does
say that the Deuyles believe and tremble before the majesty of God. But they
believe not in ^mes. ii.
such sort, as the faithful children of God do. They believe there is a God,
and do fear him, but not as the good child fears his father, but as an evil
doer (...) Judge Notwithstanding also they do believe there is one God, yet
believe they not God is their God, that is to say, that he is their Savior
and father, ready, benign favorable and merciful, and that he will show
unto them his grace and mercy through his son Jesus Christ, for so is the
nature of God, and his propre office. And he that knows him not so, knows
him not to be his God, but does hold him as a cruel tyraunte the which he
does more fear then love, for we can not know him to be other without Jesus
Christ, because that the evil conscience which does feel it self culpable of
his Iudgm^t causes him so to repute him, wherefore it is impossible that any
should have the true knowledge of God, such as is required to come unto this
soueraygne goodness, but he that has him in co^templation, not in him self
nor in him The true knowledge of God
to be considered barely, and in his majesty, nor in any other habit then in
this human flesh which he has put on by his soon Jesus Christ, in the
which he has declared his goodness, love, mercy, and tauoure, toward man,
and it is not possible that he that knows him otherwise should love him, if
he love him not, he ca^ not willingly honor him ^or yet promp^lye and redelye
obey him because the knowledge that he has is to much imperfect, for this is
the true knowledge that does move and enduce man to honor him.


Natha. And what is the true way and manner to honor God, will he that we
offer unto him, bread, wine, candels, or money, calves, sheep, rams, or
other such like things?


Phy. That were a great blasphemy and sacrilege to have such an opinion of
God as to think that he which has made all things of whose hand we receive
all, which is immortal, incorruptible, and in him self whole and perfect,
should neade or take pleasure i. Timo. ii.
in these corruptible things which he has given us for the sustinaunce of
our pore mortal bodies.


Natha. How wylt thou then that man shall psalm. Cxxxv. Gene. i. Psalm. xv
serve God? And with what offering will he that we present him?


Philip. God which has made the sun, the moon, and the sters, what need has
he of our light, he which only is rich and perfect, what need has he of our
richesse, the which he him self has given unto us, is he as a little child,
which must be appeased with an apple, or as a mortal or corruptilbe man taking
pleasure in caducte and transitory things as me^ do?


Natha. What is it the^ that man may give unto him?


Phi. He requires not that man should give him any thing, but that he should
receive of him for the nature of God is) which our sovereign Lord is) not to
take but for to give, and do good unto all.


Natha. Wherewith shall man then serve him.


Phi. He can do no other service unto God, then does the pore beggar, blind,
soore, lame, and lazer, and being all together unprofitable, askinge his alms
at the gate of a king, or as an evil doer, thief, traitor, and robber,
asking his pardon.


Natha. Manne then has no great occasion to glory in his own merittes.


Phy. And yet less.


Nathana. Can man do nothing else?


Phy. He neither can nor may do that without the grace of god and his holy
spirit do lead and co^ducte him to the end he should have no matter wherein
to glory, but in God only.


Natha. That is not very uneasy to do, nor there is no man unto whom it
should not be easy enough to serve him, seeing we must but ask and beg.


Phy. It is more hard then it seem the for albeit that the words seem very
plain and easy, nevertheless they comprehe^de great things, the which
surmounte the humayne power


Natha. Expound me then those things.


Phy. First they do conteyne the inuoucation, and calling upon the name of God,
which is the most greateste and most singular honor that we can do unto him.


Natha. What is there more.


Phy. We can not understand this invocation without faith for it is written,
who so ever calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. But how shall he
call upon him, in whom he has not believed, it does then follow, that man can
not call upon God ryghtly without trusteyng in him, and be fully assured of his
goodness and good will toward him,


Natha. That is very certain.


Phylyp. Then as this same trust in God incite the and enduce the Gyuynge of
thanks.
man to call upon his name, and pray unto him in all necessities, eue^ so of
the other part does it move and enduce by the same to give thanks for all the
benifites which he receives of him, knowlegynge that all goodness proceadeth
of him, and that without him man is nothing. Here is the^ an other part of
the invocation and calling upon the name of God the which conteyneth the
obeysaunce or obeydience, which we owe unto his holy will, which is a manner
of action of graces or geuyng of thanks, for from whence does proceed such
obeysaunce, and all the good works which the fayethfull can do in the honor
of God, then from the love which he does bear unto him, and it can not be
love without the knowledge of him that is beloved this love then proceadeth of
the knowledge the which he has of God, and of his graces and benefits which
does incite us patiently to put our trust al wholly in him to abide and look
for all at his hand and to serve and honor him in all that we may know^ to be
pleasynge and acceptable unto him.


Natha. True serving of God lies in faith
By all that I can comprehend and understand all the service of God the^ lies
in faith


Phy. She is the fundation and spring for without her it is impossible to
please God, and so can our works not please God, except Hebr. xi.
that first we be pleasant and agreeable unto him, for he does not accept
the work because of it self, but because of the person that does present
it, and it is not unto him acceptable, but as the person is unto him
acceptable.


Natha. He has then a respect and is an acceptor of persons, and yet it
seems that the holy scripture says the contrary.


Phy. That which I do say is not contrary unto the places whch thou so
understand, but thou should understand that among the sons of men
there is none, which of him self is acceptable Romans ii^. Act. x.
unto the celestial father, but only he of whom he has said. This is my
well-beloved son in whom I am well pleased. Seeing then that he only is
pleasant, unto him it is not to be thought, that any worck^ Math. xiii.
can please him, but that which is done by him, for if we hated any person he
could do nothing that might please us, and of the contrary part if we loved
him, he could do nothing that might displease us but we would take all that he
did in good part, if we will then please our celestial father, we must
neither off^e our selves, nor none other thing to him, before we have made
appoyntmente with him, and he received us into his grace favor and love, and
that ca^ we not obtain except we take away the cause which has put the hate
and dissension between us and him that is to say, the sin which can not be
defaced Esaie. iiii. Justification Act. xv. Romans vi. xii. i Cor. xii. Ephe. v.
John. vi. xii.
and taken away, but by the mean of Jesus Christ. And therefore it is
necessary for us to go unto him to be purged and made clean, and the mean to
obtain this by him is the fayeth by the which our hert^s be purified and we
Justified, that is to say absolved, and declared and pronounced Just before
the judgment of God, because that by the same fayeth we be unite and
conjoined with Jesus Christ being all members of his body, unto the which
his members he does communicate all his goods, and i. Cor. i. Ephe. ii. Gala.
ii. The rote of ^^ good works John. v. Romans xi
makes us partakers of his obeydience and ryghtuousnes, so that it serves
another more nor less, then if it were our own propre, Inasmuche then as
Jesus Christ is in us and we in him, and that his righteousness is ours and
lives in us and dwells in our hertes by fayeth, and by his holy spirit,
it is very certain that, that faith can not be idle without bringing forth
good fruit, seeing the^ that he is the true vine, and good olyue tree, upon the
which we be planted and graffed it is impossible, but the fruit which we
bear or bring forth, and the work which we do should not be to him
acceptable because of the good rote out of the which they spryng, and because
the celestial father reknowledgeth the work of his son in us for whose love
he does bear the imperfection, which abides al ways in our flesh during
this mortal life, but it is clean contrary of the Infidels and reproved
which can not be acceptable unto God, nor no works that they can do because
they be without Jesus Christ, without who^ non ca^ be beloved of the father.


Nathana. I do understand now the cause why the holy scripture does
attribute the Justification of man unto fayeth, and give it so great praises,
and who so ever understood this point as thou haste declared it, should have
no occasion to be so much offended with this doctrine, as some be, for they
say, when the Justification of fayeth is preached without Sclaunder o^
Justification by faith.
the works of the law, that they will abolish and put away good works.


Phylype. They understand very evil, but that sclaunder does come of the
doctrine of the Sophysters and hypocrites which has learned men to put the
wayne before the oxe^, (as ye proverb goes) and to build without fundation,
wherefore when they should be reformed and otherwise taught they do find it a
new and strange doctrine because they have been norished in such a contrary
way.


Natha. Tell me this some thing more clearlye. The tree can not bear good
fruit except Math. xii.
it be first a good tree. And therefore the good fruit does not make the tree
good, but the good tree makethe the fruit good, but they will have the fruit
before the tree, and will make the tree good by the fruit, which is impossible
Natha. Thou speak yet somthyng darkely.


Phy. Thou shall have it more clearlye. They will have righteousness in a man
before it be in him, and will that he does works of Justice and ryghtuousnes,
and by the same to be Justified. But how shall he do the works of Justice,
except he him self be first just, and that can he not be but by the Justice
and ryghtuousnes of Jesus Christ, and that can not he obtain but by faith
wherefore with good right is the honor of Justification given unto faith,
seeing that she is the rote and fundation of the same, and of all good works,
the which proceadeth of the same rote.


Nata. I understand this now welynoughe, but in as much as fayeth has such
virtue, declare unto me what fayeth is.


Phy. Fayeth is a certain and assured knowledge and a fyrme perswation and
trust of the love and mercy of God toward us for the love of Jesus Christ
his son.


Natha. A man which will have this faieth whole and perfitte, what is he
bound to believe.


Phylip. All that is contained in the holy scriptures, but The sum of faith
because that this doctrine of fayeth is ample and large it is drawn into a
brief and short sum for the healpe and sucoure of the weakness and
infirmity of the human understanding, and the memory of the pore and
simple people.


Natha. What understand thou by that short sum, is it the creed of the
Apostles?


Phy. It is the very same.


Nathana. Wherefore is it called the Creed of the Apostles.


Phy. Because it is a short sum of the doctrine Apostolyke, and a whole some
containing in few words the principal points and articles of the faith and
christian religion.


Natha. I desire much that thou would declare it unto me point by point,
for it does not suffice to can say it by heart and confess it with the
mouth, speaking as the pies with out understanding what we do say.


Phy. It is very certain that the confession of the mouth profits little
except it proceed of faith from the heart.


Nata. That understand I well, and therefore do I desire to have a more plain
understanding, for how can I perfectly believe that which is contained therein
without the understanding of it, for it is not possible that in those few
words should be comprehended all the apostolyke doctrine, but it conteyneth
great matters, and many goodly points worthy to be well expounded and opened.


Phylype Thou takeste it not a miss, and seeing the good desire that thou
haste, I am very well content to satisfy the same, but now I have no
conueniente leisure, for it ca^ not be so shortly done, wherefore thou shalt
have a little patience unto anon, when I shall have a more conueniente leisure,
the better to satisfy thy desire.


Nata. That is very reasonable, and reason does require that I which would be
taught take the time which seameth to the most mete, but if thou ^arye long
I will come and put the in remembrance.


Phy. Thou shall do well, and fare thou well to our next meatynge, God
conducte and bring the again shortly.


In this second dialoge is declared the first part of the Creed of the
Apostles, in the which is spoken of the trinity, and unity of God, and
pryncipallye of the father, and of the propriety unto him distributed, and of
the creation of all things, and what fruit we ought to bear.
NAthanaell. I trust thou have not forgotten the promise thou made unto me, and
therefore I am come to put the in remembrance.


Phy. If thou haddeste not come I determined to have come to the, but thou have
prevented me.


Natha. The great desire that I have to here and understand the things that
we have communed of together, has enflamed and steared me forward.


Phy. If thou have a great desire to hear. I have no less to expound, and
confarre with the, for what communication may we devise more honest and
profitable, or for better recreation then to common of our faith and religion
and of the goodness and mercy of God toward us.


Natha. There is no doubt and therefore I pray the begin to enter into the
matter.


Phy. The better to reduce al thing by order, recite first the Creed to the
end that with fresh memory we may well considre that which it does
conteyne in general, and after we shall expound it by particulers.


Nathanaell. I believe in God the father almyghtye maker of heaven and earth.
And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy
ghost, borne of the virgin marie, suffered under ponce pilate, was cruc^fied,
dead, buried, and descended into hell, the third day he rose again from death,
he ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father
almighty, from thense he shall come to Judge the quycke and the dead. I believe
in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholic church the communion of saints, the
forgyuenes of sins. The resurrection of the body and the life everlasting.
Ame^.


Phy. The better to divide these matters for the healpe of the memory we will
divide the creed al generally in four principal parts, and they of the.iiii.
parts that shall be most tedious and long we may divide where it shall seem unto
us most mete for the playner understanding, and the better to keep all things
in memory. And in the first shall be spoken of God in general of the person of
the father, and of the creation of all things. In the second of Jesus Christ
our Lord and of our redemption. In the third of the holy Ghost. In the
fourth of the church, and of the things unto her apperteyning.


Nata. This order shall be very good, let us therefore come unto the first part,
what understand thou when thou say I believe.


Phy. That I do put my whole confidence trust and hope What it is to b^^^ue.
to him, in whom I believe, trusting in him with all my heart, abiding and
lokinge to receive of him only, aid, succor, salvation, life, and al good
things.


Natha. Thou doeste Psalm. xiiii.
then confess that thou trusteste al wholl^ in him, and in none other.


Phy. It is so, for it is true, that who so ever trusts in him shall not be
deceuyed nor confounded, and I say I believe, because that none other can believe
for me.


Natha. It seems by thy words that thou wylt affirm that faith does not serve
but to him that has it, and that it profits not to another but unto him
whose it is.


Phy. I deny In what the faith of other may profitte
not but the faith of other may serve for prayer unto God for me for my
conuercion and my sins, and for to present me unto him and ask of him my
salvation, as we have example in the sick of the palseye, but if I have not
faith also in my self, I can not receive it.


Natha. What say thou then of the^ which forseth not to understand and
know the doctrine of faith but does suffice them to say I believe in the
holy mother church, I believe that which the holy church believes, albeit
they know not what she believes, and does trust more in the faith of other,
then in their own.


Phy. The prophet has learned me to speak and feel otherwise when he has
said, the Just shall live by his fayeth, wherefore I do conclude, that even as
I can not live by the soul and life an other, but of mine own, that also my
soul can not live by the fayeth of other but by his own faith, which gives
him life as the soul to the body.


Natha. Seeing then that the faith does vinifie man, it must then be lyuelye,
and that the fayeth which is dead is no fayeth.


Phy. Yes it is faith as a dead man is a man, without having life, mouynge
nor feeling, without which things man can not be man, but a dead carrion, or
else it is fayeth as a painted fire is a fire without heat clearnes or light
which be things impossible, and contrary to their nature.


Natha. They their which does say they believe, without knoweynge what they
do believe, and se^tel them selves at all aue^ture upon the faith of other, have
not the right fayeth.


Phy. What faith may that be, which has no fundation, nor ground upon The
fundation of fayeth
the promises of God, being ignorant of the^, for the true faieth has for his
ground and fundation the promise of God, and his word without the which it can
not be faith.


Natha. What is it then?


Phy. If thou will call it faith, and abuse the word we may call it feigned,
painted, historical or dead faieth. For faith can we not rightlye call it, in
such sort as the holy scripture does take and understand the word fayeth,
wherefore if thou will call it by more propre names, thou maiste call it
fantasy, or foleish opinion, or else temerite and presumption.


Natha. I am inoughe satisfied in this point, tell me then now what is that
God in who^e thou beleuest, for I have determined thus to examine the, point by
point, not as an inquirar of thy fayeth to examine thy faith and thy
conscience, but for to learn and to be taught of the.


Phy. Thou demaundeste of me a thing the which no understanding can
comprehend nor any tongue open according to his dignity.


Nathanaell Wherefore the^ call thou him God, if there be no tongue that can
setforth his name.


Phy The name of God
It is very certain that mani names be attributed unto him of al people,
tongues and nations but there is none that may perfectlye diffine and declare
his hature, his essence, his dignity virtue and majesty.


Natha. To what purpose serves then those names?


Phy. For to healpe and succoure the humayne infirmity, unto the which must
be set forth and described such things as it may comprehend and know for his
salvation.


Natha. Seeing there is no name in heaven nor in the earth worthy nor sufficient
unto his majesty, at the lest declare unto me what thou understand by the
name which thou gyuest unto him, and other like.


Phylype. I understand not a creature mortal, visible, and corruptible: but a
spirit which is not created, but eternal without What god is John, iiii.
Esaie ^l. xx, Psalm. xv.
end or beginnynge, a majesty, essence, divinity, power, wisdom, goodness,
mirable and infinite a sovereign goodness having all in him self, having no
neade of any manner of thing being sufficient unto him self, and to all
creatures, of the which he is only the author, creator, governor,
co^seruator.


Natha. Wherefore do that call him likewise father almyghtye.


Phy? The better to declare and open that which I have said.


Nata. The name of father how is it semi^g or appropried unto God.


Phy. It is semynge unto him for diverse causes and reasons, the first for
as much as Wherefore god is called father. Ephe. i.
he is father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And after because that he is author
of all things and of the which deffendeth all fatherheade as well in heaven
as in earth, and singularlye because that he is of a most fatherly affection
toward his elected, unto who^ he does show him self as a most loving
father toward his children, and does hold and take them for his, for the love
he bears unto Jesus Christ his natural son.


Natha. Expound me al these points by perticulers, and tell me first how he
is father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and how Jesus Christ is the sone of God


Phy. This place should be better entreated in his place in the second part
of the creed in the which Jesus Christ is clearlye called the son of God,
but in as much as thou requirest now the exposition of it, I am content to
satisfye thy desire for the matters be after such sort conjoined together
that it is very hard to separate them, and it is almost all one to declare
it here in the first part, and in the second, so that which shall be here
towchede has no neade to be here resited, but shall serve for the one and the
other, and if there be any more in this matter to be opened for to obtain the
more understanding, we may pass the more lyghtlie over, and need not to
tarry so long upon it, for there shall be mough of other matters to be treated
of. And for to answer unto thy question Jesus Christ is the son of The
eternal generation of Jesus Christ John. i.
God, according to his divinity, because that he is begotten of the father
eternallye, and is one self essence and substance with him, and according to
his humanity, forasmuch as without seed of corruptible, man and sin he was
conceived in the womb of the virgin by the operation of the holy Ghost.


Natha. Thou openest unto me secreted, very dark and hard to be understand,
for if Jesus Christ be God, how can he be begotten Deu. vi. Psalm. xvi. Romans i.
of the father, and how is it possible that God should beget God, seeing he
is not but one immutable and incorruptible,


Phylipe. I do well confess that these mysteries surmounteth our
understanding, and be incomprehensible unto the humayne fragilitie, and
therefore be they called mysteries that is to say secrets hidden and dark,
but we may not conceive here a carnal opinion, unworthy of the majesty of God
by these words as though we spoke of mortal men.


Natha. Wherefore spoke we so then?


Phy. Because that for lache of words and more proper and meet vocables, The
manor of speaking of the scripture.
we beco^strained to borowe these of the common language of men, to the end that
by humayne and easy similitudes we may declare the things celestial and
divine which do excede the capacity of our rude understanding which can
not co^prehende any higher language.


Natha. What similitude and comparison has the begettynge or generation of the
son of God with that of the carual father, and of his son.


Phy. We must first in this consideration and application cast away and reiecte
all absurd, strange and carnal cogitations, and thoughts. And we must not
here dream of such begettynge or generation, as the poets attribute unto
their Gods.


Na. Open unto me that similitude as thou understand it.


Phy. Even as the child is begotten of the father, and of his proper substance
unto his Image and lykenes of such substance Ieremi. xxxii. Collos. i. Hebre.
i Ihon. xiiii.
and nature, as he is, and does take his name of him, being called man, as he
is: eue^ so Jesus Christ is truly called God, being the Image of the father,
of his substance and nature, representynge the father as the true and natural
child, after such sort, that he that sees the son, sees the father.


Natha. There is then generation and corruption in the divine nature.


Phy. In this there is a great difference between the generation of God, and of
me^. And we must not stretehe the similitude and comparison to make it answer
to al points, and to apply it in all things with the humayne generation.


Na. How must we then understand this?


Phy. Ma^enge^dreth his child of corruptible seed, because he is corruptible.
And of necessity the father must be before the child But in God it is al
otherwise.


Na. Show me the difference.


Phy. It is not possible for me to co^prehende this, nor unto any creature
living, nor to ca^ open that which I do understand, feel and believe herein.
But I shall assay to make the thing sumthing more open by human similitudes:
albeit there is no comparison of the creature unto the creator.


Na. I desire much to have a more clear understanding of this place, of the
which many do speak without understanding it.


Phy. There is no creature which does not represent his creatoure, and
Creatures Images of the creator.
the word and virtue of the same, by the which all things be made. Wherefore
we will take the sun, which is a clear Image, and manifest unto all men,
for to make us this the more easy, following the example of the ancient
writers, which have wyllyngly used this comparison.


Nathana. The thing A similitude of the sun.
pleases me very well. Follow thy purpose.


Philippe. As the sun casts his beams, which be engendre^ (...) forth of
him by the which he syghteth, is (...) ^^nifest unto men, he gives clearnes
and sight upon the earth, he does norishe and vinifie all things, and yet
never was nor never shall be without the same his beams, albeit they be
enge^dered Hebr. ii. Colo. i. Ephe. i.
of him, nor they without him likewise. Even so Jesus Christ is the beams,
splendour, glory, and Image of the father, after such sort begotten of him,
that never the father has been without him, nor he without the father, and by
him w^se and know the father, as we know the son by his beams, by him the
father does illuminate, save norishe, and vinifie us, and by the holy ghost
proceadynge of him, and of the son, as the heat and virtue of the sun.


Natha. Notwythstandynge that no similitude nor comparison can be high enough,
propre nor worthy, to discriue such a majesty, nevertheless this same does
not seem very vnpropre?


Phy. But we must always understand that in god there is neither accide^t
norqualitie, but all that is in him is god and thing most substa^cial and
conuement unto his nature, and divine essence, in the which we have to
considre the father which is as the root original the fountain beginnynge,
and the first cause of all, and after his son which is his word and his
eternal wisdom, not that we should understand tha^; (...) Christ should be
only (...) ^orde spoken in the a^re, which John. i. Prouer. viii.
vanishes and suddenly is gone, or written in any corruptible book or storye.
But because that man does give knowledge of that, which is in his heart and open
his thoughts by his word, which is the Image of his understanding and mind
for to represente and open the same unto other: the scripture also does call
Jesus Christ the eternal word of God because that by him God does open him
self unto men, as we do open and make manifest our hertes by our words.
But this word is not a voice or sound, or a corporal or corruptible thing,
which may perish in God, as it is in us, but does abide always in God, and
is substancial, and of such a nature as he which has begotten him is, he is
also the holy Ghost, which is his virtue and power, and is after such sort
extended over all the world, and shede forth upon all things that yet he
does not leave nor is separated but does abide always in him self which does
fulfill the heaven and in the earth.


Natha. Even so do I understand but let us come unto the other reason, wherefore
thou call How God is father of all creatures.
him father.


Phy. Because that as the son does take his being, his beginning his life, his
norishment, and all that he has of his father being also afterward brought
up and governed of him: even so al creatures take their being and conservation
of God, which by his providence and fatherly goodness does conducte and
govern, nourishe and uphold all the creatures, which by his inestimable
power he has created, and specially Man, for whom he has created al things,
and whom he has adopted and chosen for his children and heirs by Jesus
Christ our Lord.


Na. Does it not suffice to call him creator of al things


Phy. The name of the father does bear and conteyne much more For all be it,
that God is creator of al things, yet does he not call him self father of al
creatures, but of man. And not of al men generally, as of his chosen and
elected. For he does not call him self properly father of al men. Of the
which he is creatoure: but of them only, which he has elected, loved,
boughte and saved in his son Jesus Christ, which he does hold for his
children and gives unto the^ his immortal inheritance. As the father makes
his son his heir, which he does not unto the reproved and evil. Yet
nevertheless he does nourishe, keep and defend them, as he does the beasts
and other creatures. And that principally for two reasons. The first is the
better to declar his inestimable goodness, which is so great, that there is no
creature, what soever it be, how vile abiecte and little so ever it can be unto
the which he would not the same his goodness should extend, and should feel
of it. Yea, even his enemies which do blaspheme him, of the which
nevertheless takes he yet the care and charges, pursuyng and following them
with his favorable goodness, for to overcome the malice of their hertes.

The other reason is because of his elected, unto the which he makes all
things to serve. And for the which he does uphold all other creatures, and
does spare even the evil, to the end his children should have no hurt, nor
perish with them. But he has an other manner of care of his elected and
chosen, and has called them unto a more greater blessing and benediction,
then unto that which is commune unto us with the brute beasts. And therefore
will he not only be called and holden of us, as our creatoure: but also for
father to the end that we may be assured that not only we hold Math. v. i.
Timo. iiii.
our life and birth of him, but also that he has a singular love toward us,
and more then a fatherly affection, which never does forgette, forsake,
refuse, nor reiecte his children, but has a perpetnall care for to keep and
save, for to healpe and succoure them in all their necessities and in all
dangers and peryles.


Natha. According to thine exposition the name of father attributed unto God
does not only comprehend the creation, but also The providence of God
his providence, and the infinite goodness which is in him, of the which does
follow that they which deny the providence of God making him careless taking
from him the thought, care, and charg of his creatures, believes him not to be
a father.


Phy. They believe not God, to be God, but do make him more in humayne and
cruel, then the pore queen that came to Solomo^s iudgmente, yea then the
Dogs, wolves, Lions, and all other wild beasts.


Natha. How so


Phi. The pore queen has care for her child being moved of pity and
co^passio^ toward it the wild beasts norishe and defend their little young
ons, and take such care and thought for the^, that many times there suffere them
selves to be slain to save them, and shall God then forget the work of his
own making and not care for his own propre children, which he does more
love the^ ever any mother loved hirs, where should be the^ that soueraign
goodness, what God or father should he be if he should forsake his children
after they were borne, and suffer the^ to perish, the true christians knows
no such God, but does leave him to the Epicures.


Natha. Certaynely we be maruelously blinded if we can not consider that, but
wherefore put thou to it almyghtye.


Phy. For to Esaie. xl. xlix.
show that he differs far from our carnal fathers which ca^ do nothing of
them selves, but he may do all that he will both in heaven and in earth.


Natha. And to what purpose does it serve us to know that he is almightye.


Phy. That knowledge does bear and bring a great assurance into our
consciences for being assured that he is our father that has adopted and
chosen us by his son Jesus Christ, we need not doubt of his good will and
fatherlye affection, toward us, seeing then that we be assured of his good
will, we neade not fear but that he will put it in execution, seeing he is
almyghtye and has the power.


Natha. It is very hard and difficile for a man to do any thing except he
have these two things together that is to say, the will and the power, for the
will without the power what can it profitte and to what purpose shall the power
be enployed if the will be not there.


Phylype. And therefore when we call him father, we co^fes alredi the assurance
that we have of his will toward us, and to the end we should abide, and
know that his will is not vain without putting any thing in affecte we
attribute unto him almyghtye, the which things do teach us that he is not as a
mortal man, which often would and can not. Or like unto a tyrant, or some
rych man of power, which might do much, if he would but his will not answering
or agreing unto his power.


Nathanaell. It follows then of that which thou say, that God does not keep
his power in him self, as the covetous man or vsurar does his riches in his
treasury or coffers without distributinge any to any man. But does continually
exersice his power and goodness among his creatures.


Phi. So would I have said, and that al creatures be unto him subjects and at
his disposition. And does co^ducte and govern them as it pleases him. And
none ca^ hinder him.


Nathanaell. Saying it is so thou may well Psalm. viii Ephe. i. Hebre. ii.
Psalm. Cxiii
say, that, that knowledge does bring great rest unto our consciences. For
if we could so sirmelie believe this with our hertes, as we do easelie confess
it with our mouths, we should never be in fear of any thing, for in as much
as we be assured that God has al in his hand, and that he is always so
doing, that nothing can be done, neither in heaven nor in earth without his
council and ordinance, and that there is no creature that can do any thing,
not so much as to make tof al a leaf from a tree, or to make an head hear whyt
or black, without his will. And having leave Math. x Math. v
of him and being suer of the other part that nether he wylleth or does any
thing, but it is good, and there is nothing good but he wills it: what ought
we then to fear? Is there any creature that may noy us?


Phi. In that it Genes. i
does appear, that we be al hypocrites, and that we do not believe God to be
the father almyghtie. Seeing we be so fearful.


Nathanaell. When I do consider well these things, it does seem unto me,
that they which do pray unto the angels, or holy saints, Invocation of
saints.
or put their trust in any creature, whatsoever it be, has not truly that
fayeth, which thou confessist.


Philip. They be as far of, as from the heaven unto the earth. For if they
did believe that God were their father, as they do confess him with their
mouth, they should rather have their recourse, hope and refuge, in him then
in any other.


Nathanaell. But they say they have their recourse unto him, and put in him
their trust But they do it the better to obtain his favor, fearing lest
because of their sins he will not hear them. Wherefore they do trust that
when they do join the saints with him that they shall be sooner succored. And
that they shall be sooner exalted or lift up by their intercession.


Philip. What other thing is this, then to deny that he is God, nor our
father?


Nathanaell. Wherefore?


Phi. If he be God, father almighty, we must not doubt but he may do all
what he will as well in heaven as in earth, for he has the power, and if we
doubt not in his power no more ought we not to mistruste in his will his
wisdom and goodness. If then we believe that he is our God and father, not
carnal, mortal, and weak lacking power but almighty, and eternal, in who^ may
or do we trust, that may better or sooner healpe us, then he which is
allmyghtye, who shall have more affection to do it then he that is our father,
who can do it better or in time for us most requisite, then he which is the
fountain and spring of all power wisdom and goodness


Natha. Thy reasons be so open and manifest that none can say agayuste them,
by the which I do clarly know that al they which have recourse and
confidence, and do make prayer or invocation unto any other but to God, be
hypocrites and liars when they with mouth do say the prayer of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and this creed calling God their father, which they do not
believe seeing they deny him by their works, the which do open and bear
witness, what is in their hertes


Phy. They be such as the prophet speaks of, they draw nere unto God with
their lyppes, and honor him with their mouths, but their hertes be very
far from him.


Natha. All this is well expounded but tell me yet further wherefore thou
putteste to things going before, creator of heaven and earth


Phy. For to declare that he is the author, the beginning, and the original
of all things which he has all made, and has not been made as the Gods
of the panymes, which they have taken and chosen amongst men, and have not
made one so excele^t a work as the artificers, which be mortal men, and can
do nothing of the^ selves, except they have the matter and the instruments,
propre, and conueniente for the purpose, but he has made all of nothing
without healpe, council, or assistence of any manner creature by him self, and
his eternal word, as all the scriptures do give clear testimony, and
principally Moses which does largly discryue the history Psalm. Cxiii. Esai.
iiii. Gene. i. ii.
of the making of the world, this addition then does not only deliver us
from the error of the Epicures which deny the providence of God, but also
from that of the peripatticiens, and other made philosophers, which have
holden and affirmed that the world was eternal, and that it was not created,
which is a doctrine to tu^^ie vpsedown all the order of God, al religion, and al
goodness, and furthermore this word admonishes us how we ought to learn to
know God Gods creatures be his Images
by his caeatures and to behold him in the^ seeing that he is invisible, and
incomprehensible in his essence and majesty, for all this present world is
as a shope, in the which God this sovereign workmaster does open This world
is the shop and temple of God.
and set abroad his works, to the end that by the same the worker be known.
This world is also a church or a temple in the which there is not so little a
creature, but it is an Image of his creator, and a mirror or glass to show
and manifest him unto us, wherefore it does follow that they which will
represente God by Image made with hands of men, do him great wrong, and do
not well understand this article, for what similitude has the work of man
with the work of God? Or which shall better represe^t the great workman, his
own works or the works of men, which be nothing like or in comparison to
his, except we will compare in liynge and unstableness?


Natha. I do well understand all this, but seeing that he is father and
creator of al things, wherefore calleste thou him only creator of heaven
and earth?


Phy. Because that those two creatures which be the most excellent and
manifest unto man, do conprehend all the other which be in them comprised or
that be neighbor or nerer unto their nature


Nathanaell. What will thou understand Diverse significations of the firmament
by the heaven.


Phyl. As the heaven is taken in diverse significations in the holy scriptures
so I do understand diverse things, according to the significations which be
to him appropried.


Nathanoell. What be those significations.


Phy. The first and most vulgar and commune signification is, when we
understand the firmamente, which covers all, and the speres celestial in
the which be contained as well the sterres as the plannettes, for to serve
unto man.


Natha. Signifies it any more.


Phy. This name is also usurped very The troue of God.
often, for the air, and for the regions nere the celestial speres because
they do approach more nere unto his nature, and that they be elements more
pure.


Natha. Is there any more or other signification?


Phy. Forasmuch also as man can not sufficientlye distriue the majesty of God
but by humayne things, and there is no fayrer, more noble, more excellent,
more high, nor more magnificall creature, that does appear unto the eye of
man: and because also that God declares better his majesty and power of
heaven, Esa. lxiiii. Ierem. xvil.
then of any other place: the heaven is taken for the throue, the seat, the
glory and majesty of God, and for the place: where rayneth the blessed and
happy with him.


Nathanaell. When thou say then that he is Creator of heaven, what do
thou comprehend according to his first signification


Phylype. The celestial bodies the sun, the moon and all the sterres, and
planettes contained in the same.


Natha. What profits it to know and believe all that?


Phy. To keep me from Idolatry to the end I should not honor the sun, 4.
King. xiiii.
the moune, and the sterres, which be called in the scripture the celestial
army, as the philosophers, and old Idolatouros have done, and to the end
also that I should not gyne faith unto the plannettes and folish sayings and
supersticious prognostications of the astronomers, and that I should not fear
the signs of heaven, as the prophet admonishes us, and that I do not honor
the^, seeing they Iari. x.
be creaturs to serve me, and not I to serve them but to know by them their
creator, which does conducte and govern them, whom only we must fear,
honor, adour.


Natha. What vnderstandeste thou more by the second signification?


Phy. The elements of the air, and fire, and all things engendered in them,
as inpressions, cometes, thundres, lyghtenynges, hayles, clouds, winds,
tempests, raynes, dewes, snow, and other like with those that be conuersaunte
in the air, as the fowls, and al steynge thyng^s, which for that cause be
called birds of the heaven.


Natha. what fruit may we take of this.


Phy. very great for we be assured that al these things be in the power of
our father, which is the creator, and that they be al created for our weal,
and not for our hurt and perdition, and after we do learn by the same to
fear and love him only, and not to fear nor love nothing but in and for
him, and further we be delivered from the error of them which have their
recours unto the holy Idolatry toward the saints.
saints, for to obtain fair wether, and to have rain, or for to drive away
the winds and tempests, or for to have plentye and d^yue away scarsitie, and
lack, and for to give health and deliver from pestilence and sickness that
rayneth among men, for it is an Idolatry, and a blasphemy, which greatly
dispeaseth god reprouyng the Israelites greatly by his prophets, Osee. ii. x.
which did give the honor unto their Idolles for the benifites which they
had received of God, as though they received them of their strange Gods.


Natha. And what thynkest thou of them that wene that the magissiens,
Inchaunters, and Sorcerers, do move the tempests and make the hayles, and
other like ev^lles?


Phy. I will not deny that the euyle and unhappy spirits have great power,
nor that they may not meddle them selves among the tempests to do the more
anoyaunce unto me^ Ephe. ii.
for the holy Apostle him self does attribute unto them great power in the
air, but nevertheless, al their power is always limited that they can do no
more, then God does permite, as we do se it clearlye in the exemple of Job. And
he does not permit unto the^ but as much as he does know to be expediente
for to exercise the patience of his servants or as much as our sins and
unfaithfulness does merit and deserve, to be chastised and punished. Towchynge
the sorcerers, it is a great abuse to think that they may make the hayle and
move the elements the virtue and efficatie of Satan is great enough to
trouble their understandings in as much as they have forsaken God, to make and
men to believe such things, and say that they have done that which they
have, but done by the only permission of God, or else is done naturally by his
divine ordinance.


Natha. We ought not then to fear any other but the one only God, and if we
fear him there is neither Devil nor sorcerer, that can ^oye us, and they shall
not fear us more then we them.


Phy. I am very glade that thou felest so well the virtue and fruit of this
fayeth.


Nathanaell. Thou haste already given me many goodly doctrines, in few
words but tell me yet what thou vnderstandeste by the Invisible things
last signification of heaven which thou have towched.


Phylype. All things invisible and spiritual, as Angels soulles, and blessed
and happy Psalm. xiii. Math. xviii. Hebre. i.
spirits, which all be creatures, subjects unto God to serve at his will,
wherefore we do learn to hold our selves always unto him only which is the
master and to take the other, as the servants of God, and of his elected.


Nathanaell. And what vndersta^deste thou by the earth.


Phy. The earthlye elemente and the foot or The earth and waters.
loweste of all worldelye things. And the sea likewise being near unto it,
and al lakes, pondes, fountaynes, ryuers, and all waters, and all that is
contained in these elements, and all that does receive life, and norishme^t
that is to say, men, beasts, and all fowls, fishes and all that has
living soul, together with the plants, trees herbs, and al fruits which be
created for their nourishme^tes. The metalles, mines, stones, and all other
things, which the earth and the water brings forth for the use of men and
beasts.


Nata, This same ought well also to nourish i. Petre. v.
our fayeth and trust in God, and teach us to whom we ought to give the
honor of these things, of whom to demand them, Benefits of God tow^^d
men.
and to whom to give thanks for them.


Phylype. We be very blind, and unprovided of wit and understanding, if we
have our recourse, and put our trust in any other then in the only God,
and if we know Gene. i. ii.
not his great providence, wisdom, and goodness, which he does use toward
us, and the mind and care that he has over us, and how tenderlye, and
fatherlye he does entreat v^. For before he had created man, he would prepare
his lodging, the which he did adorn and garnishe with all beautye and
richesse, and has put him in this world as in a most delectable paleis, and
has constitute him master Psalm. viii. Hebre. ii.
and Lord over all his creatures, the which he has provided in such
abundaunce, and so many sorts, that it is impossible to comprehend them nor
to desire more.


Natha. Truly if we considre diligently this largenes and goodness of God, the
which he does use toward us, and the honor which he has done unto man: we
shall have to marvel, and to cry and say. O Lord our God, how admirable is
thy name in the universal earth? And what is it of man that thou haste mind of
him, and what is it of the son of man that thou show to him so great
benefits, as to visit and take ye care, and charg of him? Thou haste made him
little less then the Angels thou haste almost made him as a God, thou haste
crowned him with honor and glory and haste constitute him over the works of
thy hands. The sin and ingratitude of man.



Phy. It is impossible, enough to consider this. But man, having been lifted up
of God into such honor, would neither understand nor Psalm. xlviii,
know it. Wherefore he has been made like unto mares and brute beasts. But yet
more ingrat and unthankful, misknowynge, and miserable: for the ox knows
his master, and the ass his masters cribbe, but man will not Esaie. i.
know God his creator, of whom he receives and holds boeth body, and
soul, and goods. Is not this a great error, that the ox and the ass,
which be beasts so vile and of little understanding, should give more honor
and obeysaunce unto man, of whom they receive but only their pasture, and that
man should have so little respect unto God, of whom he has received and does
receive every day so many and infinite benifites. Romans iiii.



Natha. I am greatly ashamed when I think of it, and can not tell how we
should be so hardye as to lift up our eyes to heaven, and how the earth may
bear so great misknowlegynge, ingratitude and vnthankefullnesse. For I do
considre when we would outragiouslye rebuke any man as an Infidele, and an
enemy of God, we call him dog, as we often do the Jews and turks. And yet
nevertheless we do al things worsse then dogs. Me^ more unthankful the^
Dogs.
For if a dog have been brought up in a house, he will always know his
master and follow him, and is in all things true and faithful unto him. And
though he beat him yet will he come always again, and never forsake him.

But manne, albeit that almghty God never cease to draw him unto him by his
manifold benefits: yet he of the contrary part is ever turnynge him self
from him, and draweeth bakwarde (such is his weakness corrupted nature and
miserable condition in the flesh) without kepinge unto him other truth,
promise, or fidelity. But does dishonor him in all the ways that he can.


Phylype. In hearing the speak, I do remember altorie that I have heard told
of a poor shepherde. There were two cardinals, that went together to the
council of constaunce, and as they rode by the way, they met a pore
shepherde very tender^ye weapyng. The one of them passed on the way without
carynge any thing of him The other being more pitiful did stay his hors^e,
tarried and asked the shepherd wherefore he wept so sor^, who answered him, I
weep for the great shame that I have for the misknowlegynge, Ingratitude, and
unthankfulness toward God. For I do behold here a toode, which is a very
foul and vile beast, which has monished me of my great misknowledge that
so has blinded my understanding, that I had never the though nor remembrance
to give thanks unto my god which has made and formed me a man, and not a
toode as he might right well have don if it had pleased him.


Nata. I assure the that this consideration and answer is well worthy of
memory. And this same pore shepherd may well arise at the day of Judgment for
to co^de^ne us of our great unkindness, and ingratitude. For if we had never
received other benifite of God the^ that he has made us men, and has given us
form and humain reason, yet could we never reknowledge and thank him enough
for it.


Phy. Thou say truth. But he has done much more, The restorynge and
redemption of man.
for as he has created man unto his Image and likeness, and al things for him
by Jesus christ his son, even so would he by the same his son, raise up and
repair again man after his fall, and restore all things with him as well in
heaven as in earth, in the which he has no les declared his power, wisdom,
and goodness then in the creation of the world, for the one of these works is
no les then the other, and does not appertain but unto one only workema^.


Natha. And therefore desire I greatly in as much as we have gone through the
first article, and have sufficiently treated of the creation and of the
providence of God toward his creatures, that we should come unto the second
part, in the which thou have promised me to expound unto me the mystery,
and the history of the redemption of mankind, made by our Lord Jesus
Christ.


Phy. I am well content that we enter into it. And to follow it by
particulars, but because there is many great secrets and goodlye points
well worthy to be noted, understood and kept in memory: mine advice is to
put of the rest till a another time, for we have already treated of mattier
inoughe for out time. And it is better to take a little, and a little at once,
then by over many words and of to much doctrine, to traueile the
understanding which does require always some rest and recreation. And also
to learn again and the better to examyne and think upon that which he has
heard.


Natha. Albeit that, this does serve me for a great recreation: yet
nevertheless I am of thine accord, upon the condition we departed before.


Phylipe. So do I mean, God be with the.


Natha. That same good God have the always in his holy keeping.


This third dyaloge and the other next followynge conteyne the second part
of the creed which is of the son of God, in which shall be spoken of his
divinity, and of his humanity, of his Incarnation, and of the mystery of the
redemption of mankind, and shows how we ought to considre and understand
the history of our Lord Jesus Christ and to apply it unto our profit,
PHylyp. Have I not kept my promise Nathanael.


Nathanaell. I do se it well, and I was in mind to have come unto the for to
have kept the from this labor, but thou haste been more diligent then I.
Wherefore I do well perceive that thou take no less pleasure to teach then I
do to learn. Wherefore I pray the because we have great matters to treat of in
this second part, that we begin be time to the end we lose or lack no time.


Phylipe. I desire non other thing, nevertheless, because that peradventure we
might be over short, in case we should go through all the points contained
in this second part at once, and it should be very hard for to retain in
memory so much at once. Wherefore it seems unto me to be more expediente to
divide it in four, and in the first we shall speak of the divinity and
humanity of Jesus Christ and of his offices. In the second of his
incarnation. And of that he has done for us during the time of his
infirmity, and unto his death and glorification. In the third we shall set
forth the fruit which of these things comes unto us. In the forth we shall
speak of his body glorified, and of his last coming, tell me then what
follows, and show upon what points thou desierest most large and easy
declaration.


Natha. It does follow. I believe in Jesus Christ his only Believe in Christ
son our Lord. etc. how understand thou this, and what is the sense of
these words?


Phy. They signify that I do trust all holy in Jesus Christ the true son
of God, and that I believe in hun as in the father, and that by him the father
has delivered me from death and eternal damnation, and has reconsiled me
unto him self, received me unto his favor, by his well-beloved son, which
has satisfied for me unto his Justice, and has obtained me eternal life.


Natha. Thou confesseste then that Jesus Christ is God, seeing thou beleueste
in him, for thou haste already said that we must not put our trust but in
one only God.


Phylype. If I did not believe, that he were truly God of one self essence,
power and equality with the father, I should be unhappy to believe or trust
in him, seeing that the prophet does pronounce and Judge. Cursed Ieremi. xvii.
be he that does trust in man, and takes flesh for his arm.


Natha. And Jesus Christ is he not man?


Phylype. He is very man and in all things has been like unto us except
sin, but he is not simply man as we be but being made manne, is nevertheless
always very God, and the very son of God, as already it has been
expounded, wherefore when I do say in the beginning of the Creed, I believe in
God, I do speak and say ingeneral, that which afterward I do more plainly
express and open declaryng how that in the essence of one God, and in one
deity, I do recognize and confess the father the son and the holy Ghost,
three persons in one self substance and divinity.


Natha This same is meruelouse hye and difficullte to be comprehended. For how
can I perceive and understand them to be three, and yet nevertheless they be but
one.


Phylype. We must not be abashed if these mistiries surmounte the capacity
of our understandings for if we can not know our selves, nor the lest
creature that is in ye world perfectly, and such as he is in his nature, no not
so much as a little mouse, or a little grass or herb, which we do every day
se: how is it possible that we should perfectlye know the creator of all the
world, and is not able to be comprehended but is incomprehensible unto all
creatures, yea unto the Angels themselves.


Nathanaell. I do confess it, but canste thou not by sum manner of speaking
more clearly give light unto these things so profound and darcke?


Phy. I can not, but by the printes and impressions Images of God
which God has put of his Image in his creatures, I will show as it were a
shadow, but as for to paint him liuelye, it is not possible unto man, and we
can not better remember nor know him, then in the^ portreture which he has
made us of him self in his holy scriptures, and in the lively Images, which
he has portretured with his hand, and imprinted in his creatures as I have
all ready declared unto the an example of the sun.


Natha. I take great pleasure in such similitudes and comparisous, and
principally because thou have showed me that the ancient doctors of the
church have willinglye used the same and could not find am other more
convenient.


Phy. Without going or seeking any further let us abide in the sun, first
when thou beholdest it, thou seeste there is but one in all the world, which
nevertheless is sufficient unto all creatures, and notwythstandynge that, it is
but one creature of God and one Image of that great fountain, of al light,
which is in the father of light.

Nevertheless it is not possible unto the humayne eyes to comprehend it, and
cast his look st^ay^e into him, for if he do look right into him, his great
clearnes and light will take his sight from him, and make him in manner all
blyude because that the littlenes, weakness and infirmity can not bear it,
then if the eye which is created of God for to receive light can not behold
the sun in his substance, nor bear his light, how should the humayne
understanding which is so streite and weak comprehend the great king of
glory and majesty which comprehe^deth in him self al creatures and can not
be comprehended of them all together such as he is in his majesty?


Natha Here is all ready many goodlye properties to give understanding what
we may know of God.


Phy. There is yet other considerations, for all be it thou seeste but one
sun in his substance, yet nevertheless thou canste not se nor considre it,
but thou shall se three things, the which can not be separated the one from
the other, and ca^ not be the one without the other and yet nevertheless the one
is that the other is, and yet always the same is but one self sun.


Natha It is very true that when I considre the son, I do se it an original
ground and fountain of light, the which nevertheless I can not se but by his
beams, and by his clearnes, nor feel it but by his heat and virtue.


Phy. Thou do experiment in this s^dane contemplation, and apprehendyng one
sun do fall into an unity, and after incontine^t out of that unity thou
falleste again into a trinity, in such sort that it does seem unto the
that there is three things, and after consideringe three, thou co^mest again
in the end always to one, and further if one should ask the of the body of
the sun what it is what, would thou answer.


Natha. That it is the sun.


Phy. And if one should ask the also of his beams and of his heat,
wouldeste thou not call it also the sun?


Natha. That is certain for when his beams or his heat, or his clearnes, do
enter into any place we do say the sun is entered, and if by the heat of
the sun any thing be do^e we do say the sun has done it.


Phy. Thou doeste se the^ how it seems that thou makeste three suns, and yet
thou know, nor doeste not confess always but one.


Nata. It is true but may we say so of God the father, the son, and the
holy Ghost?


Phy. As well may we when we speak of the son, and of the holy Ghost, call
them Gods, as we may the heat and clearnes of the sun, the sun. But
there is in this a great difference, for that which is a quality, and a thing
accidental in the sun, is in God essence, and a thing essential and
substanciall, abiding and always resident in him. And even as we do take a
similitude and comparison of the sun, so may we do likewise of the humain
Comparison taken of the soul
soul, for in every one man there is but one only soul, and yet nevertheless
in that only soul we find three distinct things, and without confusion,
that is to say reason, memory* and will, and not wythstandynge that these
things be distincted, and have some difference between them, in such sort
that, that is reason is not memory, nor will, nor memory is not reason. And
to be short, that which the one is, the other is not, and yet there is
always but one self soul, and one simple substance. But that we may call in
the soul affectes and operations of the same, in God is always propre
substance of him self.


Natha. I knowr well in hearing of the that this is a matter, the which we do
find always the more high and incomprehensible the more we do think of them,
and the more we do search of the^, the more do we find the^ mysteries and
secrets, the whch we ought rather to honor then curiously to search in the^,
and it is much better to hold us unto the simplicity of the holy
scriptures, and unto that the which by them we may understand.


Phy. There is no doubt, that if the humayn understanding, can not
comprehend these mysteries, much less can the tongue open and declare them,
for it is impossible unto a faithful man, to find propre words to open and
declare that which he may understand and feel in him self, and if we might
by our understanding comprehend God, and by words open and declare him he
could not be God, but we should he Gods, for then were he not Infinite, if
he were comprehe^sible, or and if there be any creature that were capable or
receiuable, for it is he, the which comprehends all in him self, and can
not be comprehended of any creature, wherefore we ought to content our
selves to se and know him as in a glass here in this mortal life, as much as
to us is necessary unto salvation, and to ii. Cor. xiii.
find the wai to go unto him, where as we shall se him face to face, and there
shall know him as we have been known of him, and therefore do we travel to
know him in Jesus christ which is the way to lead and convey us. John. xvi.



Natha. That do I greatly desire, and that we do follow this article, which
we have already begone, and the rest which as I do think shall not be so
dark nor difficulte to understand, I pray the then that thou will declare
unto me word by word, the other propreties and offices attributed unto the
person of our Lord Jesus Christ and that thou do The name of Jesus.
expound the name of Jesus unto me what it does signify.


Phy. It signifies savior.


Natha. Wherefore has he been so named.


Phy. Because that God has so ordained Luke. i. ii. Math. i.
him a savior, as the Angel sent unto the virgyn Marie, and unto Joseph had
said of him before his nativity interpretynge by and by the mystery of this
divine appellation and name.


Natha. It is very lykly to be true that this name was not given unto him by
the providence of God, without mystery, wherefore I desire the to open it unto
me.


Phy. He shall be called Jesus said the Angel, because he shall save his
people from their sins, wherefore the Angel declares what his office
represented by his name. And in calling him savior, he does witness him to
be truly God, which does say by his prophet I am God, and there is no
savior beside me.


Natha. The consequence is good, for if there Deity of Jesus savior. Esai.
xl. iii. Osee. xiii.
be no Savior but God, and Jesus Christ is savior (as his name and the
Angel by interpretation witnesses) it does follow necessarilye that he is not
man only but God also.


Phy. We se by this that there is not one word in the holy scriptures, which
is not well worthy to be weighed and to examine his signification and that the
places which do name Jesus Christ to be God, expreslye do not only prove
and wytnes his deity, and his divinity, but also al those places do prove the
same which do attribute unto him the offices which only do apperteyne unto
God and the honor which unto him only is dew, which be shede abroad
through all the holy scriptures without number.


Nathana. And therefore the^ let us come unto the exposition of the other name
which is also attributed unto our Lord Jesus. Wherefore is he called Christ?


Phy. Because he is anointed of God, being by him ordained a true prophet The
signification of Christ.
king and chief soueraygne sacrifice, maker of all his elected.


Natha. Does the name of Christ bear all that.


Phy. Yea albeit that few people do considre it, thought they oftentimes have
these words in their mouths.


Natha. Is it a name of the Hebrew Greek, or lati^?


Phy. Jesus is taken of the Hebrews, Christ of the Greeks, for to expound
the name of Messiah, by the which the Hebrews did understand him, which ought
or should come to save them according to the promises made unto their fathers.


Natha. It is then all one Messiah and Christ.


Phy. It is all one, conceruynge his signification, there is no difference but
in the tongue, and boeth signify as much as anointed, in our language.


Natha. Thou sayede unto me already that he is called Christ because of the
same ointment, by the which he has ordained him prophet, The prophetical
office of Christ.
king, and sacrificatour, and therefore let us speak of these three offices,
and first of his prophetical office, what vnderstandeste thou by prophet.


Phy. Him unto who^ God has reueiled and opened his will, for to declare and
manifest it unto men, and we can not say that this office was evermore
appropried unto any person then unto our Lord Jesus christ nor that any
person has better exercised it then he for who did ever better know the will
John. i. Colo. ii.
of God then he son which is in the bosom of the father, in the which be
hidden all the treasures, of the science and wisdom of god, and who might
better reueile and open his will then he (...) witnesses, that he has
mani^ested and opened unto his disciples all that John. viiii.
he had heard of his father, it was not then without cause that Moses has
called him prophet, prounsynge unto the people, that the Lord should send
them a prophet like unto him, in whose mouth he would put his Deuteronomy. xviii.
words the Lord did give unto his people many prophets after Moses, but
there was never noue worthy to be compared unto him, nor unto the which this
prophecye did properlye agree, but unto Jesus Christ which was not only
like unto Moses but as much greater and more excellent the^ Hebre. ii.
he, as the Master and the Lord does surmounte the servant, as it was well
understand of his holy Apostles and disciples, and specially. S. Petre, and S.
Stepha^ which did expou^de this place to the Jews, and did show the^ how it
did agree, and belo^ge to Jesus Christ, and Jesus christ him self in the sinagog
of Nazareth showed by works, by words, and by the testimony of the Prophet
Esai, how that he was anointed with the holy Gooste, to open and preach the
Luke. iiii. Esai. i. Math. xi.
gospel unto the pore, deliverance unto the prisoners, and the year of grace.


Natha. It is then good reason to attribute unto him the office of a prophet,
seeing he is not only a prophet, but a prince of the prophets.


Phy. There is yet, well other causes. He has The difference between christ and
the prophets.
not only exercised the office of predication as Moses and the other
prophets, but has consummate all prophecy, and fulfilled all that the
prophets had before spoken, therefore said he that the law and the prophets,
did last unto the coming of John baptiste, and that more is, he has not
only opened and Math. xi.
pronounced unto men the law and will of god, as the other prophets, but has
Imprinted it in the hertes, and given the holy Ghost Ieremi. xxxi. Hebre.
viiii. John. xiiii. xv. xvi. Math. iii.
and by the same the virtue and efficatie both to understand and to perform,
without the which the ministratio^ or mystery of al ye other ca^ be but the
dead letter.


Nata. And what profit comes unto me to know this.


Phy. First thou art assured of the will of God, and know which is the
assured and certain doctrine of salvation, unto the which thou oughteste to
hold the, and after thou may learn by this what thou ought to judge of al
doctrine, and how thou may and ought to reiecte the traditions, of men.
For if Jesus Christ be the true prophet, the which only the father will to be
herd, it does follow then that he has Deuteronomy. xviii. Math xvii.
taught us all that is necessary unto salvation, and that we have no neade of
any other doctrine but of his, and that we neade not to look nor abide for any
other prophecy nor revelation, but that which by him unto us is reueyled, and
opened, but ought to hold and Judge all other doctrines being contrary to be
deuellishe doctrines.


Natha. Seeing it is so it does seem unto me that we may well conclude that
they be not true christianes nor do not believe that Jesus Christ is that
great and soueraygue, and true prophet, which do say that he nor his
Apostles have not spoken and taught that which is necessary for the doctrine
of the church, but that we must have recourse unto councelles tradions and
humayne doctrines.


Phy. There is nothing more certain, and I am very glade that thou
vnderstandeste the matter so well, for such people deny Jesus to be Christ,
seeing they rob or take from him the offices for the which he is called
Christ, though with their mouths they confess him to be Christ, and even as
they do him iniuey in taking from him his prophetical office, even so do they
unto him as towchynge his kingdom and his priesthode which be the other two
offices, which be also comprised and signified in the name of Christ.


Natha. In as much then as we have spoken of the first, let us come unto the
other, what say thou of his kingdom?


Phy. That it is not carnal ^or of this world Christ's kingdom. John. xviii.
as he did wytnes before Pilate, that is to say a caducte, tra^nsitorie, and
mortal ministry, after the manner of terrenall kingdoms, as the Jews (...)
for and thought, but spiritual, eternal, and immortal, as the Angel
declaryn^e his conception had before said, wherefore he administreth,
^aygneth and governs, by his holy spirit, and the cepter of Luke. i.
his word


Natha. We must not then understand to raygne here in this low earth, in
voluptuousnes, and carnal trihumph^s, as the Jews did understand, seeing that
the kingdom of Christ is spiritual.


Phy. It is conueniente and necessary that the citizens and subjects of this
kingdom, be as the king fightinge with a spiritual armonie against the flesh,
the John, xvi.
world, sin and death, Satan, and hell, ^he which he already has
vayuquished and overcome.


Nathana. Wherefore is it that by the unction his kyngedome and his prophetical
and A^^^^tynge of Christ.
priestlye office be Signified.


Phylype. For to declare that he is the true king, prophet and the Soueraygne
sacrifice maker, which was figured by the kings, and prophets of Israel,
and by the sacrificers of the Levites which has performed and accommpleshed
that, which they never could do


Nata. What was that which they could not do.


Phy. The kings being mortal and sinners as well as their subjects could
not deliver their people from the tyranye and violence of sin, Death, Satan,
and hell, nor likewise the priests by all their sacrificies, as Jesus only
has done by his, and by his virtue and power.


Natha. Our Lord Jesus Christ has he been anointed as the kings, prophets,
and aunciente Sacrificers, as David by Samnell, and Aaron and his children by
Mo^ses,


Phy. Those were anointed with oil mynglyd with diverse precious odours and
sweet things for to declare that it was they which God had elected, and
ordemed unto that office, but Jesus was anointed with the holy ghost, which was
figured by the same vnctio^ as does appear by Esai, and the testimony of. S.
John, for he has the spirit without measure.


Natha. If Jesus christ be god, as I Esai. lx. i. John. iii.
do believe it how has he given unto him the holy ghost, seeing that he does
promise and give it to other.


Phylype. According to his divine nature he does not receive it, for it is in
his almighty power, but in as much as he has been made man, he has received
this unction, to the end that in him we might be all partakers of that
unction, for the which The name of Christians
we be called christians.


Natha. It is not the^ because of the creme that is given unto us in our
baptism, that we be called christians, or for the oil, that the prestes do
bring unto the sick in their extreme unction?


Phy. The christians do know neither creme nor Iewishe oyntmente, material and
corruptible, for their salvation, but that only of the holy Ghost, of the
which we must all by Jesus Christ be anointed and baptized as Saint John
does wytnes.


Nathana. Seeing we be partakers of the unction of Christ, of the which we
bear the name, we Math. iii.
be then kings, prophets, and offerers of sacrifices as he is.


Phy. So does Saint Peter call us and gives that honor unto all true
christians, I Petre. ii.
would if it were Gods will, that we understood well all that which is
signified by the name which we bear, the which in Antioche was given unto the
disciples of Jesus Act. xiii.
Christ.


Nata. In what manner be we kings, and what is our kingdom, seeing we be so
pore and miserable?


Phylype. We be kings in as much, as we be fre by Jesus Christ the which has
made us fre, and delivered us from al our enemies, the which he has made
subject un John. viii.
to us, and has made us Lords of the heaven and earth, for to raygne with
him, receiving us as his brethren into the communion of his Ephe. i.
inheritance and of his kingdom.


Natha. How has he made all subject unto us seeing we be yet subject unto
sin, and have so much unhappiness, and have yet so many enemies, that we can
not enjoy that which God has given us.


Phy. Notwithstanding that sin and the deuell do make us war, and that it
does unto us that we have need of many things, yet nevertheless there is
nothing neither in heaven nor in earth, that may anoye or damn us, nor there
is nothing which shall not be subject unto us to serve unto our salvation,
and be turned to our benifite, for all things be ours, and we be Christ's,
and Christ is Gods, and all things happen, and be turned to the profitte of
the elected.


Natha. I understand now this point, expound unto me now, how we be
prophets and priests.


Phy. In as much as he has given unto us, his holy spirit for to lead us
into the know How christian men be prophets. John. xiiii. xi^ xvi.
ledge of all truth, and has opened unto us by the same, the will of God his
father, there is no doubt, but we be all prophets, and that the least of the
fayethfull may not speak, and open more clearelye and hyghlye the mysteries of
Jesus Christ, and declare more largly his death and resurrection, the^ the
greatest prophet which was before his coming, in the which is well fulfilled
and accomplished that, which Joel. ii, Act. ii.
. S. Peter alleges of Joel saying, I shall shede forth my spirit upon you
and your sons and daughters shall prophecy, but yet not wythstandynge that
all be prophets, as conceruynge the knowledge of God, yet nevertheless it does
not follow that it is or should be laweful to al or every man, to take the
office of a prophet in the church, and christian assembles, but only for them
which be called of God and chosen and elected by his church unto that office
for to open and declare his word, and minister his sacraments, albeit that it
is every one of our offices to do the office of a prephet, in our houses
toward our families and also our neighbors when occasion is given unto us,
but that must be so done, and in such sort, that the order which God has put
in his church be not violated nor converted or confounded


Natha. There rests now no more but of our priesthod.


Phy. We be priests and true sacrificers, in Christian priesthod. Romans xii
as much as by the spirit of Jesus Christ we offer our bodies, hertes and
souls, unto God as a quick and lively holy spiritual and acceptable sacrifice
with all that we have to serve unto his honor and glory.


Natha. By that thou haste expounded unto me of the kingdom of Jesus Christ
of his prophetical office and sacerdorall dignity I understand not only
what prophet, king, and priest he has been, and what is the virtue and
excellentie of his sacrifice, but also how that al his offices, and titles
does apperteyne unto us, and yet nevertheless there abides in me a certain
scrupulositie.


Philip. Towchyuge what?


Nathana. Towchyngethe sacrifice of Jesus Christ, for thou do say, that by
his sacrifice he has fulfilled that which all the Levites could never do,
and if it so be that the sacrifice of Jesus Christ only be perfect, we must
then have non other but hold our selves unto the same.


Phy. Eue^ so ought we to understand it


Nata. Have the christians the^ no mo sacrifices.


Phy. Not material and visible but only those of the which we have spoken
and the sacrifices of praises, which be the prayers of the fayethfull, and the
alms of the faieth full which be the offerynges a^ceptable unto God, and all
good works done unto his praise, but for the redemption of souls, and
remission of sins, there is none but that of Jesus Christ.


Nathanaell. Then they which offer and sing for the redemption of the souls
as well of living as of the dead, and which do offer for the redemption, and
remission of their sins, be no christ ^^us, nor do not believe Jesus to be
Christ, though they confess him with the mouth.


Phy. They be christians, as the Jews which did persecute Romans ii. ix.
Christ, be true Israelites, and children of Abraham by name only, for if
Jesus be that Christ, he is the true sacrificator, if he be the true
sacrificator which saves the sinners, it must needs be that his sacrifice
be perfect, for otherwise he should nothing differ from the sacrificatours
of the Levites which were sinners, nor yet his sacrifice from the calves,
sheep, and rams, offered in the old testament, and so should he not be the
Christ.


Natha. It seems unto me that which thou say, is not out of reason.


Phy. By this we may well Judge that the greateste part of christians do not
understand what is signified by the name which they bear, nor yet what they
confess, when they say they believe in Jesus christ, for if they understood
that they, should be delivered from many errors, superstitions Idolatries,
and blasphemies which they commit, nor they should not dispend somuche monye,
to cause masses to be song for the dead, nor should not make so great
expenses about the outward and material sacrifices, nor should not be in
such dissension as they be for the mass, and for the ceremonies and traditions
of men.


Nathanaell, Wherefore say thou that?


Phylype. Because they should be all contented with the sacrifice of Jesus
Christ, and of the salvation which they have received by him, and should
offer unto the poor, that weep, that which they offer unto the priests that
sing, and unto the quick and lively Images of God, that which they offer
unto dombe and dead Idols and should succure the living with the goods they
spend about the dead.


Nathanaell. How vnderstandeste thou that.


Phy. Thou will not deny me but that the Hebr. ix. i.
sacrifice of Jesus Christ is perfect, seeing saint Paul does wytnes it.


Nathana. God forbyde.


Phy. If it be perfect it is then sufficient, and we must make no mo, nor
take away nor put to any other with him, for God has no neade of any human
healpe, and neadeth not that man should put to his hand after him in that
which he has fully made and co^sumate.


Natha. I do confess it.


Phy. And if thou would not confess that, that of Jesus Christ were
perfect and sufficient, for to give place unto them which be made by men? I
will reprove by the same all the other sacrificies that ever might be made for
which of the^ might we find that might do and accomplish that, which that of
Jesus Christ might not. And if al they which have been offered, according to
the law might never sanctify and make clean the sinners, notwythstandynge
they were ordained and commanded of god, but has been necessary that Jesus
Christ the soueraygne bishope and high priest, according to the order of
Melchiledecke, should come and offer his propre body and Psalm. Cx.
blood in sacrifice for the redemption of our souls, what may we hope of the^
which the priests do at th^se days in their masses, of the which they have
no commandment of God?


Natha. I donot well understand to what purpose thou speak this.


Phylype. Thou ought to understand that the priests do glory that in their
masses they offer unto God sacrifices for the redemption of our souls, and do
auaunce them selves that, that sacrifice which they offer is the propre body
and blood of Jesus Christ, and if it so be, the^ Jesus Christ is no more the
christ that is to say the anointed of God, and the eternal priest, after the
order of Melchisedech but they be it the^ selves, seeing they attribute unto
them selves the office which only unto him apperteyneth, and is propre unto
the Christ of God, for it is not in the power of any person to offer the
sacrifice of reconsiliation Sacrifice of redemption.
and of redemption, and to sacrifice Jesus Christ, but unto him self, which
is the Christ of God which is offered him self by the eternal spirit.


Natha. How agrees this then, the priests sing the Creed in their Mass,
and confess in the same that they believe in Jesus Christ, but if it be as thou
sayeste they do all clean contrary to that which they sing, and deny by
worckes Jesus Christ to be the very Christ, the which they confess with
their mouths.


Phylype. There is nothing more true, and not they only, but also all they
that give fayeth unto their doctrine, and that have recourse unto their
sacrifices and Masses for the remission of their sins, whether it be for the
living, or for the dead.


Nathana. They be then christians without Christ


Phylype. They be not christians without Christ, for a Christ they have, but
without the true Christ they be.


Nata. They have the^ a false Christ.


Phylype. That is true, and yet not content with one, but have as many as
they have priests, which do call them selves Christ's attributynge unto them
selves only that which the prophet did understand of all Psalm. Cv.
the people of God saying, touch not my Christ's, or mine anointed, they may
well be Christ's but of the number of them of the which Christ did prophesye
saying, there Math xiiii.
shall come mani false prophets and false christ's


Natha. I would not have thought that, that only name of Christ had
comprehended so many things, and had drawn such consequence after it, I
know well now by experience that many do say their creed which understand
nothing, and do all contrary and lie them selves.


Phy. Thou may Judge thy self, and there fore it is neadful that al these
points be well diffined to be clearly understand.


Natha. It seems me that this point is well inoughe diffined and largely
Inoughe declared for this time, wherefore let us pass over forward. Wherefore
say thou, his only son or his son united, it does seem that thou wylt
deny by this particular exclusive that there is no son of God but Jesus christ


Phy. I do not deny but that all the elected, be the children of God, but
there is but one that is to say Jesus, which is his true and natural child,
as we have before expounded.


Natha. How be we the^ children of god.


Phy. By adoption, and not by nature.


Nathanaell. What do thou call adoption?


Phy. I call adoption, when one does take a child, which is not his own
propre child procreate of his own body for his own propre and legitimate
child geuinge unto him al rightes and titles, as though he were truly and
naturally his child, not as though he were bound unto it but does it of
his own free goodness, and of the love that he bears unto him, and even so be
we sons of God by Jesus Christ, in whom God does love us, adopte, chose and
receive us for his children, and therefore is the spirit of God called the
spirit Romans viii.
of adoption.


Natha. Wherefore gyueste thou yet unto him this title, calling him our Lord.


Phy. Because he has bought us, and that we Cor. vi.
be his and his subjects and servants, and that full power is given him as
well in heaven as in earth, and that he is king and prince Math ii. xiii.
and Lord of all creatures, and the only governor and master, and the head
of his church and has power to give laws, and ordinances Colo. i. ii.
unto men for their salvation, unto the which all men must be subjects.


Natha. I understand well now the sense of this article, and the principal
points, which it does conteyne, let us therefore follow the rest.


Phy. In as much as we have determined to divide this part, as I did set it
forth in the beginning, it shall be good as seems me, to make here our first
rest and division and after let us enter into the matter of the incarnation of
Jesus Christ, as I have promised the.


Natha. I am of accord in all that thou will albeit that me thinks the time
not long, and that I am ready of mine own part to hear all the day long, if
it were not to thine nuer great pain and werines, notwytstandinge I do not
believe by all that I ca^ perceive that this labor and pain to be grievous
unto the, but rather that thou do it having more regard unto me then unto
thy self, for thou knoweste well that I am to small and little a vessel to
receive at once so much of this divine licoure, and lyuelye water, poured
forth of the fountain of the word of God.


Phy. I would it were the pleasure of God, that I might find many such
vessels that were so receiuable of this word of life, nor I do not this
because I mistrust thy capacity but to the end that both the one and the
other of us may the better gather and savor this bread of life which here is
ministered to us.


Natha. Thy reason is very good, let us therefore boeth go about our other
business that we may return again the more fresh and with the better courage.


In this next dialoge shall be set forth the history of Jesus Christ, from
the time of his conception, unto his ascension, and shall entreat of the
mystery of his Incarnation, and of our redemption.
Nathanaell. THou would not believe Phyllype how long I have thought the
time sens our departing, for I have taken so great a taste and sauoure, in
that I have herd of the heretofore, that I thought I should never se the time
Inoughe to hear of the, the rest, for the more I harken unto the, the greater
pleasure I do take, and the more I eat of this meat, which thou doeste
minister unto me, the more I am hungry.


Phylype. Such is the nature of the chyld^en of God, and of his word, also,
which is so pleasant unto the soul and conscience that of the great
pleasure they take in it, they can never be satisfied and filled. Seeing
therefore that thou art in so good appetite to the end I make the no longer
langoure, let us return unto our matter, and ask me questions as thou
haste begone.


Natha. It does follow after this first article that we have begone and
treated of our The conception Jesus christ Timo. iii. Gene. xxii. John. i.
Lord Jesus Christ, that he was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the
virgin Marie. What understand thou by these words?


Phylype. I confess that Jesus Christ is truly and very man, in the which
God has been opened and showed in the flesh according to the promises made
unto Abraham, and David, and according to that which the Prophets had before
said.


Nath. In this co^ceptio^ wherein god, and this eternal and divine word, has
been made flesh has it been turned and converted from the divine substance
into humain flesh?


Phylype. That should be a great absurdity, but in taking the humayne
flesh, he has vuited the divine nature, with our human nature, man with
God, the heaven with the earth, without converting the divinity into flesh,
nor yet flesh into deity, without co^foundynge or minglynge the one with the
other, but conioynyng two natures without conuertion, confusion, or of any
manner of permutation in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ being very god of
the divine substance and very manne of our flesh, blood and bones.


Nathana. There is then two natures in our Lords Jesus Christ, the one
divine and the other humayne.


Phy. Otherwise should he The divine and humayne nature in Jesus Christ.
not be Christ, and the savior of men.


Natha. Wherefore?


Phy. Because that if he were not God, he should not have power to save, and if
he had not been man, he had not borne our infirmities, sins and langoures,
nor we should not have such assurance of the remission of our sins,
except our flesh in him had borne it.


Natha. What need was it that he was made man?


Phy. For to confound Satan his adversary, and the better to open the great
virtue, and power of God, and his charity, and inestimable love toward me^.


Natha. How has Satan been confounded, by the humanity of Jesus i. Cor. i.
Christ?


Phy. In that that Satan had thought by the in firmitie of the flesh to have
destroyed the work of God, and God by the same weak flesh, would restore
that which was lost declaryng thereby, that his weakness is stronger then all
the power of Satan, and of al men, and yet is there other reasons.


Nathanaell What be they?


Phylipe. In as much as the world, could not know God, by the wisdom of
the same he would by the foleishnes of the cross save the beleuers.


Nathanaell. What is that for to say.


Phy. That in as much as men could not know God in his greatenes and wisdom,
and by the creation of all things: he would by this mean, being nearer unto
our human infirmity, which the wise me^ of this world did esteem but for
follye or folyshnes give salvation unto his.


Natha. And was there no other mean more propre and conueniente?


Phy. It pleased him to chose and elect this as most conueniente.


Nathanael. Wherefore.


Phy. Because that consideringe the humayne infirmity, and fraylues of our
corrupt nature, it was not possible, better to declare his goodness, charity,
and mercy toward men, nor no way to give him greater consolation and
assurance of his salvation.


Natha. Make me well to understand this.


Phy. Man was by his sin condemned unto death, maledictio^, and eternal
da^natio^ and had the^ need to be boughte again and delivered, or else he must
have been lost.


Na. I do confess it.


Phy. Then for to be bought and delivered, it must neades be, that some one
must have satisfied for him, and paid his ransom.


Natha. And might not that have been dove but by Jesus Christ?


Phylype. No.


Natha. Wherefore.


Phy Because that all men were in one self necessity, subjection and bondage
so that there was none that could satifie for him self, wherefore they had
all need of an other to pay that ransom.


Nathana. But seeing that God is all merciful, might he not have pardoned man,
without any manner of satisfaction?


Phylype. He might do all that pleased him, but he would so declare his Justice
with his mercy, for as he is merciful, so is he also Just.


Nathanaell. How has he by that mean, declared his Justice and mercy?


Phy. In that, that where A solution worthy to be noted of al me^
man had sinned the justice of god did remain that he were punished, and of
the other part his mercy did move him to have pity of him, and to take him to
his mercy.


Nathanaell. These be two things which seem very repugnaunte and contrary.


Phy. And therefore the Lord has satisfied his justice in punishynge the
sin of man in his son Jesus Christ, which has suffered the death, and
borne the Ice and fury and maledictio^ of God, which man Gala, iii
by his sin had merited and deserved.


Natha. And if he had punished man, might not man also have satisfied?


Phy. No, for in as much as all men were sinners and subjects unto the curse
and malediction, of the law, the which malediction, and vengeance of God had
utterly destroyed, consumed, and brought him down into hell, for it is so
terrible and heavy that no man might have borne it, no not the Angels the^
selves.


Natha. Yet has it not for all that consumed and brought down Jesus Christ.


Phylip. No for seeing that he was without sin or spotte, the death, sin,
hell, nor Satan ye prince of ye world, could do nothing against him.


Natha. And how has he satisfied by his death?


Phi. In that, that he was not detter, beholdynge nor bound, and yet
nevertheless has paid as a detter in that, that he has satisfied unto the
Justice of god, wherefore seeing that he, not being by any manner of means
detter nor bound, and yet has paid and satisfied his satisfaction, of the
which he him self had no need had served for them that believe for the which he
has answered, and fully satisfied.


Natha. That is then the cause, wherefore he has taken the humayne flesh.


Phy. Yea certaynlye, for in as much as it must neades have been that the flesh
which had sinned and al me^ also should make satisfaction, and that none could
nor might do it, but the son of God, nor the son of God in his divinity
could not suffer nor die, therefore has he taken his body, like unto ours,
by the which he has redeemed us, and has borne our infirmities.


Natha. Certaynlye thou haste not without good cause said that by this mean
God has declared his charity, toward the world gyuynge his propre son for
to save it, for if he have not spared his own propre son, but John. iii. Romans
viii.
has delivered him unto death for us we ought in no wise to mistruste his
great mercy toward us, but to be right well assured that he will give unto us
all other things.


Phy. This is also a great consolation and assurance unto us, in that we have
the son of God to be our brother, truly man of our flesh, blood and bones,
and in that same feeling our infirmities, he has pity upon us Hebre. iiii.
Ephe. ii Hebr. ix. Romans viii.
making our peace toward the father, and makes intercession for us. Wherefore
we be first certified, that for the love of him we be pleasyng and acceptable
unto the father, and that by him we have conquired and overcome death, and be
reisen again, and shall reign with him in heaven, and therefore has he not
taken the Angelical nature, but the seed of Abraham, for to assure us, that
all that has Hebr. ii.
been done in him shall be in us, and towchynge our salvation.


Nathana. These be mysteries and secrets of God well worthy to be known, and
full of great consolation, so that when thou doeste say that he was conceived
by the holy ghost, thou will say that he has taken humayne flesh, and has
been conceived in the womb of a woman, and that he has the substance of his
body of the woman which has conceived him,


Phy. I confess that he is truly man of our substance flesh, blood, and
bones, but his conception differs far from ours


Nathana. I do not doubt that, but I desire much that thou will declare it
unto me more plainly.


Phy. He is not conceived by the operation of sinful man as we be, but by or
of the holy ghost, in the womb of the virgin, as the angel did open and
pronounce.


Nata. And yet nevertheless Hebr. ii. iiii.
he has a true humayne body as ours is.


Phy. It is true, but yet without sin for if in him, had been any manner of
spotte of sin how should he have washed and made clean other, he him self
being defiled,


Natha. And therefore would he be conceived Psalm. li.
by the holy Ghost, and not in sin and wyckednes as other men be, of the
which the generation is all together corrupted.


Phy. He would be co^ceyned of celestial seed, for to make us celestial, and
to unite man with God the heaven with the earth, as it shall be again declared
more largly in this article following, where it is said that he is borne of the
virgin Marie.


Nata. What meanest thou by that.


Phy. That as he was conceived by the holy Ghost, and has taken the very
nature, and human The nativity of Jesus christ. Psalm. vii. Math. i ii. Luke.
ii.
flesh in the womb of the virgin, according as Esaie had before said: eue^
so was he borne of the virgin without corruption, in Betheleem, according to
the prophecy of Michee.


Na. Wherefore do thou make me^tio^ of the virgin mari.


Phi. For to show that he is Gene. xxii. i. Samu. vii. Psalm. Cxxxii.
the true Christ of the seed of Abraham, of Judah and of David, in the which be
accomplished the promises of God.


Na. And what need was it to make mention of the mother?


Phy. Because that he was promised to be borne of the seed Esai. vii Math. i.
of Abraham, and of David, of the which the virgin Marye came, as the
evangelists do witness.


Natha. In as much as thou have already expounded to me thy fayeth, towchynge
the mystery of the incarnation of the son of god. Luke. i. ii. iii.
Let us follow now the other articles.

It does follow. He has suffered under ponce Pilate, crucified, dead, and
buried, what understand The passion and death of Christ.
thou by this article?


Phy. That our Lord Jesus Christ has suffered death and passion for our
sins, and by the same has performed the mystery of our redemption, for
the which he becam man, and did take our nature upon him, for to no purpose
should his co^ceptio^ and birth have served us, if that by his death he had not
satisfied for us.


Nata. Where fore make thou me^tio^ of ponce Pilate?


Phi. For to show in what time he has suffered, by who^ he was condemned, and
how that he was Math. xvi. Luke. xviii.
delivered into the hands of the ge^tyles and heathens, eue^ as he had before
spoken.


Na. What was he that ponce Pilate?


Phi. The prouoste Pilate.
or Judge, which held the place, and was deputy Math. xxvii.
for ye Emperor of Rome, under who^ the Jews at that time were subjects
because of their sins, and for to declare that the time was come that the
Christ ought to come, seeing the capture was taken away from the live of David,
and from the house of Judah, and that stran^gers had over it dominion, according
to the prophecy of Iacobe.


Natha. What has he then sustered under ponce Pilate?


Phylype. Diverse injuries outragies and wounds, as the Evangelists do wytnes,
and so finallye by him condemned to death.


Nathanaell. What had he done for to be condemned?


Phy. Nothing but the work of god his father, for the which he was come.


Natha. He was then unjustly and wrongefullye condemned and put to innocente
death


Phylyp. If it had been other wise his death could not have profited us.


Nata. Wherefore?


Phylype. Because that if he had deserved his death, he should have died for
his own sins, and not for ours, but in as much as he was unjustly condemned,
by that condemption are we, which iustlye have deserved to be condemned,
delivered and absolved before the Judgment of God, and by the death, which he
has suffered have we life and our death by his is aboleshed and taken away.


Nathanael. Wherefore do we say twice one thing, for crucified and dead, is
it not al one? and would not one of them have sufficed?


Phy. we confess that he was crucified, for to signify that his death has
not been simple and commune as the death of malefactors, but the most cruel
ignominious, and shamfull, that was possible to be thought or Imagined that is
to say the death of the cross.


Natha. Wherefore was it more cruel and ignominious, the^ the other manners of
death.


Phy. First thou know well that al manner of deaths which man does suffer
by the sentence of the Judge, and under the title of Justice is more shamfull
sclaunderous, and more terrible then if a man should dye natuturallye in his
body, and yet did it not suffice unto the Jews nor satisfy the madness and
furor that did inflame them, against Jesus Christ to cause him to be put to
execution by Justice, as he had been an euel doer, but did expressly demand of
Pilate, that he should be crucified, because that ye death of the cross was
asorte of gallows the most detestable and hateful that was to be Judged, or
thought to be among men, for it was not used that evil doers should be
hanged upon the cross but only they which were esteemed, the most execrable
and abominable offe^ders, among the gentyls and panims.


Nathanaell. And did not the Jews of custom punish their malefactors by the
cross.


Phy. That fashion was only used among the Panims, and because that Pilate
their prouoste and Judge was a panime, they prayed and earnestly moved him to
cause Jesus to be hanged upon the cross for to cause him the more to be in the
shame and sclaunder and hatred of the world.


Natha. And in what manner did the Jews cause their malefactors to dye.


Phy. As far as we can Judge by the scriptures, they had four manners of
execution, that is to say, stonnynge, burning, stranglinge, and with the
sword.


Natha. And who did purchasse for Jesus Christ this so shamfull and
ignominious a death.


Phylyp. The envy and hatred of the Jews but pryncipallye the Scribes and
Phariseis, priests, bishopes and princes, of Jerusalem.


Na. Was it not in their power to chose, and elect the hynde of death, of the
which they desiered that he should dye.


Phy. It was neither in their power, nor yet in the power of Pilate, to cause
him to die, neither of that death, nor of any other but in his only, which
was offered and sacrificed, because he would and has given his life, when he
would and has taken it again when it pleased him, John. ^.
wherefore it is not to be thought, that any thing of al this has be done
by adventure fortune or chance, or after the fantasies or appetites of men,
but all by the providence and council of God, for if the Jews might have
Luke. iiii.
killed him when they would, they had done it long before it was done, for
they had often times enterprised it, and done all that they could, and yet
could not bring it to pass because that the hour determined of the father was
not come, and of the contrary part, when they would have deferred his death,
unto an other day, they could not. For they did desire to put Math. xxvi.
it of to after the feast of Ester, and had so concluded in their council,
fearing the multitude and uproar of the people, and yet they could not so
bring it to pass, but he was crucified, even at the time when they should
celebrate their Ester, but that was not do^e without misterye, and a great
providence of God for that is a great testimony unto us that did open and
pronounce unto the Jews that their Ester and all their cerrmonies were
abolished, and that Jesus Christ is the true paschal The true paschall. Exodi.
xiii. John. i. ix.
Lamb which was without spotte and sacrificed, for to deliver us from the
tira^nie of the great Pharao, which is the Devil.


Natha. Seeing that it was in the power of Jesus Christ to give his life, and
to take it again when he would, wherefore did he rather chose and elect, that
sort and kind of death, then any other?


Phylyp. For many reasons. First for to accomplish the will of God his father
and the scriptures and prophecies which were prophesied of him, he was figured
by the red hefkere, the which must and was then used The red hefker. Hebr.
xii.
to be burned without the hooste, in the same manner, was Jesus Christ driven
out of the town of Jerusalem, and was led unto the mount of Caluerie, in the
which place was the gibbet or gallowhouse for the punishment of the euyle
doers, and there was put to execution, as an evil doer because of our sins
the which he took upon him, and were signified by the rednes of the hefker,
notwithstanding that he was pure and innocent, without ever having borne the
yoke of the Deuel, nor of sin the which was represe^ted by that, that the
hefker was young without having borne ever any yoke.


Na. I should many times have read that ceremony, before I should have
understand what it did signify.


Phy. It should have been very hard to have been understand, if Jesus Hebr.
xii.
Christ by his deeds had not expounded it, and if also the Apostle had not
opened unto us the understanding and showed how it must be applied unto Jesus
Christ.


Natha. It is the same also that Jesus Christ spoke of him self, in the
parable of the euyle kepers of the viniyarde, which did cast out the son of
the owner of the viniyarde, and Math. xxii.
killed him, because they would have his enheritaunce. But thou have not yet
expounded unto me what scripture had before said, that he should be hanged
upon the cross.


Phy. Thou haste first the figure of the serpent of brass, the which Jesus
Christ has expounded of him self. For as that serpente of brass was lyfted
up in the deserte for to The serpente of brass. Nume. xxi. John. iii.
heal all them that did behold him: even so was it necessary, that Jesus
Christ should be hanged upon the tree, and be lifted up upon the cross for to
heal all them that were mortallye stryken and hurt, by the bytinge and venym
of the old serpente, and as that serpente of brass had the very figure and
shape of a serpente, and for all that was no serpente, nor had no venym, and
yet by his means, they which were hytten with serpe^tes were healed,
although the medicine seemed very strange and inco^uenie^t, even so Jesus
Christ, has taken the form of a sinner, and yet was no sinner, but has
been the only medicine of all pore sinners which look, and behold him by
fayeth, and puts their salvation in his only death and passion. And
notwythstandyng that this same mean to save men seems very vile, abiecte
and strange unto man's reason, understanding, and knoweledge, which does
Judge this wisdom of God, and preaching of the cross folishnes: i. Cor. i.
yet for all that as there was neither physike, surgerye, medicine, nor
remedy, that might heal them that were bitten with serpents, but the
beholdynge of the serpente of brass, which had been made and set up by the
commandment of God: Even so have we neither phisike, surgeri, medicine, nor
other remedy against sin and death, to get us salvation but Jesus Christ
crucified, which is given us of God, for it does not appertain unto us, to
elect or chose the medicine, but unto God the soueraygne medicine, which only
may heal us of that mortal sykenes, and only knows the remedy that to us
is effectual, and gives it unto such as it pleases him, and such as he
gives, is only sufficient and meet, and there is none other that is any
thing worth, and which brings not rather death then life.


Nathana. Who would ever have thought, and that under the history of the
serpente of brass, we should have found so many and goodli secrets, covered,
and hidden, and therefore I am not now abashede, though the word of God,
seem follye unto carnal men, which can not Judge spirituallye, nor be
receiuable of so high a doctrine, the which surmounteth and passes all men's
understanding. But is there yet any other scripture which has signified
this same cross of Jesus? De^. xxvii. Gala. iii



Phy. There is likewise written in the law. Unhappy or accursed be he that is
hanged on the tree, and because that we were most unhappy, and accurssed by
our sins, he would bear that curse and malediction, hanging upon the tree
of the cross, for to deliver us, and to make us partakers of the blessing and
benediction promised in the seed of Abraham, which is our Lord Jesus
Christ. And furthermore Gene. xxii. Esai. lv. Psalm xxii. Luke. xxiii.
it must neades have been, that he should so have been humiliated, beneth or
under all men, and that he should be the opprobrie and the last, or the least
of all men, and reputed as a worm and not as a man, he must also have been
hanged among thieves, and reputed among sinners, fastened unto a tree, and
appointed and ordained unto all hynde of vituperie, sclaunder, and outrage
according to the prophecy principally of David and Esai.


Nathanaell. I believe well by this, that there was a great providence, of God,
in all these things for the time, the place, the persons, and all the
doings, which be written in the history of his death and passion, agree
mer^eylouslye well with that which the Prophets had before said, but in
as much as thou have expounded unto me, the cause where fore we do make me^tio^,
that he was crucified: tell me also for what purpose does it serve, to put to
that he is dead? The death of Jesus.



Phylype. The moore plainly to wytnes that he was not only tormented, and
set about with the doloures, and cruel torments of death, but according to
his humayne nature, is truly and verilye dead as manne Math. xxvii. Luke.
xxiii. John. xix.
without any manner of cauteill or doubt. And took his end upon the cross,
and gave up his humayne spirit, the which he did recommende unto his father,
for in his death does lie the pryncipall point of our salvation, for in
as much as it was necessary that he should dye, for our sins, if he had
not been truly and very lie dead, we should be yet subjects unto eternal
Death and damnation.


Nathanaell. For what cause do we make me^ci^on of his Sepulcher, saying that
he was buried?


Phyly. For the more greater confirmation of his death, and to signify the
mystery of Jonas The sepulcre of Christ. The sign of Jonas. John. ii. Math.
xii.
in him accomplished, as he him self did openly declare unto the Jews.


Natha. What sygue was that?


Phy. As Jonas was cast into the sea, for to appeise the rage and tempeste,
which was moved by the Ire of God, and was received by the whale, abiding
three days, and three nights, in the deep and rage of the sea, within the
bealy of the whale, and the third day was cast up upon the shore alive,
without any hurt or damage. Even so was it necessary that Jesus Christ was
cast into the deep and botome of death, which had thought to have swallowed
him up, for to appease the Ire of God, and that he should be in the bealie of
the earth, as Jonas was in the bealy of the whale, and that he should rise the
third day as anon shallbe said.


Natha. Behold here is a goodlye mystery, and well opened when it is examined
nearly.


Phylip. Yea certaynlye, for who would ever have thought or believed, that
Jonas being so in the deape, should have escaped the death and that our Lord
Jesus Christ in death should have found us life, and that after such a
co^fucio^ upon the cross, having been cast down eue^ unto the gates of hell,
which had thought to have devoured him, he was raised up into such glory,
power, and majesty, and that by his death, the fury of God was abated and
pacified, as the tempeste of the sea, and quietness was given unto men, and the
peace made between God and them.


Nathanaell. Had he not well inoughe risen again without being buried?


Phylyp. Yes well enough if he had would, but he would thus accomplish this
mystery, and give a more euidente, and irreprouable sign of his resurrection.


Natha. Towchinge what?


Phy. Towchinge that, that he was buried by two Math. xxvii. Luke. xxiii. John.
xix.
honest persons, Nichodemus, and Iosephe of Aromathia, by the will and consent
of Pilate, which did deliver unto them the body, and they did honestly burye
it in a tomb, all new cut out of stone, wherein never none before had been
put. To ye end, that none might aledg, that some other living had been there
hidden, to counterfayte his resurrection, or that some other dead before him,
were risen and not he, or that he was not risen again, by his own power, and
virtue, but rather by the virtue of some other holy person, which might have
been there before buried, as he that did rise again when he was cast into the
Sepulcher of Elizee, or that he had towched 4. Kings. xiii.
his body.


Natha. And what does signify the article following, which says He is
descended into hell.


Phy. That is a point, which has not been of aunciente in the creed, as it
does appear Discendynge of Christ into helles,
by the same which Saint Ciprian does use but has been sense put to, for the
declaration of the things going before.


Natha. How say thou that this has been put to? Has not the Apostles
made this Creed, every one of them putting to his article, unto the number
of. xii, as it is co^monlye taken?


Phy. We read not in the holy scriptures, nor in any hystorye worthy of
fayeth, that the apostles have so brought the christian fayeth into. xii.
articles, nor that every one of them has put to his part in any such
manner.


Natha. Is not there. xii. articles of the fayeth?


Phy. The faith is single and one, and according to the declaration that we
make, we may comprehend it in moo, or in fewer articles, wherefore if is all
one, to account. xii. or moo, or less, so that it be well declared and
understand.


Natha. Wherefore do we call those. xii. articles, the creed of the Apostles, if
the apostles made them not?


Phy. We may well say the Apostles made them, in as much as they have opende
the doctrine, wholly comprised in the same, co^teinyng the sum of the
apostolyke and christian faieth the which they have preached as that which we
also ought to believe, as it has already been said.


Nata. How so ever it be I pray the let us com unto the declaration of this
matter.


Phy. We must first know what hell is, and then it shall be easy to
understand how he is descended.


Natha. What call thou hell the^.


Phylyp. It is in this necessary to considre in what signification the holy
scripture does use it.


Natha. That is that, which I do ask.


Phy. We do find hell in the usage of the holy Gene. xliiii. Esai. xxiiii
scriptures, and principally in the old testament, for the death, for the
grave, and for the state and condition of them that be departed of the which all the scripture does bear wytnes, and therefore do we call it hell, which is a word
taken of latin, and does signify as much as a low and inferior place, because
we do put the body in the grave within the earth lower the^ our habitatio^.


Natha. Is that the propre signification?


Phyly. That is the first, that it does signify in the scriptures.


Nata. Is there the^ other?


Phy. Yea, but they do hang upon the same, For as the death, and the grave is
the end and co^summation of man, as concerning this world: even so hell is
taken for the extreme dangers, miseries, dolors, and anguishes, that man may
suffer, and by the which he is darkened or brought unto death.


Nathanael. Vndersta^deste thou none other thing by hell?


Phylype. It is also likewise taken su^time for the pain dew for sin for the
Judgment and wrath of God, and for the bottom and mischief of all evil
things, and of all miseries, and unhappiness, and because (...). xvi. Math. xvi.
that in the death, and in the grave, there is no thing but stynkynge
infection, darkness, and perpetual horror, it is sometime taken for to siguifie
the state, condition, and the place of the damned, otherwise called Gehenue,
because that their death is not unto life, and that they Luke. xvi. Marc. v
do abide in the same in perpetual darkness, of the which the grave is their
beginning.


Natha. According to which of these significations, ought we to understand
that Jesus Christ is descended into hell?


Phy. According unto all.


Natha. How so.


Phy. First thou must note that he does not say in the singular number. He
is descended into hell, as though he did speak of a place certain, whereunto
he was goone. But in the plurell. He is descended to the helles, comprehendynge
all that which he had said before. He has suffered under ponce Pilate,
crucified, dead, and buried.


Natha. And did it not suffice, to have already said the same by other words,
for if discendyd into hels does signify no further, what need was it to put
to this article?


Phy. Albeit that it do comprehend all that which already has been said,
yet is it not put to without cause, for it does better open and declare that
which has been said, and does also better declare unto us, the virtue, and
efficatie of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ and does give us
to understand what condemnation he has borne, and how far the virtue of his
death has exte^ded.


Natha. Expound the same alitle better unto me by particulers.


Phi. When our Lord Jesus Christ had suffered, and endured so many outrages,
and blasphemies, as when he did sweat blood, and was full of anguish in his
Luke. xxii Math. xvi.
soul, even unto the death, and was shamfullie hanged between thieves, as
forsaken of God and of al creaturs, without help, favor, or co^solatio^, and
did yield up his spirit upon the tree of the cross, where he was hanged,
bearing the curse, Ire, and furore, of God, which is the very hell, feeling in
him self the condempnation, pains, and sorrows, which we had deserved for
our sins, then was he truly descended into hels, which had wened to have
devoured him, but they could not because he was without sin.


Nathana. Is he no otherwise descended into hell?


Phy. He was also descended, when he was put Ephe. iiii.
into the sepulcher, and is descended into the low parts of the earth, as the
Apostle does say.


Nathana. Did not his soul, and his spirit descend to the saints and
fathers, which were dead before his coming?


Phylyp. Yes,


Natha. Where were they?


Phy. In the bosom of Abraham.


Natha. What place was that?


Phy. The place of rest and blessedness, where all they were receyned, which
were dead in that fayeth of Abraham, which is the fayeth in our Lord Jesus
Christ.


Natha. Is that limbo, where they be deprived of all the Joys of Paradise?


Phy. I have not read in any place in all the holy scripture that makes
mention of any such limbo.


Natha. was it the^ in purgatory?


Phy. Jesus Christ descended well into purgatory when he did humble and cast
down him self, even unto the most bitter death of the cross sheadynge his
precious blood, for to wash, and purge our sins, and for the same did
obtain remission and grace, other purgatory does not the scripture know, but
that same which has efficatie in us by faith, which purifieth the hertes.


Natha. How is he then descended to the fathers, and where was the bosom of
Abraham?


Phy. I have said that hell signifies also the estate and co^ditio^ of the^
that be dead and departed, wherefore when Jesus Christ was dead and buried, he
was disce^ded to them that be dead and departed that is to say, that he is
dead for them, and has borne the pain that they had merited and deserved,
after such sort, that the virtue force, and efficatie of the death of Jesus,
is extended not only unto them which were alive, but also unto al the^
which have been se^ce Adam, and were dead Gene. iii.
in the fayeth of that promised seed, unto the which Jesus Christ has been
made fellow dyeinge as they, and descendynge into the grave as they, to the end
that they should be partakers of the resurrection and glory of him, which is
savior of the living and dead.


Nath. It seameth by thy words that thou doeste abolyshe boeth limbo and
purgatory.


Phy. God furbide that I should aboleish purgatory, for it is the same in the
which I have all my hope, and without the which I should wholli despair of my
salvation, for I do know well that no poluted and unclean thing ca^ Cor. xv.
enter into the kingdom of heaven, except it be purged and made clean, but in
deed I know no other purgatory, but the blood of Jesus The true purgatory.
Christ, nor yet any fire which has power and virtue to pourge our sins,
but that of his holy spirit, and as for limbo I could never find any in all
the holy scripture, I could never see so mani diverse estates of the^ that be
departed as ye priests and monks fain, lodging some in paradise, and other in
hell, and other in purgatory, and other in limbo, I do not find in ye holy
scriptur but of. ii. estates, and co^dicions, the which our Lord Jesus
Christ, has represe^ted and set forth unto us, in the exemple of the Rich
man, and Lazarus, there is but one estate of the happy and blessed, and
another of the reproved.


Natha. Unto which of those did Jesus Christ descend.


Phyly. Unto boeth but in diverse sorties he is descended to the dampened and
unhappy which be dead in unbelieve, when they have felt that they were deprived
of the merit of his death and passion, and of the grace, and salvation, which
he brought unto his elected, and when they felt the ire, malediction and curse
of God agrauated and augmented, always more and more upon them, but he is
descended unto his elected, when that by his divine virtue, he has made them,
to feel the virtue and efficatie of the death, which he suffered for them, and
the fruit of his passion, wherefore I do conclude, that they which do believe
that there is a Limbo, for the little children that be dead borne, and a
purgatory other then the blood of Jesus, for to purge the souls of the
fayethfull departed: do not believe that Jesus Christ, descended into hell, and
that his virtue should be of such efficatie, that it might come and exte^d unto
the dead, to their salvation, for if they did perfectly believe that, they would
have no further care for the dead, but would leave them in the hands of Jesus
christ which is savior, of the little and great, of the living and dead,
and would not think that the dead had any more need of them.


Na We have tarried inoughe upon this article, but in deed it was necessary to
make it somthyng more clear, for the matter was very dark, but thou have now
so well opened it, that I am satisfied, wherefore let us come unto this article
following which says. The third day he rose from the dead. What is the
sense The resurrection.
of that article?


Phy. The same which we have all ready towched, speaking of the sepulcher of
Jesus Christ, and of the sign of Jonas.


Natha. Has he abidden three days and three nights in the earth as Jonas did
in the bealye of the whale?


Phi. It was not neadful, that he should be in the sepulcher three nyghtes holly,
it was inoughe that he did rise again the third day after he was dead, as he
has done in deed.


Nathanaell. Was that the third day, when he did arise?


Phy. Yea truly, for the day that he did give Math. xxvii Marc. xv. Luke.
xxiii. John. xvi. Math. xxviii. John. xx
up the spirit, which was the euenyng of the night before the Jews Ester, he
was buried, and that was the first day of the morrow, which was the day of
the feast, he was all the day in the sepulcher. Then upon the day foloweynge
in the break of the day very tymelye he did arise, and that was the third
day, as it does appear by the Evangelists.


Na. Wherefore is this article put to?


Phy. Because that all the other could little serve us without this.


Natha. How so?


Phy. Because that if Jesus Christ had not risen, it should have been an
evident testimony, that death had vaynquished him, and that hell should have
swalowed him, as it bid the children of Adam. Then if he had been vainquished,
and had not overcome, vaynquished i. Cor. xv.
and gotten the victory, he had not satisfied for us, but we should have
bidden still in our sins and in death.


Natha. The resurrection of Jesus Christ is then a certain testimony of his
virtue, and a sure trust and hope that we shall arise again with him.


Phyli. That is the cause wherefore we believe his resurrection, and wherefore he
would testify Math. xxviii. Marc. xvi. Luke. xxiii. John. xix.
oy so many signs and apparitions, being after his resurrection. xl. days
conuersa^nte with his disciples showing him self unto the^ in drinkinge,
eatinge, speakinge, and sufferyng to touch his body, and his wounds the more
plainly, and assuredly to prove unto the^ the resurrection of his body.


Natha. We have then enough of our resurrection in his, but wherefore do we
say yet more. He is gone up into heaven, when is he gone up, and in what
form and manner? (...) asce^tio^. (...) Math. xxviii.



Phylype. Fortye days after his resurrection, when he had well approved his
sa^^ed resurrection he did bring his disciples unto Marc. xvi.
the mountaygne of Olives, and fro^thense did mount and go up visiblye, before
them which did behold him, going up unto a cloud did come betwexte him and
them, which did cause them to loose the syghte of him. They had also the
testimony of the Angels saying that he was goone up into heaven.


Nathanaell. Into what heaven understand thou that he is goone up? for thou
haste show t^ in the first article, that there be diverse manners Ephe. iiii.
of heavens.


Phylype. The Apostle does say, that he is goone up above all heauenes, for
to fulfill and accomplish all things, wherefore I do understand that he is
gone up into the celestial Timo. vi.
glory, higher then the visible heaven, and higher then all creatures into the
inaccessible light, where is the habitation and seat of God, out of all and
all manner of corruption and mortality.


Nathanaell. In what sense ought we then proprelye to understand this ascension?


Phylype. I understand by the same, that he has taken his corporal presence,
from here John. xvi.
beneth, as he had before said unto his disciples, and that he is goone up
verylye in body above all heauenes into the glory and majesty of God his
father, as it shall be more declared anoue, when we shall say. He is set down
upon the right hand of God the father almighty. The right hand of God



Nath. What vndersta^deste thou by the right hand of God?


Phy. I do not understand that God the father is set in a feate or throne that
is visible and material, as a terrenal king. And Jesus Christ in another by
him, as his son, or as one of his princes.


Natha. How then?


Phy. It is a similitude taken of human things, for to give us to
understand, that as a king or a prince does make sit down by him, and on
his right hand, him whom he will most honor, and unto the which he will give
most power and authority: even so we understand by these words, that Jesus
Christ is set up above all creatures, and that he has power, as well in
heaven as in earth, and does raygne with the father, having Math. xxviii.
equal power and Lordship.


Natha. And what does it serve us to believe, and know al these things, and
in how many ways may we use the^ to our furtheraunce and profitte?


Phyly. In diverse, but to the end I may the better show the by order, because
there be many goodlye points, worthy to be towched, let us here make an end
of this part, and in the other next, we shall not treat of any other
matter, but of this, which thou haste now set forth nor shall not declare any
othere article before I shall have declared unto the what fruits thou may
bear of these things whereof we have spoken at this present and how these
things may be used and applied to our profit.


Natha. That will be a day that I hope shall not be evil employed, and to the
which I have great desire.


Phy. Thou shalt not be deceived of thy hope.


In this dialoge shall be showed the manner how we must have in contemplation,
the history of Jesus Christ, and how many ways we may use it to our
profit.
Phylype. THe great desire that I have seen the have in these days paste,
Nathanael, In the declaration of the articles of our fayeth and religion: has
given me great courage to declare them unto the.


Nathana. There is no double but as the good master does make a good
disciple, so a good disciple causes the master to be better and the more
diligente, for it is unto him as unto a good husband man, which wyllynglye
ploweth the ground, which he knows to be good and fertyle, and will well
answer him his labor, and to the end thy labor may be always more
profitable toward me: begin to show unto me the utility and profitie that
may come unto me of these things I have learned of the.


Phy. We have two points the which we must principally considre, in the
death and resurrection The manner to hauein co^te^placion the historye of Jesus
Christ
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the first is that comes unto us by the
satisfaction, redemption, and salvation that we receive, and the other or the
second, is the exemple we ought to take for to conform our selves unto Jesus
Christ our head, and so to learn patience of him wherein to nourishe our
fayeth hope and love.


Natha. Expound this unto me more larglye, for I understand not well what
thou woldeste say.


Phylype. For to make the thing more easy unto the, I shall set it forth by
examples, by the which I shall show the the practice of that which I
understand herein. First when I do considre that Jesus Christ has
suffered, Math. xxvi Luke. xxii.
how he has prayed unto God his father in the garden, and has swette
blood, how he was taken, bound, mocked, and led Mar. xv. Iuhn. xviii
unto Annas, Cayphas, Herod, and Pilace, how he was Judged, condemned,
nailed, and hanged, upon the cross, how he was scratched, buffeted, whypped,
beaten, owtraged, and blasphemed, how there was given him to drynk vinegar
gal, and myrre, how that he was Psalm. xxii
forsaken of all creatures, and abimed unto the helles, how he did cry my
God, my God why haste thou forsaken me, how he was dead, gave up the
spirit, and shede all his blood, nailed and hanged upon the cross between
thieves and euyle doers.

When I do diligentelye considre al these things, I do learn by the same to
know how Knowledge of the Iugment of God and of sin by the death of Jesus
much the Judgment of God is horrible, fearful and importable, and how
much that displeases him, and in what error and abhourmation we ought to
have it, For when I do see the propre son of God, in such anguishe and
distress, and do see that well-beloved son sweat blood of the only fear
and reprehension, which he had of the death prepared for him, and of the Ire,
furour, and malediction of God, which he should suffer and bear, not for his
own sins, from the which he was pure and clean but for mine, have I not
the^ good occasion, to be troublede, and in fear may I not say well that
which Jesus Christ said unto the poor women that followed him weepynge, when
he was led to be put to execution, and crucified upon the mount of
Caluerie? If this Luke. xxiii.
be done unto the grene tree, what shall be done unto the dry? If the good
tree be after this soorte rejected and cast away, what shall be come of the
euel, if God have not spared his own propre son, being Just, ryghtuouse,
and innocente, because of the sins of other, the which he would bear: how
shall he pardone me, which am covered with mine own propre sins, from the
top of my head, unto the soole of my foot, may I not well esteem what
ought to be the pain and torment of the damned the which God has whollye
forsaken, cursed, and rejected, without leaving unto them any manner of hope
of salvation, when I do call to remembrance Jesus Christ forsaken of God, cast
into such fear and deepnes of all euells, and cursinges but for that little
time that the father and his divinity had wythdrawen their favor aid, and
assistence from him as though he had all together been left and forsaken as
they which be in the eternal Ire of God.


Nathanaell. Thou putteste me in fear and horror to here the speak, for
certaynlye this consideration ought to make us to deteste and have sin in a
merueylouse abomination and more to hate it then the pestilence, or any other
unhappiness that can be in the world seeing it does make men so detestable
before God, castinge them down into such depnes of malediction, and has been
the cause that the propre son of God, has suffered a death so cruel,
terrible and fearful.


Phylype. The remembrance and co^templacion of this ought well to give us
occasion to humble our selves, for it does give us knoweledge of the
greatenes of our sins seeing they be such that none could remedy nor
satisfye for them but the propre son of God, it does ministre also unto us,
occasion to accuse and condemn our selves, and not rigoriouslye to accuse
Judas the which betrayed him, and the Jews which persecuted Who has
betrayed and crucified Jesus. Hebre. vi.
and crucified him, for it is we which have betrayed, cratched, buffeted, and
delivered him unto death, and do daily crucify him by our sins, without
the which he had never suffered, nor they should have had no such power over
him. We have then good occasion to be displeased with our selves and to flee
from sin, and so to keep us ever from crucifiynge of him.


Natha Thou say true, but we think little thereon, and do but smallye
esteem the torments that he has suffered for us and the precious blood
which he shede, and the price wherewyth we be bought.


Phylyp. And yet nevertheless is that the way and manner how we ought to say
and understand our Creed, and yet is there more for as the knowledge of my
sins, and Iudgmente Gene. iiii. Math. xxviii
of God, is inoughe to cast me down into despair, as Cayn and Judas, and to
overthrow and cast me down lower then the helles. Act. i.
Even so of the contrary part, when I am assured by the word of God that
Jesus Christ has endured and suffered all this for me to the end that I
should be delivered and should not be subject unto that same terrible
Judgment of God, I do receive a great consolation, and do feel a
merueylouse Joy and ease in my heart, the which does incite move and steare
me up, more the^ can be believed, to give thanks unto that same our most good
and celestial father, the which has so much loved me, that he has not spared
his own propre son, but has given John. iii. Romans viii.
him for me, and unto that same good Savior likewise, which had so fervent
a love, and charity toward me that he would not refuse the death, nor to
give his life for me, poor misirable sinner, albeit that I was his enemy as
towchynge my part, and unworthy to behold the sun, and go upon the earth.


Na. Without doubt this consideration ought well to inflame us in the love of
that good god, and of the same our savior Jesus Christ.


Phylyp. For this cause has he instituted his The institution of ^he supper.
Math. xxvi. i. Cor. x. xi.
holy ceane or supper, to the end that the remembrance of this great
benifite should often be had and refreshede among us, and thereby the
better imprinted in our hertes, and to make us the better to feel the virtue
and efficatie to grow in fayeth charity, and all good worckes, and so to
hold and keep us in the office of true christians (for by these visible
signs of the which the signification is declared us by his word, and by his
holy spirit, of the which sacraments do take they^ efficatye) the liuelye
Image of his death and passion is cepresented unto us. And therefore The memory
of Christ to be celebrate in the supper.
when this bread dedicated unto the Sacrament represents unto me the body
of Jesus delivered unto death for me, and the w^^^ the blood which has been
shede to wash my sins: I do codsi^re how Jesus Christ has been bound,
led unto Pilate, Judged, condemned, and delivered into the haudes of the
hangemen, crucified, dead, and buried, and after risen from the dead, and
ascended into heaven, and this may ^ not only consider as a cloud, or as a
simple history, or as the lege^de life or death of some martire, or some holy
saint, but I must consider that Jesus being bound for me as a strong Sa^so^,
has broken the bo^des of death, and da^pnatio^, and has unbound me with him
self. When I consider him before the judge, and here the se^te^ce given against
him, I do the^ here mine own absolutio^, and deliueranc for he was led before
ye Judge, I of him condemned and again delivered into the hands of the
executioners, to the end that I should not be condemned at the Judgment of God,
and deli^^red into the hands of he deuylles, and sent into everlasting fire,
but that I might plead for me his ryghtuousnes, and so to win my cause and
find favor before the great eternal Judge and that I may say with the
apostle. Who Romans viii.
shall lay accusation against the elect of god, for God is he that Justifies,
and Jesus christ is our leader, advocate and intercessour, goo we then unto
the throne of grace, and we shall Timo. ii. i. John. ii. Hebr. ii. iiii.
find favor and salvation in time conueniente.


Natha. I do find this manner of remembrance of the death and passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ much better and more consolation in it, then in that
which the monks do teach us in preaching the passion on good friday for
they preach it us after such sort that we Monkish medita^io^ of the passion
of Christ.
learn nothing but to despise and be angry with Judas and the Jews, and do
not considre that it is we our selves, which be the Judas and the Jews,
which by ours sins have so outragiouslye entreated him, against whom we
ought not to be angry.

And further they show unto us Images and crucifixes for to learn us to weep,
as the pore women did weep which followed him when Luke. xxiii.
he was led to be crucified, after such sort as we weep for an evil doer,
or some other good man which were innoce^tly put to death where as we ought
rather to weep over, and for our selves and for our own children and so to
lamente langoure, and sighe for our own fautes, and sins, and so far as I
can conceive or understand by thy words, there is a great difference between
the death of Jesus Christ and that of the martyrs, for that of the martyrs can
not serve us for any satisfaction and redemption for our sins as that
Difference between the suffering of martyrs and Christ.
of Jesus Christ, but only for an example of faith strength and conscience,
but that of Jesus Christ does serve us for boeth.


Phy. It is very well understand of the and thou could have said no
better. I would to God that every one did understand it so well as thou, and
then the Sophisters should not have Joined the death and sufferynge of the
martyrs with that of Jesus Christ, for to make it meritorious unto salvation,
and remission of sins for us as though that of Jesus Christ were not
sufficitiente, and but little dyfference from that of the martires. They would
not also have corrupted the sense of the words of Saint Paul, for to
recompense by the tribulation and sufferynge of saints, Colo. i.
that which seameth unto them to want in that of Jesus Christ, nor would
not have forged the works of superogatio^, and of superaboundaunce, and their
treasure of the church into the which they gather together all the merits of
saints, and make them selves distributers of them by their kepes, and by the
applyinge of their ceremonies, sacrificies, bulls, and pardons, as though
there were other meritte, then that of Jesus Christ, and other manner to appli
it, then by the preaching of his Gospel and administration of his sacraments,
and to receive and communicate the^ by the true lyuelye fayeth the which only
is receyuable of the^. And further if al did understand this matter well, not
only the monks should learn otherwise to preach the passion, but the
priests also should be content to represent them unto us, by the preaching of
his word, and the true usage of his sacraments, The true representatio^ of
the passion.
they would hold them selves unto the ordinance of his holy Ceane, and
would vnloode them selves of so many folish vayn and chyldishe ceremonies
which they have in their mass, by the which they will represente them unto
us, as one should plai a Iuglyng cast, or as it were a play of little
children.

They take a kerchiefe in stead of a crown of throns, they have their maniple,
their stole and a gyrdle of a cord, in stead of the cords, bonds, and
cross, which Jesus Christ did bear, they have their albe and great shurte
in stead of his gown that Herod gave him. And to be short it does seem
perfectelye that they wylbe disguised for to play or dance a bet-morres or to
make little children ferd, were it not much better to be co^te^t with the simple
ordinance of Jesus Christ, and to hold the^ unto that holy ceane that he has
instituted, as Saint Paul has set it forth unto the Corinthians, and as
the Apostles, and the primatyue church did, and to remember and have in
co^te^plation the death and passion of Jesus christ in our hertes, and to
rest our selves in the fruit and consolation, that it brings unto us then
to play such castes, and to disguyse the^ selves in such sort before the
simple people, and to seek to draw them only into the admiration, and
extollynge of outward ceremonies, and so to draw them altogyther from the
true and healthful contemplation of the death and passion of Jesus Christ,
and to depryue them of the fruit, the which they ought to receive by the
same?

For when I do remember Jesus Christ upon the cross: I do see him with the
eyes of my fayeth give up the spirit, I do see him put into the Sepulcher,
risen, and ascended into heaven.

What need have I then of such illusions and painted conueyaunce for to draw
me from this holy and profounde consideration for my fayeth does make Jesus
Christ present unto me, eue^ as though he were payned and crucified eue^
before my own eyes. I does set him forth before me as a strong Samson,
which breaks the gattes of his enemies, and bears them upon his shoulders,
and does kill and distroye more in diyng the^ in living, I do see how Jesus
Christ being crucified does crucify the Devil, being nailed does nail,
sheading his blood i. Cor. xv. Math. xxvii John. xiiii. Roma. v
takes away the bond of death, which he had against us, in dying, kylleth
death, sin and brouseth, and treads down the head of the old serpente, he
opens the Sepulchers, and gives life unto the dead, when he enters into
the Sepulcher, and descends into helles as we have said he enters into the
house of death, and into the strength of the armed man, and of the prince of
this world, and does dispoyle and break down all their force strength and
power.


Nathanael. If his death be so stroung what ought then to be his resurrection
and life.


Phylype. I leave that to thy self to considre and therefore when I do see him
risen, I do Colo. ii. The fruit of the resurrection and ascentio^.
se my flesh risen with his, I do see him as victoriouse, leadynge sin, the
world, death hell, and Satan, in show and triumph, all overcome and cast
down, in such sort that they have no more power upon all the elected which
believe in him, then they have had upon Jesus Christ. When I see him ascended
into heaven, and am certain that he is set upon the right hand of God, and
that he does raygne with the father eternally. This fayeth also does bring
assurance and certifieth me, that when he is goone up, he has borne and
lift up my flesh and my body, and has opened me the way unto the celestial
glory, and that he being our head has taken possession for us.


Natha. Then his resurrection and his assention be unto us certain
testimonies, seals, and confirmation of ours.


Phy. There is nothing more certain, and we ought no less to be assured,
that we shall arise and raygne with him, then that we be of him, for in as much
as he has taken our flesh even as it in him has suffered, and has borne
the Iudgmente and maledicion of god and is dead, even so it is risen in him
and exalted into the glory of God, above all the heauenes, and therefore he is
called the first fruit of the^ that sleep and first borne of the dead not
because he is first rise^ among me^, for other were risen before him, that is
to say they which were raised as well by him as by the prophets, but because
that this is the first, and he only which is risen by his own divine virtue
and power, and is the beginning, original and fountain of the resurrection
and life of all the other, which dye, and rise in him, and by him, and the
better to confyrme and seal this hope in our hertes, he has given us a gage
and has taken of us, to the end he would not leave us in doubt, he has
taken Jesus has taken pledge of us, and has left us of his. Ephe. i. Roma.
viii, John. i. i. Petre. i
our flesh the which he has borne into heaven, by the which we be already
put into possession, and be set in the celestial places with him, and of the
other part he has given us his holy spirit to confyrme and seal the
promises in our hertes which does testify unto our spirit that we be the
children of God. Saying the^ that we be the children of God, and have his
divine seed in us, we ought not to doubt but that Jesus Christ has made
us partakers of his divine nature even as he would communicate unto ours, and
would be made manne, for to make us Gods that is to say Godly, holy, and
spiritual. Then even as the wheat which is sown in the earth dies in the
same, and does sprout John. xii. Cor. xv.
spring and take root, and after comes out grows and brings forth good
fruit: even so likewise shall we be assured that when we dye, and be put
into the earth, we be sown and shall take again and arise immortal, and
incorruptible, in as much as we bear with us the sproute or spring of the
spirit of God which can not dye, though the flesh be corrupt, but shall
deliver this body from corruption which shall be raised up by the virtue of
him, which has raised up Jesus Christ, from the dead and shall vinifie, and
raise up our mortal members.


Nathan. Here is a goodlye exercise of fayeth and a goodlye practice of
christian doctrine of the which we ought not only to be learners, and
doctors in contemplation, but also good practicians for to bring it in daily
ure.


Phy. There is yet an other point which is no less worthy to be noted, that
is, when we believe that Jesus rayneth in heaven, set upon the right hand of
God, that does assure Consolation against al te^tations.
and give us a merueylouse consolation against all tentations and dangers, for
it is no small thing, to have in the celestial court, and before the face of
that great eternal God, such a friend as Jesus Christ, which is very God,
and very man, which also has power in heaven, and is inheritour of the
kingdom of God, for we can not doubt, in as much as he always appears
before the face of God but he is intercessoure for us, and is our mediatoure,
and advocate, leader, conductoure, and gubernatoure, wherefore we have none
occasion to be aferde of any thing in heaven or in earth, if we firmly and
assuredlye trust in him.

For in as much as he is very God, we can in no wise doubt but that he has
al power as much as he is one substance and power with ye father, we ought not
to doubt but that all that the father has is his, and for as much as he has
been obedient even unto the death of the cross, and that he is his well-beloved
son, we have no cause to fear that ye father should deny any thing that he
asks of him, nor Phil. ii. Math. xxvii. John xiiii. Ephe. v. Hebr. ii. Colo.
i. ii. Ephe. i.
that we shall ask, and demand of him in his name, of the othere part in
as much as Jesus Christ is very man, our spouse, and our brother of our
flesh, of our blood and of our bones, and that he is our head and we his
members, we ought not to doubt but that he loves us, and has pity and
compassion of us, and will not renye his flesh and his blood, sufferinge to
perish, his espouse and his members, for this cause has he put upon him our
flesh and has taken al our infirmities, and has been tempted in all things
without sin, to the end we should be certain, that we have a bishope that
is not Esai. xiii. Hebr. i. iiii. v
ignoraunte of our infirmities, not without having any compassion of them,
nor that he fealethe them less then we, nor that there comes any thing
unto his members, but it towcheth him, which is the head as it does appear
well by the words which he spoke unto Saul, persecutynge him in his members,
and that as head he is ready to deliver us from al euylles, as he has been
delivered.


Natha. If we believe then firmelye, this article, it seameth unto me, we have
no need to run unto the holy saints which are departed from this world,
nor to pray unto them to be our advocates, intercessours, and Invocation of
saints
leaders unto God.


Phy. It is very certain that such invocation of saints does proceed but
of error and infidelity, and for lack of the knoweledge of Jesus Christ,
and we can not deny but they that seek any other advocate the^ Jesus christ
be very far from the fayeth, which we confess in these two articles, of
the ascension of Jesus Christ, and of his celestial raygne, and that yet more
is, they do declare manifestlye that they do not understand the mystery of the
incarnation of the son of god, for wherefore was it necessary that the son
of God should be made man, but for to conioyne and knytte manne to God. Then if
we will well Deuteronomy. iiii.
conioyne two things together that differ and be of diverse natures it is
requisite to have a third that should approach, and hold of boeth natures,
for to conioyne and, unite them, or other wise there can be no very perfect
and true communion, and pryncipallye if the natures be contrary and
repungnauntes one to an other, then what agreement could there be between God
and man. The fire co^sumynge the thrones, the light the darkness, Justice and
Hebr. ii. ii. Cor* xv.
injustice, blessing and cursynge, life and death heaven, and hell, there is
no more between god and man, if we consider man in his nature, it was the^ much
more the^ necessary that we should have a mediator for to make this agreme^te
and conjunction which should be partaker of boeth ye natures and yet without
sin, and that he should be very God and very man, for to co^ioyne man unto
God, and then is there none such but Jesus Christ, wherefore it does
necessarily and infalbly follow that none other might be our mediatoure,
aduocace, and patron, but Jesus Christ only, as the holy Apostle
testifies, for when he said, there is one God and one mediatoure of God, and
of men, the 1. Timo. ii
man Jesus Christ, and the same has been the price of our ransom, these
words be Deuteronomy. vi
as much as though he should have said, as there is but one God, the which
nevertheless is sufficient to all creatures, as one sun to shine over all
the world: even so is there but one mediatoure which is Jesus Christ, which
only has paid our ransom being only suffitiente, deputed, and appointed
properly unto that office. S. John does say no less, when he does write. My
children, i. John. ii,
I do not sai this unto the end ye should sin, but if we have sinned we have
an advocate toward the father, eue^ Jesus Christ being just which is the
propitio^ not only for our sins, but also for all that be in the world and
therefore did. S, John Baptist, call him the John. i.
Lamb of god, that takes away the sins of the world, and. S. Paul calls
him our peace Ephe. ii. Colo. i.
which pacifieth all things as well in heaven as in earth, by the blood of his
cross, saint John does not say, when ye have sinned, come unto me the
well-beloved disciple, which have slepte in the bosom of Jesus christ, and in
his lap, and I shall be your advocate to the virgin Marie his mother, the which
by him was reco^mended unto me, and has loved and taken me as her child, he
does not say also turn and adresse John. xvi.
your selves unto the virgin Marie, or unto the Apostles mi fellows, or to the
prophets and patriarchs that be dead, but does put him self in the company
and role of sinners, saieinge if we have sinned, we have an advocate toward
the father, by the which words he does give us manifestli to know, that he
does confess him self to be a sinner by nature and has need as well as other,
of our savior Jesus christ, to be his aduocat toward the father celestial
without who^ he should have been lost and dampened, he had not forgotten that
which he heard of his master, and that which him self put in writing, the
which ha^h not said, what soever ye ask of my father in the name of mi mother,
or of the prophets, or diciples shall be given unto you: but has said, that
which ye shall ask and demand of my father in my Math. xi. Hebr. v.
name. For as he does say in an other place, None can come unto the father
but by me and the Apostle does testify, not only, that he has prayed for
us with great cries, tears, Roma, viii,
and wepynges, and was herd, but does also testify that he is now upon the
right hand of God, where he incessauntly makes intercession for us.


Natha. It is not possible that I can resist or again say, that which thou
haste said, except I would go, and withstand the clear word of God, but
they which do mayntain the invocation of saints, do confess that they take
Jesus Christ, for their mean and advocate, but yet they will nevertheless have
the saints with him.


Phylype. That is even as much to say, as they hold him not for sufficient
alone, and do attribute unto him no more then unto every of the other saints,
and so will win or get their cause before God, by the multitude and force of
advocates, for other Jesus Christ is sufficient, or he is not, and if he be
sufficient, he has no neade of fellows, and if he be not suffitiente, he is
not Jesus Christ nor is not set at the right hand of God his father.


Natha. They will replye wellynough unto all that, for they will confess the, of
Jesus Christ all that thou will, with their mouths, but they say that
notwythstandynge that Jesus Christ is our advocate toward the father yet
nevertheless, as we have neade of him for to be our advocate toward the
father: even so it is necessari for us to have other advocates Intercessours to
Christ. John. xvi.
toward him, for inasmuch as he is god, and we be sinners, and god does not
exalt, and hear sinners, we have neade of the saints, which be more perfect
then we, to be our intercessours toward him.


Phy. We must have then a great train of intercessours, and advocates, and
in the end we must have intercessours, toward the saints, because we shall
not be worthy inoughe for to address our prayers unto them.


Natha. We have them already, for the priests, monks, friars, and nunes,
makes us believe Intercessours to saints.
that they be our advocates, and intercessours toward the saints, and
toward God, and therefore bring we them money, from all parts and offer
unto them every day gifts and presents, as the clientes do to their
counceylers of the law.


Phy. Thou maiste se now well, that the couetuousnes of priests is the mother
and nursse Intercession of lyuinge.
of this Idolatry, and superstition, I deny not but we have commandment to
pray the one for the other, while we be in this present life, but we ought
not for all that to Timo. ii James. i.
make marcha^dise of our prayers, nor to think they have any efficatie, but by
the intercession of Jesus Christ, nor that we must address them unto any
other then him only, for to present them unto the father, for we have neither
commaundeme^te nor exemple in the scripture, to adresse our prayers unto the
saints departed, for we may pray unto diverse the which we know not whether
they be saints or no, nor whether they be in heaven or hell, but we be very
certain that Jesus Christ is in heaven, and if we were assured they were in
heaven yet we can not tell whether they know what we do here, nor whether they
hear us or not, nor whether they may healpe us or no, the scriptures witness
rather the co^trari but of Jesus Christ we doubt not. And yet further.
Wherefore should we not without fear go unto Jesus Christ rather then unto
any other? Is there any that has more power wisdom, and goodness, or that is
more merciful? Should our sins withdraw us from going unto him.


Natha. That is the cause they do aledge?


Phy. But that cause is against the^ Christ calls the s^nners
selves, for if I were no sinner, I should have no need of Jesus Christ, if
I were whole I had no need of the phisitia^, but because I am Math. vi.
a sinner and sick, have I need to go unto him, which has said. Come unto
me al ye that labor and are laden, and I shall ease you, and does testify
him self that he is not come for the just but for the sinners, nor for the
whole but for the sick. They then which withdraw us Math. v.
from him, be like unto the scribes and phariseis, which were offended and did
murmr against him because he was conuersaunte with sinners, and publicanes,
and they which make difficulty, to go to him, have such a foleishe shame, as
they which have some secret sikenes, and had rather ieobarde life, then open
and show their discease unto John. xiii.
the physician, or as Saint Petre had, which would not have suffered Jesus
Christ to have washed his feet, without the which washing, he might not
have been any partaker of his kingdom. Or else it is with the^ Luke. v.
as it was with the same Peter, after he had fished all the night and gate
nothing til he had raste his nets into the sea by the commandment of Jesus
Christ, and drue up so much fish that the ship was full and sanke, in such
sort that they were constrained to call for healpe of their fellows, and
haueynge great marvel, he said unto Jesus, gooe from me, for I a^ a sinful
manne, he would that Jesus christ should go from him, because he did know
the virtue, and holiness to be his, and did know the sins and imperfections
to be his own, and did repute and think him self unworthy to be in his
co^pani, where as he ought rather to have sought him to the end that by him he
might have been fanctified and made worthy.


Nathana. I am much aferde it will be with such men, as it was with Saint
Petre, which gatte nothing with all night fysshynge till he had cast in his
net by the commandment Fishinge by night
of Jesus Christ, and so I believe that we fyshe by night in all that we do and
go about, in darkness and ignorance without the word of God and his
commandment and without directing our selves unto Jesus Christ, and he
being out of our company, but I believe also, that when we have him with us
and govern our selves by his commandment that we shall never fail to take
plentye and have good fisshing.


Phy. If we do otherwise it shall come unto Math. vi. Mar. xv. Luke. viii.
us as it did unto the woman being syke of the bloudye flyxe, we shall spend
all our goods upon such phisike, surgery, and medicines, and our sykenes
shall always appayre and be worsse unto such time as we come unto Jesus
Christ, the which may only heap us.


Nathanaell. I now well understand all this, and do know that they which
seek any other advocate then Jesus Christ, do not perfectlye believe that he is
dead for the^, ryse^ and ascended into heaven, for if they believed it
perfectely, they should know the great love he has borne them, and the good
will he has toward them, and the power that he has in heaven and in earth,
and would stick, clean and content them selves better with him, the^ they
do. But in as much as thou haste expounded unto me the first manner and way,
how I ought to have in remembrance, and contemplation the death, resurrection
and ascension of Jesus Christ, for to know the fruit that comes unto me,
and the efficatie of the same, declare unto me now, the other manner and how
it serves us for an example.


Phy. We shall come to it but first I will admonish the of one point,
towechyng the ascension of Jesus Christ that is, that this article Colo. i.
ii. Ephe. ii.
does serve to show us that Jesus christ is the only head of his
triumpha^te church and that there is neither Pope nor living manne upon the
earth, nor any creature what soever he be unto whom that office may
appertain, for the head can not be without his members, and his office is to
vinifie, lead, govern, healpe, and assiste unto all the body and all the
me^bres. Then in as much as the church is universal, and sparkled through all the and world, there is no creature, nor living man, that can be the head,
seeing there is not that can be in all places where she is, nor that can give
her aid and assistence, such as to her is requisite, but the only Jesus
Christ the which by his divine power, and by his holy spirit, fulfilleth
the heaven and the earth and is present unto all his elected, the which he
does lead conducte, govern, and vinifie which non other can or may do,
wherefore what so ever he be that will make him self head of this church,
whereof he ought to be but a membre, he is neither head nor member, but does
make him self a member of Antichriste, and has chosen Satan for his head in
as much as he sets him self in the place of Jesus Christ, setting up him
self above him not knowledgynge him for his head unto whom boeth Angels and
men ought to be subjects, for. S. Paul showing the fruits of the
resurrection and ascension of Jesus Ephe. i. iiii Colo. i. ii.
Christ, writes how that God has exalted and set him up above all heavens,
and above all the thrones, powers, Lordeshyppes, and dominions, and has given
him to be head of his church.


Natha. I understand well what thou wouldeste say, I shall hold me then unto
him, and will never acknoweledge other head, of that triumphant church but
shall hold for his ministers the true ministers and pastors of his church
and the other which will attribute unto them selves that dignity, for very
Antichrists. But let us come now unto that thou haste promised me, and
declare unto me what example we may take of all the history of our lord
Jesus Christ.


Phy. That were very long to be recounted and told, for there is nothing so
little which co^teineth not great sacraments and mystery, but I will only
set forth the thing unto the in two words by the which thou may judge of
all the rest. The history of our lord Jesus Christ serves us for an example
in two manners, and first how we ought to confirm How the history of Jesus
christ serves for exemple.
our selves unto him, as concerning our regeneration and spiritual life,
which is hidden in him, the other how we ought to confirm our selves unto
him in our outward living and co^uersatio^.


Natha. The more thou wouldeste make the things short, the more they seem
dark unto me, wherefore I pray the think not much nor spare me, another time
nor words, but expound me the things so largly, that I may have clear
understanding of them, and tell me the first point, what vnderstandeste thou
by the spiritual life, of the which the history of Jesus Christ serves us
for an example.


Phylype. I understand that all the life of Jesus Christ ought first to
serve us as an allegorye, by the which we ought spirituallye, to yield our
selves to be conformable unto Jesus Christ, in that which verelye, and
riallye has been accomplished in his body, the which can not be in ours.


Natha. Thou speak not much clearlier the^ thou dydeste, therefore declare
unto me that which thou wouldeste say by exemple.


Phy. I am content. Jesus Christ has been conceived by the holy Ghost borne
of the virgyn Marye, he has been crucified, dead, buried, is risen again, and
gone up into heaven all which things can not be accomplished in our bodies
as they have been in his. But let us take pain, that our spirit may in
the same be conformable unto him, our bodies be conceived and borne in sin,
and iniquity, and not of the holy Ghost in the womb of a vyrgin, but of
corruptible seed, and then for to be conformable unto him in this, let us
now come unto his church believe in his Gospel, and in the same which is our
mother, and a virgin pure and chaste, we shall be conceived and begotten by the
incorruptible seed of the word of God, our father, and by Spiritual co^ceptio^
and birth, Gala. iiii. i. Petre. ii. John. xxxi. Ephe. iiii.
the virtue of his holy spirit, and shall be borne again children of God, and
shall be new creatures, and put of the old manne and put on the new,
bearing the Image of the new Adam which is Jesus Christ, as we have borne
that of the old and of the sinful man.


Natha. Behold, for this is a holy conception and happy birth.


Phy. Then in as much as we be all ready so conceived of the holy Ghost, and
borne of that pure virgin the church, which is the spouse of Jesus, it must
follow also that the Ephesians. v.
rest of our life be conformable unto that of Jesus Christ according to our
spiritual conception, nativity and birth.

We be not crucified nor put unto death as he was but learn we of him to bear
our cross To be crucified with christ.
with him to be crucified unto ye world, and the world unto us, as saint
Paul does write of him self.


Nathana, And how can we be crucified unto the world and the world unto us?


Phylyp. When we dye unto the world: likewise dies the world unto us.


Na. These manner of speakynges To die to the world.
be very dark.


Phy. They be dark unto them which be not acquaynted, or accustomed with the
manner of speaking of the Apostles. But I do use ^ wyllynglye boeth to accustom
the, and because I do take pleasure in the style of the spirit of God, and of
his Apostles. To be crucified and dead unto the world, that is to be crucified
and dead unto sin, and that is to forsake Romans vi.
sin, and to have no more acquayntaunce with him, and to do him no more
service, the^ the dead do unto the living, for as the dead have nothing in
commune with the living but be separated the one from the other, and have no
more acquayntaunce together, even so be they dead unto the world, which have
forsaken it to serve God, and will no more be conformable unto it, that is to
say unto the flesh, nor unto his concupiscences, and so is it impossible, but
they which be thus dead, unto the world live unto God, and the world To live
unto the world.
likewise dead unto them, and by the contrary they which live unto the
world, and unto whom the world lives, be dead unto God as the Apostle does
write, of the voluptuous wydowe saying, the wydowe which i Timo. ii.
does live in lusts and pleasures, in so living is dead, and because that she
lives unto the world, she is dead unto God, so then when we dye unto the
world we rise unto God, and do practice in our selves the exemple of the
death and passion of Jesus Christ spiritually when we mortify our earthlye
me^bres and offer our bodies as living sacrifices unto god Roma. xii. Colo. iii.
and do kill by the swerd of the word, and do burn up by the fire of his
spirit our concupiscence and carnal affections and lusts which be the
brute beasts, that we sacrifice unto him. We dye the^ with Jesus Christ when
we mortify and crucify our old Adam, we rise again also, and go up into
heaven with him, when we put on Jesus Christ, and serve unto ryghtuousnes,
forsakynge this world and all that is Phi. iii. Ephesians. i. ii.
in it or of it having our hertes and conversation in heaven seeking Jesus
Christ which is upon the right hand of God his father.


Natha. Trueli that is a commodious setting forth of the history of Jesus
Christ unto us.


Phylype. So does the Apostles teach us and specially Saint Paul sets
forth unto us the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ as an Image mirror and
glass of the christi an and spiritual life, and does expound unto us, how
the baptism does conteyne the The significacion of baptism Romans vi. Gala.
ii. Coll. ii. John. iii. vii.
Sacrament and signification of these things, for the water which is poured
upon our head is first unto us an assured and a certain testimony sign and
seat of the remission of our sins by the holy Ghost, which is the water of
life, that does wash and make clean our consciences from sin, as the
visible water does wash the filthe from the body.

And further it is also a Sacrament of penance which does teach us that as
the water is cast upon us, so must we drown our old man with Pharao, and
the Egyptians in the red sea, and must be buried with Jesus Christ, but by
that, that this water abides not always upon our heads, nor does not drown
us, is signified unto us that the penance and mortification which God does
require of us, is not unto death but unto life Exo. xiii. Luke. xxiiii.
making us by the death, to enter into life, as the childrene of Israel
passing through the myddeste of the deep of the red Sea, wear brought
unto liberty, and as Jesus Christ by the death of the cross is entered into
the glory of God his father, and so in baptism is not only presented unto
us the grace and mercy of God, and be not only by the same received into his
alliance, and into his church, but we have also the sacrament of the death,
burial, and resurrection of Jesus Christ, and of ours with him, and the
Sacrament of repentance, and of remission of sins, and the sum of all the
Evangelical doctrine, and the Image or patron of all the christian life.


Nathan. I now understand this part, but there rests yet to know the
other manner to take example of the historye of Jesus Christ for the rulynge of
our outward life and conversation.


Phyli. I shall declare it the by exemples in somuche as thou desireste to have
the things plainly expounded. First in the life of Jesus Christ, there be
diverse worckes which Example of Christ for the outward life. Math. iiii. Marc.
i.
be propre to him self, the which noone can do but him self, as his fasting
forty days and his miracles works, which he did. Then must not we undertake
to do such things, except we will as mockers make a mock of him, and after
the manner of apes counterfayte his worckes as things to laughe at, as many
priests, and religious, and hipocrites do in diverse things, not regarding
those things in the which Christ would us to follow him, for there be other
things done and set forth by Christ for us to follow, as his innocentie,
ryghtuousnes, holiness, zeal Worckes of Christ for us to follow.
and feruentnes, which he had for to advance the glory of God his father,
and in setting forth his truth and his Gospel. His sobernes softnes,
benignity, patience, constancy, temperaunce, the pains, travels, and labors
which he took as a true pastor for his church, for the salvation, and
consolation of men, and for the solace and conforte of their bodies and
souls, nor never failed person, when it was expedient, and conueniente for
his office, or for any other that had need, and had to do with him: all
pastors, and ministers of the church, and all true christians have in him a
goodly mirror or glass, and a very plain rule for to learn us how to lead
conducte, and use our selves in this humayn life, and therefore we ought to
traueile and draw as near unto him as to us shall be possible by holy life and
co^uersatio^, to the end that the light of his image may be seen to shine
Ephesians. v. Colo. iii. Phil. ii. Tessalo. i. ii.
in us in such sort, that we may be the light of the world, and that we may
show light eue^ in the midst of the darkness of the same as goodly lights
following, principally his inestimable humility, patience, and charity, to the
end that we may say as the Apostle did. Be ye folowers of me, as I am of
Jesus Christ, and in doing after this sort it shall ^ Cor. x.
well suffice us to have Jesus for our patron and leader, and if we will have
the Saints for our patrones, we ought not to take them for such otherwise,
but as that holy Apostle does teach us, and not in electyng them for our
mediators and advocates, for there is no such patron but Jesus Christ, but
in following their holy life and co^uersatio^ as they have followed that of Jesus
Christ whom they have taken for their true patron, for patron is to be
understand the thing, upon the which we do take example, and then can we find
none more apt, meet or conueniente then Jesus Christ.


Nathana. I do understand well this matter.


Phy. I will yet show the how this passion does serve me for a remedy and a
medicine The suffering of Christ a remedy against all evil
against all the temptations, combrau^ce sykenes, adversities, and perelles
that may come unto me into this world, for if any man have done me a
displeasure or iniuri whether it be with right or wrong, I have in
consolation, if I do suffer with good right, and i. Petre. iii. Luke. xxiii.
that I have deserved it, I do considre Jesus Christ which has suffered
innoce^tly and do think in my self, if Jesus Christ which has suffered
innocently, has borne patientlye all the injuries and outragies done unto him,
and has prayed for his enemies, the which had persecuted and pursued him even
unto the death of the cross, have I not then a good occasion patiently to
suffer the evil, which I do suffer for my sins, and to condemn my self and
to pray for them, which persecute me and be sent to me of God for my
chasticement, and not to curse and ask vengeance upon them, and if I do
suffer wrongefullye without having deserved toward men, I do rejoice and
take consolation in my tribulations and give thanks unto God the which has
made me not only a fellow partaker of Math. v. i. Petre. iiii.
his prophets and Apostles, but also of him self, also in that, that he will
as a membre of his body, I do follow my head being assured that as I suffer
with him, shall I also Romans viii.
be glorified with him, I do give him thanks of the great grace that he has
given me that is to say, by his goodness he has kept me from fallinge into
any crime for the which men might have any just occasion to hate or persecute
me, but has so led me by his holy spirit, that the euyle ca^ find in me
another color, nor reasone to afflicte me except only because I desire and
offer my self to be an honest man, and to follow truth and ryghtuousnes the
which thing comes not of my self, but of God, the which has so kept me
without the aid of whom I should be the most miserable and greatest sinner
of the world.


Natha. Certaynely the consideration of this is no small consolation.


Phy. There is yet other things to follow for I con^idre that how innocent or
irreprehensible so ever I be, or can be before men, yet nevertheless I can not
be before God, but a great offender and culpable of eternal damnation, if he
would enter into iudgmente with Psalm. Cxlii.
me, and punish me in his rigor, wherefore I do think that though I have
not deserved the evil that I do suffer by such occasion for which men do
persecute me, I am not yet for all that so innocente before God, but I have
deserved that and much more before God, and therefore I do receive that as at
the hand of God, as David did suffer the outragies ii. Reg. xvi.
of Seme^, and have pity and compassion of mine own enemies, considering
that they are my brethren, not knowing what they do, and do more anoyaunce and
hurt to them selves then to me, and therefore am I moved to pray unto God for
them, that he will pardone them their faults, for they can not hurt me, but
in my body, but they hurt and sle^ their own souls, and if I se my carnal
brother in the hand of the hangeman leading him to the gollowes, how evil or
untrue ^o ever he were, or what displeasure he might or should have done me,
yet shall I have pity and compassion of him, and should bye him from the
gallows it I might, and deliver him from the hands of the hangman, have I not
then much greater occasion to have pity and compassion of my pore blind and
ignorante brethern, the which I do see by their infidelity and sins to be
in the hands of the Devil, which is the great hangeman of hell, for to lead
them unto eternal dampnation, ought we not well here to follow the example of
Jesus Christ which is come to save and not Luke. ix.
to lose, and to ask of God pardon for them, and further when I do considre
that which I do suffer and do compare it with the afflictions and torments of
Jesus Christ, and that I do know the difference between my tribulations and
his, I shall be ashamed greatly of mine impatience, or to missaye them which
do me injury, when I do remember the prayer that Jesus Christ made upon the
cross for his enemies, but shall rather be moved to pray to Act. vii.
God for the^ as. S. Stephan did. And further when I do considre the innocence
of Jesus Christ, and the multitude of sins, which be in my self, and in
what number God does pardon them every day, I shall have good occasion to
pardon my brethern of a small offense or iniurye done unto me, seeing that my
celestial father does pardon me mine offenses being so great and many in
number and without having deserved any such forgyuenes.


Natha. We show our selves very unthankful and ingrate, if that when other
have forgyue^ unto us a myllion of crowns, we will nor can find in our
hertes to forgive our detters one halfpenye, and surely I do find these
considerations, which thou haste resited very fruitful and do perceive and
know every day more in hearing of the speak the great consolation, and
Godly doctrine and fruit, that we may receive and bear of this creed, if we
considre and examine it near lie as thou doeste at all times that thou resueste
it.


Phy. Likewise must I do in all the tribulations and sykenes that may come unto
Remedies a^^ynste al (...).
to me, for if I have pain in my head, I shall call to remembrance the
crown of thrones which did perce the brains of Jesus Christ and the tree of
the cross which he had for his boulster, where as I have my head wrapped and
bound in soft and sweet kerchiues, and my head laid upon a suf^e pelowe. Or
it I do feel my body werye, and over for traueled, and all mine other members
so weak that with great pame I may turn me from one side to an other: yet
shall I perceive mi self much better entreated the^ Jesus Christ my savior
remembryng him spread upon the tree, hanging upon the cross, having his hands
and fete nailed, and might not stir nor remove any membre, yea, and that
after that he had been all the night, and almost all the day scrached, beaten,
whypped, and his body all to broken and almost shed all his blond where as I
am laid in a good soft bed, and tenderlye entreated, and have servants
and healpe to take me up, and lay me down and to conforte and to give me all
things that I ask, or that ca^ be devised to be good for me.


Natha. Alas that we can not think of this, for if we could we should be much
more pacient in all our sikenes and adversities the^ we be.


Phylipe. Yea, and we should not be so much nor so sone moved when we hear
any evil or outragragious words spoken against us for that our good savior
has suffered much greater, yea and even in the same hour that he was most
oppressed with torments, for he was left and forsaken of al creatures, without
having any manner of aid, confort or co^solatio^, no not so much as an evil doer
that is lead to execution, for he herd none other thing, but injuries,
outragies and blasphemies against him self, the which did no less per^e his
heart then the thorns and nails did pear^e his head Esai, liii
his hades and his fete, and yet for all that came there never out of his mouth
one euile word but was always meek as a lamb that is in the hands of the
sherer or bocher, wherefore if I do see my self forsaken of all men and of
all my special friends, yet shall I recomfort my self in Jesus Christ seeing
that I am not yet in such extremity as he was, knowing also that I am not
forsaken of god, but that he is always with me, as he was with his son Jesus
Christ, notwythstandynge it did seem that he was altogyther, and utterly
forsaken of him the which he would in deed feel in him self, to the end that
we should not feel it in our selves, but should receive consolation by him.


Natha. Certaynely the consolation is great principally for the poor people,
which sumtyme be extremly oppressed in all manners, as well with sykenes as with
extreme poverty without having any aid or healpe of any person, there is
none so sore sike, but it is great pity, how well so ever they be kept and
treated. But let us the^ behold and think what it is or may be in them that
have extreme poverty toyned with their sickness, and have nothing to healpe
them selves with nor no body for to keep them as it is most often seen
principallye in the time of the plage, in the which the most richeste them
selves have many times much ado to find any that will serve and keep them,
happy be they then that in such anguishes and distres have remembrance of
Jesus Christ, and have the consideration that thou speakeste of.


Phy. Also likewise when I am in any manner of burning and extreme heat, that
does so alter me that it does seem unto me as fire were in my body,
impossible to stacke my thyrste, and that my mouth is so brought out of taste,
that I can away with no manner of meats nor drynkes what so ever they be.

Then I do think of two things, the first is, I considre the pains of the
poor, unhappy and dampened, and perceive in my self, that if a little piece of
an humor, and a little excessive, and extra ordinary heat has engeudred in
me such pain and grief that I have almooste lost all patience, alas may I
then think, how should I endure or suffer that which Jesus Christ has
suffered for me, or how should I do if I should be cast into that ardent
eternal fire, and bear all the ire, iudgmente, and malediction of God, which
the vnfayethfull reprobate do bear, as Jesus Christ has borne for me, I
find my self then much bound to gyne him thanks seeing he has delivered me
from such torments and ought to esteem this worldly pains very light, and
as things to learn me the fear of God, to flee from sin and to put my
whole trust in Jesus Christ, for the auoidynge of that horible and fearful
iudgmente of God, of the which the sicknesses and al other adversities be but
as small aduertismentes, the better to learn us to know his grace and the
better to withdraw us from this world. And of ye other part when I do consider
and think upon the thirste and alteration that Jesus Christ might have after
his great torments which he suffered a^l the night, and all the day after he
had almost shed all his blood, and was hangded upon the cross all most three
hours and yet could not have so much as one drop of water to quench his
thyrste with al, but had given him in the stead of good drink bitter gall,
vunger and myrre, I may then think in my self to have great cause of
complaint, seeing that I may have the good maluesey and all other things that
I can ask, for the comfortynge of my heart, and my savior Jesus Christ
might not have so much as one soap of water to quench his thyrste, when I
have well considered all this, and have a little mingled, and steped with my
meats, poreges, and suppynges of this vinegar gal and myrre, which Jesus
Christ did taste and feel, I do find it more sweet then huny. And yet is there
one thing that I do learn by the same to keep miself from doing wrong or
imurie Ephe. v.
to any creature, nor to hate my christian brother, knowing that when I so do,
I do give unto Jesus Christ to drink viniger gall and myrre, and am a branch
of that unhappy iudicall vine, which in the stead of good grapes, hrynge
forth thorns and sloes, which be so exceeding bitter, for to make drink for
his savior, which has made planted and dreste it.


Natha. This is not evil taken for so far as I cause the death and passion of
Jesus Christ is a consolation, medicine, and remedy against all sikenesses and
deseases both of body and soul.


Phy. But yet where it does most chieflye serve me, is when I do feel the
temtation and assautes of death. I do the^ call unto remembrance Remedy against
the assaults of
how Jesus Christ is dead for me, how that he is rise^, and has triumphed
over death. This remembrance and consideration does mitigate the fear of
death which al me^ have naturally, and does assure and confirm me against all the assaults of death, of sin, and of Satan and of hell, knowinge that he
which believes John. v. vi.
in Jesus dies not, nor enters not into iudgmente, but is already passed from
death unto life, for this same corporal death, is not death but only a passage
from misery into pleasure and felicity, and away by the which we enter into
eternal glory, wherefore I rejoice in my heart, and do say with the holy
Apostle, death Ose. v. i. Cor. xv
where is thy sting, hell where is thivictorie?


Na. This is a verifearful assault wherefore it is very necessari and nedeful a
man to show him self at that hour to be a true champion, and a christian
knight.


Phylype. It is the same hour by the which it shall be plainly known whether
we have been hypocrites or true christians and whether we believe with our
hertes that whythe we confesle with our mouths, for there be such which have
so great fear of death, and have had so little experience of the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, that when they be syke, if a man advise them to
look on their consciences, and dispose their houses, and make their wylles they
before grieved, and sometime angry with them that move them, and be
merueylouslye grieved, where as they ought to return unto God, with all their
hertes and follow the exemple of the good patriarchs which did not leave their
business undone, and their goods undisposed til they felt death Genesis xl.
ready to stop their throtes, but did it while they had time, and their
wits and understanding perfect. Of the which also Jesus Christ has given
us an exemple, and has showed us in the same what care we ought to have for
them the which be given us in charge when that he did reco^mend his mother,
unto. S. John, but they which be so fearde of death do she we that the death
and resurrection of Jesus Christ is not well printed in their hertes, for that
is the Souerayngne remedy and the true armore to strenthe^ us in this battle,
and there is no other true consolation, they that be syke or in other adversity
have many times conforters, but many be such as came unto Iobe, more like to
bring him to desolation and despair then to consolation. Some set before
them their good works, or as a man might better say, their supersticitions
and hypocrisies, and do learn the^ to put their trust, and other which shall in
the same be done by them after their death, do promise them heaven. But what
manner of proceading is this for when the conscience does feel it self laden
with the burden of his sins, and the eyes open and sees him self
personally before the judgment of God, which can receive nothing but that
which is just and perfect, what consolation may the conscience receive of
his worckes, the which at that time she shall know to be al imperfect and be
nothing but sin, and unworthy to be presented before the majesty of God?
what terror and fear ought she to have, when she sees that horrible mouth
of hell wide open ready to swalowe her, except she have other aid and
succoures then of her self, yea, and if she have not trust and confidence
that she is delivered and saved, not by her own righteousness, but by that of
Jesus Christ, or if she be so blinded that she have some trust of her works
and leave upon the same, and not the promises of God, and the grace in Jesus
Christ, what may come of her, but fall into the deep pytte of hell, seeing the
forsakes Jesus Christ and his satisfaction toward god which can not be
joined, or have any place with our satisfaction, which of it self is
nothing.


Natha. There be which do comfort them of a better sort showing them the
miseries of this present life and how that death is unto them the end of al
euiles, and an entry unto rest and the beginning of felicite.


Phylype. That same seems to have some color and to be mete to bring
consolation, but the philosophers have done s^ much and their books do
conteigne no less, but there must be an other consolation for to appease the
conscience pressed with the iudgmente of God, the which is not found, but in
the christian doctrine, and in the death and resurrection of Jesus christ, for
valiantly to enter into the battle of death, and boldly to present him self
before the iudgmente of God, there is no better way or mean then for to
despair of his own virtue and power, and to put his only trust and hope in
Jesus Christ, and to condemn him self and all his works, and to judge the^
worthy of eternal death, and dampnation and to present him self before God
in the only co^fide^ce that he has in Jesus Christ being assured of his
salvation by the only favor, grace, and mercy of the same.


Nata. I believe well that this is the best of all other, and that there is
none other, for truly thou haste opened unto me a goodly shope full of all
manner of medicines against al manner of sikenesses and adversities boeth of
soul and body, in the which I am determined to fetch all the medicines which
shall be necessary for my salvation.


Phy. It there came a poticarie or physician which would promise medicines and
remedies for to heal all sikenesses, and for to keep a man always in health,
there is none but would run to him, yea, and bestow al his gooddes to bye
that health, how poor so ever he were, what desire ought we then to have
and to run unto Jesus Christ, which is the sovereign and true medicine
which heals not only the bodies, but also the souls from al infirmities
and sikenesses, and does not only keep them in health during this mortal
life, but that more is, it does keep them from ever diynge, and makes
men immortal, and to live eternally, which none John. iii. vi.
other medicine can do.

And that we might the better love his medicines, and that he might the
better insite us the better to come unto him, he does Esai. i. ii. lv.
give the unto us freely without demau^dinge other gold or silver, and
therefore we be very miserable to forsake him for to have recourse unto the
popes priests and monks, which so dearlye sell their medicines unto us, the
which can in nowise profit us, but rather venim and poysen our souls and
consciences.


Natha. I intend never from hence forth to have recourse to other but to
him, and to the end I may the better know him, I pray the let us come unto
the article folowinge, the which already has been expounded, for by that
thou haste taught me this day thou haste enough opened the understanding for
to learn me to know, how I ought to practice all the christian doctrine, and
how to use it to my profitte.


Phy. I will also do that which thou desireste, but to keep the order we
have begone and holde^ hitherto, we may of this mattier make here a stop, and
so go forward with that that follows, as we have done before. And we have
also commoned long mongh for one.


Nathanaell. I shall always agree to all that thou will.


In this dialogue shall be spoken of the second coming of Jesus Christ of
the nature of his gloriouse body and of his last iudgmente?
Phylype. We have all ready treated largly of the history and mystery of
our redemption, and that which does concern the first coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ in the flesh the causes of the same what he has done for us
and the fruits we ought to abide and look for, There rests now to speak of
his seco^dco^mynge, in the which he shall appear not in humility, and
infirmity, as he did at the first, but in glory and majesty, not for to
open and pronounce the grace and mercy of God unto sinners as he has done
before but for to glorify with him self, them which received his grace and
mercy in the time that he presented and offered it unto them, and for to
condemn and judge them which would not knoweledge him for their savior. And
for to reenter into the matter, resite that which follows.


Natha. There follows after that which we have said. That he is set upon the
right hand of God, and from thense shall come to The second coming of
Christ.
judge the quike and the dead. I do first demand of the if the body of
Jesus Christ glorified be in some certrine place, or whether it be in diverse
places, or in all places?


Phy. It ought to suffice us to know and believe that which we have al ready
said of his ascension, and of his seat upon the right hand of God, I deny
not but Jesus Christ is in all places by his divinity, and by his holy How
Christ is in all places
spirit, in as much as he is God, but in as much as he is truly man, his
body can not be a true and very body without occupiyng some place. To be in all places as his divinity is, it can not be of his nature, for nothing can be
over all but God, wherefore if his body were over all and in all places, it
should follow necessarily that it should be God. If it wear God it should
then not be a body but a spirit, and Jesus Christ should not be very God,
and very man, but God only and the body which he did take in the womb of
the virgyn should be a new God, which had some beginnynge the which is a
thing repugnaunt unto the nature of God.


Natha. But may not God do what so ever he will, and in as much as the
divinity of Jesus Christ can not be separated from his humanity, is not his
body in all places where his divinity is?


Phy. Nothing is impossible unto God, and albeit he may do al, yet nevertheless
his power is aswayes conjoined with his wisdom and uses it not disordinatly,
but always in such sort that his worckes be not confused, but that his
creature abides always a creature, gyuing him such propreties as he will and
yet follows it not, that the divinity and humanity of our Lord Jesus
Christ be so inseparable that his humanity fulfilleth the heaven, and the
earth as his divinity does for my body and my spirit be conjoined together,
and yet it follows not therefore that my body should be in all places where
my spirit may be, for my spirit may be ravished even up into heaven, and
yet my body nevertheless shall be in the earth, or and if thou loueste better
the comparison of Saint Austen God dwells in us by his holy spirit, and yet
nevertheless we be not in all places, and enerye where, where God is, albeit he
dwells in Jesus Christ otherwise then in us, but this ioyninge together or
comunction of two natures does not take from the natures their propreties.


Natha. But is there no difference between the bodies glorified and the mortal
and corruptible bodies?


Phy. Yes very great, and I deny not but The glorious body of chirst
that the gloriousse body of Jesus Christ is now far other then it was
before his death and resurrection, and yet has he not for all that changed
his body, but has always kept the same he had before, and has not changed
his substance, except that he has put of the qualities of imperfectio^s and
miseres which he took for us, and is immortal and glorious or otherwise he
should not be truly risen, nor we should not call the resurrection,
resurrection, except that same propre body, and that same propre flesh, which
is fallen by death were risen up again, nor should not receive life by the
same, and so might it be rather called mutation or changing, the^
resurrection, and the^ to dispute subtellye and curiouslye of the properties of
the body glorified, and of the place where the body of Jesus Christ is,
should be a thing not only vnseamynge, but also unworthy of the
simplicity and of the evangelical doctriue we ought to content our selves, to
know Luke. xxiiii John. xxi.
that Jesus Christ is in the celestial glory, and that he has a very true
body such as he showed it unto his disciples, having flesh and bones, and that
it is not changed into spirit but does hold always the properties of a
very true body, such as appertains unto a very and true glorified body,
which not wythsta^dynge it has put of al human infirmities, yet follows
it not for all that, that it is in all places, nor in diverse or many places al
at one time and instante. We ought to believe that he is in heaven, set upon
the right hand of God his father, where as Act. vii.
saint Stephan did see him. For to dispute and diffine what is this heaven,
and that right hand of God, is here no neade, but is more sure to put it of
and leave our disputation unto the time we came there, and may se it by
experience, and that we may use such diligence to follow Jesus Christ in the
time we be in this life, that we may come thither and behold him.


Natha. And if it be thus as thou say how can we make it agree, with that
which the priests make us believe that the body of Jesus Christ is in the
host, between their hands, The corporal presence.
or in the pixkes, even as great and large, as he was upon the cross.


Phy. They which believe that, believe not that he is set upon the right hand
of God And shall come from thense to judge the quick and the dead.


Natha. Wherefore not? May he not as well come down and go up, by the virtue
of the sacramental words, as he is goue up.


Phy. To what purpose or what neade is it that he should come down, descend,
or ascend, seeing he fulfilled all by his virtue and power? If it were neadful
that his body should be presented unto us carnallye, wherefore is not he
tarried with us, or wherefore is he not returned to be co^uersaunte, as he was
before with his disciples, wherefore did he say unto his disciples. It is
expediente for yo^ that I depart, for except I depart, that conforter shall
not come? If the corporal presence he Jesus christ did with hold the hertes of
the Apostles here in this low earth, and did hyndre them to know him
spirituallye, how should he have wylled us to set our spirits to seek
him in almorsell of bread in the hands of a sinner, or in a pixce or box,
has he not said, he would be prayed unto of them which should honor and
seek him in spirit and in truth, and that such be the true honorers, and
how shall we honor him in spirit and truth, if we go about to seek and
honor him in visible and corruptible things, and Ihon. iiii.
in houses made with the hands of men, and to muse upon a morsel of bread,
or upon a pyxe or box, how may this agree with that which Saint Paul
commands us saying. If ye be risen again with Jesus Christ, seek not the
things which be Colo. iii.
on the earth, but those that be above where Jesus Christ is upon the right
hand of God the father, or wherefore do the priests sing in their masses,
Sursum corda, have your hertes on hye, and wherefore do the other answer We have
the^ to God? Why will they rote them here in this low earth, and hold them in
the Imagination of corporal and carnal presence, rather then to learn them
to know Jesus Christ spirituallye, making them to feel the fruit of his
bitter death and passion? For this cause has he instituted his holy
Institucion of the supper
supper, not for to make us seek a corporal presence, but for to represent him
self unto us by these visible signs, and for to learn us by the same to go up
into heaven to him, for he will not that we draw him from heaven by words, as
coniurars and enchaunters, but will draw us unto him self, by his holy
spiritte and wylleth that our hertes be lyfted by unto him, and that we there
be traunslated and traunsported by his virtue, to receive repast and
nouryshmente of his flesh and of his blood wherefore it is no neade that he
should descend or go up, for if he might not communicate his flesh and his
blood unto us other wise then by his corporal and carnal presence, and
without descendynge corporallye from heaven, the virtue and power of him self
and of his holy spirit, were not great and should not have so much power as
the sun, the which without coming down from heaven does very well communicate
his light and heat to me^, wherefore may not the^ Jesus christ communicate him
self to our spitites souls and bodies, by the virtue of his spirit, and
co^ioyne and unite us with him self, as the me^bres with their head? We have
not the^ any cause to make a god of the body of Jesus, or a mo^struousse body
which should fulfill al places, or to give him many bodies, as we must neades
be constrained to do, if we will follow the doctrine of the priests, seeing that
they will that all in one hours, one self minute, momente and instante, he
should be in so many places all at a time, it is much more sure to hold our
selves unto the testimony of the Angels, which have testified unto his
disciples the day of his ascension, that as they saw him go up visiblye, so
should he be seen descend, which Act. i.
he him self also before had affirmed. Saying that he should come as a light
which should be seen from the Orient unto the occidente, Math. xxiiii
wherefore he does declare that he shall not come invisible, and that there
where his body shall be, there shall be his elected.


Natha. These words be understand of his The sacrame^tal coming of Christ.
corporal coming unto the judgment, but there is an other which is
sacramental.


Phy. I deny not but Jesus Christ comes eueri day unto us and is in the
middeste among us, and with us unto the end of this world, and present unto
us, but that is by his divine virtue and by his power and his holy spirit,
but of coming and presence corporal and carnal, the scripture promises us
no other the^ that: which shall be at the last day, I deny not but he is
present unto us by his word and by his sacraments, but that is in the manner
that I have already showed.


Natha. Thou wylt then say, that he descends not corporallye unto the last
day.


Phy, It is the scripture that so says and not I.


Nathana. How shall he come then and in what form?


Phy. He shall come accompanied with Angels with the clouds in the Math xxv.
glory of God his father, in the propre form that he ascended.


Natha. Wherefore shall he come then in his propre body, then visiblie rather
then now?


Phy. Because that then shall be the time that he must make account, and make
them pertakers of his glory and immortality which have suffered with him, and
believed in him and shall make them the footstool of his fe^e which have
resisted him, to the end they may feel him their iugde and Lord in their
great confusion, in the day of the ire of god in as much as they would not
know him nor receive him for their savior in the time of grace and mercy.


Natha. Wherefore say thou the quick and i. Cor. xv. i. Tessa. iiii.
the dead, shall there be then some living?


Phy. According to the saying of Saint Paul, it is manifest that there
shall be then when he shall come, the which nevertheless shall be changed and
hydden sodaynlye and shall mete Jesus Christ in the air.


Natha. And shall they come before the^ that be dead?


Phy. No. For first the trumpet shall blow and the dead shall arise and then
all together shall be found in a mome^te with the Lord.


Natha. And shall not the same dye?


Phylyp. Saint Paul calls not that change death because it shall be more
short and sudden the^ the twynkelynge of an eye, but nevertheless they shall
be all together changed, even as they which shall have slepte in the powder
of the earth, and shall put of mortality, for to put on immortality.


Natha. Thou understand then by the living, and the dead, them which at
that time shall be living, and them which before that time shall be dead.


Phy. I say that the article may very well be so understand, and that the
doctrine of. S Paul is conformable unto the same understanding, but we may
also well understand it otherwise, without contradiction of the scripture.


Natha. Declare it unto me.


Phy. We may take this copulation for one universal, signifiynge as much as
though we would say, he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, that is to
say, al humayne creatures for the same two words does comprehend all sorts
of people, or he shall come to judge the quike, which yet at this present
time be alive, which shall dye nevertheless at their time, and the dead, that
is to say, all them which have been, before us, which is as much as though
he should say, all them which have been be and shall be, of what estate or
condition so ever they be.


Nathanaell. Declare unto me yet in how many manner of ways I may use these
things unto my profit.


Phylype. In very many, but I shall touch one or two of the pryncipal. This
judgment of God ought to learn and admonish us to walk in this same mortal
pilgrimage in simplicity of heart and to put a sure bridle upon our carnal
concupiscences, and to redress and refourme our selves to the right way of
the will of God, being assured that we must make account, and that not unto a
mortal manne as we be, but unto him that knows not only all our worckes,
but also al our words and thoughts knowing that Math. xii. Math. i.
there is nothing so secret, but at that time it shall be discovered before
God, before his Angels, and before all men that ever shall have been upon
the earth.

We ought then to be very ware to do any thing in secret, which we would
not do openly, but we ought to walk in this life, as though we saw God
always before our eyes.

And after the abiding and lokynge for this Judgment ought to wythdrawe
our selves from doing any wrong or iniurye unto any person, and ought
well to keep our selves from going out of the right way of truth other
for any praise, or for any disprayses, or for sclaunders, or for the good or
evil will of men, another yet for any profitte or damage that might come
unto us, another for prosperity nor adversity that might come, for we are
certain that then shall be holden the great and last appellation, and all
causes shall be brought forth and judged, but not according to the judgment
of men, but according to the just iudgmente of God, by the which every one
shall receive praise or shame, and vituperie, according as he shall have
deserved.


Natha. This article as thou expoundeste it ought to bring great consolation
unto all the true fayethful which suffer persecution in this world knowing
that, at that time their sorrow shall be turned into joy, and their shame
into glory, and of the contrary it ought to give great fear unto the
infideles and hypocrites, for they may well hold them selves for assured that
their infidelity and hypocrisy shall be distroyed, and their glory shall be
turned into shame and confusion. And in as much as we be common thus far forth,
it does seem unto me that these mattiers have been sufficientlye declared, and
all the mystery of our redemption after such sort that I hold my self very
well satisfied for my part, and because I fear to make the werye with taking
over much of the at once, let us here make a rest, to an other time.


Phylyp. Thou canste not make me werye in such mattiers, yet nevertheless I am
co^tente to follow thine advice? Farewell.


Natha. To God I commend the unto who^ I pray to give us such grace that we
may at that great day of Iudgmente be found blameles and irreprehensible by
the favor and merits of Jesus Christ.


Phy. So be it.


In these. ii. last diologes is opened the other part of the creed, the which
do concern the holy Ghost and the church wherein is declared that which
appertains to the one and the other and is showed what is the true church of
Jesus Christ what is her polesie, and ministration, and what goods she received
of him.
Nathanaell. IN as much as we have done the greatest part Phylype, I shall
desire the to have patience, and to take the pain to expound unto me the
rest, that we may se the end of this mattier.


Phy. It is reason, and I will not deuye the my pain, seeing it brings ^o
less consolation unto me then to the.


Natha. It seems unto me that there be yet two parts to be declared, the one
of the holy Ghost and the other of the church.


Phyly. It is true, but we may well conioyne that of the holy Ghost with that
of the church, go forth as we have begone.


Natha. It does follow. I believe in the holy Believe in the holy ghost
Ghost, it is no further neade that I should ask how thou vnderstandeste
this, for by that thou haste already declared unto me the fayeth thou haste in
the father and in the son I understand well thou confesseste that thou putteste
all thy trust in the holy Gooste.

And that thou beleueste, that by the same, the father and the son does
sanctify the as by Jesus Christ, thou art justified by the virtue of the same
holy spirit.


Phylype. It is true.


Natha. Notwythstandynge I understand that, yet would I very gladlye thou
wouldeste expound me more largelye, what thou understand properly by this
holy spirit,


Phy. The same virtue, power, mouynge and efficatie of God, by the which the
father and The holy ghost
the son works in us, nourishes and viuefieth as we have all ready said,
in declaryng our fayeth of the father and the son.


Natha. In as much as thou beleueste in him thou holdeste him for a God, as well
as thou doeste the father and the son.


Phy. Yea without doubt, for I understand not by this any manner of thing,
out of god or beside God but in God, and of his propre substance.


Na. Wherefore call thou him spirit, the father and the son be they not
also spirit saying thou confesseste they be God, and that Jesus Christ does
openly testify that Ihon. iiii.
God is a spirit, the which must be honored in spirit and truth?


Phy. I deem not but God is a spirit, and so by consequence, the father, and
the son, but we must first considre The signification of the word spirit.
what is the signification of this saying spirit, and whether we speak of
the essence and unity of God, or of the distinctions which be in the same,
which the ancient fathers have called the persons of the trinity.


Natha And what is the propre signification of this same vocable spirit?


Phy. I have said before that man ca^ not find propre words as to speak of
divine things, but must borowe them of humayne things and by similitude of
the same declare the things celestial and spiritual.


Natha. I remember it well, but tell me the^ what is the natural signification
of this same word, and how it agrees with God.


Phy. Spirit, signifies properly inspiration blowing, and wynd, and because
there is nothing more subtille among corporal things, nor that less can be
perceived by vewe or syghte the^ the wind, and the spirit, it is often taste^
in the scriptur for to signify the things invisible and divine.


Na. Therefore I think we call the soul and understanding spirit, not that it
should be taken but for a wind, but because it is invisible sodaynd and light
as the wynd.


Phy. Eue^ so likewise God is called a spirit, not that we should think that
he were nothing eles but a wind which passes, but to make us understand that
we ought not to Imagine that he should be any manner of thing visible,
material or mortal, but one nature essence, perfect invisible,
incorruptible, and immortal which will also be served with the heart, and
the^ soul, of the spirit and understanding which be immortal, and not with
ceremonies and corruptible things.


Nathana. According to this signification the father, the son, and the holy
Gooste be then al called spirit, and all for one cause, but expound unto me
wherefore thou calleste more perticularlye, the holy Gooste spirit then thou
do the father and the son.


Phy. When I behold the divine essence and unity of god, I call them al
spirits, but when I consider the personal distinction of the which we have
spoken here before I do then principally call the third person, spirit,
because that word does better open his property then any other we can
find. Thou must also understand that often times in the scripture The holy
spirit for his gifts and graces. Esai. xi. i. Cor. xii.
the holy Ghost is taken not for the essence and substance of him self, but
also for his gifts and graces.


Nath. Wherefore call thou him holy?


Phy. For to deserve him from creatures, and for to declare that I speak of
that virtue power, and mouynge of God, which is in God by the which the father,
by his son Jesus does sanctif^e save and vinifie us.


Nathana. What call thou holy?


Phy. A thing pure and ferme, separated from all corruption, and pollution,
and from all profane and carnal usage, and a thing whole and entier, and
inuiolate, and all together dedicate unto God, I ^al the^ the holy ghost,
because he is such in deed, and that by him God in Jesus Christ sanctifies
ma^ne, that is to say, he purges, makes clean, consecrateth, and dedicateth
him whollye to him lelfe, seperatynge him from all vile and profane vsages, to
serve The christian sayutes.
only unto him, Therefore also be the christians called saints, because they
be anointed with that oyntemente, and wythdrawen from the servitude of the
devil, consecrate by Jesus Christ for to serve the only God.


Natha. I understand now wherefore Jesus Christ did send a great mighty
wind when he gave his holy spirit unto his Apostles.


Phylyp. There is no doubt, but he did it to The holy spirit shewe^ in wind.
signify, that as the wind suffers the Rociers, the little and small trees,
and overthrows by the roots, breaks down, broseth and makes ruinous, the
great and mighty trees, So the virtue of this holy spirit is to bring
consolation to the hertes aflicted to purge the consciences, to judge the
euile, to overthrow and set down the proud, and to uphold and bear up
the weak and humble.


Natha. If we will then have any thing of God, we must obteygne it by Jesus
Christ workynge in us by his holy spirit.


Phylip. It is even so, for by him all the beleuers, be unite in one self body
with their head Jesus Christ, and be nourished and vinified in him, as by the
soul and spirit all the me^bres which be in one body, be partakers of the
goodness which is in the same body.


Natha. I believe for that cause we put to, by and by after this article, the
which appertains nyghe unto the church, the which is the body of Jesus
Christ, of the which thou speakeste of vinifiynge and sanctifiynge by the same
holy Gooste, for we do say, by and by after the catholyke church.


Phy. There is no doubt.


Natha. In as much the^ as we have treated the other three parts The church
of the creed, and that we be come to the fourth, which concerns the
church, daughter of the celestial father, spouse of Jesus Christ, tell me
first what thou call the church.


Phy. Church signifies congregation and assemble, Ephesians. v,
but I do take it and understand it here, for the assemble of the true and
faithful christians, which be unite and co^ioyned by one self spirit and one
self fayeth.


Natha. Is there any other church then the church of the faithful?


Phy. As we do call the body and members of Jesus Christ the church, so has
Antichriste his body and members, which together make the malignaunt church,
but for as much as that touches us in nothing, we leave it aparte, and speak
only here of the true The malygnant church
church of Jesus Christ and therefore do we call it holy.


Natha. For what cause?


Phy. To put difference between her and the church of Antichriste, and for
as much as she is sanctified by the holy Ghost, for to be the temple and
habitatio^ of God.


Natha. Where fore do thou also call it catholic, what signifies that word
catholyke? Catholic



Phy. It does signify universal, and therefore do I say, I believe the
universal church, because the church does signify all assembles, and
congregation, where the fayethfull be assembled, as is the church of Cho^hi of
Rome Galathiens and othere like, I will declare that there is one catholyke
church, that is to say, universal and general, comprehending all the other,
the which is generallye sown through all the world, only known of the
only God which knows the hertes.


Natha. If she be sown through all the world how is she a church, seeing that
church signifies congregation and assemble, and so as thou sayeste, it should
seem rather to disperation, separation, and confution?


Phylype. Therefore must we considre this The church invisible.
church spirituallye, and must not think it to be a visible and local
assemble, set and limited in a certain place.


Nathana. How understand thou this, or how can the church be invisible,
seeing it is the assemble of the fayethful, which be visible men,


Phy. I deny not but that the men which be of the church be visible, but
this ioynynge together of the church ought not to be considered of the
conjunction of the bodies, but of the hertes, spirits, that be invisible which
none cause, and therefore notwythstandinge I see the men that be of this
church when they be present with me, yet nevertheless I The church mingeled
through all the world.
can not see them all because they be sparkeled abroad through all the world,
and though they might be assembled all in one place, yet could I not know
them perfectlye, because that the elected shall never be so well separated in
this world, from the infidels and reproved, but there shall be always many
hypocrites mingled among them, the which we can not well deserve nor judge,
unto such time as Jesus Christ shall make separation of the Math. xxv.
go^es from the lambs, and of the wheat from the tares, therefore do I say
that this church is invisible, because the eye ca^ not se it, nor the humayne
judgment well deserve it, therefore do we say we believe it, for if we did se it
at our eye, we believed not, but notwythstandynge we can not se it at our eye,
yet we believe that the Lord has his elected, which notwithstanding they be
sparkeled about through all the world as touching their bodies, be yet
nevertheless so joined together by the spirit of God, that they be but one
self body one self heart, and one self soul. Act. ii. iiii.



Natha. Thou wylt then say that the universal church is a spiritual and
invisible assemble of all the elected and children of God, which be upon the
earth, in what place so ever they be, which notwythstandinge they be separated
and far distaunte one from a another, as concerning their bodies, yet they
be all unite by one self spirit into one body mystical, of the which
Christ is the head, Col. i. ii.
which dyed for to assemble the children of God, that were sparkeled, but if
this church be invisible how canste thou say, thou beleueste in her and that
thou holdeste her faith, how canste thou know what she is, and what she
believes if thou know her not?


Phylype. I say not that I believe in her.


Natha. Doeste not thou confess, I believe in the holy Ghost, the holy
universal church?


Phy. I do say and confess openly. I believe in God the father, and in Jesus
Christ, and in the holy Gooste, but of the church I do not say, I believe in
the holy church, but I believe the holy church.


Nathana. Is it not all one, what difference is there?


Phy. Very great. For if I said I believe in the holy church, I should
confess that I put my trust in her, as I have said before to believe in God,
and the church is not god but is an assemble of men, and cursed is man that
trusts in man, wherefore if I said, I believe Iere. xvii
in her, I should speak against my self, and should reuerse the fayeth, which
I have confessed hitherto


Nathana. Declare unto me the difference.


Phi. By expositio^s going before it is open enough, what se^ce mi words should
have, if I said, I believe in the church. But when I do say, I believe the
holy church, that is to say, I believe and confess that there is an assemble
by the which I have diffined the church, and that in the same I will live and
dye.


Natha. How wylt thou live and dye in her when thou know not where she is.


Phy. Although I can not perceive, nor know all that be comprised in it, yet
nevertheless I have certain signs by the which I know and am assured what she
is.


Nathanaell. What be those signs?.


Phy. In all places and companies Syngnes to know the church by ^
where as the word of God is purelye opened and received the sacraments of
Jesus Christ observed and kept, I am certain that there is of the sheep of
Jesus Christ, and of the elected, or otherwise his voice should not be opened
nor yet received.


Natha. Thou wylt then say, that the word of god, and the sacraments of Jesus
Christ be indubitable signs of the same, but many speak of Jesus Christ, and
make semblant to hear his word which be hypocrites, and believe not in him as
Judas was and such ^yke. And co^trariewyse there be many unknown which be
esteemed unhappy and damned and yet have faith and shall atteyne to the kingdom
of heaven, be fore them that show great apparent, as Jesus Christ did say,
the harlottes and publica^s Math. xxii.
should obteigne it before the scribes and phariseis.


Phy. Therefore have I said, that this church is invisible, and unknown unto
me not because we se not with the bodily eyes, the me^ which be of it, but
because that man can not se the hertes nor can not deserve nor know whether
the man that he sees believes or no Ephe. ii.
how holy soever he seem, nor none ca^ know it but the only God, which gives
the faith, and knows the heart that receives it.


Nathan. Thou art then often begiled thinking that the church is where the
gospel is preached and the in stitutio^ of Jesus observed, seeing that they that
be there and do such things may be such as Judas, Act. i. v. viii.
Simo^ magus, Ananias, and Saphira we^.


Phylip. Albeit that such hypocrites may be mingled in great number among
the faithful, which be always the little flock, yet nevertheless it is certain
that among them be some of Christ's sheep, for else God would not permit nor
suffer, that the preciouse pearls, and margarites of his holy Gospel should
be cast before dogs and swine only.


Natha. What if the wolves swine and dogs call them selves sheep, and instead
of the gospel set forth their own dreams and humayne traditious, how
causte thou know and deserve the church. ^. Cor. xii.



Phy. The Lord has left us his holy scriptures, for to judge and deserve
by the analogy of the fayeth, and the rule of charity, whether the spirits
be of God or not, and whether the spirit in the which I believe do reign the
which is given unto the elected, for to judge all things, for the spiritual
man judges all things, and is judged of no man. The roman church.



Natha. And is not the romayne church that holy catholyke church, which thou
beleueste and must be followed?


Phy. If the romayne church do abide and persevere in the apostolyke doctrine,
I will reknowledge her a church of Jesus Christ inasmuche as she declares her
self to be the spouse of Jesus Christ, in obeying unto him as unto her head,
and for to live under his laws and ordinances, but yet may I not take it for
this universal church, of the which we have spoken, for she can be but a member
of that church, no more then other congregations, and other christian churches
that be abroad in the uniuersall world separated both in places and bodies, and
yet joined in spirit and soul, making all together one universal church.


Nathan. But is not the Romayne church the head of all the other, unto the
which all the other ought to obey as subjects?


Phy. If she be head, she is no more the^, another spouse nor membre of his
body, such as the faithful ought to be, if she will have dominion and give
laws unto other, she is no more a church of Jesus, but is the church of
Antechriste, which attributes unto her self the office appertayninge unto
Christ, for the office of the church is not to give laws unto her but
receive them of him, and to make her self subject under the same.


Natha. The church then which will exarcise power over the other, and give
them other laws then the Gospel of Jesus, is no church of Christ, because
his spirit reygneth not there, but to what purpose serves it to believe the
universal church?


Phy. Without that article, all the rest going before should serve me for
nothing. For all that we have said of God, and that we believe of the father,
and of the son, and of the holy Ghost, has regard unto this church
without the which all our faith should be vain for in this creed we do not
considre what god is in him self, but what he is toward us, which be his
church, and by what means he has willed her to be delivered, conserved ruled
and governed, wherefore all that we have treated here before pretends to this
end, for we must needs have laid this fundatio^ to build after thereupon
this edifice, without the whythe the fundation should profitte us in nothing
if we were not surely builded there upon.


Nathana. I understand well that thou haste said of the universal church,
but I desire yet much to know what thou understand by the communion of
saints.


Phy. I understand here no other thing but that which I have already said,
that is to say, the holy universal church, but this we put to, the better
to declare the unite that is among the faithful, for as in one town, in one
common wealth, and in one co^munaltie and communion among the inhabitau^ces
citizens, and members that be within it, so likewise in the church of Jesus
christ there is one unite, aliau^ce, burgelie and brotherhede, which after such
sort conioyneth the body with his head Jesus Christ, and all the members the
one with the other, that they have no goods that is not common among the^, nor
that the one does not communicate unto the other, for Jesus Christ co^municateth
al his goods to his members, and all the goods that he does communicate to his
church, returns or comes to every one of his me^bres in particular, and
every one receives his part as the me^bres, the which the head does
communicate unto them, and as the soul which is shed through all the body,
and gives life unto all the me^bres of the same.


Nath. It is then no small benifite to be in the church of Jesus Christe-nor
no small evil to be out of that church.


Phy. It is with the^ that be without, as with the branch that is cut of the
vine, or as the bowgh or twigge cut of the tree, the which from the^se forth can
have another nourishmente nor life but must neades dry away, and is good for
nothing but to be cast in the fire.


Na. They which be excommunicate be they out of this communion?


Phylip. The word of excommunication should give the understanding enough for
excommunication signifies none othere thing, but to be cast out of a
communaltye.


Nathanaell. It is then as much to be excommmnicate out of the church as to be
banished from some certain places


Phylype. It is almooste like, for as a town Comparison of the church
has his ciuell policye, and his magistrates the which do conduce and govern
it according to the laws and ordinances conueniente with the common wealth.
for it, even so has the church his spiritual policy and ecclesiastical
discipline and his pastures, ministers, and senatoures to entertayne and
govern her according to the laws and ordinances that she has received of
Jesus christ.

Even so then, as in the ciuell common wealth that which is done by them
which have the charge, being lawefullye thereunto elected, and go not out of
the limits of their offices, and of the laws and ordinances, by the which
the town ought to be ruled and governed, is approved and confirmed of al men.
Even so in the church of Jesus Christ, all that is done according to his
word by the^ unto whom she is committed: is ratified, not Math. xvi. John. xx.
only by all the church, but also by Jesus Christ, in the name and virtue
of whom the thing is done.

And if a man for his euyle behauour or demeanoure, be lawfully banished from
a town he is deprived of the co^munaltye of the same and is no longer pertaker
of the liberties fraunchises, and privileges, nor of the commune goods no more
then a stranger, which has there nothing to do. Eue^ so is it of him that is
excommunicate by the church.


Nathanaell. And who has the power to excommunicate?


Phy. Jesus Christ has given that power to al his church unto the which he
has committed The ecclesiacal power
the keys of his kingdom, by the which this excommunication is exercised.


Natha. Is it then required that when a man shall be excommunicate, to assemble
the whole church, and that every one should say his opinion, and give his
sentence? M^ seems that were very hard and should engendre a great
confusion.


Phy. Our Lord Jesus Christ has well provided, for he teaches us the
mean and way Math. xviii.
that we ought to hold, and by what degrees we must proceed, he teaches us
first, how we ought to admonish the offendre aparte, and how we should call
him before witnesses, and if he will not hear those and receive their
brotherly admonission and correction, and be converted and chastise him self,
and if his offense do so deserve, the^ to report it unto the church and
congregation, which is the last remedy we must come unto, and yet it is not
necessary to assemble all the church for this, but suffiseth to have the
ecclesiastical council, which have the charge of the ecclesiastical dicipli^e.


Natha. What vnderstandeste thou by this eccesiastical council?


Phy. I understand the priests and ministers of the church with other good and
honest persons of the people which be lawfullye elected and chose^ for to
wache over the manners and sclaunders of the church, and for the vpholdynge of
discipline in the same eue^ as the cou^celers and magistrates be elected and
chose^ for the conservation and maintenance of justice in the commune wealth,
and for the enterteynynge of peace and unite among the Cytyzens, and these be
they which the scripture calls priests, which sygnifieth as much Priests
as elders and senatoures, because they have like office in the church as the
senators have in the co^mo^e wealth saying there is a great difference in the
administration, for the one is civil and temporal and has the material
sword, for to uphold mainteigne and defend her the other is Difference of the
civil and ecclesiastical Rule Romans xiii. Ephe. vi.
ecclesiastical and spiritual, and has the swerd of the spirit, which is
the word of God to conserve her.


Natha. By all that I can co^prehe^d by thy words, thou will say that as in a
town, we do say, that the town has done that which has be done by the
council and magistrate of the same. Eue^ so in the church we ought to
vndrestand that, that which is done by them that have charge of the same, and
unto the which Jesus Christ and she also have given the power and the
administration of the keys is done by the church,


Phy. So understand I it. For those be but servants and ministers of the
church by who^ she does exercise the power that Jesus Christ has given her
and does declare the authority of the key^, which she has received of him.


Natha. What need is there of excommunication seeing there is a magistrate in
the church for the punishment of the offenders.


Phy. What need is there of any euangelical pastor, when there is a magistrate,
or of preaching when there is ciuell justice, wherefore does not the
magistrate boeth the one and the other?


Natha. Because the matters be diverse and is necessary that the offices
should be distinct and separated in the commune wealth or otherwise there
should be confusion to mingle the temporal things and spiritual together, and
is not possible that those self persons might well exercises both to acquit
them selves well but in taking upon them to do both should do another but mar
al.


Phi. Thou say well. And therefore as it is requisite that the civil and
temporal administration should be separated fro^e the ecclesiastical, and the
temporal from the spiritual. Eue^ so likewise must the correctio^s of the one
and the other after a sort be separated, for otherwise the church should not
have her whole right, nor spiritual jurisdiction the which is given unto her
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the which the cyuylle magistrate cannot take from
her, without doing her great wrong and Iniurye, nor without doing great
dishonor unto Jesus Christ her head, which has given her that authorite,
for the magistrate is not ordained of god for to usurp by power or tyranny
over the church of our Lord Jesus Christ, as the papisticall church, and
the Antechrist her head has usurped over the maiestrate, and over the
temporal sword, but it is ordained of God for to uphold the church, and to
healpe to conserve her, and to mayntaygne her rightes. Therefore says the
prophet, that the kings and queen's shall be her nourishers. Esai. xxvi.



Natha. But when the magistate has chasticed and punished the traunsgressours
ought it not to suffice the church.


Phylip. Thou oughteste to understand that there be diverse faults, which be
sclanders unto the church, of which the ciuyll laws do not greatly force,
for they have not so much respect unto conscience, as to the outward
Correction by the church.
peace and tranquillity, but the church has her respect to edify the
conscience, and to reconcile the manne unto God, and further, albeit that a man have been punished corporallye, and has made satisfaction unto the
law, yet has he not for all that satisfied the church, which was offendyd
by him, for notwythstandynge he has been punishede in his body or by his
purse, or by boeth, yet does it not for all that follow that he is an honest
manne, for in that he has been punished, has been against his will, and
the pain that he has suffered has not for all that changed his heart,
except the Lord with his holy spirit have touched him, and therefore as the
church leueth unto the punishment of the magistrate, such as by him be
punishable to be punished with such punishmente as they have deserved, without
medelynge her self with the temporal sword: even so ought the temporal
magistrate not only to suffer the church to proceed in her office after he
has done his, but also to healpe her in the execution of her office if nead
require, as and if there be any rebellion against the same, which requires more
greuouse punishment the^ she may give or put in execution, for what other
thing is the ecclesiastical council or senate but a membre or part of the
magistrate, and of them which partly be ordained by him saving there is an
other manner of proceading for such as have been moved to repentance but
rather hardened by the punishme^te of the temporal sword, which shall be
converted by that which shall be opened unto them, of the word of God, for God
has not co^stituted the ministration of his Gospel in his church without
gyuynge her virtue and efficatie by his holy spirit, by the which he does
strike the souls more lively the^ the material swerd stryketh the body, and
further when a man has made such amends as he has been joined unto by the
law, the^ is the civility of the law satisfied, which forces not much
with what heart it be done, but the church requires the testimony of the
heart, and cannot admit them into her communion, which be sclaunderous unto
her, and which have by the works declared that they be no members of her
body, except that first she shall have seen their repentance, and that they
shall have given certain signs and testimonies of the same, for it is
defended her to give that Math. vii.
which is holy unto Dogs, and to cast her margarittes and precious stones
before swyne.


Natha. But in as much as the church is constitute of men, how can she
better judge of the heart then the ciuyle magistrate, and further what
satisfaction will thou have other the^ that of Jesus Christ, for thy self has
said that none othere can satisfy unto the Justice of God.


Phyly. As towchynge the heart, the church leaves it unto the iudgmente of
God, which only knows it, but yet nevertheless she has more care the^ the
ciuyle magistrate, and can not admit, nor receive a man into her company
which at the least will not confess with his mouth by the which he does
testify the christen heart that he has, it may well be that often times the
heart does not agree with the confession of the mouth, and that the confession
be feigned as it was in Simon Magus Ananias, and Saphyra, but it suffices unto
the church that a man show her outward testimony of the heart, for she can
not judge whether it be fained and hypocriteth or faithful wherefore she can
not cast out him which comes unto her with any testimony of fayeth, for
if his testimony be feigned she leaves the iudgmente unto God which shall
discover it in his time, but to receive any person without open testimony of
repentance and faieth, she ca^ not without doing against the word of god,
for when the dogs and swine do ope^lie show the^ self, such by their works,
and be not covered with sheep skines, why should she not judge the^? She has
none excuse nor reasonable cause for to receive the^ seeing that god has given
her the iudgme^tes of such things, and that she has the mean so to do, and
therefore when a man declares him self manifestly sclaunderous, and a rebel
unto the ecclesiastical correction and discipline, the last remedi that the
church has is to excommunicate, that is to say to open unto him that she
takes him not for any member of Christ, nor worthi to be in the co^pani of the
faithful, nor to communicate the Sacraments, which Jesus Christ has given her
unto the which ought none to be admitted but her Math. xviii.
disciples but ought to be rejected, and deprived of them as a publican, and a
panim, or as a Jew or turk, which the fayethfull will nor receive, into
their communion, but does hold him as an Apostata, and enemy of christian
religion, and when he is so rejected from the church, i. Corin. v. ii. Corin.
ii. i. Timot. i.
he is in the hands of Satan for to afflicte him, and is separated from Jesus
Christ after such sort that if he do not reknowledge his faults, amend him
self, and labor to reco^cyle him self, unto the church, he is utterly
lost and dampened, for in as much as the church has bound him he is
bound, seeing that Jesus Christ has given it that power, by the
ministration of his word, by the which also he is unbound, if he
reknoweledge his Math xvi. and xviii.
faults, and be received again into the church by penance.


Natha. The church is then very rigorouse and has a power much moore to be
feared then the swerd, of the magistrate for it ca^ punish but the body, but
that of the church sleaeth the souls, how does this the^ agree with that which
Jesus Christ has said, that he was not come for to destroy or lose, but to
save, is the church of any other nature the^ Luke, ix.
Jesus Christ her head?


Phyly. No. But the evil do kill and da^ne them selves in reiectynge the
blissinge of Jesus Christ, which is presented and offered unto him by his
church, and therefore the church does not dampne him, but only declares
unto him his damnation and rejects him as damned, not to the intent that he
should so be, but to the intent he should not be, but he knowing his damnation,
and seeing him self deprived and shytte out of the company of Jesus Christ
of the Angels and of all saints, and forsaken of all the fayethfull, might be
the more ashamed and confounded, and the better feel the iudgeme^te of God
upon him, to the end that by this mean he might he moved to repentance that
he should not perish eternallye, for this same ought well to astony him, seeing
him self bound by the church which has such power by the keys which Jesus
Christ has given her, that whatsoever Math. xvi. xviii.
is bound or vnbou^de in the earth by her, is bound or unbound in heaven.


Natha. Then is the excommunication rather a medicine and a remedy, then a
death and damnation.


Phylip. According as every man does use it to his profit, for it is the
last remedy of the church the which she does use as a corsey toward
sinners, that can not be helped by other remedies, if the sinner perceive the
virtue of this excommunication, and amend him ii. Corin. i.
self as the poor Corynthien did, it shall the^ serve him for a medicine of
health, but if he perseyuer obstinate in his malice, without reconcilynge him
self, unto the church, he abides bound and dead in his sins, and not
wy^hstandynge that if he would reconcile him self unto the church, yet she
will not receive him by and by before that he shall have Ecclesiastical
satisfaccion
showed open testimony of his repentance forto take away the sclaundre he
has made, and for to give example unto other, and therefore according to the
deseruynge of the offe^der, the church does enjoin them some manner of
penance for to testify their repe^tau^ce and for to prove whether it be
feigned or true, and also to give terror unto the sinners that the
ecclesiastical discipline come not into sclau^der if she should over lightly
receive the sclaunderours, and so this pain is not like unto that which is
imposed by the ciuyle magistrate but is rather an open testimony of
repentance for to satisfy unto the church and not unto God, for toward God
there is no other satisfaction sufficient but that of Jesus as it has been
said many times already but as I am bound to satisfy unto my neighbor
that which I owe him: even so am I to the church, if I have made offense, and
as the satisfaction that I make unto my neighbor is not sufficient to take
away my sins toward God, if God by his mercy do not pardon me: even so of
the satisfaction that I make unto the church which serves not but to
entertayne her discipline, and to avoid sclaunders, and yet nevertheless he
that would refuse to make such satisfaction for the edifiynge of his
neighbor who^ he has sclaundered or offended, when he has the mean and
occasion so to do: does declare him self unworthy to obteygne pardon of God
for so doing is a certain testimony of the infidelity and the rebellion of
the heart.


Natha. I understand now this matter and do not doubt but if this
excommunication were practiced in the church as it was in the primative
church, there should be fewer and less sclaunders, and the word of God in
much greater reverence then it is,


Phy. Think not that Jesus Christ has instituted it without cause, as for mine
own part I do not doubt but if it were practiced in the virtue of God, as it
was in the Apostolyke church, but it should have much more efficatie to
refrain such sinners as were not all togythere reproved of God, then the
punyshmentes of the cyuylle magistrates the which nevertheless she takes not
away but leaves it always whole in it self.


Nathanaell. I have an other scrupulositie towchyng this excommunication, for
as much as he that is excommunicate is separated from the church of Jesus
Christ, and deprived of his sacraments which is no small thing it does
therefore seem unto me that we ought not temerariouslye and lyghtlye to
excommunicate a man without good and just, cause and some great crime and
fault that should co^strayne us so to do, wherefore I have merueil of the
priests which do excommunicate the power people for small things, sometime
for dettes, yea sometime for three halpenies and that such as have not where with
to bye their children bread. Excommunication for dets



Phyly. In that have they well showed, how they esteem but little the
communion of Jesus Christ, and of all his Saints, and the salvation of the
poor people which they did show to esteem less then three halpens, but in
as much as they have not the true church of Jesus Christ I do esteem them
as happy that be excommunicate by them, and specially for the Gospelles sake,
as the poor blind man that was excommunicate by the scribes and phariseis, and
as they which were exco^municat Pharisaicall excommunication. John. vi.
by the sinagoge of the I^es, because they had confessed Jesus Christ, for
the excommunication is but a very tyranny, and their church is the church of
Antichriste, out of the which we must be excommunicate, if we will be
received into that of Jesus Christ in the which the true pastors, and ministers
do not usurp tyranny over the people, nor do not attribute unto them selves
only the authority of excommunication which is given unto all the church,
but does exercise it with them, the which the church has chosen and i.
Corin. v. ii. Cori. ii.
elected unto such offices as the Apostle has practiced among the Corinthians.


Na. There rests yet in me an other scrupul in as much as excommunicate
does signify to be banished and cast out of the communion Excommunication
against beasts.
of the christians, how may the bishops and priests excommunicate the
snayles, mile, newtes, snakes and such othere like beasts, for they be not of
the co^munalty of the christians nor be not accustomed to come unto the ceane
how can we then deprive, and cast them out yet nevertheless it is said of
certentye, and I have also seen it in writing, that the bishop of Lusane did
once excommunicate the news and snaks out of the lake or stagne of Lusane and
that never after there was found nor seen none there. And as I have been
infourmed the priests in some place do excommunicate for all inte^tes, the
beasts that hurt the fruits, and goods of the earth.


Phylyp. They could not better show their assyshnes, nor better declare that
they be sorcerers and enchaunters, nor that they never understood the
institution, of excommunication nor the cause of the same. Be they aferde that
the beasts should go into heaven seeing they chasse and cast them out of the
communion of Saints, of the which they were never nor can not be?

But what othere thing is this but plain sorceries, charms and
enchaunteme^tes unto which they have their recours as magicie^s, where as they
ought to have their recourse unto prayer and orisons, unto the which they ought
also to move and insite the people and unto true repentance for to appeise the
ire* and God, and so take away those wounds that God has sent unto men
for their sins Behold, these be the excommunications the which the
Prophets and the true servants of God have used against such beasts, and
not to use charms as the magiciens of Pharao did.


Natha. Thou haste contented me, and I think these beasts do more obey unto
their excommunications, then unto the charms and sorseries of the enchauntors.
But we have tarried long enough upon this point, and have yet three other upon
this article which I will ask of the one after an other?

Thou haste said unto me that in this communion of Saints all was commune, is
it then necessary that all the christians have their goods in commune one with
an other.


Phy. This communaltye of goods have two considerations if thou understand
spirituallye: there is no doubt as all the spiritual goods, which be in
Jesus Christ the husband, be commune unto the church his spowse, and also
unto all the members of the same, which is his mistical body, and have all his
gifts and graces in commune one with an other. But if thou mean of the
earthlye goods that is an other matter, for seeing that the church is the
kyngedome of Jesus Christ and his kyngedome is not of this world, we must
not therefore seek in his church a carnal communion, but a spiritual, for
as the spiritual kyngedome of Jesus Christ does not aboleyshe nor take away
the civil pollytie but does approve and confyrme it: even so the spiritual
communion of saints does not aboleyshe the division of the earthlye goods
that is among men, but that it is lawefull for every one to possess that
which is assigned him according to the human laws.


Natha. Thou will then say, that this communion ought not to be understand
but of the spiritual goods.


Phylyp. I deny not but there is also a communion of the corporal and
earthlye goods among the fayethfull, not that it is lawefull for every man
to lay his hands upon the goods of his neighbor as it were his own and so
to make it his, of his own authorite, for if it were so it should not be a
communion of Saints, but of robberye, and a comminaltie of beasts and Dogs,
and not of christians for so all ryghtes boeth divine and humayne should be
violated, and the commandments Communion of beasts.
of God should have no place among men, for then theft should be no more
theft if it were lawefull for every manne to lay his hands and take where
soever he might find, and adultrie should be no more adultrie, if it were
admitted that every one might abuse the daughter and wife of his neighbor
after the manner of the brute beasts, which have no manner of reverence another
unto co^sanguinitie nor matrimony.


Natha. I am of thine opinion, for Jesus Christ is not come to make of men
beasts, but to make of beasts men, and of men Gods for the man that
knows not Jesus Christ is worsse then a beast, but how understand thou
this communion of the earthly goods.


Phyl. The practice of the primative church declares inoughe unto us, for that
same charity did make their gods all commune among Act. ii. iiii. v.
the fayethfull, and yet for all that did every man possess his own goods,
and enheritaunce, the which with out constraynte of their own liberality
they them selves did bring unto the Apostles to be distributed unto the power
neady brethren, but it was not laweful for other to take it at their pleasure,
but as it was distributed unto them by them, unto whom it did appertaygne as
it does well appear by the words which saint Petre had unto Ananias, and
Saphira. Act^, v.



Natha. I understand well now what communion this ought to be, for the gospel
does leave unto every one that which appertains unto him, but the charity
which the Gospel above all things does set forth unto us, does teach us
how we ought to use, and how we ought to communicate the goods that we have
received of God unto the poor members of Jesus Christ, but tell me now which
be the saints among the which this communion is.


Phi. Vnderstandeste thou not by that I have answered to the before, that they
be the faithful christiens?


Natha. I understand that well, but because we do commonly call them Saints
which be in heaven, and that they which be in this world be all poor sinners:
I have here a little Who be saints.
doubt, for I understand not well how we may call sinful men Saints,
which be yet environed with this flesh of sin, nor knows not whether we
ought to understand this communion of Saints, of them only which be already
in heaven, or only of the^ which be yet in this world, or of both together.


Phy. As to the first I know well when we speak commonly of saints, the pore
simple people understand no othere thing but of them that be departed, and
that they hold for saved, but that comes of ignorance and for lack of
understanding of the Apostolic doctrine, which does customably call the faith
full christien saints, and there is no inconvenience to call them saints,
notwithstanding they be sinners, for as the church is called holy, eue^ so be
the fayethfull called Saints, of the which she is composed because that God
has justified, pourged made clean, and sanctified them which he has
elected for to serve unto al holiness, and innocence, and for to make shine in
us the Image of his glory, and therefore the church is called the spowse of
Jesus Christ gloryousse without spotte or wryncle notwythstandynge that all we
the members of the same pray every day unto God and he pardons our sins.


Natha. It follows then that all the true christians be Saints and sinners
all together, but Math. vi. Luc. ii.
how may these things agree, being so repugnaunte?


Phy. They be not repugnaunte if they be well understand: for each man if we
Ephesians. ii. Romans iii. Gal. ii. i. Co. i.
considre him in him self, and in his nature: is the child of ire naturalli a
sinner execrable worthi of death and eternal da^natio^, but if we consider him
in Jesus Christ he is holy, for by the faith which he has in him, he is
justified and sanctified, not that he is altogether without sin, but because
that Jesus Christ does make him partaker of his ryghtuousnesse and
satisfaction after such sort that notwythsta^dynge he be a pore sinner yet is
it not imputed Psalm. v. Romans iiii.
unto him, but is covered and defaced, and he reputed just before God, by the
mean of Jesus Christ another more nor less, then if he had not sinned at all?


Nathanaell. This holiness of the church is not yet then perfect?


Phi. No not till it be altogether delivered from this world, and perfectly
conjoined and unite with her head Jesus Christ, for during the time she shall
be in this world, she shall have always battle against the flesh and
sin, and shall never be fullye and delivered from the spots and
imperfections of the same unto the day of her redemption, when Jesus Christ
shall appear in glory, and therefore said Jesus Christ that he that is
clean and washede, has yet need to wash his fete, and therefore say we
after this article, that we believe the remission of sins.


Nathanael. Before we come unto that article thou must first declare unto me
the points I have demanded of the upon this, the which we have already
treated on.


Phy. Towchyng that thou haste demanded me of the Saints, we may
understand this communion generallye of all the elected that ever has been,
be, or shall be, but there is some difference, as touching the practice. True it
is that all the goods of Jesus Christ, because they be spiritual, be commune
vnt^^^l, but there is an othere communion betwen^ (...) Saints that yet be
living, and them which be departed for either of them have their estates
aparte. And therefore is there no such Communion between saints lyueinge and
them that be dead.
communion between the Saints that be departed and us as there has been
between them, in the time that they lived, and the^ that lived with them, and
at the least we have no testimonye of the holy scriptures for they serve not
now unto the church with the gifts and graces which they in their time
received of God for the edification of the same for they have fulfilled and
ended their course and their ministration which now is committed unto others,
and of the other part they have no more nead of us nor of our goods for they
be out of al necessity.


Nath. Ought we not then to honor them?


Phy. We may not honor them, as though they were present with us, nor do unto
them reverence nor salute them, nor speak to them nor present unto them of
our goods nor any manner of service for othere honour^ nor service can we not
do unto them but in following their holy doctrine and holy life, and
conversation as they have followed Jesus Christ, for those be the reliquies
that they have left us, in the which they would be honored by us and so then
when we have the ^^lye scriptures in reverence the which god has given unto
us by them, then do we honor their reliquies.


Nathana. It is then great folly to offer unto Offering to saints
them bread, wine, candels, gold and silver and other things like, seeing
they have no manner of need.


Phylyp That is a furye or follye more then pa^^imrie, it wear much better
for to offer unto the living Images and Saints, for to accomplish that
which the Apostle exhorts us to admonishynge us to communicate unto the
necessity of the saints, it is very clear that he speaks not there of the
Saints departed, but of the living and of the pore members of Jesus Christ
being among us languisshyng and over priest, with poverty and necessity.


Nathana. I doubt not but those offerynges were more pleasynge unto God.


Phi. Such were they of the primative church for the gatherynge spending and
distributynge of the which, the church at that time hadd^ her deacons to
serve at the tables, and At. vi. Romans xvi.
unto the necessity of the pore, we can no here find chapel church or Image
more meet for the practisynge of this excommunication and to offer unto the
Saints, then in visitynge the hospitales, pore wydowes, orpha^s fatherles,
sick, lame, neadie, and indige^t. Upon such Saints ought the goods of the
church to be employed and spente, and upon them that serves her and have need.


Nathan. That same were a goodlye thing, but tell me yet what seameth it the,
of brotherheades and monkerye, for seeing there is but Deuteronomy. vi. i Timo. ii.
Ephe. iiii.
one christian church, one communion of laintes, one God, one mediator of God
and man, one spirit as we have confessed hitherto, and that all is but one
gospel, one Baptism, one Ceane one fayeth, and that all the christians ought
to be in one self body one self heart, and one self soul, it seameth to
me, that there ought to be but one religion, and one brotherheade, seeing that
all the christians be brothers and have all received one self spirit of fayeth
and christian religion.


Phy. There is no doubt but they which have been the authors of the
monastical lectes, and that follows them, such as they be at this present
time, and those brotherheades likewise taken of the following of the panyms, be
Apostatase from the true church of Jesus Christ, for as Sismatykes they do
divide, break and tear the communion of saints, for as there is but one God,
so can there be but one religion, The which. S. James does diffine in this
manner, the religion that is pure and without spot toward God the father is
this. Viset the fatherles, and widows in their neades and tribulations and be
not spotted and defiled with this world, he does not say that the true
religion is to shute thy self in a cloister, or to dwell in the deserte to be
disguised in diverse habites, to eat, and devour the pore widows and fatherles
under the color of long praiynge, for such religion is to much pharisaicall,
but the christian religion does lie in fayeth, which makes us study unto all
purity and innocentie, and to exercise our charity toward our neighbor
which is the true mark of the true christians and disciples of Jesus Christ,
and the Abbot of that religion is God the father, and the guardian is Jesus
Christ, and the religious brethrene be al true christians and faithful, for
as the Apostle testifies the spirit of God witnesses unto our spirit, that
we be the children of God, by the which we cry Abba, that is to say father,
then in as much as Abba, does signify father, and that we take God so to
be, and call him father, there is the^ no doubt but he is the Abbot and founder
of our religion, Act. ii. Ephe. ii.
the which he does conserve, maynteyne, and govern, by Jesus Christ his son
whom he has given to be head of the church Ihon. vi. x.
and into whose hands he has put us all to be vinified, sanctified, unite
and conjoined with him by his holy spirit, and the habit that we must put
on, in this religion is our Lord Jesus Christ the new manne, which we must
put on, and of the old Adam for Ephe. iiii.
we must change the skin, and the heart and not the air, and the coote or
clothes.


Nathana. In as much then as God is the father of us all and that we make
invocation unto him by that name, it does follow also that we be all
brethren, and so will Jesus Christ that we call our selves, and then if we
be all brethrene, we be then one brotherhead. I can not then understand that
here is any other brotherhead but that of the holy Gooste, by the which the
church is assembled and all the saints unite and conjoined in one communion.


Phy. Thou concludeste very well, therefore Brotherhed Math. xiii
confess we first in this creed the faith which we have in the father, which
saves us by Jesus Christ his son, and does sanctify us by his holy
spirit, which be of one self essence and divinity with the father, in the
which we believe and put al our trust, we lay first the fundation and the
cause, and after we come unto the church which upon the l^me is founded and
builded. How can we the^ say, that we be of the brotherhead of Saint
Bernarde, and of Saint Sebastian and of The brotherhed of saints
such othere like, or of Saint Barbara or saint Katheryn, or of our Lady,
or of any other of the holy Saints what soever they be for we can another
call the^ fathers nor monor we be not b^etherne, by the reason of the^ nor
unite and conjoined by their spirits, but if they have been true and
fayethfull, they be our brethren, and have been led with oneselfe spirit.

And likewise may we also say of all the monastical sects and diversity of
religions. For if Saint Paul have called the Corinthyans S^smatikes which
said I am of Paul, and I of Cephas, and I of Appollo what title or name shall
I give them which say, I am of the religion of Saint Fraunces, and I of
Saint Dominike, and I of S Benet, and other such like, which be in greater
number among the christians then ever they were among the panims, may we not
well say unto them with the Apostle, is Christ divided? has Frauncys or
Dominike dyed for you? or are ye baptized in their names?

In as much then as we are baptized in the name of the father, of the son,
and of the holy Ghost, what have we need of any other religion but of that,
in the which this holy spirit does raygne, which does learn us to make
innocatio^ unto the fathers, in the name of Jesus Christ his son, which has
taken us all into their sauegarde and protection, what have we need of any
othere rule, but of that the which Jesus Christ has The Rule of the
Religion of Christ Gal. vi.
brought us from heaven? Of the which the Apostle does speak in this manner,
all they which walk after this rule, peace and mercy be upon them, and upon
Israel of God.


Natha. I have learned many goodlye points by the occasion of this communion
of saints, for thou haste not only taught me what it is, but also what is
the true excommunication, religion and christian brotherheade, and what is the
honor dene unto Saints, therefore now expound unto me the rest.


Phy. Because we have abyden solonge upon these two articles of the church and
the communion of Saints, we may here divide our matter and keep the rest
till an other time the which shall be shortly done.


Natha. At thine own pleasure be it.


In this last dialogue shall be spoken of the remission of sins, of the
keys of the kyngedome of heaven, of the resurrection and immortal life.
Nathanaell. We have done so much by our Iorneis that we be al most come to
the end of the creed, seeing therefore we be arrived thus far fourth, our
hertes must not fail us for the little way we have to go.


Phy. I have better courage then ever I had, tell me therefore what follows?


Natha. The remission of sins, what is the understanding of this article.


Phy. I confess by these words that I believe that as there is one church
assemble, and unite by the holy spirit, and in the same o^e communion of all
goods, that the sins likewise and the faults be pardoned, unto the
fayethfull by the grace, goodness, and mercy of God, which does quitte them
all their dettes, to the end they should not be rekened unto them at his
Judgment, nor that they should not bear the pain which they have merited
and deserved. Humayn Satisfacion and merets



Nathan. Seeing there is remission and forgiveness it does appear and follow
that there is nothing of our satisfaction, for where there is pardone, there can
be nothing of our merits.


Phylype. There is nothing more certain for the dete is not forgiven to him
that satisfies and pays wherefore it does follow, in as much as there is
remission and forgyuenes for us that the satisfaction is of sum other then of
our selves, and that we can pres^t no other recompense unto god, but the
satisfaction of his son Jesus Christ, for whose love we obtain of the
father pardon of al our sins.


Natha. And this pardon and remission ca^ we not obteygne but in the church.


Phy. No for as at the time of the floude, none could be saved which were
without the shipe or ark of Noah: so none can avoid the Genesis viii. P^^^r. iii.
No s^luacion ou^ of the church
judgment of God, and obteygne grace and pardon of his misdedes, except he be
a true membre of the church, incorporated in the body of Jesus Christ,
persenerynge with the people of God in the unity of the fayeth.


Natha. It follows then that all cismatykes heritikes, infidels,
excommunicate, and al authors of sects, which be divided and separated from
the church: can have no pardon of their sins, but abide in death and
damnation unto such time they be recouciled with her.


Phy. It is even so.


Nathana. Tell me then by what means we obtain pardon in the church. Is it
necessary to confess, our sins unto the priests, and to have their
absolution for to obtain this remission.


Phy. It is very requisite that if we will, that God pardon us that we
reknoweledge our faults, but not to the priests, for it is not against the^
that we have sinned but against God, which only as most soueraygne king
may give us grace and pardon, and therefore as we have sinned against him,
even so must we conteste unto him our sins, and ask of him pardon according
to the example of David, of Daniell, and of othere holy prophets and
servants of God. For as Saynce John says (if we confess our sins) he is
faithful and will hear us.


Natha. I understand well, we must confess our selves unto God first, but
is it not re-requisite that we confess our selves unto me^.


Phy. We may confess us unto men in diverse sorts, as first. If we have
offended any we ought to reknoweledge our faults toward him, and ask him
pardon, and enforce our selves to return into favor with him, for we can not
obteygne pardon of god so long as the injury we have done unto one neighbor
does accuse us before him, asking vengeance against us, except we study
to reconcile our selves, unto him who^ we have offended, and this confession
may be called brotherlye reco^siliation the which Jesus Christ does greatly
recommend unto us. There is yet another manner of reco^siliatio^ toward men,
the which may be boeth publyke and particular, for when we have been Open
co^fes^^on
in error, and abused in Idolatry and superstition, and have offended God, we
ought not to be ashamed to reknoweledge our faults ope^lie, and to give
thanks unto God, as did i timo. i. Math. i. Act. ii. iii.
saint Paul, writing unto Timothe, and they which did come unto the baptism
of John Baptiste, and they which were converted by the p^eachynge of Saint
Petre, and also of the Ephesians which did burn the books of sorcerie: even
so the^, as I may reknowledg and confess my faults openly in this manner,
before the church of God: even so may I do in particular or secret unto my
neighbor and for to have council and consolation of him or for to reconcile
my self unto him if I have Particular confession
offended him or to the end he pray to God for me, unto such confession
does Saint James exhort us saying, Confess your selves one to an other,
and pray each one for other, he does not say, confess the unto the priests,
for as we ought to pray the one for the other, and not the priests only,
even so ought we to reknowledge our faults one to an other, and confess our
infirmities for to give praises unto God, for the entertayning of amity among
us and every one to seek the quietness of other, but I have not found in all
the holy scripture that God has co^m^unded us to go to tell all our sins in
the eat of a priest, for that is impossible, and God does not so much desire
the reliting of our sins by particular, Math. xvi.
as the co^trition, sighs, and sorrows of the heart and the tears, as we have
exemple in. S. Petre which did much better confess his sins with his heart
and his eyes the^ with mouth.


Natha. I find that, that thou say is very good, but I would yet feign
know how this remission is practiced in the church, and how we be partakers
of it, is it not by the bulls, indulgence and pardons given by the Pope?


Phy. It is by pardon and indulgence but not of paper and perchemente sealed
with wax or lead, as those which the Pope gives, but by the indulgence and
bulls that the celestial father has sent us from heaven by his son Jesus
Christ written in our hertes with his own propre finger, and by his holy
spirit sealed with his precious blood, and ratified, and confirmed by his
death and passion.


Natha. The bulls and pardons of the pope be then nothing worth.


Phy. Yes they profit them that gives them, as towchyng their bodies because
they take money for them, but they bring great damage and hurt unto their
souls, and also unto the bodies and souls and goods of them that receive
them, for in as much as they seek remission of sins by any other mean then
by the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ they do not believe the remission of
sins the which they confess, the which is in the church of Jesus christ,
wherefore they abide always in their sin and da^natio^, and subjects to the
cu^sse and maledictio^ that S. Petre did give unto Simon Magus and his monei.


Nata. Thou will then say there ^^ no other true pope that may give us
indulgence and pardon, for to deface and take away ours sins but Jesus
Christ, but by what means does he make us partakers of his pardons and
indulgences?


Phylype. By the ministeri of the keys of the kingdom of heaven, that is to
say, by the predication and preaching o^ his word which is the true keye of
knowledge.


Nathanaell. And who then has these keys ^uc. xi. Math. xxiii Math. xvi.



Phy. The church to whom Christ has given them, and be put in ure, and
practice by all true evangelical Apostles, pastors, ministers and priests.


Nata. Have they the^ authority and power to pardon sins, and to absolve men?


Phy. Not of them selves, but by the ministration of the keys, and preaching
of the gospel.


Natha. Speak this more clearlye.


Phy. There is but the only God that may pardon and forgive sins, and that
may give grace, but when by his ministers he does offer unto us Jesus Christ
his son, by his word, and in him remission of our sins, he that believes
is saved, unbound and delivered from his sins, and he that believes not,
abides bound and damned as the minister opens unto him by the word.


Natha. Then the ministers be but servants and ambassadors, and have no
authority nor power* but so much as the^ take of the word, and in that they do
faithfully set forth their message and ambassade.


Phy. No for none can pardon the sins but God, and when man does open the
word of god, it is not man that speaks, but it is the spirit of God that
speaks in him, by the which the bearer is bound, or losed, according to his
fayeth or unbelieve. Therefore did Jesus Christ blow toward his disciples and
gave them the holy ghost before he said unto them, whose sins soever ye
forgive shall be forgiven, and whose sins soever ye retain shall be retained,
he would by that show that it was the holy Ghost that did pardon them, and
not they which he did use as his instruments and messengers.


Natha. I understand well, it is as an ambassadoure, which if he fayethfullye
execute his Math. x. Ihon. x.
change the prince confirms it that he does if he do othe^wyse he will not
confirm it, but punish him greuouslye.


Phylype. It is as a man that will open a gate, it he have no keye or if the
keye that he has be not mete for the lock, he ca^ not open it, and therefore
in as much as Jesus Christ^ is the door and the way, by the which only we
may go unto the father Romans x. Luc. xi.
and we can not go unto Jesus Christ but by fayeth, which opens unto us
the door and all the treasures that be in him, and fayeth comes by hearing of
the word of God, which is the key of knowledge, it does well follow that all the
power of the Apostles and of their successors is there limited, and that he
that has not this key, is no minister of christ.


Natha. I may the^ well understand by this that the power of the pope, of
byshopes, and priests does extend so far as they follow the word of God,
and God does approve and confirm that which they do by it, and that which
they do without it, or against it he does condemn all.


Phy. If thou wylt se the practice of this, considre how. S. Peter did use at
Jerusalem, he did open Jesus Christ, penance, and remission of sins in his
name Practies of the keys Act. ii. iii.
unto the Jews, they which the word did touch at the heart, and believed in
it were losed by his ministry according to the promise of Jesus christ, saing
that he that believes Mark. xvi.
and is baptized shall be saved, and contrary wise he that believes not shall be
condemned, it follows the^ that all the infidels abide bound as by the open
preaching, all the hearers be bound or unbound, according to their fayeth or
unbelieve, even so be we by all the particular admonicions of the Gospel,
opened, and showed forth unto us by the servants of God visitynge,
correckynge, admonishynge, or co^solatyng of us other in health or sikcenes.


Nathanaell. This point is inoughe opened Resureccion of the flesh
and declared, let us come now unto that which follows of the resurrection of
the flesh and the life eternal, which shall be for the end and co^clusio^,
wherefore be these two last articles put in?


Phy. For many causes, for without them all the religion were nothing, for if
we believe not the resurrection of the flesh, and that our bodies should rise
again after this i Cor. xv.
mortal life, we should be most miserable of all me^, and should reuerse all the eua^gelical preaching which should also be faulse and ^ame if it were
otherwise.


Natha. What vnderstandeste thou then by the resurrection of the flesh?


Phy. I understand that every one shall arise truly in his propre body, and
that the same body, and the same flesh which shall have slepte, and shall have
been corrupted, and consumed in the earth unto powdre, shall be fully restored,
and again co^ioyned with his soul after she shall have put of al infirmity,
and corruption for to be like unto the glorious body of Jesus.


Natha How may it be done that the body which Ihon. xix.
has be turned into pondre and earth, should be restored into greater dignity
then ever i^ was and to be immortal.


Phi. We may not ask how that may be done which god has promised for that is
most sure, he that has made man of nothing, is he not strong inoughe to
restore him again, we se every day the experience of this in the corn when
it is sown, it seems to be lost, and does corrupt in the earth but after it
comes forth much fayrer and fruitful.


Nathanaell. Then when a man is put in the earth according to the ordinance
of God, he is sown as the wheat in the earth, and abides the time ordained
of god, at the which time he does arise come, forth of the earth, and is all
together perfect.


Phy. Even so it is, for as the wheat because of the sproute that he does
bear does take again and is reuined: even so the fayethfull which dye and
go to rest with the sproute of Jesus Christ which is the spirit of god is
raised again by the self same spirit which raised up Jesus Christ from the
dead.


Nathanaell. There ryseth none then, but the true christians,


Phylyp. All shall arise both good and evil.


Natha. But in as much as the unfaithful de part not from this world, with
the sproute or spryng of Christ, how be they partakers of his resurrection?


Phy. They are not partakers of his resurrection, seeing they rise in
condemnation, for to go unto the second death but as they be dead with the
sproute of Satan which is mortal: even so shall they arise for to be punished
eternally with him.


Nath. There is the^ a life eternal and a death eternal.


Phi. We must not doubt, the one is comuneto the good, the othere unto the
reproved, and therefore do we conclude the articles of our faith, by the
eternal life, which is the end and co^su^mation of al things.


Natha. Did it not suffice to say, I believe the resurrection? Wherefore put we
to, Of the flesh Or wherefore say we not as well the resurrection of the body, as
of the flesh?


Phy. We say first. The resurrection, for to declare that the same self man
which did fall by death shall arise and be raised, and to the end that none
should think that the resurrection shall be only of the soul without the body,
and in the immortality of the same as the philosophers have thought, or that
the same propre bodies which we have should not arise again but should be
changed into other, or should be converted into spirit, we do say notabli,
the resurrection of the flesh for to declare that the self same body, and the
self same flesh which we have borne from the womb of our mother shall arise
in glory, in incorruption, and immortality.


Nathan. And did it not suffice to confess the resurrection of the flesh,
without put tynge to of the eternal life? Is it not al one?


Phy. We declare by that, that we do not rise for to dye again, as they did
which were raised again miraculously by Jesus Christ, by the Apostles and
prophets, but shall arise into a life far differing from this which shall be
immortal and perdurable for ever, for we shall be out of all miseries, and
shall be no more subjects to poverty, hungre, thyrste, sickness, death, sin,
nor hell, but shall be like unto Math. xxii.
the Angels of God with the which we The fode of eternal life.
shall raygne eternally.


Natha. This shall be then a life without eating or drinking.


Phy. No, but the meat that we shall eat, and the pleasures that we shall
have, shall not be such as Mahumite does promise to them that keep his laws,
but al shall be sateled, and satisfied of the tree and bread of life, of the
goodness and glory of God, for of meats, and other i. Cor. xv.
corruptible things there shall be no need when the cause for the which we use
them shall be taken away, that is to say, when that death shall be abolished,
and that our corruption and mortality shall be turned into incorruption and
immortality, and that the last enemy, sin death, Satan, and hell, shall
be overthrown and that God shall be all in all.


Natha. Seeing the evil and reproved shall as well arise as the fayethfull, and
that there is as well an eternal death for them, as a life eternal for the
faithful Wherefore makeste thou no mention but of the one, and speakeste no
word of the other?


Phy. Because the fayethfull have nothing ado with the vnfayethful. And
therefore do we leave aparte and do not touch in this sum of our fayeth, but
that which serves unto the consolation of the elected, for to show unto the^
the goods that be given the^ of God.


Nathana. In what manner may we use this article to our profit?


Phylype. It does teach The sovereign goodness of man.
us that which we have all ready treated in the beginning of our matter,
that is to say in what does lie the Soueraygne goodness and the felisitie of man, we may well by this know that we must not seek it in this earth,
nor in this present life, and if we well understand this, we shall also know
that al this mortal life is but a pilgrimage, and that we must not seek here
any permanente city or dwelling, nor to rote our hertes in these Hebr. xiii.
corruptible things, but to seek an other, and to repute our selves as
strangers in this world, according to the exemple of the holy patriarchs.

This fayeth also teaches us not to be discoraged though we feel our selves
overwhelmed with so many euiles in the mean time whyleste our life is as yet
hydden in Jesus Christ, and that we can not as yet fullye feel Colo. iii.
the fruit nor the grace that God has done to us in him, and for to redres
us in hope, and to sustain and suffer by patience unto such time that Jesus
Christ shall be reueiled from heaven, and that we shall have full reioysyng of
the glory and felicity, that we abide and look for.


Nathanaell. Thou haste so well satisfied me in all things that I can ask nor
require any more, but to give the thanks for the pain thou haste taken with
me, and yield graces and thanks unto God, who has done us so much good.
To whom I pray that it will please him so well to imprinte in our hertes this
fayeth, of the which we have so much spoken that it may have efficatie in us
by charity in such sort, that the Image of Jesus Christ may be seen in us
to shyue. And that by him we may come unto the same sovereign goodness and
eternal beatitude unto the which we be borne and called.


Phylip. God give us that grace as I hope he will do unto who^ I also pray to
have the alwais in his keeping.


Natha. So be it of the FINIS.


Imprinted at London by John Day and Wyllyam Se^es, dwelling in Sepulchers
Parish at the sign of the Resurrection a little above Holbourne Londuite.
Cum gratia and priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.




