Judgment.
SAint Jerome said, Whatsoever he did he still thought that that Voice was still
in his Ears, Arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment.

St. Jerome used this excellent saying, If my Father stood Weeping on his Knees
before me, and my Mother hanging on my Neck behind me, and all my Brothers,
Sisters, Children, and Friends howling on every side, to retain me in a sinful
Life, I would run over my Father, fling my Mother to the Ground, despise my
Kindred and fling them under my Feet, that I may run to CHRIST. Here Is Love and
Fortitude!

CHrisostom says, God had rather Men should love him, than fear him; to be
called Father, rather than Master: He wins by Mercy, that he (...) not perish
by Justice.

O (...) Godly Man knows how to make (...) of Mercies.

It was St. Hierom's saying, Dead Flesh is to be cut off for fear of Gangrene.
Arias at first was but a Spark, but being not suppressed betimes, proved the
Incendary of the whole Church.

St. Austin says, Love is strong as Death; as Death kills the Body, so Love
of Eternal Life kills Worldly Desires and Affections.

The Love of Christ being predominant in the Soul, deadens the Affections to
any thing else.

Christ asked Peter Three Times, Love thou me, not for his own Information,
but that by his Threefold Profession he might help his Threefold Negation of
him. Nicephorus.

Good and Wicked Men, and Hypocrites.
THey are like True and Counterfeit Money, the one seems to be good, and is
not; the other both seems and is good. Ignatius.

Chrysostom says, As a Rock, though the Winds blow, and the Waves beat against
it, is Immovable; so Faith, grounded on the Rock Christ, holds out in all
Temptations, and Spiritual Combats.

Chrysologus says, Neither in the Steel alone, nor in the Flint alone, any
Fire can be seen, nor Extracted, but by Conjunction and Collision; so, nor by
Faith alone, nor by Works alone is Salvation to be attained, but by joining
both together.

Alexander of Hales says, What the Eye is to the Body, Faith is to the Soul,
it is good for direction if it be kept well. And as Flies hurt the Eyes, so
little Sins, and Ill-Thoughts do the Soul.

Divine Love (says Basil) is a never failing Treasure; he that has it is Rich,
and he that wants it is Poor.

Chrisostom says, A Bulwark of Adamant is not more impregnable than the Love
of Brethren.

THE GOLDEN TREATISE OF THE ANCIENT AND LEARNED FAther VINCENTIVS Lirinensis.
For the antiquity, and universality, of the Catholic Religion: against the
profane novelties of all Heresies: Newly translated into English by A. P.
Very profitable for all such as desire in these dangerous times, to embrace
the true Gospel of Jesus Christ, and to remain free from all infectio^ of
false doctrine as in the Preface more at large is declared.

With Privilege.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader zealous of truth, and desirous of Salvation: A. P.
wishes the knowledge of the one in this life, and the fruition of the other in
the life to come.
IPRESENT thee here (gentle Reader) the ancient french Father Vincentius
Lirinensis, attired after the English cut: a book as learned as little, and no
less profitable, then pleasant: of small volume, if thou respect the
quantity, but of rare prise if thon consider the quality. It entreats not
of gathering and scraping together the pelf of this world, which choaketh up
the Mat. 13. V. 22 Mat. 19. V. 24
heavenly seed of Gods word, and puts man in a dangerous state, if we
credit him who being rich, for our sake became poor: it disputes not of
ambitious and gallant attire, nor of the art of pampering this corruptible
carcass which brought that brave belligod, of Luc. 16
whom we read in the Gospel, to the furious flames and endless torments of
Hell fire: it prosecuteth not wicked and wanton discourses, which corrupt good
manners, being in very deed the bellows to kindle the coals of carnalitie, the
nources of unchaste thoughts, and the very bait with which the Devil does
daily angle and catch the unfortunate souls of mortal men. But it handles
that which redou^deth to the benefit of our soul, created to the image of
God, and shows us the way how we may so govern this frail vessel of ours,
in the tempestious Sea of this wicked world, that at last we may safely arrive
at the port and harbor of celestial felicity. For if the first step to
Heaven is to believe aright, and the foundation and ground of all salvation be
faith, as I think no man can doubt, that believes that there is any God or
truth at all, then can not this golden treatise but be acceptable to all such
as love Jesus Christ, and tender the salvation of their own souls, being as
it were the heavenly pillar of fire that Exodus 13
may guide us through the deserte of this world, unto the land of promise, and
the glittering star to lead us unto Mat. 2
the newborn King of the Jews and Savior of mankind. But to the end that
thou may more plainly and particulerly view the excellency and great
necessity of this rare book, and as it were with Moises from the top of
Mount Nebo Deuteronomy. 34.
contemplate the land of Canaan flowing with milk and honey. I will briefly
set down such motives as invited me to the labor of the translation, for the
self same, as I verily think, cannot but inflame thee to the dilligent reading
of the same. Three principal reasons then especially moved me. The first was,
because it is very ancient, being written above an eleue^ hundred years past,
for it was composed three years after the general Council of Ephesus, as
appears in the conclusion of the book. And as the Author him self is of
great antiquity so is his doctrine more ancient, being the self same which
flourished in his time, and came from the Apostles of CHRIST: which thing as it
was never of any good man doubted of, so is it also most apparent: First by
sound reason grounded in gods word, because when any man writes ought
concerning faith and religion, and the same is not controld of any of that
time, it is an evident argument, that it was consonant to the doctrine then
generally taught and received, otherwise those Pastors and Doctors which God
(as S. Paul says) has given that we be not little ones wavering and be carried
about with every blast of doctrine, Ephesians. 4
could never have held their peace, but would as the Prophet admonishes Have
cried out, exalted their voice like Esa. 58.
a trumpet, as we find in like case, the licentious Nicholaits noted by S.
John for their false doctrine: Himineus and Apoc. 2
Philetus reproved by S. PAVL for an error about the resurrection. Secondly 2.
Tim. 2.
because the author him self does not only confess the same, in setting down
the answer of many excellent holy, and learned men, which lived in his days,
nor only because he acknoledgeth that what he has here written, that he
received it from his ancestors, and forefathers, both which he does in the
very first entrance, and generally throughout the wholle book: but especially
for that toward the latter end he so highly commends the general Council
of Ephesus, that is the Parlame^t of the world: which surely he never would have
done, had he not joined with the^ in opinion, concerning faith and religion,
and what their opinion was, him self records, for he says that those
Fathers inspired by God decreed that nothing was to be believed, but that which
the sacred antiquity of our fore fathers agreeing together in Christ, had
holden and believed: Which surely is a notable argument, that what faith was by
Christ planted, and his Disciples preached, was by them carefully kept and
maintained: which thing is especially of us English men to be noted because the
first four general Cou^cells, amongst which this of Ephesus is one, and the
third in order, are worthily allowed by act of Parliament. Wherefore moved with
such reasons, we may Anno. 1. Elizabe.
without all scruple or doubt, not only read this book but also embrace and
intertaine it, as the common doctrine of that time, as the religion practiced
and reverenced in the primative Church as the faith and belief of the Ephesin
Council and so consequently, as the true doctrine of Jesus Christ. Now the^
seeing we live in those days in which so many new sects and doctrines, such
strange and monstrous opinions, such superstitious and newfangled devises fly
up and down the world, and seeing we are fallen into the latter times in which
Men shall heap up to them selves masters according to their own desires, 2.
Tim. 4
and shall not endure sound doctrine, but auert their ears from truth and be
converted to fables. In which they shall love pleasures 2. Tim. 3.
more then God, have a show of godliness, but yet denying the virtue thereof, In
which many scoffers shall come, walking Ep. Iud.
according to their own desires, who divide them selves, sensual, not having
the spirit.

In which many false Christ's, and many false Prophets shall arise and seduce
Mat. 24
many. Very necessary it is, being thus forewarned of God, that before all
things we take great heed not to be perverted, and seduced by erroneous
teachers, or false Prophets, but on the contrary do diligently preserve our
faith, the light of our souls: the root and foundation of all goodness, and
with out which it is impossible to please God as S. PAVL says. Wherein we can
take no Heb. 11
better course, no way more surer then to repair to the time of the primative
Church, when the blood of Christ was yet fresh bleeding in men's hearts, when the
Gospel was insta^tly preached, firmly believed, sincerely practiced, confirmed
by miracles, established by the death of so many thousands of Martirs
especially being exhorted hereunto by the holy scriptures, for as by the^ we
are admonished of the dangers and troubles of the latter days, so are we for
a preservative against them, sent to ancient times to conduct us to gods true
religion. Stand (says the Prophet Jeremy Cap. 6.
upon the way and inquire of the ancient paths, which is a good way and walk
in that and you shall find rest for your selves. Solomon likewise in his
proverbs admonishes us in this sort. Do not pass the ancient bounds which
thy Cap. 22.
Fathers have set down. And in Ecclesiasticus. Do not set light by the report
of thy elders for they have learned of the Cap. 8.
forefathers, because of them shall thou learn understanding, and in the time
of necessity shall thou give answer. To the end therefore (gentle Reader) that
thou be not carried away with the sweet benedictions of those licentious
masters, with which the latter times, according to the predictio^ of the
Apostles, should be much pestered, nor seduced with the erroneous doctrine of
those false Prophets, and false Christ's, of which the son of God, the true
Prophet and true Christ, has forewarned us. And that thou may find out a
good way to walk in, and keep thee within the ancient bounds, set down by
our forefathers, and by their report learn wisdom and understanding: I am to
request thee to vouchsafe the reading of this old Father newly translated, and
I nothing doubt but thou will give that censure which Queen Saba gave of 3.
Reg. 10.
the wisdom of Solomon.

The second reason which set me for ward was, for that I find this book, not
written against some one or a few particular false teachers (as S. Augustine
and diverse ancient learned Doctors did against the Arians, Pelagians and such
like) but against any heresy or erroneous doctrine whatsoever which is a thing
of so great importance, as I know not what can be devised more. What gold
were to much, or what treasures to dear for that medicine which had virtue to
cure all disseases? False doctrine and heresy is a great soar, a canker more
pestilent then any corporal infirmity whatsoever, seeing this works only the
temporal destruction of our carcass: but that causes death both of body and
soul everlasting. In other books we find the co^futatio^ of some special
fase point of doctrine, in many the overthrow of diverse, but to destroy all at
one blow, and those each so contrary to them selves, so distinct for time, so
diverse for place, so many for number, is a property peculiar only to this
most excellent treatise, and therefore it may fitly be compared to that
miraculous pond, whereof we read in the Gospel, Joan. 5
which cured all diseases: for as that water moved by the Angel cured
whatsoever infirmity of him that first entered in: so this book written no dout
by the motion of the holy Ghost, has force to cure any such as is corrupted
with erroneous doctrine, or to preserve him from all infection, if he voutsafe
to enter in, that is to read it to ponder it, and to weigh diligently what is
said an discoursed of. The reason why this book has this rare quality, in my
opinion is, because it shows the right way of expownding Gods divine
scripture, in which so many to the great danger of men's souls, do so greatly
go a stray: and therefore as David overthrowing Golias the chief cha^pion of
the camp, 1. Reg. 17.
put all the Philistians to flight, so no marvel though this ancient Author
discovering the false expositions and gloses of sacred scripture, the
principal pillar of all poisoned doctrine over throws also all wicked
heresy.

The third and last motive which encouraged me to this labor, and ought partly
to move thee to the reading, is the brevity of the work, the finenes of the
method, the eloquence of the style: and therefore if long and large volumes do
little please, this is short which can not cause dislike, if confusion be
ingratfull, a methodicall order can not but like thee, if a style harsh and
course fitteth not thy taste, then I trust that which is fine, pleasant and
delicate will content thy humor. Only I am to crave pardon that my rough and
rude English, nothing answers his smoothe and curious latin, and therefore I
could wish thee, if skill serves, rather to common and parle with the Author
him self, then to use the help of his rude interpretor, otherwise for such as
be not of so deep reading, for whom especially I have taken this pain, I am
to desire that they nothing dislike the soueraign medicine for the wodden box,
nor the exquisit and rare gemme for the course casket.

These be the reasons (gentle Reader) which especially moved me to the
translating of this ancient and learned Father: I beseech thee as thou
tenderest the salvation of thine own soul, that thou would voutsafe to
read him attentively, in whom thou shalt see cleerelye as in a glass the
faith of our forefathers, the religion of the primative Church, and in him thou
shall find by Gods word and authority of sacred scripture, the madness of all
Heretics crushed in pieces, and that in a short methodicall, and eloque^t
treatise. The holy Ghost which moved no doubt this ancient learned Father to
the writing of this work, incline and move thy heart to the diligent reading
and sincere following of the same.

A. P.

VINCENTIVS LIRInensis for the Antiquity and Universality of the Catholic
faith, against the profane Novelties of all Heresies.
THE holy scripture of GOD saying and warning us in this sort: Ask thy
Fathers and they shall tell thee, thy elders Deuteronomy. 52
and they shall report unto thee: And again, Accommodate thy ears to the
works of wise men: Likewise My son Prou. 22 Prou. 3.
forget not these speeches but let thy heart keep my words.

It seems unto me a peregram and the least of Gods servants, that it shall
by his gracious help be a matter of no small profitte to set down in writing
what I have of holy Fathers faithfully received, being a thing very necessary
for mine own infirmity, having always thereby in readiness, how by daily
reading thereof I may help my weak memory. Unto which labor not only the
profit to be reaped by the work, but also the very consideration of the time,
and opportunity of the place moved and invited me: the time, because reason it
is, that seeing it consumes and bereueth us of all humane and earthly things,
that we should also take out of it something which may avail us to life
everlasting: especially seeing the terrible judgment of God, which we expect
drawing near upon us, does seriously inuit and provoke us to increase our
studies and exercises in religion, and the fraudulent dealing of new Heretics
requires much care and atte^tion. The place, because having forsaken the
company and troubles of the world and chosen a solitary Abbey in a little town
for mine abiding where I may without any great distraction of mind put in
practice that which is song in the Psalm: Be vacant and see that I am God.
With which reasons also accords the purposed end and resolution Psa. 45
of my whole state of life, in that I have by the help of Christ, after long
and diverse storms endured in the wars shrewded my self in the harbor of a
religious life (a secure port for all states of men) where contemning the
blastes of vanity and pride, I may pacify god with the sacrifice of
humility, and so escape not only the shipwreck of this present life, but also
the fire of the next.

But now in the name of God will I set upon that, which I have taken in hand,
that is, to set down in writing such things as our forefathers have delivered
and committed to our charge, using herein rather the fidelity of a reporter,
then the presumption of an author, meaning yet to keep this rule in my
writing, not copiously to lay forth all, but briefly to handle each necessary
point, neither that in fine and exact words, but in easy and common speech
in such sort that most things may seem rather touched then declared. Let the^
write delicately and pen curiously, which trusting either upon wit, or
moved with respect of dewty, enterprise any such actio^, but for me it is
sufficient, that for helping my memory or rather forgetfulness I have gathered
together this Commonitorie, which notwithstanding by Gods grace I will daily
endeavor by little and little (calling to mind such things as in times past I
have learned) to correct and make more perfect. And this have I thought good
to forewarne, that if haplye this work of mine passing forth, fall into the
hands of Censurers, they do not ouerhastely in it reprehend that which they
understand present promise to undertake, with future correction better to
polish and amend.

CHAP. I.
INQVIRING therefore often with great desire, and attention, of very many
excellent, holy, and learned men, how and by what means I might assuredly and
as it were by some general and ordinary way discern the true Catholic
faith, from false and wicked Heresy. To this question I had usually this
answer of the^ all, that whether I or any other desired to find out the Note
the answer of many excellent holy and learned men.
fraud of Heretics, daily springing up and to escape their snares, and
willingly would continue safe and sound in religion, that he ought two manner of
ways by Gods assistance to defend and preserve his faith, that is first by the
authority of the law of God: secondly by the tradition of the Catholic
Church.

Here some man perhaps may ask, that seeing the Canon of the scripture is
perfect and most abundantly of it self sufficient for all things, what need
we join unto it the authority of the church her vederstanding and
interpretation. The reason is this, because the scripture being of it self so
deep and profound all men do not understand it in one and the same sense, but
diverse men diversely this man and that man, this way and that way expound and
interpret the sayings thereof, so that to ones thinking, so many men, so many
opinions almost may be gathered out of them, for Nouatus expounds it one way,
Photinus another, Sabellius after this sort, Donatus after that: Arius,
Eunomius, Macedonius will have this exposition: Appolinaris and Priscillian
will have that: Iouinian, Pelagius, Celestius, gather this sense, and to
conclude Nestorius finds out that, and therefore very necessary it is for the
avoiding of so great windings and turnings of diverse errors that the line of
expounding the Prophets and Apostles, be directed and drawn, according to the
rule of the ecclesiastical and Catholic sense.

Again in the Catholic Church, we have greatly to consider, that we hold
that, which has been believed every where, always and of all men: for that is
truly and properly Catholic (as the very force and nature of the word does
declare, which comprehends all things that be truly universal) and that
shall we do, if we follow universality, antiquity, consent. Universality
shall we follow thus, if we profess that one faith to be true which the Church
throughout the world acknowledges and confesses: Antiquity shall we follow,
if we disagree not any whit in opinion from them, whom all know that our holy
elders and Fathers reverenced and had in great estimation. Consent shall we
likewise follow, if amongst our forefathers we hold the definitions and
opinions of all or almost of all the Priests and Doctors together.

CHAP. II.
WHAT then shall a Christian Chatholicke do, if some small part of the Church
cut it self off from the communion of the universal faith? What else but
prefer the health of the wholle body before the pestiferous and corrupt
member. what if some new infection goes about to currupt not only a little
part but the Wholle CHVRCH? Then likewise shall he regard, and be sure to
cleave unto antiquity, which cannot possibly be seduced by any craftye
noueltye. What if in antiquitye it self, and amongst the ancient fathers, be
found some error of two or three men; or happily of some one city or Province?
Then shall he diligently take heed that he prefer the decrees and
determinations of the universal ancient Church, before the temerity or folly
of a few. What if some such case happen where no such thing can be found? Then
shall be labor, by conferring and laying together amongst them selves the
ancient Fathers opinions, not of all, but of those only which living at diverse
times, and sundry places, yet remaining in the communion and faith of one
Catholic Church, were probable masters and guides to be followed: and
whatsoever he perceives, not one or two, but all jointly with one full
consent, plainly usually, constantly, to have holden, written, and taught, let
him know that without all scruple or doubt he ought to believe, hold, and
profess that faith, that doctrine, that religion. But for more perspicuitie
and light of that which has been said: each part is to be made clear with
several examples, and somewhat more at large to be amplified, least to much
breuity breed obscurity, and overmuch haste in spech take away the substance
and weight of the matter.

When in th time of Donatus, of who^ came the Donatistes, a great part of
Afric fell headlong into his furious error, and unmindful of her name,
religion, and profession, preferred the sacriligious temeritie of one man,
before the Church of Christ, then all those of Afric which detested that
profane Schism and united them selves to the universal Churches of the
world, they only amongst them all remaining with in the bosom of the catholic
Church could be saved, leaving certainly a notable example to their posterity
how ever after by good custom the sound doctrine of all men, ought to be
preferred before the madness of one or a few. Likewise when the heresy of the
Arians had near corrupted not a little part, but well nigh the wholle world,
in such sort that (almost all the Bishops of the latin Church deceived, partly
by force partly by fraud) men's minds were covered as it were with a mist, what
especially in so great a co^fusio^ was to be followed: then whosoever was a
lover and a follower of Christ, and preferred ancient faith before new error,
was not touched with any spott of that infection. The danger of which time
does abundantly show, what calamity enters in, when a new doctrine is
admitted. For at that time not only small matters, but things of great
importance were overthrown: for not only alliance, kindred, friends, families,
but also cities, common wealths, countries Provinces, yea and at length the
wholle Roman Empire, was shaken and ouerturned. For when the profane novelty
of the Arrians, like a certain Bellona or fury, had first taken captive the
Emperor, afterward subduing all palaces to her new laws never ceased after
that to trouble and confound all things private and public, holy and not
holy, putting no difference betwixt good and truth but as it were from an high
place did strike all at her pleasure. Then married women were defiled, widows
spoiled, virgins violated, Abbeis suppressed, Clergy men vexed, Deacons
beaten, Preistes banished, Dungeons, Prisons, Mines, filled with holy men, of
which the greater part banished the city, like exuls, pined and consumed away
amongst deserts, dens, and wild beasts, with nakedness, thirst, and
hunger. And all this misery had it any other beginning? but because humane
superstition was admitted for heavenly doctrine, well grounded antiquity,
subverted by wicked novelty, whilst our Superiors decrees were violated, our
Fathers ordinances broken, the Cannons of our ancestors abrogated, and whilst
the licentious liberty of profane and new curiosity, kept not it self
within the chaste limittes of sacred and sound antiquity. But perhaps we
devise all this of hatred to Novelty, and affection to Antiquity? Who so
thinks, at least let him give credit to blessed Ambrose who in his second
book to Gratian the Emperor bewailinge the sharp persecution of that time,
says thus: But now O God (quoth he) we have sufficiently washed and purged
with our ruin and blood, the death of the Confessors, the banishment of
Preistes, and the wickedness of so great impiety, it has manifestly appeared
that they cannot be safe which have violated and forsaken their faith. Likewise
in his third book of the same work. Let us therefore (quoth he) keep the
precepts of our elders and not with temerity of rude presumption, violate those
seals desce^ding to us by inheritance. None durst open that prophetical book
close sealed, not the elders, not the powers not the Angels, not the
Archangelles: to explicate and interpret that hook was a prerogative only
reserved to Christ. The Preistlike book sealed by the Confessors and
consecrated with the death of many Martirs, which of us dare presume to open,
which book such as were compelled to unseal, notwithstanding afterward when
the fraud was condemned, they sealed again, they which durst not violate or
touch it becam Martirs: how can we deny their faith, whose victory we so
praise and commend? We commend them I say O venerable Ambrose, we surely
commend them, and with praises admire the^. For who is so senseless, that
although he cannot ariue to their perfection, desires not yet to imitate them,
who^ no force could remove from defending their ancestors faith: not
threatenings, not flatterings, not life, not death, not the King, not the
Emperor, not the Empire, not men, not Devils, those I say whom for
maintenance of religiouse antiquity, our Lord vouchsafed of so highlye and so
great a grace, that by them he would repair the overthrown Churches, give
life to the dead spirituality, restore the overthrown glory of Preistes,
blotte out and wash away with a fountain of heavenly tears (which God put
into the hearts of the Bishops) those wicked, not books, but blottes and
blurres, of new impiety, finally to restore almost the wholle world (shaken
with the cruel tempest of vpstart heresy) to the ancient faith, from new
error, to old sobernes, from new madness, to ancient light, from new
darkness. But in this divine vertew which they showed in the confession of
their faith, this thing is especially of us to be noted, that in that
antiquity of the church they took upon them not the defense of any one part,
but of the wholle. For it was not lawful that such excelent and famous men,
should maintain and defend with so great might and maine the erroneous
suspicions, and those contrary each to other, of one or two men or should stand
in contention for the temararious conspiracy of some small Province, but they
did those by following the Canons and decrees of the Catholic and Apostolic
verity of all the Preistes of holy Church, rather to betray them selves, then
the universal ancient faith. For which fact of theirs they merited so great
glory that they are accounted not only Confessors but also justly and worthily
the Princes of all Confessors. Great therefore and surely divine was the example
of these blessed Confessors, and of every true Catholic continually to be
remembered who like the seuenfold Candlestick, shining with the seuenfold
gifts of the holy Ghost, delivered unto all posterity a most notable example;
how afterward in each foolish and vain error, the boldness of profane novelty
was to be repressed with authority of sacred Antiquity.

CHAP. III.
NEITHER is this any new thing, but always usual in the Church of God, that the
more religious a man has been the more ready has he always resisted novel
inventions, examples whereof many might be brought, but for breuity sake I will
only make choice of some one which shall be taken from the Apostolic sea by
which al men may see most plainly with what force always, what zeal, what
endeavor the blessed succession, of the blessed Apostles have defended the
integrity of that religion which they once received. Therefore in times past
Agrippinus of venerable memory Bishope of Carthage, the first of all mortal
men maintained this assertion against the divine scripture, against the of the
universal Church against the mind of all the preistes of his time against the
custom and tradition of his forefathers that rebaptization was to be admitted
and put in practice. Which presumption of his procured so great damage and
hurt to the Church, that not only it gave all heriticks a pattern of sacrilege
but also ministered occasion of error to some Catholics. When therefore every
where al men exclaimed against the nouelty of the doctrine, and all priests in
all places, each one according to his zeal did repugne, then Pope Steue^ of
blessed memory, bishop of the Apostolic sea, resisted in deed with the rest
of his fellow byshopes but yet more then the rest, thinking it as I suppose
reason so much to excel all other in devotion toward the faith, as he was
superior to them in authority of place. To conclude in his Epistle which then
was sent to Afrike, he decreed the same in these words. That nothing was to
be innouated, but that which came by tradition ought to be observed. For that
holy and prudent man knew well, that the nature of piety could admit nothing
else but only to deliver and teach our children that religion and that faith
which we received and learned of our forefathers, and that we ought to follow
religion whither it does lead us and not to lead religion whither it please us,
and that nothing is more proper to Christian modesty and gravity, then not to
leave unto posterity our own inventions, but to preserve and keep that which
our Predecessors left us. What therefore was the^ the end of that wholle
business? What else but common and usual, to wecte antiquity was retained,
novelty abandoned. But perhaps that new invention lacked patrons and
defenders? To which I say on the contrary, that it had such pregnant wits,
such eloquent tongues, such number of defendants, such show of truth, such
testimonies of scripture, but glosed after a new and naughty fashion, that all
that conspiracy and schism should have seemed unto me invincible, had not the
very profession of novelty it self, so taken in hand, under that name
defended, with that title reco^mended, overthrown the very ground of so great
a schism. To conclude what force had the Council or decree of Afric? By
Gods providence none, but all things there agreed upon were abolished,
disanulled, abrogated, as dreams, as fables, as superfluous. And O strange
change of the world, the authors of that opinion are judged and thought
Catholics, the folowers accounted and reputed Heretics, the masters
discharged, the scholars condemned, the writers of those books shall be
children of the kingdom of Heaven, the maintainers of those books shall burn
in Hell. For who donbteth but holy S. Ciprian, that light of all Saints, that
lantern of Bishops, and spectacle of Martirs, with the rest of his companions
shall reign with Christ for-euer. And contrariwise who is so wicked to deny
that the Donatists and such other pestilent Heretics, which by the authority
of that Counsel vaunt that they do practice rebaptization, shall burn for
ever with the Devil and his Angels. Which judgment in mine opinion seems
to have come from God, for their fraudulent dealing especially which endeavoring
under the cloak of an other man's name, coningly to frame an heresy commonly
lay hold of some dark sayings of one ancient Father or other, which by
reason of the obscurity may seem to make for their opinion, to thend they
may be thought that whatsoever I know not what they bring forth to the world,
neither to have been the first that so taught neither alone of that opinion:
whose wicked device in mine opinion is worthy of dubble hatred, both for that
they fear not to sow their poisoned seed of heresy amongst others, and also
because they blemishe the memory of some holy man, and as it were with
profane hands cast his dead ashes into the wind bringing infamously that to
light, which rather with silence were to be buried, following therein the steps
of their father Cha^, who not only neglected to cover the nakedness of venerable
Noe, but also showed it to others to laugh at, by which fact of his he incurred
so great a crime of impiety that Genesis 9
his posterity was subject to the malediction of his sin: his blessed
brethren doing far otherwise, who neither with their own eyes would violate
the nakedness of their reverend father, nor yet permit it to remain uncovered
for other to behold, but going backward as the holy text says they couerd him:
which is as much to say that they neither approved with heart, nor blased with
tongue the holy man's fault, and therefore they and their posterity were rewarded
with their fathers blessing. But to return to our purpose.

CHAP. IIII.
WE have therefore much to fear the sacrilege of a changed faith of a violated
religion: from which fault not only the discipline of the ecclesiastical
decree does restrain us, but the authority also of the Apostles censure
deterreth. For all men know how gravely, how severely, how seriously the
blessed Apostle S. PAVL inueigheth against certain which with Gal. 8
great leuitie Were so soon transferred from him that called them into the
grace of Christ unto another Gospel, which is not an other: That had heaped up
to the^ 2. Tim. 4
selves masters according to their own desires, auerting their ears from
truth, being converted to fables: Having damnation because they have made void
their 1. Tim. 5.
first faith. Whom those men had deceived of whom the same Apostle, in his
epistle to the Romans thus writes I beseech you brethren to mark the^ that
make dissentions and scandalls contrary Ram. 16.
to the doctrine which you have learned and avoid them, for such do not serve
Christ our Lord but their own belly: And by sweet speeches and benedictions
seduce the hearts of Innocents. That enter into houses and lead captive seely
women 2 Timothy 3
laden with sins, which are lead away with diverse desires, always learning
and never attaining to the knowledge of truth. Vain speakers and seducers who
subvert wholle houses teaching Tit. 1
the things they ought not for filthy lucre: Men corrupt in their mind,
reprobates concerning the faith: Proud, 2. Tim. 3
and knowing nothing but languishing about questions and strife of words, that
are deprived of the truth, that esteem a 1. Tim. 6. 1. Tim. 5.
gain to be piety: And with all idle they learn to go from house to house
not only idle but also full of words and curious, speaking things which they
ought not: 1. Tim. 1.
Which repelling a good conscience have made shipwreck about the faith: Whose
profane speeches do much grow to impiety, and their speech spreads as a
cancre. But that is also worth the noting which is written of them. But they
shall 2 Timothy 2. 2. Tim. 3.
prosper no further for their folly shall be manifest to all as theirs also
was. When therefore such kind of men wandering up and down through Provinces
and cities to set their errors to sale, came also unto the Galathians, who
after they had heard the^ and were delighted with the filthy druges of
heretiall Nouelty casting up again the heavenly Manna of the Apostolic and
Catholic doctrine. The Apostle used his authority decreeing very severely in
this sort. But although we (quoth he) or an Angel from heaven euangelize unto
you beside Gal. 1. Euangelize signifies such preaching of good tidings as
concerns the gospel Anathema signifies accursed be he
that which we have enangelized be he Anathema. What means this that he
says But although we, why did he not rather say But although I: That is to
say, although Peter, although Andrew, although John, yea finally al though the
wholle company of the Apostles euangelize unto you otherwise then we have
enangelized, be he accur sed. A terrible censure, for maintaining the
possession of the first faith, not to have spared him self, nor any other of
the Apostles. But this is a small matter: Although an Angel from heaven (quoth
he) Euangelize unto you, beside that which I have Euangelized be he Anathema he
was not contented for keeping the faith once planted to make mention of man's
weak nature unless also he included those excellent creatures of Angels.
Although we (qhoth he) or an Angel from heaven not because the holy Angels of
Heaven can now sin, but this is the meaning of that he says: Although (quoth
he) that might be, which cannot be, whosoever he be that goes about to change
the faith which was once planted, be he accursed. But peradventure he uttered
those words slightly and cast the^ forth rather of humane affection then
decreed them by any reason grounded in Gods word. God forbid: For it follows,
and that very earnestly urged, very often repeated. As I have foretold you
(quoth he) and now again I tell you If any body euangelize unto you beside
that which you have received be he Anathema. He said not if any man preach unto
you beside that which you have received let him be blessed, let him be
commended, let him be received, but Anathema, that is, separated, thrust out,
excommunicated, least the cruel infection of one sheep with his poisoned
company corrupt the sound flock of Christ. But peradventure this was given in
commandment only to the Galathians: then likewise were these precepts
following commanded only to the Galathians, to weete. If we live Gal. 5.
in the spirit, in the spirit also let us walk, let us not be made
desirouse of vain glory, provoking one an other, envying one an other and
such like which if it be absurd to say, and no man doubts, but that they were
indifferently commanded to all then certain it is, that as these precepts
touching manners include all, so likewise those concerning faith and doctrine,
exclude none And therefore as it is not lawful for any to provoke one another,
to envy one another, even so it is unlawful for any to admit or to receive
any other faith or religion then that which the Catholic Church every where
teaches, or happily shall we be so mad to say that the^ it was commanded to
curse and anathematize him that preached any otherwise then before had been
preached, and that now it is not commanded, then was that likewise which is
there said. But I say walk in the spirit and you shall not fulfill the
desires of the flesh, then only commanded but now is not; which if it be
impious and dangerous so to believe, then of necessity it follows that as
these precepts of life and manners are to be kept of all ages, so likewise
those set down against innouating of religion and changing of faith, are
commanded to all posterity, wherefore to preach unto Christian Catholic men,
besides that which they have received never was lawful, no where is lawful, at
no time shall be lawful.

And on the contrary to say Anathema and curse those which teach otherwise
then once has been received, was at all times needful, is every where
convenient, and ever shall be requisite. Which being so, is there any man
either so bold that dare teach that, which in the Church has not been taught,
or of such leuitie that will receive ought besides that which he has received
of the Church. Let that vessel of election, that master of the Gentiles, that
trumpe of the Apostles, that preacher of the world, he that was acquainted with
heavenly affairs, cry out, and again cry out in his epistles, to all men to
all times, to all places, that whosoever preaches a new doctrine is to be
accursed. And on the contrary part, let certain frogs corruptible gnates
and flies, such as the Pelagians be, reclaim and that to Catholics. We
being your authors (quoth they) we being your leaders, we being your
interpreters, condemn that which before you did hold, hold that which before
you condemned. Cast away your old faith, your forefathers laws, your elders
constitutions, and receive, what a gods name? I shake to speak, for they are
so proud and presumptuous, that as they can not be maintained without sin, so
neither impngned without some blotte of offense.

CHAP. V.
BUT some man will say, why then does god very often permit certain notable
and excellent men in the Church to preach unto Catholics a new religion. A
very good question and such as deserves a more diligent and ample discourse,
unto which notwithstanding I. will answer out of mine own head, but with the
authority of sacred scripture, and the doctrine of a notable master in Gods
Church: let us then hear holy Moises, let him give us the reason, why learned
men and such as for their great gift of knowledge are called of the Apostle
Prophets, be some times permitted to preach new doctrine, which the old
testament allegorically calls strange gods, because there opinions are so
observed and honored of heretics, as the gods were of the gentels: thus the^
writes blessed Moses in Deuteronomie. If there shall arise (quoth he) in the
midst Deuteronomy. 13
of thee a prophet or one which says he has seen a dream, that is some
master in the Church whose disciples or followers suppose to teach by some
revelation from god: what then? and shall fortell (quoth he) some sign or
miracle, and that shall happen which he has said: some great master is here
surely meant, and one of so deep knowledge whom his folowers imagine not only to
know things humane, but also to foresee future, and such as shall happen, which
is far above man's reach as the scholars for the most part of Valentinus,
Donatus, Photinus, Apollinaris, and such like did brag that their masters
were. What follows? And shall (quoth he) say unto thee let us go and follow
strange Gods, which thou know not, and let us serve them. What is meant by
strange Gods, but foreign errors, which thou know not, that is new and
never heard of before, and let us serve them, that is believe them, follow them.
What the^? Thou shall not (quoth he) hear the words of that Prophet or
Dreamer. And why I pray you? is not that forbidden by GOD to be taught, which
is by God forbidden to be heard? Because (quoth he) the Lord your God does
tempt you, that it may appear whether you love him or no, in your wholle
heart, and in your wholle soul. The reason the^ is more clear then day, why
the providence of God does some time suffer certain teachers and masters of
the Church to preach certain new opinions that your Lord God (quoth he) may
tempt you. And surely a great tentation it is, when as he whom you think a
Prophet, a disciple of the Prophets, whom you esteem a Doctor and maintainer
of the truth, whom you have highly reverenced, and most intierly loved, when he
suddenly and privily brings in pernicious errors which neither you can quickly
spy, lead away with prejudice of your old teacher nor easelie condemn,
hindered with love to your old master.

CHAP. VI.
HERE some man happily does earnestly desire to see that proved by some
ecclesiastical examples which by the authority of Moises has already been
avouched. The demand is reasonable, and therefore of reason not long to be
differred. Wherefore to begin with those which are yet fresh in memory, and
to the world best known. What kind of tentation think you was that of late
days when that ungracious and cursed Nestorius suddenly from a sheep
transformed into a wolf began to devour the flock of Christ, at such time as
those which were spoiled commonly took him for a sheep and therefore were more
subject to his cruelty. For who would have easily imagined him to have erred,
whom every man knew to have been chosen with such judgment of the Empire, who
was so highly in grace with the Clergy, so much beloved of all holy men, so
greatly in favor with the people, who openly expounded the scriptures, and
also confuted the pestiferous error of the Jews: why could not this man, by
such means easelie persuade any, that he taught aright, preched aright,
believed aright, who to smooth the way and make entrance for his own heresy
persecuted and preached against the blasphemies of all others. But this was
that which Moises says: The Lord your God does tempt you, if you love him or
no. And to passover Nestorius in whom was always more admiration, then
profit, more fame the^ experience whom for some time humane favor had made
greater, then Gods grace exalted. Let us rather speak of them which endowed
with many gifts, and men of great industry, have been no small tentation to
Catholics, as amongst the Pauonians, in our Fathers memory Photinus is
recorded to have tempted the Church of Sirminum, in which being preferred with
the liking of all men unto the dignity of Priesthood, for sometime he behaved
him self very Catholikely but suddenly like that naughty Prophet or Dreamer of
whom Moises speaks he began to persuade the people of God committed to his
charge, to follow other gods, that is strange and unknown errors which before
they were not acquainted with. But as this is usual, so that was very
pernitiouse, that he had so great helps and furtherance for the advancing of
so great wickedness: For he was both of an excelent wit, and singulerly well
learned, and passing eloquent, as he which both in disputation and writing was
copious and grave in either language as appears by the books which he wrote
partly in greek and partly in the latin tongue. But in happened well that Christ's
sheep committed to his charge very vigila^t and careful in keeping the
Catholic faith did speedely remember Moises warning, and therefore albeit they
admired much the eloquence of their Prophet and Pastor: yet were they not
ignorant of the temptation. And therefore whom before they followed as the
chief leader of the flock, the same very man afterward they avoided as a
ravening wolf Neither do we learn only by Photinus but also by the example of
Apollinaris the danger of this ecclesiastical tentation, and thereby also be
admonished diligently to keep and retain our faith and religion. For this
Apollinaris procured his auditors great trouble and anguish of mind, whilst
the authority of the Church drew them one way, and the acquaintance of their
master haled them another, so that wavering and tottering betwixt both, they
were uncertain whether part was best to be followed. But happily he was such a
one as easily deserved to be contemned. Nay he was so famous and worthy a man,
that in very may things he wone credit too fast. For who surpassed him in
sharpnes of wit? in exercise, in learning? how many heresies in many and
great books has he overthrown? how many errors against the faith has he
confuted? That most notable and great work of thirty books in which with
great weight of reason he confounded, the frantic cauills of Porphirius does
give credit to my report, and testify the truth of my relation. It were too
long to rehearse up all his works for which he might have been compared to the
chief pillors of Gods Church, had not the profane licentiousness of
heretical curiosity, by inuenting I know not what new opinion spotted and
discredited all his former labors, whereby his doctrine was accounted not so
much an edification, as an ecclesiastical tentation.

CHAP. VII.
HEREsome man perhaps requires to know what heresies these men above named
taught: that is, Nestorius, Appollinaris, and Photinus. This pertains not to
the matter, whereof we now entreat, for it is not out purpose to dispute
against each man's particular error, but only by a few examples plainly and
clearly to prove, that to be most true which Moses says, that if at any time
any ecclesiastical master, yea and a Prophet for interpreting the mysteries of
the prophetical visions, goes about to bring in any new opinion into the
Church, that the providence of god does permit it for our proof and trial.
But because it will be profitable, I will by a little disgression breefely set
down what the forenamed heretics Photinus, Appollinaris, and Nestorius
taught This then is the heresy of Photinus. he affirms that God is as the
Jews believe singular and solitary, denyning the fullness of the Trinity not
believing that there is any person of the word of God, or of the holy ghost he
affirms also, that Christ was only man, who had his beginning of the virgin
MARY, teaching very earnestly that we ought to worshipe only the person of god
the father, and to honor Christ only for man. This then was Photinus opinion.
now Appollinaris vaunteth much as though he believed the unity of Trinity
with full and sound faith but yet blasphemeth he manifestly against our Lords
incarnation. For he says that our Savior either had not man's soul at all, or
at least such a one, as was neither endued with mind or reason furthermore he
affirms that Christ's body was not taken of the flesh of the holy virgin MARY,
but descended from heaven into the womb of the Virgin, holding yet doutfully
and inconstantly some time that it was coeternall to the word of God, some time
that it was made of the divinity of the word: for he would not admit two manner
of substances in Christ, the one divine, the other humane, the one of his
Father, the other of his Mother, but did think that the very nature of the
word was divided into two parts, as though the one remained in God, and the
other was turned into flesh, that whereas the truth says, that Christ is one
consisting of two substances, he contrary to the truth affirms, of the one
divinity of Christ to be two substances: and these be the assertions of
Apollinaris. But Nestorius sick of a contrary disease whilst he faineth a
distinction of two substances in Christ, suddenly brings in two persons: and
with monstrous wickedness, will needs have two sons of God, two Christ's, one
that was God, and another that was man, one begotten of the Father, another
begotten of his Mother. And therefore he says that the holy Virgin MARY is not
to be called the mother of God, but the mother of Christ, because, that Christ
which was borne of her was not God but man. And if any man think that in his
books he says there was one Christ and that he preached one person of Christ,
I must needs confess that he lacks not ground to say so, for that he did
either of crafty policy, the rather to deceive, that by some good things,
he might the more easily persuade naught as the Apostle says. By the good
thing he has wrought Romans 7
me death. Wherefore either craftily as I said in certain places of his
writings he vaunteth to believe one person in Christ, or else surely he did
hold, that after our Ladies delivery, two persons became in such sort sort one
Christ that yet in the time of our Ladies co^ception or delivery, and for some
time after, there were two Christ's, and that Christ was borne first like unto
another man, and only was man, and not yet joined in unity with the person of
God the word, and that afterward the person of the word descended down
assuming and ioininge him self to that man in unity of person, and although
he now remain in glory assu^pted for some time yet there seems to have been
no difference betwixt him and other men. Thus then Nestorius, Apollinaris,
Photinus, like mad dogs barked against the Catholic Church: Photinus not
confessing the Trinity: Apollinaris main taining the nature of the Word
conuertible, and not confessing two substances in Christ, denying also either
the whole soul of Christ, or at least that it was endued with mind and reason,
believing for his pleasure what he liked of the second person in Trinity.
Nestorius by defending either always or for some time two Christ's. But the
Catholic Church believing aright both of God and of our Savior, neither
blasphemeth against the mystery of the Trinity, nor against the incarnation
of Christ for it worshipeth one Divinity in Trinity and reuerenceth the
equality of the Trinity in one and the same majesty confessing one Christ,
not two, and the self same both God and man, believing in him one person, yet
acknowledging two substances, but yet believing one person: two substances,
because the word of God is not mutable that it can be turned into flesh: one
person least professing two sons, it may seem to worship a quaternitie and
not to adore the Trinity.

CHAP. VIII.
BUT it is worth the labor to declare this matter more plainly, more
substantially, more distintly. In God is one substance and three persons, in
Christ be two substances, but one person. In the Trinity there is an other,
and an other, but not another and an other thing. In our Savior is not an
other, and another, but an other and other thing. How is there in the Trinity
an other and an other, but not another and an other thing, Marry because there
is an other person of the father, an other of the son, and an other of the
holy ghost: But yet not an other and another nature, but one and the self
same: How is there in our Savior another and another thing not another and
another, because there is another substance of the divinity and another
substance of the humanity, but yet the deity and the humanity is not another
and another but one and the self same Christ, one and the self same son of
God, and one and the self same person, of the self same Christ and son of
God. As in a man the body is one thing, and the soul is another thing, but yet
the body and the soul are but one and the self same man. In Peter and Paul
the soul is one thing, the body is another thing, and yet the body and the
soul are not two Peter's, nor the soul is not one Paul, and the body an other
Paul, but one and the self same Peter, one and the self same Paul, subsisting
of a doble and diverse nature of the body and the soul. So therefore in one and
the self same Christ there are two substa^ces, but one a divine substance, the
other humane, the one of God the Father, the other of the Virgin his Mother,
the one coeternall and equal to the Father, the other substantial to his
Mother, yet one and the same Christ in both substances. Therefore there is not
one Christ God another Christ man, not one increated, another created, not one
impassible, another passible, not one equal to the Father, another less then
the Father, not one of the father, another of the mother, but one and the self
same Christ God and man, the same increated and created, the same incommutable
and impassible, the same changed and suffered, the same equal and inferior to
the father: The same begotten of his father before all times, the same
conceived of his mother in time, perfect God and perfect man, in him as God is
perfect Divinity, in him as man is perfect humanity, perfect humanity I say
because it had both soul and body, yet a true body such as our body is and
such as his mothers was, and a soul endued with understanding with mind and
reason. There is therefore in Christ, the Word, the Soul, the Flesh, but yet
all these together is one Christ, one son of God, our only Savior and
Redeemer: One I say, not by any I know not what corruptible confusion of the
divinity and humanity together, but by a certain perfect and singular
unity of person: for that conjunction did not change or convert either into
other (which is the proper error of the Arians) but did rather so unite both in
one that as the singularity of one and the same person remains always in
Christ so likewise the properties Vide annota.
of both natures do for ever continue, so that neither God ever begins to be
a body, nor now at any time cease to be a body, which thing is also more
apparante by some humane example for not only in this world, but also in the
next every man shall consist of body and soul, and yet never shall either the
body be changed into the soul: or the soul ever converted into the body,
but as every man shall live for ever, so for ever of necessity in each man the
differnce of either substance shall continue. So likewise in Christ each
property of either substance, shall continue for ever, saving always and
reserving the unity of person. And when we often name this word Person and say
that the son of God was made man, we must take great heed that we seem not
to say that God the Word the second person in Trinity took upon him our
actions only in imitation and rather in show and shadow and not as a perfect
and very man practiced humane conversation: as we see used in Theaters and
Stages where one man in a little time, takes upon him many parts of which
notwithstanding himself is none, for as often as we counterfeite an other man's
actions, we so exercise his office, that yet we be not those men whose actions
we take upon us for neither a tragedy player (to use profane examples and
such as the Maniches allege) when he plays the Priest or King, is therefore
a Priest or King, for so soon as the tragedy ends that person also which he
played forth with cease: God keep us from this horrible and wicked mockery.
Let this madness be proper to the Maniches, which preaching a broad their own
fantasies, affirm that God the son of God not to have been substantiuelye
the person of man, but to have fained the same by supposed action and
conversation. But the Catholic faith affirms that the word of God was so
made man, that he took upon him our nature and the proprieties belonging to
the same, not deceitfully and in show but truly and verily, and did such
things as belong to man, as his own, and not as one that imitated other men's
actions, and was verily that which in life and conversation he did show him
self to be, as we our selves also, in that we speak understand, and subsist
do not counterfeite our selves to be men but are verily men. For neither Paul
and John (to speak of them especially for example sake) were men by imitation,
but by subsistence, neither likewise did Paul counterfeite the Apostle or
feign him self Paul, but was in verity an Apostle and was Paul by
subsistence. In like manner God the Word by assuming and having flesh; in
speaking doing, and suffering, in flesh, yet without any corruption of his
nature vouchsafed perfectly to perform this, to weet not that he should
imitate or counterfeite, but exhibit him self a perfect man, not that he
should seem or be thought a very man, but should in verity so be and subsist.
Therefore as the soul joined to the flesh and yet not turned into the flesh,
does not imitate a man but is a man, and not a man in show and appearance but in
substance. So God the Word without any conversion of him felfe, uniting him
self to man was made man not by confusion, not by mutation, but by subsisting.
Let that exposition therefore of a fained and counterfeite person utterly be
rejected in which always one thing is in show, and an other in deed, in which
he that does ought is never the same person whom he represents: for God
forbid that we should believe that God the Word took upon him the person of
man after such a deceitful manner, but rather in this sort that his substance
remaining inco^mutable in itself, and yet taking upon him the nature of
perfect man, was him self flesh, was him self a man, was him self the
person of a man not deceitfully but truly, not in imitation, but in truth and
substance, not finally after that sort which with actio^ should desist, but
after that manner which perfectlye in substance should persist. This unity
therefore of person in Christ was not framed, and finished after the virgins
delivery, but in her very womb. For we must diligently take heed that we
confess Christ not only one, but also to have been always one, because it is
an intolerable blasphemy to grant him now to be one and yet contend that
once he was not one, but two, that is one after the time of his Baptism, but
two in the time of his Nativity, which great sacrilege we can not otherwise
avoid, but by confessing that man was united to God in unity of person, not in
his ascension, not in his resurrection, not in his baptism, but in his mothers
womb and immaculate conception: by reason of which unity of person both the
proprieties of God are indifferently and promiscually attributed to man, and
the proprieties of man ascribed to God: Hereof it comes that which is written
in the scripture, that the son of man descended from Heaven, and the Lord of
majesty was Crucified upon earth: Hereof also Joan. 6
it proceeds that we say that when our Lords flesh was made, when our Lords
body was framed that the very word of God was made, the very wisdom of God was
replenished with created knowledge as in the foresight of God His hands and
feet are said to be dug: Psa. 21.
From this unity of person, I say it proceeds by reason of like mystery that
when the flesh of the word of God was borne of his pure and immaculate morher,
we do most Catholickly believe that God him self the Word was borne of the
Virgin and most impiously the contrary is maintained: Which being so god
forbid that any one should go about to deprive the holy Virgin MARY of her
privileges of gods favor as her especial glory: For she is by the singular
grace of our Lord and God her son to be confessed most truly and most
blessed to have been the mother of God, but yet not in such sort as an impious
heretic imagine and suspecte, who affirm that she is to be reputed in name
only and appellation the mother of God, as she forsooth which brought forth that
man which afterward became God, as we say such a woman is the mother of a
Priest or Bishop not because she brought him that then was either Priest or
Bishop, but by generating that man which afterward was made a Priest or
Bishop: not in that manner I say the blessed Virgin is to be called the
mother of God, but rather because as have been said, that most holy mystery
was finished in her sacred womb which by reason of a singular and one only
unity of person as the Word in flesh is flesh, so man in God is God.

CHAP. IX.
BUT now what has already been said towching the foresaid heresies or
concerning the Catholic faith, let us in few words and compe^diously for
memory sake repeat them over again, that thereby with more facility they may
be understood and with more surety retained. Accursed therefore be Photinus
not admitting the fulness of the Trinity and affirming our Savior Christ to
have been only man. Accursed be Appollinaris maintaining in Christ corruption
of changed divinity and bereauing him of the propriety of perfect humanity.
Accursed be Nestorius denying God to have been borne of a virgin, teaching two
Christ's and so abandoninge the faith of the Trinity bringing in a
quaternitie. But blessed be the Caholicke Church which adoreth one God in
perfect Trinity and likewise worshippeth equality of Trinity in one
divinity, so that neither singularity of substance co^foundeth propriety of
persons nor distinction of Trinity seperateth unity of deity. Blessed I say
be the Church which believes in Christ two true and perfect substances but one
only person, so that neither distinction of natures does divide the unity of
person, nor unity of person does confound the difference of substances.
Blessed I say be the Church which to thend she may confess Christ always to
be and to have been one acknowledges man united to God, not after our Ladies
delivery but even then in his mothers womb. Blessed I say be the Church which
understands God made man not by any conversion of nature but by reason and
means of person, and not that a fained and transitory person but
substantially subsisting and permanent. Blessed I say be the Church which teach
that this unity of person has so great force that by reason thereof by a
mystery strange and ineffable she ascribes unto man the proprieties of God,
and attributes to God the proprieties of man. For by reason of this unity of
person she confesses that man as he was God descended from Heaven, and God as
he was man was made upon earth, suffered and was Crucified. Blessed therefore is
that venerable, happy and sacred confession and co^parable to those supernall
praises of the Angels, which glorifieth one Lord God with triple
sanctification. For this is the principal reason why the Church teaches the
unity of Christ, least otherwise she should exceed the mystery of the
Trinity.

And let this suffice touching this matter spoaken by way of digression:
hereafter if it please God I will entreat and declare these points more
copiously. Now to return to our former purpose.

CHAP. X.
We have said in the premises that in the Church of God the error of the
master is a great tentation to the people, and the more learned he were that
erred, so much the greater was the tentation: Which we showed first by the
authority of holy scripture, afterward by the examples ecclesiastical of those
men, which for some time reputed and accounted sound in faith, yet at last fell
either in some other man's error, or else coined a new heresy of their own:
This surely is a great matter, profitable to be learned and necessary to be
remembered, which once again we must inculcate and make plain by greater store
of examples, that almost all Catholics may know that with the Church they
ought to receive Doctors and not with the Doctors to forsake the faith of the
Church. But I am of this opinion, that although I could bring forth many to
show this kind of tentation, yet there is almost none which can be compared
to the tentation of Origin, in whom were very many gifts, so rare, so
singular, so strange, that in the beginning any would have thought that his
opinions might have been believed of all men. For if life procures authority,
he was a man of great industry, of great chastititie, patience and labor, if
family or learning who more noble? being of that house, which was honorable
for martyrdom, him self afterward for Christ deprived not of father only but
also spoiled of all his patrimony, and so much he profited in the mysteries of
holy poverty, that as it is reported, for the confession of Christ's name he
often endured much affliction. Neither was he only adorned with these gifts,
all which afterward served for tentation, but was endued also with force of
wit, so profound, so quick, so delicate, that he far excelled almost all
other whatsoever. A man of such wonderful learning and erudition that there
were few things in Divinity, in humane Philosophy haplye nothing which he had
not perfectly attained: who having gotten the treasures of the greek tongue,
labored also about the hebrew. And for his eloquence what should I speak of?
whose talk was so pleasant, so delectable, so sweet, that in mine opinion, not
words but honey flowed from his mouth. What things were so hard to believe
which with force of argument he made not plain, what so difficulte to bring to
pass, which he made not to seem easy? But perchance he maintained his
assertions by arguments only: Nay without question there was never any Doctor
which used more examples of sacred scripture. But yet happily he wrote not
much? No man living more, yea so much that in mine opinion all his works are
so far from being read over, that they can not possibly all be found, who not
to lack any furtherance to learning, lived also until he was passing old.
But yet perchance unfortunate in his scholars: What man ever more happy,
having trained up and been master to infinite Doctors, to Preistes without
number, to Confessors and Martirs. Now who is able to prosecute with words, in
what admiration he was with all men? in what glory, in what credit and grace?
Who more zealous in religion repaired not to him, from the furthest parts of
the world? What Christian did not almost worship him as a Prophet? what
Philosopher did not honor him as a master, and how greatly he was reverenced
not only of private men, but also of the Empire it self, histories do speak
which report that he was sent for of Alexander the Emperors mother to weet,
for his merit of heavenly wisdom with the grace and love whereof he was
inflamed. His epistles also testify the same thing which with authority of a
Christian master he wrote unto Phillip the Emperor the first Christian amongst
all the Roman Princes. And if any man upon our report admits not the
testimony of a Christian touching his wonderful knowledge, and learning, at
least let him receive the confession of an heathen Philosopher. For that
impious Porphirie says that him self being but yet as it were a boy, moved
with his fame, travailed unto Alexandria where he did see him being then old,
but yet such a one and so learned as he that had attained to the perfection of
all knowledge. Day would sooner fail me, then I could touch though breiflye
those notable gifts which were in that man, all which notwithstanding pertained
not only to the glory of religion, but also to the greatness of the temptation.
For who is he that would willingly have forsaken a man of such wit, of so deep
learning, of so rare grace, and would not sooner have used that saying, that he
had rather err with Origin then believe aright with others. And what should I
say more, the matter came to that issue, that as the end showed, not an usual
and common, but a passing dangerous tentation of so worthy a man, so famous a
Doctor, so notable a Prophet, carried very many from the true and sound faith of
the Church: For this Origin so rare and singular a man, abusing the grace of
God, to insolently flattering him self, to much in his own wit, believing
him self more then reason would, little esteeming the old simplicity of
Christian religion, presuming to be wiser then all other, contemning the
traditions of the Church, and the old Fathers documents, waded so far in
expounding cartaine chapters of the scripture after a new fashion, until he
deserved, that the Church of God should also say of him. If there arise up in
the midst of thee a Prophet, and a little after thou shall not hear (quoth
he) the words of that Prophet. And again because (quoth he) your Lord God
does tempt you whether you love him or no. And surely it is not only a
tentation but also a great tentation when a man carries away secretly and by
little and little the Church depending upon him (admiring his wit, knowledge
eloquence, conversation, and grace, nothing suspecting him, nothing fearing
him) suddenly from the old religion to a profane and new doctrine. But some
will say that Origens books be corrupted: I will not gain say it, but rather
it were so: for that has both been said and written of some not only
Catholics, but also Heretics. But this is now the point we have to consider,
that although not he, yet the books passing abroad under his name are a great
tentation, which stuffed with many horrible blasphemies, are read and used,
loved, and liked, not as the books of others, but as his own works: so that
although Origin gave no cause of erroneous doctrine, yet his authority has
been the occasion why the error has been liked and followed.

The case also of Tertullian is the very same with the former: for as Origin is
to be thought the best amongst the Greek Doctors, so Tertullian without
controversy the chief of all the latin. For who was more learned then he?
Who in Divinity or Humanity more practiced? for by his great and wonderful
capacity of wit, he attained to, and embraced all Philosophy, all the sects
of Philosophers, all their authors and patrons, all their learning, all sorts
of histories and studies. And for his wit, was he not so excellent, so grave,
so sharp, that he almost undertook the overthrow of nothing which either by
quicknes of wit or weight of reason he crushed not in pieces. Now who is able
to set down the commendacion and praise which his style and phrase of speech
deserved, which was so fraught (I know not how) with that force of reason, that
such as could not be persuaded, were compelled: whose almost so many words, so
many sentences, so many senses, so many victories. This is well known to
Marcion and Appelles, well known to Praxeas, and Hermogenes, the Jews
understand this, the Gentiles have tried it, the Gnostikcs have proved it. and
diverse others have felt it: whose blasphemouse opinions he has overthrown
with his many and great volumes, as it had been with thu^der and lightning. And
yet this man after all this, this Tertullian I say, not holding the Catholic
religion, that is the universal and old faith, being far more eloquent then
fortunate, cha^ging afterward his mind, did at last that which the blessed
Confessor Hillarie in a certain place writes of him. He discredited (quoth
he) with his latter error his probable writings: and therefore he was also a
great tentation in the Church. But hereof I will say no more, only this I
add, that by his defending against the precept of Moises, for true prophecies
the new madness of Mo^tanus springing up in the church and these mad dreams
of a new doctrine of the frantic woman, he deserved that we should also say
of him and his writings. If a Prophet shall rise up in the midest of thee and
straight after, thou shall not hear the words of that Prophet. Why so?
Because (qnoth he) your Lord God does tempt you whether you love him or no. We
ought therefore evidently to note by these so many so great and diverse, others
such weighty examples, and by the law of Deuteronomie most clearly to
understand that if at any time any ecclesiastical teacher straieth from the
faith, that gods providence does suffer that for our trial, whether we love
him or no in our wholle heart and in our wholle soul.

CHAP. XI.
WHICH being so, he is a true and perfect sincere Catholic that loves Gods
truth, that loves his body the Church, that prefers nothing before the
religion of God, nothing before the Catholic faith, not any man's authority,
not love, not will, not eloquence, not philosophy but contemning all these
things, settled in faith; stable and permane^t, whatsoever he knows the
Catholic Church universally in old time to have holden, purposes with him
self only to hold and believe: and therefore whatsoever new doctrine and not
before heard of such a one perceive to be brought in of some one man, beside or
contrary to the old Saints and Doctors, let him know that not to pertain
to religion but rather to tentation, for his proof and trial, especially
being instructed with the saving of the Apostle Saint Paul. for this is that
which he writes in his first epistle to the Corinthians. There must (quoth he)
be heresies also that they which are approved may be made manifest amongst
you. As though he should say. This is the cause why the authors of heresies are
not straight rooted out by God, that the proved may be made manifest, that is
every one may appear how steadfastly, faithfully and constantly, he loves the
Catholic faith. And certain it is that straight upon the springing up of any
Novelty, the weighty corn is discerned from the light chafe, then is that
easelie shaken out of the floare which before lightly remained in the floare,
for some by and by leap away, others only shaken are afraid to perish, and
ashamed to return, remaining wounded, half dead, half alive, like unto those
which have druncke so much poison, as neither kills, nor digesteth, neither
brings death, nor yet permits to live. Alas the miserable state of such
persons, with what seas of cares, with what storms are they tossed? for some
time as the wind drives them, they are carried away headlong into error, an
other time coming again to the^ selves, they are shaken and beaten like
contrary waves striving together, sometime with rash presumption they allow such
things, as seem uncertain, an other time of pusillanimitie they fear those
things which are certain, doubtful which way to take, which way to return,
what to desire, what to avoid, what to hold, what to let go: which misery
and affliction of a wavering heart and not settled, were they wise, is the salve
of Gods mercy toward them. For this is the reason why (being out of the safe
port of the Catholic faith) they are shaken, tossed, and almost killed with
storms and troubles, to the end they should strike down the sails of their
proud mind, which they nough tely hoised up to the winds of novelties, and so
retire and keep themselves with in the most sure port of their calm and good
mother, and first cast up those bitter and turbule^t waters of errors that
afterward they may drink of the flowing rivers of lively and running water.
Let them learn to forget well, which well they have not learned, and those
articles which the Church teaches, and by reason are to be attained to: let
the^ in Gods name comprehend, and those which surpass reason let them by faith
believe.

CHAP. XII.
WHICH being so, often times calling to mind and remembering the self same
thing: I cannot sufficiently marvel at the great madness of some men, at so
great impiety of a blinded heart, to conclude at so great a licentious desire
to error, that they be not content with the rule of faith once delivered us,
and received from our ancestors, but do every day search and seek for new
doctrine, ever desirous to add, to change, and to take a way some thing from
religion as though that were not the doctrine of God, which was once
sufficiently revealed, but rather man's institution, which cannot but by
continual correction (or rather corruption) come to perfection: Whereas the
divine scriptures cry out Do not translate the bounds which thy fathers have
set down, and Do not judge over thy judge. And, the Serpent will bite him that
cutteth the hedge. And that saying of the appostles by which all wicked
novelties of all heritickes have often been cut in pieces as it were with a
spiritual! sword and always hereafter are. O Timothy keep the depositum
avoiding the profane novelties of voices and oppositions of falsely called
knowledge which certain promisinge have erred about the faith. And yet for all
this, some there be so shameless, so impudent, so obstinate, which will not
yield to such force of divine scripture, which be not moved with such weight of
reason nor yet shaken with such heavenly ha^mers, to conclude which be not
beaten in pieces with such celestial lightning: Avoid (quoth he) the profane
novelties of voices. He says not avoid antiquities, he says not avoid
auncientnes, nay rather shows what contrariwise should follow. For if nouelty
is to be avoided, antiquity is to be retained if nouelty be profane,
antiquity is sacred, and oppositio^s (quoth he) of falsely called knowledge.
Verily the name of knowledge in the schools of Heretics is false, where
ignorance is called knowledge, mist, reputed cleerenes, and darkness termed by
the name of light. Which certain (quoth he) promising have erred about the
faith. What promised they, when they erred about the faith? What else, but I
know not what new and unknown doctrine? For you may hear some of them say. O
ye unwise and seely souls which commonly are called Catholics, come and
learn the true faith, which no creature understands besides us, which has
been hidden, many hundred of years past, but of late has been revealed and
laid open, but learn it privily, learn it secretly, for it will delight you.
And again when you have learned it, teach it secretly, that the world may not
understand it, that the Church may not know it, for it is granted to few to
understand the secret of so great a mystery. Are not these think you the
words of that harlot which in the Proverbs of Solomon calls unto her the
passengers: Who is (quoth she) most Prou. 9
fool amongst you let him turn unto me. And such as be of small judgment
she exhorts, saying. Touch willingly secret bread, and drink sweet water
privily. What follows? But he knows not (quoth he) how in her company
earthly men do perish. who be these earthly men? Let the Apostle declare: Those
(quoth he) which have erred about the faith. But it is worth the labor more
diligently to examine the Apostle his whole Chapter. O Timothy (quoth he)
keep the depositu^ avoiding profane novelties of voices. This exclamation O,
both shows foresight and also argues charity: for he foresawe certain
errors which before hand he was sorry for: who at this day has the place of
Timothy? but either the whole Church or especially the wholle body of
Prelates, who ought them selves to have the wholle knowledge of divine
religion, and also to instruct others, what is meant by keep the depositum.
Keep it quoth he for fear of thieves, for danger of enemies, least when men
be a sleep they ouer-sow cockell amongst the wheat, which the son of man
has sowed in his field. Keep (quoth he) the depositum. What is me^t by this
depositum: that is, that which is An excelent exposition of S. Paul's words.
committed to thee, not that which is invented of thee: that which thou have
received, not that which thou have devised: a thing not of wit, but of
learning: not of private usurpation, but of public tradition: a thing brought
to thee: not brought forth of thee: wherein thou must not be an author, but
akeeper: not a beginner, but a follower: not a leader, but a comer after: Keep
the depositum. Preserve the talent of the Catholic faith pure and sincere,
that which is committed to thee, let that remain with thee, and that deliver
unto the people. Thou have received gold render then gold, I will not have one
thing for another. Do not for gold give me either impudently lead or craftily
brass, I will not the show, but the very nature of gold it self. O
Timothy, O Preiste, O Teacher, O Doctor, if Gods gift has made thee meet
and sufficient for thy wit, exercise and learning, show thy self Beseelel,
that divine workman in building of the spiritual tabernacle, ingraue those
precious stones of Gods religion, faithfully set them, wisely adorn them, put
upon them brightness, give them grace, give the^ beauty. That which men before
believed obsourely, let them by thy exposition understand more clearly. Let
posterity rejoice for coming to the knowledge of that by thy means, which
antiquity without that knowledge had in veneration. Yet for all this, in such
sort deliver what thou have learned, that albeit thou teach newly and after
a new manner: yet thou never preach a new religion and deliver a new faith.

CHAP. XIII.
BUT peradventure some will say, shall we then have no increase of religion in
the Church of Christ? no growing on, no proceeding forward? To which I answer
and say. Let us a-Gods name have the greatest and most that may be. For who is
either so envious to men, or hateful to God which would labor to stop or
hinder that? but yet in such sort and with this prouiso that it may appear to
be truly an increase in faith and not prove to be a change in religion for
this is the nature of such things as increase, that in them selves they become
and grow greater. And this is the nature of a change and mutation, that some
thing be turned from one thing which it was, to an other which it was not:
Convenient it is and very necessary, that the understanding, knowledge, and
wisdom, as well of every man in particular, as of all in common: as well of
one a lone, as of the wholle Church in general, of all ages in times past,
should abundantly increase and go forward, but yet for all that, only in his
own kind and nature, that is in the same faith, in the same sense, in the
same sentence. In this case let the religion of our soul imitate the nature of
our bodies, which although with process of time they passover many years, yet
they remain the same that they were. There is great difference betwixt
flourishing youth and withered age, yet the self same men become old which
before were young so that although the state and condition of one and the self
same man be altered, yet one very nature and person, does still remain. The
limbs and members of infants be small, of young men great, yet not diverse but
the very same. So many iointes as young children have so many have they when
they be men, and if any parts there be, which with increase of years spring
forth, those before by nature were in man virtually planted, so that no new
thing come forth in old men, which before were not contained in them being yet
children. Wherefore there can be no doubt, but that this is the due and right
order of growing, the most natural and goodliest way of increasing only to
have in old years, those members, those parts and iointes which the wisdom
of our Creator before framed when we were yet but little ones: And therefore if a
man be afterward changed into some other shape or likeness the^ his nature
require: or if the number of his members be more or less the^ nature
prescribes: then of necessity the wholle body must either perish or become
monstrouse, or at least remain lame and maimed. In like manner Christian
religion must follow these rules of increasing and growing, to weet, that with
years it wax more sound, with time become more ample, with continuance be
more exalted, yet remain pure and incorrupt, and continue full and perfect
with each of his parts, and as it were with all his members and proper senses:
And furthermore that it admit no change or mutation, sustain no loss of his
propriety, no variety or mutabilitie in definition: for example sake. Our
forefathers in old time in the spiritual feilde of the Church, sowed the
wheaten seed of true faith and religion, it were now very injurious and
unreasonable, that we their posterity in steed of perfect and true wheat
should reap the false error of cockle: And contrariwise it is reason and very
convenient that the beginning and ending not disagreeing with it self, we
should of the increase of wheate^ seed reap the fruit of wheaten religion, so
that when with tract of time, any of those first seeds begin to budd and
come forth, let them be tilled and trimmed, yet without cha^ging ought of the
propriety of the corn springing up: and albeit fashion, shape and
distinction, be added and put to, yet must the nature of each kind remain and
abide. For God forbid that those rosy plants of the Catholic doctrine should
be changed into thirstles and thorns, God forbid I say, that in this
spiritual paradise, of the slippes of Cinnamon and Balsme should suddenly grow
up darnel and poison. Therefore what soever has by the grace of God and our
Fathers faith been sown in this Church, reason it is that the same be
cultiuated and maintained by the industry of the children: meet that it flourish
and wax ripe, convenient it grow and come to perfection: for lawful it is
that those ancient articles of heavenly philosophy, should be trimmed,
smoothed, and polished: but unlawful it is that they should be changed,
mangled and maimed. And albeit they receive perspicuitie, light, and
distinction, yet of necessity must they retain their fulness, soundnes, and
propriety. For if once this licentiousnes of wicked fraud be admitted, I
tremble to speak what danger is like to ensue of rasing and abandoning
religion, for if we take away any part of the Catholic faith, straight ways
other parts, and after that other, and again other, and that as it were of
custom and by law shall be abandoned. And what follows when every part by
little and little is abolished but that in conclusion the wholle corpse of
religion at one blow be refused and rejected. And contrariwise if new things
and old, foreign and domestical, profane and sacred, begin once to be
confounded together then must needs this custom generally follow, that nothing
hereafter remain in the Church vntowched, nothing without corruption, nothing
sound, nothing pure, nothing sincere, and so where before was the sacred
school of chaste and immaculate truth, there shall be a very brothel house of
wicked and filthy errors. But God of his goodness deliver his servants from
such minds, and let the impious rather and graceless follow that furious and
mad proceeding For the Church of Christ is a careful and diligent keeper of
religion committed to her charge, she never cha^geth or alters in it any
thing, she diminishes nothing, nothing she adds: What is necessary she
loses not, what is superfluous she forces not, her own she maintains, not
her own she usurps not, but with all industry labors only about this
one thing, that is by faithful and prudent handling of our forefathers
doings, what by them in times past was well entered and begone, she polisheth:
what the^ was well polished and declared she confirms: what then was
confirmed and defined she retains. To conclude what has she else endeavored
by the decrees of Counsels but that, that doctrine which before was simply
credited, the same afterward should be more diligently believed: that religion
which before was taughtmore slowly, the same afterward should be preached more
instantly: That faith which before was more securely reverenced, the same
afterward should more carefully be practiced. This I say always and nothing
else has the Church provoked with the novelties of Heretics set down by the
decrees of her Counsels, to weet only to confirm that to posterity by
writing (comprehe^ding a great sum of things in few words and often times
for more easy understanding to an old article of faith giving a new name)
which before by tradition she had received of her forefathers.

CHAP. XIIII.
BUT to return to the Apostle. O Timothy (quoth he) keep tho depositum
avoiding profane novelties of voices. Avoid (quoth he) as a viper, as a
scorpian, as a basiliske, least they infecte thee, not only by towching, but
also with their very eyes and breath. what is meant by Avoid that is, not so
much as to eat with any such, what 1. Cor 5
imports this (Avoid) if any man (quoth he) come unto you and bring not this
doctrine, what doctrine but the Catholic and universal, and that which with
sound tradition of the truth, has continued one and the self same, through
all successions of times, and that which shall continue to the worlds end.
What the^? Receive him not (quoth he) into the house, nor say God save you, for
2. Joan. 7
he that says unto him God save you, communicates with his wicked works.
Profane novelties of voices (quoth he) what is (Profane). Those which have no
holiness in them, no jot of religion wholly unknown to the Church which is the
temple of God. Profane novelties of voices quoth he (of voices) that is
novelties of opinions, novelties of things, novelties of senses, contrary to
our forefathers faith, contrary to antiquity, which if we admit and
receive, of necessity the faith of our blessed ancestors, either all, or a
great part of it, must be overthrown, the faithful people of all ages and
times, all holy Saints, all chaste, all continent, all virgins, all widows,
all Clearkes, all Deacons, all Priests: so many thousands of Co^fessors, so
many bands of Martirs, so many famous and great cities, and common wealths, so
many Islands, Provinces, Kings, countries, kingdoms, nations, to conclude
almost the whole world incorporated by the Catholic faith to Christ their
head must needs be said, so many hu^dredes of years to have been ignorant,
to have erred, to have blasphemed, to have believed they know not what. Avoid
(quoth he) Profane novelties of voices, to receive which, which to follow never
was the custom of Catholics, but always the property of heretics. And to
say truth, what heresy has ever peeped forth but under the name of some
certain man in some certain place, and at some certain time. Who ever set
abroche any heresy? who first divided not him self from the consent of the
universality and antiquity of the Catholic Church, which to be true,
examples do plainly prove. For who ever before that profane Pelagius presumed
so much of man's free will that he thought not the grace of God necessary to
every particular good act. Who ever before his monstrous disciple Celestius
denied all mankind to be tied and bound with the sin of Adams preuarication?
Who ever before sacriligious Arius durst tear in pieces the Unity of
Trinity. Who ever before wicked Sabellius attempted to confound the Trinity
of Unity. Who ever before cruel Nouatia^ affirmed God to be so merciless
that he had rather the death of a sinner then he should return and live. Who
ever before Simon Magus (punished by Apostolical censure from whom that old
sink of filthiness came by continual and secret succession unto Priscillian
that was the last) durst ever affirm that God our Creator was the author of
evil, that is the author of our wickedness, impieties, and horrible crimes;
because God (as he said) so made man's nature that by a certain proper motion
and impulse of an enforced will, it can do nothing else but sin, desire
nothing else but to offend, because being provoked and inflamed with the
furious rage of all vices it is with an insatiable desire carried away headlong
into the pit and sincke of all filthiness. Such examples are infinite, which
for beuitie sake I omit, by all which not-withstanding it appears plainly
and clearly that it is an usual and common thing in all Heresies to take
great pleasure in profane novelties, to loathe the decrees of our forefathers,
and so fall from the faith, by opposing the false and counterfeit name of
knowledge and learning: contrariwise this is proper to all Catholics to keep
that faith which the holy fathers have left and committed to their charge to
co^de^ne profane novelties, and as the Apostle has already said and again
does say. If any man shall preach otherwise the^ that which is received to
accurse him.

CHAP. XV.
HERE happily some man may demand whether heretics also do use the
testimony of holy scripture. To which I say that they do and that very
earnestly, for a man may behold the^ ranging and coursing in every part of the
Bible, in Moses, in the kings, in the Psalms, in the Apostles, in the
Ghosples, in the Prophets. for whether they be amongst their own brethren or
with strangers: whether in private or in public, whether in talking or in
writing, whether in the house a feasting or abroad in walking they almost never
allege any thing of there own which they do not pretend to shadow with the
words of sacred scripture. Read the pamphlets of Paulus Samosatenus, of
Priscilian Eunomius Iouinian and the rest of such like pestilent Heretics,
and you shall find through all their works an huge hepe of examples almost no
page omitted which is not colored and painted with the sayings of the new and
old testament. But the more closely they lurk under the shadow of Gods law,
the more carefully are they to be feared the more narrowly to be watched for
they know full well that their stinking and unsavory drugges be not likely
almost to please any, if simply and nakedly they be set forth: and therefore
they do temper them as it were with the sweet powder of Gods word, that he
which quickly would have contemned man's erroneous invention dare not so
readily reiecte Gods divine scripture: wherein they are like to those, which
minding to minister bitter potions to young children do first anoint the
brimmes of the cup with honey that there by unwary youth feeling the swetnes,
may nothing fear the bitter confection. This devise also practice they which
upon noughtie herbs and hurtful ioyces writ the names of good and wholesome
medicines whereby almost no man reading the good superscription, anything
suspecteth the lurking poyso^. The self same thing likewise our Savior cries
out to all Christians. Take ye heed of false prophets Mat. 7
which come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves. What
is meant else by sheep clothing but the sayings of the Prophets and Apostles,
which they with sheepelike sincerity did wear like certain fleeces for that
immaculate Lamb, which takes away the sins of the world: And what is to be
understood by ravening wolves, but the cruel and dogged opinions of heretics,
which always trouble the sheepfoldes of the Church, and by all means possible
tear in pieces the flock of Christ. But to thend they may more craftily set
upon the sheep of Christ mistrusting nothing, remaining still cruel beasts,
they putt of their woluish weed and shroude them selves with the words of
scripture, as it were with certain fleeces whereby it happens, that when the
feelie sheep feel the soft woll they little fear their sharp teeth: But what
says our Savior. By their fruits you shall know them. That is when then
begin not only to utter those words, but also to expound them, not only to
cast them forth, but also to interpret them, then does that bitterness break
forth, then is that sharpenes espied, then is that madness perceived, then is
that fresh and new poison belched out, then are profane novelties set abroch,
then may you see straight way the hedge cut in two, the old fathers bounds
removed, the Cotholicke doctrine shaken, and the Churches faith torn in
pieces. Such were they whom the Apostle sharply reprehendeth in the 2.
epistle to the Corinthians: For such false Apostles (quoth he) are crafty
workers 2. Cor. 11
transfiguring them selves into the Apostles of Christ. What is transfiguring
them selves into the Apostles of Christ? But this. The Apostles alleged the
examples of scripture, and they likewise cited them. The Apostles cited the
authority of the Psalms, and they likewise used it. The Apostles used the
sayings of the Prophets, and they in like manner brought them forth But when
that scripture which was alike alleged, alike cited, alike brought forth, was
not alike and in one sense expounded, then were discerned the simple from the
crafty, the sincere from the counterfeit, the right and good from the froward
and perverse: and to conclude true Apostles from those false Apostataes. And no
marvel (quoth Saint PAVL) For Satan him self transfigureth him self into an
Angel of light, it is no great matter therefore if his ministers be
transfigured as the ministers of Justice. Wherefore according to Saint PAVL,
whenever either false Apostles or false Prophets, or false Doctors do bring
forth the words of holy scripture, by which they would according to their
noughtie interpretation confirm their error, there is no doubt but that they
follow the crafty sleight of their master, which surely he would never have
invented, but that he knows very well that there is no readier way to
deceive the people, then where the bringing in of wicked error is intended,
that there the authority of the word of God should be pretended. But some will
say how prove you that the Devil uses to allege scripture? Such as doubt
thereof let them read the Gospel where it is written. Then the Devil took him
up (that is our Lord and Savior) and set him upon the pinnacle of the Temple,
and said unto him, if thou be the son of God cast thy self down, for it is
written that he will give his Angels Mat. 4
charge of thee that they may keep theee in all thy ways, in their hands
shall they hold the up, least perhaps thou knock thy foot against a stone. How
will he think you handle seely poor souls? which so sets upon the Lord of
majesty with the authority of scripture. If thou be (quoth he) the son of
god cast thy self down. Why so? For it is written (quoth he). we have
diligently to weigh the doctrine of this place and to keep it in mind that by
so notable an example of the scripture we make no scruple or doubt when we see
any allege some place of the Apostles, or Prophets, against the Catholic
faith, but that by his mouth the devil himself does speak. For as at that time
the head spoke unto the head, so now the members do talk unto the members,
that is the members of the Devil to the members of Christ, the faithless to
the faithful, the irreligious to the religious, to conclude Heretics to
Catholics. But what I pray says the Devil? If thou be the son of God
(quoth he) cast thy self down. That is to say: Desire thou to be the son
of God and to enjoy the inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven Cast thy self
down, that is Cast thy self down from this doctrine and tradition of this
high and lofty Church, which is reputed to be the Temple of God. And if any
one demand of these heretics, persuading the^ such things, how do you prove
and convince me, that I ought to forsake the old and universal faith of the
Catholic Church Straight ways is ready at hand: For it is written, and
forthwith he will allege you a thousand testimonies, a thousand examples, a
thousand authorities out of the law, out of the Psalms, out of the Apostles,
out of the Prophets, by which expounded after a new and wicked fashion he
would throw headlong the unfortunate souls from the tower of the Catholic
Church into the deep dungeon of wicked heresy. Now with these sweet promises
which follow, Heretics do wonderfully deceive simple men. For they dare
promise and teach that in their Church, that is in the conuenticle of their
communion is to be found a great and special yea and a certain personal
grace of God: So that whosoever be one of their crew, they shall straight ways
without any labor, without any study, without any industry yea although they
never seek, nor crave, nor knock, have such special dispensation that they
shall be carried up with the hands of Angels, that is preserved by Angelical
protection: that they never hurt their foot against a stone, that is that they
never can be scandilized. But some man will say, if the Devil and his
disciples, whereof some be false Apostles, false Prophets, and false teachers,
and all perfect Heretics, do use the scriptures, cite their sayings, bring
forth their promises, what shall Catholic men do? How shall the children of
the Church behave them selves? How shall they in the holy scriptures discern
truth from falsehoode? To which I answer that they must have great care (as in
the beginning of this Treatise I said holy and learned men taught me) that they
interpret the divine and canonical scripture according to tradition of the
universal Church, according to the rules of the Catholic doctrine: in which
like wise they must of necessity follow, vniniuersalitie, antiquity, and
consent, of the Catholic and Apostolic Church. And therefore if at any time
a part rebel against the wholle, novelty against antiquity, the dissension
of one or a few (carried away with error) against the consent of all, or the
far greater part of Catholics: In that case let them prefer the
integrity of universality before the corruption of a part: And in
universality let them also prefer the religion of antiquity before profane
novelty, and again in antiquity let them prefer before the temeritie of
one or a few, the decrees of a general Council if any be, or if no such be
found, let them take that which is next hand, that is to follow the opinions
of many and great learned Doctors agreeing together, which faithfully, soberly,
diligently, observed and kept: By Gods grace we shall without any great
difficulty find out the errors of new vpstarte Heretics.

CHAP. XIIII.
HERE I perceive by order it follows to show by examples how the profane
novelties of heretics are by bringing forth and conferring together the old
Doctors opinions agreeing together to be found out and condemned, which
ancient consent of holy fathers is not so carefully and diligently to be
sought for and followed in every small question of the scripture, but only and
especially in the rule of faith, neither yet always, nor all heresies are
after this sort to be impugned, but only such as be new and vpstart, to wit,
at their first springing up and before they have (let with lack of time)
falsified the rules of the ancient faith, and before the poison spreding far a
broad, goes about to corrupt the Fathers works: But those heresies which
have already got ground, and be of some contiunance are not this way to be
dealt with all, because by long tracte of time they have had opportunity to steal
truth And therefore such kind of profane schisms and heresies which be of
longer standing, we must not otherwise convince, but either only if need be, by
the authority of the scriptures, or else to avoid and detest them being
already convicted and condemned in old time by general Councels of Catholic
Preistes: Therefore so soon as any infectious error begineth to break forth and
for her defense to steal certain words of holy scripture, and craftily and
fradulently to expound the^, straight ways for the right understanding thereof
the Fathers opinions are to be gathered together by which let any whatsoever
new, and therefore profane doctrine growing up with out all delay be dejected
and speedely condemned. But those Fathers opinions only are to be conferred
together which with holiness, wisdom, and constancy, lived, taught, and
continued in the faith, and communion of the Catholic Church and finally
deserved to die in Christ or happily for Christ to be martired, who^
notwithstanding we are to believe with this condition, that whatsoever either
all or the greater part with one mind, plainly, commonly, constantly, as it
were a Council of Doctors agreeing together have decreed and set down
receiving it from their ancestors, holding it for their time, and delivering
it to their posterity, let that be had and accounted for undoubted, for
certain and firm truth (And whatsoever any although holy and learned,
although a Bishop, although a Confessor, and Martyr has holden otherwise then
all, or against all, let that be put aside from the authority of the common
public and general faith and reputed amongst his own proper, private, and
secret opinions, least with great danger of eternal salvation, we do
according to the custom of sacriligious Heretics and Schismatickes, forsake
the truth of the universal faith, and follow the novel error of one man) the
holy and and Catholic mind of which blessed Fathers least any man think that
he may rashly contemn. The Apostle says 1. Cor. 12.
in his first epistle to the Corinthians: And some verily has God set in his
Church first Apostles of which him self was one: Secondly Prophets as Agabas
was of whom we read in the Acts. Thirdly Doctors which now are called Cap. 11.
Tractators who^ also this Apostle some time names Prophets (because their
office was to expound and declare to the people the mysteries of the Prophets)
these therefore disposed and placed by God at diverse times and sundry places,
agreeing and consenting all in one mind in Christ, touching the understanding
of the Catholic faith whosoever co^temneth, does not contemn man but God:
and that we disagree not by any means from the perfect and true unity of
those Fathers, the same Apostle does earnestly beseech all Christians, saying:
I beseech you brethren that you say all one thing and that there be no
schisms among you, but that you be perfect 1. Cor. 1
in one sense and in one knowledge. And if any man separate him self from the
communion of their opinion, let him hear that saying of the same Apostle: He
is not the God of dissension but 1. Cor. 14
of peace: that is not of him that leaves consent and unity, but of them that
remain in peace and agreement: As I do (quoth he) teach in all the Churches of
the Saints, that is of Catholics, which therefore be holy because they
continue in the communion of the faith: and least happily any one should
contemn others and proudly require only to be heard, only to be believed,
strait after he says. What has the word of God (quoth he) proceeded from you
or have it only come to you. And least this might be taken as spoken slightlye
he adds. If any (quoth he) seemeh a Prophet or spiritual, that is a master
in spiritual matters, let him be a zealous lover of unity and peace, in such
wise that he neither prefer his own opinion before the judgment of others,
neither leave or forsake the sense and common consent of all men. The
commandments of which things he that is (quoth he) ignorant of: that is he
that learneth not those things which he yet knows not, or contemns those
which he knows, he shall not be known, that is he shall be thought unworthy,
whom amongst such, as be united in faith and equal in humility God should
regard and look upon: a greater evil then which I doubt whether any man can
inue^t or devise which yet notwithstanding (according to the Apostles
commination) we see to have fallen upon Iultan the Pelagian who either
conte^ned to be joined in opinion with his fellows or else presumed to separate
him self from their society and communion.

But now it is time to bring forth the example which we promised: how and after
what sort the judgment and opinions of holy Fathers were gathered together,
that according to the^ by the decree and authority of a Council the rule of
faith might be set down: which to the end that I may more commodiously do, I
will here make an end of this commonitorie and so take a another beginning for
declaring of those things which do follow and ensew.

A RECAPITVLATION of all that has been said in the former two books.
WHICH being so it is now time that in the end of this second book we
recapitulate and touch in few words the Sum of all that which in these two
commonitorie books has been spoken. We said in the premises that this
always has been and at this day is the custom of Catholics to try and
examine true faith two manner of ways. First by the authority of the divine
scripture: secondly by the tradition of the Catholic Church, not because the
Canonical scripture is not of it self sufficient for all things, but because
very many expounding Gods word at there own pleasure, do thereby bring forth
and hatch up diverse opinions and errors. And for that cause it is necessary
that the interpretation of the divine scripture be directed according to the
one only rule of the Churches understanding: especially in those questions
upon which the foundation of the whole Catholic religion does depend.
Likewise we said that in the Church we had to consider the consent both of
universality and antiquity, so that we be neither carried a way from sound
unity to schism nor yet cast headlong from antiquity of religion into the
dangerous gulf of heretical novelties. We said also that in antiquity we had
diligently to observe and seriously to consider two things, unto which all
those that will not be heretics must of necessity stand. The first is, that
which has in oulde time been determined by all the bishopes of the Catholic
Church by authority of a general Council. The second is that if any new
question did arise in which the determination of a Council were not to be
found that then we ought to have recourse to the sayings of the holy fathers,
but yet of these only who in their time and place were probable masters,
being such as lived and died in the unity of the communion and faith. And
whatsoever we knew that they believed and taught with one mind and consent to
judge and take that without all scruple to be the true and Catholic Religion
of the Church.

And least any man might think that we said this rather of presumption the^ of
any authority of the Church, we gave an example of the holy Council holden
almost three years sithence at Ephesus a City in Asia in the time of the
right honorable Councels Bassus and Antiochus, in which disputation was had of
constituting and setting down rules of faith: and least there might by chance
some profane Novelty creep in, as happened at that persidious meeting in
Ariminum this was reputed and thought the most Catholic, holy, and best
course to be taken, by the judgment of all the Bishops there present, which
were almost two hundred in number: that the opinions of these Fathers should be
brought forth of who^ it was certain that some of them had been Martirs,
diverse Confessors, and all to have lived and died Catholic Priests that by
their authority, consent and verdict, the old religion might be rightly and
solemnly confirmed, and blasphemous profane novelties condemned, which being
so done worthily and justly, Nestorius was judged to have taught contrary to
the old Catholic religion and blessed Cirill to have maintained holy and
sacred antiquity. And to the end nothing might be wanting which procures
credit we put down also the names and number of these Fathers (although not
remembering their order) according to whose consent and uniform doctrine both
the textes of holy scripture were expounded, and the rule of Gods word
established. Neither will it here be superfluous for memory sake to repeat
them all once again. These then be the names of them, whose works were cited
in that Council either as judges or else as witnesses. S. Peter Bishop of
Alexandria a most excellent Doctor and blessed Martyr. S. Athanasius Bishope of
the same sea a most faithful teacher and famous Confessor. S. Theophilus
Bishope also of the same City, a notable man for faith, life and learning,
next after whom succeeded venerable Cirill, who at this present does honor the
Church of Alexandria. And that no man happily should suspecte that this was
the doctrine of one City or of one Province: to the former there were adioined
those two lights of Caperdocia Saint Gregory Bishop and Confessor of
Nazianzene and Saint Basil Bishope and Confessor of Cesurea, and also another
Saint Gregory Nissen worthy for his merit of faith, conversation, integrity,
and wisdom of such a brother as Basil was. And for proof that not only the
greek and East Church, but also the Latin, and Weast, were always of the
same opinion, the letters of Saint Felix Martyr and Saint Iulie both Bishops of
Rome, which they wrote unto certain men were there read. And that not only
the head of the world but also the other parts should give testimony in that
judgment. From the South they had blessed S. Ciprian, from the North S.
Ambrose Bishop of Millan. These then be the holy Fathers agreeing with that
sacred number of the ten Commandments which were alleged in the Council
of Ephesus, as Masters, Counselors, Witnesses, and Judges, whose doctrine the
blessed Synod holding, following whose counsel, beleeuinge whose testimony,
obeyinge whose judgment, without spite, without presumption, and without
favor, pronounced and gave sentence concerning the rules of faith. And albeit
a far greater number of Fathers might have been set down, yet was it not
necessary, because it was not requisite that time should be spent with
multitude of witnesses: and further no man doubted but that those ten did
little differ in opinion from all the rest of their fellow Bishopes. After all
this we set down the worthy sentence of Cirill which is to be found in the
Ecclesiastical acts of that Council. For when the epistle of S. Capreolus
Bishop of Carthage was read, who intended nothing else, nothing else desired,
but that novelty might be over thrown, and antiquity defended, Bishope
Cirill spoke and gave his definition in this sort: for I have thought good not
to omit it here: these then be his words in the end of the acts of that
Counsel. And this epistle (quoth he) of the venerable and religious man
Capreolus Bishope of Carthage shall be adjoined to the faith of the Councels
acts, whose opinion is plain and perspicuous, for he desires that the
dostrine of the old faith may be confirmed and new opinions superfluously
invented and impiously spread a broad may be reproved and condemned. To which
all the Bishopes with one consent cried out. This we spoke all, this we teach
all, this we desire all: what I beseech you said they all, what desired they
all? surely nothing else but that which was of old time delivered, might be
still retained: and that which was newly invented might speedily be rejected.
After all which we maruailed at and highly commended the great humility and
holiness of that Council, in which were so many Bishopes, the greater part of
whom were almost Metropolitanes, of such eruditio^, of such learning, that they
were almost all sufficient to have disputed of matters of faith Which great
assembly and meeting together although it might in some man's opinion have
imboldened them to presume and determine somewhat of themselves, yet they
delivered nothing, presumed nothing, arrogated nothing to themselves, but
before all things they were very careful not to leave any thing to
posterity, which before they had not received of their forefathers: not
thinking it sufficient to dispose well of the business then present but also
to leave an example to their posterity, how they in like manner should
reverence the religion of sacred antiquity, and utterly condemn the
inventions of profane novelty. We inuaighed also against the wicked
presumption of Nestorius who boasted that he was the first and the only man
which understood the scriptures, and that all others which before his days
preached and taught, all that interpreted and expounded the word of God were
ignorant and unskillful, that is all Preistes, all Confessors and Martirs, of
whom some had expounded Gods law others allowed and believed them. To conclude
he maintained that the Church both now did err and always had erred, because
as he thought it had and did follow unlearned and erroneous Doctors: All which
albeit they were abundantly sufficient for the ouerturning and extinguishing of
all profane novelties. Yet least that ought should in such ple^tie of proofs
be wanting, we added for a conclusion a doble authority of the Sea
Apostolic, the one of holy Pope Xistus which venerable father now honors
the Church of Rome, the other of Pope Celestinus of blessed memory his
predicessor which I have thought good also here to set down. Pope Xistus then
in his epistle which he wrote to the Bishope of Antioch towching the cause of
Nestorius says thus. Therefore (quoth he) because as the Apostle says the
faith is one which evidently has obtained to be so called let us believe, and
such things as are to be holden let us believe. Afterward he prosecuteth and
explicateth what those things be which are to be believed, what they be which
are to be kept, saying thus: Nothing (quoth he) is further lawefull for
Novelty because it is convenient that nothing be added to Antiquity. The
faith and belief of our forefathers is clear and perspicuous let it not be
troubled or defiled with any permixtion of filthy mire. Apostolically spoken:
in commendation of our forefathers faith, to compare it to light and
perspicuitie, and in likening novel prophanes to the admixtion of filth and
mire. Pope Celestinus likewise is of the same opinion, for in his epistle which
he sent to the Preistes of France, wherein he reprehendeth their dissimulation
in that they left by their silence the old faith destitute, and suffered
profane Novelties to spring up, thus he writes Worthelie (quoth he) the
cause does touch us if with silence we foster error therefore let such men be
corrected, let them have no liberty to speak at their pleasure. Some happily
doubts who they be, whom he forbids to have their liberty in speaking,
whether the preachers of antiquity, or the inuentors of novelties: Let him
speak and discharge the Reader of this doubt, for it follows: Let nouelty
cease of (quoth he) if the matter be so: that is if that be true which diverse
accuse unto me your Cities and Provinces that through your pernicious
dissimulation you cause the^ to yield unto certain new doctrine: Therefore
(quoth he) if the matter be so, let novelty cease of to provoke Antiquity This
then was the blessed opinion of holy Celestinus, not that antiquity should
cease to overthrow Novelty, but rather that Novelty should give over to
provoke antiquity: Which Apostolic and Catholic decrees, whosoever
resists first of necessity he must proudly contemn the memory of S.
Celestinus who defined that novelty should give over to provoke antiquity.
Again he mustiest and scoff at the decree of holy Xistus, whose judgment is,
that nothing is lawful for novelty, because it is not convenient that ought
be added to antiquity. Again he must contemn the determination of blessed
Cirill, who highly commended the zeal of venerable Capreolus, in that he
desired, that the old articles of faith should be confirmed and new inue^tions
utterly condemned. Likewise he must reject the Council of Ephesus, that is the
judgment almost of all the holy Bishopes of the East, who inspired by God
would not decree that posterity should believe ought but that which the sacred
antiquity of our forefathers agreeing together in Christ had holden and
believed, who with their uniform allowing and acclamation testified that they
all decreed, all wished, all gave judgment, that is all heretics almost
before Nestorius contemning antiquity and defending Novelty were condemned.
So likewise Nestorius him self the author of novelty and impugner of
antiquity should be condemned. Whose sacred consent and agreement proceeding
from Gods goodness if any dislike, what remains but that he maintain that
Nestorius profane opinion was unjustly condemned. Finally he must also set
light by, and contemn the universal Church of Christ, and her masters the
Apostles and Prophets, and especially the Apostle S. PAVL, as dreggs and
dross. The universal Church because she has always religiously kept and
maintained that faith which was once delivered S. PAVL, because he has written
thus. O Timothy keep the depositum avoiding profane Novelties of voices. And
again. If any preach unto you otherwise then you have received be he
accursed. And if neither the Apostle his definition nor the Ecclesiastical
canons ought to be violated, by which according to the sacred consent of
universality and antiquity, always all heretics, and lastly Pelagius
Celestius and Nestorius were justly and worthelie condemned, surely necessary
it is that hereafter all Catholics which desire to show themselves true
children of their mother the church do cleave, join, and stick unto the holy
faith of their holy Fathers detesting and abhorring, pursueing and prosecuting
the profane novelties of all profane misereantes. This almost is the sum of
that which in these two commonitorie books we have more amply discoursed of,
and now after the manner of recapitulatio^ in fewer words gathered together that
my memory for helpinge whereof I have wrote this Treatise may both with dailye
admonition be repaired, and yet not ouerlaid with fastidious prolixitie.


