THE SCHOOL of Beasts, Entitled, the good Householder, or the Oeconomickes.

Made Dialogue-wise, by M. PETER VIRET, translated out of French into English,
by I. R.

GOD IS MY DEFENDER

GOD IS MY HELPER



AT LONDON; Printed by Robert VValde-graue 1585

The Contents of this Book.
I Have entitled this Dialogue, the good Householder, or the Oeconomicks,
because I make comparison in the same, of the good and evil householders with
the beasts, which know best to provide for their nourishment and
conservation, as well of them as of their young.

And because also that the Philosophers, have called the knowledge of well and
wise governing the houses and families, by the name of Oeconomicks, and also
the books which they have composed and made of such matter: It seems to me
that this title agrees very well to this Dialogue. As touching the principal
matters which are entreated of in it, first I declare, in what degree of
humanity we may put the wysest men of this world, which are without the true
knowledge of God, and without true religion, and which nevertheless govern
themselves more wisely then any others, as touching their housholdes and
worldly affairs.

And therefore, I compare the reason and prudence of men, with the same of
Beasts, touching their domestical government, and chiefly with the same of
the Antes.

And prosecuting that matter, I speak of the transformation of Antes into men.

Afterward I declare how Solomon does send us unto the school of the Ants,
Connies, Grashopers and Spyders.

And by that occasion, I speak of the nature of those Beasts, and do declare
what things we ought to learn of them.

Item, of the comparison of the works of those Beasts, and of those of men.

Of the transformation of Arachna, and of Acteon, and of the providence of God,
the which manifests it self in the nature of the brute beasts, and
cheefely in those which are the least.

And because that the cheifest thing that is required in a good householder, is
the amity and love of the husband and the wife, the one toward the other,
and the care that the fathers and mothers of the family, ought to have of
their children and families: I make a certain discourse, touching the nature
of the Beasts which have some singular gift more then the others have, in
the conjunction of the male with the female, and in the affection toward
their little ones, and the care they have of them.

And therefore I speak, cheefely of the nature of the Pigeons, of the
Swallows, of the Partridge, of the Hares, and of the Hedge-hogges, touching
that point? and make comparison with those men, which do not their duty so
well toward theirs, as those beasts do in their behalf.

I do add also unto those, the Halsion a Bird of the Sea. And afterward I
do also make mention of certain fishes, and certain Sea beasts, as the
Phyces, the Lamprey, the Tortice, the sea Calfe, and the Crocodiles.

And after to conclude, I declare what is the office of fathers and mothers
toward their children, according to the doctrine of Saint Paul.

A DIALOGVE of the school of Beasts, Entitled the good householder, or the
Oeconomickes.
The speakers.
Tobias. Theopharstus. Jerome.
Tobias, THOU TAKE IN hand a work (Theophrastus) the which shall not be
greatly to the honor of men, if thou can atayne unto that to which thou
have bound thy self. For if the beasts do better their office according to
their nature, then men do theirs, they deserve more to be called reasonable,
then men.


Theophrast. I doubt not but that at the first sight, many will find that
which I have said to be very strange. But since that the spirit of God does
send us so often times unto the school of beasts in the holy scriptures, Men
are sent to the schole of Beasts.
we may thereby judge, how much men ought to esteem and set by them selves,
seeing they understand so evil their office, that they must be sent unto the
beasts, for to learn of them what they ought to do.


Tobias, I pray thee declare unto us the places of the holy scriptures, agreing
with that matter for to make us better to understand what is that school of
beasts, to which the spirit of God sends us, as thou say.


Theophrast. First mark, what the Lord said by the mouth of Job, Job. 21 7.
ask the Cattle, and they shall inform thee: The Fowls of the air, and they
shall tell thee: speak to the errth, and it shall show thee: Or too the
fishes of the Sea, and they shall certify thee. Now seeing that Job does
send us to the beasts, generally for to be taught by them: I will now bring
forth more specially and perticulerly the Doctors and Masters, which are set
forth unto us by the word of God, in this school of the beasts which we
speak of.


Tobias, With which of the beasts will thou begin.


Theophrast. With that which is the least of al. Cood householders and pollitike
me^.
Thou know that men do greatly esteem those which know best to govern
them selves in this world, and which are prudent and wise, to gather together
great store of earthly treasures, and for to govern well their house, A City,
a Cuntrie, or a whole Realm.


Tobias, Such men are so much esteemed among others, that commonly they do not
esteem any other to be wise, prudent nor good men but only those.


Theophrast. It is even so as thou say: But when al shall be well considered
what comparion is there in such matter, between such men and the Author,
and wherein are they to be preferred before the Antes? The Ante.
I do not yet speak of other beasts, which according to their nature, know
to provide althinges for their affairs, as needs for their conservation. But
I take this same, which is the least that may be: And yet nevertheless she
has so much industry, prudence, Prou. 6.6.
and diligence in her, that Solomon was not ashamed to send the sluggard unto
her school. It were a thing incredible, if we had not the experience for a
witness, that such little beasts, could carry such heavy burdens as they do,
and that they can heap together the things as they do for their provision:
and to keep among the^ such order as they keep.


Tobias, I would to God that men in their behalf, knew to keep so good order
amongst them selves. What say thou Jerome?


Jerome, Thou should have yet better occasion to say so as thou say, if
thou had heard that which Pliny and Plutarke, besides other wise men, have
written of the nature of those little Beasts, and should be yet less
abashed, Prou. 6.6.
for that Solomon gives them for mystresses to the sluggarde.


Tobias, Thou shall do me great pleasure, to declare unto me what things
those two Authors have written, whom thou namedst unto me but now. For I
understand that they were both of them very learned men; and that they have
written very well of those matters, of which they have spoken.


Jerome, I will begin with Pliny, Plini. lib. cap 30. Aristo. lib de animalib.
9 cap. 38 The common wealth of the Ants. and their labors and industry*
who has written marvelous things. First he confesses that there is among
them, the order and fashion of a common wealth, and a remembrance and care. But
amongst al their other works, is it not a pastime, to see them bite the
burdens that they will carry? If they be too great and heavy for them, they
turn them selves backewardes, and stay it with their shoulders thrust it
forward with their hinder feet. And to the end that the seeds which they
hyde in the earth, should not grow, and take root, they byte it before they
lay it up in their Garners and store houses. And if the graynes be too great,
and that they cannot easily enter in at their holes, they divide it in the
myddest. If they be moist or wette with the rain, they do bring them out and
dry them. Also they labor in the night, when the Moon is at the full, and
cease and leave of when she is in the waine. Wherein they declare, that they
understand some thing in Astronomy. But what labor and diligence is there in
their works? And for that that they do fetch and gather their provision from
diverse places, and that the one knows nothing of the other, Pliny liber.
11. and. 30. The faires of the Ants.
Pliny witnesses, that they have certain days of fayres, for to know the
one the other. Every man may think what course and what diligence there is
then amongst them. But if one mark them nerely, will he not say, that they
speak together, and do ask and answer the one the other? Do we not see the
stones and hard works made smoothe, and holes worn in them through the often
going too and fro about their work? Wherein we may well know how much the
diligence and exercise is worthy, and can do in every thing. For if the feet
of those little beasts can make hollow and smooth the hard stones, through
their often going and coming to and fro, what may the continual labor and
travail of men do? It is not then without cause that the Greeks said in a
proverb, A proverb.
exercise can do all things. But besides all that, Exercise and diligence can
do all things.
it is also written of them, that they do burye the one the other, as men do.
These things make me to think, The burial of the Ants.
that the Poets have feigned, that the people called Myrmidons, Pliny. lib.
11. Cap. 30.
came from the Antes which were changed into men? Because of their industry
and labor, Antes turned into Myrmidons.
and of that prudence and direction that they have, which is next to the nature
of men. For those people have been much esteemed among the Poets, and chiefly
because of Achilles, Achilles homer Ili.
which was their captain in the wars of Troy.


Tobias, Which of all the poets has spoken, of that transformatio^?


Jerome, Ovid makes a great discourse in his Metamorphoses, in which he
declares how that the people of king Aeacus, being altogether discomfited
through the great plague and death, was restored again by the means of the
Antes, which were changed into men, of which transformatio^, he speaks
after this manner, as it is translated into English miter.

Ovid. meta. lib. 7
Hard by us as it hapt that time,
there was an Oken tree,
With spreaded arms as bare of boughs,
as lightly one shall see.
This tree (as all the rest of Oaks,)
was sacred unto Jove,
And sprouted of an Acorne which,
was fet from Dodon grove.
Here marked we how the pretty Antes,
the gatherers up of grain.
One following other al along,
in order of a train.
Great burdens in their little mouths.
did painefully sustain.
And nimbly up the rugged bark,
their beaten path maintain.
As wondering at the swarm I stood,
I said, O father dear,
As many people give thou me,
as Antes are creeping here.
And by and by afterward, following on his purpose, he comes to the
transformation of them, and said as follows.

Me thought I saw the self same Oak, Ovid meta. lib. 7

with all his boughs and twiges,
And all the Pismires creeping still,
upon his taunts and spriges.
Which trembling with a sudden brayde,
these harnest folk of threw.
And shed them on the ground about,
who on the sudden grew.
In bigness more and more,
and from the earth them selves did lift,
And stood upright against the tree,
and there withal did shift.
Their neygernes, and cole black hue,
and number of their feet:
And clad their lymmes with shape of man,
away my sleep did fleet.
And by and by afterward, Ovid him self expounds and declares the cause
wherefore that transformation was feigned, as I even now declared, and therefore
he brings in Aecus speaking after this manner.

Ovid meta. lib. 7.
And I (my vows to Jove perfourmd,)
my City did divide:
Among my new inhabiters,
and gave them land beside.
Which by decease of such as were,
late owners of the same,
Lay wast, and in remembrance of,
the race whereof they came.
The name of Emetes I them gave,
their persons you have seen:
Their disposition is the same,
that erst in them has been.
They are a sparing kind of folk.
on labor wholly set:
A gatherer, and a horder up,
of such as they do get.
These fellows being like in years,
and courrage of the mind,
Shall go awarfare when as soon,
as that the esterne wind.
Which brought you hither luckely,
(the Eastern wind was it,
That brought them thither,)
turning to the Sotherne coast do flit.
Ovid, has partly taken the occasion of this fable, because that Myrmex
signifies in Greek an Ante, Myrmex.
of which name it seems that the name of the Myrmidons is taken, The cause of
this fable and of the name of the myrmidons.
for the cause which has been already alleged by Ovid him self. And therein
Ovid has showed, how much he has esteemed the Antes and their labors,
when he did not only compare those men unto them, which he thought to be most
industrious and given to labor, but also has feigned that me^ were made of the
Ants. As though he would say, that men are not naturally so industryous and
given to labor, as the Antes, and that the Myrmidons should not be so
industrious, if they had not been before Antes, and that they had been taken
from their kind.


Tobias, Seeing that the Myrmidons are called by that name, for the cause thou
speak of, that name cannot by right be given unto the sluggardes, whom
Solomon does send unto the Ante.


Jerome, It is easy to judge. But seeing that I have in effect declared, that
which Pliny has written, of the nature of the Antes, it remains now, that I
do also declare that which Plutarke witnesses of it. The witness of Plutarke of
the nature of the Ante.
For he does not only accord with Pliny, in that that he has written, but
also he declares more specially and particulerly, the great virtues which are
in these little beasts, of whom he speaks after this sort. Plutat. in opus.
But as it is impossible (says he) to speak worthily enough of the
discipline, and domestical industry of the Antes, yet we must not pass
without speaking ^omewhat of them. Nature has no ^reater and more excellent
mirror of great and excellent things. For in (...) it shines the signet of all
virtue, ^s in a pure little drop. That communication that they have among them
selves, is the Image of amity: that strength and liuelines that they have in
their labors and trauayles, ^s an Image of force and magnanimity. To conclud,
they have a great many of seeds and witnesses of temperance, of providence and
of Justice. Now although that Cleanthes esteemed not that the beasts were
endu^d with reason, yet nevertheless, he confessed, that he did see on a time
that spectacle, that is, that certain Antes went to an ant-heape, carrying
(...) dead Ante, from which ante-heape ^ame before the^ certain other Ants.
^fterwards when they had as it were spoken together, they went again ^n, and
did so twyse or thrice. In the end they brought a worm, which was the price
as it should seem, for to redeem the dead. The which worm was taken by those
which did bring the dead Ante: the which they gave unto the others and went
their way. But now every one may know their benevolence when they meet the one
the other: when those that are empty, give place unto those that are laden,
that they may pass the more easily: When they divide into many pieces, a
burden that is too heavy for them either to bear or to draw: The astrology
and Prognostication of the Antes.
when they set the corn in the son to dry it. It is a sign of rain, as
Aratus esteems, when the Ante brings out of her hole and den al her
eggs, Although that some say that they be not eggs, The co^seruation of the
grains and provision.
but the fruit which they bring forth, when they feel and perceive that it
waxes mustie. And for that cause they fear least it should wax rotten. And
the care that they have least their graynes should not spring and grow,
surpasses al men's understanding: And that care also which they have, that
their seeds which they have laid up in their hole and den, should abide
dry and not rotten, fearing least suddenly they should wax moist, and become
like milk, and that being moystened with the moystnes of the place, it should
return again into grass. To the end then that their graynes should not grow
and spring: and that so by that means they should not loose their nourishment
and food, but that it may continue and they live, they bite the nable of the
grain, which is the part by which it springs and grows, and gelde it long
time before. Now some say that the first descending, and next to the entering
in of their holes, is not right and straight forth, and that there is no other
beast which can go in at it: But that it is crooked and with many turninges,
having many cross ways, the which is made into their holes and dens. The
one is that, where they make their assemblies and parliaments. The other celle
or hole is, that where they lay up their provision for all the year: And the
third is the burial place for the dead. Behold that which Plutarke has
written of the Antes.


Tobias, Since that Solomon has set forth for the sluggrdes, Proverbs. 6.
the example of the Ante, I doubt not but that she is very laborious and
diligent. But I know not whether we ought to believe all that which Pliny
and Plutarke have written.


Jerome, Whether all that which they have written be true or no, I refer me
to themselves. But yet nevertheless, I think that they have not written
without some reason that, that they do testify: Besides experience witnesses,
at the least in so^e part, the things the which they do witness. But since
that we have heard their witness, let us now hear what Theophrastus will say
more upon that place, the which he has alredie alleged out of Solomon,
touching this mattet.


Theophrast. It shall be good that we hear the very words of Solomon himself,
the better to understand the doctrine, the which he would give us to
understand by the same. Proverb. 6.6 The sluggard sent to the schole of the
Ante.
Go to the Emits (says he) thou sluggard, consider her ways and learn to be
wise. She has no guide, no teacher, no leader: yet in the Summer she provides
her meat, and gathers her food together in the Harvest. How long will thou
sleep thou sluggishe man? when will thou arise out of thy sleep? Yea sleep
on still a little, slomber a little, fold thy hands together yet a little, that
thou may sleep: So shall poverty come unto thee as one that trauaileth by
the way, and necessity like a weaponed man. And in an an other place, mark
what he speaks, not only of the Ante, but also of certain other little
Beasts, which are not of any great strength. Prou 30.24
There be four things in the earth (says he) the which are very little: but
in wisdom they exceed the wise. The Emmets are but a weak people, yet
gather they their meat together in the Harvest. The Conies are but a feeble
folk, yet make they their couches among the rocks. The Grasshoppers have not a
guide, yet go they forth together by heaps* the Spyder laboreth with her
hands, and that in the Kings palace.


Tobias, Wherefore does Solomon set forth the feebleness of those beasts?


Theophra. It is to take from the slugardes and idle persons, The excuse as the
sluggardes and slothful excluded.
all the excuses which they might aleadge for to excuse their slugishnes and
slothfulnes. For although that these little beasts are feeble and weak, and that
they have no king nor Prince for to defend and conduct them: yet nevertheless,
that does not let and hinder them to do their works.


Tobias. Is, that the cause, why he said, that they had no guide?


Thophrast. In speaking the same, he gives two aduertisementes unto men, the
which are worthy to be noted. For on the one side, he rebukes them for that
they do nothing but through compulsion, and that they cannot yet do their
duty, although they be incited and driven forwards by many means, wherein
they have a great advantage, which the beasts have not. For they have none
other master nor mystres to teach them, but the nature which God gave the^,
with which they do better keep their estate, then men do in that with which
they were first created of God. And on the other side, he does also admonish
the Princes and all superiors, The office of princes
not to suffer those to live idly whom they have in charge, and to keep and
defend them. And by that he speaks of the Conyes, he rebukes the rashness and
folish hardines of men. Rashness.
And by that he speaks of the Grasshoppers, he rebukes them of their
disobedience toward their maiestrates. And by the Spider, Disobedience.
he admonishes that those which have the charge of the common wealth or
public things, Care.
ought to be more careful and vigilant.


Tobias. Me thinks that thou would say that those which are in public
office, and in Kings and Princes houses, ought to be more careful and diligent
then any other, after the example of the Spider, who is not idle in the Kings
palace. And yet nevertheless, those houses are commonly the schools of the
greatest Idleness that is in the world.


Theophrast. And therefore God does send them the spiders, for to rebuke and
check them.


Tobias, And therefore I think that that is the cause wherefore the Spyders
are so much driven away with their copwebs, A Proverb.
wherefore men say in a common proverb, That the Spider has taken up her
lodging with the poor men, and the Gout in the rich men's houses, in which
she may take best rest.


Theophrast. Let us leave of that matter, and come again unto Solomon, who
joins here these four beasts, who notwithstanding they are but little of
body, yet nevertheless they do plainly show, that they have a maruaylous
natural wisdom, by which they pass and excel the same of the wise men.
Then as he would that we should learn of the Ante, to be diligent, given to
labor, and well foreseeing to our affairs: So he sends us unto the Connies,
The Connies and that that they do teach unto man.

A sure dwelling.


that we may learn by their example, not only to be diligent, and given to
labor, but also to seek for a sure and firm dwelling. For notwithstanding
that the Connies are without strength and resistance, insomuch that they can
do none other thing, but to fly at the baye and barking of the least Dog in
the world: yet nevertheless they are such continual diggers and scrapers,
that they bring it to pass in the end, that they do cleave a sunder and make
hollow the stones and rocks, for to lodge them selves therein, and their young
ones with the^. And therefore it is said in the Psalms. The rocks are a
refuge for the Connies. Psalm 104.18.
For they know very well how to make their Caves and dens, and to find out
fit and sure places for the same: and they are very diligent for to provide
for their meat and their yong-ones, of which they are so fruitful, Pli. lib.
8.55.
that sometimes the Balearians were constrained to demand aid and soldiers
of Augustus Caesar, against those, fearing least they would destroy their
Cuntry, as they have sometime destroyed Cities. Now seeing that we have not
here any abiding and permanent City, Heb. 13.14.
but do seek another: where may we find a sure habitation and dwelling, but in
the holy City of the celestial Jerusalem, Heb. 2.3. Apo. 21.22. Psalm.
118.19. Math. 16.21. 1. Cor. 11.34 Pro. 18.10. Ephe. 2.19.
of which God is the wall? And in the Church of Jesus Christ, which is the
house of God builded upon the sure stone and sure rock? For the name of God is
a strong bulwark and a sure forstresse. Wherefore seeing that we have Jesus
Christ the sure stone which is the foundation of the holy City of the
celestial Jerusalem, and of the prophets and Apostles we are admonished that
we must not be fearful and cowardes, how great feblenesse soever be in us:
But that we employ our selves every one according to the gifts which we have
received of God, having always our refuge unto that stone and Rock. Those
then which put all their trust and affyance in the vain and brittle things
of this world, and in their riches, honors, parentages, and in the vain
ceremonies and traditions of men, and in the works of their hands, are not so
wise and prudent as the Connies, but are those fools of whom Jesus Christ
speaks, Mat. 7.26.
which builded their houses upon the Sands. For since that they are not builded
upon the word of God, and that they do not keep it in their hearts, their
building will fall down upon them. The which thing we ought well to learn, not
only of the Connies, but also of the Moules. For Varro witnesses, Plin. lib.
8.29. mart in Apopho.
that in Thessalie, a City, was overthrown by the Moules: And another in
Spain by the Connies.


Tobias, If these little beasts can overthrow and destroy the buildings,
edified and builded by men, we may well know what fortress one can find which
can resist the power and judgment of God.


Theophrast. We have yet to note, that besides all that, the Connies may brag
and bost them selves that they have taught men, the manner to make mines, holes
and caves under the ground, for to undermine and overthrow Towns, Castles and
fortresses. And therefore the mines and Caves that men make under the ground,
keeps yet the name of Conies among the Latins. For they call them Cuniculi,
of the same name by which they call the Connies. wherefore they have learned us,
how much we ought to trust to our fortresses, and to the works of our hands.
In like-maner, the men which know not how to keep order among them selves, and
which do no honor nor reverence unto justice, are not so wise as the
Grasshoppers. The wisdom of the grasshoppers Plin. lib. 1.29
For notwithstanding that they are without King and governor, yet
nevertheless they keep an order in flying: And there is among them some form
of justice, as those which God did send into Egypt, and there was found good
order among them. For they fly by great troops and companies, and do pass
the long Seas and cuntries. And therefore when the scripture would signify a
great Army, it says sometime that the army covers all the earth, as the
Grasshoppers. Judges. 6.5
What shall we say then of those men, whom we cannot make to obey justice, nor
to render their duty, neither toward god nor toward men? For although that
they have Princes, Maiestrates, and laws, and which is more, although that
they have God their sovereign king and father, which never cease to teach
and learn them by his word, yet nevertheless, they will not be kept in order.
And although that we have God for king, and that we are under his protection,
yet nevertheless we think our selves to be lost, as soon as the protection of
men and creatures wants. Wherein the Grasshoppers show them selves more hardy
and curragious then we. The Spiders Pli. li. 11.24.
And what shall we say of the spiders, ought they to give less shame unto the
sluggardes and sleepers, then the Ante? For notwithstanding that she be but
weak, yet nevertheless she fears not to haunte, not only poor men's
houses, but also the kings and princes Palaces, and to make her webbes in
them, turning and winding them now on the one side and now on the other, The
weauing of the Spider.
and catching all that which serve her, for to stretch them out and make them
as long as they can be. And although that one do break and deface her works,
and drive her from one side to the other, yet nevertheless she is not so
fearful that she forsakes her lodging therefore, but returns daily to her
work: Insomuche that men do not so fast break them, as she repaireth and
amendeth them, setting forth still new works. Wherein she makes men greatly
ashamed, which turn them selves from their duty and office be it through the
greatness and mightiness of Kings and Princes, or through all the lettes that
men may do unto them. Let us also consider what pain that beast takes to
make her threades, for to get her living by it. And afterward when they are
made, what diligence she takes after her chase? Let the silke-weauers and also
the lynen cloth makers, and the tapestrie makers, and imbroderers, and also all
those that make threddes come, and compare their work to the spiders webbes,
and let them consider in which is most conning. And who has learned them that
occupation? It was not men, but rather they have learned of them.


Jerome. Pliny tells maruayles of their works, to weete, how they divide
the labors between them, and how the wife spinneth and makes the webbes and
threads, and the husband on the other side chaseth and hunteth for their
nourrishment. I think that the same was the cause wherefore the poets have
feigned that Arachne, Arachne transformed into a spider.
that good and cunning weauer, was transformed into a Spider, because of her
Art, who was found to have followed the Spiders: of which transformation Ovid
has written after this manner.

And when minarue should depart,
Ovid meta. lib. 6.
with juice of Hecats flower:
She sprinkled her, and by and by,
the poison had such power,
That with the touch thereof her hear,
her ears and nose did fade:
And very small it both her head,
and al her body made.
Instead of legs, to both her sides,
stick fingers soft and fine:
The rest is belly from the which,
she nevertheless does twyne.
A slender thread, and practices,
in shape of spider still
The spinners and the websters crafts:
of which she erst had skill.

Theophrast. Let us leave of the transformations of the poets, and return unto
the school of the Spiders, to which Solomon sends us. Then if we consider
the huswiferie which the spider holds, Evil huswiues.
how many evil huswifes shall we find, which know not how to spinne, nor
sewe, neither the art of weauing, nor yet any science at all for to occupy
them selves in their houses? Wherefore such women are not worthy to be
compared unto the Spider, saving as touching the poison which they are full of.
Also if men will glory and boast them selves in hunting, The chase and hunting
of men and of the spiders. Plini. lib. 11. cap. 24. Arist. hist. animal. lib. 9
cap. 39.
and for that they are so ingenious and wise that they know the means to take
al kind of beasts, what matter of glorying and boasting have they more greater
then the Spiders? For what hunters are there more subtle, then the Spider for
to lie in wait, and for to trappe and snare the beasts, and to make them to
fall into their nets, or more diligent to lay hold on them? And yet
nevertheless she has neither sinews nor bones, But a very little body.


Jerome, Although it be so as thou say, yet nevertheless, she has the
industry to stay and catch sometims little euets, and lezards, in her nets. And
therefore Plutarke says, is not the work of the Spiders greatly to be
maruailed at, which have given unto women the pattern for to make their
thredes, and unto the fysher me^, for to make their netts. Let one behold the
perfection and the subtilitie of the threde, and the knotes of the web that
cannot be unloosed, being as a soft and tender skin, and glewed together as
though it were starched. Furthermore, the dying of the color declares some
ayrie and troubled thing, to the end it may the better deceive. Finally, a man
would never have believed that they had been so well taught to draw together the
lines which governs their works, in so much, that as soon as there is any
pray or captive, they feel and perceive it, and in a moment leap out and
draw together their nets, as does an expert and conning hunter. And if it
were not but, that we see it daily before our eyes, a man would think that it
were but a fable. Behold the witness of Plutark.


Thophrast. Besides all that which we have alredie spoken of, they have yet
another great advantage. For if men will chase and hunt, there must be many of
them, and that they must have many instruments for their hunting, the which
will be great charge unto them.


Jerome, That is very true. And moreover, Hunters eaten up by their dogs.
they must nurrish and feed a great company of dogs, the which oftentimes
eat up their masters. Even as the Poets have written, The transformation of
Acteon.
that the dogs of Acteon did eat up their master, being changed into an
heart: of which transformation Ovid has written after this manner. Diana makes
no farther threats, Ovid. meta lib. 3.

but by and by does spread:
A pair of lively old hearts horns:
upon his sprinkeled head,
She sharpes his ears, she makes his neck,
both slender long and lanke:
She turns his fingers into feet,
his arms to spindle shanke.
She wrappes him in a hairie hide,
be-set with speckled spots,
And planteth in him fearefulnes,
and so away he trottes.
And afterward toward the end he says.

Acteon now was full of care,
of sorrow and of grief:
And blamed much his horns,
which did betray him as a thief.
As often as they named him,
he sadly shook his head:
And feign he would have been away,
thence in some other stead.
But there he was, and well he could,
have found in heart to see:
His dogs fell deeds, so that to feel,
in place he had not be.
They hem him in on every side,
and in the shape of stagge:
With greedy teeth and griping paws,
their lord in pieces dragge.
So fierce was cruel Phaebes wrath,
it could not be alayde:
Til of his fault by bitter death,
the ransom he had paid.
Behold as touching the faining of the poets. But yet we must not think that
it is altogether vain.


Theophrast. Although the hunters be not in very deed turned into hearts, yet
there are a great many of whom one may rightly say, that their dogs have eaten
and devoured the^. And we must not doubt, but that gods judgment is just
herein. For although the hunters committed none other fault, but in these that
they give unto the dogs that which would nourishe, and feed agreat many of
poor people, that fault is great yenough for to provoke upon them, not the ire
and wrath of Diana, as it is written of Acteon, but that of the living God. And
further-more, there is yet another evil, which is, that the hunters all the
while they bestow and loose in hunting, cannot employ the^ selves to their
labor and tilling of their grounds, or to work upon any other their
occupation. For after that they are once given and addicted unto it, they
despise their housholdes and their affairs and doings, and are not so careful
as they ought to be. Whereby it comes to pass that afterward they fall into
poverty and need. Wherefore one may well say, that not only their dogs, but
also their hawks and horses have eaten the^, not only because they have
bestowed al their substance and goods to nurrishe them, but also because that
through the occasion of them they are become evil husbands, and have left and
foreslowed their chiefest affairs and business.


Jerome. That which thou speak agrees well with the exposition, Palepha. de
fabul. natra.
the which Palephatus gives of the transformation of Acteon, which we have
spoken of. For first of al he says, that the poets give us to understand by
this fable, that men ought to take heed that they do nothing which may
displease the gods, and provoke them to anger. Afterward he says that in
times past, all men labored with their hands, and did not their business by
servants and strange people, but by them selves. And therefore al those which
were diligent in labor were rich. And the more they busied them selves, the
richer they waxed. And on the other side, those that were idle and slothful,
and the proud which shunned labor, and were ashamed of it, and which gave
themselves unto hunting and unto other pastimes, became pore and beggars, as he
said happened unto Acteon, for the causes before rehearsed. And therefore he
was made a common proverb, who afterward did give matter unto the fables and
faynings of the Poets.


Theophrast. There are yet at this day many houses not only of rich Gentlemen,
but also of rich yeomen, and husbandmen, which have been destroyed partly by
such means.


Jerome. We may see it before our eyes. And therefore I am of the same advise
with Palephatus. And I do not think but that the poets have fained this
changing of Acteon that great hunter changed into an heart, and devoured by
his dogs, but for to signify the folly of a great many of foolish hunters,
which destroy them selves by their hunting and feeding their dogs. And if
that be to be condemned in gentlemen, which make it a daily occupation, it is
yet more to be condemned in laborers and artificers, when they leave undone
their works and business, for to give them selves unto such occupation, which
will bring them to beggerie. But let us return again unto the Spider, whom we
talked of, she is a better householder, then those are whom we spoke of. For
first, she lives by her hunting, as of her proper occupation, and she leaves
not of her occupatio^ by which she lives, for to use any other which would
make her dye with hunger. Again, she exercyseth her hunting all alone, and
without any cost at al. Moreover she knows the times and the seasons fyt for
to take her venison, and the places where she must pytch her nets. Spiders
are Astrologers Plini. lib. 11 cap. 24. Arist. hist. animal. lib. 9. cap. 38.39.
For she is an Astrologer, and knows when it will rain and the water
increase, then she pytcheth her nets higher. Also they make their webbs in
cloudie and dark wether, not in clear weather, because that the cloudie
wether is best for to take the beasts. And therefore when you see a great
multitude of them, they signify rain. We may add unto these beasts, the
silk worms, The silk worms. Plini. lib. 11. cap. 22.23. Arist. hist.
animal. lib. 5. cap. 24.
of which the Philosophers have also written maruaylous things, that is to
say* of the manner of making their nestes, and of their wolles and webbs with
which they do make men and women brave.


Theophrast. What is he that will not greatly maruayle of the wisdom of God,
when he beholds the industry, the sense and understanding which is in those
little beasts? For if there be so much in one so little abodie, as is the same
of the Ante or Emet, that with much ado one can scant perceive with the eye,
let us think what is the wisdom and providence of the Creator, which has
created them? Let us also think whether saint Paul had not just cause to say,
Romans 1.20
that his eternal power and Godhead is known by the visible things. Where are
the Epicures which deny the providence of God? The wisdom and providence
of God, manifested in the little creatures against the epycures.
If there be so-much in those little Ants, and in those other little creatures,
for to preserve and keep their kind, what ought it to be in God, for to
Preserve his creatures and works of his hands, and cheefely mankind, whom
he has created to immortality? Are these wicked epicures worthy to be
compared unto these beasts? Have not we just occasion to send them to their
school to dispute with them, and for to learn in the same, for to know God,
and his providence? What say thou to it Tobie?


Tobias, I think that we have as good an occasion as Solomon had, to send
thither the sluggarde.


Theophrast. Furthermore, if we will compare the Ante and those other beasts
which we speak of but now, and also the order of their common wealth, with all
that which Plato, Zenophon, Aristotle, and the other Philosophers have written
in their Oeconomickes and politickes, of the laws, rule and government of
houses, families, common-welthes, cities, and kingdoms, and also the most
excellent Oeconomikes, and politics which ever have been among men, men
shall be found more beasts then they, and more worthy to be sent unto their
schools, then unto the schools of the Philosophers. For the philosophers are
many times like unto many preachers, which preach very well, and speak very
earnestly against the deeds of the flesh, but they work but euilly, and they
are those which do the least of that which they teach others. But these
schoolmasters to whom the holy ghost sends us by his holy scriptures, are
masters which teach their disciples and scholars not in vain and babbling
books, and which tend al to Pleasure, but in doing the^ selves that which
they teach, for they teach by their own example. The which manner of teaching,
has more authority and majesty, then the other, and has more virtue to move
and induce men to that whereunto they would induce and bring them. And as
touching that which has been said of gods providence, the which manifests it
self in the nature the which he gave unto the creatures, it manifests it
self, yet better in that, that the least amongst them, are those unto whom he
gives most industry and wisdom, to the end that by the same they may
recompense the force and strength which is wanting in them. Art not thou of
mine opinion friend Jerome.


Jerome. Experience teaches us that thou say. But seeing we are entreed
into talk of good householders, I think we have one point to talk of, which
is very requisite, not only in all those which would be esteemed for good
householders, but also in all those which would be accounted for humane men,
and not for beasts more inhumaine then the savage and brute beasts. The point
of which I speak, is touching the love and amity that the husband and the
wife ought to have together, and touching the care that the one ought to have
the one of the other, The affection of fathers and mothers of families,
toward there families
and in like manner the fathers and mothers toward their children. For if
those virtues be not in fathers and mothers of families, what can their
housholdes be? Now if it be a question of such virtues, all the beasts
generally (as Plutark wittesseth) do love e^tierly that which they engender and
bring forth, and cherish them carefully. And if there be some of the male
kind which have not that love nor care, yet it is always found in the
females, and not only among the terrestrial beasts, but also among the
aquatical and seabeasts. Wherefore seeing we are in hand with the schole of
beasts, we may yet send men thither, touching that point. For that cause (but
that I fear I shall weary you) I could declare unto you a great many of
examples touching this matter, of many beasts which have a singular affection
and industry in such matters.


Tobias, So that I may take pleasure in it, I am well assured that Theophrastus
will also agree unto it. For I take you both for my masters. Wherefore I am
content to learn of you both, whatsoever it shall please you to teach me.


Jerome. The pygeons.
First of all, I will speak of the pygeons, both the male and feemale, because
we have a good example in them, of the Amity which ought to be between the
husband and the wife, and of the care that the one ought to have the one of the
other, and afterward both of them together of the young ones which God
gives them. For the cock pygeons in this point differ from the nature of the
male partridges, for the males of the partridges break their females eges, and
fiinally their femals do loose them, because they will not receive them all the
while they hatch: And therefore they forsake them.


Tobias. Then thou can not set them forth unto us for an example of good
househoulders and good husbands, Evil husbands.
but rather for an example of evil husbands which love not their wives, but as
the whoremasters their whoores, to wit, for the only cause of carnal pleasure,
that they may have with them.


Jerome. And therefore I set forth the male pygeons for a contrary example.
Good husbands.
For they do take with their females a part of the care and pain, that they
must have of their eggs and young. For they keep the eggs when need is, Also
they feed their young, And when the female tarieth over long in the feeldes,
they flappe them with their wings, and compel them to come unto their young.


Tobias, All husbands and wives, and all fathers and mothers of families, do
not agree so well together to bring up their children, and to keep in good
order their housholdes. For it happens often times, that the one lays all the charge upon the other. For how many husbands are there which are evil
householders, which have no care at all of their housholdes, neither of their
wives, and children, but leave all the charge unto their wives? How many also
are there of women, that do the like toward their husbands. But this is yet
worse, when that neither the one nor the other do their duty, but let al
alone, not caring for any thing.


Jerome. The svvallovves. Plutarke.*
The Swallows also have this property, among other birds, that they teach
their young, so that they know how to cast out their donge from their nest.


Tobias. I think the other birds do the like?


Jerome. It is very true, that they are not so filthy as men: and their young
are not so defiled with their doung and fylth, as the young children are with
theirs: But yet nevertheless, the Swallowe has one singular property herein,
more then the other birds have, if we will give credit unto those which have
written of the nature of them.


Tobias. We may better know that which the swallowe does in such a case, then
we may know of other birds, because they dwell not so nere as the Swallows.


Jerome. It is very true. And as touching the industry to keep their young,
The partridge. Plutarke.
the partridges use in the same a great subtlety. For all the while that their
young ones cannot yet fly for their young age, they accustom the^ to lie upon
their backs, and to cover the^ with moss or leaves, or with some other thing,
when the hunters are hard by them: and in the mean time they lead the hunters
to the other side, and turn and fly as though it were paynefull unto them,
and make as though they could not run, and they do it so long until they
have retired, and drawn the hunters very far from their yongones.


Tobias, Behold a great subtlety, joined with a greatloue, and care toward
her yong-ones.


Jerome. That which we read of the Hares, The hares. Plutarke.
to that same purpose is no less worthy to be wondered at. For the hares
before they betake them selves to their forms, do carry their young, one in one
place, another in another place: And sometimes they separate them a good
forlong the one from the other, to the end that if paraduenture their come
either man, or dog, they are not al of them in like danger. And after that
they have made great scraping with their feet, making a great leap, they
keep them selves there and take their rest.


Tobias. I would never have thought that the hares had been so wise and subtyl,
to keep their yong-ones.


Jerome. The hedge-hogs.
If the hare be wise and subtle in keeping of her young, the Hedg-hogges are no
less, not only for to provide for theirs, but also for to save and defend
them selves. And therefore, here what Plutarke has written. First he says,
that the subtlety of the Hedg-hogge has given place unto this proverb. A
proverb of the fox and of the hedg-hog.
The Fox has many wyles, but the Hedg-hogge knows one exellent.


Tobias. It is also said that the Cat is more wily then the Fox.


Jerome. There is more reason of the saying of the Hedg-hogge. For when the Fox
pursues him, the Hedg-hogge rowleth him self (as men say) within his
prickles, as the Chestnut is enclosed with in his hull. And by that means he
keeps him there enclosed, so that he cannot be any whit hurted. But the care
and the wisdom, that he has of his yong-ones, is worthy to be wondered at.
For as Plutarke witnesses, he goes into the vineyards in the time of cutting,
and with his feet he beats to the ground the grapes, afterward he rowleth
himself upon them, and makes them to stick upon his prickles. Plutarke who
has written so, brings in a man who witnessed, that he did see it with his
eyes. And therefore he says, I remember that on a certain day, we saw one,
that we did think that it was a Grape tree, which went, he was so laden with
grapes. And when he is entered into his den and hole, The Astronomy and
pronostication of the hedghog.
he gives one part to his yong-ones, and keeps the other for him self. For
his hole or borrowe has two entrings in, the one toward the north, and the
other toward the South wind, the which he stops and opens, according as
he sees the times do change, as the mariners do the sails of their ships.
And therefore a certain man of Cyzicenia, taking good heed thereunto, did get
by that means, a great renown, as though he could foreshewe by Astronomy,
what winds would blow.


Tobias. That man of whom thou speak, may well advance and bragg him self,
that he has passed master in astronomy, and in the art of prognostications in
the school of the Hedg-hogge: Seeing that by his knowledge he has gotten
such a fame among the ignorant.


Jerome, Thou say true. But since that we have spoken of beasts, which are
conversant and dwelling upon the earth: I will say also something of those
which haunt the waters, and live there, and chiefly in the Sea, and I will
first begin, by a sea bird, called Halcion. Halcion. faithfullnes ^n household.
Plutark among others, tells of his great virtues. For first he says, that
this bird loves singulerly his femal: and ioineth not himself with her at
certain times only, but at al tims of the year, and not for that he is so
much given unto luxury: For he never has the company of any other. But he
does the same through amity and good will, as it behooves husbands to do. When
the male is old, and that he follows his female with great pain, she takes
care on him, and bears and nurrisheth him, never leaving him behind her. For
she carries him upon her shoulders, and leads him whether it pleases him,
and keeps and cherishes him even until death.


Tobias, A man shall find very few such wives, which are so faithful unto
their husbands, and which have such care over them, and so long.


Jerome. I do not deny but that we shall find many good husbands and good
wives, who do sufficiently their duty the one toward the other, if we will
make comparison with those which do euilly discharge their office in such a
case. But those here are very thick sown, in comparion of others And after
we have to note, that the beasts which I speak of, have this more then men:
That is, that there is not only some of them in their kind, which govern them
selves so, but al are so by nature, and follow it without doing any fault,
because that they are not corrupted through sin, as the me^, which makes them
more beasts, then the beasts. But mark yet more what this author has writ
ten of the care that this bird has, to prepare lodging for his yong-ones. The
buildings of the Halcion.
The mother (says he) has such great care over her yong-ones, that as soon as
she feels her self great, she begins to build. She heapeth not the claye
and lome against the walls, and the mire as the Swallows do, neither charge
al her members as the honey bees do, when they make their combs, dividing their
work and their chambers in fashion, having six squares and as many feet: But
the Halcion employeth but one organ, and one simple instrument, that is her
byll: and not having any aid, the diligence and care toward her yong-ones,
joined and added to her industry. O good God, what does she? What takes she
in hand? It is hard to be believed of those, which have not seen it. For she
makes a work after a new fashion, much like unto a ship, the which cannot
be broken neither drowned with the w^ues and surges. For she makes and tyeth
it together, with the bones and prickles of little fishes, and joins them the
one within the other: some right, others cross: As we see how cloth is wouen.
And after that she has joined and fastened the^ so together, she bends and
turns them round? And at the last, she makes it after such sort, that it
seems properly that it is a ship, pycked and narrow in the bottom, and
wide above, or else a long fishing boat. After that she has finished it, she
brings it to the sea shore, and sets it by the seaside, and when the sea
begins to flow and beat softly against it, it teaches her to stop the
holes and ventes, and to amend and make strong that which is weak. Now after
that al is very strong and sound, she shuts it so fast, that neither stone
nor iron can break it. But in all the work there is not a thing more worthy
to be maruailed at, then is the dooer of the said work. For it is made after
such sort, that none can enter but she only. The other beasts can neither see
nor perceive it, yea and the water cannot enter into it.


Tobias, Thou tellest me of incredible things. If that which thou say be
true, the Halcions have rather taught men the manner to make ships and
boats, then the Halcions have learned of them the science and knowledge that
they have to build their houses, as well for them selves as for their
yong-ones, the which may flote and swim upon the Sea, as the ships.


Jerome. I boast not that I have seen that which I speak of. But Plutarke who
has written it, alleges for witness of such things, mariners which dwell
in the Isles, have oftentimes seen the experience of those things, which he
has written, Of the foresight and care of the fishes toward their ftuite
and young.
as well of this byrd Halcion, as of the fishes, of which he makes a great
discourse. For he praises greatly some Seafishes for their foresight, and care
that they have of their fruits and young, as well in their procreation and
birth as in the nourishment, keeping and preservation of them. And therefore he
says touching this matter: First, that all the fishes which inhabit the Seas
near unto any lakes, or into which rivers do come, following the same rivers,
do seek earnestly (when the time approaches that they must bring forth their
fruit) the sweetest waters, and those that have least saltnes: and they do the
same for two causes, to wit, either because that tranquillity is best for them
to yield their fruit, or else because that the lakes and rivers are less
dangerous because of the beasts, and also because they may best nourishe
their fruits. Wherefore many bring forth and cast their fruits in the Eginian
sea: For it has not in it any whalles, but only little Dolphus, and little
seacalues: And the great rivers that run into it, give a sweet and gentle
temperatenes and most pleasant to the fishes.


Tobias Behold a good foresight, it wants a great deal, that me^ know so
well to provide for their families, in such a case.


Jerome. And by and by after Plutarke says. And although that peradventure
that is common unto all mothers, to have care of that which they have
engendered: yet nevertheless the males do not murder and kill their young,
as Aristotimis has said: But which is more, they take such great care, that
they will not stur from them, and do geather and heap to geather the eggs, as
Aristotle says. There be also some which follow the females, and sprinkle the
eggs, with the genitall seed, because without the same nothing can grow
excellent and perfect, but will abide imperfect, and will not grow as it ought
to do. Commonly the fishes which we call Phyces, Phyces.
having made as it were a knot of an herb which we call Algue, put it about
their young, and it defends them from the tempests. But the lampries do bear
the bell, The lamprey.
and do merit the crown above all other fishes in case of fatherly love, and
indulgence, goodness and gentleness toward their yong-ones. First they do lay
their eggs, and then the little ones. But they do not cast forth their young as
other fishes do, but nurrish them in their bellies, as though they engendered
them twice: And when they are grown, then they cast them forth, and teach
them to swymme and play about them. And afterward they receive them again
into their bellies in at their mouths, and give unto them their bodies for to
dwell in, giving them place, meat, and refuge, until such time as they know
that they are able to help themselves.


Tobias If it be so as thou say the sea beasts do surmount and pass the
beasts of the earth, in that love and care toward their fruit and young.


Jerome. Thou will marvel more of this, that the same Aucthour has written
touching this matter, touching the Tortic of which he speaks thus. The
tortice.
The care also that the Tortice has to nourish and keep her yongons, is worthy
of great admiration, for leaping alitle out of the sea, she brings forth her
young. And because that she cannot continue long out of the sea, and stay upon
the land, she lays first her eggs upon the sand, and afterward she
covers them with fine sand, and after that she has covered them well, (as
some say) she marketh the place, and signeth it with her feet, so that she may
find it again, or as others say, the femall being ouerturned by her male,
printeth upon the sand, the carecter and form of her own shel. After-wardes,
which is a thing greatly to be maruayled, forty days being past she, comes
again: for so long time the young must be shut up. And when the male and
female are come, every one of them knowing their treasure, uncovers it more
joyfully and cherefully then men uncover the holes and places in which they
have hid up their treasures. Plutarke calls the treasure of the Tortice their
eggs and their young, because that there is no man so careful of his treasures,
and which loves them so much as the Tortice loves, and is careful of her young.


Tobias. It is said in a common proverb, A proverb.
that those that come from far, have greater liberty to tell what they list,
then others. And because that one cannot easily gainesay that which they
speak, they have the greater license to lie. We may say the like of those
which speak of the sea and of the Sea beasts, unto those which know not what
they are.


Jerome. I require thee not that thou should believe as the Gospel, all that
I shall rehearse unto thee of Aristotle, Pliny and of Plutarke, and of such
other. But yet nevertheless I do not think, but that those worthy men having
written those things that they have written, but that there are some things
therein true, and that they have had some experience, or else some good
witnesses thereof. Fot seeing that they were learned men, and of great
authority, and renown, we must not think that they have written at all
adventure, for to cause them selves to be mocked at, knowing well that their
writings should be well examined by many learned men, and which have tried
and proved the things, whereof they have written. Wherefore we must not by and
by reject as fables, all that which we our selves have not seen, and which is
strange unto us. For God is maruailous in his creatures and in his works, the
which he would not have them to be altogether covered and kept secret. And
therefore he would be served of the Painims, which have enquired of the
secrets of nature, for to manifest unto us many of his maruailes, to the end
we might always have more matter to glorify him in the^, and in his
providence. And therefore to conclude this matter, I will yet declare unto thee,
touching this matter, that which Plutark has written of the sea-keyne, The
sea-keine.
after this sort. The sea-kyne (says he) do bring forth their young upon the
sand: And when they wax something great, they carry them into the sea, as
for to taste of it, afterward they bring them again upon the sand, and do so
many times, until such time as they know that they can help the^ selves, and
to take pleasure in the sea. Quintilian says, that if one would fill at ones,
a Phiole or glass which has a narrow neck, Quintillian. instit. reth^*
lib. 1.
and would power in at once the liquore that he would put into it, it will not
enter, but will sprinkle abroad here and there. But if one would fill it by
little and little, and as drop by drop, he shall fill it easiely, and shall loose
nothing of that he powers into it, Quintilian uses this comparison for to
give us to understand, that it is requisite to use such beginning, The means
that we must use in teaching.
in the instruction of those whom we have to teach, and chiefly of young
children. For they cannot comprehend at once all that one can teach them.
Wherefore we must go by little and little. On the other side, it is in like
manner very hard to use them selves suddenly to one thing, to the which they
have not been used unto, and chiefly when it is new and strange. Wherefore it
behooves to keep means, and to do by little and little that, that one cannot
do at once.


Tobias. There be a great many which have not yet that discretion and wisdom.
For they would have those with whom they have to do, should be perfect at the
first dashe, and that they should know in one day or in one month, that
which they cannot understand them selves in a year. There are also many
fathers, the fault of fathers and mothers toward their children.
which make their children to despair, because they press and charge them
above measure, and require of them more then they are able: As also to the
contrary, there are others which have not such care and diligence to teach
their children, as they ought, nor to keep them under good discipline, but let
them have so much their will, that they are quite marred and spoiled.


Jerome. And therefore we shall have just occasion to send the first to the
school of the sea-kyne. For they are more calves then the kyne and bullockes.
I say as much of the masters of schools, which know not to teach their
scholars, by good methoode, and order. As touching the other which endeavor
the^ selves nothing at all to teach their children, I send them unto the
school of the Crocodiles, Crocodile.
if that beast were not so cruel, But yet nevertheless take away the
cruelty, yet she declares that she will not suffer her yong-ones, except they
have courage, and except they will rob and steal. And therefore the mother
kylleth him, which at his first going forth, he neither steals nor
deuoureth, either a frogge, or a snayle, or some little grass, or some other
such thing which comes before him. On the contrary, she loves the coragious,
and loves them, as Plutarke says, not with a foolish affection, as the
foolish mothers do, but through judgment, as the most wysest of the world
have used to do. Although that that cruelty of the Crocodile is to be
despised: yet nevertheless this is to be praised, that the mother is not so
foolish over her yong-ones, that she supporteth them if they be other then
they ought to be according to their kind. But we have spoken sufficiently of
the nature of beasts, upon the matter of good and evil householders. It now
remains that we make an end of this matter, except Theophrastus will say
anoother thing for the confirmation hereof. The instruction of saint Paull unto
fathers and mothers.



Theophrast. I have no other thing to say at this time, but that Saint Paul
gives a very good rule unto fathers and mothers, and unto al those which have
charge of children, yea in a few words, when he said? Ephe. 6.4.
Ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in
instruction and information of the Lord. And in another place, Collo. 3.21.
ye fathers provoke not your children to anger, least they be discouraged. By
these words he gives the fathers and mothers well to understand, what
moderation they ought to use toward their children, as well to the end they
be not altogether discouraged, and in despair, as also to the end they mar
the^ not through to great liberty. For when he admonishes them to bring the^
up in instruction and informatio^ and correction, he gives them to understand
that they ought not to bring the^ up in idleness, and to let them do what
they list, but to hold and keep them under fear and correction. Whereupon we
have to note that he says not only, bring them up in instruction and
information, but he adds, of the Lord. For there be agreat many, which are
very good householders, for to cause their children to learn, siences, arts
and occupations, for to become of some good countenance in the world, and for
to get them great honors and riches, or at the least wise how to get their
living: But they make none account, to bring them up in the fear of God, and
in the true knowledge of him and his word, without which, as we have alredie
said from the beginning, that men are more beasts the^ the brute beasts. And
therefore, he that will show him self a good householder and a good father,
having true care of his children must begin there. For it is not written
without cause. Psalm 111.10. Pro. 1.7.9.10 Galoa. 1.16.
That the fear of the Lord is the beginning, the foundation and head of al
wisdom, and he can never fail to do well, and please God, which does fear
him. And as touching that which Jerome said of the Crocodile, there are many
which follow her example, and many more then is needful. The children of the
Crocodile.
For if their children be not cruel and rauenors, as they are, they think
them not to be their lawful children, but disauowe and forsake them, as though
they were not of their blood. But we must not require of our children, that
they may be like unto us in our vices, but that they and we may be trewly
reformed after the image of God, and that we may rule al our life after the
rule that he has set forth unto us in his word.


Jerome. Behold a very good conclusion, upon which I think that Toby will
willingly stay him self with us.


Tobias. I should do wrong if I should resist it.


FJNJS.

