The whole.xii. Books of the Aeneidos of Virgill.

Whereof the first.ix. and part of the tenth, were converted into English
Meeter by Thomas Phaer Esquier, and the residue supplied, and the whole work
together newly set forth, by Thomas Twyne Gentleman.

There is added moreover to this edition, Virgils life out of Donatus, and the
Argument before every book.

IMPRINTED AT London by Wyllyam How, for Abraham Veale, dwelling in Poules
Churchyearde, at the sign of the Lamb. 1573.

To the Right honorable Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, one of the Queens Majesty's
most honorable privy Counsel, and Lord keeper of the great Seal of England.
EXperiment partly, and partly Presumption, two bold guides, have moved me to
attempt your honor with the dedication of this book. Hoping that as you have
already honorably received the latter two books and a parcel of another,
ioygned with the former seven of Virgils Aeneidos translated into English
meeter by Thomas Phaer, and taken them to your honorable protection: So
likewise your honor will not refuse the same work again imprinted, and set
forth with such diligence as conveniently might be. Which, to the intent it
should not always remain imperfect, but rather answer the purpose whereto M.
Phaer had respect when he took it in hand, (which was to delight the
nobility of this Realm, and others that should vouchsafe to read it) and
also that so noble a Poet should not sustain so foul a mayme in the English
tongue, as always to lie vnfynished: I have enterprised more ventrously then
wisely, and with better courage then cunning to end that which he left
imperfect. Not that I think my self co^parable unto him in any thing that he
took in hand, for so would I not have your honor, or any other to judge of
me. But seeing so many excellent wits as since his time have flourished, have
left it untouched: I have bin bold at length to spend Time, and hazard
Estimation therein. The acceptance whereof, as it will be, I hope, at some men's
hands: I embrace: and at others: I do not reguard. Unto your honor, whom I
presume to make patron hereof, with all humility, and dutiful reverence I submit
myself, and my travails. That if it shall hap the same in the accepting, to
conceive any good opinion thereof, either for well doing, or well meaning: I am
fully satisfied. Whereof I stand in the greater hope, since your honor being
advanced unto the dignity wherein you now stand, through your own industry
and virtue: can deem the better of such labors, and do use more entierly to
embrace with favor, such as bear goodwil unto learning. And having already
stoared your self sufficiently with such plausible furniture: yet amongst al
other good gifts wherewith god has endued you, both for your own ornament, and
for the commodity of the commonwealth of England, persuade your self that there
is no one virtue that more amplifieth your title of honor, then that courtesy,
and affability which you show unto suitors, and such as have occasion to attend
your honor. Wherein though some suppose that a disgracing of Nobility, and
worship does consist: yet then they shall know it to be contrary, when they
shall begin to know themselves, and to understand that such means do make men
not only noble above the Co^monaltie: but excellent also above the Nobility.
Almighty God perserue your honor with wisshed increase, prolong your days
with happy delight.

Your honors most humble at commandment: Thomas Twyne.

Virgils life, set forth, as it is supposed, by Aelius Donatus, and done into
English.
VIRGIL surnamed Maro, was borne but of mean parentage, especially on the
fatherside, who was called Maro, whom some suppose to have bin a potter, but
more think that he was at the first, covenant servant with a traueilinge
wyseman, and afterward for his towardnes, by mariadge of his daughter: became
his soonne in law, whom when his father in law had put in trust with his
husbandry, and his catteyle, and byinge of wooddes, and lookinge to Bees,
thereby he increased his small substance. He was borne the year yt Cn.
Pompeius, and M. Licinius Crassus were first Consuls the.15. day of Octobre, in
a village called Andes, not far from Mantua. His mother Maia, being great with
child with him, and dreaminge that she was delivered of a laurel bow, which
pricked into the grownde grew forthwith to a great tree, replenyshed with
sundry kinds of Fruits, and Flowers: the next morning walking forth into the
country with her husband, stepped a side, and was delivered thereby, in a ditche.
The report goes, that the child so soon as he was borne never cried, but
looked so pleasantly, that he gave an assured hope that by his birth some
notable thing should chance.

There befell also another strange token, for a Poplar tree branch, which was
pricked into the grownd according as the manner of the country at women's
traueiles is, so grew up in short space, that it matched in bigness many great
Poplar trees, that were set there long before, which was afterward
consecrated, and called by the name of Virgils tree, and had in great reverence
amongst teemynge women, and such as were with child, which daily made prayers,
and offringes there. His infancy, that is to say, until he was seven year
old, he passed in Cremona, and when he was thirteen year of age he received
the garment of manstate, when those were made Consuls again that were when he
was borne, and it fortuned that Lucretius the poet departed the same day. But
Virgil, from Cremona went to Millain, and shortly after from thence to Naples,
where diligently applying the study of the Greek, and Latin toonges: at
length betook himself to Physic, and knowledge of the Mathematicals, wherein
he surpassed all other in skill, and departinge to Rome, fell in favor with
the M. of the horse to Augustus, and cured the horses of many, and sundry
diseases. Who commanded therefore that Virgill should have such allowance of
bread, as other of the stable had.

Duringe this time the Crotoniati sent unto Caesar for a present, a goodlye
horsecolt, that in all men's judgment would prove both very courageous, and
wonderful swift. When Virgil beheld him he told the M. of the stable, that he
was fooled of a sick, and infected mare, and that he would prove nether
strong nor swift, as afterward it appeared, whereof when the M. of the stable
had informed the Emperor: he commanded that his bread should be dubled, for
reward. Likewise, when there were certain Dogs sent to Augustus forth of
Spain, Virgil both told what manner ones the siers were, and what stomach and
swiftnes they would be of. Which when he understood* he then commanded again
that Virgil should have so much more bread as he had before. The Emperor
Augustus doubtinge of himself whether he were sun to Octauius or to some man
else, and supposinge that Virgil Maro could resolve him, that knew so well the
natures and siers of horses, and dogs: remoouing all company aside Augustus
called him into the privy chamber, and asked him there alone, if he knew what
he was, and what ability he had to make men happy? I know (quod Maro) that
thou art Augustus Caesar, and thou have almost equal power with the immortal
gods and that thou may make happy whom thou list. Surely (quod Caesar) I
am of this mind, that if you answer me truly to that I shall ask, I will make
thee happy, and blessed. I would to god (quod Maro) that I could answer truly
to that you demaundest. Then said the Emperor, some say I am sun to Octauius,
and some suspect that I am some other man's sun. Whereat Maro smylinge: I will
sone tell you that (quod he) if you pardon me in answeringe that you commau^d.
The Emperor swore by an Oath that he would take never a word in ill part, yea
and that he should not depart unrewarded. Therwithall Maro fixinge his eyes fast
on the Emperors: it is an easy matter (quod he) by other lyuinge things to
discern the disposition of the parents, through skill of Mathematickes, and
Philosophy, but in men it is not possible. Howbeit I am able to give some
probable judgment, what trade of life thy father exercised. To this Augustus
gave dilligent ear what he would say. Then Virgil, so far as I can perceive
(quod he) thou art a Bakers sun. The Emperor thereat was astunned, and
marueiled much in his mind how that could come to pass. Marie then (quod
Virgil) I will tell you why I judge so. When as I foretold certain things which
could nether be known, nor understood but by such as be very well learned: thou
that art prince of all the wordle commaundidst that I should have a certain of
bread given me for a reward, which is the use either of bakers, or else of such
as are bakers children. This merry jest, pleased the Emperor well, but
henceforth (quod he) you shall not be rewarded by a baker but by a most valie^t
prince, and esteemed him much, and commendid him to Pollio. He was of body and
stature big, of color tawnie, hardfauoured, sycklie, for he was manytimes
grieved with pain in the stomach, jaws, and head, and some times he did spet
blood. He frequented but little the use of deyntie meats and wine. Some report
that he was prone to the detestable sin with boys. But the better sort
suppose rather that he loved them as Socrates loved Alcibiades, and Plato also.
Above the rest he loved most Cebetes, and Alexander, whom in the second Ecloge
of his Bucolikes he terms Alexis, given unto him by Asinius Pollio. When they
came unto him they were nether of them unlearned. For Alexander was a good
Grammarian, and Cebetes a Poet. Some likewise affirm that he had carnal
company with Plotia Hieria. But Asconius Pedianus says that he was wont to
declare to some ancient me^, that indeed he was requested by Varius jointly
to keep her, howbeit he ernestly refused so to do. In all other respects he
was of life, language, and conversation so upright: that through all Naples he
was called, commonly Virginity. And when happily he was seen at Rome, (whether
as he came very seldom) going abroad in the open streets if any followed, or
noted him: he would turn away into the next house. When Augustus offered him the
goods of one that was banished, he utterly refused them He was worth in
substance an hundred Sestertia, which were given him through the liberality of
his friends, and he had an house in Rome in a place called Aesquiliae near to
Mecoenas gardaynes, although he was accustomed much to withdraw him self into
Campania and Scicil. Whatsoever he requested of Augustus: he never had denial
thereof. Every year he sent money abundantly to succor his parents which died
when he was of lawful years, his father being blind when he died, and his
two brethren the one surnamed Silo died while he was a child, and Flacchus when
he was come to ma^state, whose death he bewayleth under the name of Daphnis.
Among other studies (as I have said before) he chiefly applied himself to
Physic and Mathematickes. He never plead at bar more then one cause, and
that but once, whom Melissus reports to have bin very slow of toongue, and as
though he were altogether unlearned, when he first began Poetry, he made this
Disthic, or these two verses upon one Balista a scholemaster, that for report
of theeuery was couerid with an heap of stones.

Under this hugie hill of stones Balista tombd does lie,
Waifarer saufe both night and day thy journey now may hie.
After this he wroat Moretum, Priapus, Epigrammes, Dirae, and Culex when he was
yet but fifteen year old, the argument whereof is this. A shepherd wearyed
with heat, and sleapinge under a tree, when a serpent was cumming fast toward
him, there came a Gnat flying out of the Fenne nearby, and lighted on the
sheapheardes forhead between his temples, and there stunge him. Then he
lyftinge up his hands crushed the gnat, and when he espied the serpent: killed
him also, and made a tomb for the gnat with this superscription.

Thou little gnat, the shepherd for thy due desert to be,
This burial rite, for loss of life, here yeldeth unto thee.
He wroat Aetna also, whereof some men doubt. But shortly after when he had
begun Roman matters mislikynge the sharpnes, and roughnes both of the
argument, and names, he fell to the Bucolickes but chiefly to celebrate the
name of Asinius, Pollio, Alphenus Varus and Cornelius Gallus, by cause yt in
the division of land beyond Padus amongst the old soldiers after the conquest
at Philippe made, at the co^maundment of the Triumuiri, or the Three
conspiratours, they had saved him harmless. Afterward he made his work called
Georgica in the honor of Mecoenas by whose means, when he was yet scarce
known unto him, he was assisted against the old soldiers of Claudius, or
rather as some suppose, against the violence of Arius the Centurian, by whom in
that hurlyburly about dividing of lands, he was very near slain. Last of all
he took the Aeneidos in hand, a work of a diverse, and manifold argument, and
resemblinge, in a manner both the works of Homere. Besides that it contains
indifferenly both words, and matter as well Greek as Latin, and that chief
is which he most endeavored, it comprehends both the original of the city of
Rome, and Augustus the Emperor. When he wroate the Georgica, it is reported,
how that every morninge he was accustomed to write a certain number of verses,
which he would all the day long ouerlooke, and so abbridginge them, bring
them unto a very few, not unfitly saying that he brought forth verses, as the
femall Bear does her young and brings them into due fashion by lickinge. The
work called Aeneidos he wrote first in twelve books in prose (as some think)
and afterward digested it into verse. And othersome judge that if he had lived
longer, he would have le^gthned it unto xxiiij. books even unto the time of
Augustus, and would have touched many other things therein, and with great
diligence have set forth Augustus time, since that in writing, least he should
be vainly troubled with any thing: he left some things imperfect. And some
things he wroate in very slender verse, which (as he was wont, to jest) he
said he put in for Iesters, and Minstrels, to hold up the work, until the
sownd pillars were framed. He absolved his Bucoliks in three year, at Asinius
Pollios request. The same at that time ruled the province beyond Padus, by
whose means and suit, when the Cremonenses, and Mantuans lands were
distributed unto Augustus auntie^t soldiers, yet notwithstanding Virgil lost
not his. This Pollio, Virgil loved entierly, and was likewise of him very
well-beloved again, and greatly rewarded, for when he was upon a time desiered
by him to supper, and there suddenly surprised with the singular beutie, and
diligence of Alexander, Pollios boy: received him of gift. Likewise he loved
dearly C. Asinius, Pollios sun, and Cornelius Gallus a noble Orator and a
singular Poet, who translated Euphorion into Latin, and wroate in fouer books
his love of Cytheris. At the first he was in good credit with the Emperor
Augustus, but afterward upon suspicion of co^spiracie against him, he was
slain. Of whom Propertius speaks thus:

Whilst Gallus in the tents, the ensigns does defend:
Before the Egle bloody sign, he found his fatal end.
Virgil loved this Gallus so well, that the fouerth book of Georgikes from the
middle to the end contained his praise, which afterward at Augustus
commaundment he changed into the fable of Aristaeus. He finished the Georgiks
in seven year at Naples, and the Aeneidos he made partly in Sicilia, partly in
Campania, in eleven year. And his Bucoliks he made with so good success that
they were oftentimes sunge openly by Musicians in plays. When Cicero had heard
certain of the verses, and by and by through sharp judgment perceived that they
proceeded from no commune vein: he willed that the whole Ecloge should be read
from the beginning. Whereto when he had attended diligently, in the end he said
these words Of mighty Rome a second hope, as though himself were the first hope
of the Latin toongue, and Maro would be the second, which words also he
recites in the Aeneidos. The Georgikes, when Augustus returned from the
Actiacan victory, and for recreationsake soiourned at Atella, he read there
unto him continually the space of fouer days, and when his voice failed him at
any time: Mecoenas supplied his romth in readiynge. He pronunced with marvelous
sweetness, and great delectation. Seneca writes that Julius Montanus the Poet
was wou^t to say, that he would take away by force some thing from Virgil if he
could set them forth with the same voice, cou^tnance, and gesture* And that the
selfsame verses if he pronounced them, would sound well, but without him: would
be dry and dumb. Of the Aeneidos scarce yet begun, there was spread such a
fame: that Sextus Propertius doubted not thus to foretell.

Giueplace you Roman writers all, and Greeks giueplace likewise
I can not tell what greater work then Ilias does arise.
When Augustus by fortune was absent from the Cantabrick expedition, and partly
by requestinge and partly by manacinge letters, merely required of Virgil that
he should send to him if it were but the very title or some one full sentence
of Aeneidos, for those were his words: he refused so to do. To whom yet not
long after when the matter was fully perfected, he recited three books, namely
the Second, the Fourth and the Sixth. And that especially, because of Octauia,
who being there present at the recital, at those verses of her sun,
Marcellus thou shall be, is reported to have fainted for sorrow, and when by
much labor she was recovered again, she commanded that Virgil should have to
the value of five pou^ds for every verse. He read his books also to diverse,
but not often, and those places only whereof he stood in any doubt, thereby to
hear the judgment of men Yt is said that Erotes his secretary, whom he also
made free, when he was very aged was wont to report, that once in the readinge
of his work he made two of his half verses out of hand, and that Misenus
Aolides added, was better none then he.

Likewise unto this verse, In kindlinge men with noise, with like heat he
adjoined, And fightinge fields to cheer with brass, and that he was
commanded strayt ways to write those ij. additions so in the work. He
perused both his Bucoliks and Georgiks. And when he was 52. year old, to
the intent to finish the Aeneidos, he was determined to withdraw him self into
Greece, and Asie, and there to employe whole three years in correctinge and
perusinge, that he might bestow all the resdue of his life only in the study
of Philosophy. But when he was in his journey, and met with Augustus at Athens
who was returninge forth of the East cuntreyes toward Rome: he purposed to go
home again with him. And trauailinge to Megara, a town nigh Athens, only to
see it, took there a sickness, which continual travail on sea augmented,
and encreasinge more and more until he came to Bru^dusium with in few days
after dyed there, the xxj. day of September when Cn. Plautius, and Q. Lucretius
were Consuls. Who when he felt him self mortally assaulted with the malady: he
called often, and very ernestly for his deske, that he might burn the
Aeneidos. Which being deneid him, he willed notwtsta^dinge by his last
testament that it should be burned, as a work both faulty, and imperfect. But
Tucca and Varrus told him that Augustus would in no wise suffer that. Wherruppon
he bequeathed the same work, and his other writings unto Varrus and Tucca
upon this condition, that they should set forth nothing but that which he would
have set forth, and such verses as were imperfect: they should so leave them. He
willed also that his bones should be borne to Naples, whereas he had lived long
time, and merely. His bones therefore were translated to Naples, at Augustus
commaundment, as he appointed, and were buried in the way to Puteol. at the
second stone, and upon his tumbe was written this disthick, which he made him
self.

Me Mantua bred, Calabres took, Parthenop now does hold,
Of pastures I have sou^ge, of fields, likewise of captains bold.
He made heyers of half his goods Valerius Proculus his half brother by another
father, and of the fourth part, Augustus, of ye twelfth part Mecoenas, of all
the remainder L. Varrus, and Plocius Tucca, who after his decease as he
requested at Caesar's commaundment corrected, the Aeneidos. For no man judged
the Aeneidos worthy to be burned, whereof these verses of Sulpitius the
Carthagian are extant.

These verses in to flaming fires command for to be flunge
Virgilius did, wherein the deeds of Trojan duke he sunge.
But Tucca nilles, and Varrus eke, thou Caesar do forbide,
And Latin stories to preserve do better means provide.
Unhappy Pergame twice in duble fire welnigh was roast,
And Troy by second flame, to smoking dust was brought almost.
There remain also many noble verses made by Augustus upon the same matter,
whose beginning is this.

And shall a wicked work so vile a deed in final voice
Command? and shall it into fire be thrown, is there no choice?
And shall the noble Muse of learned soundinge Maro die?
And shortly after.

But faith of laws must needs be keept, and what last will does say,
And what it does command be done, that needs we must obaie.
Nay, rather let the sacred force of laws be broken quight,
Then that so many trauayles great sustaind by day and night
One day should quight consume. And as thereafter follows.
Wherefore Varrus at Augustus commaundment did set forth nothing, as Virgil
willed he should not: but generally perused all, leaving also those verses as
they were, still imperfect. Which verses diverse afterward took in hand to
make up, but they could not for the difficulty thereof, for they be all
Hemistichia, that is to say half verses, besides this: Whom Troy untimely bare
thee, which seems to carry with it perfect sense. Nisius the Grammarian said
that he had heard of his elders, that Varrus had changed the order of two
books, and that which was then the Second he transposed into the third place.
And that he changed also the beginning of the First book, taking these
verses clean away:

I that my slender Oten pipe in verse was wont to sound
Of wooddes, and next to that I tought for husbandme^ the ground
How fruit unto their greedy lust they might co^straine to bring,
A work of thanks: lo now of Mars, and bloody wars I singe.
Virgil also amongst other, who was one of the pillars of the Latin toongue,
lacked not slaunderers. In his Bucolickes, Paro, but very foolyshly, mocketh at
two Ecloges, and thus he begins to flout.

If Tityrus thy gown be warm, under what beachen shade?
And in the next.

Whose beasts are these Damaetas, tell, is this god Latin speech?
No but it is Aegons, for our clownes in country so do teach.
Another also when he read this place out of the Georgiks: Ear naked, naked
sow: he added, then cold, and fever thou shall take. There is also exta^t a
book made by Carpilius Pictor under this title, The Aeneidos scourge. M.
Vipranus said that Mecoenas had set up a finder out of an evil imitation, and
that he was nether lofty in Style, nor low, but that he made that work with
commune vulgar words. Herennius only gathered together his faults, and
Perilius Faustinus, that which he stole of others. There are also certain
volumes of Quintus Octauius Auitus, in the which are observed what verses, and
from whom he took them. Asconius Pedanus in his book which he writes
against the slaunderers of Virgil, sets down a few things which were
objected against him, and this chiefly, that he tied not well his history
together, and that he borrowed much of Homere. But this fault (as they say) he
was wont thus to defend, saying why do not they likewise attempt the like
theeft? But they if they wayghed it uprightly should understand that it were an
easear matter to pulle the club out of Hercules hand, then to take a verse away
from Homere, and that notwithstanding he determined to withdraw himself for a
time to amend every thing that his ilwillers found fault withal.

Pedianus also reports, that he was very courteous, and a lover of all good
and honest men, and so far from Envy, that if he saw any thing done, or
spoken lernedly by any, he rejoiced thereat, none otherwise then if it were his
own: that he dispraysed no man, praised goodmen, and was of so gentle nature:
that there was no man, unless he were over stubberne and malicious, that not
only favored him, but also heartily loved him. He seemed to have nothing
private to himself. His library stood as ready open to othermen as to
himself, and he oftentimes used the saying of Euripides: All things amongst
friends are commune. He had all the Poets of his time so freendlye, and
beholdinge unto him, that although they much envied one another, yet him they
all reverenced, as Varrus, Tucca, Horace, Gallus, Propertius, But Anser, by
cause he took not part with Antonius, did not regard him. Comificius could not
abide him, such was his froward nature. He so much contemned glory, that when
some ascribed to them selves certain of his verses, and therefore were accoumpted
the better learned, he took it not only not displeasantly, but he much
reioysed thereat. And making a couple of verses contayninge the praise and
felicity of Augustus, which were set upon the gates with out name, the verses
were these.

All night it raynes, the sights at morning tide return again,
And Caesar with almighty Jove has match and equal reign.
The author of which verses Augustus long made inquiry for, but he could not
find him. At length when none came, Bathyllus an indifferent good Poet,
ascribed them unto himself, and was therefore encoraged, and rewarded by
Caesar, which Virgill not taking well, set upon the same gates this beginning
four times: So you, not for your selves. Augustus required that these verses
should be by some finished, which many assaying in vain: Virgil thus replied,
to the forewritten Disthic.

These verses I did make, thereof another took the praise. So you not for your
selves, poor birds, your nestes do build in trees
So you not for your selves, ye Sheep, do bear your tender flees.
So you not for your selves, your honey gather, little Bees.
So you not for your selves, your necks, poor beasts, with harrowes squees.
Which being once known: Bathyllus for a time was all the jest ingstocke to
the whole city of ROME. When on a time he had the works of Ennius in his
hand, and being demanded by one what he did with the^: answered yt he
gathered gold out of Ennius dounge. For that author expresses worthy
sentences and matter, under words not of the finest. Unto Augustus that
demanded of him how a City might best be governed: he answered, if the wisest
men did hold the helm, and good men were set in authority over evil, and
so that the best men may have their due honor, and the rest be not in
iuriously dealt withal. Then Mecoenas, what thing is it (quod he) that never
brings lothsomnesse to man? The likeness, answered Virgil, or the abundance
of every thing, anoyeth us, except of understanding. He asked moreover, how a
man might always preserve his happy and fortunate state? To whom then Maro,
if by how much he excel other in Honor, and Riches: he endeavor to excel
them in Liberality an Justice. He was wount also to say, that there was
nothing more meet nor commodious for a man then Patience, and that there was no
fortune so sharp which by wisely tolleratyng a valient man might not overcome.
Which opinion of his, he has expressed in the fist of the Aeneidos.

O Goddess sun, where destnies draws and drives: let us go there,
What ever it is, who conquer fortune will, must fortune bear.
There was familiar with Augustus one named Filistus, an orator, and meetly
well learned in Poetry, and had a pleasant, and variable wit, and used to
carpe the sayings of all men, not to the intent thereby to learn the truth
(for so Socrates was wont to do) but thereby to appear the better learned. The
same, wheresoever he had occasion to meet with Virgil or be in his company,
used to provoke him with reproaches, and floutes. Wherefore, either he departed
commonly with silence, or else with blusshing held his peace. Then when as in
presence of Augustus, he said that Virgil was dumb, and that if he had a
toongue he could not defend himself: hold thy peace babbler (quod he) for this
taciturnitie of mine causes Augustus, and Mecoenas to be the patrones of my
cause, and when I list I will speak with such a trumpet, that shall
euerywhere, and very long be heard. And thou with thy pratlyng do not only
break men's ears, but walls also. Then the Emperor looked upon Filistus with
a fierce countenance, and rebuked him. And Virgil, Caesar (quod he) if this man
knew a time to hold his peace: he would seldom speak. For a man ought
always to be silent, until such time as his silence shall either hurt
himself, or his talk may profit others.

When Augustus had obtained the Empire, he debated with him self whether it
were better to resign up the Dominion, and commit the state to yearly
Consuls, and the government of the Commonwealth to the Senate. In which case he
called to counsel twain, of two several opinions, Mecoenas, and Agrippa.
Agrippa in long discourse showed, that although it were not very decent for
him to do, yet would it be profitable, which contrary, Mecoenas very much
diswaded him from. By occasion whereof, Augustus mind was brought into great
perplexity, for their sundry opinions, were confirmed by sundry reasons.
Wherefore he demanded of Maro, whether it were expedient for a private man, to
usurp a government in his common wealth or not? Then Virgil, unto all (quod
he) that have usurped the state of their commonwealth, the government has bin
wearysom both unto them, and to the subjects, because that of necessity
through hatred of the people, or suspicio^ growinge to them of their own great
injustice: they do live in much fear. But if the citizens could find any one,
whom they do love entierly: it should be profitable to the city, if he were
set in authority. Wherefore, if you do continue to execute justice to all men,
without regard of any person, as you have alredie begun, it shall be most
profitable both for your self, and all the world that you ruled, for you have
so much the goodwill of all men, that they honor you, and repute you for a
God. Whose opinion Caesar allowinge: retained still the Empire.

But since we have now briefly spoken of the auctour, it seems good we
speak of the kind of verse, which commonly is handled two manner ways, that is
to say, before the work, and in the work. Before the work are, the Title,
the Cause, the Intention. The Title, in which is asked, whose it is. The cause,
from whence it rose, and for what cause chiefly they Poet took this in hand to
write. The Intention, in the which is known his drift, and where about the
Poet goes. In the work three things are marked, the Number, the Order, the
Explanation. Although therefore by falsification, many works are carried
abroad under othermens names, as the tragedy of Thiestes made by this Poet,
which Varrus setforth for his own, and many such like: yet we cannot doubt
but that clearly the Bucolickes are Virgills, especially since the Poet,
doubtinge some such matter, both in the beginning of the Aeneidos, and in
another place witnesses that they are his, saying:

I that my slendre Ote^ pipe in verse was wont to sound. Likewise
I that the rimes of sheapheardes sunge, and rash in tender years,
Thee Tityrus etc.
That they be fitly termed Bucolickes, and so accounted: if nothing else
declared, yet this might be proof sufficient, that in Theocritus they be
called by the same name. But we must show also some reason. There be three
kinds of Sheapheardes that are famous in Bucolickes. Whereof the vilest sort
are termed Caprarii, or Goatheardes. The Opiliones, or Sheapheards are next of
dignity, but ye Bubulci, or Cowheardes are the best and chiefest. Whereof
therefore was it most convenient that the Sheapheardes verse should be named, but
of that degree which is found most excellent amongst Sheapheardes?

The cause may be two ways considered, of the beginning of the verse, and of
the mind of the writer. Of the beginning, and Original of the Bucolick
verse: diverse have assigned diverse causes. There are some that say this kind
of verse was first instituted to Diana, by the Sheapheardes of Lacedaemonia,
when through occasion of war, which at that time the Persians made upon all
Greece, the virgins could not do sacrafice according to their custom. Others
some say, that the same kind of verse was made to Diana by Orestes, when he
wandered about Sicilia. What ever they all say, this is most certain, that the
Bucolik verse, took beginning of great antiquity, when men led only
sheapheardes lives, and therefore the simplicity of such personages does
represent a show of the golden wordle. Wherefore Virgil begun very
commendably with those, verses, as it were, with that life, which was first in
the earth. For afterward the fields were tilled, and last of all, for earable
and fertyle ground: contention rose, and wars ensued, which Virgil, that he
would express: sange first of sheapheardes, next of Husbandmen, and last of
warriors. It remains now that we consider what cause moved the Poet
chiefly to write the Bucolickes. Either he was entised by the sweetness to have
Theocritus verse in admiration, or else for orders sake he sought to express
the life of man, as we have said before. Or rather that Virgil would setfoorth
the three kinds of Elocution, which the Greeks call Carecters, Ischnon that
is, low, Adron which is lofty, Meson, that is the mean or middle. Whefore
being likely that he which was right cunninge in all the kinds: endited his
Bucolickes in the first, the Georgikes in the second, and the Aeneidos in the
third. Or therefore it is to be supposed he wroat the Bucolickes first, to
the intent in that kind of verse which is more free and rough then the rest he
might take opportunity to currie the Emperors favor, and to recover his
land which he had lost, for this cause. The third day of the Ides of March,
when C. Caesar was stayne, and the old soldiers had taken up Augustus Caesar
being but a child to be their captain, the senate not much repugninge against
it, a civil war risinge thereof, the Cremone^ses with other of the same
faction, aided the adversaries of Augustus Caesar. Whereby it came to pass that
when Augustus had the victory he commanded that the old soldiers should be
brought in to the Cremonenses fields, to divide, and possess them. And when
their fields were not sufficient for them all: their neighbors the Mantuans,
among whom was Virgil, lost a great part of their lands, by cause they lay
near unto the Cremonenses. But Virgil, presuminge on the familiarity which he
had with Augustus, and on his own verses: durst resist Arius the Centurian. He
strait ways, like a souldyour, put his hand to his sword. And when Virgil had
betake himself to flight: he left not of followinge him, until Virgil had cast
himself into a river, and so escaped. But afterward through the favor of
Mecoenas, and Pollio, and Augustus himself, he was restoared to his lands. The
Intention of the book which the Graetians call Scopus, is grounded on the
imitation of Theocritus the Poet, who was both a Sicilia^ and a Syracusia^. The
intention also is to be reduced into ye praise of Caesar, and other princes and
noblemen by whose means he was brought again into his former seat, and
living. Whereby yt the end might co^taine both delectatio^, and profect: he did
althinge according to order, and precept.

This question is sometime asked why he wroate no more then ten Ecloges, which
will be no marvel unto him that shall weigh the antiquity of the pastoral
Scenes, which cannot be stretched beyond this number, and since this Poet more
circumspect then Theocritus as the matter it self declares, seems to doubt
least that Ecloge which is entitled Pollio, will not appear rusticklike
enough, which he begins after this manner, saying:

Sicilian Muses, of things sumdeale greater let us singe.
And so likewise does he in other twain. And this we foretell to be observed
in all the Bucolikes of Virgil, that they are neither wholly destitute of
figures, neither altogether full of figures, that is to say Allagories. These
things are scarce to be granted unto Virgis, for the praise of Caesar, and to
recover his lands, since Theocritus, whom Virgil sought by all endeavor to
imitate: wroate altogether plainly, and simply.

As touching such things as accustomably are handled in the verse are these:
Number, Order, Explanation The number of the Eclogs is apparent, for there are
Ten, of which, seven are thought properly to deserve the name of Bucolickes.
For the last three ought not to be called Bucolickes, namely Pollio, Silenus,
and Gallus. The first therefore contains a public complaint, and a private
thanks gouyng for land, and is called Tityrus. The second, the love of a boy,
and is termed Alexis. The third, a contention of Sheapheards, and is called
Paloemon. The fourth, Genethliacum, and is named Pollio. The fifth, Epitaphium,
and is termed Daphnis. The sixth, Metamorphosis, and is called, Varus, and
Cilenus. The seventh Pharmacentria. The eight, the loves of diverse sexes, and
is named Damon. The ninth contains a complaynt for his lost lands, and is
termed Moeris. The tenth, the disier of Gallus, and is called Gallus. As
touching the order of them, we must understand this, that only in the first
and last Ecloges the Poet would keep due order, for in the one he began, as he
witnesses in the Georgickes:

O Tityrus, of thee I sange, under the broad Beech tree.
In the other he showed the end, when he says,

This final travail mine, grant Arethusa unto me.
But amongst the Eclogs that there is no sheapheardly, or prescript order
observed, it is most certain. Wherefore there are some, that say the Bucolikes
begin not at Tityrus, but:

Our Muse in Syracusian verse vouchsaued first to play.
There remains now Explanation, unto which before we come, I must admonish
this, that the verse of a Bucolike is but a stender verse, and so far
differyng from the style of the Heroike: that this kind of verse has his
peculiar division, and cuttinges, and is did inguished by his own proper
laws. For, since a verse is proved by three things, cutting, scannyng, and
tunyng: it is no Bucolike verse unless the first foot do contain a full part
of the sense, and the third foot be Trochaeus and a cuttyng, and the third
being rather a Dactile then a Spondeus: do finish a parcel of sense, the fifth
and sixth feet consist of whole words. Which being observed by Theocritus, yet
wearied at length through difficulty of the work: he neclected it, and only
in the beginning it is uncertain whether diligence, or chance did keep these
cuttynges. For, Tityre, a Dactile finisshed part of the Oration: tu patu, lae
re cu, cloased up the third Trochaeus, though in a compounde word: bans sub,
and when he had put the fourth Spondeus for a Dactile, tegmine fagi, when he
had ended the parts of oration, he absolved the whole Co^ma, wherein the
diligence of Theocritus almost in all his verses is wounderfull. And he that
shall diligently with sharp judgment consider the above written, shall easily
understand what is the intention of the Georgikes, and what the end, and
likewise also in the Aeneidos.

There are three kind of styles in a Poem, either Active, either Imitatiue
which Graecians call Dramaticum, wherein are persons brought in speakinge,
without speaking of the Poet, such as Tragoedies, and Comoedies are. For Dran
in Greek signifies to do. In which kind first Tityrus was written, then next
Quo te Moeri. Or else Enerratitiue, which the Greeks call Diegematicon, in
which the Poet himself speaks without interpretation of person, as the first
three books of Georgikes. Likewise Lucretius verses. Either else commune, and
mixed, which the Greeks do term Micton, where both the Poet himself does
speak, and persons likewise are brought in, such as is the Aeneidos of
Virgil.

FINIS.
THE ARGVMENTES of the twelve books of Aeneidos, expressed in twelve verses.
Aeneas, in the first, to Liby land arriueth well.
The fall of Troy, and woeful dole, the second book does tell.
The third of wandringes speaks, and father dead, and laid full low.
In fourth Queen Dido burns, and flames of raginge love does show.
The fifth declares plays, and how the fleet with fire was cought.
The sixth does speak of ghosts, and how deep Plutoes reygne was sought.
The seventh book, A eneas bringes unto his fatal land.
The eight-prepareth war, and power how foes for to witstand.
The ninth of battles tells, and yet the captain is a way.
Aeneas grievous wrath Mezentius, in the tenth, does slaye.
The eleventh in unequal fight Camilla castes to ground.
The twelfth with heavenly weapons gyues to Turnus mortal wound.
A GENERAL SVM WHEREOF ALL THE XII. BOOKS OF AENEIDOS DO ENTREAT.
WHEN Troy was destroyed by the Greeks, and their most of Noblitie slain,
Aeneas being Son to prince Anchises, and begotten of VENUS, a man of most
valient courage and virtue (after great slaugh ter made on his enemies) was
forced to flee his country, and taking with him his Images and Gods, whom he
than worshipped for his auouries, withdrew himself to the sea, with his sun
Ascanius, and his old father Anchises and family to whom a great number of
Trojans, from every quarter resorted, and ioynyng togethers under him, erected
a Navy of twenty ships and departed to seas, persuaded by their Gods, that
they should come to a land, where their kingdom should flourish. First he
arrived in Thracia, and would have remained there, but understanding that young
Polydorus his cousin was murdered there by the king thereof, for his Gold, he
forsook that coouetous land, and after he had builded a city called of his
name Aeneas. From thence he sailed into Candy, where he was settled a while, but
he felt his prophecy wrong expounded, and was put from thence by a pestilence.

Than remembryng that his ancient forefathers came out of Italy and being
better instructed by his Gods, that Italy should be his place and kingdom
appointed: he cut another course to the land of Chaonia, where one Helenus
reigned, being his kinsman a Trojan, of whom he learned many things touching
his Prophecy, and was newly refreshed with men, amor, and treasour. He passed
from thence to the isle of scicil, and was there well received of king Acestes
his cousin, and there he buried his old father Anchises, by which time, vij.
years wear almost expired. Than having but a short journey to Italy, he went
thitherwards out of Scicil, and by the way was taken with an horrible tempest,
and driven from Italy an extreme course, to the country of white Moors in
Affrike, and after extreme desperation, was honorably there enterteyned of the
Queen DIDO a widow, with whom he joined in love, and remained till his Gods
(...)

The first book of the Aeneidos of Virgil.
The Argument.
When Troy was taken, Aeneas the son of Anchises and Venus, a man endued with
singular godliness, and like valiencie whylst in the seventh year of his
wandering he sailed upon the Tyrrhene sea from Sicil, toward Italy, a mighty
tempest being raised by Aeolus the king of winds at lunos request: was driven
to the shore of Afrike, where entering on the land, he slew with bow and
arrows seven great stagges and divided them equally to each ship one, for so
many sail he had gathered together of his dispearsed fleet, and hartneth his
soldiers ouerweryed now with travail, with the hope of future rest: manfully
to endure the labors that were yet to come. In the mean while Venus pleads
her son Aeneas, and all the Troianes cause before Jupiter, and imputes al
those calamities unto Juno, but Jupiter on the other side, disclosing all the
order of the destrinies: recomforteth his daughter with hope of happy
posterity, and power of the Romans. wherewith Venus being well satisfied:
meets with her son Aeneas, being ignorant of the place, and romyng up and
down in the country, and shows him how that his dispersed ships be safe,
and tells him that Carthage is not far of, a citle which Dido builded in
that place. wherefore Aeneas by his mothers mean being shrouded in an hollow
cloud accompanied with Achates: enters into Carthage, where both he finds
his mates safe, and is courteously entertained of Dido the Queen. Venus
notwithstanding not overmuch trusting to Iunos entertaynme^t, nor the
vnco^stancie of women, laying Ascanius a sleep in the woods of Ida: addressed
Cupide in his steed, who amongst embracinges, and kisses, privily inspireth
the Queen with the love of Aeneas.

Other books made by Virgil before this greatwork.
I That my slender Oten Pype in verse was wont to sound
Of woods, and next to that I taught for husbandemen the ground,
How fruit unto their greedy lust they might constrain to bring,
A work of thanks: Lo now of Mars, and dreadful wars I sing,
Of annes, and of the man of Troy, that first by fatal fight
Did thence arrive to Lauine land, that now Italia, hight.
But shaken sore with many a storm by seas and land ytost,
And all for Iunos endless wrath that wrought to have had him lost.
And sorrows great in wars he bode, ere he the walls could frame
Of mighty Rome, and bring the gods taduaunce the Roman name.
He calls for divine power.
Now Muse direct my song to tell for what offense and why:
What aylid so the queen of gods to drive thus cruelly,
This noble prince of virtue mylde from place to place to toil,
Such pains to take? may heavenly mynds so sore in rancour boil?
There was a town of ancient time Carthago of old it hight,
Against Italia and Tybers mouth lay loof at seas aright:
Both rich in wealth and sharp in war, the people it held of Tire:
This town above al towns to raise was Iunos most desire,
For sooke her seat at Samos isle and here her arms she set,
Her chare, and here she minds to make (if all godds do not let)
Affrik other wise called Lybya, did worship Juno which was enemy to troi ans.
An empire all the world to rule: but heard she had beforne
From Troy should rise a stock, by whom their towers should all be forne
That far and wide should bear the rule, so fearre in war to feel:
That Lyby land destroy they should, so fortune turns the wheel.
For fear of that, and calling eft the old war to her mind,
That she at Troy had done before for Greeks her friends so kind.
Ne from her heart the causes old of wrath and sore disdain
Was slakyd yet, but in her breast high spyte did still remain.
How Paris Venus beauty praised and hers esteemed at naught.
She abhores the stock and Ganimede whom Jove to heaven had raught,
Thus flamed in her mood, she kest through all the seas to throw
The intent of this work is only to tell the beginning of Rome.
The sely poor remain of Troy that Greeks had laid so low.
And them that wild Achilles wrath had spared alive at last
From Italy she thought to keep till deftnies should be past.
And many a year they wandered wide, in seas and soondrie pyne,
So houge a work of weight it was, to buyld of Rome the lygne.
Scant from the sight of Scicil isle, their sails in merry array
Went under wynd, and through the seas, and salt foam made their way:
When Juno her bethought again of her immortal wound
Juno fretting with her self.
Unto her self. And shall I thus be conquered, and confound?
And shall I leave it thus quod she? shall yet this Troyan king
For all my work to Italy this people safely bring?
I trow the destnye wills it so, but did not Pallas burn
A fleet of Greeks, and in the seas them all did ouerturne
For one man's sin, and for the faut of Ajax made to fall?
She threw the fires of mighty Jove from skies upon them all.
And drowned their ships, and he him self with whirlewynde set a sier
All smoking on the roks she kest his carcas to erpier
But I, that queen of gods am called and sister of Jove in throne
And eke his wife, how long I war with this poor stock alone?
So many a year? and who shall now dame Iunos godhead know,
Or shortly upon mine altars who due honors will bestow?
Acolia a windy cofe irey.
Thus rolling in her burning breast she straight to Aeolia hyed
Into the country of cloudy skies where blustering wyndes abide.
King Aeolus the wrasiling wynds in caves he locks full low:
In prison strong the storms he keeps forbidden abroad to blow.
They for disdain with murmour great at every moush do rage,
But he a loft with mace in hand their force does al aswage.
If he so did not: lands and seas and skies they would so sweep
Within a while, that all were gone. Therefore in dongeons deep
Almighty Jove did close them up, and hills has ouerset,
And made a king, that should know when to louse them, when to let.
Whom to entreat this Juno came, and thus to him she spoke:
King Aeolus, for unto thee the great god has betake
And given thee leave to lift the floods and calm to make them still:
On Tyrrhen sea there sails a fleet that bears me no good will.
To Italy they mind to pass, a new Troy there to bylde.
An angr^ Goddess.
Let out thy wynds and all their ships do drown with waters wild.
Disperse them al to sondrie shores or whelme them down with deep.
Of goodly Ladies seven and seven about me I do keep,
Whereof the fairest of them all that called is Deiopey,
Shall Be thine own for evermore, my mind if thou obey,
And of a goodly son (quod she) she shall thee make a syer.
To that said Aeolus: O Queen: what needs all this desyer:
Command me dame, I must obey, my duty it is of right,
By you this kingdom first I gat, and grace of Jove on hight.
You make me sit among the gods at banketts this ye know,
You gave me might these stormy wynds to strain, or make to blow.
He turned his sword when this was said, and through the hill he pusht
And at that gap with throngs atones the wynds forth out they rusht.
The whirlewinds to the land went out, and then to seas they flewe,
Both East and West, and from the sauds the waves aloft they threw.
The stormy South again the cliues the waters drive so hye,
A sudden storm.
That cables al began to crack, and men for dreed to cry,
Anon was taken from Trojans eyes both sight and light of son
And on the sea the grym dark night to close all in begone.
The thonders roard, and lightning lept full often on every side,
There was no man but present death before his face espyde.
Aeneas than in every lymme with cold began to quake,
With hands up thrown to heavens aloft his moan thus began he make.
O ten times treble blessed men that in their parents sight
Before the loftye walls of Troy, did lose their lives in fight.
Drownyng is miserable.
O Diomedes, valiant lord, and guyd of Greeks most stout
Could I not of thy force have fallen and shed my life right out:
In Trojan feelds? where Hector ferce lies under Achilles lance
King Serpedon and many a lord, how blisfull was their chance?
Whose bodies with their arms and sheeldes in Simois waters sinkes.
A piteons tempest.
As he thus spoke, the Northern blast his sails brake to the brinkes,
Unto the skies the waves them lift, their ores bin all to torn,
Away goth helm, and with the surge the ship side down is borne,
In come the seas, and hye as hills some hang in studs above,
Some down the gaping water sends against the sands to shoue.
There three at ones the Sothern wynd into the rocks has cast
(So they call stones that in the seas like altars lie full fast)
And three the Eastern wind also (that pity it is to think)
Out of the deep into the sholdes, and quicksands made to sink.
And one that men of Lycia land, and trusty Orontes held,
Before his face there fela sea that made the puppe to yield.
And hedlong down the master falls, and thryse the keele aground
The water whirlde, and at the last the wild sea swallowd round.
Than might you see both here and there, men with their armor swim,
The robes and peinted pomp of Troy lay fleeting on the brim,
And now the ships where Ilionee, and where Achates strong,
And where as Abas went, and where Alethes living long,
The wether had won, and through the ribs the seas came wonders fast:
A friend in extremity.
When suddenly the god Neptune vpsterte him al aghast.
With wonder how so great a rage should hap to him untold,
And forth his noble face he putts the waters to behold,
There saw he how Aeneas ships through all the seas bespred,
And Trojan folks y^ound with flood, and storms falke over head.
Anon the craft thereof he knew, and Juno his sisters ire.
Strait by their names he calls the winds, who than began retire.
Are you so bold you blastes (quod he) without my license here
The lands and skies and seas also with such a storm to steer?
I will be quyte: but first is best the floods to set in stay,
And after this for your deserts be sure I shall you pay.
In have begone, go tell your king the seas is not his charge,
But unto me that lot befell with mace threforked large.
Not here, but in his caves of wind, his court go bid him keep.
There let him if he list, you blasts enclose in prison deep.
Obedience of waters.
This spoken: with a thought he makes the swelling seas to cesse,
And Sun to shine, and clouds to flee, that did the skies oppress.
The Mermaides therwithal appears, and Triton fleetes above,
And with his forke they all the ships from rocks do softly move,
Then letts he lose the perlous sands that ships a way may slide,
And on the seaful smoothe his chare with wheels he made to ride.
And like as in a people stout when chances to betyde
The multitude to make a fray of wit full often wide,
That stones, and weapons flies abroad, and what come furst to hand,
Some sadman comth, that for his right is loved of all the land:
Anon they cease and silence make, and down they lay their rage,
To hark at him, and he with speech their wood minds does aswage.
So fell this deadly fray at sea, when Neptune had controlde
The waters wyld, and through the seas his chare abroad had rolde.
The men of Troy unto the shore that next was in their sight
Their were driven to Afrike,
Made have to draw, and on the cost of Africa they light.
Far in the shore there lies an isle, and there besides a bay,
Where from the channel deep the haven goes in and out always.
On either side the reaches hie, to heaven up clyme to grow,
And under them the still sea lies, for there no breath can blow.
But green wood like a garland grows, and hydes them al with shade,
And in the midds a pleasant cave there stands of nature made,
Where sits the Nymphs among the springs in seats of moss and stone
When ships are in, no Cables need nor ankers need they none.
Then from the ship to walk a land Aeneas longid sore,
And chose of all the number seven and brought with him to shore.
There by a bank their weery limbs of salt sea did they stretche,
Ease after traualle,
And first Achates from the flynt a spark of fire did fetch,
Which he received in matter meet, and dry leaves laid about.
Than vitells out they laid a land, with seas welnere ymarde.
And corn to dry they set, and some with stones they brusyd hard,
There whylest Aeneas up the rock was gone to walk on hye,
To see where any ships of his astray he might espy,
If Caicus arms upon the sail, or Capis happs to show.
No boat in sight, but on the shore three Hearts there stood arowe:
And after them the heard behind along she valley fed.
He stayed, and of his bow and bolts Achates strait him spedde.
The cheef that highest bare their heads, adown with darts he kest,
And to the woods he followed than with like pursuit the rest.
He left them not till seven of them were fallen with bodies great,
To match the number of his ships that now had need of meat.
Than to the haven he does the flesh among his men divide,
And pipes of wine departed eke that was abourde that tide,
Which good Acestes had them given when they from Scicile went.
And than to cheer their heavy hearts with these words he him bent.
Good comfort of a Captain.
O mates quod he, that many a woe have bidden and borne ere this,
Worse have we seen, and this also shall end when gods will is.
Through Scilla rage (you wot) and through the roaring rocks we past,
Though Ciclops shore was full of fear, yet came we through at last.
Pluck up your hearts and drive from thence both thought and fear away,
To think on this may pleasure be perhaps another day.
With pains and many a danger sore by sondrie chance we wend,
To come to Italia where we trust to find our resting end,
And where the destnyes have decreed Troys kindoms eft to rise,
Be bold, and harden now your selfs take ease when ease applise.
Thus spoke he tho, but in his heart huge cares him had oppressed,
Under the name of Aeneas is described in Virgill the part of a perfect wise
man and valiaunte captain if ye mark it.
Dissymling hope with outward eyes, full heavy was his breast,
Than all bestyrd them to the pray, the bankettes began begin,
The skins from of the flesh they pluct, and eke thentrailes within.
Some cut their shares, and quaking yet on broches began to broyle,
Some blew the fire to burn, and some their cawdrons set to boil.
Good cheer they made and fed them fast as on the grass they sat,
With wine and vittels of the best, and red dear good and fat.
When meat was done and honger past, and trenchers up were take,
Great search and talking for their friends that were behind they make.
In hope and dreed of them they stand, and whether a live they be
Or what is else of them become, or shall they hem ever see.
But chiefly good Aeneas did the case full sore lament
Of stout Orontes and Amicus whom the seaes had hent,
And other whiles he syghed sore for Licus piteous fall,
And mighty Gias and Cloanthus mournd he most of all.
And now an end thereof therwas, when Jove him self on hye
Beheld the seas where shyps do sail, and broad londs under sky.
And from the tops of heavens above he kest his eyes adowne,
And stayed to look on Affrike land and who there bare the crown.
And unto him as to and fro his careful mind he cast:
Came Venus in, and sad she was unlike her custom past.
With tears about her eyes so bright she thus began to plain:
O king (quod she) that over us all both gods and men do raygne
For evermore, and with thy dintes of lighting make a fright:
What has my son Aeneas wrought or spoken again thy might?
What has the simple Trojans done? that after torments all,
From Italy to keep them of the world is made to small?
Sometime ye said there should arise (when years were comen about)
The men of Rome that of the ligne of Troy should be so stout,
That seas and lands should to their rule both far and nigh suppress.
What makes O mighty father now your will a way to dress?
In hope thereof ywis I took the fall of Troy so light,
And thought amends should now be made and pleasur pain to quyte
But now I see the same mischaunce the poor men yet to chase.
What end thereof shall we a wait at your almighty grace?
Antenor through the mids of Greece had fortune sauf to steal,
And to Lyburnus kingdom came as destnye list to deal
Even to the mids thereof, and head wherout Tymauus springs,
Where issues nine the sea makes in, for noise the mountain rings.
Yet for the men of Troy to dwell a city bylt he there,
Padua by name, and gave them laws and arms of Troy to bear.
Now lies he there in pleasant rest, no wight him does disease,
But we your stock whom to the stars of heaven admit you please:
Our shyps destroyed (I abhor to think) and for the cruel spite
Of one alone, we be betrayed and spoiled of our right,
Ne to the coasts of Italy for ought we can attain.
Is this the fathers love we find? so stablish you my raygne?
The maker of the Gods and men to her all sweetly smyles
With countnaunce such as from the skies ye storms and clouds exiles.
And sweetly kosthys daughter dear, and there withal he speaks:
Fear not (quod he) thy men's good hap, for none their fortune breaks.
Thy kingdom prosper shall, and eke the walls I thee behight:
Thou shall see rise in Lauyne land and grow full great of might.
propheties spoken by Jove to Venus of things that after ensued.
And thou thy son Aeneas stout to heaven shall bring at last,
Among the gods be sure of this, my mind is fixed fast.
And now to thee disclose I shall (for sore I see thee dout)
The long discourse of destenyes that years shall bring about.
Great war in Italy have he shall, ere he the people wyld
May vndertread, and learn to live, and than the city byld.
That summers three ere he shall sit as king them shall renew,
And winters three, before he can the Rutyls all subdewe.
Than shall Ascanius (now a child) whose name Yulus hight,
(Was Ylus called when Troys estate and kingdom stood vpryght)
Till space of thirty years expire his kingdom shall obtain,
And he from Lauyne shall translate the old state of the raygne,
And strongly fortifye the town of Alba long shall he,
Where whole three hundred years the stock of Hector kings shall be.
Til Iha Queen, Romulus and Remus were nourished of a she Wolf.
with child by Mars two twins to light shall bring
Whom wolves shall nurse, and proud thereof he grows that shall be king.
He Romulus shall take the rule, and up the walls shall frame
Of mighty Rome, and Romans all shall call then of his name,
No end to their estate I set, ne terms of time or place,
But endless shall their empire grow and Iunos cruel grace
That now with fear the ground beneth turmoiles, and eke the skies,
Shall leave her wrath, and work with me, and take more sad auyse,
To love the Romans lords of peace, and people clad in gown.
Let it be so: let time roll on, and set forth their renown.
Then shall be borne of Trojan blood the emprour Caesar bright,
Whose empire through the seas shall stretch and fame to heaven upright
And Julius his name it is of mighty Iule derived:
Him laden full of Esterne spoils by him in wars atchiued:
In heaven thou shall bestow full glad, and vows men shall him hight.
Then down goth war, men shall be mylde, in arms shall not delight,
Then truth and right and Roman gods shall sit with laws in hand,
The gates of war with bolts and bars of hard steel fast shall stand.
And therewithin on armor heaps sits Batail rage, and wailes
With brazen chains a hundred bound, his wastling not auailes.
Thus much he said, and down anon the son of May he sent,
Mercury the somee of May.
That new Carthage, and all the costs of Affrike should be bent
The Trojans to receive a land, lest Dido there the Queen
Might from her shore expel them of, er she the cause had seen.
And down he flies him through the skies, with wings as swift as
And on the land of Lyby stood, and did his fathers mind. (wind
With that the Moors laid down their rage (as god did bid) and eke
The Queen her self began turn, and to the Trojans waxed meke.
But good Aeneas all that night his mind about he tossed,
And in the morning went him out to search and see the cost,
To learn what land they were com to, what people dwelt thereon
If men or saluage beasts it hold, for tilde he could see non.
This would he know, and to his men the truth of all to tell.
Therwhilest within a water cave his ships he made to dwell,
Whom trees and woods with shadows thick and eke the rock does hyde.
Than forth he goth, and took but one Achates by his side.
And lances two they bare in hand of metal sharp and light,
And as they went amid the wood he met his mother right,
Most like a maid in maidens weed, she maidens armor bears,
As does Harpalicee the Queen that horses wild outweares.
So wight of foot, that Heber stream so swift she leaves behind,
For hunterlike her how she bare, her locks went with the wind
Behind her back, and tuckt she was that naked was her knee.
She called to them and said, good sirs, I pray you did you see
To stray this way as ye have come, my sisters any one?
With quiver bound that in the chase of some wild best are gone?
Or with a cry pursues a pace the fomy bore to pain?
So Venus said, and Venus son her answered thus again.
None of thy sisters have I seen nor heard I thee assure
O maid, what shall I make of thee, thy face I see so pure.
Not mortal like, ne like mankind thy voice does sound, I guess
Some goddess thou art, and Phoebus bright thy brother is doubtless,
Or of the noble Nymphs thou come, of grace we thee beseech
What ever thou art, and help our need, and now vouchsaue to teach
What land is this? what coast of heaven be we come under here?
Where nether man nor place we know, so straied we have in frre,
Out of our course we have been cast with winds and floods yshake,
Before thine altars many a beast to offer I undertake.
As for mine altars (quod she tho) no such estate I bear,
The manner is of virgins here this short array to wear.
In purple weed we use to walk with quiver light onbound,
The realm of Affrike here thou see, and men of Tyrus ground.
Here is the city of Agenor, ferce be the lands about,
Queen Dido rules and weres the crown from Tyrus she came out
And lately from her brother fled, the cause is long to lere.
The story long, but touch I will the chief and leave it there.
Sicheus was her husband tho: the richest man of ground
In all that coast, and deep (good heart) in love with her was dround.
For her to him her father gave a virgin yet ontwyght
And to her brother came the crown of Tyrus than by right
Pigmalion, a sinful wretch of all that ever raignde,
Whom couetise did blind so sore, and rage of fury strainde,
That onaware, with privy knife before the altars pure
He slew Sicheus, and of his sisters love he thought him sure.
And long he kept the deed in close, and she good soul full sad
The crafty thief made wondrous means and tales her mind to glad.
But in a dream (unburied yet) her husband came tappere
With visage pale, and wondrous hewes, full deadly was his chere
And told her all, and wide his wound disclosing showed his breast
How he before the altars was, for what intent oppressed.
And had her flee the wicked soil ere worse might her befall.
And treasor under ground he showed to help her therwithall,
Both gold and silver plenty great unknown till than, and so
This Dido did, and made her friends and ordeind forth to go.
Than such as for his wicked life the cruel tirant hates,
Or ben afraied of him for ought, them getts out of the gates
In ships that ready lay by chance, the gold with them they packt
They spoild also Pigmalion, this was a woman's act.
Than past they forth and here they came, where now thou shall epsy
The hugy walls of new Carthage that now they rere so hie.
They bought the soil and Birsa it called when first they did begin,
As much as with a bull hide cut they could enclose within.
But what are you feign would I know, or what coast come ye fro?
Where would you be? demanding thus he answered her onto.
With sighing deep, and from his breast heavy his tale he fet.
O lady mine (quod he) to tell if nothing did me let,
And of our pains ye list to here the stories out at large:
The day were short, and ere an end the sun would him discharge.
Of ancient Troy (if ever Troy beside your ears has past)
Of thens be we: by sundry seas and coasts we have been cast.
And now the tempest has us brought to Lyby land by chance.
My name Aeneas clepyd is any country gods (taduaunce)
In ships I bring: unto the stars well blased is my fame.
Of Italy I seek the land, and Jove's offpring I am
A Trojan fleet I took to sea with twenty vessels wide,
My mother goddess taught my way, as destny did me gide.
Now seven thereof do skant remain, the rest with wethers gone,
And I unknown in wilderness here walk and comfort non.
From Asia and from Europa quite thus driven I am: with that
She could no longer bide him speak, but brake his tale thereat.
What ever thou art (quod she) for well I wot the gods above
Does love thee much to save thy life to this place to remove.
Go forth to yonder Palais straight, assay the Queen to see,
For safe thy company a land be set believe thou me.
And safe thy ships are come to shore, with Northen wind at will,
An old superstition of bruinatio^. by birds called augutium.
Onles my cunning fails me now whom wont I was to skill.
Behold the flock of six and six that yonder cheerly flies
Of Swannes, whom late an Egle ferce did chase through all the skies.
Now toward land, or on the land, they seem their course to keep,
And as for joy of danger past their wings aloft they sweep
With mirth and noise: right so thy men and al thy ships a row
Be come to haven, or nere the haven in safgard, this I know.
Now get thee forth, and where the way thee ledes hold on thy pace.
Skant had she said, and therwithall she turned aside her face,
As read as rose she began to shine, and from her heavenly hear
The flauour sprang, as Nectar sweet, down fell her kirtell there,
And like a goddess right she fled. When he his mother wist,
He followed fast and called (alas) what mean you, thus to list
In fained shapps so often to me begiling to apeare?
Why hand in hand embrace we not, and jointly speak and hear?
Thus plaining sore he still his pace unto she city holds.
But Venus as they went, a weed about them both she foldes, Venus enclosed
them both in a cloud.

Of mist and cloud and air so thick, that no man should them fyie
Ne do them harm, nor interrupt, nor ask them who nor why.
(...) And eke him self among the lords of Greece he saw to be.
And armies out of Inde there came and Memnons black array,
And from the realm of Amazon with thronges and targettes gay
Penthasilee Virago feers, amids the millions stands
In armor girt, her pappe set out with lace of golden bands,
A Queen of war, though maid she be, with men she likes to try.
She would bekowen for a woman.
While thus about this Trojan duke Aeneas led his eye.
With marvel much, and ernest stood him still in one to vewe,
To temple comes this Dido lo, the Queen so faier of hew
Of lords and lusty yonkers fine about her many a rout.
Most like unto Diana bright when she to hunt goth out.
Upon Eurotas banks, or through the copps of Cynthus hill
Whom thousands of the lady Nymphs awaite to do her will.
She on her arms her quiver beres, and al them ouershynes,
And in her breast the tikling joy her heart to mirth enclines.
So Dido came, and freshly glad among the prease she past.
And forward she their work set forth and cherly biddes them have.
When she into the temple came, before the goddess gate
Amidds her guard, her down she sat in seat of great estate.
There justice, right and law she gave, and labors did divide
In euquall parts, or else by lot let men their chance abide.
When suddenly Aeneas sees with great concourse to throng
Both mighty Anteas and Serestus, and Cloanthus strong.
And other Trojans many one, whom wethers wide had spread
And driven abroad in sundry sorts to diverse coasts yled:
Astoind with him Achates was, for joy they would have lept
To join their hands, but fear agein them held and close ykept
Took nothing on, and through the cloud they hid, did all behold
What chance they had, and where their ships and what shore might the^ hold
What make they there, for men youlde of all the navy chief
With cries into the temple came, to seek the Queens relief.
When they were in, and license had before the Queen to speak,
The greatest lord sir Ilionce, thus began the silence break.
The oration of Ilioneus to Dido.
O Queen to whoome is given of god to bylde this city new,
And for your justice peoples proud and saluage to subdue:
We Trojans poor, whom through the seas al tempests tossid have,
Beseeke your grace our seely ships from wicked fire to save.
Have mercy upon our gentle stock, and graciously relieve
Our painful case: we come not here with wepons you to green,
To spoil the coast of Lyby land, nor boties hence to bear.
We conquered men be not so bold, our pride need none to fear.
There is a place the Greeks by name Hesperia do call
An ancient land and stout in war, and fruteful soill withal
Out from Enotria they came that furst did till the same,
Now Italy men say is calde so of the capteins name.
To that our course was bent,
When suddenly there rose at south a wind and tempest wood
That toward shore enforst to fall, and so took on the flood,
That in the rocks we be dispersed, we few this coast have caught.
What kind of men be these of yours? what manners wild ytaught
This country keeps? to lodge in sand we can not suffered be.
They fight, and non to tread a land they can content to see.
If mortal men you do despise and care for non in fight:
Yet have respect to goods above that judge both wrong and right.
We had a king Aeneas called, a iuster was there non
In virtue, nor in feats of war, or arms could match him one.
Whom if the destnies keeps alive (if breath and aier of skies
He draws, nor yet among the goasts of cruel death he lies)
There is no fear it shall be quitte the favor now you show,
You furst his kindness to provoke shall never repent I know.
In diverse yles some cities be that Trojan armor bears,
Of Trojans blood there is also Acestes crown that wears.
Now give us leave our shaken ships to lay a land we pray,
And timber to repare them eke, and ores to pass our way:
That with our king if we can meet, and eke our fellows moo:
To Italy by your relief with glad chere we may goo.
But if that comfort all be past, and mighty father thee
The Lyby seas has had, nor of Ascanius hope may we:
Yet at the least to Scicil isle, and seats that will not swerve,
From whens we came let us depart, and king Acestes serve.
So said sir Ilionee, the rest of the Trojans cried the same
At ones with murmour great.
Than Dido shortly full demure her eyes down set, and thus
Cast of your care you Trojans, set your hearts at eas for us.
Great need, and yet the raw estate of this my kingdom new,
Compells me thus my coast to keep, and wide about me vietre.
Who knows not of Aeneas? who? or has not heard the name
Of lusty Troy: and of the men and all that war the flame?
The further from the son, the duller wits The common people imagined the son
to be carried about in a charetwith horses.
We Moors be not so base of wit, ne yet so blunt of mind.
Ne from this town the sun his steedes so far away does wind.
Go where you pleas, to Italy to old Saturnus feeldes,
Or get you into Scicile land that king Acestes weeldes.
I will you help, and see you saufe, and give you goods to go.
Will you remain even here with me? can you content you so?
This town is yours, I have it made, set up your ships anon:
A Trojan and a Moore to me indiffrent shall be one.
And would to god your king had hapt this way also to bend,
And were him self Aeneas here, forsooth I will out send
Along the coasts and wilderness, perhaps he may be found,
Af anywhere in towns he straies, or woods of Affrike ground.
With this the Trojans comfort took, and now Achates strong,
And lords Aeneas through the cloud to break they thought it long.
Achates to Aeneas first him drew and to him said:
Thou goddess son what meanst thou thus: how long shall we be staid?
Al thing thou see is sauf and sure, our fleet, our friends, and all.
We miss but one whom in the mids of studds we saw to fall
And drowned, but in the rest I see your mothers tale is true.
Skant had he spoke, and suddenly the cloud from them withdrew,
And vanished into aier alone, and left them bare in light.
Aeneas stood and freshly shind, all men be hold him might,
Most like a god with face and hew, for than his mother dear
Set forth her son with shoulders faier, and comely shind his hear.
And with a roset youth his eyes and countnaunce ouercheard,
And white as burnisht Iuery fine his neck and hands appeard,
Full like as if the silver clear, or pearls are put in gold.
Than to the Queen he steps, and said (all sodeinly) behold
He that you seek, lo here I am, Aeneas Trojan I:
Escapid from the Lyby seas where lost I was welny.
O Queen that in our woes (alone) such mercy do extend
To us the poor remain of Troy, that welny brought to an end
By seas and lands are tossed and tierd, of all thing bare and peld,
Our town, our house, our peoples eke: you worthy thanks to yield
It lies not Dido in our power nor what is every where
Of Trojan blood, not all that through the wide world skattred were.
The almighty gods (if pity they regard, or if there be
Of justice any whyt, or soul that virtue loves to see)
Do pay thy meede: what happy world forth such a treasur brought?
What blessed father thee begat, and mother such has wrought?
While floods into the seas do run, while hills do shadows cast,
And while the stars about the skies does turn and tarry fast:
Shall neuermore with me thy name thy praise and honor end,
What land soever calth me to. So said, and than his friend
Sir Ilionee by hand he took, and than Serestus strong,
The Queen astoined began to be, when first she saw the sight,
And waied the chance of such a lord, and thus her words she dight.
Thou goddess son, what fortune thee through al these dangers drives?
What force onto this cruel shore thy person thus arriues?
Art thou not he Aeneas whom from Dardanus the king,
Anchises gat on Venus hie, where Symois does spring?
Ere this I well remember, how that Teucer from his reign
Expulsed was, and to the town of Sidon flee was feign,
Some help at Belus hand topteine, his kingdom to restore.
Than ward my father Belus wide in Cypers land so sore,
And conquered all and kept the state, that time I heard the fall
Of Troy, and eke the name of thee, and kings rehearcid all.
Their enmies of the Trojans than great praise abroad did blow,
And of the ancient race of Troy to come he would be know.
Wherefore approach, and welcome all, my houses shall you host,
For like mischaunce with labors sore, my self sometime has tossed.
And fortune here has set me now, this land thus to subdewe,
By proof of pain I have been taught on painful men to rewe.
Thus talked she, and than Aeneas to her pallais brought,
When on their altars they had done such honors as they thought.
Yet ceased not the Queen to send unto his men that tide
A skore of bulls, and eke of brawnes a hundred rough of hyde,
And with the dammes a hundred more of lambs both good and fat,
The gladsome gifts of god.
The inner court was all beset with riches round about,
And in the midds the feasts they began prepare for all the rout,
With precious clothes and conning wrought, and proudly enbrodred wide.
And on the bourdes the mighty piles of plate there stood beside,
Whereon was graven in golden work the stories all by row,
And deeds of lords of antike fame a long discourse to know.
Aeneas than (for in his mind could love not let him rest)
His friend Achates for his son Ascanius has him dressed
Onto the ships, and bad him tell the news, and bring him there
As fast as may, for in Ascanius fixed was al his fear.
And gifts with him he bad to bring from Troy destroyed yfet.
A royal pal, that al with gold and stones was ouerset,
And eke a robe with borders rich, sometime it was the weed
Of Helene bright, when Paris her from Greece to Troy did leede.
Her mother Ledas gift it was, a wondrous work to view.
A scepter eke that Ihonee king Priams daughter true
Was wont to bear, and more a brooche that from her neck went down
With precious pearls, and dooble set of fine gold eke a crown.
These things to fet Achates have onto the navy makes.
But Venus strange devises new, and counsails new she takes,
That Cupide shall the face and hew of sweet Ascanius take, Venus
tra^sformeth Cupide her son into the likeness of Ascanius.

And bear the presents to the Queen her heart a fire to make
With fervent love, and in her bones to fling the privy flame.
Suspect she does the Moors, that have of dooble tongue the name,
And Iunos wrath her fretts, and in the night her care returns.
Therefore she thus exhortes her son Cupide that lovers burns.
My son, that art my stay alone, my great renown and might,
My son, that of the thonderblastes of hye Jove setst but light,
How through the seas Aeneas mine thy brother has been thrown
By cruel Iunos wicked wrath, to thee is not unknown.
And often mournd with me thou have therefore, but so it is,
With Dido Queen he lodges now, and faier he flattred is.
But whereto Iunos Innes will turn, is matter hard to know,
In such a time of danger great thou may not be to slow.
Wherefore preventing al mischaunce, I list to work a wile,
And with the flame of love I mean the Queen now to begyle.
Lest by some misaduenture bad her mind she happily turn,
But for Aeneas love with me somedeale I like she burn.
And how this thing ywrought shall be, give ear and know my mind.
Now goth the child, my chiefest care unto his father kind
Into the town, and from the seas the presents forth he brings
That from the flames of burning Troy was kept as worthy things
Him purpose I a sleep to make, and into hie Cythere,
Or to my seats in Ida mount, all onaware to bear,
That from this craft he may be far, ne let herin do make
Thou for a night, and not beyond, his form and figure take
Her to begile, and of a child thou child put on the face,
That when within her lap the Queen thee gladly shall embrace,
Wantonness after good fare.
Among the royal pomp of meat and wine of Bacchus bliss,
And clippes thee sweet, and on thy lips does preesse the pleasant kiss:
Disperse in her the secret flame and poison sweet inspier.
Love does obey, puts of his wings, and after her desire
Puts on Ascanius shap forthwith, and like the same he went.
But Venus on Ascanius sweet a restful slomber cast,
And in her bosom up she bears, and forth with him she past
To Ida woods, where bedds of Time and Maioram so soft,
And lusty flowers in greenewod shade him breathes and comforts often.
And now is Cupide on his way, Achates with him yeid,
The royal presents to the court they bare as they were bydde.
When in they came, the Queen her set in chair on carpet gay,
Of kingly state, with hangings rich in gold and proud array.
And now the Lord Aeneas eke and youth of Trojan rout
Together came, in purple seats bestowd they were about.
The waiters gave the waters sweet, and princely towels wrought,
And eke the bread in sondrie gyse on basketts fine they brought.
And fifty ladies far within there was, that had the charge
Of all the feast to be set forth, and fires on altars large.
A hundred more to wait and carue, and like of age and trade
A hundred gentlemen, the bourdes with deinty fare to lade.
And many lords of Moors among, at every bourd to dine
Came in, and weere commanded sit on picturd carpets fine.
They wondered at the presents there, they wondered at Iule,
His countnaunce quick, and well that god his eyes and tongue could rule:
But specially the Queen was caught in meruell to behold
Upon the child, upon the pall, the gifts and robe of gold.
No sight her eyes could draw there from, and as she looked more:
The more she fell into the flame, that after paind her sore.
But chiefly to the noble boy she moves, who in a while
When he his father false with love and kissyng did begyle:
Onto the Queen he drew, and her with eyes and breast and all
About her neck embraseth sweet, and whole on her does fall.
She on her lap sometime him setts, good Dido nothingh knows
How great a god upon her sitts, what cares on her he throws.
He thinking on his mothers art, by small and small does make
The Queen forget her husband dead, and him from mind to shake.
And where of love she nothing feels her heart she kept so true:
Her woonted heat and old desires he steeres and does renew.
When men from meat began to rest, and trenchers up were take,
Great bolles of wines along they set, and crowns on them they make.
Great chere in all the chambers wide, of noise the hall it ringes,
And tapers toward night they burn hie hanged with golden stringes.
And with the light of torches great the dark of drive atones.
The Queen commands a mighty bolle of gold and precious stones
To fill with wine, whom Belus king and al king Belus line
Was wont to hold, than through them al was silens made by sign.
O Jove, quod she, for thou of hosts and gestes both great and small
Men say the laws have put: give grace I pray, and let us all
Both Moors and also Trojans here this day for good be met,
That all our offspring after us this time in joy may set.
Now Bacchus maker of the mirth, good Juno goddess dear,
And you O Moors go do your best these Trojans for to cheer.
Thus said she, and when the grace was done, the boll in hand she sipt,
And in the liquor sweet of wine her lips she scantly dipped:
But onto Bitias she it raught with charge, and he anon
The fomy bolle of gold vpturnde, and drew till all was gone.
Than all the lords and states about: And on his golden harp
Iopas with his bushie locks in sweet song began to carp,
Of stories such as him had taught most mighty Atlas old.
The wandering Moon, and of the Son the daily toil he told.
Songs of astronomy for princes
How mankind was begoon and beast, wherhens the fire and shoures
Proceeds, and how the stars arisen and fallen in certain hours.
The wain, the plough stars, and the seven that storms and tempest loures.
What means the son that to the seas he westward hieth so fast
In winter days, and why the nights so short in summers wast.
The Moors with cries cast up their hands, so does the Trojans eke,
And all that night of them the Queen new talk began to seek.
Full often of Priam would she know, of Hector often enqueeres,
In what array Auroras son came in, she gladly here is.
What horses Diomedes brought, how great Achilles was
She lernid all to soon, and of long love she bibbes (alas)
And from the first (quod she) my gest, vouchsaue I pray to tell
The treasons of the Greeks, and how your town and people fell.
And of your chance and travails all, for thus these seven year
About the lands and all the seas thou wandrest as I here.
DEO GRACIAS.
Per Thomaem Phaer,
25. Maij finitum. Inchoatum 9 eiusdem. 1555. in foresta Kilgerran Southwallie.
Opus 11. dierum.
The second book of the Aeneidos of Virgil.
The Argument.
Aeneas at the request of Dido, declares the destruction of Troy, which was
after this manner. The Greeks in the tenth year of their sledge, when their
force was quailed, and distrustinge their own abititie: fell unto crafts, and
subtilties, and counterfaytyng a flight the night before the town was burned:
hid them selves in the I Will of Tenedos, leauyng in the Troiane fields a wodden
horse of such inesteemable bigness, that it could not be received in at the
City gates, and in his womb they enclosed the most valient soldiers of al
their nobiliti. The Trojans persuaded partly through the subtlety of SINON,
and partly afraid by LAOCONS punishment: pull down part of their town wall,
and so bring in this horse into their Castle. But in the dead time of the night
the Graetians returnyng from Tenedos entered into the city through the same
bretch which was made to bring in the Horse. SINON opens the womb of the
Horse and lets forth the armed men, who immediately spoil all with fire,
and sword. Whiles these things were doing, Aeneas is warned in his dream by
Hector to provide for himself by flight, and to deliver his country Gods from
the fire. But he preferryng an honorable death, before a cowardly flight: in
vain betaketh him to arms, wherein at the first assault the Trojans had the
vpperhande, until, followyng the counsel of Choroebus, they put on Greekish
armor, and so one of them slew another. Then Priamus pallayce is besieged, and
Priamus slain by Pyrrhus, Achilles son. Thus, when Aeneas had assayed all
things in vain, when he was now quite out of hope: betaketh the relics to
his father Anchises, and taking him up on his shoulders, with Ascanius his
son, and Creusa his wife: commits himself to flight. The Graetians follow
fast after, and in that tumult he lost his wife Creusa, upon occasion to seek
whom, when as he wandered about all the town: he met with her ghost, who
certified him that she was dead. He returns again to his company, whether as
now were come together a great number of men and women, ready to follow him
whether so ever he would carry them.

THey whusted all, and fixed with eyes ententiue did behold.
When Lord Aeneas where he sat from hie benche thus he told.
A doleful work me to renew (O Queen) thou do constrain,
To tell how Greeks the Troia^ wealth, and lamentable reign
Did overthrow, which I my self have seen and been apart
No small thereof, but to declare the stories all: what heart
Can of the Greeks or soldiour one of all Ulysses rout
Refrain to weep? and now the night with hie heaven goth about,
And on the Skies the falling Stars do men provoke to rest:
But if such great desire to know, such longyng have your breast
Of Troy the latter toil to here, to speak or yet to think
For all that it my mind abhors, and sorows make me shrink:
I will begin. Forsaken of Gods, and tyerd with wars at last,
The Lords of Greeks, when all in vayn so many years had past,
Pallas goddess of wisdom and invention, whom the Greeks and Troya^s did
houour.
A Horse of tree by Pallas art most like a Mount they frame
With timber bourds, and for a vow to leave they blow the fame.
There is an isle in sight of Troy and Tenedos it hight,
A welthy land while Priams state and kingdom stood upright,
But now a bay, and harber bad for ships to lie at road,
To that they went, and hid them close that none was seen abroad.
We thought them gone, and with the wind to Greece to have been sled.
Therefore all Troy for ease of labors long, abroad them spread,
With open gates they run to sport, and Greeskih camps to see,
And places long of soldiers kept whereof they now be free.
Here lay the men of Dolop land, here fearce Achilles fought,
Here stood their ships, and here to try were wont the armies stout.
Some gased at the straungy gift that there to Pallas stood,
And wondered at the Horse so great: and furst for council good,
Tymetes straight would into town and market have it brought,
God wot if craft or whither so of Troy the fortune wrought.
But Capis and a few beside that wyser were of skill,
Bad throw the Treasons of the Greeks and gifts suspected ill
Into the seas, or with a fire ymade to burn outright,
Or hew the ribbs and search within what thing yhid be might.
The commons into sundry wits divided were and stood,
Till from the town Laocon came in have as he were wood,
And after him a number great, and ere they began to throng
He cried, O wretched citezins, what rage is you among?
Believe ye gone the Greeks? or do you think that any gifts
Of them be good? so know you well that false Ulysses driftes?
In this tree (for my life) is hid of Greeks an hideous rout,
Or this is but an engine made to skale our walls without:
And suddenly to slip them down and on the city fall,
Or other worse devise there is, take heed ye know not all.
What ever it is, I fear the Greeks, and trust their gifts as small.
He said, and with a courage good his mighty spear he drives
Against the side beneth his ribs, that where it hittes it cliues.
It shakes aloft, and still it stood that through the belly round
The vawtes within and crooked caves of noise did all rebound.
And if the will of Gods had not: had not our hearts ben blind:
Enough was don all up to break, and all the craft to find,
And Troy thou sholdst have sto^d as yet, and Priams toures have shind.
Behold the shepherds in this while a yongman have ycaught,
caused him self of purpose to betaken.
And piniond with his hands behynd unto the king him braught.
That for the nones had done him self by yelding to be take
To compass this, and to the Greeks, Troy open wide to make.
A fellow fly, and stout of mind, and bent in both to try,
To win by guile, or if he fail, with certain death to die.
On every side about him drew the Trojan youth to see,
And some of them to skorne him began, but now take heed to me:
You shall perceive the treasons false of Greeks, and of this one:
Conjecture all.
For as unarmed in the mids all vexed there he stood,
And with his eyes on Trojan men did look with piteous mood:
Alas (quod he) what ground may me, Sinons lamentacion.
what sea may me receive?
What shall I caitif miser do? what hope may I conceive?
That neither with the Greeks dare bide, and now the Trojans here,
(As worthy is) my blood to shed for vengeance do requeere.
With mourning thus our minds began turn, our force we left alone
And bad him tell what man he was, what meant he thus to moan,
What news he had he should expres, and forth his mind to break.
He at the last set fear a side, and thus began to speak.
All thing (quod he) o king, what ever it is I will confess,
Nor me a Greek I can deny among them borne doutlesse.
This first: for though that fortune falls has Sinon captive brought,
A fine dissimuler.
Yet lier shall she never make, nor feign or flatter ought.
In speech if ever to your ears the name of Palamede
Has come, and of the glory great that of his fame did sprede.
Whom by a treason false the Greeks in spite by wicked law
Unguilty did condemn (alas) for he from war did draw
To death him put, He took up on him to be kinsma^ to Palamedes a Grecian that
always did favor the Trojans,
and now him dead they morn to have again.
His squier I was and kinsman near, my father (to be plain)
To him for poverty me put in arms my youth to frame,
Whiles yet his kingdom stood outwight and (truth to say) some name
And honor eke we bare with men: but when through false envy
The wicked wretch Ulysses had betrayed and done him die:
For woe my life in corners dark, and wayling forth I drew,
Lamenting sore the fall of mine unguilty friend so true.
And fool I could not hold my peace, but if that fortune served,
If ever to my country come I might, as he deserved
With him I threatened to be quite, and great things did I crake.
Here was the cause of all my woe, this did Ulysses make
New crimes against me to invent, and cause me be suspect
To all the camp, as one by Troy of treason than infect.
Nor would not rest til Calchas had by his ungracious wit,
But what do I rehearse these things to show that be not fit?
If all the Greeks in one estate you hate, if I it wist
It is enough: you have me here, take vengeance if you list,
Ulysses and Atridas twain great goods for that would spend.
Than kindled be we more to know the circumstance and end,
Not thinking of so great a craft, and Greeks devise so fell.
All trembling on his cale he goth with fained heart to tell.
Full often the Greeks would have been gone, and Troy have left at last,
For weary of the war they were, that long in vain had past.
And gone they had: but often times rough seas, and cruel tide,
And winter storm, and sothernwinde them stayed and made to bide,
But chiefly when this timber horse was raised and stood on ground.
Such noise among the clouds was hard that all the skies did sound.
Euripilus to Phoebus straight for council al amaasd
We sent, and he returning home this heavy answer blaasd.
With blood (O Greeks) ye wan the winds and with a virgin slain,
When first the seas to Troy ye took, Agamemno^ slew his daughter to have
goodwind.
and now through blood again
Seek to return, a Greekish soul for wind you must bestow.
That word when to the commons ears was soon abroad yblow,
Al men aghast, and trembling fear on every person falls
To think who now this death should die, and whom Apollo calls.
Ulysses here his time espied, and Calchas forth he drew
The prophet great, and him before the states of Greeks aneew
(...) Another monster worse than this, and worse to dread, our eyes
Amasid made, and quite from doubt confounds our hearts so wise.
For as by chance that time a priest to Neptune chosen new,
Laocoon a mighty bull on the offering altar slew:
Behold from Tenedos aloof in calm seas through the deep
Laocon that smote the worse was billed with his chidre^ by serpents.
(I quake to tell) two serpents great with foldyngs great do sweep.
And side by side in dragons wise, to shore their way they make.
Their heads above the stream they hold, their fierred manes they shake,
The salt sea waves before them fast they shouen, and after trailes
Their ugly backs: and long in links behind them drag their tails.
With rushing noise the some vpsprings, and now to land they past
With blood read looks, and glistring fires their sparckling eyes out cast,
Where hissing out with spirting toongs their mouths they lickt for ire,
We dead almost for fear do flee, they straight with one desyer
On Lacon set, and first in sight his tender children twain
Each one they took, and winding wraps their tender limbs to strain,
And gnawing them with greedy mouths (poor wretches) fed they fast.
Than he him self to their defense with drawn sword making have,
In hold they caught, and wrething gript his body about at twice,
And twice his throat with rolls they girt themselfs in compass wise,
And than their heads and skalebright necks him over aloft they lift;
When from their knots himself to ontwine, with hands he sought to shift,
Their poisons rank al over him ronnes, and lothsom filth out flies.
Therewith a grisly noise he castes, that mounts up to the skies.
Likewise as from the mortal stroke some woundid bull at stake,
The slaughtring axe has fled by chance, and roaring loud does make.
But they anon the dragons twain all gliding swift their leapt,
And to the goddess sacred seat in Pallas temple crept,
There underneath her sheelde and feet they couching close them kept.
Than trembling fear through al our hearts was spread, and wonder new
We think how Lacoon for sin was paid with vengeance dew,
For hurting of that holy gift, whom he with cursid spear
Assailid had, and worthy was (men said) that plage to bear.
Bring in the holy horse they cry, this goddess wrath to appeas,
And her of mercy great beseeke.
They open their walls to bring in the horse
Than wide abroad we break the walls, away through them we make.
With courage all men fall to work, some sort does undertake,
His feet on sliding wheels to slip, some thwart his neck begin
The cables bind, and on the walls now climes the fatal ginne.
With armor freight, about him runs of boys and gyrles the skul
With songs and himpnes, and glad goth he that hand may put to pull.
It enters, and a front the town it flydes with thretning sight.
O country soil? O house of gods? thou Ilion, O the might
Of doughty Trojan walls in war, for there four times a ground
It swaied, and four times through the womb was harneis hard to sound.
Yet we went on, and blind with rage our work we would not let,
But in this cursid monster brought, by Pallas tower to set.
Cassandra a prophetess douphter to king Priam.
Than prophecies aloud to preach Cassandra nothing spares
As god enspierd, but never of us believed who nothing cares.
And wretches we that never day beside that day should bide,
The temples strowd, and through the town great feasting made ye tide.
This while the firmament does turn, and dark night up does rise,
And ouerhides with shadow great both lones, and seas, and skies,
And falshed of the Greeks withal and now along the walls
The weery Troyans laid at rest, the dead sleep on them falls.
When with their fleet in goodly array the Greekish armies soon
From Tenedos were come (for than full freendly shone the Moon)
In silens great their woonted shore they took, and than a flame
Their Amral ship for warning showed, when kept all gods to shame
Sir Sinon out by stelth him stirs, and wide he settes abroad
His horses paunche, and he disclosid straight laith out his lode,
Thersander, Stelenus, and false Ulysses, captains all,
And Athamas, and Thoas eke, by long ropes down shey fall.
Neptolemus Achilles brood, Machaon chief of pride,
The inue^ter of the horse was in it him self.
And Menelae with numbers moo full gladly forth they slide:
And he him self Epeus there this mischief first that found,
The town invade they do forthwith: in sleeps and drinking drowned.
They slew the watch, and than the gates broad up they break, and stands
Their fellows ready to receive, and thick they join their bands.
That time it was, when slomber first and dead sleep deep oppressed
Midnighter.
On weery mortal men does creep, through gods gift sweet at rest.
Unto my sight (as dream I did) all sad with doleful cheer
Did Hector stand, and large him weep with sobbes I might well here,
With horses haled, as blooddy drawn sometime he was in dust,
And al to swollen his worthy feet where through the thonges were thrust.
Alas to think how sore beraied, how from that Hector sore
He changed was, that in Achilles spoils came home before,
Or when among the ships of Greece the fires so fierce he flong.
But now in dust his beard bedaubd, his hear with blood is clong.
With naked wounds, that in defense of Troiane walls sustainde
He often had: and me to weep for pity woo constrainde,
With heavy voice me thought I spoke, and thus to him I plaind.
Aeneas to Hector in vision.
O light of Troy, O Trojan hope at need that never failde,
What country thee so long has kept? what cause has so preuailde?
That after slaughters great of men, thy town, thy people tierd,
With sundry pains and dangers past, thee long (so sore desierd)
At last we see? what chance unkind thy face before so bright
Has made so foul alas? and why of wounds I see this sight?
He nothing hereto spoke, nor me with vain talk long delayed,
But heavy from his breast he fet his deep sight, than he said.
Flee flee thou goddess son, alas, thy self save from these flames,
The walls ar won (quod he) the Greeks of Troy pull down the frames.
For Priam and our country dear our duty is don, if hand
Or man's relief might Troy have kept, by this hand had it stand.
And now religions all to thee with Gods does Troy betake,
New fortune thou and they must seek: thou unto them shall make
More mighty walls, wha^ through the seas long iourneis have you take.
So said, and with his hands me thought he from their altars drew
The mighty gods, and all their fires aye lasting out he threw.
By this time diverse noise abroad through all the town is steerd,
And wailinges loud, and more and more on every side appeerd.
And though my father Anchises house with trees encompast round
Stood far within, yet brim we hear the noise, and armours sound.
Therewith I wooke, and up the tower I clymbe by stairs on hie.
And laid mine ear, and still I stood about me round to spy.
And even as fire in boystrous wind some country ripe of corn
Does burn, or as a mountain flood with great force down has borne
The grain, the grass, the toil of me^, that plowes and beasts have wrought,
And trees it hedlong draws withal, for stones it forces naught,
The plowman wayling from the rock beholds and hears the sound:
Right so this woeful sight I saw, and Greekish treasons found.
And now the great house down was fallen by fire that wild does fly
Of Deiphoebus furst, and next, his neighbor burns on hie
Vcalegon, and shores and strondes with blasings shines about.
And shriking shoutes of people rise, and Trompets blown are out.
Amasid I mine armor took, nor what to do I wust,
But hedlong ran, and through the throngs to fight I thought to thruff.
And to the castleward I hied more aid to call me nie.
With anger wood, and faier me thought in arms it was to die.
Behold where skaping from the Greeks, and through their weapons past
Does Panthus run, that of the tower was Phoebus priest, and fast
His relikes with his conquered gods he hare, and him beside,
His Neuew small he haling drew, and swift to shoreward hied.
Panthus? where goth the worst: what shift: what tower is best we take?
Skant had I said, when he all straught in cries this voice out brake.
Our utter hour is comen alas, fell destnies death has brought.
We have been Troyes when Ilion was, our glories great to naught
The spiteful gods have ouerturnd our pomp, our town, our toures,
The city burns, and who but Greeks ar lords of us and ours.
The hougy horse abroad his men in harneis pourith out,
And Sinon over all triumphs, and fires he throws about
With conquest wide, and every gate is filled with peoples armde,
With thousands such as out of Greece so thick they never swarmde:
The straytes in every streate they keep, the ways with wepons pight,
And stout in ranks they stond with steel fast bent to death in fight:
Skant does the watch that keep the towers, resist with feeble might.
This when I heard, no longer hold my self I could, but right
Into the flames and weapones flew, where most resenibling hell
Men roaring made, and where with cries to heaven the people yell.
Than Ripheus him self adioynd, and mighty most with lance
Came Iphitus unto my side, by moonelight met by chance.
And Hipanis, and Dimas eke, and about me flock they more,
With young Choroeb duke Migdons son, that few days than before
To Troy was come, Cassandras love with wood desire to win:
And socour than for Priam brought to assist her Trioan kin.
Unhappy man, that what his spouse him rauing told in trance:
Would not regard.
Aeneas to his company about him.
Whom as I saw to batell bent, thus bold me clustre about:
I thus began. O lusty youth of valiant hearts and stout,
In vain, if into dangers most attempting after me
You mind to roonne, the state of things and fortune here ye see:
The temples left and seats alone, and altars quite forsake,
The Gods whereby this empier stood ar gone, you undertake
A city burnt to seek to save, what shall we do? but die
Like men, and in the midds of arms and wepons let us fly.
One chief relief to conquered men is desperately to try.
When this the young men heard me speak, of wild they waxid wood,
And than like wolves whom hunger drives to rauine for their food,
In cloudy mistes abroad to raunge, their whelps with hungry jaws
Them bides at home, and they for rage do run to feed there mawes.
Even so through thick and thin we flang, through foes and wepons pight
To doubtless death, right through the streets encompast al with night.
Who can the slaughters of that night with tongue declare? or wh^
With worthy tears can tell the toil that death men drove unto?
The city falth that ancient long and many a year the crown
Has borne, and every street is strowed with bodies beaten down,
And heaps in every house there lies, and temples all ar filde
With bodies dead, and not alone the Trojans poor ar kilde.
Sometime when tyrid ben their hearts their manful stomachs steeres,
And down their conquerours they quell, on every side apeeres
The fearful dreede, and wailing wide, and face of death at hand.
Androgeos a Greek.
There furst against us of the Greeks with men a mighty band
Androgeos us met, and thought his contreymen we were.
All on aware, and like a friend he called us void of fear.
Set forward sirs: what triflyng thus so long you linger makes?
When other men the burning town does sack, our fellows takes
The spoils of Troy while you for flouth scant from your ships can pas.
He said, and straight (for answer non that liked him given there was)
All suddenly amids his foes him self betrapt he knew,
He shrank therewith, and stopped his tale, and foot he backward drew,
As one that vnbethought has hapt some snake among the briers
To tread, and quickly sterting back with trembling fear retiers,
When swollen with angry teene he sees his blew neck bent upright.
So quaking when Androgeos us speed, he took his flight.
But we pursued, and thick with arms them all encompast round
On every side, and them affraied (and nothing knew the gound)
We overthrew, and fortunes luck our first assay succeedes.
Young men proud of the first good luck.
For joy whereof, triumphing fyerce Choroebus nothing dreedes,
Now mates (quod he) where fortune first has showed relief, and where
Our valiant hands our aid has well begoon, proceed we there.
And let us change our sheeldes with Greeks, and armd in Greeks array:
Let us set on, what skilles it force or falsehood enmies slay?
Our enemies lo their weapons yeeldes against them selfs to fight,
So said, and on his head he puttes Androgeos helmet bright,
And with his gorgebus sheeld him self he clad full gay to bear,
Policy in aparaunce,
And on his side the Greekish sword he comely gyrt did wear.
So Ripheus, so Dymas does him self, and therwithall
The youth of Troy with Greekish spoils them deckes both great and small.
God led them.
Than mixed among the Greeks we gone, our selfs us does not gyde,
And many a skirmish sore that night we blindly fought and tryde.
And many a Greeks to Hell we sent, some other away for fear
To shipboarde ran, and some to shores with coursyng here and there.
Some foul afraid their hougy horse again do clime, and take
Their wonted seats, and in his paunche their harbrow old they make
Alas, what may mankind prevail when gods him does forsake?
Behold, where haeld by hear and head from Pallas temple sure,
King Priams daughter drawn we see Cassandra virgin pure.
And up to Heaven in vayn for help her glistryng eyes she cast,
Her eyes: for than her tender hands with boltes were fettryd fast.
That sight Choroebus ragyng wood could not him hold to see,
Passion of love and wrath.
But even among the mids he lept, with will to die, and we
Him after sued, and thick in throngs of arms our selfs we thurst.
There from the temples top aloft, with Trojans weapons furst
Our own men us did whelm, where does most piteous slaughter rise,
Our armours falls mystake, and Greekish sheeldes deceived their eyes.
Craft has ill end.
Than all the Greeks when from them take the virgin was, for ire
By flocks on every side with cries invade as wild as fire.
Atridas twayn, and Ajax chief, and egre in armies stout,
And after them their battayles all, and youth of Dolop rout.
None otherwise than when sometime the whirlewinds out are brast.
And sundry storms from sundry coasts are met, and struglyng fast:
Conflicts, both est, and west, and south, that woods with cracking quakes,
And Neptunes fork the fomy seas from botoms wyld up rakes.
And they also whom through the dark, that night we chasyd had,
And overcame by chance before: they first with courage glad
Appeard in sight, and first our sheeldes and armours falls eskried.
They knew, and marking by our soundes our several tongs espied.
There down by heaps the number us threw, Choroebus first of all
At mighty Pallas seat of Peneleus hand does fall.
And fall does Ripheus to ground, the iustest man that was
Gods will must be do^.
Of Trojan kind, and one that most of right and law did pas.
But god of them did otherwise than dispose: and them beside,
Both Hipanis, and Dimas eke were lost and slain that tide.
Their own men through them wepons threw, nor thee o Panthus pure
Thy virtues great, nor Phoebus crown, from death could than assure.
Yet by the flames extreme I swear that all Troy brought to dust,
At your decays I witness take (if truth protest I must)
I never man ne wepon shund of Greeks, ne from you swarued,
If gods will were: my death I sought, and sure my hand deserved.
Than out we brake, both Iphitus and I, and Pelias kind,
The great assault at the kings palais
The one for age, the other Ulysses wound made come behind.
And by the cries to Priams court our king forth with enclind.
There now the battle great was up, as if no place else where
Had felt of war, as die did none through all the town but there.
So ragyng Mars and Greeks up run to houses tops we see,
And posts pulled down and gates up broake beset, that none should flee.
The walls with scalyng ladders laid, and stulps of scaffolds hie,
And up by stayres they clyme, and back they drive the darts that fly
With sheeldes: and battilmentes above in hands they catch and hold.
Against them Trojans down the towers and tops of houses rold,
And rafters up they reaue, and after all attemptes, at last
Those tools for shift at death extreme, to fend them selfs they cast.
The golden beams, their ancient fathers frames of comely sight
They tomblid down, some other allow with wepons pointed bright
At gates and every door does ward, and thick in rancks they stand.
Anon the pallais of our king to help we took in hand,
Our aid to put, and add relief to men with labors spent.
A wail there was, and through the same by postern gate there went
An entry blind, that secret seruid Priams lodginges wide.
Wherthrough sometime when yet in state their kingdoms did abide,
Full often Andromache was wont her self alone to pas
Unto the king and Queen her father and mother in law that was.
Andromache was Hectors wife.
And young Astianax her child his graunsier to she brought.
Therthrough I skope, and up the tops of houses hie I past,
Where down the sely Trojans darts in vain for fainting cast.
A tower that steep upright did stand and hie to skies up reard
Above the roofes from whens all Troy full broad in sight appeard,
And whens the ships and camps of Greeks and tents in times of wars
Men wonted were to view, that tower with ginnes and mighty bars
We vnderheaued, and where the joints and timber beams it bound,
Beneth together at ones we lift, at last it lose from ground
We shogd, and with the shog for heft, with rattling noise and fall
Down over along the Greeks it light, and far and wide withal
Great slaughter makes, but other up steps for them, nor stones this while
Nor kinds of wepons cease thereon.
Pirrhus the son of Achilles.
Before the porch all ramping first at thentry door does stand
Duke Pyrrhus in his brazen harneis bright with burnisht brand.
And glistring like a serpent shines whom poysonid weeds has filled.
That lurking long has under ground in winter cold ben hild.
And now his cote of cast all fresh with youth renewd and pride
Upright his head does hold, and swift with wallowing back does glide
Bresthigh against the sun, and spits with toongs threforked fire.
And hugy Periphas with him, with him Achilles squier
Antomedon, his masters steedes that wonted was to chase,
Than all the youth of Scyrie land ensues, and to the place
They enter thick, and fires about on houses hie they flynge.
Him self in hand among the cheef a twyble great does bring.
And therwithall he through the gates and doors with dints does drive,
And down the brazen posts does pull and timber plancks does cliue.
And now the bars a sonder brast, and ioystes up hewed does fall,
An entry broad, and wyndow wide, is made now through the wall.
There houses far within appears and hals are laid in light,
Aperes king Priams parlours great that ancient kings had dight.
And harneyst men they see to stand at thentry doors to fight.
A wonder full brief description of a city invaded.
But the inner lodgyngs all with noise and woeful waylyng soundes,
With bounsyng thick and larums loud the buildyngs all rebounds.
And howlyng women shoutes, and cries the golden stars do smite.
Than wandryng here and there with dreed through chambers wide affright
The mothers clippe their country posts, and kissyng hold with might.
But Pirrhus with his fathers force on preaseth, neither walls
Nor keepers him therout can hold, with rams and engines falls
The portall posts and thresholds up are thrown and doors of halles,
Than forceing forth they shooue, and through they push, and down they kill
Them first that meets, and every floor with soldiers fast they fill,
Not half so ferce the fomy flood whose rampire banks are torn
With rage outronnes, when diches thwart and piers are ouerborne
With waves, and forth on feelds it falls, and waltring down the vales
And houses down it bears withal, and heardes of beasts it hales.
Neptolemus my self I saw, with slaughters wood to rage,
And brethren twayn Atridas ferce, their furies non could swage.
Queen Hecuba and her hundred daughter laws, and Priam there
With blood I saw defyle the fires, him self to god did rere.
And fyfty paramours he had, and childrens yssewe, told
No number less: the stately spoils and posts full proud of gold
Abroad are thrown, and what the fire does leave the Greeks does hold
The fatal end of Priam now perhaps you will requier.
When he the city taken saw and houses tops on fire,
And buildings broke, and round about so thick his foes to rage:
His harneis on his shulders (long onworn till than) for age
All quaking, on (good man) he putts, to purpose small, and than
His sword him gyrt, and into death and enmies thick he ran.
Amids the court right underneath the naked skies in sight,
And altar huge of sise there stood, and by the same upright
An ancient Laurel tree did grow, that wide abroad was shed,
And it, and all the caruyd gods with broad shade ouerspred.
There Hecuba and her daughters al (pore souls) at the altars side
In heaps together affrayd them drew, like doves when does betide
Some storm them headlong drive, and clipping fast their gods they hold.
But when she Priam thus beclad in arms of youth so bold
Espied: what mind alas (quod she) o woeful husband you
In harneis dight: and whither away with wepons run ye now?
Not men nor wepons us can save: this time does are to bear
No such defense, no not if Hector mine now present were.
Stand here by me, this altar us from slaughters all shall shield,
Or dye together at ones we shall. So said she, and began to welde
Him aged man, and in the sacred seat him set, and held.
Behold where skapyng from the stroke of Pirrhus fers in sight
Polites, one of Priams sons, through foes and wepons pight,
Through galeries along does run, and wide about him spies
Sore wounded than, but Pirrhus after him sues with burning eyes
In chase, and now welnere in hand him caught and held with spear,
Till right before his parents sight be came, than feld him there
To death, and with his gushyng blood his life outright he shed.
There Priamus, though now for woe that time he half was dead,
Him self could not refrayn, nor yet his voice nor anger hold.
But, onto the (o wretch) he cried, for this despite so bold,
The gods (if any justice dwells in heaven or right regard)
Do yield thee worthy thanks, and thee do pay thy due reward,
That here within my sight my son have slain with slaughter vile,
And not ashamd with loathsome death his fathers face to fyle.
Not so did he (whom falslye thou beliest to be thy sier)
Achilles with his enmy Priam deal, but my desire
When Hectors corpse to tomb he gave for gold, did entertayn
With truth and right, and to my realm restorde me safe again.
So spoke, and therwithall his dart with feeble force he threw.
Which sounding on his brazen harneis hoarce, it backward flew,
And on his targat side it hit, where dyntlesse down it hyng.
Than Pirrhus said, thou shall go now ^erfore and tidings bring
Unto my father Achilles soul, Neptolemus and Pyrrhus were brethren.
my do^full deeds to tell.
Neptolemus his bastard is, not I, say this in hell.
Now die, and (as he spoke that word) from the altar self he drew
Him trembling there, and deep him through his sons blood did embrue.
And with his left hand wrapped his locks, with right hand through his side
His glistring sword outdrawen, he did hard to the hiltes to glyde.
This end had Priams destnies al, this chance him fortune sent
When he the fire in Troy had seen, his walls and castles rent.
That sometime over peoples proud, and lands had reingd with fame
Of Asia the emprour great, now short on shore he lies with shame
His head besides his shulders laid, his corpse no more of name.
Than first the cruel fear me caught, and sore my sprites appalde,
And on my father dear I thought, his face to mind I calde:
When slain with grisly wound our king, him like of age in sight
Lay gasping dead, and of my wife Creusa bethought the plight.
Alone, forsake, my house dispoyld, my child what chance had take
I lokyd, and about me vewd what strength I might me make:
All men had me forsake for pains, and down their bodies drew
To ground they leapt, and some for woo them selfs in fires they threw.
And now alone was left but I, when Vestas temple staier
To keep, and secreetly to lurk all couching close in chaier
Dame Helen I might see to sit, Helen that was cause
bright burnings gave me light
Where ever I went, the ways I past, all thing was set in sight.
She fearing her the Trojans wrath, for Troy destroid to wreke
Greeks turmentes, and her husbands force whose wedlock she did break
The plage of Troy, and of her country monster most vntame:
There sat she with her hatyd head, by the altars hid for shame.
Straight in my breast I felt a fire, deep wrath my heart did strain
My contreis fall to wreke, and bring that cursid wretch to pain.
What shall she? into her country soil of Sparta, and hie Micene?
All saufe shall she return? and there on Troy triumph as Queen?
Her husband, children, country, kin, her house, her parents old
With Trojan wifes and Trojan lords, her slaves, shall she behold?
Was Priam slain with sword for this? Troy burnt with fire so wood,
Is it herefore that Dardan strondes so often have swet with blood?
Not so: for though it be no praise on woman kind to wreke,
And honor none there lies in this, nor name for men to speak:
Yet quench I shall this poison here, and due deserts to dight.
Men shall commend my zeal, and eas my mind I shall outright.
This much for all my peoples bones, and country flames to quite.
Venus let him to kill Helene.
These things within my self I tossed, and fierce with force I ran?
When to my face my mother great, so brym no time till than
Appearing showed her self in sight, all shining pure by night.
Right goddess like, with glory such as heavens beholdes her bright.
So great with majesty she stood, and me (by right hand take)
She stayed, and red as rose with mouth these words to me she spoke.
My son, what sore outrage so wild thy wrathful mind up steeres?
Why fretst thou? or where away thy care from us withdrawn apeeres?
Not first unto thy father see? whom feeble in all this woe
Thou have forsake? nor if thy wife does live thou know, or no,
Nor young Ascanius thy child? whom thronges of Greeks about
Does swarming run, and were not my relief, withouten doubt
By this time flames had up deuourd, or swords of enmies kylde.
It is not Helens face of Greece this town (my son) has spilde,
Nor Paris is to blame for this: but gods with grace onkynde,
This wealth has ouerthrown, and Troy from top to ground outwynd.
Behold, (for now away the cloud and dymme fog will I take
That over mortal eyes does hang, and blind thy sight does make)
Thou to thy parents heast take heed (dread not) my mind obey.
In yonder place where stones from stones, a^ bildings huge to swey
Thou see, and mixed with dust and smoke thick streams of reekings rise:
Himself the God Neptune that side does turn in wonders wise
With forck thretinde the walls vprootes, foundations al to shakes,
And quyte from under soil the town with groundworkes all up rakes.
On yonder side with furies most dame Juno fiercely stands,
The gates she keeps, and from their ships the Greeks her friendly ba^des
In armor gyrt she calls.
Lo there again where Pallas sittes on fortes and castle towers,
Gorgon was a monster. that kyld men with loking only.
With Gorgons eyes in lightning clouds inclosid grim she loures.
The father god him self to Greeks their mightes and courage steres
Him self against the Trojan blood, both gods and armor reres.
Betake thee to thy flight (my son) thy labors end procure,
I will thee never fail, but thee to resting place assure.
Thus said she, and through the dark night shade her self she drew from sight.
Appears the grisly faces than, Troys enmies ugly dight
The mighty powers of Gods.
Than verily right broad I saw whole Ilion castles sink
In fires, and vpsodown all Troy from botom turn to brinke.
And like as on the mountayn top, some ancient oak to fall
The plowmen with their axes strong do strive, and twibles tall
To grubbe, and round about has hewd: it thretning from above
Does nodde, and with the branches wide al trembling bendes to move.
Till overcome with strokes at last, all cracking down to fall,
One wound it overthrows, and ground it draws and rocks with all.
Than down I went as god me led through flames and foes to try.
All weapons as I pas, give place, and flames away do fly.
But when into my fathers mantion house I came, and there
His father would not flee.
Him first I thought to shift, and up the mountains next to bear:
My father after Troy destroyed no longer life desiers,
Nor outlawe would he non become. O you whose youth requiers
To live, and blood in lust vpholds (quod he) your lymmes to weelde
Take you your flight.
For as for me, if Gods above would life have had me led,
This place they would have kept me: enough to much, and ouerhed
Of slaughters have we seen, our city brent we do survive.
Go fourth, let me remain (I pray) for me do you not strive.
Mine own hand shall my death obtein, my foe will rue my plight,
My corpse he can but spoil, for of a grave the loss is light,
of all this war. Anchises was stryken with lighning in his youth.
This many a year to Gods abhord unwieldy life I find,
Since time when me the father of Gods and king of all mankind
Beblasted with his lightning wynd, and fires on me did cast.
Thus spoke he, and in his purpose still he fixed remainyd fast.
We therageinst with streaming tears, my wife also she stood,
Ascanius, and our household all, we prayed that in that mood
All things with him good father turn he nold, nor slaughter make
Outright of all, nor us to death and destnies fell betake.
He still denied, and stif his mind nor purpose would forsake.
Again to wepons fourth I flewe, and death most miser call:
For counsel what? or what relief, or fortune now can fall?
Think you that I one foot from hence, you father left behind
Can pas? or may there such a sin escape your mouth unkind?
If nothing of so great a town to leave the Gods be bent:
And fixed in mind you have decreed Troys ruynes to augment
With loss of you and yours, agreed, at this door death does stand,
And here anon from Priams blood comth Pyrrhus hot at hand,
That chyldern in their fathers sight, and father on the altar killes.
For this O mighty mother mine through fires and foes and bills
Have you me kept til now for this? that in my parlour flores
Mine enmyes I must see to kill my folks within my doors?
Ascanius my child? my wife Creusa? my father old?
All sprauling slain with blood in blood embrued shall I behold?
Weapons servant, bring me wepons, our last hour does us call,
And yield me among the Greeks to fight, let me to battails fall
Afresh, for never shall we die this day vnuenged all.
Than me with sword again I girt, my left arm under sheeld
I put, and out at doors I ran with rage to fight in feelde.
A periful meting.
Behold at thentry gate my wife, embracing both my feet,
Does kneel, and up to me she holds my child Ascanius sweet.
If toward death thou go, take us with thee to chances all,
If socour ought or hope thou findst in arms, than first of all
Defend this house, to whom forsakst thy child Iule alas?
To whom thy father leauest, and me sometime thy wife that was?
Thus wailing al our house she filde, thus cried she through the halles.
When suddenly (right wonder great to tell) a monster falls.
For even between our hands and right before our face in sight,
A vision of fire came out of his sons head.
Behold, from out Ascanius top a flame arisith bright,
And harmeles lickes his locks, and soft about his temples feed,
We straight his burning hear ga^ shake, all trembling dead for dreede
And waters on the sacred fires to quench anon we sheede.
But than my father Anchises glad, to heaven does lif^e his eyes
With hands vpthrown against the stars, and voice exalted cries.
Almighty Jove (if man's respect or prayers do regard)
Behold us now this ones, and (if our deeds deserve reward)
From hensforth father help us send, and bless this grace with more.
Skant from his mouth the word was past, when skies aloft to rore
Begin, and thonder light was thrown, and down from heaven by shade
A streaming star descends, and long with great light makes a glade.
A token from heaven to bid him flee.
We looking, brim behold it might, and over our house it slipps,
And forth to Ida woods it went, there down it self it dipps,
Us pointing out the way to flee, than straking light along
Does shine, and broad about it smokes with sent of sulphur strong.
Than straight my father overcome, him self aduauncing welds.
And prays his gods, and worship to that blessed star he yelds.
Now now no more I let, lead where ye list, I will not swerve.
O country gods our house uphold, my neuew safe preserve.
This token yet is yours: yet Troy in your regard remaynes.
I yield me son, nor further stay with thee to take all pains.
So spoke he, and now about our walls the fires approaching sounds
At hand, and nere and nere the flames with fervent rage redounds,
Dear father now therefore your self set on my neck to bear,
My shulders shall you lift, this labor me shall nothing dear,
What ever chance betides, one danger both we must abide,
In saufty both a like we shall be sure, and by my side
He appointed where they shall meet.
My child Iule shall go, my wife shall trace aloof behind.
You servants what I say take heed, imprint it well in mind.
There is a hill when out the town ye come, and temple old
Of Ceres long vnvsid, there beside ye shall behold
An ancient Cipers tree to grow, that for religions sake
Our fathers there did set, and there long time did honor make.
In that place out of diverse ways we all shall seek to meet.
Took his images with him,
You father take your country gods in hand, our comfort sweet.
For me, that from the battles fresh am come and slaughters new,
I may not them for sin presume to touch, till waters dew
With floods has washed me pure.
Thus said I, and on my shulders bread and thwart my neck I kest
A weed, and in a lions skin full read my self I dressed.
And under burden fast I sled, my child my right hand kept
Iule, and after me, with pace unlike in length, he stepped.
My wife ensued, through lanes and crokes and darkness most we past.
And me, that late no shoutes, nor cries, nor noise, nor wepons cast
Could fear, Anchises espied enemies coming after.
nor clusters great of Greeks in throngs aghast could make:
Now every wind and puff does move, at every sound I quake,
Not for my self, but for my mate, and for my burdens sake.
And now against the gates I came, which out of danger found,
I thought I well escapid had, when suddenly the sound
Of feet we hear to tread, and men full thick my father skand.
Flee flee my son (he cried) lo here they come, lo here at hand,
Their harneis bright apeares, and glystring sheeldes I see to shine.
There what it was I not, some chance or God (no friend of mine)
Amasyd than my wit, for while through thick and thin I pas,
And from the accustomd ways I draw to seek to skape (alas)
My wife from me most woeful man Creusa beloved best,
(Remain she did, or lost her way, or sat her down to rest,
He lost his wife.
Onknowen it is) but after that in vain her all we fought.
Nor of her loss I knew, nor back I lokid or bethought:
Till onto Ceres temple old and ancient seat, each one
Was come, and there togithers met we all, but she alone
Did lack, and there her friends and child and husband did begyle.
What man or god (for anger mad) did I not curse that while?
Or what in all that town vpturnd saw I so fore befall?
My father and my child Iule and Trojan gods withal
Onto my men I took, and in a crokyd vale them hid,
Again unto the city gyrt in glystring arms I yede,
All chances there again to try my mind I fixed fast,
All Troy for her again to seek, my life to dangers cast.
First back vuto the walls and gate I turn, and thentry blind
Where out I came I sought, and steps of feet I mark behynd,
Where night to see could serve, and fires that glistring shines about.
Great fear on every side I see, the silence makes me doubt,
My house at home, if happily there, if happily there she heelde.
I went to look, the Greeks were in, and houses all they fylde.
Devouring fire does all consume, from house to house it flies.
The wynd encreasith flames, and up the rage to heaven does rise.
To Priams court I turn, and to the castle view I cast.
The temples great were spoylde, and Iunos holy doors were brast.
Amids the flore the keepers stood, the chief of capteines stout,
Both Phoenix and Ulysses false with them their trayn about
The pray did keep, and Greeks to them the Trojan riches brought,
That from the fires on every side was raught: all temples sought
And tables from the gods were take, and basins great of gold,
And precious plate and robes of kyngly state, and treasours old,
And captive childern stood, and tremblyng wifes in long array
Were stowed about and wept.
I ventred eke my voice to lift, and through the glimsing night
The ways with cries I fyld, and Creusas name fulloud I shright.
In vain I called and called, and often again and yet I cried.
Thus seeking long with endless pain and rage, all places tried.
At last (with woeful luck) her sprite and Creusas ghost (alas)
Her soul appeered unto him.
Before mine eyes I saw to stand, more great than wonted was.
I stoinid, and my hear vpstood, my mouth for fear was fast.
She spoke also, and thus fro me my cares she began to cast.
What mean you thus your raging mind with labors sore to move
O husband sweet? these things without the powers of gods above
Has not betide: me now from hence to lead, or by your side
You shall see never more, he does resist that heavens does gyde.
Long pilgrimage you have to pas, huge feelde of seas to ear.
Onto Hesperia land you shall ariue do you not fear,
Where Tyber flood through fertile soil of men does softly slide.
She prophesied to him of an other wife.
There substance great, and kingdom strong, and Queen to wife beside
You shall enjoy, for me thy Creusa dear do weep no more.
To Mirmidons nor Dolop land shall I not now be bore,
Nor to the ladies proud of Greece shall I be servant seen:
Of Dardan and of goddess Venus daughter law.
But me the mighty mother of gods will not from hence to move.
And now fare well, and of our child, for both, keep thou the love.
Thus when she said, I weeping there, and more things would have spoke
She left me, and with the wind she went as thin from sight as smoke,
Three times about her neck I sought mine arms to set, and thrice
In vain her likeness fast I held, for through my hands she flies
Like wavering wind, or like to dreams that men full swift espies
Than to my company at last when night was gone I drew.
And there a multitude of menfull huge and number new
I found, with marvel much, both men and women young and old
A rabble great exyld, and piteouse commons to behold
From every coast were come, and with their goods and hearts assent,
What land or sea so ever I would them lead they were content.
And now from up the mountayn tops the dawning star does rise,
And brings again the day, the Greeks (as best they could devise)
The gates possessed and held, all hope and help was gone: at last
I yielded, and my father took, and up the hill I past.
DEO GRACIAS.
Per Thomam Phaer,
in foresta Kilgerran, mense Iulii. Anno. 1555. Opus Viginti dierum.
The third book of the Aeneidos of Virgil.
The Argument.
When Troy was utterly subverted, Aeneas having gathered together his company
in flight, that remained after the great fire and slaughter, and having
obtained of Atander a fleet of twenty sail: arriueth first in Thracia.
Whereas, when he began to build a city, being terrefied through the prodigious
tokens of Polydorus that was slain by Polymnestor: departs to Delos, and
there taking counsel of the Oracle of Apollo, and being advertised that he
must go to yt land from whence his auncetours first descended: through ye false
interpretation of Anchises his father, arrived in Creta where he began also to
lay the foundations of a City. And being there afflicted with a great plague
of pestilence: was warned by his household Godds in his sleep, that he should
leave Creta, and go to Italy. In which journey, by a tempest he was driven to
ye Islands Strophades, and there much troubled by the Harpyes, and shortly
after arryuyng at Actium: made plays in the honor of Apollo. From thence he
sailed by Corcyra into Epyrus, whereas Helenus ye son of Priamus raygned, that
married Andromache after the death of Pyrrhus. By whom he was courteously
entertained, and admonished by him of the perils which he should substayne both
by sea and land. From thence he sayleth to Tarentum, and passing alonge by the
first shore of Italy; arriueth on that side that lies near to the Mount
Aetna, and there he receaueth Achaemenides who was left in the Cyclops den by
Ulysses, anon from thence he hoyseth sail as Helenus commanded, and passes
by Scylla and Carybdis. And coastyng along the shore of Scycilye takes lance
at Drepanus, where Anchises partly weakened by age, and partly by travail
ended his life. From thence saylyng toward Italy: was driven into Affrike by a
tempestuous weather raised by Aelous, as is expressed in the first book.

When Asia state was overthrown, and Priams kingdom stout
Al gitles by the power of gods above was rooted out,
And down the fortress proud was fallen that Glorious Ilion hight,
And flat on ground all Neptunes Troy lay smoking bread in sight:
To diverse lands and diverse coasts, like outlawd men, compelde
By tokens of the Gods we were, to seek from thence expeld.
And underneath Antander hill, and mountes of Ida name,
In Phrigy land our navy great we wrought and up did frame.
Uncertain whereupon to stay, where destnies us does gyde,
And power of men assembleth fast. Scant summer first we spied:
When sails onto the wyndes to set my father Anchises cries.
Than partyng from my country shores and havens with weepyng cies,
The feelds where Troy did stand I leave, fourth outlaw fare I right
My son my mates and friends with me through deep seas took their flight
My saints my country Gods also that are full great of might.
There lies a land far loof at seas, where Mars is lord, and wheare
Thracia.
The largy feeldes and fertile soil me Thracia called, does ear.
Sometime Lycurgus fearce therein did reygne and empier hold.
An ancient stay to Troy, and like in faith and freendship old
While fortune was. To that I went, and on the crooked shore
Foundations first of walls I laid with destnies luck full sore.
And of my name their name I shoope, and Aeneads them call.
Unto the mother of Gods that time, and heavenly persons all
Great sacrifice I made, for luck my works to prosper new,
And to the king of heaven himself a bright bull down I slew.
A bank by chance by me there stood, where bright as horn of hew
A tree called a mirtill.
Witi, rods upright and branches thick a Myrtill bushe there grew.
I drew me near, and from the ground the green brush up I pull,
Mine altars to adorn therewith with bows and shadows full.
A dreedfull sight and monster (marvel great to tell) I found,
For from the twig that first I brake and roots I rent from ground,
The black blood out does break, and down with tricklyng drops it trils
Defilyng foul the soil, with that for fear my body chilles.
My limbs do quake, my blood for dread does shrink with frosty cold.
Another branch again to pluck with force I waxed bold,
The cause thereof to learn, and see what thing therunder lay.
That other branch again does bleed, Field Nymphs other wise called
faieries.
and black does me beray.
Great things in mind I kest, and straight the feeld Numphes I adore,
And Mars the father great that prince is of that land and shore,
Good fortune me to send, and turn that sight to good they should.
But when the third time twigs to take with greater might I pulled,
And knees against the sand I set with force, what shall I do?
Speak out, or silence keep? a piteous waylyng us unto
Was heard from out the hill, and voice thus gronyng spoke me to.
A voice to Aneas made by Polidorus his neuewe there slain.
Why do thou thus Aeneas me most woeful myser tear?
Abstain my grave to file, from sin thy gentill hands forbear.
I am to thee no stranger borne, nor thus deserve to speed,
This blood thou see from out this stub ywis does not proceed.
Flee, flee (alas) this cursid shore, flee from this greedy land,
For I am Polidore, in this place slain I was with hand,
This bush of darts is grown, and sharp with pricks on me they stand.
Than more with doubt and dread oppressed my mind fro me was past
I stoynid, and my hear vpstert, my mouth for fear was fast.
This Polidore sometime, with gold of weight full huge to tell,
His father Priam king (good man) by stelth had sent to dwell
Unto the king of Thrace, when first to Troy he began mistrust,
A falls king.
When he the city sieged saw, that needs defend he must.
But he when Troy decay began and fortune fourth was past:
The stronger part he took, and ( Agamemnon ayding fast)
All truth he brake, and Polidore of chops, and than the gold
By force into his hands he caught, and held. What can be told?
Or what is it that hunger sweet of gold does not constrain
Men mortal to attempt? when fear my bones forsook again:
Unto the peoples lords I went, and first unto my fire,
The monsters of the Gods I show, their councels I requier.
All they with one assent do bid that cursed land forsake.
To leave that hostrie vile, and ships to wyndes at south betake.
Anon therefore to Polidore a hearse we began prepare,
And huge in heyght his tomb we rear, all altars hangid are
With weeds of mourning hewes, and Cipres trees and black devise, They make
Polidorus obyt.

And Trojan wives about with hear unfold as is their gise.
Great fomy boolles of milk we threw luke warm on him to fall,
And holy blood in basins brought we pour, and last of all
We shright, and on his soul our last with great cries out we call.
Than when the seas we see to trust and wind with pipling sweet
Is out at sowth, and to the seas to saill does call the fleet:
My mates their ships set fourth, and shores with men they mustred al,
To seas we flee, and as we flee, both towns and hills do fall. They went to
the isle of (...).

There is a land in mid sea set whom Neptune dear does love,
And mother of the mermaides eke, that land sometime did houe
In floodes, and to and fro did stray, till Phoebus it did bynd
With lands about, and fixed it fast, and bad defy the wynd,
With Giarus and Miconce (two countries) strongly stayed.
When in we came, our weary ships in haven at rest we laid.
And went to wurship Phoebus town, and gifts with us we bear.
Kings that time were pree stes.
King Anius, king ofmen and Phoebus priest against us there,
His head with holy labels laid and crown of laurel green
Came out, and welcome bad his friend Anchises long unseen.
Than hand in hand we set, and lodging took in houses hie.
I wurship eke the temple there that to that God I spy
Of ancient stone: He makes his prayer to Apollo for knowledge whither to go
O Phoebus bright give me some house to dwell,
Give walls to weary men and town from whence may non expel.
Have mercy upon our blood and save of Troy this last remain,
The leauinges of Achilles wild and Greeks abiectes vnstayne.
Who shall us lead? or where apoint our place it may thee please?
Our rest to take, give token God, enspier our hearts with ease.
Scant this I said, when trembling fast with sodein show to shooue
The Laurel trees began quake, and doors, and thresholdes all do move.
The mount therewith does bend, and up the gates with roaring brekes
Adown to ground all flat we fall, and strait a voice there spekes.
Ye Trojans tough, the ground that you first bare from parents bold:
The same shall you receive again, seek out your grandame old.
For there Aeneas house shall stand, whom contreis all shall dreede.
And childerns child and al their ligne that of them shall proceed.
This Phoebus said, Apollos answer doubtful.
and we for joy great noys and murmur make,
And what those walls should be we scan, and council great we take:
What place it is that Phoebus bids to seek, and where to find,
My father than the stories old of ancient men to mind
Does call, and than, you lords (quod he) lay now to me your ear,
And mark me well, Anchises enterpretes the prophecy to lead to Candy.
for now of me your great hope shall you leare.
Candy from hence in myd sea lies, Jove's ylond great it is.
Where Ida mount does stand, and where first sprang our stock er this.
Ahundred mighty towns they keep, most fruteful soil to till:
From whence our ancient grandsir great (if true report I skill)
King Teucrus issued first, and on the coast of Rhoeta hit.
And there his kingdom first began, Troy was not up as yet,
Cibele a goddess.
Nor Ilion toures did stand, but there in low vales did they dwell.
Cibele wilderness does haunt therein with sounding bell.
And Coribantes beat their brass the moon from clips to cure. Coribantes
people that beat bastns when the moonc is in the clips.

From thence we have that service time we keep with silence pure,
For Lions in that ladies chare their yokes to draw do bear,
Come on therefore, and where the Gods do call, let us go there.
Please we the winds, and fourth to Candi kingdoms let us wend,
The course is not so long (if Jove us luck vouchsaue to send)
Our ships on Candi shore to stand the third day shall we see,
So speaking, on his altars there due honors kill did he,
A bull to thee O Neptune first, a bull to Phoebus bright,
A black beast to the winter storm, to western flaws a white.
There flies a fame that of his fathers kingdoms quite for sake, They hear
that Candi is void of a king.

Idomeneus duke thereof expelde his flight has take.
And all the coast of Candi lies wide open for their foes,
Unfenced, and the towns of people void, so rumor goes.
Anon therefore our havens we left, and through the seas we fly,
By green Donisa, and Naron hills where men to Bacchus cry.
Olearon, and Paron white as snow, and skattrid wide
Of Cicladas we compass lands, that rough seas makes to ride.
The mariners their shoutes up set, each man his mate does bold, Their course
to Candi out of Thracia.

To Candi let us cheerely fare, to seek our gransirs old.
A merry cool of wind them fast pursues, and fourth does drive,
And at the length on Candi coast our ships we do arrive.
My town therefore (with great desire) and walls I gynne to frame,
He bilbeth a town in Candy.
And Pergam I the city call, right glad they take that name,
I courage them that land to love, and towers and temples byld,
And now welneare our ships up set, dry land our navy hyld,
With weddings and with tillage new the youth them selves applies,
And houses eke and laws I gave: when suddenly does rise
Among them (foul) a plage, and piteous murreyn to be thought,
The skies corrupted were, that trees and corn destroyed to naught,
And limbs of men consuming rottes, such year of death them deares
That sweet life of they leave, or long their grievous woe them wears.
A pestilence
The Dog star up does rise, the soil for heat of son does fry,
That grayn and grass up dries, and feelds of food does men deny.
Again to Phoebus holy seat, yet back again our way
Through seas my father bids us turn, and Phoebus mercy pray,
What end of woe to weary men he puttes, and how from pain
His images gave him answer.
Our selfs we may relieve, and where from thens to turn again.
Than was it night, and on the ground all creatures laid a sleep,
The gods of Phrigy land, whom I with me full dear did keep,
Whom from the mids of burning Troy with me I brought in flight
Before mine eyes (as dream I did) I saw to stand upright,
All shyning in their glory bright behold I might them clear,
The way that through my window than the full moan did appear,
They spoke also, and thus from me they lighten began my cheer.
The thing that of Apollo now to know you do entend,
He speaks it here, and us to thee with glad will does he send.
We from the flames of Troy with thee thine army came to gyde.
We under thee with navy great the salt seas broad have tried.
We be the same that to the stars thy ligne shall lift with pride,
And empier great we shall thee give, and city great to rear,
For mighty men make mighty walls, long flight do thou not fear,
Change yet thy place, not here it is that Phoebus bids thee bide,
It is not here to Candy shore Apollo thee did guide.
There is a place the Greeks by name Hesperia do call.
An ancient land and feirce in war, and fruteful soil withal.
Out from Oenotria they came, Thri apoint him to Itali.
that first did till the same,
Now Italy men says is called, so, of the captains name.
There be our dwelling seats from thens king Dardan self was born,
And Iaseus the prince from whom our ligne descends beforn.
Arise, go to, and tell this thing onto thy father dear,
Seek out Italia land, the shores of Corit coast enqueare,
Be bold, proceed for Jove does thee from Candy contreis take.
Astoined I with this was made when gods to me so spoke.
For slomber was it not (me thought) but plain their faces bright,
And folded hear bewrapt I saw, and knew them sure by sight.
With cold sweet all my body than did run, and therwithall
From out my bed I leapt, and straight on knees there down I fall.
By hands to heaven I held, and prayed, and gifts and offerings pure,
In fires to them I threw, and all my duty don with cure:
Anchises I asserteyn than, and him declare the caas.
Anon the doubtful ligne he knew, how he begylid was,
By graunsyrs twain and chrildren twain, Tha^ they knew they had expou^did the
proph^ci wrong.
and places old mistake.
Than said he thus, O son whom Troy by destnies tough does make,
Cassandra alone, of al mankind, these things to me did tell,
These chances of our stock she sang, I now remember well.
Of Italy full often she spoke, often of Hesperia shore.
But who could ever think that time, or this believe before?
That Trojans to Hesperia land should come to dwell at last?
Of prophecies, or who that time of mad Cassandra past?
To Phoebus let us yield, and after warning take the best.
So spoke he, and anon with joy all we obeyed him pressed.
That seat also we than forsake, and (few folk left behind)
With beams through hugy seas we cut, and sails set up for wind.
When to the deep our ships were come, and now on neither site
Appeeres no land, but seas and skies about us broad are spied:
A storm.
A shoure above my head there stood all dusky black with blew,
Both night and storm it brought, and rough the waters dark their hew.
Straight all the seas with winds are tossed, and mighty surges rise,
And through the deepes we to and fro be thrown in wonders wise.
The clouds inclosid have the day: dim night has hid the heaven:
And from the skies the lightning fires do flashe with grisly steauen.
From out our course we be dispersed, and blind in waves we stray,
Eke he him self our master there can skant the night from day
Discern he says so trobleth him the tempest Palinure,
Nor in the waters wyld his way to hold he can be sure.
Three days therefore uncertain where we go, withouten sun
In seas we wander wide, and three nights like in dark we run
Withouten star: the fourth day land to rise we spied at last,
And mountains far in sight are seen, and smoke do seem to cast.
Our sails forthwith do fall, and up with ores, and than anon
The mariners do sweep the seas, and through the foam they gone.
Escaping so the streams on shore at Strophades I light.
At Strophades, for so their names in Greekish tongue does hight.
For Islands in the salt sea great they stand, They ariue at Strophades.
wherein does dwell
Celeno foul misshapen bird, and Harpies more right fell:
Since Phines house from them was shut, their former fare they fled.
A monster more to fear than them, Description of monstrous souls called
Harpies.
nor plage was never bred.
Nor from the pit of hell up start the wreke of god so wild.
Like fowls with maidens face they ben, their paunches wide defilde
With garbage great, their hooked paws they sprede, and ever pale
With hungry looks.
When there we came, and first in haven we entered, lo we see
The heardes of beast full far to feed on every side full free,
And goats also to grase, and keeper none there was to vewe:
Our wepons on them fast we lay, and down them thick we slew.
And banks upon the shore we make, and gods to part we call,
And Jove him self to bless the pray, and fast to meat we fall.
But suddenly from down the hylls with grisly fall to sight,
The Harpies come, and beating wings with great noys out they shright,
And at our meat they snatch, and with their claws they al defile,
And fearful cries also they cast, and sent of savor vile.
Again into a privy place where rocks and caves does hide,
With trees and shadows compast dark our tables we provide.
And altars up again we make, and fires on them we tinde.
Again from out a diverse coast, from holes and lurkings blind,
The preas with crooked paws are out, and sounding foul they fly,
Polluting with their filthy mouths our meat, and than I cry:
That al men weapons take, and with that ugly nation fight.
They did as I them bad forthwith, and in the grass from sight
Their swords by them they laid, and couching close their sheelds they hide.
Than when the third time from the cliues with noise again they glide:
Misenus from aloft with brazen trompet fets a sound.
My mates invade them than, and felt the fight but newly found.
And on the filthy birds they beat, that wild sea rocks do breed,
But feathers none do from them fall, nor wound for stroke does bleed,
Nor force of weapons hurt them can, their backs and wings no spear
Can perce, but fast away they fly, full hie from sight, and there
The pray to us half maunched, and begnawn full foul they leave.
But one of them, Celeno a Harpye.
Celeno, than her self on rocks does heave
Unhappy tale to tell, and thus her loathsome voice she brake.
And is it war (quod she) with us? war Trojans do you make?
And for our cattle slain, do you with us to bataile bend
Pore Harpies, and our kingdom take from us that naught offend?
Take this with you therefore, and well my words imprint in mind.
That God him self to Phoebus said, and I by Phoebus find,
That am the chief of furies all, and thus to you I tell:
To Itali your course you take, when wind shall serve you, well:
In Itali ariue you shall, and haven possess you there,
But power you shall not have your town nor walls thereof to rere
Till famine for your trespass here, and for our cattle slain,
She prophesies: hunger which afterward is fulfilled in the vii. book.
Shall pinche you so, that tables up to eat you shall be feign.
She said, and into woods therewith full fast she took her flight.
But than my mates, their blood for cold did shrink, and sore affright:
Their courage down does fall, and now no wepons more they welde,
But vows and prayers make, and down for peace they kneel in field.
If goddesses perchance they be, or furies, or of seas
Some boistous birds, what ever it is, full fain they would them pleas.
But than my father Anchises up his hands to heaven on hye
Does hold, and to the Gods above with honors great does cry.
O Gods defend this fear, O Gods from this chance us preserve,
God save good men from harm, than from that shore he bids to swerve,
And cables up to wind, and sails up hoys with halsers hie.
The northen wind us blows, and fast through fominge seas we fly.
Where wind does drive, and where our master calls our course to keep. Another
course.

Zacinthous ylond, full of woods, appeeres amyds the deep.
Dulichium, and Samey londs, and cragges of Nerite hye,
Of Ithaca we flee the rocks, and (as we pass them by)
The kingdom of Laertes there, sir false Ulysses nurse,
That land aloof we leave, and it with good cause often we curse.
Anon the point Leucates called, and cloudy tops of hill
Apeeres Apollos point, and coast that shipmen trust full ill.
All wearye there we land, and there the city small we view.
Our ankers out we laid on land, and ships to shore we drew. All this while he
had passed the dangerous plands adjoining to Greece.

Therefore, to main land when we came long lokyd for at last,
Processions great to Jove we make, and altars kyndle fast,
And on the shore in Trojan gise our games and plays we point,
Some wrestling for disport with naked limbs in oil anoint,
And maistries with them selfs they try, great joy they make to se:
That through so many towns of Greeks, and foes they skaped be.
This while the son with compass wide the great year brings about,
And winter winds and northen frosts rough seas does make nien cout.
He set up a monument there with a title.
A sheelde of beaten bras, sometime that Abas strong did wear:
On posts I fired fast and title wrote, and left it there.
Aeneas from the victor Greeks, these arms has offered here.
Than ports I bid them leave, and fursh to sea them selfs to stere
Strait with their ores they sko^m the seas, and salt some through they sweep,
And strait from sight Pheaca towers we hid with mountains steep.
Again to seas.
And round about Epirus cost we run, and than anon
To Chaon haven, and up the town of Butrot hie we gone.
(...) There Helenus (as custom was) furst heysers down he slew,
And prayed his God of peace, and than the labels he withdrew
From of his holy head, and to thy blessed secrets, me
O Phoebus hand in hand he brought, all trembling them to see,
And than with mouth divine he spoke, Answer of Helenus.
both priest and prophet he:
O goddess son, (for greater luck than mankind, through the deep
Does gyde thee thus, and greater might to greater things does keep)
Right true it is, the king of gods him self so destny gydes,
So lots does fall, and so the wheel of fatal order slydes.
Few things of nombers mo, to thee, that bolder through the seas
Thou may endure, and to thy port at last arrive with eas
He deciareth him his courses.
In brief I will declare, for destnies deep I leave ontold,
I know them not, and Juno more to tell my toonge does hold.
First Itali, whom nere at hand onware thou do suppose,
And nere at hand in haven thy rest to take thou do propose:
Far out aloof, and long aloof it lies, in compass sore,
And furst in Sicil stream thou must embathing bend thine ore.
And fleeting in the salt sea foam long coursinges must thou make,
For Circes isle must furst be seen, and lands of Limbo lake,
Ere thou thy city sauf on land may build, and resting find.
Tokens.
These tokens I thee tell, do thou imprint them well in mind.
When thou alone with careful heart shall sit besides a flood,
And se a sow of mighty fise that late has laid her brood,
Beneth a bank among the roots with thirty sucklings out,
All white her self on ground, and white her bratts her dugs about:
There shall thy city stand, there lies thy rest of labors all,
Nor dread thee not the plage that shall of tables eating fall.
The destnies will invent a way therefore, and Phoebus bright
Shawe thine aid, and thee thereof from dangers all acquit.
But yonder coast, and all that land that over next us lies,
Though part of Italy it be, attempt it in no wise.
He bids him fetch a compass.
Leave all aloof, the cursed Greeks all cities there have filled,
One quarter men of Locrus has, and castles strong they bild.
Another were in Salent field, all places pestryng wide,
Idomeneus duke his army keeps, and there beside
Petilia small, whom Philoctetes wall does compass round,
Duke Melybee therein does dwell, and Greeks possess the ground.
He teaches him a new manner of sacrifice.
Mareouer, when the seas ar past, and ships in saufty stand,
And altars thou shall make to pay thy vows upon the sand:
With purple weeds and hoodes of purple hews your selfs attyer,
In purple hyde your heads from sight, before the sacred fire,
For honoar great of Gods: that no unfriendly sign or face,
Of enmytie apeere, disturbing all, and hinder grace.
This custom keep thy self, so let thy mates and all thy train,
In this religion pure also thine offspring shall remain.
But when approaching Scicil coast the wind thee forth does blow,
He shows him of diverse dangers.
And that Pelorus crooked straytes begin them selfs to show:
Than left hand land, and left hand sea, with compass long alee,
Fetch out aloof from londs and seas on right hand, se thou flee.
These places two sometime, by force with bretche and ruins great,
(So Time does alter things, and what is it but Age does eat?)
From soonder fell (men say) when both in one the ground did grow,
The seas brake in by force, and through the mids did overthrow,
Scicil and Italy were sometime but one land.
Both towns and feildes: and Itali forthwith from Scicill side
Did cut, and yet with narow stream and sharp it does deuyde.
The rightsyde Scylla keeps, the left, Caribdis gulf vnmylde,
With gaping mouth she sits, and to her womb the waters wild
Three times to ground she gulps, and thrice the same to skies on hight
By course aloft she lifts, against the stars the surges smight.
But Scylla couching close in cave, if pray she happily finds:
Caribdis, Scilla.
Her head above the stream she holds, and ships in rocks she winds
From shulders up a man she seems, in breast a maiden bright,
But from the nauel down a whale, with ugly shape to sight.
Compacted of the wombs of wolves, and mixed with Dolphins tails
Behind her long they lag, and thus in seas her self she trailes.
Yet better is Pachinus point, and crokes both in and out
By leisure al to seek, and courses long to cast about:
Than once this Scylla monster wyld behold in dongeon foul,
Or hear the roar among the rocks of dogs that there do houle.
Besides all this, if cunning ought of prophecies, or skyll
To Helenus is given, if Phoebus me does truly fill:
One thing to thee thou Goddess son, one thing, and over all
Great persons must be won with humlitie.
One thing I will thee warn, and yet again, and yet I shall.
Dame Iunos Godhode great adore, with heart and prayers meek.
To Juno make thy vows, that lady great and mighty seek
To win with humble gyfts, so shall thou to thy mind at last,
All sauf to Italy aryue, the land of Sicill past.
There when thou comst, and Cumas town thou entrest first at shore,
Where holy lakes, and woods, and floods ( Auerna ^ald) does rore,
A frantike Prophet priest of womankind thou shall behold,
That deep in ground does dwell, The description of Sibill.
and under rocks her self does hold.
And destnies out she sings, and leaves with notes and names she signs.
What ever thing that virgin writes, in leaves and painted lines,
In rymes and verse she settes, and them in caves in raunges couche:
There still they lie, nor from their orders move if nothing touch
But when the door by chance does turn, and wind the corner blows:
Their heaps a sonder fall and forth they fly, and break their rows.
She them to stay, nor from their caves to fly does never let,
Nor seeks them eft to join, nor of her verses more does set.
Away they run, and Syblies house their maystresse seat they hate.
There let no time be lost, but though for have thou thinkist late,
Though al thy mates do call and cry to seas, and wind at will
Allurith forth thy fleet, and sails thou may with puffing fill:
Assaie the prophet first, and her with prayers due beseache,
Thy destnies thee to tell, and chances all by mouth to teach.
Of Italy she shall thee show, and peoples all declare,
And wars at hand, He byds him resort to Sibill.
and how thy self thereto thou may prepare.
And every labor how thou may avoid, or how endure,
And all thy course she will thee tell, that priest and prophet, pure.
These things I may thee show, and this to hear has been thy chance.
Go, play thy part, and mighty Troy to heaven with deeds advance.
Which things, when thus the prophet me so like a freende had told:
Great gifts of Yuery wrought, and treasour great in weight of gold,
He renewes them with furniture.
To ships he bids us bear, and rowmes abourd he made to lade
With silver plenty great, and Plate full rich and massy made,
A gorgeous armor coat also, three folded gilt with hooks
Of gold, and helmet eke, with crest thereon that glistryng looks,
Neptolemus his arms. My father eke has his rewards.
And horses more, and captayns more.
And armor eke unto my mates he gave, and does supply
Our want of Ores, my father all this while does bid them hie,
And sails in order set, that nothing lack when wind does call.
Whom Phoebus prophet spoke unto with these words last of all.
Anchises, whom dame Venus proud in bed did not discayne,
Thou care of gods that twice from Troyes destruction do remain:
Lo Italy, lo yonder it to thee, set up thy fail
And take the same, yet must thou pass by this land out of fail.
That further land it is, He shows them Italy from Sicile but they must go
about.
Appollo shows that further shore.
Go forth, O happy man with such a son, what should I more
Prolong the time in talk? and you from wind that rises keep?
Likewise Andromache no less at parting began to weep.
And robes of rich array, and broyded deep with gold she brought,
A Trojan mantel for Ascanius wondrous gorgeous wrought.
And him with gifts, and weauing works of gold full gay does lade.
Than said she thus: take this of me, mine own hands has it made,
Take this my child, that long with thee my love in mind may last.
She resem bleth him to her own son that was killed.
Of Hectors wife receive thy friends good will, and tokens last,
O figure, next Astianax, alone to me most dear.
So he his eyes, so he his hands, so like he bare his cheer,
And now alike in years with thee his youth he should have led.
Than parting thus to them I spoke, and tears for weeping shed.
Now fare ye well, O happy men, whose fortunes end is past.
New destnies us does call, and we from care to care ben cast.
Your rest is ready won, no feeld of seas you have to ear,
To seek the land that back does always flee you need not fear,
Your city fair in fashion like to Troy and Xanthus old,
Your river like, and bildings worthy praise you do behold.
Your proper hands them made, the frames thereof your selves do rear
With better luck (I trust) and less shall need the Greeks to fear.
If ever I to Tyber flood and fields of Tyber fayer
May come, and see my city bylt, whereof I not despayer:
Two freendly towns hereafter, that and this, Aeneas be fore his de parture
makes a leage perpetual between their issue.
both near of kynne,
Two peoples neighbor like shall dwell, and friendship fast betwinne
Epirus and Italia land, whose founder both of name
King Dardan is, one blood we be, and chance have had the same.
And now of both one Troy to make in mind let us prepare,
And to our offspring after us likewise we leave the care.
In seas we went, and at Ceraunia near our selfs we put.
Again to seas and rested awhile under a mountain.
From whence Italia lies, and shortest course there is to cut.
The son this while does fall, and shadows great does hide the hills,
We spread our selfs on land, and laid us down with gladsom wills,
When ships to shore was brought, and chere we make on corners all
Our weary lymmes we fresh, and slomber sweet does on us fall.
Lodesma^.
Nor yet from us the midnight hour his compass quite had run:
When Palinurus quick from couche himself to stere begone,
To feel the wind, and quarters all with ears attentif harks.
And every star that still does stand or moves in heaven he marcks,
The wayne, the plowstar, and the seven that storms and tempests poures,
Orion grym with fauchon great of gold also that loures.
When all thing sure he sees, and al thing faier in skies above,
From shipbourd loud he gives a sign, we than our camp remove,
The way we seek to keep, and wings of sails full hye we houe.
And now the morning read does rise, and stars expulsid be,
When far aloof with mountains dim, They epsy Italy.
and low to look, we see
Italia land. Italia first of all Achates cried.
Italia than with greeting loud my mates for joy replied.
Anchises than my father, Anchises prayer at the sight of Italy.
straigt a mighty boll of gold
Did crown, and fill with wine, and up to Gods on hye did hold,
Auauncing forth in ship.
O gods, that londs and seas, and tempests great have might to gide:
Vouchsafe your grace to send, and speed us fast with wind and tide.
The wind at wish does blow: They entered a haue^ of Italy tosacrifice to their
gods on the la^d.
and haven more open now is near,
And Pallas temple tower to us does broad in sight appear.
My fellows made to shore, and down their sails they do bestow,
The port lies in from estern seas, and crokith like a bow,
A front it rocks do stand, and salt sea foam about them falls,
But close it self it lies, on either side mith hugy walls
Two rocky towers arise, the temple shrinks away from shore.
There for a luck four horses first I saw to feed in gras,
The ground with teeth they share, and white as snow their color was.
My father than Anchises: war (O country quod land he)
Thou thretnest war, these beasts betoken war, right well I see.
But than again, for in the cart I see they wonted were,
Luck and balucke.
To draw like matches meet, and glad their bitts and yokes to bear,
I hope of peace (he said) than last our blessed gods we pray.
And Pallas great in war, that first us did receive that day.
And heads with purple hoodes before the fires in Trojan gist
We hid from sight, as Helenus with great charge did advise,
And unto Greekishe Juno there, with gifts and honors new
We sacrifice, Again to sea for they must go about to come to Tiber
and after all things don with order dew:
Our shroudes aloft we lift, and sails abroad on hie we heave.
Anon the Greekishe towns, and country sore suspect we leave.
Than pass we by Tarentum baye, where Hercules sometime
(If men's report be true) did dwell, and there against does clime
Lacima goddess seat, and towers of Caulon castles hie.
And than to Scillas wrackfull shore with ships approach we nie.
Than from the flood a far, Aetna the burning mou^tain in Scicille.
we do the mountain Aetna see,
And hugy noise of seas we here, and stones that beaten be
Against the cliues, and flapping voice of waves and water sounds,
The surges ^eapes aloft, and from the sands they stere the grounds.
Than said my father Anchises, lo, here is Charibdis hold,
These stones did Helenus declare, Scilla and Caribdis ii. dangers.
these ghastly rocks he told.
O mates, lay to your might, and us with ores from hens remove.
They did do his command, and Palinurus first above,
His tacle to the left hand set, and stern to left hand wried:
To left hand all my mates their ships, with winds and ores aplied.
As hie as heaven we rise, with mounting waves, and therwithall
When down we come, onto the souls of hell we think we fall
Three rorings loud among the rocks we heard and surges flashe.
And thries the falling foam to break, and stars we saw to wash.
This while the wind our weary fleet forsook, so did the sun,
And onaware, on Ciclops coast from out our curse we run.
A haven right large there is, Discriptio^ of Aetna.
whom force of wind can never move,
But Aetnas brasting noise, and grisly thondring, rores above.
Sometime therout a blustering cloud does break, and up to skies
All smokin black as pitche, with flakes of fires among it flies,
And flames in foldings round, to sweep the stars, the mouth does cast,
Sometime, the rocks and mountains deep entrails, a sonder brast:
It belching, bolkith out: and stones it melts, and up it throws
In lompes with rearing noise, and low beneth the botome glowes.
Enceladus (men say) half brent, (some time,) with lightning blast
A Giaunt.
Is pressyd here with weight, and Aetna houge on him is cast.
Whose flaming breath along those furneis chimneis up does rise.
And when his weery side he happs to turn, in wonders wise
All Scicil land does shake with noise, and smoke does close the skies.
Wonderful noises by night in that wilderness.
That night in woods with straungy sightes and monsters far from kind
We troublid were, nor cause of all that nois or sound we find.
For neither star nor light in skies there was, nor welcken clear,
Nor yet for clouds and tempest dim, the Moon could ought apeere,
The morning next does rise at east, and light abroad was spread,
And from the skies the drowping shade of night away was sled:
When suddenly, from out the woods, with flesh consumyd lean,
A desperate man came to them.
A straungy man to sight apperes, in piteous form vneleane.
To us he came, and down did kneel, with hands abroad vpthrown.
We lokyd, foul araied he was, his beard was ouergrown
His vesture rent with thorns, and like a Greek in weed he went,
And was sometime among the Greeks to Troy in armor sent.
He when that Trojan enseignes out, and arms of Troy beheld,
Affraied, he pawsyd first, and still him self a while he held.
Anon in have, all hedlong down he roonnes, and prayers meek,
With tears he wayling makes. Now by the stars I you beseeke,
By all the Gods, and by this breath of heaven that men do feed:
Take me from hence (O Trojans) where ye list away me led,
To lands, or seas, I recke not where, I know my self a Greek,
And in their ships I came, the spoil of Troy your town to seek.
For which, if my offense so great deseruith such a wreke:
In floodes do you me drown, or al my limbs in waters break.
If mankind me does kill, it does me good my life to loose.
So said he, and his knees before us still he keept in woofe.
What man he was we bid him straight to tell, what kindred born,
And what him ailes, and why he lokes so like a man forlorn.
My father Anchises gave to him his hand him self anon,
And bad him comfort take, for harm of us he should have non.
He set his fear aside, and thus his tale proceeded on.
I am a man of Ithaca, Achaemenides tells them his hard adventure.
Ulysses woeful mate.
My name is Achaemenides, to Troy I came but late.
My father sent me there, and Adamastus is his name,
Of poor estate, I would we yet continued had the same,
For in this place, when all my fellows fled this coast unkind
For have, in Cyclops dungeon wide, they left me here behind.
A bloody shop, where slaughters vile, and deynties foul do styncke:
But houge and broad within: but he him self is worse to think,
The stars he reatcheth: Ciclops were Giauntes.
such a plague God from this world defend.
No heart can him behold, nor toongue in talk can comprehend,
On fleash of men he feeds, and wretches blood he gnawes and bones,
I saw my self, when of my fellows bodies twain at ones,
With mighty hands he caught, and grouelyng on the ground outright
Against a stone he brake them both, the dongeon floor in sight
Did swim with blood, I saw the blood, and filthy slauer drop
From out his mouth, when he with teeth their quakyng limbs did chop
But paid he was, nor there Ulysses in that danger great
This mischief could sustain to see, nor did him self forgeat.
For when he gorged had him self with meats and drinkyng drowned, How
Poliphemus eye was put ont.

He bowed his neck to sleep, and there he lay along the ground,
An hideous thing to sight, and belching out the gubbes of blood,
And lompes of flesh with wine he galpyd fourth, we all vpstood,
And prayed our Gods for help, and all atones him round about
We spread our selfs, and did his eye with weapons sharp put out.
His mighty eye, that on his frowning face full broad he held,
In compass like the son, or like a Greekish armyng sheld.
And thus our fellows lives at last full glad we be to wreke.
But flee (alas) O caitiues, flee, and fast from shore do break
Your cables.
For of the sort that Poliphemus is in dongen deep,
And closyth beasts, and strangers all does kill, and milketh sheep:
A hundred more a long this crooked coast, of Ciclops fell
Among these mountains hie do stray, and deep in dens they dwell.
Three times the moon her light has filde, and thrice her light exilde:
Since I my life in woods, and hauntes of beasts and monsters wild
In wilderness do lead, and Ciclops hie from holes and rocks
All quaking I behold, and of their feet I fear the knockes.
For hunger, floes has been my food, and mast on trees I found
And Hawthornes hard, and roots of herbs I rent from out the ground.
All things about I spied, this fleet at last on sea, I see.
What ever it were, I did my self bequeth thereto to flee.
And now escapyd from this wickid kind, I am at eas.
Destroy me rather you, and give to me what death you pleas.
Skant had he said his tale, when on the mountain tops above,
Him self among the beasts we see, with boystous noise to move.
They see the Giau^t.
That ugly Poliphemus, and to shore him selfenclind.
A monster foul, mischapen, lothsom great, vneeied, and blind.
A post in hand he bare of mighty Pyne, and therwithall
He felt his way, and led his sheep, there was his comfort all.
About his neck a pype there hong, his grief therewith to eas.
When to the floodes he came, and set his foot within the seas,
From out his grievous eye, thee blood he washed and poison foul
With gnasshing teeth for woe, and loud for woe began to houle.
And through the streamy waves he stamping goth, and yet above
His breast is nothing wete, and thus him self in sea does houe.
We all affrayd in have away do flee, and up we take
Our gest as worthy was, and soft our cables of we brake.
They flee.
Than sweep we through the seas, and ores we pull with might and main
He heard us, and against the sound, he turning stepped again.
But when with hand on us to gripe, he could not have his retche,
Nor wading through the deep of seas, us back he could not fetch:
A roaring loud aloft he liftes, whereat the seas, and all
The waters shook, and lands therewith affrighted began to pall
Of Italy, and Aetna mount did yell as it would fall.
But from the woods, all Ciclops kind, in swarms on every hill
The giau^tes gather.
Arose and to the ports they run, and shores along they fill.
We saw them stand (but harm they could not do) with louring eyes,
The brethren grym of Aetna mount, their heads were up to skies,
And ugly council, like in sight for number to behold,
Onto a forest great of oaks, or trees of Cipres old,
Or like Dianas wood that hie to heaven their tops does hold.
All headlong fear enforfith us to flee, nor way we know,
But fourth to seas in have we flew where wind us list to blow.
But than again king Helenus commaundments did us stay,
To keep between Charibdis gulf, and Scilla middle way.
Between them both we past with danger great, an glad we were,
If course we could not keep, yet back again we thought to bear.
Behold, a northen blast from out Pelorus mouth was sent,
The wind help the^.
Therewith Pantagia stony cragges I past incontinent.
And Megarus and all those bays where Tapsus low does lie
I left them all, and through the seas withwind at will I fly
These places us repeted than, where left he had beforne,
Pore Achaemenides, Ulysses mate unlucky borne.
Against the race of Scicil land, there lies in seas an isle
Plemmyrium of ancient men it hight, but later while
Ortigia.
Ortigia does it call: the fame is, how Alphaeus brook
By secret ways, His long course about scicil.
all under seas to this land passage teke.
And here it brastyth out, and Arethusas mouth it meets.
And therwithall to Scicil seas it ronnes, and fourth it fleetes.
The blessed gods that in that place do dwell we honor than,
And strait Elorus fertile soil we past, and fourth we ran,
Than through the rocks that steep do stand against Pachinus nookes
Our ways we share, with labors great we overcame the crookes
Than Camerina poole whom destnie never grant to move,
And Gelas town full great, and Gelas hills apeeres above.
Than Agragas his gorgeous walls aloof sets out on hie:
Where horses feerce sometime did breed, the towers a far we spy.
And thee with all thy dates Selinus soon I left behynd.
And Lilibeas lurking stones and sholdes I passyd blind.
Than haven at Drepanus I took, in that vngladsome shore: Hetooke haven at
Drepanus in Scicill and there dyed his father.

When dangers all of seas and tempests great were past before:
Alas my father, there, my only joy in care and woe,
Anchises I do lose (alas) he there departes me fro.
There me, O father dear, in labors all thou do forsake.
Alas in vain from dangers all of seas thou have ben take.
Nor Helenus when he to me great fearful things did tell,
These waylings did forspeake to fall, nor yet Celeno fell. Going fro Scicill
the storm took him as in the first book appears.

This is my labor last, there was my journey long at end.
From thence departing now does god me to your contreys send.
So lord Aeneas, to them all ententife to behold,
The destnies of the Gods did show, and all his courses told,
He stayed at last, and making here an end, did silence hold.
DEO GRATIAS.
Per Thomam Phaer,
in foresta Kilgerran. x. Octobris. Anno. 1555. Opus Viginti dierum.
(...) Getula towns, a people wyld in wars, and uncontrolled,
And sturdy Moors on every quarter closes, and beside,
The sands of Sirtes coast, and wilderness both long and wide,
And deserts dry, where saluage men of Barcey broad do stray.
Than of the wars of Tyrus now that rise, what should I say?
And of your brothers threatenings?
I hope the gods of purpose good, and mighty Iunos grace:
Has made the winds to bring the Trojan ships into this place.
What city sister shall you see of this? what empier grow?
When Trojan arms to us are knit, and men this wedlok know?
With what renown and glory great shall Affrike think you rise?
Do you your gods of pardon first beseeke (I thus advise)
And after service don, do him in gestwise entertain,
And causes find from day to day to make him here remain,
While winter wind endures, and while the skies have laid their rage,
And while the ships reparing ben, and force of seas aswage.
With this her burning mind incensyd more began to flame,
And hope in doutfull heart she caught, and of she kest her shame.
First unto temples all they gone, and peace on altars all
They pray their gods to give, and slaughters down they make to fall,
To Ceres first that laws did give, to father Bacchus pure,
To Phoebus, and to Juno chief that has of wedlocks cure.
Her self with boll in hand, Queen Dido Queen most fresh of hew
The wine between the hefers horns (so white as snow) she threw,
Or at the stagys great of gods with gifts and vows she walks
The manner was than to know fortunes by lokig upon the inward parts of their
slain sacrifices and by sothsaiers. A lover like a wounded dear.
With musing mind, and fortunes new by wondrous means she calks:
On beasts entrayles she pries, and livers hot, and from their throtes
The breathing lungs she seeks, and every sign therein she notes.
O calcars dreaming heads: what helps her vows, her pilgrim deeds,
What helps her temples sought? when soking flame her mary feeds
This while, and festring deep in breast her wound the faster breeds.
So sely Dido burns, and through the town with raging chere
Astray she wanders wide, as does sometime the stricken dear,
Whom ranging through the chase, some hunter shooting far by chance
All onaware has smit, and in her side has left his lance.
She fast to wilderness and woods does draw, and there complains
Alone, but underneath her ribs the dealy dart remains.
Sometime about the walls she walks ( Aeneas by her side)
And town already made she shows, and pomp of Tyrus pride
Begins to speak, and in the midds thereof her tale she stays.
Sometimes again, and toward night to bankettes him she prays,
And Trojan toils again to tell she him beseekes, and harkes
With burning mind, and every word and countnance al she marks.
Than when they parted weere, and light of Moon was down by west,
And on the skies the falling stars do men provoke to rest:
She than alone (as one forsaken) mournes, and in his place
She lays her down, and thinks she hears and sees him face to face.
Or on her lap Ascanius for his fathers likeness sake
She holds, if happily so she might this yrksome love aslake.
The works of towers are left, no feats of arms the youth applies,
Nor hauons are wrought, nor for the wars the mighty bulwarks rise.
All things onperfit stand, the buyldings great, and thretnings hie
Of hugy walls, and enginnes for their height that match the sky.
Juno does practice with Venus to keep Aeneas still in Affrik yt he might not
com to Italy to bilde Rome.
Whom when dame Juno saw with plage so wood to be d^naide
(The mighty spouse of Jove) nor for no speech it could be staide:
To Venus first she came, and thus to her began to break.
A goodly praise (in deed) and worthy conquest great to speak
Thy boy and thou do get: a gaye renown you do obtain,
If one poor woman trainid be by heavenly persons twain.
Nor think not but I know that thou my walls of Carthage hye
Have in suspect, and dreding still the worst, al things do try.
But shall we never end? or why do we so fearcely strive?
And do not everlasting peace and freendship fast contriue?
Why wedlockes join we not? thou have thy self thin own desire,
Now love in Didos bones is bredde, she fries in raging fire.
Two people now therefore in one let us conioine, and guide
With equal love: to Trojan husband (lo) she shall be tide,
And Carthage all I give to thee for ioynter fast to bynd.
To her again (for well she knew she spoke with fainid mind
That Rome she might reject, and Carthage kingdom empier make)
Than Venus answered thus. Who is so mad that will forsake
This thing? or gladly would in war with thee so long contend?
If what thou speakyst now will fortune bring to parfit end.
But distnies makes me doubt, and whether he that reigns above
One town of Troy and Tyrus made can be content to love:
Or will allow the peoples twain to myxe and league to bynd,
Thou art his wife, thou may be bold to frame and feel his mind.
Begin, I will proceed. Than said dame Juno Queen so stout,
Let me alone for that: now how this thing shall come about
Give ear to me, for now my mind thou shall perceive outright.
A hunting forth Aeneas goth with Dido woeful wight
In woods and forest wide, when morning next begins to spring,
And son with glistring beams again to sight the world does bring.
I from aloft a stormye cloud, and mixed with sleet and hayle
A tempest dark as night on them to power I will not fail.
While in the woods they walk, and while the youth enclose the toil:
The rayn shall rise, and heaues with thonders all I will turmoyle.
Their company from them shall flee, each one his head shall hide,
A cave the Queen shall take, the Trojan duke with her shall bide.
I will be there, and if thy will accord onto my mind:
For ever I shall make them fast and wedlock steadfast bind.
There shall begin the day, that sorrows all shall quite exile.
Dame Venus granted that, and to her self she began to smyle,
She gave a nodde, and glad she was she could perceive the gile.
The morning rose, and from the sea the son was comen about,
When to the gates assemblith fast of noble youth a rout
With nets and engines great, and hunter spears full large of length.
The horsemen rush with noise, and dogs are brought a mighty strength.
The great estates of Moors before the doors await the Queen.
In chamber long she stays, and ready brydlyd best beseene
The plafrey stands in gold, attirid rich, and feerce he stampes
For pride, and on the fomy bit of gold with teeth he champes,
At last she comes, and forth with mighty train she does proceed,
All brave with mantell bright, encompast fresh in glistring weed,
Her quiver on her shulder hanges, her hears with knottes of gold
Are trust: and gold about her breast her purple garments hold.
The Trojan peers also went on, Ascanius glad of cheer,
Aeneas eke before them all that fairest did apeere
Aduauncith forth him self, and with the Queen he ioynith band.
Most like onto Apollo clear, when to his country land
To Delos down he comes, and winter cold he does forsake,
And feasts among his country lords and banketts great does make,
The daunsers do disguise them selfs, and altars round about,
The husbandmen do hoppe and cry, with noise and joyful shout.
Him self aloft on hills does walk, his wavering locks behind
He wagges, and they with garlonds gay and twists of gold ar twind,
His arrows on his shulders clattring hanges: in manner like
Aeneas went, so great a mirth to men his face does strike.
When to the mountains out they came and hauntes of beasts on hie:
Behold, adown the rocks the dear with bounsing leapes do fly.
And over laundes they course, and many an heard of heart and hynd,
With feet through dust vpthrown they skud, and hills they leave behind.
But in the vale his praunsing steed Ascanius swift bestrides,
And sometime these, and sometime those, with swift course ouerrides.
With dastard beasts his mind is not content, but makith vows
Some fomy bore to find, or lion ramping read would rowse.
By this time heaven with rombling noise and clouds is ouercast,
And thonders break the skies, and rain outrageous pourith fast,
And shoures of hail and sleet so sharp, that fast on every side
The Carthage lords and Trojan youth each one them selfs does hide
In woods and houses, here and there they seek, both man and child
For fear, and down from hills the floodes do fall with waters wild.
A cave the Queen did take, the Trojan duke with her did bide.
The ground proclamyd mirth, and Juno self did give the bryde.
The fire and air agreed, and to this cowplyng gave their light
In sign of joy, and over head the mountain fairies shright.
The fairy ladies.
There first began the grief, that day was cause of sorrows all,
For nothing after that by fame she setts nor what may fall,
Nor longer now for love in stelth Queen Dido her prouides,
But wedlock this she calls, with wedlocks name her faut she hides.
Anon through all the cities great of Affrike, Fame the daughter of earth and
sister to the Giauntes that attempted to skale heauem.
Fame is gone,
The blasing fame, a mischief such, as swifter is there none.
By moving more she breeds, and as she ronnes her might does rise.
By low for fear she lurkith first, than straight aloft in skies,
With pride on ground she goth, and percith clouds with head on hight.
Dame Earth her mother brooded forth (men say) that child in spite
Against the Gods, when Giantes first of serpent feeted line
Enceladus and Ceus wrought hie heaven to undermine.
Than for disdain (for on them selfs their own work Jove did fling)
Fame.
Their sister crawlyd forth, both swift of feet and wight of wing.
A monster ghastly great, for every plume her carcas bears:
Like number leering eyes she has, like number harckning ears,
Like number toonges and mouths she waggs, a wondrous thing to speak,
At midnight fourth she flies, and under shade her sound does squeake.
Al night she wakes, nor slomber sweet does take, nor never sleeps
By days, on houses tops she sittes, or gates, or towns she keeps.
On watching toures she climes, and cities great she makes aghast,
Both truth and falshed forth she tells, and lies abroad does cast.
She than the peoples mouths about with babbling broad did fill,
And things onwrought and wrought she told, and blew both good and ill.
How one Aeneas of the blood of Troy was come to land,
Whom Dido fresh for wanton love full soon had caught in hand.
And now this winter season long in pleasour pass they must
Regarding non estate, but give them selves to filthy lust.
These things in mouths of men this goddess vile full thick did thrust.
A woer.
Than turning, straight her way she took onto Hiarbas king,
Whose mind with tales on fire she set, and sore his wrath did sting.
This king was Ammons son of Garamanth Nimphe his dame,
A hundred temples huge about his kingdoms wide of fame,
A hundred altars hie to Jove he kept, with waking fires
Both night and day to God, and holy priests had their desyers.
Of beasts and slaughters fat: the soiles with blood were al embrued
And sweet with flowers and garlondes fresh, the floores always renewd.
He mad in mind, and through these bitter news incensyd wood,
Men say, as he before his altars prayed and humbly stood:
His hands to heaven up threw, and thus he cried with vexid mood.
Almighty Jove, whom duly Moors esteem for God and king,
And feasts of broidred beds to thee, and wines of joy do bring,
Antiquity fed upon beds as the Turks do yet.
Beholdst thou this? and mighty father thee with thunder dintes
Despise we thus? and yet from us thy strokes of lightninges stintes?
Nor quake we not, when through ye clouds thy sounding breaks above?
In vain thy voices run? will nothing us to virtue move?
A woman, lately come to land, that bought of us the ground,
To whom the soil we gave to tille, and city new to found,
And laws also we lent, my wedlock (lo) she has forsake:
And now Aeneas lord of her and all her land does make.
He compares Acneas to Paris.
And now this pranking Paris fine with mates of beardles kind:
To dropping hear and savors nice, and vices all enclinde,
With Greekish wimple pinkid, womanlike: yet must the same
Enjoy the spoils of this, and we thy servants take the shame,
For all our offryng gifts to thee we find no fruit but fame.
Thus prayeng in his fervent mood, and altars holdyng fast,
Almighty Jove him heard, and to the court his eyes did cast.
Where now these lovers dwell forgettyng life of better fame.
Than Mercury to him he calls, The commaundme^t of Jove to Mercury.
who stayght obeyed the same.
Go son, come of, and call the winds, and wynged slip thee down
Unto the Trojan duke, that now aloof in Carthage town
Does linger time, and of his fatal cities has no mind.
Go speak to him, and thus convey my words as swift as wind.
Not such a man his mother dear did promise he should prove,
Nor him from dangers twice of Greeks for this did she remove:
But one that should Italia land where dreedful wars do swell
By conquest vndetread, and them to right and peace compel,
And Trojan blood he should advance to due renown and fame,
And all the world should under laws subdue and rule the same.
If glory non of things so great nor courage him does move,
Nor for his praise him self to take the pains he does not love,
Yet from Ascanius why does he the towers of Rome remove?
What means he? why remains he thus within his enmies ward?
And had not unto Lauin land and offspring there regard?
Bid him to sea, this is the sum, (quod he) go tell him this.
This spoken, he his fathers mind obeyed as duty is.
Mercury busketh him forward.
And first his slender feet with shoes and wings of gold he ties,
That him both up and down does bear, where ever coast he flies,
Both over seas and over lands, in post in air above.
He took his rod also, wherewith from hell he does remove
The louring souls, and souls also to dongeons deep he sendes,
And sleeps therewith he gives and takes, and men from death defendes.
The winds by force thereof he cutts, and through the clouds he swimms,
And now, approaching near, the topp he sees and mighty limms
Of Atlas mountain tough, The ^escriptio^ of his journey from heaven along the
mountain Atlas in Affrike, hiest in earth.
that heaven on boistous shulders bears,
Of Atlas old, whom beating shoures and storms and tempests wears
Whose head encompast all with trees of Pine in garlondwise,
With louring clouds is ever clad, that more and more do rise,
His shulders hid with snow, and from his hoary beard adowne,
The streanies of waters fall, with ise and frost his face does frown.
There first on ground with wings of might does Mercury ariue.
Than down from thens right over seas himself does headlong drive,
Most like a byrd that nere the banks of seas his haunting keeps,
Among the fishfull rocks, and low byneth on water sweepes.
Non otherwise Mercurius between the skies and lands
Did sheare the winds, and ouerflew the shores of Lybi sands.
When first the bowres of Affrike land with wingid feet he twight:
Aeneas he might see to stand among them broad in sight
Aduauncing up the towers, and houses hye was altring new,
Begyrt with hanger bright, beset with stones as stars to vewe,
And shining read in roabe of Moorishe purple, mantle wise,
He stood, and from his shulders down it hing Morisco gise.
Queen Didos work it was, her precious gift of love to hold,
Her self the web had wrought, and warpyd fine with wreath of gold.
Straight unto him he steps and said. Thou now of Carthage hye
Foundations new do lay, and doting do thy mind apply
To please thy lusty spouse, and city fayer thou do prepare,
Alas, and of thine own affairs or kingdoms have no care.
Him self the mighty god does me to thee on message send,
The king of heaven and earth, that all this world with beck does bend.
Himself has bid me through the winds so swift these things to tell.
What ghost about? why spendist time in Lybi land to dwell?
If glory non of things so great thy courage do not move,
Nor thou for praise to take the pain wilt for thine own behoue:
Yet by Ascanius rising now have some regard to stand,
And hope of heirs of him, to whom by right Italia land
And empier great of Rome is dew. So said this heavenly wight,
And in the mids his tale he brake, and fled from mortal sight,
And out of reatche of eyes as thin as aier he vanished quighte.
Aeneas than affrighted stood in silence domme dismayed,
His hear vprose for fear, his voice between his jaws if stayed.
Feign would he flee, and of that country sweet his license take.
Astoynid with so great commaundment given, and god that spoke.
Alas what shall he do? how dare he now attempt to break
Unto the Queen of this? or where his tale begin to speak?
His doubtful mind about him swift he kest both here and there,
And sundry ways he wayed, and searches dangers every where.
Thus striving long, this last devise him liked best of all.
His capteins.
Cloanthus and Serestus strong, and Mnesteus he does call,
And bids them rigge their fleet, and close their people draw to shore,
And armors all prepare, and lest thereof might rise uproar:
Some causes else they should pretend, him self when time shall serve,
When Dido least does know, and lest suspectes his love to swerve,
He will assay to seek most pleasant time with her to treat,
And meetest mean to make (for craft is all, who can the feat)
They glad without delay their lords commaundment did fulfill,
All things in order set, and close they kept their princes will.
Anon the Queen had found the gile. What craft can compass love?
She did forcast no less, and first she felt their practice move,
All things mistrustyng straight, and fame also that monster wood
Her fumes increased more, with news, the ships in armor stood,
And Trojans for their flight (she said) all things prepared had.
Her heart therewith did faint, and frantike (like a creature mad)
She rayles with rampyng rage, and through the streates and towns about
With noise she wanders wide, most like a gide of Bacchus rout:
When shouting through the fields with trompet sound they run by night,
In freke of Bacchus feast, and mountains hie they fill with shright,
At last unto Aeneas thus talk her words she dight.
To hide also from me this mischief great, have thou the heart?
Thou traitor false? and from my land by stelih woldst thou depart?
Nor my unfeigned love, nor thy remorse of promise plight,
Nor Dido, like to die with cruel death, can stay thy flight?
But in the mids of winter storm away thou will in have?
In these outrageous seas, and through the force of northen blast?
O caytife most unkind: what if it were a country known,
The land thou ghost to seek, no straungy realm, but all thine own?
What if that Troy, sometime thy native town, did yet endure?
Should Troy through all these boystous seas this time thy ships allure?
And fleest thou me? Now by these weepyng tears, and thy right hand
(For nothing else I left me miser now whereby to stand)
By our espousayll first, and for the love of wedlock sought:
If ever well deseruid I of thee, if ever ought
Of joy thou had of me, have mercy now, I am ontwind.
Destroy not all my house, O be not so extreme enkind,
If prayers may prevail, let prayers yet relent thy mind.
For thee alone the tirantes all and kings of Lyby land
Do hate me now, for thee alone my people me withstand,
For thee also my shamefast life I brake, and evermore
(...) He would have spoke, her ladies lift her up, and up did bear,
To chamber her they brought, in precious bed they laid her there.
But good Aeneas though full feign he would her grief aswage,
And words of comfort speak to turn from her that heavy rage,
In heart he mourned much, and shaken sore with fervent love:
Yet to his ships he went to do the charge of gods above.
Than all the Trojans them bestyrd, in have on every side,
Their ships they launched out, the anointed plankes on water glide.
And ores they made of bows, the woods with them to seas they bear
Unshapen yet for have.
From all the town they ran, you might them swarming thick behold.
The description of pismares or emotes.
And like as Antes apply their work, that thinck on winter cold,
When heaps of corn they spoil, and to their house convey their store:
Their army black goes out, and from the feelds with labor sore
Their booties home they bring, and some the kernels great of grain
With might of shulders shoue, and some behind survey the train,
Correcting some for slewth, with cheering forth the work it heates,
The ways are worn with weight, and every path of labor sweates.
What mind alas O Dido now? what grief was this to thee?
What wailing up thou setst? when so on shore thou did them see?
And when thou might behold before thy face from toures on hye
The seas on every side resound with such uproar and cry?
O Love vnmylde, what do thou not man mortal drive to seek?
Again to tears she goes, again she falls to prayers meek,
She yeeldes to him for love, nor nothing will she leave untried,
But practice all to prove, if ought will help before she died.
Lo sister Anne, thou see how swift to shore this people hies,
From eueri coast they come, their sails are set for wind to rise,
With crowns for joy their seamen deck their pups in garlandguise.
If ever, sister, such a grief had come within my thought:
I would have borne the same, or else some other swift have wrought.
Yet one thing sister, in this woeful plight do thou for me,
For this peiured wretch regarded non so much as thee.
To thee alone he would commit both secret thought and deed,
Thou know the man's good hours, and plesa^t time with him to speed.
Go sister, and go tell my words to my disdainful foo:
I was not she that did conspier with Greeks to Troy to goo,
Nor did subvert his towns, nor ships nor armor ever sent
To stroy the Trojan blood, nor to his foes assistens lent.
I never brake his fathers tomb, nor bones in peaces chopped.
Why has he thus to my request his ears so stiffly stopped?
Where now away to run, will he remove in all this have?
O let him yet have one respect to me for token last,
This one reward I crave, for duties all most miser wight,
O let him bide a while, till wind and seas may serve his flight.
I seek no more the wedlock old, which he has now betrayed,
Nor from Italia goodly land he longer should be stayed.
I seek no longer him to keep his kingdom to forbear.
A vacant time I ask, and respit small my woe to wear,
While fortune learn me to lament, and brook my fatal fall,
For pity (sister) sue for me this pardon last of all.
Which when thou do obtain: requite it with my death I shall.
Thus talked she with tears, and weeping thus both to and fro
Her sister went and came, and bare and brought increase of woe.
But weeping naught preuayles, nor wailing ought his mind does move,
His breast so stiffly bent, entreatinges al from him does shoue,
God works so, his gentle ears are stopped from heavens above.
And as an ancient Oak of timber stout is tossed and torn,
With northen boystous blastes, now here, now there with bending born,
When struggling winds do strive, the craking noise aloft does sound,
The branches break above, and bows abroad ar spread on ground.
Yet still on rocks it stands, and as the top does climb to grow
To heavens in height: so reaches down the root to Limbo low.
Non otherwise afflicted is this prince with message brought,
Incessauntly with tears, and grievous cares oppressed his thought,
Yet stands he fixed still, and tears of eyes do tryll for naught.
Than Dido (woeful soul) with plagues of destnies foul affright
Desires to dye, she lothith now of heaven to see the light.
Her purpose also further forth to set, and life to leave:
As she on burning altars did encense and offeringes heave,
(A loathsome thing to speak) the sacred liquors black they stood,
And wines in pouring forth she saw them turn to filthy blood.
This vision to no wight, no, not her sister dear she told.
Princes had temple in their houses
There was also within her court, to serve her husband old
A marble temple pure of wondrous work, that day by day
Devoutly she did dress with fleeses white, and garlandes gay:
(...) Description of midnyght.
Than was it night, and creatures all that weery were on ground
Did take their stomber sweet; both woods and seas had left their sound,
And waves of waters wild, when stars at mydnight soft do slide,
When whust is every field, and beasts and birds of painted pride
In bushes: broad that breed, and country fowls of land and lake,
By night in silence still are set on sleep, their eas to take,
Forgetting labors long, and care away from heart they shake.
But not so Dido could, nor never rest relieues her mind,
On sleep she never falls, her eyes or heart no night can find.
Her cares increasing rise, with raging love in breast she boyles
A fresh, an surges wild of wrath within her self she toils.
Between them thus she strives, and thus her heavy heart turmoyles.
Lo, what shall I now do? shall I again go seek with shame,
My former suitors love? shall I go sue to wed the same?
Whom I so oftentimes to take to me disdayned have?
Or shall I in the Trojan fleet go serve, and live a slave?
What else? for where they had before this time relief of me:
They will remember that, and well they quite me now you see.
Admit I would so do, what is he there will me receive
To their disdayneful ships? O fool, thou do thy self deceive.
O creature lost, do thou not yet the falshed understand
Of that perjured nation false of Laomedons band?
What than? shall I alone pursue these boatmen brave in flight?
Or shall I raise my people al in arms with me to fight?
And them that out of Sydon land I skarsely brought with pain,
Shall I go bid them sail, and send them out to seas again?
Nay rather dye thy self, as worthy well thou do deserve,
And with this weapon quench away thine own distress and sterue.
Thou sister overcome with tears, on me this mischief furst
Did put, and to my mortal foe did throw me most accursed.
Could I not yet my life have led without reproach or miss,
As does some saluage beast? and not have felt the cares of this?
My promise broken is, that I my husband dead did make.
These waylings she within her breast with heart full heavy brake.
Aeneas than abourd in ship assured forth to pass:
Was taking rest, and for the flight al thing prepared was.
To him the god again in habit like, and former face
Appearing showed him self, and thus in dream bespake his grace.
All things lybe Mercury he bare, both form and voice and hew,
And gloss of shining hear, and comely youth of beauty new.
Thou goddess son, in all this parlous season can thou sleep?
Nor how thou art beset with dangers great have thou no keep?
Thou foolish man? these goodly western winds do thou not here?
She now on mischief thinks, and wicked craft her mind does stere,
Assured bent to death, and waves of wrath her heart does cast.
Wylt thou not headlong flee betyme, while power to flee thou have?
Anon the seas enclosed under ships, and blasing brondes
On every side shall shine, thou shall see burning all the strondes,
If thee this morning son about this country find to raunge.
Break of dispatche: a diverse minded thing, and full of change
Is woman kind always, dispatche. So spoke this heavenly wight,
And through the dark of night himself withdrew from mortal sight.
Aeneas with that sudden voice in mind right sore appalde:
Him self from sleep he shook, and on his mates he freshly calde.
Now every man awake, bestow your selves on hatches hye,
In have hoyst up your sails, again the god is come from sky.
In have forthwith to shift, and cables cut from hence to flee,
Lo ones again he calls. O blessed god we wait on thee
What ever thou art: thy will ngayne with glad cheer we obey.
Be with us now for speed, and send us stars to guide our way,
And weather good (he said.) With that, he drew his fawchon out,
That bright as lyghtning shone, and cables struck with courage stout.
Than every man bestirs: they seek, they snatche, they take, they tear,
The shores aloof they leave, the seas for ships appeeres no where.
The morning was taken for a goddess and imagined nightly to lie with Tithon
king of the East.
And now the Morning read had left sir Tythons painted bed,
And broad on earth her glystring beams and light had newly spread.
The Queen as dawning waxed white from tooting towers on hye,
When she the fleet thus under sail in order did espy,
And wind at will to drive, and nothing left behind at shore,
And saw the hauons all empty stand withouten beat or ore:
Three times her hands she beat, and four times struck her comely breast,
Her golden hear she tare, and frantikelyke with mood oppressed:
She cried, O Jupiter, O god (quod she) and shalla go
In deed? and shalla flowte me thus within my kingdoms, so?
Shall not mine armies out? and al my peoples them pursue?
Shall they not spoil their ships, or burn them all with vengeance due?
Out people, out upon them, follow fast with fires and flames.
Set sails aloft, make out with ores, in ships, in boats, in frames.
What speak I? or where am I? what furies me do thus enchaunt?
O Dido woeful wretch, now destnies fell thy head does haunt.
This first thou should have don, when thou thy kingdom putst from thee.
Lo this it is to trust. This goodly faith and troth has he
That so devout, his country gods men say does seek to rear,
And he that on his shulders did his aged father bear.
Could I not him by force have caught, and piece from piece have torn?
Or spread his limbs in seas, and all his people stain beforne?
Could I not of Ascanius chopping made? and dress for meat
His flesh? and than his father done thereof his fill to eat?
Than grown a doubt there had perhaps in fight, what if it had?
Whom dred I bent to death? than would I straight with furies mad
Have brent his camp with bronds, and filled his ships with fire and flame.
Both sier and son destroyed, and of their nation quench the name,
That done, I would have thrown my self full glad upon the same.
O Son with blasing beams, that every deed on earth do vewe,
And Juno goddess great, that know what thing to this is dew:
Diana deep, whose name by night al towns in crospathes cry,
And fends of vengeans fell, and gods that Dido make to die,
Receive my words, and turn from me the wreke of sinners pain.
Hear now my voice: if destnies do that wicked head constrain
To enter haven, and needs he must with mischief swim to land,
If god will needs dispose it so to be, there let it stand.
Yet let him vexed be, with arms and wars of peoples wyld,
And hunted out from place to place, an outlaw still exyld,
Let him go beg for help, and from his child disseuered be,
And death and slaughters vile of all his kindred let him see.
And when to laws of wicked peace he does him self behight,
Yet let him never reign, nor in this life to have delight:
But die before his day, and rotte on ground withouten grave.
This is my prayer last, this with my blood of you I crave.
Than to their lineage all, O you my people show despite,
O Moors apply them still with strife, let hatred hate acquit.
This charge to you I leave, Other came Hannibal that after plaged Rome.
these offering presents send you me,
When dead I am: let never love nor leage between you be.
Than of my bones arise there may some impe revenger fell,
That shall the Trojan clownes with force of fire and sword expel.
Now, than, and evermore, as time shall serve to give them might
Let shore to shore, and stream to stream, be still repugnant right.
This I desire, let them in arms and al their offpring fight.
Thus said she, and her mind about in compass wide she kest,
Desiring soon this hateful world to leave and be at rest.
Than thus to Barcey straight, Sichaeus nurse she shortly said,
(For at her country old, her own, in dust before was laid:)
Dear nurse (quod she) go bid my fister have that she were here,
Attire her self she must, and wash with streams of water clear,
And offerings bid her bring, and beasts appointed here to lead,
And thou thy head (O nurse devout) with vesture see thou spread,
Than let her come. To Pluto deep such vows as I have take
My mind is to perform, and of my cares an end to make.
The tokens all of Troy to burning fire I will commit.
She hearing steppid forth, and hasted on with aged wit.
But Dido quaking fearce with frantike mode and grisly hew,
With trembling spotted chekes, her huge attemptings to pursue,
Besides her self for rage, and toward death with visage wan,
Her eyes about she rold, as red as blood they looked than.
Anon to the inner court in have she ronnes, and up the pyle
She mounting climes aloft, and on the top thereof awhyle
She stood, and naked from the sheath she draws the fatal blade
A gift of Troy, that unto these effects was never made.
There, when she saw the Troyan weeds and couch acquainted laid
With tricling tears awhile, and mourning heart her self she stayed.
Than flat on bed she fell, and these her last words than she said.
O sweet remain of clothing left, and thou O dulcet bed,
(While god and fortune would, and while my life with you I led)
Receive from me this soul, and from these cares my heart untwine.
A time of life I had, of fortunes race I ran the line:
And now from me my figure great goth under ground to dwell.
My walls I raised have, and city rich that does excel.
My husbands death, and on my brother false I wroke my teene.
O happy (we laway) and over happy had I been,
If never Troyan ship (alas) my country shore had seen.
This said, she wried her head, and unrevenged must we die?
But let us boldly die (quod she) thus, thus to death I plie.
Thus under ground I gladly go, lo thus I do expier,
Let yonder Trojan tyrant now with eyes devour this fire,
As on the seas he sittes, and with my death fulfill his ire.
Thus speaking, in the mids thereof she left, and therewithal
With breast on persing sword, her laties saw where she did fall.
The blade in fomy blood, and hands abroad with sprauling thrown*
To heaven the shoutes arise, and through the town the fame is blown.
Lamenting loud begins, and wailinges wide, and roarings hie,
In every house they houle, and women cast a ruful cry.
The city shakes, the noise rebounding breaks the mighty sky.
Non otherwise, than if some rage of enemies all their town
At ones had ouerronne, and houses hie were tearing down,
As all at ones should fall, Carthago proud, or ancient Tire,
And buildings both of gods and men should burn with blasing fire:
Her sister heard the sound, as dead for dreede she stood undressed,
With nails her face she tare, and with her fistes she beat her breast,
And ramping through the midds of men she ronnes, and by her name
She calls her: now in death. O sister mine, and lady dame,
Is this the cause that I from thee so far beguiled was?
Did I this pyle of fire and altars build for this? alas,
What should I now forsaken first complain? O sister sweet,
Have thou despised, me to take with thee, a mate so meet?
Why did thou me thy sister to this death disdain to call?
One wepon should us both dispatch at ones from sorows all.
And with my hands have I so wrought? have I my gods so cried?
That from this cruel plight of thine my presens was denied?
O sister, now thou have undone this day both thee and me,
Thy town, thy peoples all, thy worthy lords confounded be.
Carthago quenched is: O let me wash these wounds in have,
And if there be remaining yet soine life or breathing last,
My mouth shall fetch the same furthwith. So said she, and now alost
The pyle she clymyd had, and in her bosom clasping soft
Her sister heavy held (in pang that was) and with her weed
She wailing wypid of the deadly blood that black did bleed.
She toward her, he heaui fainting eyes would feign have cast,
But fixed underneath her breast her wound reboyleth fast.
Three times her self she lift, and on her elbow sought to stay.
And thrice she sounding fell, and there upon she gave a braye,
Than thrice on bed she tossed, and with her eyes vprolling round,
Of heaven she sought the light, and groned sore when it she found,
Almighty Juno than, these labors hard, and passage long
Lamented sore to see, and down she sent in message strong,
Dame Iris hie, that on the Rainbow read in heaven does sit:
This struggling soul to take, and from these pains her lyms unknit.
For whereas no deserved death, nor destnies her did kill,
But sely soul before her day, by rage of frantike will,
Her golden hear as yet from her not taken was, nor yet
Diana dampened had her head to lake of Lymbo pit:
Dame Rainbow down therefore with safron wings of dropping showers,
Whose face a thousand sundry hewes against the sun deuoures,
From heaven descending came, and (on her head.) Here I do thee
To Pluto now bequeath, and from this corpse I make thee free.
She said, and with her hand she clipped her hear so clear that shynde,
And therewithal her lymmes at ones their heat from them resynde.
And thin as air her life went out, dispersed abroad in wind.
DEO GRATIAS.
Per Thomam Phaer,
in foresta Kilgerran, ix. Aprilis. Anno. 1556. Opus Quindecim dierum.
The fifth book of the Aeneidos of Virgil.
The Argument.
Aeneas leauyng Carthage, and saylyng toward Italy, by force of a tempest is
driven into Scicil, where, being freendly received by Acestes: he celebrateth
his father Anchises tweluemonethes mind, whom he had buried at Drepanus that
day tweluemoneth before. And makes plays, and games at his grave, and
distributeth rewards to such as wunne them. Cloanthus wins in fight on sea.
Eurialus, through the sleight of Nisus: wins the price in runnyng, and so
does Eurytion in showting. Entellus the ancient, ouercometh Dates at ye game
called Caestus (which is fightyng with bags or flappes of leather hanging by
stringes, wherein is either lead, or sand) who youthfully boasted of him self.
Howbeit the chief rewards, and honor, in respect of age, and dignity: were
adjudged unto Acestes, whose arrow when it flew into the air: suddenly waxed a
fire. Ascanius in the honor of Anchises his graundfather with the other youth
of nobility practizeth fight, and feats on horseback, resemblyng warlike
prowisse. In the mean time the Troiane wives, at the instigation of the
Raynbovv and for weary somnesse of their long travail: cast fire among the
fleet, and quite destroyed four tall ships. The rest by a soden shower of
rain sent by Jupiter: were preserved from burning. The night followyng,
Anchises appears to his son Aeneas in a dream, and warns him from
Jupiter, that followyng the counsel of Nautes, he leave behind him the women,
and the impotent old men, in Scicil, and he himself with the force of his
army, and the lustiest youths of all the company: shou d sail into Italy.
Where he should first go seek Sybillas den, by whose direction he should be
brought unto him into the fields called Elysij, or fields of pleasure, where
he should be enfourmed of all the race of his posterity, and learn the
euentes of all wars that should shortly befall him. Wherefore Aeneas then
obeying his fathers commandment: builded a city in Scicill named Acestes,
and there made a Colonye of women, and old men that were unfit for war, and
him self with the strength of his army takes his viage toward Italy.
Therwhiles, Neptunus at the entreaty of Venus makes the sea calm, whylst
Aeneas sayleth. In this goodly calmnesse Palinurus the stearesman falling a
sleep: is cast helm and all into the sea, whose turn Aeneas supplieth.

AEneas on his way this while with ships the seas did sheare,
Amids the working waves of Northen wind full rough yt were,
Assured now to pass, and back full often he kest his eien
To Didos woeful walls, on every side that now did shine
With flames of burning bright, what kindlyd has so great a fire,
The cause unknown it is, but wondrous feats in fervent ire,
Is wrought by woman kind, when breach of love has made them mad:
Thus pensive pass the Trojans from that sight and token sad.
When to the deep their ships were come, and now on neither side
Appears no land, but seas and skies about them broad are spide:
A shower above his head there stood, all dusky black with blew,
Both night and storm it brought, and straight the waters dark their hew.
Him self the Lodesman Palynure from puppe at stern on hie
Alack, why has these clouds so thick encompast thus the sky?
What workst thou father Neptune now? he said, and therewithal
He bids them trusse their tackels, and with ores to labor fall,
And sails to leeward set, than thwart the wind he kest about,
And thus he spoke Aeneas prince of might and courage stout.
If god him self, as now this wether stands, would say to me,
To fetch Italia land, yet would I think it could not be.
So work these waiward winds, and from by west the tempest grimme
Does rise with boistous noise, and aier with clouds encloseth dim.
Nor strive no more we may, nor if we list we can come there.
Since fortune therefore does prevail, let us with fortune bear,
And turn where fortune calls, not far it is (as I suppose)
Unto thy brother Erix coast and hauons of Sicil woose,
(If I in mind my wonted course of stars do well retain.)
Aeneas gentil said, In deed I see thee strive in vain
With labor all this while, and so me think these winds require.
Turn thou thereto thy sails, is any land to me more dear?
Or where should I my weary ships more wish to set at rest?
He landeth in Sicil from whence he came out at the first. The king of Sicil.
Than where Acestes Troyan dwells my friend beloved best?
And where my father Anchises bones entombed lain in chest?
He said, and toward hauons anon they make, and winds at west
Does blow them through the deepes: the channel swift their navy drives,
And glad at last on their acquainted shore their ships ariues.
And from the mountain top, with meruell great to see them fleet,
Acestes hasting ran, his country ships at shore to meet.
All hunterlyk, in hide of boystous bear, with dart in hand,
His father (flood Crinisus) him begat in Trojan land.
Dame Troy his mother was, his worthy stock full stout he bare.
He bad them welcome back, and joyfully with mountain fare
He did them entertayne, and freendly comfort after care.
The morning next, when first the dawning stars expulsed were,
And clear the day began, Aeneas out from every where
Assembled al his mates, and into counsel did them call.
Than from a bank on hie, he thus pronounced to them all.
You mighty Trojans, from the blood of great gods that descend,
This time is comen about a perfect year is now at end,
Since when my father Anchises blessed bones were put in ground,
And mourning altars for his holy relikes we did found.
And now the day (if I do not mistake) approaches nere:
That unto me shall ever doleful be, and ever dear,
Since gods has pleased so: if I this day were cast a land,
Among the saluage Moors, or on the shores of Sirtes sand,
Or caught on Greekish seas, or in Micena town a slave:
Yet pay my yearly vows I would with pomp of duties brave,
And gifts in feastful gyse on altars large I would advance.
Now here in haven we be, among our friends, not by no chance,
But by the gods (I trust) of purpose wrought, and for the nones,
To worship here my fathers blessed dust, and precious bones.
Come on therefore, let every man set forth these honors pure
With mirth on every side, that of good winds we may be sure.
And as I yearly now these offringe days to him do make,
So when my city builded is, in temples he shall take.
They feasted alway-before their idols.
For every ship Acestes gives to you of oxen twain,
With charge your selfs to chere, set out your country gods again,
And with our host Acestes gods to feasting see you fall:
In worship of this day, let us rejoice with courage all.
Moreover, when the morning ninth to mortal men does spring,
And sun with glistring beams the world again to sight does bring,
For prises proud to strive, I will provoke the Trojan fleet.
And who so wrastleth best, or best can run with force of feet,
Or surer drives a dart, or archer best his bow can draw,
Or fighting dares combat, with boystous baggs of lether raw:
Rewards I shall set forth, and prises meet for every match.
Be present all, and he that best deserves the best shall catch.
Say all Amen, and crown your heads with bows of Laurel green,
So speaking on his head he set his garlond fresh beseene.
So Helimus, so king Acestes does, (full grave of age)
So child Ascanius does, and after him both man and page.
He from the counsel came with thousands thick in mighty throng,
Unto his fathers tomb, in mids of all his princes strong.
Two bolles of blessed wine in solemn guise he kest on ground,
And milk in basins twain about the tomb he powered round,
And twain of sacred blood: than all the grave he spread and laid
With flowers of purple hewes, and thus at last full loud he prayed.
All hail O blessed father mine, yet ones again all hayle:
From death preserved twice, but naught to me can that prevail.
Thy bones I worship here, unto thy soul mote glory be.
My luck was not Italia fatal feeldes to find with thee,
Nor Tyber flood (where ever it is) could we togethers know.
Thus talked he, when from the tomb at secret cave by low,
A serpent great did slide, with circles seven of mighty sise,
Along the grave he drew with foldings seven in compaswyse,
Embrasing soft the tomb, and tombling soft on the altars rolde,
His back as azure blew, bespotted gay with specks of gold,
And gloss of burning skales, as in the clouds with diverse hewes
Against the sun, the rainbow red in thousand sorts renewes.
Aeneas with that sight astoynyd was, but he along,
Came lagging forth in linkes, and all the deynty meats among
He tasted every dishe, and home again in hermeles wise,
Returning took his tomb, and was not seen again to rise.
So much the more his fathers tomb he plied with offerings than.
For what it was, or how thereof to think he could not skan.
If private ghost it were, or sprite that in that mountain dwells,
Or servant from his father sent, but slaughters down he fells,
Of sheep in number five, and five of swyne full large of syse,
And mighty hefers black in number five, as is the gyse.
And wines in bolles he shed, and on the mighty soul he cried,
Of great Anchises ghost, and sprite that over ground was spied.
His mates also full glad, as every man was sped of store,
Their offringe presents brought and laded altars more and more,
And hefers down they slew, and some by rows their pans of brass
Did set to sees in sight, and down they spread them selves on grass,
On vmbles fat they feed, and broche, and broyle, and time they pass.
And now the ninth desired day was come with morning bright,
And Phoethons horses faier had mounted up the son to sight,
And by the fame, and for Acestes worship round about
The contreys al were come, and shores they fill with joyful rout
To see the Troyan lords, and some in mind themselfs to try.
Wagers for rowing
First prises great in sight, aloft a banck, advanced hye,
Were set amids them all, three footed bolles of precious mold,
And crowns and garlonds gay, for them that win the wager should.
And poudryd purple robes, and armor gorgeous glistring bright,
And talents great of gold, and plenty plate of silver pight.
With glee the game begins, the trompet blows with noise on hight.
First vessels four, that chief elected were from all the fleet,
Auncetors of certain the noblest men in Rome when he wrote this book
Come forth to coape with ores of hugy weight as matches meet.
Sir Mnesteus his galeon swift whose name was Pistrin, drives,
Sir Mnesteus Italian prince, whence Memmus line deriues.
Sir Gias than with hugy monster ship Chimera calde,
A cities work she was, with rancks of rowers treble walde,
And Trojan youth with triple tire of ores did shoue the same.
Sergestus than, from whom the house of Sergis draws the name,
Centaurus him did bear (that galee great). But Scilla blew
Cloantus brought: from whence thy race (o Romain Cluent) grew.
Far out in seas there stands a rock against the fomy shore,
That sometime under water lies with surges beaten sore,
When storms of winter wind encloseth stars in cloudy skies:
But smoth in calm it lies, and in the mids thereof does rise
A pleasant plain of feeld, where often Mewes, and birds of seas
Do keep their haunting walk, and sun their feathers when they pleas.
Aeneas there aduauncing set a sign of branches green,
A mark of oken bows, that of the boatmen might be seen,
To know their turning place, and courses long from whence to fold.
Each man by lot their standing took, and glistring bright in gold:
The gorgeous capteins stood, on hatches hie in garments gay.
The rest of youth with crowns of garlonds green in due array,
Their necks and shulders shine with oils anointed naked bare,
On settels down they sit, their ores in hands prepared are,
Their arms ententiue bent, when at the sign they shall begin.
Their hearts for joy does hop, and fear does flap their breasts within,
And greedy pride of praise, and fervent love renown to win.
Than when the blast of trompet first does sound, they al arise
Atones, and from their bounds they break, their clamors perce the skies,
Their stroks at ones they strike, the fomy waters through they cliue,
The stremes resisting break, and with their ste^mes the seas they sliue,
Their ores with labor creaks, by strength of arms themselfs they drive.
Not headlong half so swift, does coursing steedes bestys their heels,
When for their wager fast with all their force they fly with wheels.
Nor charet gyder non more fre on feeld does let them slip,
Or slacker shakes his raines, or louder them does lash with whip:
Than with the shoutes of men that clap their hands, and parties takes,
The cries increasing rise, that every wood with sounding shakes,
The noise repulsed ronnes from banck to banck, and through the shores
The voices broken ben, and hill to hill rebounding rores.
Before them al sir Gias first escapes through all the throng,
And first to seas he flies with noise, and him Cloanthus strong
Pursues at hand, and better was with ores, but sluggish keele
And mast unwieldy lets. Than after him even hard at heel,
Centaurus preasing glides, and Pistris her does equal match,
They strive with sturdy strokes, and foremost place they seek to catch.
And now Centaurus gets the vauntage, now does Pistris win:
Now jointly both, with side to side, and equal speed they spin.
And now approaching near the rock they were, and mark they held,
When Gias victor prince, (of conquest proud) the land beheld.
And as from chanel deep his barge to land he would have hied.
Unto Menetes lodesman than thereof full loud be cried.
Why roust away so wide? take here I say, love nie the shore,
Fetch me this left hand land, and on these rocks let beat thine ore.
Let others keep the deep, he said, but fearing rocks, and sholdes,
Menetes still at stern his hand on helm to seaward holds.
Where yet astray so wide?? yet (when I bid thee) fetch the stones,
Sir Gias on Menetes cried and called, and (lo at ones)
He sees Cloanthus come, even hard at back, and foremost glide,
He through the roaring rocks, and underneath sir Gias side
Did sheare his lefthand way, between them twain, and swift anon
Escapes them both, and suer in seas beyond the mark is gone.
Than verily for fervent woe, the young man's bones did glowe,
Nor tears his eyes could hold, Menetes is cast over bourde.
but by and by Menetes slow,
(Forgetting worship all, and that he was his help at helm,)
Yet hedlong down he threw, and him in seas did over whelme.
Him self to stern he stepped him self his masters room supplies,
Exhorting men with noise, and fast to shoreward helm he wries.
But when (good aged man) Menetes up was cast on brim,
From botom deep of seas, and in his germentes wet did swim,
He caught the rock on hie, and on the dry land there he sat.
The Trojans had good game, and sporting al they laughed thereat,
When first in seas he fell, and when he rose and flat did fleet,
And when to pourge his gorge he kest up floodes of falt onsweete.
Than hope and comfort kindlid is unto the twain behind.
Sir Mnesteus and Sergestus strong, they both with burning mind:
Would pass sir Gias by, (that hindrid is) and pass they do,
Sergestus first the place does take, and rock approchith to,
And yet not foremost al, nor al her keele has forhand won,
But part before, for half with her does Pistris striving run.
But kindling fast his mates on every side sir Mnesteus steeres.
From man to man he steps, and chafing up their courage cheeres,
With loud exhorting noise. Now now (quod he) with might and maine,
Now cheerely stur your ores, now al your force do you constrain.
O Hectors worthy peers, whom I at Troys extreme decay,
Did match to be my mates, and chose with me to take our way,
Express me now the might yt sometime brought us through ye streams,
And sturdy waves of seas, and sundry gulfes of Greekish realms,
I seek not now the chief, nor of this game renown to bost,
(Albeit O), but let it go where Neptune favors most.
Yet last let us not be. O lively laddes of noble kind,
Let never man for shame behold us last to lag behind.
Now for our contreys love, (if any thing your hearts reuiues)
Now pull or never pull. They than at ones all for their lieues,
Laid on with lusty strokes, the brazen puppe with plucking quakes,
With strength of arms they strive, that skudding forth the stem it strakes
The land aloof withdraws, than panting breath does beat their lims,
Their mouths of moistur dry, on streming swet their bodies swims.
Fortune also to them desirid luck and honor sent,
For as Sergestus (mad in mind for have) in turning bent
Too near the shore, and straighter would have cut the shorter space:
Among the stones he stack (unlucky man) in parlous place.
The rocks therewith they shoke, and on the craggy pointed pikes
Their ores with crashing break, and keele on ground with danger strikes.
The botemen rise with noise, and loud with cries the^ selves they let.
And proppes, and pykyd poales, with hurlyburly great they get.
And some their broken ores, in pieces sleeting up they fet.
But Mnesteus rejoicing than, and proud for this mischaunce,
With cluster swift of ores, and winds at will that did advance:
Al groweling through ye seas he skouring ronnes, and through the deepes
The waves he smothly cuttes, and swift his way on water sweepes:
Most like a Dove, whom chance distourbyd has from pleasant rest,
That in some corner close within some house, does keep her nest,
Afraid she stertith first, and flushing loud she flappes her wings,
That all the house resoundes, than up to skies aloft she springes,
And fast to field she flies, where gliding soft in aier above:
She sheares her tender way, and wing for have does never move.
So Mnesteus, so Pistris makes her way with might extreme,
So slides she through the seas, and so with force to fly they seem.
And first Sergestus strong, that on the rock did yet remain,
He leaves him struggling there, and calling help full often in vain,
Among the sholdes, and glad with broken ores to learn to creep.
Than Gias, than Chimera ship her self that monster steep,
He ouertakes, (for of her master late she spoiled was)
And now remaynes there non but sir Cloanthus last to pass,
Whom fast he does pursue, and hard at hand he has in chase,
With power and pith he pulles, and toward him he draws a pace.
Than noyses dubbled been, and shoutes of friends exaltyng cries.
Prouokyng forth with praise, that up to heaven the clamours flies.
They proud of former praise, their honor won they will not lose.
And if they should, no longer than to live they do dispose.
Those other fortune feeds, they think to win for win they may.
And with the prise (perhaps) or half thereof had gone theys way:
Had not Cloanthus to the seas his hands abroad displayed,
And called his gods for help, and thus to them full loud he prayed.
O Gods that empier keeps on seas, whose kyngdoms here I struck,
Upon this water shore to you mine altars will I make.
A white elected Bull I vow to give with service brave,
And cast his fleash in fluddes, if I mine honor now may save.
And plenty pure of wynes, I will to you in waters throw.
He spoke that word, and him beneth in botoms deep by low,
The god Portunus heard, and virgin rout of Mermay des all:
And ladies bright that daunsing lives in seas with bodies tall.
Him self his mighty hand to send her forth did set behind.
So did the noble water Nymphs, she swifter than, than wind:
And swifter glaunsing smooth than arow glidyng goes from dow,
To land she leapt, and sauf in haven her self she did bestow.
Aeneas than each man in order due let call by name,
And sir Cloanthus victor chief by Heraldes did proclaim.
And crown of Laurel green about his brows himself he set.
Than gifts for every ship, three hefers large he bids to fet,
And plenty great of wines, and talents fair of silver bright.
But specially the capteins all with due rewards he dight.
A mantell rich to him that wan the chief was given of gold,
Whom purple borders broad enuironned with diverse fold,
And wrought therein there stands a princely child of precious face,
That in the woods with Dart in hand both Heart and Hind does chase.
All lively, breathyng like, whom, falling down from Jove on hie:
An Egle feerce vptooke, The story of Ganimedes.
and in his paws conveyed to sky.
His keepers waylyng stand, and hands abroad to heaven they hold
In vain, and barkyng noise of dogs against the clouds do skold.
But he that second place by doughty deeds deserved had:
A harneys coat to him with heavy hooks of gold bestad,
A harneys coat he gave, whom he him self in battle broyle
Did under Trojan walls from Demoleus breast dispoyle.
That worthy gift he had, and strong defense in arms to wear.
Skant yemen twain with shoulders jointly set the same could bear,
So sondrie fold it was, but Demolee him self alone,
Was wont therein to hunt the straglyng Trojans one by one.
Than for the third renown, two caudrons great he gave of brass,
And silver cups, with signs of stories old engraven that was.
And now rewarded all, each man full proud in best array,
They went with garnisht heads, and bare their gifts galanta gaye.
When from the parlous rock, with much a do to skape the same,
(Besides his loss of ores, and of a rank of rowers lame)
With laughter great of men, his prayselesse ship Sergestus brought,
In manner like, as when some serpent (by some banck unsought)
Is bruised by some wheel, that overthwart his back has past.
Or pilgrim passing by, with stroke of stone welnere has brast,
In vain he seeks to flee, and wriglyng wreathes his limbs about,
His angry half on broke, and hissing neck he launchith out,
All bright with burning eyes, and though his limping half him holds:
He knittes him great in knobbes, and in him self him self he foldes.
Non otherwise, and like, with feeble ores his ship did steer,
Yet sail he makes with wind, and into haven approaches clear.
Aeneas to Sergestus gave reward of duty there,
Rejoicing for the ship, and for the men that sauid were.
A woman him was given, a servant good to weaue and spinne,
And sucking boys a payer, of giauntes kind, her pappes betwinne.
Than good Aeneas went (when all this match dischargid was:)
Running.
Into a goodly field, that ouerspred was all with grass,
Whom woods and crookid hills on every side did compass round,
And in the mids a vale there lay, and pleasant plain of ground,
Where he with thousands thick did make for plays a seemly plat,
And in the mids of al, in stately seat, as prince he sat.
Here they that list to run, and try themselfes with force of feet,
With gifts he them prouokes, and settes before them prises meet.
On every side they came, both men of Troy and Sicill land,
Eurialus and Nisus first.
Eurialus a springold fresh of youth, and beauty clear,
And Nisus that of al mankind had him in love most dear,
And young Diores, of king Priams blood a princely child.
Than Salius and Patron, ancient stocks and vndefilde.
Panopes than, and Helimus, of Sicill, striplings twain,
That hunters were in woods, and men of old Acestes train
And many more also there came, whom fame in darkness hides.
To whom in mids of al, Aeneas thus his tale deuides.
Take this for certain truth, and in your minds conceive it so,
Not one of all this number here shall unrewarded go.
For darts I will them give, with pointed steel full bright a paier,
And wrought with silver fine to bear in hand a Pollar faier.
All men alike shall here rewarded be, save only three,
With bows of Olives green, as victors chief shall crowned be.
The first a palfray bright, with harneys gorgeous glistring brave,
Shall get, the second for his pains a quiver gay shall have.
A quiver gay, with girdle broad of gold and arrows fret,
Embroydryd fine that is, and precious stones thereon are set.
The third shall with this Greekishe helm depart and be content.
When this was said, their place they took, and right incontinent,
At sign of trompet heard, their bounds they break, and out they power,
As light as whirling winds, and to the mark in sight they skowre.
First and before all other bodies, nimble Nisus springs,
More swifter yet than wind, and than the dint of lightnings wings,
Next unto him, but long aloof, in distance next of place,
Does Salius pursue, and after him a certain space,
Eurialus the third.
And next Eurialus sir Helimus ensues, and jointly than
Behold he flies, and heel to heel with him Diores ran,
With elbow next and next, and if the race do long remain:
Is like to escape them all, or one to leave in doubtful gain.
And toward now the latter end they drew, and weary all,
They ran with panting breathes, when suddenly did Nisus fall.
(Unhappy man) where hefers had been slain by chance on grass,
And ground was slypper made by certain blood that shed there was.
There now the gentle lad, (when conquest proud he had in hand)
His legs he could not hold, nor stombling so, could longer stand,
But groueling flat he fell and in the slime embrewd him vile.
Yet not Eurialus his friend, did he forget that while:
For quickly sterting he, sir Salius way with foot did stop,
That headlong down in dust he ouerturnid tail and top.
Eurialus than springing skuddid forth, and through his friend,
With joyful shoutes of men, he gets the chief at races end.
Than Helimus and now Diores third in place succeedes.
There, when the lords were set, and each came forth to claim their meedes:
Sir Salius before them all, with noise exclaming cried,
And prayed his honors dew, that by deceit was him denied.
The peoples favor helps Eurialus, and comely tears,
And virtue found in body fayer the greater grace it bears.
Diores eke, that third in wager was, does him complain
What wrong sustain he must, and al his course has ron in vain,
If Salius, without desert, the first reward shall have.
Than lord Aeneas said, you shall not need to strive nor crave,
Your prises certain ben, shall no man them from order steer.
Yet let me rue the plight of mine unguilty friend so dear.
He said and than a Lions heavy hyde of combrous fold,
To Salius he gives, full rough of hear and paws of gold.
Quoth Nisus than, if such rewards have folks that conquered be,
And pity show thou do to fallinge men, what gifts to me
Shall worthy yielded be? that chiefest prise did first deserve:
Had not envious fortune me (as Salius) made to swerve.
And as he talkid thus, his face he showed with dirt defild,
And body moist of mud. The noble prince on him than smilde,
And bad bring out a sheld, a target great full coastly wrought,
That by the Greeks sometime was for a gift to Neptune brought.
That semely gift he gave unto that gentil lad to bear.
When courses al was past, and all the gifts dispatched were,
Fighting with bags or flappes of lether and lead.
Now he that manhood has, or courage bold does bear in breast,
Show forth himself, and with his arms in thonges let him be dressed.
He said, and therwithall he setts rewards of honors twain.
A crownyd bull, all clad with gold, shall be the victors gain,
A sword and sheld to him that beaten is, shall comfort be.
Nor linger long they do, but straight with force full huge to see,
Aduancyth Dares forth, with murmour great of men extold,
Alone sometime that durst with Paris fight in armor bold.
He, in the place where Hector most of might entombyd lies,
Did overthrow sir Buten, giaunt byg of monstrous sise,
That wrastlyngs all did win, and Bebrix lineage boasted strong.
Yet Dares him to death did ouerturne, and laid along.
Such one this Dares was, and hie on feelde his head he lifts,
And shows his shulders broad, and to and fro his arms he shifts,
And braggs with boistous brawnes, and with his fists he beats the wind,
A match for him they seek, but through them al is non to find,
That durst with Dares coape, nor ones his slings with fingers touch.
He proud thereof, and thinking al men's might to him did couche,
Before Aeneas feet he stood, and longer nothing stayed,
But by the horn in left hand took the bull, and thus he said.
Thou goddess son, if no man dare come forth to try with hand,
What end of waiting is? How long am I thus bound to stand?
Let me rewarded be, the Trojans al did cry the same:
And, yield unto the man his promise due they do proclaim.
Acestes there, as on a banck by chance he next did sit,
With these rebukes of speech Entellus old at heart he smit.
Entellus, thou sometime of doughty knights the capteyn chief,
(In vain) so goodly gifts to lose is it to thee no grief?
How can thou suffer this? shall from thy side with trial non
These worthy pryses pass? O where is now our master gone?
Erix our master good? where is become that gloriouse fame?
That Sicill land did fill? and spoils with thee records the same,
Within thy halls yt hang, is it for naught thou knewst that game?
He theronto: it is not sure for fear (you may well think)
Nor love of praise I lack, nor for no doubt thereof I shrink.
But age me feeble makes, and slothful blood congealyd cold,
Has spent my former force, and dull does make my carcas old.
If I had now the strength sometime that was, and yet wherewith
This yonglyng proudly braggs, if of those years I had the pith:
Not for the prise, nor for the bull, but gladly, and (onpraid)
I would have come, for gifts I care not for. When he thus said,
He brought before them al, of baggs onweldy, matches twain,
And threw them down in sight, wherewith sometime in battle plain
Sir Erix wonted was to give combat, and hand to hand
Against all men to strive, and sturdy strokes he did withstand.
Men's hearts astoinid were. Of backs of bulls seven boistous hides
All vnderlaid with lead, and stif of steel they stood besides.
Above al other wondrith Dares most, and does refuse
Such great onlawfull tools, or in conflict the same to use.
Aeneas eke their massy wondrous weight, and endless fold,
He vewd with marvel much, and up and down full often he rold.
Than onto him with breast onfaynyd, spoke Entellus old.
What if a man had seen the dreadful baggs, and wepons sore
Of Hercules him self? in doolefull fight here on this shore?
These tools thy brother Erix than did bear, with these he stood
Against sir Hercules most strong, here yet thou see the blood,
And brains that broken were, thou see how yet they ben enbrewd.
These wepons I sometime (when better blood my strength endewd)
Was wont in ure to put, when not as yet envious age,
Nor head with hoary hears my lusty courage did aswage.
But if this Trojan Dares here, these tools will needs refuse:
If so Aeneas please, and me Acestes will excuse:
Let us be matchid meet. These Erix baggs I pardon thee.
Cast of thy fear, and thou of Trojan baggs onburdend be.
Thus speaking, from his shulders twain he kest his garments al.
And bare with mighty bones, and mighty joints of members tall,
And sinows great in sight, among them al he stood full stout.
Than baggs of meaner match Aeneas prince him self brought out,
And each with equal weight and hands of both, he bound and dressed.
Upright forthwith they stand, and face to face, aduauncing pressed,
Their arms to heaven they heave, and void of fear they throw their slings,
Each one from others dints their heads full boistous backward wrings,
And strokes in strokes they mix, and hands in hands, and fires they fight,
That one with lusty legs, and fresh of youth in shifring light,
The other huge in heyght, and large of limbs, but moving flow,
His trembling knees him letts and troblid breath does panting blow.
Full many a wound is given between them twain with leaden lomps,
And many a stroke in vain, and on their rybbs full thyck it thomps.
Their sides within the^ sounds, and loud their breasts with bobbings rings,
And still their arms they stur, about their brows the buffets flynges,
About their ears, and crakyng both their jaws their weapons swings.
Entellus heavy stands, and in his place onmouid bydes,
With arms and watchyng eyes, and for the strokes defense prouides.
But he, as one, that with some engine work does siege a town,
Or tower or castle strong, and long thereat is beatyng down,
And this way now, and that way now he seeks, and entries all
Assautes with sundry sleyghtes, and faylyth yet to break the wall.
Entellus rowsing than, his ryghthande bent on hye did lift:
He from the stroke that came, with good foresight and body swift
Aduoiding shranck for fear, and from the dint thereof declinde.
Entellus mist his mark, and al his force he lost in wind,
And over that, himself, with heavy peyse and heavy sound,
All groueling flat he fell, and with his limbs he spread the ground.
Non otherwise, than when some ancient oak and ouergrown,
From mountayn top on hie, by vnderminyng down is thrown.
The Trojans rise for aid, so does the youth of Sicill land,
To heaven the cries ascend, and first to him with helpyng hand
Acestes swiftly runs, and from the ground his freende he takes,
Of equal age, and in his heart for him great moan he makes.
But nothing slack for this, nor with his fall one whit affryght,
This valiant knight vpstood, and fiercer yet renewes his fight:
And forceyng preaseth forth, and wood for wrath his strength vpsteres,
Than shame prouokes his might, and manhood felt of former years,
And headlong Dares down, through all the field, he dashyng dynges,
And now the right hand stroks, and now the left hand sends the slinges,
Nor time, nor rest there is, but as a stormy shoure of hayle,
On houses rattling falls: so does this knight with force assail,
With thondrings thomping thick, and weary Dares wretch on soil
With both his arms he bumpes, and vpside down does toss and toil.
Than lord Aeneas would no longer wrath should in them fret,
Nor more Entellus bitter mood on rage he would have set.
But end of fighting made, and tyeryd Dares up did take,
And soft with gentill speech in comfort thus to him he spoke.
Unhappy man, what fond outrage has thus possessed thy mind?
A stronger force than thine, and Gods against thee do not find?
Give place to god, he said, and with his word the batell brake.
Him dragging weak his legs, and to and fro his head did shake,
And casting much at mouth, and cloddrid blood with teeth among,
His trusty mates vptooke, and bare to shyps a way from throng.
And than commanded came, and sword and helmet did receive,
And to Entellus did the bull and fame of combat leave.
Than bragging proud in mind, and of his bull conceiuyng joy:
O goddess son behold, and you (quod he) ye men of Troy.
What strength in lusty years sometime I had now judge in me,
And from what death your Dares taken is, now shall you see.
He spoke that word, and right afront before the bull he stood,
That there for gift was set, and up the slinges with courage good
In righthand marking held, and just between the horns at ones
He struck, and brake the brains, and al in pieces drove the bones.
The beast is ouerthrown, and groueling dead on ground it quakes.
He stamping thereupon, with fervent mind his prayer makes.
This better soul to thee for Dares death I victor send,
(O Erix) here of bags, and al min art I make an end.
Anon Aeneas them that list contend with arowes wight,
Shotyng.
For wagers he prouokes, and settes before them gifts in sight.
And from Sergestus ship aduauncing huge in heyght a mast,
He hanges a pigeon there, and by a cord he made her fast.
A mark for men to shote, and where their darts they should direct.
Assembly great there came, and by their lottes they were elect,
In brazen helmet cast, and first of al with joyful cries,
Unto Hippocon worthy lad by draught the lot does rise.
Next whom sir Mnesteus, that late at seas was victor seen,
Sir Mnesteus with crown and garlond gay of Olyue green.
Eurition was third: (thy brother dear thou noble knight
O Pandarus, that did sometime the leage asonder smight,
And first commanded did, among the Greeks thy wepon throw)
Acestes last of all, and last in helmet lay by low.
Him self also with hand, the young men's game did not disdain.
Than bending al their bows, their courage great they do constrayne,
And each to serve him self from quiver draws his tools amain.
And first from sounding string along by heaven his arow drives
Hippocon lusty lad, and swift therewith the skies he cliues,
It lights apace, and in the midds the mast it stack and stayed.
The tree with trembling shook, and of the stroke the bird afraied,
Did flickring flushe her wings, and noise there rises round about.
Than Mnesteus his bow to draw, forthwith with strength stood out.
And stretching hand aloft, his dart and eye did level right,
Yet could not he (good man) for all his art the culuer smight.
But hit the hemping cord, and of the knot the bands he brast,
Whereby the byrd was bound, and by her foot did hang at mast.
She took the wind forwith, and to the clouds full fast she flewe,
And even that time (as he his bow and dart directing drew)
Eurition, and for his brothers help in heaven, he cried:
The byrd he saw was lose, and sporting her in skies he spied.
Yet markyng well with eyes, and steadfast hand, in clouds above,
He quickly brake her play with sodein stroke, and slew the Dove,
That tumblyng down she fell, and in the stars her life she laft,
And dead she came to ground, and in her body brought the shaft.
Acestes than alone, with no desert did yet remain.
Who nerethelesse his dart to hurl in air did him distrayne.
And shewde his former might, and of his bow to prove the sound,
There suddenly their eyes a wondrous monster did confound,
And token sore of things, as afterward the end did teach,
And all to late for naught their fearful songs did prophets preach.
For as in tender clouds his arow swift from him did fly,
In sight it caught a fire, and flaming forth it went in sky.
And wasted thin in wind, as oftentimes we think do slide,
The fixed stars of heaven, with drowpyng tails along that glyde.
Astoynid al they stood, and on their Gods above they prayed,
Sicilians and Trojans both, nor he him self denayed
Aeneas peerless prince, to take that same in sign of grace.
But glad with great rewards, he did Acestes thus embrace.
Most noble father dear, (for by these tokens well I see,
The mighty king of heaven for thy good will does honor thee,)
Thou shall have here a gift of old Anchises friend of thine,
A drinkyng bolle of gold, that portraied is with figures fine.
Which unto him sometime, Cisseus, great of Thrace the king,
In token gave of love, for evermore with him to bring.
So spoke he, and with Laurel green his temples twain he tied,
And loud before them all Acestes victor chief he cried.
Nor good Eurition did his preferment ought envy,
Though he alone it were, that brought again the bird from sky.
Advanced next with gifts was he that cord a sonder brast,
And last of all was he that with his arow struck the mast.
Than lord Aeneas, ere these matches all dissolved were,
Epitides to him, Ascanius mate and keeper there,
He calde, and roundyng thus to him he spoke in secret ear.
Go bid Ascanius (if by this time he the childerns crew
Assembled has with him, and horses put in order due)
Before his graunsire here let him bring out his bands in row,
For worship of this feast, and let him self in armor show.
Dispatche (quod he) with speed, the people than he bids divide,
And broader spread them selves, and made a lane both long and wide,
Than come the childern forth, and proud before their parents sight
In order seemly shine, on barbed coursers brideled bright,
Whom for their fresh array, and comely marchyng through the field,
The youth of Sicill land, and Trojans all with joy beheld.
Each one as was their gyse, with rounded hear, and garlond bands,
And horny darts a payer, with poynted steel they bare in hands,
With quiuers light at backs and down their breasts in diverse fold,
About their gorgets runs, the rollyng cheines of wreathed gold.
Three bands of horsemen were, and capteyns three their bands did gide,
And ranks of riders three, and childern twelve on every side
In glisteryng armor went, with masters like and equal peers,
One ward of stronger youth, whom trim triumphant fearce of years,
Did Priam young conduct (thy noble child Polites tall,
That of his gransirs name increase Italians shortly shall.)
A valiant steed him bare, bespotted white, of kind of Thrace,
And white his foot before, and lifting white his loftly face.
Another trowpe the was, that little Atis giding lad,
The little Atis, whom Ascanius small for darling had.
From whence the line at Rome of Atis name does now proceed.
Than last of all, and most of beauty bright, and precious weed,
Ascanius himself on palfray gorgeous borne above,
Whom unto him sometime Queen Dido gave for pledge of love.
The rest of youth, and such as were of old Acestes train:
On horses fayer they rode.
The Trojans them did chere, and did receive with wondrous joy,
And in their minds conceive resemblaunce old of former Troy.
When mustrid all they had, and all the feeld had compast round,
And vewd Anchises tomb, they ioynyd al on equal ground,
Epitides to them with noise and whipping gave a sound.
They courfing brake their bands, and three from three disseuered all.
By matches half from half, and fast again they turn at call,
With wepons breast, to breast and compass round returning met,
By coursings byckring brave, and race with race entangling let,
Inuading skyrmishe wise, and like the face of battall fight.
And now retire they done, now show their backs in sign of flight.
Now turning throw their darts, now truce they make with hand in hand.
Like Labirinthus maze, that men report in Candi land,
Is compast deep in ground with sundry walls, and crokings blind,
And thousand wandering ways, and entries false for men to find,
Where tokens non there be, nor skape can non that steps astray,
Such turnings them begiles, and so deceytful is their way.
Non otherwise, the Trojan youth by coursings round about,
Disporting chase them selfs, and windyngs weaue both in and out.
Like Dolphin fishes light, that for their pastyme daunsing swim,
In mids of depest seas, and play them selves on water brimme.
This kind of pastime first, and custom boys to learn at Baase,
How play of Baase come up.
Ascanius when Alba walls he made, did bring in place.
And taught the Latins old, in solemn sort to use the same,
As he sometime a child, with Trojan youth had made that game.
The Albans than from thence with practice like their children taught,
And thens has perelesse Rome and most of might, that custom caught.
And for their contreys love, with honor due this day it stands,
And yet the name remaynes of Troyan boys, and Trojan bands.
Thusfarfurth worshipped was, his father dear with service due.
There fortune false to trust, did turn their case with chaunges new.
For, as about Anchises tomb with plays the time they spent:
Dame Juno down from heaven the Rainbowe read her servant sent, A new vexation
by Inno.

Reuoluing former grief, and rancours old not yet from mind,
Against the Trojan fleet, and as she went she gave her wind.
She swiftly bent her bow, and through the clouds with thousand hewes,
Full virginlike she falls, her new devise onknown, to use.
A huge concourse she sees, and compass wide she vews the strandes,
How bare the hauons are left, and navy dry defenceles stands.
But secret by them selfs, the Troyan wives assembly kept,
And for Anchises loss lamenting sore they stood and wept.
Beholding broad the seas: alas, alas, O wretches we,
So much of boistous waves remains us yet that weary be?
A town to dwell they crave, and of the seas abhor the pain,
Each one to other wayles, and all with one voice do complain.
Dame Rainbowe subtle there, amidds them all her self did place,
Her garments gay she left, and laid a side her goddess face,
And of Doriclus wife the likeness took, a sober dame,
That sometime great renown, and children bare of noble fame,
And Beroe was called, and thus to them she did proclaim.
O women misers most, whom hands of Greeks would never kill,
O cursid nation, when of thee shall fortune have her fill?
What death, or mischief more are we thus kept to bide at last?
Sins Troy vproted was, now summers seven are comen and past,
That we through seas and lands, and contreys all (the world beside)
To straungy stars of heaven, and endless streams we wander wide,
In seeking land that flees, and we always with surges tossed.
Here is our country ground, here dwelles Acestes dear our host.
Why should we hence remove? who lets us here our walls to bilde?
O former native soil, O country gods (in vain exilde)
Shall never Troy vpryse? shall city Trojan never be?
Those Hectors wholesome streams shall I from henceforth never see?
Come on (good wives) come burn with me these ships of luck unkind.
For so Cassandra through my dream apeering did me bind.
And gave me burning brondes, seek here (quod she) your Trojan walls,
Here lies your country rest, this is the time that fortune calls,
What need we longer look? lo Neptunes altars four on fire,
Lo god himself (you see) with minds and might does us enspier.
Thus talkid she, and with a brond in hand full fierce she sprang,
With (whirling loof aloft) against the fleet the same she flang.
The rest amasyd were, their hearts astoinid stood with rage.
Than one among them all, dame Pirgo matrone most of age,
King Priams nurse that was, and princely children up did rear:
Not Beroe (quod she) this woman is, you wives I swear,
Nor neighbor none of ours, behold what beauty bright divine,
What lively sprite she bears, and mark me well her glistring eyes,
Her look, her sounding voice, and of her pace the great estate.
I left dame Beroe my self at home full sick but late.
Full sick lamenting sore that she her self from us alone,
This day must absent be, and yield Anchises worship none.
This spoken:
Therewith the matrons first, with wavering minds began to dout.
And with peruersid eyes beheld the navy round about.
And what between the love of present land, and present rest,
And fame of fatal realms: they wot not which of them is best.
When lifting up her self to clouds above with equal wings,
In flight before them all, with bow full broad the goddess springs.
Than verily with monsters wild affright, and mad for ire,
They cry to burn their ships, and from their tents they reaue the fire.
Some spoil their altar piles, and burning bows, and slicks, and brandes,
Abourd the ships they spreede, vpleapith flame with loosid bands,
On hatches, decks, and ores, and plancks anoyntid thick on sides.
Unto Anchises tomb, Eumelus post with panting rides,
And shows the ships are brent, and they them selves beholding spy,
The sparcklings rising broad, and blustering smoke to sprede in sky.
And first Ascanius as coursings still he kept and played,
He took the camp in have, that with uproar was all dismayed,
Nor for their lives his masters him could hold, or backward send,
What sodeyn rage is this? where now (quod he)? what do ye entend?
O neyghbors, wretched wives, your enmies host you have not here,
This is no Greek is he camp, you burn your own relief most dear.
Lo I Ascanius your own, and to the ground his helmet kest,
Wherewith in bataill plays, he for disport that time was dressed.
Aeneas eke with have, and Trojans, all thereto them sped.
But straggling diverse ways, through all the shores the women fled,
To woods, and mountayn caves, and holes of rocks they miching run,
And creeping hide them selfs, repenting foul their work begone.
Abhorring sight of heaven, and on their friends they think and quake,
With better change of mind, and from their breast dame Juno shake.
But not therefore the flames, nor burning rage the lesser spreedes,
But catching still increase, it more and more prevailing breeds.
And spitting spewes a smoke, whom vapor wild of pitche and towe,
And dropping timber feeds, and mischief close in keele does grow,
Nor might of men can help, nor water floodes that on they throw.
Aeneas from his shulders than his garments tearing brast,
And calde his gods for help, and broad to heaven his hands did cast.
Almighty Jove, if not as yet all Trojans from thy mind
Rejected ben to death, if service old of poor mankind
Not utterly be lost: now save these ships from burning fire.
Good father now, preserve these Troyan goods, and small desire,
Or thou thy self (which one thing yet remaynes) with lightning fell
Here whelme me down to death, if I deserve, and drive to hell.
Skant spoken were these words: when rattling storm not seen before,
And rain downraging falls, and thonders thick does rombling rore,
That tremblith hills and fields, down roll the skies in gushing shoures,
And troublous water streams from all the heaven the tempest powers.
That ships therewith are fyld, and burning bourds are quenchid quite,
And still descending drives, and on the fleet with force does smite,
Till smoke was ceassyd al, and all the ships from plage was kept.
So sauid al they were (by gift of god) but four except.
But lord Aeneas whom this great mischaunce did pinche at breast,
With heaps, of hugy cares, now this, now that, was sore oppressed,
Reuoluing much in mind, should he remayn in Sicill lend:
Forgetting destnies al, or still go seek Italia strond.
Than father Nautes old, whom goddess Pallas learnid had,
With arts of worship great, and famous name of wisdom sad:
These answers him did tell, which either gods eternal ire,
Or fatel destnies wrought, or fortunes course did so require,
And thus with freendly speech Aeneas mind he set on fire.
O goddess son, where destnies draws and drives let us go there,
What ever it is, who conquer fortune will, must fortune bear.
Thou have Acestes here, of Troyan blood and stock divine,
His counsel take to thee, and join with him advise of thine.
And leave with him those people which thy ships can not receive,
And such as of thy great affairs no corrage does conceive,
Both aged feeble folks, and wives of seas that weary be,
And all that fearful is, or weak of strength should comber thee,
Let them be chosen forth, and here on gods name city frame,
And of Acestes name, Acesta they shall call the same.
Incensyd so by this (for from his friend this council past)
Than verily from care to care his mind discoursyd fast.
And night with darkness dymme, the poles of heaven had vndercast.
That time his fathers face descendyng down, in vision clear,
From heaven appering came, and suddenly thus did him cheer.
My son, more dear to me than life sometime, when life I had,
My son, whose virtues Troy does try, by destnies good and bad,
Commanded here I come, from mighty Jove in skies above,
That comfort sent at last, and from the fleet did fire remove.
Obey the counsels good, which faithful Nautes the has told,
And for Italia land, pike out a youth of courage bold,
To take with the to seas: an eger nation feers and tough
Thou have to vainquish there, and must subdue in batailes rough.
Yet first Auerna cave, and under grownd the dwellings grimme,
Of Lymbo must thou see, and dangers pass of darkness dymme.
And thens ascend to me, for I (my son) am not in hell:
Nor with no wickid kind of woeful ghostes have I to dwell.
But fields of pleasur pure, and Paradise, does me retain,
With joyful sort of souls, in blisfull state that do remain.
There Sibly pure, by offryngs black of beasts shall thee conduct,
And there thine offspring al, and fortunes al I shall thee instruct.
And now farewell, for midnight moist her half course hens does wrethe,
And dawning day with blast of horses, hot on me does breathe.
Sprites can not abide the da^ light.
He spoke, and thin from sight as smoke, in skies dispersed he styed.
What now: where ghost away? why do thou shrynke? Aeneas cried.
Whom fleest thou thus? or who from sweet embracings us withsta^des?
Thus talked he, and from the dust he steres the steepinge brandes.
And Trojan sacred fire of Gods that evermore does dure,
And offrid simple flower, and frankinsens, in plenty pure:
Strayt for his mates he called, and first onto Acestes old
Commandments great of Jove, and what his father dear had told,
He shows before them all, and where unto his mind enclines.
Nor counsel long they make, nor good Acestes ought repines.
A town they measur forth, and wines and people there they plant
Of baser hearts, deserving worship small, for courage skant.
Them selfs their ships repare, and burnid bourdes anew restores,
And cables meet they make, and shrowdes and sails, and strength of ores.
A youth of number few, but lively bluddes in battle tough.
Therwhiles, Aeneas did the cities plat describe with plough,
And houses laid by lot, here Ilion toures: here gates of Troy
He sets: and of his kingdom new Acestes makes joy.
And market place he made, and laws he taught and judges gave
Than large and broad in sight right nere the stars, a temple grave
To Venus founded is, in hiest place, and priest divine
To serve Anchises tomb, and sacred grove thereon to shine.
And now nine days this people feasted had, and altars all
Applied with offringes due, and sun had made the sea to fall,
And sound of pipling wind, eftsoon to deep their ships does call:
A wondrous weeping noise through all the shores is reisyd wide,
And all that night and day they tween themselves embracing bide.
The matrones now themselves that of the seas were erst affraied,
And dowted labors long, and of their strength dispairing stayed,
Now gladly go they will, and travails al sustain at seas.
Whom good Aeneas did his best with friendly speech to apeas,
And weeping did commend unto Acest his kinsman dear.
Three Calves to Erix than, and to the storms a lamb full clear,
He biddes for offering kill: and cables loose through all the strandes.
Him self with garland fresh, and crownet green of Olive bands,
Aduauncing stood in ship, and bolle in hand he held on hie,
And flesh in fludds he threw, and wines in plenty kest in sky.
Behind them blows a cool, and wind at will them forth does drive,
His mates they skomme the foam, and saltsea brine to turn they strive.
But Venus in this while, whom care for Trojans sore did strain,
To Neptune straight she came, and thus to him began to plain.
The grievous wrath of Iunos breast, whom no revenge can slake,
Compells me (Neptune) now to thee, all humble suit to make,
Whom neither length of time, nor pity non, from rancor stays,
Nor destnies order non, nor Jove him self one whit she ways.
She thinks it not enough the Troyans town to have down torn,
And all their last remain with turmentes long almost forlorn,
The bones and powder poor she persecutes, and all their brood
She would destroy, let her declare one cause of such a mood,
Thy self can record bear, how in the waves of Lyby coast,
What wild uproar she made, and seas and skies turmoyling tossed.
With storms of Aeolus her friend, and all with labor vain:
So bold within thy kingdoms thus to do.
O vile despite, lo yet of late how Troyan wives in fume
She made their ships to burn, and foul their navy to consume,
And leave their kindred there, in country strange onknown to bide.
There is no more, but let us now (I pray thee) saufly ride
In sailing through thy seas, let us arrive where Tyber flows,
If granted things I are, if destnies us those kingdoms shows.
Than spoke Neptune, that hie seas does control with lordly brows
Good reason Venus is, that in my kingdoms thou be bold,
From whence thy lineage leads, I have deseruid eke of old.
Full oftentimes ere this, both seas and skies unkindly rage
I bridling couchid have, and madness wood did often aswage.
Nor less my care on land, as all the streams of Troy can tell,
Was for Aeneas thine, when fierce Achilles did compel
His throngs in field to fall, when thousands thick down tombling dead
He under Troyan walls with slaughter wood did trampling tread.
That brokes and rivers cried, when peoples heaps their channels filled,
Nor fall to seas they could, nor find their ways for bodies kilde.
I from Achilles than, Aeneas thine, full sore beslad
In fight, (that neither force with him nor gods indiffrent had)
Conueid away by cloud, when piece from piece I would have torn.
(Min own handworck that was) the walls of Troy so falls forsworn.
And now also that mind with me remains: cast of thy dreede,
In hauons where thou do wish he shall ariue right saufe with speed.
One only man shall be, whom lost in deep seas he shall seek,
One poll shall walk for all.
When he the goddess breast with speaking thus had put from care,
As prince his horses proud he cupling set and bound in chare,
With fomy bridlyng bittes, and lowsing gave them all the raines,
Full smoth his charet slides, and blew sea brim it skantly straynes.
Down sinck the surging waves, and great sea swollen in thondry skies,
Does couche their waters close, from all the heaven the ratches flies.
Than sundry fourmes and faces show them selfs, onweldy whales,
And mossy Glaucus gray, and mankind monsters void of skales,
And Pollantines, and armies broad of seals, and Dolphins blew,
And Tritons blow their Trumpes y^ sounds in seas with dropping flew.
Dame Thetis lefthand keeps, and dance does lead of Mermaydes all,
And Ladies bright, that leapyng lives in seas with bodies tall.
There lord Aeneas secret mind a sodeyn joy did fetch,
He bids them reyse their Mastes, and all their sails abroad to stretche.
Together to their tacles all they step, and slackyng lines,
To Larbourd now they set, and now to Starbourd sails enclines,
And halyng hoyse their wings, that shrowdes and hooks and bowlines bends
And swift in seas they swim, Palinure his principal pylot.
the wynds them selves their navy sends.
As prince and pilot chief, sir Palinure his course does bear,
Before them all, and each to mark at him commanded were.
And now from heaven the drowpyng night her mid course nere had past,
And folks in slumber sweet, their weary limbs on rest had cast:
And Mariners had laid them selves on hatches hard of bars:
When lightyng swift, from skies, the God of steape did fall from stars,
And brake the darcke of night, with glimsyng shade of feigned beams.
To thee (O Palinure) and brought to thee right heavy dreams,
Without desert, and on the puppe full hie his seat did take,
Resemblyng Phorbas face, and unto him these words he spoke.
Friend Palinure, lo how the tides themselves conueys the fleet,
This gale by measure blows: an hour of rest to take is meet.
Lay down thy head, and steal thy painful eyes one nap of fleepe,
I will for thee my self supply thy rowme thy helm to keep.
Whom aunswerd Palinure, skant liftyng eyes for slumber deep:
Know, I not yet my seas? what? think thou me so small of wit?
To trust this fawnyng face? shall I my lord and prince commit,
To this inconstant beast? should I believe that monster wild?
So often as I with flattring seas, and skies have been begylde?
Such things he spoke, and holding hard at helm he cleauid fast,
And still did serve the streams, and still on stars his eyes did cast.
Behold, the God on him a broppyng branch of Lymbo pyt
With deadly sleepyng dew, on both his temples dashyng smyt.
And struggling to resist, his swimming eyes with sleep oppressed.
Skant first resoluyd were his weery lymmes with sodeyn rest,
And leanyng noddyd low: when half the puppe with him he drew,
And rother, helm, and all, in mids of seas he falling threw
Quyte hedlong over bourd, and calling often his mates in vain.
The God than took his wings, and thin in wind he went again.
Yet nerethelesse therefore, with sauf conduct their fleet did pas,
And careless ronnes their course, as god Neptunus promise was.
And now they entering were the straytes, Sirenes rocks that hight,
A parlous place sometime, and yet with bones of people whight.
Than breaking broad the fludds, the saltsea stones full hoarce did sound,
When lord Aeneas felt his ship to stray and master dround.
And took himself the giding than thereof in seas by night,
Lamenting much in mind his friends mischaunce and heavy plight,
O Palinure, that flattring seas and skies to much did trust,
All nakid on some strangy sand onburied lie thou must.
DEO GRATIAS.
Per Thomam Phaer,
in foresta Kilgerran, finitum iiii. Maii. Anno. 1557. post periculum eius
karmerdini. Opus xxiiii. dierum.
The syxt book of the Aeneidos of Virgil.
The Argument.
When Aeneas was come to Cumas, he went unto Sibyllas den, where doing
sacrafice according to the custom: he asks counsel at the Oracle of Apollo,
and there learneth both the dangers at hand, and the success of future wars.
Misenus body which he found on the shore he burns, his furniture, and his
spoils he burieth under the next hill, which thereof was called Misenus. From
thence, by direction of Dooues, he was braught to the golden boughe, which
being gathered, and having appeased, and worshipped the infernal gods with
slain sacrafice: by conduct of sibylla he goes down to hell, through the
mouth of Auernus. He finds Palinurus wandryng about the lake of STYX, because
his body was unburied, and when sibylla had refused to take him over unto the
farther shore, which he requested: Aeneas puts him in good comfort with
exequies, and hope of honorable burial. From thence Aeneas passing over styx,
and castyng Cerberus in a sleep with a medcined soppe, taking his journey
through the place of Infantes, and of such as were wrongfully condemned, and
put to death undeservedly: he comes unto the seats of those, that through
impaciencie of love, had shortened their own days, where espying Dido, when he
would have purged him self unto her: disdaynfully she avoided his sight. Then
departing thence, he came to the habitation of those that were sometime famous
in war, where he saw Deiphobus torn, and rent with many wounds, and is there
by him informed by what cruel and shamfull means he came to his death.
Afterward, leaving Tartarus on the left hand, and being by sibylla instructed
in the punishments of the wicked: he approaches nigh the walls of Pluto, and
there sticks up the golden bough even in the Queens entry, and from thence
he proceeds to the fields of the blessed, and is by Musaeus braught unto his
father. There Anchises declares unto his son AENEAS the order, and
succession of the Albane, and Roman kings, and runnyng over the names of
certain of the Roman nobility: comes to the commendation of Julius, and
Augustus Caesar's, and wonderfully extolleth Marcellus the son of Octauia, who
was suddenly cut of by untimely drath. Then going forth out of the Iuery gate
upon the earth: visits his mates, and leauyng Cumas, sayleth to Caiera.

SO talkyd he with tears, Here he comes to Italy at Cumas.
and to his fleet he gave the raines.
And at the last on Cumas coast Italia land attaines.
Their foreships al from seabourd tha^ they turn, and ankers
They pitching laid a la^d, and all the crokid shores along (strong
Their ships in order set, out leapes the youth with long desire
To tread Italia land, some seek for seeds of lurking fire
In secret veins of flints, some break the bedds of beasts onkind,
And reauing spoil their dens, some show what woods, He visites the temple of
Apollo at Cumas where sibilla that time did prophe cie. Dedalus made the temple
at Cumas Diverse histories graue^ upon the walls. City of Athenes. Pasiphae
wife to king Minos of Candy. A monster half man, half bull.
what floodes they find.
But good Aeneas to Apollos church, and temple towers,
He went to seek the secret cave of Siblies dreedfull bowres.
A vaute of widenes wast, where mighty sprite, and mighty mind
Apollo her inspires, that al thing knows in secret kind.
And things that fatal ben he does to her full broad unfold.
And now the sacrid groves they see, and houses bright of gold.
By old report when Dedalus from Minos kingdom fled,
With bold attempt of wings he took the skies hie ouerhead.
And Northward fast he slew, a passage strange unseen before,
And lighting down at last, he stood a land on Cumas shore.
There he ariuid first, and there (O Phoebus bright to thee)
Did consecrate his wings, and made a temple huge to see.
Upon the doors Androgeos death there stands, than year by year
How Athens was compeld, (a wretchid thing), their children dear
By couples seven and seven, both sons, and daughters bound in bands,
To send to slaughter vile, the pot with lotts there ready stands.
Right theragainst in seas does Candy kingdoms answer full.
There Pasiphae was made, and next to her there stood the bull
With tokens foul of love, and how by stelth, in metal thin
She underlay that beast, with stinking lust of loathsome sin.
And Minotaure there was, the mongrell vile of mixed kind,
Inclosid kept in maze, where issue non there was to find.
There lay the labor sore, and wandering house of endless ways,
In corners croking dark, a woeful work for them that straies.
But Dedalus, that pity did the Queens outrageous love,
Him self the craft did teach, and dangers all he did remove,
Icarus son to Dedalus slew from Candy with his father and was drowned by the
way in the sea,
By giding through the dark her passage blind by threde full fine.
And thou O Icarus also among those works divine
Had had no slender part, if sorrows him not let had.
Two times in shining goold, thy drowing fall with heart full sad
Thy father there began, and twice his hands for fainting fell.
These stories old, and things of former fame right long to tell
They should have ouervewd, when (sent of purpose there before)
Achates did return, and brought the priest with head full hoare,
That seruid Phoebus church, now called thereof mare Icarium.
and did Dianas offerings make,
And Deiphebe she hight, and to the king these words she spoke.
This time requirith not with gasing thus to linger there.
Now hefers seven to kill, to serve the gods more wisdom were.
And seven of chosen sheep (as custom is) you should have brought.
These things she spoke, and they furtwith her just commaundment wrought.
Discriptio^ of siblies cave in the temple and how she prophesied at certain
hours by fittes. The said cave yet remains.
Than she the Trojan lords into the temple gorgeous calls.
A cave there is, cut out in rock, even through the temple walls,
Both huge and broad at mouth, a hundred vautes, a hundred doors,
A hundred roarings sound, when Siblies answers beats the floores.
Before the same they stood, when she the virgin close within,
Diskried her self and spoke. Now does (quod she) my time begin
To learn at god, lo here comes god. As she thus babbling prates,
All suddenly, with faces more than one, before the gates,
And colors more than one, disfigurid wild she stood in trance.
Her hear vpsterting stands, her trembling breast does panting praunse.
Her heart outraging swells, nor mortallyke she lokes at last:
Above mankind she speaks, when of the god she felt the blast
No grace without prayer.
In sprite approaching near. And standst thou still, and do not pray?
Thou Trojan thou? (quod she) and standst thou still? shall not this day
One door disclose it self till prayer come. When she thus said,
She silence made: than quaking cold in Troyans limbs affrayd
Did ron through al their bones, Aeneas oration to Phoe bus and to siblye.
and thus their king full humbly prayed.
O Phoebus, whom the painful toils of Troy did ever grieve,
Thou that sir Paris hand and dart (poor Troyans to releue)
Directing did conduct, and gave Achilles mortal wound,
Thus many mighty seas that mighty lands encompas round
I entryd have by thee, through nations wild, and parlous strands,
Through coasts of mountayn Moors, and contreys close of Sirtes sands.
And now Italia shore (always that shrancke) we touch at last.
Thus farfurth now have we through dangers al our fortune past.
And you also your indignations great is time to end,
You gods and goddesses each one, whom Troy did ought offend
With glory great of pride, eke thou, (O sacred prophet true)
That fortunes do forsee, (I ask nothing but kingdoms due
That destny does me give), Italia land let us enjoy,
Our wandering gods to place, and relikes dear outcast of Troy.
Than I, to Phoebus clear and to Diana, temples pure
Of marble stone shall make, This was accomplished afterward, and in rome there
were x. interpreters of siblies books, called december viri sibillini, with a
college of the same. sibil reststed til the sprite compelled her.
and feasts that evermore shall dure.
Rewards also to thee, and offerings great for thee shall stand
Within my kingdoms all, and I my self shall out of hand
Enrolle thy sacryd lotts, and dities, dear of holy rymes.
My people them shall learn, and chosen men at standing times
Shall consecratid be, thy mighty mind that shall expound.
Do thou this time thy self thy verses speak with perfect sound.
Nor write no line in leaves, lest whirling wind therewith may play,
Confounding then from course, and lest in skies they fly their way.
He endid thus. Speak thou (quod he) thy self I humbly pray.
But wrestling wild as yet, against the god in thentry large
Dame Sibly mombling made, and struggling strong withstode the charge,
If happily so she might the gods enforcing shake from breast:
But he prevailing still, with more and more her sprite oprest.
Her heart, her raging mouth, he taming stayed and fixed fast.
And now along the cave, a hundred doors were open brast
Of proper strength, and through the vaute these answers out she cast.
O thou that dangers great of seas at last have skapid all,
But greater things on land remains for thee. The Troyans shall
To Lauin kingdom come, siblies voice.
cast from thy breast that point of fear.
But sone repent they shall, and curse the time that brought them there.
Repent right sone they shall: wars, dredful wars vprising grows,
And Tyber flood I see, with fomy blood how thick it flows.
Eft sons of Troyan streams nor Greekish camps thou shall not fail,
And in Italia thee a new Achilles shall assail,
That borne of goddess is, nor from the Troyans Juno stout
Shall one where absent be, when thou at need extreme for dout,
What nations of Italya land shall be? what cities great?
That thou that time for aid with humble suit shall not entreat?
The cause of all this woe, shall be a wife of forayne line.
A forain spouse yet ones ageyn to Troyans.
Yet for these mischiefs all do thou not shrink, but bolder prease,
Where thee thy fortune leads, thy chiefest health and cause of peace,
(Where least thou do sespect) shall from a Greekish town apeere.
These words did Sibly speak, and rapt with spright in cave oncleere,
Her compass crokyd songs, and doubtful rimes she belwing soundes,
Inuoluing truth in darck, such bridling bittes and rauing bounds
Truth in darkness.
Apollo gives his priest, and close to preach he pricks her breast.
When first her pattring mouth and raging limbs were left at rest,
Aeneas prince began. No trauail new this is to me
O virgin pure, nor face of labor non unfelt I see.
All this I do conceive, and in my mind considrid late.
One thing I shall desire, (for here men say begins the gate
Of great infernal king, and darcksome floodes by hell that fleet)
Give licens me to go to seek and see my father sweet.
Vouchsaue to gide my way, and holy doors do open make.
Him I from thousands swords, and burning flames away did take.
These shulders, even these shulders, through the foes did bring him out,
He passage took with me, with me al streams and lend about,
And threatenings all of seas and tempests all with weary pain,
Above his age and strength, onweeldy man, he did sustain.
And now that I this time before thy door so meekely pray:
He me commanded thus. Have pity now of both us tway
O sacred virgin pure (for thou may all) nor here in vain
Diana thee has set, on Lymbo woods to rule and rain.
If Orpheus obteynid ones his wife from under ground:
By singing sweet at harp, and striking stringes of pleasant sound:
If Pollux did his brothers death redeem with his exchange,
And went and came so often, what should I talk of Theseus strange?
Or strongest Hercules? my self from hie Jove to descend.
An easy way to hell.
These things he talked thus, and fast he held the altars end.
Than prophet Sibly said. O borne of blood of heavenly kind,
Thou Trojan duke, the way that leads to hell is light to find
Both nights and days, the door of Limbo black does open gape.
But backward up to clime, and free to skies eftsoon to skape,
There worck, there labor is: few men whom equal Jove did love,
Or virtue percing al, did to the stars advance above,
Could worck so great a worck that midwaies al ar compast wide
For he must never theles afterward. She apoints him first to the golden tree
whereby is signified wisdom that ouercometh al things.
With deserts darck of woods, and slimy flood full black does slide.
But if so great desire, such fervent love thou have in mind,
Two times to look on hell, two times to swim those lakes onkind,
If pleasour ought there be, this frantike toil to lake on thee:
These things first must thou do. In shadows great there lurks a tree,
With golden cropps and bows, with leaves and branches smothe of gold:
Which to Diana deep, infernal Queen, is sacred hold.
This tree has every wood, and dark in vales does hide with shade.
But no man breathing life can under ground have power to trade,
Til from those goldilocks of bows he brings one branch divine,
Which to her self for chief reward Diana does assign.
When one bough broken is, another springs as fresh in sight
Of gold, and twigges are ever like, with buddes of metal bright.
Seek out therefore with speed, and when thou duly have it spied,
Lay thou thereon thy hand, for willingly with eas, onwried
It self it shall releas, if dest nies thee thereto do call:
For otherwise not break it will, for strength, nor wepons all.
Moreover, now thy friend deceassyd lies with corpse on ground,
Alas unware thou art, and al thy fleet he does confound,
While here thou harkning standst, and councels great of God do crave.
Him first go bring to earth, and give to him his worthy grave.
And slaughters black of beasts for sins redemption see thou lead.
So may thou Limbo woods, where breathing man may never tread,
Behold at last, (quod she.) With that, her mouth she stopping stayed.
Aeneas mourninge went, with fixed eyes on ground dismayed.
And leaving thus the cave, He found his tro^pettour Misenus dead on the land.
these fortunes hard and chances blind
He pondring did reuolue, so did with him Achates kind,
And jointly step by step with equal cares they walking went.
Much talk between them twain of sundry things they speaking spent,
What friend dame Sibly means, what corpse it is they should entiere.
But when to shore they came, onware on sand approaching near,
Misenus stain they see with giltles death, their friend full dear.
Misenus trompet sounder chief, whose nobler never was,
In kindling men with noise, and fighting fields to cheer with bras.
Sometime sir mighty Hectors mate he was, to Hector strong
With trompet bold and spear he courage gave in battle throng.
But when that him from life Achilles victor spoilid had,
Unto Aeneas Trojan prince this vailiant captain sad
Did place him self as peer, and nothing worse his chance he drew.
But than (as mischief was) while brazen trompe he swimming blew
For pride, and calling to compare the Gods of seas did grieve:
Triton a fish with a tro^pet did drown. Misenus in the sea for spite,
Him Triton took for spite (if men may beldly this believe)
And dragd him through the rocks, and deep in seas his enmy drowned.
The Troyans than with noise his body dead encompast round,
And good Aeneas chief, than to a complish Siblies charge,
No longer time they take, but weeping fast an altar large
They lade with timber logges, and hie to heaven a pile they bilde.
Into a forest old they gone, and hauntes of beasts vnmilde,
Down tombling crake the trees, vprisith sound of axes strokes,
Both holmes, and beches broad, and beams of ash, and shides of oaks,
Which wedges great they clyue, and mountain elmes with leauers roll.
Aeneas eke their work with courage kindling did controlle.
And tools in hand he took, and foremost man amongst then wrought.
Yet heaviness in heart he bare, and often thus he thought,
If now this golden branch will through this forest thick apeere,
Than verily right true it is (as al things else ben clear)
And too too true (alas) of thee she spoke Misenus dear.
Skant spoken were these words, when culuers twain by chance in sight
Came ouerhead in skies before his face, and down they light,
And softly sat on ground, he knew forthwith his mothers burdes
Aeneas mighty prince, Doves are Venus birds for their encreas.
and thus he prayed in silent wurdes.
O, be my gides (if any way there be) and through these glades
Direct me to the place where fertile soil in darcksome shades
Does bear this golden branch, and thou O mother great, I pray
Now faill me not at need. Thus speking still himself did stay,
Beholding brim those byrds, and how they rise, and where they fly.
They feding there a while amounted forth, and went in sky.
Mysteltew called of some mistelde^ growyng on trees in winter with a yelowe
slimy bery clammy like bird lyme, it comes by donging of birds on the tres.
So far as eyes of man could them pursue, or mark could make.
Than when against Auerna mouth they came, (that stinking lake)
They lift them selfs aloft, and through the tender aier they slide
And falling down at last, they took their tree, and there did bide,
Where glistring branches shows of sundry glossid shining gold.
None otherwise, than misteltewe on woods in winter cold
Renewes his bushes green, whom tronck of tree did never breed,
But saffronfrutid bows the stubbes thereof does ouerspreede,
So from the tree the golden branch did show, such was the kind,
So wavering soft it wagde, and tincling sweet it made in wind.
Aeneas at it straight, and caught a crop with much ado.
And glad with comfort great, dame Siblies house he brought it to.
Nor nothing less this while, the Troyans all in solemn gise
Did wayle Misenus corpse, and gave to him their last outcries.
First, cut in culpons great, and fat of sap with pitche among
The funerals.
A stately pile they bilde, with timber trees and Cipers strong.
(That dead men's treasour is) his gorgeous arms also they set,
Some brought the water warm, of Misenus maruelously expressyd of Virgill.
and coudrons boiling out they fet.
The body cold they wash, and precious ointments on they power.
Lamenting loud is made, than close his limbs in bed on floor
They couch with weeping tears, and purple weeds on him they throw:
His robes, his harneis bright, and enseignes all that men may know.
In mourning sort, some heave on shulders hie the mighty beer,
Warm water and cryengs, for many seem dead and be yet a live.
(A doleful service sad) as children do their father dear,
Behind them holding bronds, than flame vprising, broad does spreede,
And oils and deinties cast, and frankinsens the fire does feed.
When fallen his cinders were, and longer blase did not endure:
His relics and remain of dust with wines they washyd pure.
Than Choriney his bones in brazen coffin bright did close.
And sprincling water pure, about his mates three times he goes,
And dropps of sacrid dew with Olive palms on them did shake,
Nouissima verba.
And compass blessed them al, and sentence last he sadly spoke.
To fields of joy thy soul, and endless rest we do betake.
But good Aeneas than, right huge in height his tomb did rere,
And gave the lord his arms, his ore and trompet fixed there.
On mountain nere the skies, that of Misenus bears the name:
And everlasting shall from world to world retain the same.
This done, dame Siblies further mind to execute he shapes.
A dongeon dark there is, Discriptio^ of a place in Italy called Auerna, where
antiquity supposed to be the entry into hell and is yet a terrible place to look
on.
that evermore wide open gapes,
Full rough of rocky stones, and loathsome lake there flows about.
Therouer dare no bird attempt to fly, for deadly dout,
Such prison breath outbreaks, and through the throat with stifling stink,
Such smolthring vapor smokes, and up to skies is borne from brinke.
Whereby the Greeks by name Auerna mouth that place do call.
There hefers chosen four, full black of backs, he first of all
Did bring, and wines between their fronts the priest of custom threw,
And with her hand she plucked the hear between their horns that grew,
To cast in sacrid fire, redemption chief of deeds amiss.
And on Diana calls, in heaven and hell that mighty is.
Some other sturres with knives, and blood lukewarm in bolles they take.
Him self a lamb by dark, onto the dame of furies blake,
And to her sister great with sword he struck, and onto thee,
(O Proserpine) a frutelesse cow he killed full black to see.
Than onto Lymbo king his altars large he made by night.
And bowelles whole of bulls in burning fire enflamid bright.
And plenty fat of oils, till offerings al were wastid quight.
Behold, sibly brought Aeneas in to Auerna mouth, and so under ground to Lymbo
wherein Virgil expresses all the belief and opinion of the Pagans.
before that light of son did rise in skies above,
The ground with roaring shook, and under feet did trembling move.
And tops of trees do turn, and dogs in shade did seem to houle,
When first the goddess came. Auaunt, auaunt, you sinners foul
Dame Sibly loud did cry, from al these woods stand out beneath.
Keep thou thy way by force, and nakyd sword pull from thy sheath.
Now time of courage is, now fix thy mind Aeneas fast.
And with that word into Auerna mouth her self she cast.
He void of fear does stalking her pursewe at elbowe fast.
O gods that empier keeps on ghostes, and souls of silens dumme,
Thou Chaos, and you fiery boiling pittes and places glumme:
Give licens me to tell your secret workings under ground,
Give pardon to disclose things deep in mist, and darkness dround.
Then walking went in night, alone, in silens through the shade,
By Lymbos kingdoms wast, and houses empty void of trade.
Like as the feeble Moon does give sometime a fainting light
To men that walk in woods, wha^ clouds do keep the skies from sight,
And al things altered ben, and couloures clear are hyd by night.
Even at the porche, and first in Lymbo jaws, done Wailings dwell,
And Cares on couches lain, and Settled Minds on vengeans fell.
Diseases lean, and pale, and combrous Age of dompishe years,
And Fear, and filthy Need, and Hunger hard that mischief steeres.
Misshapen things in sight. Than death himself, whose neighbor next
Was Sleep that kinsman is to Death, than proud Minds vnperplext
Rejoicing vile in sin and mortal Wars afront the gate,
And Furies fight in beds of steel, and Discord far from state
With bleding brows, and vgsome startling hears of angry snakes,
Amids them all an Elm with arms out spreding, shadow makes.
An Elm both huge and old, that seat, men say do Fancies keep,
And Dreams uncertain dwell, and every leaf they vndercreepe.
And diverse monsters more there was, of sundry sorts unkind.
As Scillas and Centaurus, man before, and beast behind.
In every door they stamp, and Lions sad with gnashing sound.
And Bugges with hundryd heads as Briarey, and armid round
Chimera fightes with flames, and ghastly Gorgon grim to see,
With heardes of Harpies vile, and Goblines foul of figures three.
Aeneas suddenly for fear his glistring sword out took,
And as they threatening came, he toward them his fauchon shook.
And (but his learnid gyde instruct him did, to let go by
Those flittring tender forms, and not to touch those shappes that fly
Which nothing ben but life, and substance none, but likeness thin)
He would with them have fought, and did in vain to beat begin.
Here now the way does lead to Lymbo lake and filthy flud,
Whose channel chokid is with troublous grounds of miry mud,
And belching boyles a sand, which to the banks it throws from deepes.
A dreedfull feryman that stream with visage loathsome keeps,
In tattrid wretched weed, and Caron he by name does hight.
His hoary bushe and beard both ouergrown and foul vndight,
With skouling steaming eyes, Caron the fery man of hell fludds.
and from his shulders down his loins
His filthy mantell hanges, whom sluttishe knot oncomly ioynes,
Himself with pykyd poale his boat does guide, and bears a charge,
Transporting still the souls, in rusty dusty cankryd barge.
Well agyd now, but sappy strength he keeps of greener years.
To this place all the rout does draw themselfs with louring cheres,
By numbers great, both men and women dead, nor long delayed.
With princes, preaced boys and girls, that wedlocks never said,
And flouring youth, that in their parents time were laid in ground,
And all that life had borne, about the bank they clustrid round,
As thick as leaves of trees among the woods in winter wind
When first to ground they fall, or like as fowls of waterkind
Assembling flock them selfs, when year of frost has first begone,
And over seas they seek in warmer londs to take the son.
They stood, and craving cried, that first transport they might before,
And stretching held their hands desiring much the further shore.
The churlish feryman, now these now those by course receives,
And some down thrusting throws, and from the sand restraining weyues.
Aeneas than, for of this great tumult he merueld sore:
O virgin tell (quod he) what means this busye great uproar?
What seek they thus? why to this water banck run they so fast?
Wherefore be these reject? and yonder those their course have past?
And some with ores I see are sweeping yet this channel blewe?
Than shortly thus to him dame Sibly spoke, that prophet true.
O great Anchises son, undoubted child of gods in bliss,
Now Lymbo lake thou see, infernal poole this water is.
Cocitus called it is, and Stigies moore the name does bear,
By which the gods them selfs so sore afraid ben to forswear.
This prease that here thou see, ben people dead not laid in grave,
A piteous rabble poor, that no relief nor comfort have.
This boateman Caron is, and those whom now this water bears,
Are bodies put in ground with worship due of weepinge tears.
Nor from these fearful banks nor ryuers hoarce they passange get:
Till under earth in graves their bodies bones at rest are set.
A hundred years they walk, and round about these shores they houe,
And than at last full glad, to further pooles they do remove.
Aeneas stopped his foot, and stayed him self against that place,
Reuoluing much in mind, and pitied sore their woeful case.
He saw lamenting there, and lacking graves and worship due,
Leucaspis and Orontes, lords of Troyan fleet full true.
Whom jointly both from Troy, as through the swelling seas they past:
The southwind whirling took, and ship and men did ouercast.
Behold, his master chief, and pylot guide, sir Palinure
Chafing did vex him self, who late in Sicil seas full sure
His course with sailing kept, while stars of heaven he vewd at helm
He through the puppe was fallen, and seas him quite did ouerwhelme,
Him scarce he could discern among the souls with frowning face.
Than first he spoke. O Palinure, what god with heavy grace
Has spoilid me of thee? and thee in deep seas thus has drowned?
Declare to me, for never here tofore that falls was found,
With this one tale untrue Apollo me did feed in vain,
Who said, that sauf from seas, Italia land thou shuldst attain,
Lo where a man may trust. Is this his faith so vndefilde?
He thereonto. It is not Phoebus thee that has begylde
O Trojan king, nor me that god in seas did ouerwhelme.
For as at stern I stood, and steering strongly held my helm,
Wherewith I charged was, and course of ships with sails did bear,
I hedlong fell therewith. By all the seas full rough I swear,
Nothing so sore I dredde, nor for my self so much did care,
As lest thy ship dispoyld, and of her guide and master bare:
Should by misfortune fail, as waves so great that time did rise.
Three weery winter nights, in combrous seas in waltring wise,
With waters borne I was: the fourth day skant at last I spied
Italia land, as over waves full hie my head I wried.
By small and small to landward than I swam, and sure I was,
Had not the nation wild destroyed me there unknown, alas.
And as I creping held with crokid hands the mountains top,
Encombrid in my clothes that dabbing down from me did drop:
They slew me there with swords, and thought by me to grain a pray.
Now still in floodes I fleet, and to and fro with winds I stray.
That I thee, by the gladsome light of heaven and ioufull skies:
Now for thy fathers love, and for thy son whose luck does rise:
Unwrap me from these wrongs (o pereles prince) and bring me a ground,
I pray thee, (for thou may) in Velin havens I shall be found.
Or thou, if any way there be, if goddess mother thine
Has showed thee how to shift (for not without some power divine
This place I think thou see, nor Lymbo pooles thus can thou swim)
Reatche me thy hand, and take me wretch with thee by water brim,
That after death at least, in pleasant rest I may remain.
Such things he talking spoke, when Sibly thus replied again.
Since when O Palinure, has all this madness comen on thee?
Woldst thou the Lymbo poole and doleful fluddes vntombid see?
Unbidden from this bank do thou in deed to skape entende?
Seek never Gods eternal dome with speech to think to bend.
Yet take with thee his word, and comfort thus thy grievous fall.
For they that border next unto that mount, and cities all,
By tokens great from heaven shall be compeld thy bones to take,
And tomb they shall the byld, and solemn service thee shall make.
And Palinurus name for evermore the place shall keep.
This spoken, from his heavy heart his cares abating creep.
And sorrows partly shrank, and glad on earth his name he knew.
They on their journey went, and toward now the flood they drew.
Whom as the boteman first, with eyes vpcast in coming spied:
To walk in silent woods, and how to shore their feet they plied:
He thus began to chafe, and toward them full loud he cried.
What ever thou art, that armid thus unto our fluddes do trace:
Tell what thine errand is, and stay thy self, and stop thy pace.
Here is the seat of souls, the place of sleep and slumbry night,
Nor breathing bodies non this boat may bear by law nor right.
Nor Hercules (whom I did last receive) did me no good,
Nor Theseus, with Pirithous, that passid here this flood,
Though born of gods they were, and peereles lords of strength and mind.
He with his mighty hands the mastif hound of hell did bind
Before the king at benche, and dragde him trembling out to light.
Those other did attempt to steal from hens our empress bright.
Than Sibly prophet priest, with gentle speech thus did entreat.
Here is no treason such, do thou not chafe nor further freat.
These wepons work no harm, the porter huge for evermore
May barking keep his cave, and bloodles souls affraye from shore.
Well may Diana chaste her uncles chamber long enjoy.
Aeneas famous here, the curteis prince, in arms of Troy
Unto his father goes, unto the souls of Lymbo low,
If virtue non so great may move thy mind this man to know.
Behold (quod she) this branch, and from her garment out she took
The golden branch, than angry wrath his swelling heart forsook,
Nor, more he spoke, but wondering at that blessid gift of grace,
And fatal rod, that seldom seen had been within that place,
He shouid forth his ship, and on the banck approaching hit.
Than other souls, that on the sides in long arayes did sit:
He tombling drove them down, and made a rowme, and in he takes
Aeneas mighty prince, the boat in iointes for burden crakes.
And through that lethrin seames the filthy flood in plenty drinks.
Yet landed sauf at last both priest and man, on the utter brinkes,
In miry woas, and slimy mudde mischapen foul that stinkes,
There Cerberus, Cerberus the porter of hell.
infernal hound, with throotes wide open three,
Does bawle with barking noise, at Lymbo mouth full huge to see.
Whose neck when Sibly saw with startling snakes to swelling fixed:
A soppe of bread with sleepy feeds, and honey sweet commixt
Against his throat she threw, he gaping wide his threfold jaws,
Al hungry caught that gubbe, and couching strait with stretching paws,
He bowed his boistous back, and on the ground himself be spread,
Encombring all the cave, and groueling lay with slumbry head.
Aeneas took the place, while thus the porter slurging was,
And skoope the further shore, where backward home no life can pas.
Anon were voices hard, and piteous cries, and wailings shrill,
Of souls of tender babes, and infantes weeping void of skill.
That pleasure sweet of life did never taste, but from their breast
Untimely death them took, and fortune grimme has down oppressed.
Next them be such, as false surmise have don to death by law,
Nor they without their judge, and for their seats their lots they draw,
King Minos moves their box, and as a judge their lives enqueres,
And calls enquestes of souls, and al their sins in silens here is.
Than louring next in place, ben they that fell with wilful death,
And giltles slew them selfs, with hasty hands, abhoring breath,
And shoke from them their souls, how gladly now in skies again,
Would they full poor estate, and hardness al of life sustain?
The destnies do resist, and lake unlovely them detaynes,
And pooles of Lymbo nine in compass ronning, them restraines.
Not far aloof from thens, dispersed abroad on quarters all,
The mourning feeldes they see (for so by name men do them call)
There they whom cruel love consumid has with fretting moodes,
In secret paths they walk, and hide them selves in Mirtill woods,
Encombrid still with cares, nor death it self their sorows slakes.
There Phaedra, Procris, and Euriphilen he sees that morning makes
For love, and of her son unmercifully the wounds does bear.
Euadnee than, and Pasiphae, likewise that martryd were.
And Cenaeus, a lad sometime that was, but now a wife,
Converted eft by kind to former shap of females life.
Among al these, Queen Dido late that died of fatal wound,
In forest wandering went, whom the Troyan duke had found,
Approaching nere and knew, in shimring shadow darck and thin:
Much like, as after changing new when prime does first begin,
Men see, or think they see, that doubtful moon in clouds above:
He blubbrid out in tears, and thus did speak for dulcet love.
O woeful Dido dear, the tale to true (as now does seem)
Was brought me of thy loss, and of thy stroke and wound extreme.
I was thy cause of death, alas, now by the stars I swear,
By all the Gods, and if there be remaining yet one where
Vnfainid faith, if truth on ground or under ground may be:
Against my will (O Queen) from thy dominions did I flee.
But me, ye threatenings great of Gods that through these glimsing glades
Compels to seek, these hoary moory musty darksom shades:
Has forcid me to this, nor never (Queen) could I believe,
That my departing thee, so sore at heart could ever grieve,
Now stay thy self, and from my sight withdraw thee not so fast.
Whom fleest thou thus? this unto thee must be my talking last.
Aeneas thus to her, that frowning stood, with skouling eyes,
He spoke to swage her mind, and tears out gushing still did rise.
She turning, fixyd fast her face on ground with louring look.
Nor more to him did moon, nor at his tale regard she took:
Than sturres a standing stone, or mountayn rock for blast of wind.
At last from him she brake, and back she fled with spiteful mind,
To shadows thick of woods, where joint with her, her husband old
Sichaeus does complain, and equal love with her does hold.
Aeneas nethelesse, whom this mischaunce full sorry shook,
Pursude her, weepyng long, and at her partyng pity took.
From thens their way they sought, and now the borders last they held.
Where worthy lords of arms enhabit thick in secret field,
There met he with sir Tydeus, and valiant noble knight
Parthenopee, and pale Adrastus ghost, that woeful spright.
There, they that much lamented were on earth, and died in war:
The Troyan lords, he knew them all in long arayes a far.
Thersilochus, and Glaucus dear, he sobbid them to see,
And Medon, and Anthenor the famous children three.
And Polibetes, Ceres priest that was, both strong and bold,
Idaeus eke, that horses swift and armours yet does hold.
By flocks about him drew the souls full thick on every hand,
Nor satisfied they ben with loking ones, but still they stand,
And steps with him they join, and glad they be his cause to learn.
But all the Greekish, lords, and Agammenons captayns stern,
When first the man they saw in glistring armor through the night:
They trembling shoke for fear, some turning took their wonted flight,
As to their ships somptime they ran, some others squeking thin
Would lift their voice, Deiphebus that married Helen after the death of Paris.
but in their jaws begone, it stack within.
There Deiphebus, Priams son he saw, al boucherwise
Bemanglid foul in face, with body torn in cruel gise.
Both body, face, and hands, and temples twain, and ears dispoilde,
With lothly croppid nose, and shameful wounds each where defoilde.
Skarse him he could discern, that trembling shrank, and covered would
His filthy wounds, than thus he spoke with voice acquainted old.
O Deiphebus, mighty most in arms, O Trojan blood:
What saluage tirant beast has given to thee this plage so wood?
Who might so great a power obtain on thee? The rumor went
How in the night extreme, of Greekish slaughters weary spent
Thou headlong threwst thy self on mixid heaps of enmies slain.
Than I my self to thee, an empty tomb on Rheta plain
Aduaunsing up did bilde, and thrife thy soul saluted clear.
Thy name and arms that place preserues, but thee (O friend so dear)
Could I not see, that in thy country ground I might enteere.
Than Deiphebus said. Nothing (sweet friend,) can I requier.
All duties done thou have, nor more my ghost can the desire.
But me, min own mischaunce, and Helen strompetts mischief more
Has plungid thus in pains these tokens me she left in store.
For when that latter night with joys deceitful us did feed.
Thou know: and overmuch thereof to think we must of need.
When first that fatal horse our country walls did ouerskippe
With armor freyghted full and harneist fotemen down did slip:
Dissembling than to daunse with songs, and himpnes in streets about
She drew the Troyan wines, and in her hand amids the rout
She bare the burning torche, and from the towers the Greeks did lure.
Than overcome with cares, I woeful miser sleeping sure
Within my chamber was, in pleasant eas, and laid at rest,
And slomber sweet and deep, most like to death had me oppressed.
My goodly spouse this while, my wepons al way she cloinde,
From al my house, and from my head my trusty sword purloind.
And Menelae her former husband called, and filled the floores
With clusters great of Greeks, and open wide she set the doors,
And me to them she gave, for token chief of former love,
That fame of old offense by that amends she might remove.
What should I longer make: into my chamber all they thrust,
With falls Ulysses help. O gods redubbe them vengeance just.
If due rewards I seek, if Greeks with me unjustly wrought.
But thee, alive, what wondrous fortune here this time has brought?
Declare to me, by wandering wide at seas art comen astray?
Or gods appointment great, or what mischaunce does thee dismay,
To see this troublous place, these houses heavy void of son?
With talking thus, the Morning golden bright had ouerronne
The compass half of heaven, and mids of skies she now did clime.
And happly speaking more, they should have spent their pointed time.
But Sibly warning gave.
The night approaches fast, we weep away the time in vain.
Here is the place where now the way deuides it selfs in twain.
The righthand path goth underneath the walls of Pluto deep.
That way we must, if path to Paradise we think to keep.
The lefthand leads to pain, and damnid sinners sends to hell.
Than Deiphebus said. O prophet pure that do excel,
Do thou no furter freat, I will depart to yonder feeld
To fyl the number there, and me again to darkness yield.
Go worship, go thou glory great of Troy, with heavenly grace,
God send thee more good luck, and with that word he turned his pace.
Aeneas turned his eyes, and in the rock on lefthand side
A castle broad he sees, with three thick walls encompast wide.
Whom enuironned with rage of flaming flood that fire out spewes,
A dampishe fiery flood, that sounding stones outhelching stews.
A gate against it stands, full huge of height, with pillars great
Of Adamant uncut, whom force of mankind non can beat,
Nor gods themselfs of heaven: vpstands to skies a brazen tower,
Where sits Tisiphonee with blood read tools, and visage sour,
That combrous monster feend, both days and nights the watch she keeps
Before that entry grim, with gargell face, and never sleeps.
From thens were howlings heard, and wretches wawling tossed in pains,
And clinching loud of iron, and gingling noise of dragging chains.
Aeneas sterting stood, and all that bustling harknid to.
What vengeance noise is this? O virgin tell, what have they do?
That thus tormented ben? what means this bounsing? this outrage?
Than Sibly thus began. O Troyan duke of wisdom sage,
No good man may come near this cursid house of dampnid Hell,
But me, when in Auerna woods Diana set to dwell,
She taught me than their pains, and through these places al did gide.
This boistous empier keeps fir Radamanthus, king of pride,
Correcting men for sin, and al their falshodes hears and tries,
Constraining to confess what ever thing they did in skies:
Differring til their death, as if al pains escapid were.
Anon, the guilty souls with ramping force and grisly fear
Tisiphonee does take, and scourging them she swappes with whippes,
And serpents grim she shakes, and over them she stamping skippes,
With flocks of swarming feends, and al her sisters out she calls,
Infernal hideous haggs, and to their turments them she stalles.
Than verily with thondring fearful noise, the sacrid hooks
Does opening turn their gates, see what a guard against us looks?
What faces? what a watch there stands at every gate in sight?
With fifty garing heads a monstrous dragon stands upright?
Yet sitts a worse within. Than, Hell it self, that sinkehoole steep
Two times as broad descends, two times as hedlong downright deep:
As heaven upright is hie, if men thereto from thence might peep.
There lie the Titans brood, and of dame Earth the lineage old:
Downthrown with lightning dintes, and in that gulf are tombling rold.
There saw I serpentfeeted bastards twain, of giauntes syse,
That in conflict with heaven, to tear the skies did enterprise,
Despising Jove himself, whom from his throne they would have thrust.
Eke Sulmon there I saw, in cruel wreake of turmentes just.
For he the flames of god, and thondring soundes would counterfeat.
He borne with horses four, and shaking brondes and torches great
Through contreys al of Greece, and towns triumphing went about,
And honors due to God usurping took of every rout.
A frantik man, that peereles lightning clouds would think to skorne,
With brass and ronning steedes, that footed ben with hoof of horn.
But Jove almighty than, a fiery dart on him down flang,
His arts could him not help, nor cressetts fierce wherewith he sprang.
But hedlong he to hell in whirling storm was thrown to deepes.
There plungid now in pains, he in the botom crawling creepes.
Eke Tition the darling dear of Earth which al thing breeds
You should have seen, that furlongs nine of ground with body spreedes.
And huge on him there sitts, with crokid beak and croming paws
A ghastly Gripe, that evermore his growing guts outdrawes.
And tiring tearith forth his euerduring liver veins,
Nor never rest there is, but fresh renewes his endless pains.
What should I now rehearse the beastly Centaures rabble all?
Whom over hangs a stone that evermore does seem to fall.
Their bridebedds faier are spread, and golden carpets shine full bright,
And precious princely fare before their face is set in sight.
Than comes the foulest feend, and al their deinties ouerbroodes,
Forbidding them to touch, and from their hands does snatch their foods,
And beats with burning bronds and thondrings thick her mouth does cast.
There they that did their brethren most abhor while life did last,
Or beat their parents, or their clients cause have foul betrayed,
And such as gatherid goods unto themselfs, and no man paid,
Nor alms never gave, whereof there is to great a throng.
Or for aduoutry have been slain, or reis^ wars in wrong.
Or rebels to their prince, or masters goods would not discern:
Includid in that Iaile their pains they bide. Seek not to learn
What pains: what world of woe there is: how each his fortune feels.
Some rolls vnwoldy rocks, some hangs on hie displaid on wheels.
Some tombling tire themselfs. There ever sitts and ever shall
Unhappy Theseus, and Phlegias most of misers all:
Among those caytiues dark and loud with voice to them does rore,
Learn justice now by this, and gods above despise no more.
One wretch his country sold, and prince of strength thereto did call,
He forgid laws for bribes, and made, and mard, and altrid all.
Another leapt into his daughters bed, confounding kinds,
All meant outrageous deeds, and fyld their foul outrageous minds.
Not if I had a hundred mouths, a hundred tongues to spend,
And voice as strong as steel, yet could I never comprehend
Their sundry sins and pains, nor of their names should make an end
When Sibli to Aeneas thus had said. Now make me speed,
Go forth, keep on thy way, perform those things that thou have need.
Dispatche we now (quod she) I spy from hence the chimneis topps
Of Ciclops boistous walls, I see their gates their forge, and shopps,
Where we commanded be to leave this gift of golden spraies.
She said, and jointly both they past through croking darksom ways,
And marching through the mids, unto the gates approchid near.
Aeneas through them rusht, and than him self with water clear
Besprinckling, took the branch, and at the gate he fyxt it fast.
Description of paradise
These things so done, and all the goddess gift fulfyld at last:
Into the gladsome feeldes they come, where arbers sweet and green,
And blessed seats of souls, and pleasant woods and groves are seen.
A fressher feeld of aier whom larger light does ouerstrowe,
And purer breath, their private son, their private stars they know.
Some to disport them selfs there sundry maistries tried on grass.
And some their gambolds played, and some on sand there wrestling was.
Some frisking shake their feet, and measures tread and rimes they sown,
And Orpheus among them stands, as priest in trayling gown.
And twancling makes them tune, with notes of music several seven.
And now with Yuery quill, now strings he strikes with fingers even.
There were the Troyan lords, and antike stock of noble race,
Most prudent princes strong, and borne in years of better grace.
Both Ilus, and Assaracus, and founder first of Troy,
Ring Dardan, at their armor weeds he wondered much with joy.
Their spears beside them stand, their charets strong are set on ground,
Their comely coursing steedes along the launds do feed unbound.
What minds, what love they had, to deeds of arms when life they drew,
Or what delight in steedes: the same them dead does now pursue.
Another sort he sees, with hand in hand where gras does spring,
That feasting feed them selfs, and heave and hoaw for joy they sing.
Among the Laurel woods, and smelling flowers of arbers sweet:
Where bubbling soft with sound the river fresh does by them fleet.
There such as for their countries love while lives in them did last
In battle suffrid wounds, or priests that godly were and chaste,
Or prophets pure of life, and worthy things to men did preach:
Or to adorn man's mortal life did science goodly teach:
Their heads ar compass knit with garlond flowers right fresh of hew.
To whom than Sibly spoke, as round about her fast they drew.
Onto Musaeus first, for he inclosyd is in throng
With numbers great of souls, and him they keep always among,
Bresthigh above them all, and all to him their heads incline.
Declare (quod she) you blessed souls, and thou priest most divine
What place Anchises has? where shall we find him? for his sake
We be come here, and passyd have the fluddes of Limbo lake.
Than unto her the sacred priest with words full gentle spoke.
No man has certain house, but in these shadows broad we dwell.
In beds of river banks, and meadows new that sweetly smell.
But you, if such desire you have, pass over yonder downs,
My self shall be your gide by easy path into those bownes.
He said, and went before them both, and fields full bright that shynd
He showed them from above, and all the downs they left behind.
Anchises prince, that time in pleasant vale surueyeng was
The souls included there that to the world again should pass.
And reknid al his race, and childers childerns line he told,
And kest their destnies al, and lives, and laws, and manhods bold.
He when against him there Aeneas coming first beheld:
As he did walk in grass, his hands to heaven for joy up held,
With tricling tears on cheeks, and thus his voice from him did yield.
And art thou comen at last, long lokid for, my son so dear?
Thy virtue overcame this passage hard, and now so clear,
Do I behold thy face? with rendering speech to speech of thine?
So verily me thought, and in my mind I did divine
Acompting still the times, nor me my carck has not begild,
What contreys thee (my son) what combrous seas? what nations wild?
Turmoyld with dangers al, thee scapid now do I receive?
How sore afraied I was, lest Lybie lands should thee deceive?
He thereunto: Thy ghost O father sweet, thy grievous ghost,
Perturbing in my dremes has me compeld to see this coast.
On Tirrhen shore my navy stands at seas, now let us join
Good father hand in hand, now thee from me do not purloyne.
Thus talkid he with tears.
Three times about his neck his arms he would have set, and thries
In vain his likeness fast he held, for through his hands he flies
Like wind, vngropable, or dreams that men most swift espies.
This while Aeneas sees a crooked vale, and secret wood,
Lethee a flood of forgetfulness.
And shrubbes of sounding trees, and fleeting through them Lethee flood,
With sleeping sound, that by those pleasant dwellings softly rann:
And peoples thick on every side that no man number can.
As bees in meadows fresh, (whom somer Son does shining warm)
Assembling fall on flowers, and lilies white about they swarm,
With huzzing fervent noise, that every feeld of murmour ringes.
Pagans opinions.
Aeneas with that sight amasid stood, and of those things
The causes al did are, what flood it is, so dull that glides?
And what those peoples ben, that fill so thick those water sides?
Anchises than to him. These souls (quod he) that bodies new
Must yet again receive, and limines eftsoon with life endue:
Here at this Lethee flood they dwell, and from this water brinck
These liquors quenching cares, and long forgetful draughts they drink,
That of their lives, and former labors past, they never think.
These things to thee, full true I shall set forth before thine eyes,
And show thee all our stock, of thee and me that shall arise.
That more thou may rejoice Italia land to find at last.
O father, is it true? may souls that ones this world has past
And blessed ben in joy, to bodies dulle again remove?
What mean they so? why wretched wordly light do they so love?
I will declare forsooth, nor long (my son) I will thee hold,
Anchises answer made, and all in order did unfold.
First heaven and earth, and of the seas that flittring feeldes and fines.
These gloriose stars, this glistring globe of moon so bright that shines,
One lively soul there is, that feeds them all with breath of love:
One mind through al these members mixed this mighty mass does move,
From thence mankind, and beasts, and lives of fowls in aier that flies,
And al what marblefacid seas conteines of monstrous fries,
One chafing fire among them al there sittes, and heavenly springes
Within their seeds, if bodies noisome them not backward bringes.
But lompe of liueles earth, and mortal members make them dull.
This causes them, of lust, fear, grief and joy, to be so full.
Nor closid so in darck, can they regard their heavenly kind,
For carcas foul of flesh, and dongeon vile of prison blind.
Moreover, when their end of life, and light does them forsake:
Yet can they not their sins nor sorrows al (poor souls) of shake.
Nor al contagions fleshly, from them voydes, but must of need
Much things congendrid long, by wondrous means at last outspreed.
Therefore they plagid ben, and for their former fautes and sins
Their sundry pains they bide, some hie in air does hang on pinnes.
The painims purgatory.
Some fleeting ben in fluddes, and deep in gulfs them selfs they tier.
Til sins a way be washed, or clensyd clear with purgin fire.
Each one of us our penance here abides, than sent we be
To paradise at last, we few these feeldes of joy do see.
Till compass long of time, by perfect course, has purgid quighte
Our former cloddrid spots, and pure has left our ghostli spright,
And senses pure of soul, and simple sparks of heavenly light.
Than al, when they a thousand years that wheel have turned about:
To drinck of Lethee flood, by clusters great, God calls them out.
That there forgetting al their former lives, and former sin,
The mortal world afreshe, in bodies new they may begin.
Anchises said, and therwithall his son and Sibly takes,
And draws, them through the mids of all that prease yt sounding makes,
Unto a mount, from whence they may their orders long a row,
By leysour over read, and as they come their faces know.
Now let us see what glory great our Troyan line shall spreede,
And what redoubted lusty laddes, Italia land shall breed,
Most princely sprites, our noble Trojan fame advance that shall,
In brief I will dispatche, and thee declare thy destnies all.
See thou not yonder lively child that leaning bendes his spear?
His lot is next to rise, and next in world his head shall rear,
Of Troyan and Italian blood commixt, thy worthy child,
Thy Siluius, borne after thy deceasse in forest wild.
Here Virgil takes a wonderful occasion to discorrsethe posterity of Aeneas,
and to set forth the glory and nobility of Rome.
Whom late at last to thee thy wife Lauinia bearing bringes,
A stately king him self, and father great of stately kings.
From whom our lineage long shall Alba kingdoms rich enjoy.
Than yonder Procas next, the proud renown of former Troy,
And Numitor, and Capis good, and he that thee by name
Shall represent, Aeneas Siluius of noble fame.
And deeds of arms with virtue mixed, if ever he may raygne,
If ever he his Alba lands, and kingdoms may obtain.
Which lusty laddes behold, from them what courage does redound.
And how their tops with oken bows, and civil crowns ar bound.
They unto thee Nomentum land, and Gabios towns s^l tame,
And Fidenas, and cities great and proud they shall reclame.
Pometium, The chief crown of honor among Romans was of grass and oken bow.
Romulus the founder of Rome.
and Innus castles strong, and Bolam bowres,
And Collantine, and Coram hills, suppress they shall with toures.
These names shall than vprise, now nothing is but nameles dust.
Than Romulus, that valiant impe of Mars, him forth shall thrust,
To match his graunsir great, whon Ilia Queen shall bring to light
Of Troyan blood, see not his dubblecreastid head upright?
And with what grace the king of heaven does mark his chosen knight?
Behold my son the man, for through his luck and huge devise:
That peereles mighty Rome, that gloriose Rome aloft shall rise.
Whose rod shall rule the total earth, whose minds shall match the heaven,
And reyse their walls they shall, including toures, and mountains seven,
Most fortunat in fruit of men, as Berecinthia Queen,
From whom the race of Gods, and lineage al descended been.
She riding through the world, in charet borne with godly grace,
Her hundred deerlings sweet her childerns childern does embrace
All heavenly wightes, al scepter bearers bright, in stars on hie,
Now this way turn thy face, and on this nation cast thine eye.
Behold thy Romans, He puto Augustus next Romulus for dignity, being many
years after in time.
see where Caesar is, and of Iule
The progeny that under poles of heaven shall bear the rule,
This man, this is the man, of whom so often I have thee told,
Augustus Emprour, prince divine, he shall the world of gold
Saturnus Golden world (sometime that was) eftsoon restore.
On Garamants, and Indes, and contreys conquered more and more
His empier out shall stretche. Beyond the stars the kingdoms run,
Beyond the firmament and sign, from course of year and son.
Where Atlas (mighty mount) on shulders strong the heaven does turn,
And vnderpropes the pole that bears the stars that ever burn.
At this man's coming, lo, even very now, For Augustus subdued Aegipt.
al Asia quakes
For dread, and temples great of Gods with aunswers gresly shakes.
And Nilus flood for fear his issues seven does foul confound.
Nor never Hercules him self could walk so much of ground,
Though he with dart the windy footed hind did ouertyer,
Though monsters swift he slew, and dragons quaking brent with fire.
Nor Bacchus victor so could nations wild and proud reclame.
Though he with bridlyng bits of vines did ride on Tigers tame.
Here he returns to Romulus succession.
And stand we still in doubt by valiant deeds to purchase fame?
Or for Italia land to fight, should we our destnies blame?
But what is yonder he, that Olive palm so comely bears?
Most like a priest? lo now I know, I know those hoary hears,
And whitishe beardid chinne of prudent Numa, Romain king,
That unto laws and peace shall first the simple people bring,
From poor estate to mighty kingdom called, whom shall succeed
He that his contreys ydlenes shall break, and force of need
To stir themselfs in arms, king Tullus, he shall up revive
Their slugging sprites, and teach to win, and triumphs eft atchiue.
Next unto him, with greater boast, king Ancus them shall guide,
That of the peoples praise to much already takes a pride.
Wult see the Tarquin kings? and stately soul of Brutus breast?
Of Brutus, mischief wreaker? Brutus slew his sedicious sons
and by him the kings suppressed?
He first the Consulship on him shall take, and first of all,
His only sons unto their death, for wealth of Rome shall call,
When they with battles new against the Consuls would rebel:
Himself for fredom sayer, with edge of axe shall do them quell.
Unlucky man, how ever latter age shall praise the same,
His contreys love him drives, and greedy lust of endless fame.
See Decios, and Drusos, and his are that does distraine
Torquatus. Lo Camillus, Camillus recouerer of ensigns
standards lost that brings again.
But yonder matches twain, whom shine thou see in harneis bright,
Now loving souls they be, while both are wrapped in dark of night.
Alas, what wondrous wars? if ever they in life apeere,
Julius Caesar Pompeius.
What bloody fighting feeldes? what slaughters wild shall they vpsteere?
The fatherlaw from Alps hills, and towers of France shall fall.
The son in law, from Estern lands shall move with armies all.
Not so my lads, not so, such grievous wars do you not mind,
Nor with your hands your contreys womb to tear be so unkind,
Pompeius.
And chiefly thou, thou from the gods of heaven that do descend,
Cast from thy hand thy wepons, O my blood.
He with triumphant joy, in charet borne, and mighty train
Shall clime the Capitol of Rome, when lords of Greeks are slain,
And towns vprootid ben, Corinthus, Argos, great Micene,
He victor conquer shall, and from the ground subvert them clean.
Quintius.
Another vanquishe must Achilles brood, sir Pirrhus wild,
And wreke his graunsirs old of Troy, and Pallas church defilde.
Who can but think of thee, Cato. Cossus. Gracchus. scipios destroid Carthage.
Fabritius. serranus. Pubius max.
most worthy Cato stern of mind?
Or noble Cossus thee who can forgetting leave behind?
Or gracious Gracchus line, or capteynes twain who can withstand
Two Scipios? two thonderboltes of war: for Lybie land
A deadly fatal plage: or who can thee extol enough
Fabritius? that much can do with small, or from thy plough
Serranus thou that come? and after conquests sowest thy corn.
Where now away withdraw you weary me? you noble borne
You Fabij? thou Maximus, thou only art the man
That al our wealth forlorn, by sober lingering reskue can.
Some forsing metalls fine shall brazen shappes with breath endue,
I ween they will to marble stones give life with likeness true.
Cicero. Firmicus.
They causes best shall plead, and course of heaven in wondrous wise,
They shall describe with rod, and teach the state of stars that rise.
Remember Roman thou, to rule thy realms with empier just,
Good counsel.
Let this thy practice be. To much on peace set not thy lust,
Thy subjects ever spare, and stomachs proud down vanquish plain.
So lord Anchises said, and (as they wondrid) spoke again.
Behold, how gorgeous gay with spoils Marcellus goth upright,
Above all men, by shulders hie he does surmount them quight.
Marcellus.
He, when the Romayn state with great commotion troubled is,
Shall stay with horsemen stout, and make the Moors their purpose miss,
And overthrow their throngs, and rebel French in combat kylde,
His armor spoils to Jove* for offering third he shall vpyelde.
Aeneas there, Young Marcellus, Augustus sisters son, that should have been his
heir in the empier.
(for walk with him he saw a seemly knight,
A goodly springold young in glistring armor shining bright,
But nothing glad in face* his eyes down cast did show no cheer.)
O father, what is he that walks with him as equal peer?
His only son? or of his stock some child of noble race?
What bustling makes his mates? how great he goth with portly grace?
But cloud of louring night his head full heavy wrappes about.
Than lord Anchises spoke, and from his eyes the tears brake out.
O son, thy peoples huge lamented loss seek not to know.
The destnies shall this child, onto the world, no more but show,
He died in youth, and was buried with six hundred hearses.
Nor suffer long to live, O gods, though Rome you think to strong
And overmuch to match, for envy yet do us no wrong.
What wailings loud of men in streets, in feeldes, what mourning cries
In mighty camp of Mars, at this man's death in Rome shall rise?
What funerals: what numbers dead of corpses shall thou see?
O Tyber flood, when fleeting nere his new tomb thou shall flee?
Nor shall there never child, For these xxvi. verses Octauia mother of Marcellus
did give, in reward to Virgill as much as amounted in english money to more
than v. M. french crowns.
from Trojan line that shall proceed,
Exalt his graunsirs hope so hie: nor never Rome shall breed
An impe of marvel more, nor more on man may justly bost.
O virtue, O prescribid faith, O righthand valiant most.
Durst no man him have met in arms conflicting, foteman fearce,
Or would he fomy horses sides with spurs encountering pearce.
O piteous child, if ever thou thy destnies hard may break:
Marcellus thou shall be. Now reatche me Lillies, Lilly flours,
Give purple Violetts to me, this neuews soul of ours
With gifts that I may spread, and though my labor be but vain:
Yet do my duty dear I shall. Thus did they long complain.
And compass round the camp they wandering went, and vowed about,
In borders broad of air, and of the souls surueied the rout.
Which when Anchises thus had showed his son in order due,
And kindlid glad his mind with fame of things that should ensue:
Than him of al his wars, and great affairs to come, he told,
Of king Latinus town, and of his realms and peoples bold,
And how each labor best may voidid be, or easily borne.
Two gates of sleep there be, the one men say is made of horn,
Wherthrough by passage soft do sprites ascend with senses right.
That other gate does shine, and is compact of Yuery bright.
But false deceitful dreams that way the souls are wont to send.
With talking thus, when lord Anchises first had made an end:
And counsel gave his son, and all his mind had put from dout,
He brought them both, and through the Yuery gate he let them out.
He took his way furthwith, and to his navy went by land.
And finding there his mates, Caieta in Italy between Cumas and Tyber.
and to his navy went by land.
And finding there his mates, he brought them to Caieta strand.
Their ankers from their foreships cast, their pups on shore they stand.
DEO GRATIAS.
Per T. Phaeer
in foresta Kilgerran 13. Augusti, 1557. Opus ^iginta dierum.
The seventh book of the Aeneidos of Virgil.
The Argument.
AENEAS burieth Caieta his nurse, and calls the place Caieta, by her name.
From thence he passes by the seat of Circes, and by prosperous wind is
brought to the mouth of Tiber, and driven with a contrary stream: he arriueth
on the coast of Laurentum. And understanding thereby Ascanius words, that
the same was the land that was predestinate unto him: he sends unto king
Latinus, that ruled those quarters, an hundred orators, which should both
carry gifts unto him in his name, and request a place wherein to build a City.
King Latinus gently hearing their embassadge, over and besides their request
voluntarely offreth unto Aeneas, his daughter Lauinia to wife, whom by the
prophecy of his father Faunus, and the answer of the southsayers: he was
commanded to bestow upon a stranger. This while Juno displeased with the
prosperous success of ye Trojans: calls Alecto out of Hell to disturb this
peace. Who first enrageth with her fury Amata, king Latinus wife, and Turnus
also. Then, turnynge her self to the Trojan youth, which then happily was busied
in huntyng: brings unto their hands a tame stag which was dearly beloved
among Tyrrheus the kings heardmans children. Whom when Ascanius had wounded
with an arowe, the husbandmen betakyng them selves to weapon, set upon the
Trojans. Alecto from an hie place gives thalarme, in which tumult are sleyne
Almon. Tyrrheus eldest son, and Galesus the ritchest husbandma^ in all that
country. Who when they were braught dead unto the city, Turnus and Amata do
prick forth king Latinus to make war, and to revenge this injury. But he
calling to remembrance the destnies, and the league which he made of late with
the Trojans: could not be persuaded to make war against them. Then Juno her
self opens the gates of war. Mezentius with Lausus his son do accompany
Turnus into battle. Likewise Auentinus son to Hercules by Rhea. Also
Catillus and Coras Tyburtine brothers, and Camilla of the realm of Volsca, a
most valient woman, and diverse other, whose names are recited in the end of the
book.

ANd thou Caieta, He burieth his nurse Caieta and gives her name to that coast.
Aeneas nurse, deceassing on our shore:
Have thereby given thereto a lasting fame for evermore.
Thy bones, and name, thine honor there preserues, and settlid be
In great Italia land, if that may worship do to thee.
But good Aeneas, when her obyt ryghtes were ended al.
And tomb vpreisid round, as soon as hie seas down did fall,
He took his way with sails, He sayleth along the coast of Circes a famous
enchantres or witch than dwelling in Italy which turned men into beasts
and from that port departid quight:
The wind with pipling blows, nor moon does lack to give them light,
The trembling water shines with beams reflected glistring bright
Along dame Circes coast adioynant next, their course they cut.
Where Circes Phoebus daughter proud her welthy seats has put,
In sounding saluage woods, and savors sweet by night she burns.
And precious weauing webs, with clattring tools she works and turns.
From thence were wailings heard, and lions wrathful loud did groan,
Resisting in their bands, and nere to night they make their moan,
Both bristlid groining bores, and bears at mangers yelling yawle,
And figures foul of wolves they hear for woe to fret and wawle,
Whom from the shappes of men, to brutishe beasts, and faces wyld
Dame Circes did transform, with herbs of might, and charms vnmild.
Which sore mischaunce, lest simple Troyans poor should feel the like,
Or in those havens ariue, or on that parlous coast should strike:
Neptunus filled their sails with prosperous wind, and gave them way
To flee that cursid shore, and from that danger did convey.
And now the sea with son beams waxid read, and hie from skies
The golden morning bright with roset wheels did mounting rise,
When every wind was laid, Here he espieth the river of Tiber in Italy.
and suddenly no breath did blow.
And they their ships in marble seas with ores did wrastlyng towe.
And there Aeneas from the seas beheld a hugy wood,
Where fleeting swift with whirling streams most pleasant Tyber flood
Breaks out it self in seas, with sandy waters troblous read,
Where sundry sorts of fowls, on every side, and over head,
Their wonted chanel keep, and banks, whose cheereful noises shril:
Reioycid sweet the skies, and in the grove they flew at will.
Their forships al to landward than to turn, Thet enter Tiber.
and inward bend
He bids his mates, and to the deep flood glad he does descend.
Now muse, now let us se: what government, what state of things,
In Italy that time there was, what captains great, what kings,
When first this strangers fleet in Latium laud did ships ariue
I will setfurth, In ye first syx books he described the travails of Aeneas
now in other vi. he declares of his wars perfourming his promis of arms and
of the man I sing.
and causes first of fight I shall descriue.
Thou goddess give me might, of ghastly wars now must I sing,
Of mortal battles fought and slain with armies king by king,
Vprores of angry realms, and all Italia mixed with blows
I must report, a greater course of things to me their grows,
A greater work. I steer. King Latin than that country held,
Well aged now, and cities long in welthy peace did welde.
This man was Faunus son, Marica goddess was his dame.
King Picus, Faunus father was, and he does fetch his name
From thee O Saturn great, thou art his sire and first of blood.
No son to him there was, non issue Male (so fortune stood)
For in his springing youth withdrawn he was, and life did yield.
One daughter did remain, and all that house susteining held,
Now husbandripe, now wedlockable full, of laufull years.
From large Italia land, full many a lord, and princely peers,
Full glad for her did sue, but over al, of beauty most,
King Turnus lusty prince (of kingly stock that best might bost)
Above them al was chief, and him the Queen did see most meet,
And wondrously did have, to join with him her daughter sweet.
But monsters great from gods, Laurentum the city of king Latinus.
and heavenly threatenings makes her dread.
A Laurel tree there was, amids the court, that hie did sprede,
With sacred crops and bows, and many a year in reverence had:
Which when king Latin first that tower did build, by destny glad
He found, and unto Phoebus great did consecrate the same,
And of that Laurel tree, did Laurent call that cities name.
A wondrous thing to speak, this Laurel bushe full thick of browse:
From skies descending down, a swarm of bees beset the bows,
Incessant thick with noise, and fast with feet in cluster clung
Al suddenly did close, and on the top with heft they hung.
Anon the prophet cried. An alien captain, O (quod he)
And alien army comes, and gettes possession here I see.
And parties clustring cleave, and gathring strength the tower they take.
Lauinia king Latinus daughter.
Besides all this, when she her self to godds did offering make*
Lauinia virgin pure, and stood at the altars next her Syer:
A wondrous sight was seen, that all her hear had cought a fire,
And crakling flame outspred, and all her garments brent at ones.
Her robes, her virgin locks, her crown beset with preciouse stones.
Which suddenly did stint, than blustering smoke, and blasing light
With violence vpflew, and to the roof it ran upright.
This dreedful sign, and on this wondrous sight men marueld much.
For like to her in fame al prophets sang, should be non such.
But causes great of war, betokened were by her to grow,
That time spirits gave aunswers in woods.
But Latin king, that on these monsters all did muse and carck:
His father Faunus mind and sentence sooth he went to harck,
To dark Albumea wood, which on the mountain grows full great,
Where sacred flood does sound, and fountains falling down do sweat.
From thens the countries nere, and through Italia nations all
Do fetch their council chief, and in their doubts for aunswers call.
The priest his offering makes, and killes the sheep at dead midnight.
And lays his limbs at rest, and soundly sleeps on fleeses white.
There visions straung he sees, and many a spryte full thin that flittes,
And sundry voices heeres, and with the gods in task he knittes,
In heaven, in Lymbo pooles, and souls he sees in hell that sittes.
There: when king Latin first devoutly prayed for answer full,
A hundred chosen sheep he down did kill that bare their wulle,
And spread their backs on ground, and resting slept upon their skins,
With meek desire: than through that grove a loud voice thus begins.
Seek not to set thy daughter dear with none of Latin land,
O worthy son, nor trust this wedlock now thou have in hand.
A son in law from contreys far there comes, whose stately race
Unto the stars our name shall lift, whose issue great of grace,
All things within this world, where ever son does round recule,
On both sides londs and seas, shall under feet down tread, and rule.
These warnings of his father Faunus given at dead midnight,
King Latin did not hide, but Fame the cities filde forth right,
Of all Italia realms, when to the shore this Troyan fleet
In landing took their banck, and fastened ships with cables meet.
Aeneas with his captains chief, Ascanius faier to see,
On green grass took their eas, and underneath a seemly tree,
Their deintes forth they drew, and meat they set on cakes of meal,
Refeshing sweet their minds, so Jove him self did pleas to deal.
And mountain fruits they took, and heaps of apples hie they pight.
When al things else were spent, and they by chance were driven to bite
Their crusts of cracknel cakes, and eat for skantnes up their cremmes,
And hungry brake with hands their leauings last, and set there gommes
Here the prophecy of the Harpie was fulfild, mentioned in the third book that
they should be driven to eat their tables.
Upon their fatal bread, nor trenchers broad they did not spare:
How now sirs? have we eat our tables up for want of fare?
The child Ascanius said. Nor more to this did he allude.
That voice received strait, al fear from them did first exclude,
And end of labors brought, and from his mouth as he it said
His father took that word, and with devotion great he stayed.
Than kneelyng, thus. Alhayle O country mine by destnie due,
And you al hayle (quod he) O Trojan goods of promise true.
Here is my dwelling house, my resting land: my father old
(Now comes it in my mind) these secrets me full often told,
When thou (my son) thy ships on coast onknown do first ariue,
And hunger hard for lack to eat thy tables thee shall drive,
There may thou trust thy resting place to byld, and safly there
Foundations make of walls, and houses hie be bold to rere.
This was that hunger sore, this is our last of labors al,
Al sorrows now shall ceas.
Wherefore come of, and in the morning next at sight of son,
What people dwells hereby, what towns they keep, and where they won,
Let us enquire and look, and from the haven withdraw we al.
Now skinke your cups to Jove, and great Anchises cheerely call.
And pray to gods for help, and fetch forth wines in plenty round.
This spoken, he with garlond bows his temples freshly bound,
And prayed his gods of peace, and worship gave unto dame Ground,
(That foremost is of gods) and angel good that keeps that place.
And Nymphs, and fairie Queens, and fluds unknown he sought of grace.
Than Gods of night he calde, and signs of stars by night that rise.
And chiefly Jove, A token from heaven to Trojans.
and both his parents strong in hell an skies.
The almighty father than, three times arowe from heuens on hight,
Did sign of thondring show, and golden beams with burning light
Was seen, and with his hand himself in clear sky shook the cloud.
Anon the rumor spread, and through the camp was blasyd loud,
That now the day was come, that houses hie they should possess.
Their bankettes they restore, and man to man their joys express.
And wines in bolles they set, and cups they crown, and feasts renew.
The morning next, when torche of burning son the world did view,
And day dispersyd was, on every side they seek, and send
Surueiours through the coast, and topps of mountains next ascend.
A city chief they find, of Numik lake, here springs the well.
This river Tyber is, here Latin peoples strong do dwell.
Than lord Anchises son, from all his bands a hundred knights
Ambassadors did choose, and to the king on message dightes.
Their crowns in compass knit with bows of peace, and myld attire,
To bear the king his gifts, and leage to Troyans to desire,
They forth without delay, with speedy feet did plie their pace,
Whiles he describing drew to bilde his walls a comely place,
In facion like a camp, with trenche and bulwarks strong and hie.
And now the knights their journey nere had past, and toures they spy,
Of king Latinus town, and loftly castles large appear:
And orderly they set them selfs, and walls approchid near.
Before the town the lively youth, and children fresh of lust
On horses tried them selves, and coursers wyld vpturnd in dust.
Or whirling drue their darts, or lances long with strength they shake.
And some their bows did bend, and some for wrestling matches make.
A ridyng post forthwith unto the king does tidings bear,
How foreign knights unknown, in garments strange approaching were,
He bids men them receive, and to his court to bring and call.
Himself to counsel went, and in the mids he sat in hall.
A Halle of huge estate, with pillars hie a hundred borne,
Above the town there stood, The description of king Latinus hall.
king Picus court in time beforne,
Beset with sacred woods, where old religion dreadful dwells.
There wonted were the kings to take their crowns and no where else.
And there their scepters stood, this was both minster, court, and hall,
Here stood their offryng pewes, and many a slaughter down did fall.
And Lords at tables round in solemn days did feast and dine.
There was besides all this, full many an image old and fine
Of antike Cedar wrought, and row by row his graunsirs tall
Both Italus and Sabin kings, and he that first of all
Did plant Italia vynes, Saturnus old, with crooked hook
In hand, and doublefaced Ianus sly did backward look,
At entry first they stood, and other kings of old descent,
That for their countries love, in battle fight their blood had spent.
And over this, there hangs much enmies harneis fixed on height,
And spoils, and captive chares, and halberd axes, huge of weight,
And helmet crestes, and brazen boltyng bars of conquered towns,
With spears, and battrid sheelds, and topps of ships, and garland crowns.
Himself in kyngly throne, with cuttid coape, most like a God
In heavenly armor sat, and held in hand his bagle rod.
King Picus, king, and tamer proud of steedes, A bagle stat whom prelates that
time did use in their reli^
whom caught with love
Dame Circes dear his spouse from shape of mankind did remove.
She changed him by charm, and smit his head with golden spray.
And poisoned drinkyng draughtes, and him of man she made a iay,
And to the woods he flew, with speckled wings of colors gay.
In such a temple, and so costly seat, and comely wrought,
(...) If freendship such he seeks, and if he list this leage to bind:)
Approach our presence to, Prophecis had settled his mind before the coming of
Aeneas.
let him not fear his friend to seacute;e.
His right hand ones to touch, shall pledge of peace remain to me.
Depart your way and to your king do you my words declare:
A daughter I have, whom join to neighbor none I skarcely dare
For tokens down from heaven, for woonders daily thick that rise.
The destnies do forbid, and prophets books pronounce likewise,
That for the peoples wealth a stranger borne should have that chance,
Whose famous blood should to the stars of heaven our name advance.
Perhaps him fortune calls, and if in mind I rightly guess:
This man is he, and if gods will so be, I would no less.
These things he spoke, and horses straight from stables forth he calls,
Three hundred fresh there stood, at mangers hie bestowd in stalles.
For every Troyan knight, a palfray brave he bids out bring,
In crimsin couerid all, and of their feet as swift as wyng.
Their breasts embroydred gilt, their poitrels pendant compasfolde,
All gilded glistryng bright, and under teeth they gnaw their gold.
A charet for Aeneas eke, with coursers like in tire,
Of heavenly seed, and from their nosethrils fierce outbreathyng fire.
Circes invented to join celestial horses to mortal Mares, whereof came a
divine race of steedes.
Engendered of that race, whom Circes lively did invent
To mix with mortal steedes, and stale the storms for that intent.
With such rewards, and with king Latins words, the knights of Troy
On horses hie return, and peace they bring with feastfull joy.
Behold, from Craecia land dame Juno Queen did than remove,
(The testy spouse of Jove) and hie on clouds she stood above
Beholding all these things, and from the Cape of Sicil strond
She vewd the Trojan fleet, and army saufly set a land,
She sees Aeneas glad, and plattes vprise for men to dwell,
And navy desert stand: with boylyng mood her breast does swell.
Than shaking mad her head, her wrathful heart did thus expel.
O hated brood, A new vexation by Inno.
O spiteful fortune, me that always frettes,
This fortune vile of Troy, how every chance my purpose lettes?
Where they not clean downkilled? yet could they not be clean destroid?
Were they not caught? yet could they not be caught? has fire them noid?
Has burning Troy them burnt? but through the thro^gs, and through ye fires
They found away? I ween against their luck my power expiers.
Or have I left my wrath? and yet not fylde am fallen at rest?
Expulsed from their land I them pursued, and down oppressed
With total power of storms, and total seas on them I brought.
Both force of skies and deepes on them I spent, and all for naught.
What good did Scilla me? what could prevail Charibdis wood?
Or Sirtes parlous sands? be they not now in Tyber flood?
In spite of seas, and me? and where they wished are settled sure?
Yet Mars could have the might to kill down quite without recure,
The hugye Centaurs kind. Diana did of gods obtain,
On ancient Calidon to wreake, while one man did remain.
For what offense? or how could Centaurs so, such wrath deserve?
But I, the mighty spouse of Jove, whom all things else should serve?
That nothing left untried, to every shift my self transformde:
My strength, my practice spent, and yet my purpose vnperformd:
Aeneas makes me shrink, and Troyes of me shall conquest crake.
What should I therefore doubt where ever I can my friends to make?
Since heavens I may not move, yet pits of Hell I will vprake.
From Italy to keep them of, no shift I see can hold.
Let pas Lauinia wedded needs shall be by destny told.
Yet still prolong the time, and discord foul between them breed,
And peoples both distroy, were in my mind a worthy deed.
The stepsoune and the father both, shall have their loueday fee,
With Trojans and with Rutils blood, this wenche endowde shall be.
This Venus goodly brood, and second Paris, She rese^bleth him to Paris. whose
mother in vision seemed to bring forth a fire brond. Alecto is raised.
fine and nice,
Shall bring again to dust this second Troy, by mine advise.
Nor Priams wife alone shall be, whose womb a brond of fire,
To world did bring, but like success I give this gentle ^uier.
These things when she had said, adown on earth she greesly falls,
From dark infernal damps, Alecto mournful up she calls.
Alecto foulest fend, in doleful wars that does delight,
And wrathes, and treasons vile, and sins, and slanders, and despite.
A dampened monster grimme, whom all her sisters deadly hates,
Her father Pluto lothes, and evermore she breeds debates.
Such faces foul she shifts, so many mouths she turnyng makes,
So serpentfull she seems, and over all begrowen with snakes.
Whom Juno quickened thus, and soon with speech she set on fire.
Thou child of night: Do (virgin) this for me at my desire.
Virgin for none will have her,
This trauail shall be thine, let not our honor shrink nor quayle,
Let not the Trojans league with king Latinus ought prevail.
Nor let them land obtain, nor yet this wedlock to persuade,
Thou best can work this feate: Of strife and woe thou have the trade,
Thou freendshippes all can cut, and brethren kind constrain to fight,
And towns untwine with hate, and cities whole subvert with spite,
And houses burn with brondes, a thousand shifts thou have to spill,
A thousand names of harms, now shake thy self, and work thy fill.
Give causes thick of war, disturb this peace that is begone,
Set al their youth in arms, and to their slaughters let them run.
She tarieth not to answer.
Anon Alecto vile, with poisons rank infected, flies,
And first to Latium land, and up king Latins house she sties,
And to the Queen Amata first in secret sort she slides,
Behind her chamber door, and close her self in silence hides,
Where she, Amata the queen vexed by Alecto.
with coming of this Trojan nation much turmoyld,
Both Turnus care and wrath, her female breast enflamyng broyld.
To whom this goddess, from her ugly hear one viper blew
Did draw, and in her bosom soft against her heart she threw.
That thereby all her house with sondrie mischiefs should be vexed.
He creepyng through her clothes, her tender breast approchyng next,
Did fold himself unfelt, and serpents foul within her breathes
Than shiftyng sundry shappes, about her neck himself he wreathes,
And seems a golden cheine, sometimes a hearlace long to knit,
To roll her locks, and thus from limme to limme does fall and flit.
And while the poison first, and ticklyng sting with sokyng sinkes,
And gropes her gristlebones, and venim drops her senses drinks.
Nor yet in mind the burning flame did rage without restraint,
More soberly she spoke, as mothers use, and made her plaint.
Often weepyng for her child, and often for Trojans wedlock day.
To wandryng outlawes shall Lauinia thus be given away?
O man: nor of your self regard, nor daughter mercy shows?
Nor me her mother (wretch) whom with the next northwind yt blows
This traitor will forsake? and to the seas the pyrat thief,
Our virgin daughter steal, and spoil from me my comfort chief?
Dissemblyng rouer vile? has not the like, ere this be seen?
Did Paris so not cloyne from lands of Greece dame Helen queen?
Where is your godly mind? your woonted carck of country dear?
And faith so often plight in Turnus hand, your kinsman near?
If son in law from countries strange, we only must admit:
As Faunus answers hids, and in your breast it does so sit:
All lands that of themselves from our estate are severed clean,
I call them strange, and so I take, in deed the gods do mean.
Than Turnus (if ye list his elders line to call in mind)
Of great Micena town, and mids of Greece you shall him find.
Of Inachus descent, and of Acrisius noble kind.
With language like, when she Latinus mind in vain had felt,
And sees him still withstand, and poison more did inward melt,
Which from the serpent shed, and all her limbs infectyng straied:
Than verily with monsters huge affright, and deep dismayed,
She raylyng rampes and runs, and through the town she troubles al.
Much like, This play is yet used in wales, and the ball is called knappan.
Bacchus triumphs: much like to our morice daunces in summer. Commotion of
women.
as when by strength of slyng is cast a whirlyng ball,
Whom boys for their disport, in cloister wide, or vacant halles
Infentif drive with noise. It thrown with force, before them falls.
The careless prease pursues, with wondryng much the bowl of box,
From youth to youth that rolls, their courage kindlith more by knoxe.
None otherwise, and with no less concours she gaddes about,
Through cities mids and towns, and people thick she gathers out.
Besides all this in woods, with faynyng feast of Bacchus name,
A greater mischief springes, and fransie more and void of shame,
She flies abroad, and in the busshie hills her daughter hides,
The Trojans to prevent, while day of wedlock passing slides.
With heave and hoaw, on Bacchus name they shout. For thee alone,
This virgin worthy is, thou shall her wed or never none.
Thou god, thy custom is, to shake triumphant hie thy spears,
Thy chief delight is daunse, thou comely keep thy holy hears.
The Fame outflies, and madness like enflames the mountain wives,
To seek them dwellinges new, the Queens example out them drives.
Their houses all they leave, and with their hears disheuilid bare,
Their naked necks they wag, and frantiklyke they rage and fare.
Some other lift their voice, and skies they fill with quaueryng shrickes,
And girt in skins they iet, with vinetree garlands borne on pricks.
Her self among the mids with flaming torch in hand outsprynges.
Proclames her daughter bryde, and Turnus wedlockes feast she singes,
With wrestyng wild her face, and suddenly with bloudread eyes
She makes a noise. O matrons wise, O friends, O subjects mine.
Who ever Latin blood does love, and you that mothers be,
Unlace your heads attire, and celebrate this dance with me.
To Bacchus let us singe and to the mountains out go we,
If any gentell heart does pity this my woeful plight,
If any touched be with just remorse of mothers right.
Thus into desert mountain woods, and hauntes of beasts vnmilde,
Alecto stingyng drives this careful Queen with madness wild.
When she with mischief such king Latins counsel troubled had,
And topsituruy tossed his household all with sorrows sad:
Incontinent this doleful dame vpsterts, with waylfull wings,
And to the walls of Turnus bold, Alecto incenseth Turnus kig of ye Rutils, to
whom the virgin was despoused. Arde in Italy.
in Rutil realm, she flinges.
Which city, when dame Danae by storms was cast on ground,
Men say she first did build, and for a vow the same did found.
A place, which of our gransirs old did Ardea name obtain,
Of anticke date, and yet the name of great Arde does remain.
The fortune, sometime was: there Turnus king in toures of might,
Was taking sweet his rest, and sleepyng sound at dark midnight.
Alecto than, her frownyng face, and fendly limbs of worms
Puts of, and to a woman old in likeness her transformes.
Her forhead foul with wrinckels long she plowes, and horewhite hears
In cap and kerchief knittes, and Olive branch thereon she wears.
Like Calibee, dame Iunos temple Sexten, old of years.
And suddenly before his eyes with these words she appeeres.
Why Turnus? will thou see thy labors long thus lost in vain?
And can thou suffer Trojan clownes thy kingdom thus obtain?
King Latin thee reiectes, and with thy blood that thou have bought,
Thy wedlock he denies, and heirs of aliens in are brought.
Go now, go venture yet thy self in danger, laughed to skorne.
Go fight, and vanquish yet the Tirrhens host, their enmies sworn.
Bring Latins to their peace, and kill their foes, for thank forlorn.
These things to thee to tell (where now thou lie in pleasant rest)
Almighty Juno bad, and me this time on message dressed.
Wherefore come of, in mustryng call thy youth, and through thy lands
In harneis put thy power, come boldly forth with all thy bands,
And Trojans now by Tiber flood that sit, with captains all,
Destroy them down to death, and burn their ships resist that shall.
The great assent of heavenly gods so biddes, and king Latin,
If he refuse to obey, and to thy wedlock due incline:
Than let him feel, and Turnus power at last repentyng know.
The bachler hearing this, to her in mockyng made a mow.
Than thus he said. The navy lately brought to Tiber shore:
Not as thou do coniect, has been to me untold before.
Feign me no needelesse fear, no such tumult, nor Juno Queen
Unmindful is of us.
But thou a dotyng trot, whom withryd age from truth exiles,
In vayn thy self do vex, with causeless carke (O fool therwhiles)
And kings affairs, and wars with needelesse fear thy mind begiles.
More meet thy temple keep, and serve thy gods good aged crone.
To men belonges the wars, let men with wars and peace alone.
In talkyng thus: Alecto flaming wood with wrathful look
Vprose, and suddenly his limbs a tremblyng palsy took.
His eyes vpstaryng stood such sundry faces out she settes,
So many hissyng snakes, so many ways she fomyng frettes.
Than burning broad with eyes, as he in space would more have spoke,
She thrust him of, and serpents twain from among her locks she broke
And struck him, loud than from her mouth these words she kest with smoke
Lo, I the dotyng trotte whom witherid age from truth exiles.
Whom kings affairs and wars with needless carke afraid begiles.
Look hereupon: lo, here I am, of hagges infernal most,
Both wars, and death in hand I bring.
So speaking, to the young man's breast a firebrond hot she cast,
With blustryng smoky light, and in his heart she fixed it fast.
Than from his dead sleep fear him brake, his bones and all his limbs
On water brastyng out, and streamyng swet down gushyng swimmes.
For armor, mad he cries: for armor, house, and bed he turns,
With cursed rage of wars, and love of steel that inward burns.
His wrath vpswelles, as when a caudron great is set on fire,
And sticks are kindled fast, and flame with noise does close vpspyre,
The liquor leapes for heat, and water waves vptossyng toils
In smoke, and over flowyng flood of foam redoundyng boyles,
Nor can it self receive, the vapor black in air up flies.
A choice therefore of youth to king Latin to send he hies,
Renounsing league of peace, and bids him straight prepare to fight,
To clear the coast from foes, and to defend Italias right,
Or he against them both with power sufficyng will descend.
When this was said, his gods he calls with vows, good luck to send.
Than straight the Rutils strive, who shall be first to serve the wars,
Each man himself exhorts, him beauty fresh of youth prefars,
Him kings his gransirs moves, him deeds of arms before time tried.
While Turnus thus the Rutils minds with boldness fiercely plied:
Alecto to the Trojan nation drew, and foul with wings,
For new devise a place she spies, Alecto trobleth the Trojans.
and thereon swift she sprynges.
Where fair Ascanius stood, and on the shore the time to pass
With engines after beasts, and course of runnyng huntyng was.
There suddenly, among his hounds, this virgin vile of Hell
Did cast a train, and by the suite their noses filled with smell,
A Heart to find and rouse, which afterward of mischiefs all
Was chiefest cause, and first the plowmen made to fighting fall.
A Heart there was of comely port, and huge with horns yspred,
A tame stag.
Whom Tirrhus children (from the dug withdrawn) for pleasure bred,
And Tirrhus great their sier, that for the king had all the charge
Of beasts, and trusted was with heardes that fed in pastures large.
Him tame at every beck their sister Siluia dear did love,
And wreathyng garland flowers, would trimly trick his horns above,
And pure in fountaynes wash, and comely kembe his wanton locks.
He suffryng every hand, his masters bourd, and feedyng flocks
Did use, and thence abroad in woods, and through his woonted gate,
He would return to home, though night on him were nere so late,
Him wandryng loof astray, where child Ascanius swift did hunt,
His hounds before them had, as he by custom kept his wont,
To soil himself in flood, and under banckes to void the heat.
Ascanius kindled than, with love of praise and courage great,
His dart for joy outdrew, and crooked bow he bent of horn,
Desirous of that stagge, and seldom saw the like beforne.
Nor from his hand the goddess absent was, but sharply sent
The quarrey through the paunche, and through the guts with sounding went
The wounded beast forthwith unto his masters house he drew,
And brayed with piteous noise, and waylyngs loud he bleedyng threw,
Like one beseeching help, and all the house with mournyng vexed.
Their sister Siluia, beatyng both her hands, for woe perplexed,
Outcalles the hines for aid, and plowmen tough, and neighbors next.
They suddenly (for in the woods the plage yet lurkyng sat)
Assemblyng flock themselves, one brought in hand a burned bat,
Another caught a clubbe, with heavy knobbes, and what they found:
Echman outhrynges, wrath wepon makes, them Tirrhus gathreth round
As he by chance that time with earnest mind an oak did cliue
In quarter shides, and wedges strong with force therein did drive.
He took his axe, and down with threatening huge descendyng blows,
But from her tootyng place Alecto foul that mischief sowes,
(When she her time espied) she flew, and took the houses hie,
And on the stable top she sat, to rear the country cry.
Her fendly voice she lifts, in crooked crinkled horn on height,
And blew the heardmans blast, and wonted sign to rise and fight,
So loud: that with the sound thereof, the trees with tremblyng shakes
And caves of mountain rocks, and woods of deepnes tho^dring makes.
The lakes aloof it heard, and floods and fountaynes neighbors all,
And sulphur streams of Nar and mountain waters down that fall
And trembling mothers to their breast did clasp their children small.
Than verily unto that noise, where first their trompet blew,
The country clownes vprose, with tools, and wepons thick they drew,
Stifnecked plowmen stout: the Trojan youth also brake out,
With open camp, and to Ascanius rescue drew for doubt.
Their armies out they spread not now like fraies of countries chubs.
Nor work with burned bats, nor sharped stakes, nor mountayn clubs.
But try with edged tools, and every feelde with swords upright,
As stubble starckly stands, and thick with points of weapons pight,
The sheelde with sun vpshines, and to the clouds repulse their light
As when the tempest rises first, and seas does white begin
By small and small to swell, and belchyng floods reboyle within,
At last aloft it mountes, and to the skies the bottom skippes.
Before the voward first, an arowe swift that soundyng slippes.
Does Almon throw to ground, that Tirrhus child and eldest was,
Beneath his throat it stack, and where his breath and voice should pas
It stopped, and with his tender life expiring left his blood.
About him bodies thick of men, and old Galesus good
In medlyng making peace, a man of right and justness most
That was, and greatest wealth sometime in all Italia cost.
Five flocks of sheep he had, and herds of cattels feeding five,
And soil so much did turn, as plowes a hundred still did drive.
While these things woorking were with equal chance on both the parts:
The spiteful Goddess spied so great success in all her arts,
And peoples fierce of both, with blood and battle full embrewd.
And saw their armies joint in flaughters vile together glewd:
She left Italia land, and through the skies of compass wide,
Dame Juno to she comes, and thus she spoke with bragging pride.
Lo thy request is done, now strife, and wars among them is,
Go bid them freendly join, and louyngly like neighbors kiss,
Alecto to Juno.
Since Trojans have begun Italians blood thus much to spill:
Yet more I shall augment (if I may know it be thy will)
The towns and borders next I will with rumors set on fire,
And make them such uproar, that battles mad they shall desire,
And bustling run to help, and every sielde with armor spreede,
Than Juno said: enough there is of false deceit and dreede,
Good causes stands of war. Together now I see they roonne,
With bloodshed both embrued, this game of thine is well begoonne.
Such wedlocks let them make, that goodly brood, that Venus elfe.
Such feast is for them fit, and for the king Latin him self.
Thy person over mortal skies with longer leave to stray:
The guider great of heaven for ease of mandkind does denay.
Give place this time, if any chance or travail be behind,
My self shall take that charge. So Juno speaking told her mind.
She mountyng forth did fly, with squeakyng wings of lothly snakes.
And leauyng light of skies, her wonted seat in Hell she takes.
In mids of Italy, Description of a place in Italy where Alecto went down to
Hell.
there is a place in mountains cold,
Right notable, and for the marvel much in countries told.
A darsome vale and deep, with woods encompast thick on sides,
And headlong down there sinkes, in mids of rocks that hills deuides,
A roryng stinkyng poole, and breakyng stones the brook does sound.
A dongeon dark there is, and dreedfull gulf of gapyng ground,
Where deadly breath outbreakes. Alecto there (so god did please)
Did hide her hateful head, and heaven and earth thereby did ease.
Nor nothing less this while, dame Iunos hand did workyng cease.
The numbers all of heardes, unto the city came with prease,
To king Latinus court, and brought in sight the bodies twain,
Of Almon flouryng lad, and good Galesus foully slain.
They cry their gods for aid, and to the king their case complain.
In mids of that, is Turnus nere at hand, with sword and fire
He threatens Latin king, that Trojans wedlock would require.
Outlandysh blood brought in, himself reject, the realm defilde.
Than from the woods the wives, whom Bacchus dance astoined wild
Came rampyng down with dro^mes ye queens respect does give them sprite.
From every coast men come, and with the Trojans cry to fight,
Each one against al right, against all gods, for war does call.
The subjects swarmyng rise, and to king Latins court they fall.
He, like a rock in seas resistyng stands, vnmoouid, fast,
Full like a rock in seas, when surgyng waves with wind are cast,
Whom strokes of water strikes, with barkyng sound, and beats about,
It self with weight it stays, the floods in vain their fomyng spout,
With ratlyng loud of stones the sides repulse the fleetyng weeds.
When nothing does prevail, and blind outrage his counsel leedes,
And after Iunos beck he sees how backward things appeeres:
Protestyng much his gods, and aier of skies that nothing heeres,
We run to wrack (quod he) that woe is me, with tempest borne.
Your selves shall first repent, and pay for this your blood for sworn.
O wretched souls, O sinful Turnus, thou shall bide the pains,
And call to late thy gods, a doleful death for thee remaynes.
For I am sauf at rest, my feeble ship is brought to shore,
Of happy funerals I am dispoyld. And made no talkyng more:
But locked himself in walls, and rule of things did clean forsake.
The manner was in Latium land, which cities all did take,
And sacred custom kept, now Rome most mighty still retaynes.
When first their wars they move, or for renown will take the pains
To conquer feas or lands, or to the Moors give mortal wars,
To nations under North, and countries distant far from stars,
Or pierce with power to Inde, and seek the seat of morning sun,
Or from the Parthies people fetch, Description of Ianus temple at Rome that
never was shut but in peace and most in Augustus time Ianus had two faces
whereby was signified prude^s to look both before and behind in beginning of
war.
with bloodshed standards won:
Two gates of war there be, for so their names at Rome they bear,
Religious, sacred kept to dreadful Mars, and temple there,
A hundred brazen boltes, and everlasting strength of steel
Does lock the same, and Ianus keeper stands at threshold heel.
These gates, when sentence first of fight the lords have full decreed,
Himself the Consul chief, in robes of pomp, and purple weed,
In warlikewise begyrt, with romblyng noise abroad displaies.
And first proclames the wars, than all the youth in their araies.
And blastes of brazen horns with hoarce assent concordyng braies.
In such a sort, king Latin than the Trojans to defy
Commanded was, but he the grievous gates would not come nie,
The good prince did refuse, and from that service vile he fled,
And kept himself in close, and under darkness hid his head.
Dame Juno than her self, the queen of heaven, adown did slide,
And took the lingering gates, and shouyng set them open wide,
Them turnyng swift with noise, and brazen posts and hinges brast.
Than all Italia land (unmoved erst) their peace vpcast.
Vncald they stur themselves, some runs as footmen fierce in feelde,
Some stur their startlyng steedes, and dust vpthrowes and spears they weeld
Ethe man for armor cries, and some their sheeldes and harneis light
With fat of lard they scour, and whetstones hacke to make them bright.
Their streamers glad they bear, and trompets sound with joy they here.
Five cities great therefore, with forges set in countries nere,
Renew them fighting tools, both Tyber proud, and Atin strong,
And Arde, and Crustum toures, and great Antemna large and long.
Their metal mass they bow, and for their heads the steadfast plates,
And buckler bosses broad, and wickers weaue for target grates.
Some beat them coats of brass, or sturdy brestplate hard they drive,
And some their gauntlets gilde, or boots with silver nesh contriue.
Regard of shares and culters all they leave, both sith and plough
They turn to this, and swords, and glauies, in furneis neale they tough.
And sagbuttes now they found, up goes the sign to battle strokes.
One gettes his sheelde for have, an other swift his horses yokes
In chase to ride, and helmet bright on puttes, threedubbled shyrtes
Of Gold, with gorget great, and trusty sword about him gyrtes,
Now Muses move my song, He describes the musters, and gatheryng of princes
co^spired against Aeneas.
now let me sup your learning springs,
To tell what nations tough, what captains fierce, what noble kings,
With armies filde the feeldes, what armor strong, what manred bold,
Italia sacred land did flourishyng that time uphold.
You ladies, you remember best, and vttryng best can speak.
Skant breathyng thin of fame by us does pass with pipling weak.
First enters war from Tirrhen coast, Mezentius, tirant king,
Despiser proud of Gods, and armies strong with him does bring.
Than Lausus next his son, whose corpse in beauty peer had none.
That time, and chiefest fame did bear, save Turnus corpse alone.
Prince Lausus, conqueror of beasts, and tamer strong of steedes,
A thousand men from Agillina town him after leedes.
In vain that followd him for love: well worthy to have had
A father not so naught, and of his realm to be more glad.
Next them, triumphant fierce with steedes that wager all did win,
Duke Auentine, sir Hercles worthy seed, of heavenly kin:
Victoriously out shows his charet faier, and bare in sheelde
His fathers arms, a hundred dreadful dragons huge to weelde,
A hundred serpents grimme, and Hidra monster girt with snakes,
Whom Rhea virgin priest, as she to God her service makes,
In Auentinus mount, and bushes thick by stelth out brought:
Engendring mixed with God, when Hercules had conquest wrought
In Spain, and Gerion down killed, and to Italia strand
Arriving braught his beasts, and oxen faier had set a land.
Their parlous pykes in hand, and puncheons close in staves they bear,
And pykes like broaches long, and fight with foyne of pointed spear.
Him self on foot, a fold of Lions huge unwieldy hide,
With brestlid hears vnkemt, and tusked white, and gaping wide
In helmet wise did wear, so to the court he come full rough:
All terribel, and his fathers weed he bare on shoulders tough.
Than brethren twain of Tiber strong, forsook Tiburtus walls,
(A town that of their brothers name the people yet so calls.)
Both Coras and Catillus, eger knights of Greekish kind,
Before the voward went, in weapons thick as swift as wynd.
Like Bulls, or misbegotten Centaures twain, from cloudy hills
Descend with stamping noise, and hedlong down with restles wills
They run, that woods do rustling yield, and bows with breaking crack.
Nor of Praenesta town, the founder first thereof did lack:
Vulcanus dredful sun, a king of beasts and mountains cold,
A fondling found besides a fire (as all report has told)
King Ceculus, a legion large of heardmen next his side,
And men of hie Praeneste town, and all that compass wide,
Dame Iunos sacred land, and Auiena river chill,
And all that Hernick stones (with watery springs bedewed) do till.
Whom Amaseni pastures feeds, and rich Anagnia feelds,
Nor harneis to them all, nor charrets rattling ben, nor sheelds.
The greatest sort with slinges, their plummet lompes of lead out squats.
And some their sheues of darts, their heads defensed broad with hats
Of heary skins of wolves, their rightside shankes be naked bare.
Such is their shift, their leftside legs with raw hides covered are.
But king Messapus, Neptunes child, that coursers wild can tyer,
Whom nether strength of steel can overthrow, nor force of fire,
His peoples long in rest, and out of ure of battle strife;
Does suddenly vpcal, and teach to handle sword and knife.
They from their Fescen hills, and from Faliscus equal toftes,
They from Soractus towers, and yelow feeldes of Flauine croftes,
And mount of Ciminus with lake, where Capens woods outsprang,
By numbers like they went, and on their king in praise they sang.
As swannes, that in the waueringe clouds do fly, with sounding sweet,
Returning from their foodes, when singing flocks in one do meet,
With stretched necks, their melody they yield, their mixed voice,
Rebounding beats the skies, that lakes and rivers do rejoice,
And Asia long aloof.
Nor by their noise men knew, that harnest bands their clattring cast.
But like a cloud of fowls, that from the seas were forcid fast,
And near to shore were come, and hoarce with cries their chanel past.
Behold from Sabines ancient blood, sir Clausus does proceed,
With mighty throng, and like a thronge him self, as much to dreede.
From whom descending comes both tribe, and house of Claudia line
In Latium land, since Rome to Sabines first did part incline.
Together Amiterna manred strong, and burgeis towns.
And al Mutusca strength, that Olives bear, and all their downs,
They that Nomentum city kept, and rosy countries pure
Of Velin, and Seuerus hills, and all that thought them sure
In Tetrix rocky cragges, and such as turn the fertile soil
Of Forulos, and where Himella stream full fast does boil.
And they that Tiber waters drinks, or Fabaris good floodes.
Or who^ Casperia sent, or Nursia cold for want of woods.
And peisants al of Latin land, and seamen come from ships.
Allia a river where the Romans had diverse overthrows, and therefore cursed it.
And all that feet in cursyd streams of dampened Allia dippes.
As thick as winter waves in marble seas as turned and tossed.
When storms and tempest rise, and sight of stars and light is lost.
Or like to standing corn, that parchid is with heat of son:
So thick the people prease, from every coast to war they run.
The rattling shieldes resound, the soil with trampling beaten quakes.
Than Agamemnons child, an enmy old of Troy, a wakes,
Halesus, borne on steedes, and to king Turnus armies great,
A thousand people brings, of them that ground with mattockes beat
To till the blisfull veins, and they that rake the mountains fat,
Of Messica, and nere the seas al husbandment that sat.
And all Auruncus youth, and they that Caleis land forsook
And dwellers all beside the fourdes of should VVlturnus brook.
Saticula their testy people sent, and Osca strength.
Their weapons troncheons be, and malles of maces, small of length.
But them by lethrin thongs they while and draw, such is their gise,
Their lefthands Targets keep, and hooked Fawchons from them flies.
Nor thou from this account, and verses mine shall pass untold
O Ebalus, whom Telon gat (as goes report of old)
Of lady Sebethis (that Nimphe) when he the kingdom hent
Of Capreas, and lands, but not his son therewith content:
Sarrastes people rich with empier sore that time did tread,
And welthy countries large, where Sarnus brook to sea does lead,
And they that Batulus does hold, and Rufas feeldes object,
And all that fruitful vale, that Bella city may prospect.
Like Almain rutters, borespeares long they whirle, or foynyng forks,
Their nuddockes bolstred ben, and skulles of heads with barks of corks
They shine with brazen sheeldes, they shine with swords, and rapiers bright.
And thee to wars thy country Nursa sent, O noble knight,
O Vfens, much renowned both of deeds, and great good chance,
Whose mountain people strong, with practice long of sword and lance,
And huntyng still in woods, and breakyng clottes ben hard of flesh.
They weaponed till the ground, and ever more their prays a fresh
They fetch from countries nere, it does them good to drive and watch.
They live by booty spoil, it is their own what ere they catch.
Than from Marrhubia there came a Priest, and prophet gay.
His helmet compass knit with lucky bows of Olive spray.
From king Archippus sent, most valiant knight of Vmber land,
That woonted was with songs, and with his charms, and holy hand,
All poisoned adders kind, and serpents dreadful cast on sleep,
And calm their wrathes and stinges, and from their bityng peoples keep
And ease with art their wounds, and venims all confound and choke.
But not the Troyan blade could he avoid nor heal the stroke
Of great Aeneas dint, nor to his wounds could help him ought
His sleeping songs in vain, nor lechecraft herbs on mountains sought.
For thee, the woods did wayle, for thee the fountaynes clear as glass:
For thee, the waters wept: and lakes lamentyng cried alas:
In all Angitia land.
Than of Hippolitus also, the child most worthy went,
Sir Virbius, whom fresh of fame his mother Aritia sent,
Brought up in saluage woods, and by the banckes of wholesome streams
Of dame Dianas walk, and Nimphe Egerias desert realms.
For when Hippolitus (by old report) was put to pain,
And by his stepdams craft, was of his father giltlesse slain,
In pieces drawn with steedes, again to breath and worldly skies,
He was (men say) vpcald, and eft from death to life did rise,
By power of Phoebus herbs, and at Dianas suit for love.
The almighty father than, and king of heaven that reygnes above,
Disdaining, that a mortal man from dead souls might reuart:
The finder of that physic first, Esculapius was thrown to Limbo for reising
of Hippolitus to life.
and him that made that art,
( Apollos learnyd son) with lightning dint to Lymbo threw.
Diana than, Hippolitus to secret woods withdrew,
From fight of man, and to Egeria Nimphe did him betake,
Where he alone in desert groves does worldly care forsake,
Nor praise of people seeks, but leading life as he best can,
Virbius. i. bis vir.
He yet remaynes, with name converted Virbius, Twice a man.
Therefore it is, that from Dianas woods, and temples clear
All horses ben forbid, nor to her service may come near.
For they affraied did flee, at sight of monsters than that sprang
From seas, and down the young man threw, and charet ouerflang.
Yet nerethelesse his son, courageously with horse in feeld
Did run, and fyrisprited steeds in charet fierce did weeld.
Turnus.
Himself among the chief, with valiant body, Turnus bright,
Displaies himself in arms, above all men with head upright.
Whose triple crownid creast, and helmet hie, with ugly paws
Chimera monster holds, and sparcling flames she spoutes at jaws.
The more she fretting fumes, and more with burnings waxes wood:
The more that fighting feeldes embrew them selfs in sheding blood.
But on his target smothe, dame Io stands, with horns upright,
Imboasid pure in gold, even like a cow, with hear in sight.
A story huge to learn: and Argus, with his hundred eien,
Did keep that virgin there: so portraid was that worck divine:
And Inachus his noble stream did power from pitcher fine.
A cloud of footmen following him pursues, and mixed with dust,
The shieldes, and harneis dimmes, and clustring thick in throngs they thrust
As well the Greekish youth, as all the strength of Rutill hands,
Auruncus aid, and all Sicanus cities ancient bands.
Sacrana crewes, Labicus painted buclers, and besides
All such as Tyber hills, and sacred shore thereof deuydes,
That Rutil ground vpgrubbes, and with their shares apply the soil,
And all that on the mountains neck of Circes seat do toil.
And Anxurs holy hills, where Jove himself is patron chief.
Faronia joyful town, of green wood grove that took relief.
The way that Vfens mighty stream does stray, and black with pooles,
Does seek by deepest bales, and in the seas himself he cooles,
And over this, there came from Volsca realm, Camilla a Lady.
Camilla stout,
With trowpes of horsemen fresh, and glistring footmen many arout.
She closid last her crewes, a woman warlike, strong and stern.
She neither weauing tools, nor distaffe work did use or learn.
Nor female fingers had, but bruntes of wars Virago grymme
Would bear, and ouerpasse the winds, with lightness swift of lymme.
She for a pastime would, on croppes upright of standing corn
Have flowen, and with her tender feet, have never an ear down borne.
Or in the mids of seas, on swelling waves before they reele,
Would course have fet, and neither dipped in water, toe nor heel.
From houses al and feeldes, the youth with wondering issued out,
And matrons gasing stood, both how she rides behind the rout:
How princely purple keeps her shulders light, how trym her hears
With gold are vnderknit, her quiver gorgeous how she bears,
And dreadful lance of length, and pointed like to fosters spears.
DEO GRATIAS.
Per Thomam Phaer,
in foresta Kilgerran finitum iii. Decembris. Anno. 1557. Opus xii. dierum.
The eight book of the Aeneidos of Virgil.
The Argument.
Turnus gives a sign of war out of Laurentum castle, and joins unto him
self in aid all Latium, and the cities near about: Venulus also is sent to
Arpos unto Diomedes to persuade him to war by likeness of the danger. Whereat
Aeneas moved, and distrustyng the smalenesse of his power: is admonished by
Tiberinus, and brought up alonge the river into that place where Rome was
afterward builded, and there requires aid of king Euander, who fliyng forth
of Arcadia: founded a city upon the hill Palatinus, called Pallanteum. When
Euander understood the cause of Aeneas coming, he courteously receaueth him
into his house, and taking him with him unto the sacrafice and solemnities of
Hercules wherein he was then busy: shows him the cause, and the manner of the
sacrafice, and recites to his gest the names of the chiefest places in those
quarters The next day Aeneas being aided with four hundred horsemen whom
Pallas, Euanders only son did govern, and part of the power he sends unto
his men down the stream, him self with the residue goes to Agylla, the most
flouryshyng city of Tyrrhens who bare deadly hatred against Mezentius, whom
for his intolerable cruelty, they had driven out of his kyngedome. In this
while, Vulcane entised thereto by the flattery of Venus makes armor for his
son in law, which she brings unto Aeneas. Who being surprised with he
beutie thereof: diligently woundreth at every thing therein, especially his
targat, wherein were curiously engraven such noble exploytes as should be
valiantly atchiued, by his worthy posterity.

WHen sign of war from Laurent towers king Turnus up did rear,
And horns up blown wish blasses, their tre^blyng tunes full hoarce did tear,
When first his egre steedes, and armor clattryng began to clashe:
Men's minds molested rose, and suddenly unbridled rash
The youth for madness runs, all Latin towns for quakyng fear
Tumultuous clustryng join, and league confeddryng knit they swear.
Messapus and duke Vfens leaders chief, and puffed with pride
Mezentius gods dispiser, power of men from every side
They draw, and void of filmen wide dispeoplyng spoil the shyres.
Then to the mighty town of Diomedes with desires
Is Venulus out sent, his needful strength in time to call,
Instructed plain by mouth, what thing to him declare he shall:
How Trojans to Italia lands are come, and what a fleet
Aeneas bryngs of ships, and how their gods that under feet
Were conquered late by Greeks, he now exaltyng sets in fame,
And king will needs be called, and says him destnie gives that name,
Dilatyng more, how many nations been that ioygne their deeds
With Troy: and how the Trojan name in Latium shrewdly spreedes,
What these beginnyngs mean, and if his chance should give success
What sequel work he would: more manifest him self may guess
Then either Turnus king, or king Latinus list express.
Such work in Latium land there was. All which considering great,
The Trojan prince did view, and fluddes of care his breast did beat.
His wisdom swift now here, now there, he kest, and did divide
In sundry thoughts his mind: and each devise he tossed and tried:
As in some brazen cawdrons lips, where water standing streams,
When sun reflected shines, or face of Moon with quiueryng beams:
The twincklyng light up leapes, each corner seeks and flickering flits,
Now hie, now low, and tops of house, and rafters waueryng hits.
Then was it night, and creatures all that weery were on ground,
Both birds and groueling kinds of beasts deep sleep has settled sound:
When lord Aeneas underneath cold skies in sight of stars,
Perturbed much in mind with troublous carcks of heavy wars:
As on a bank he sat, sore musyng sad with careful breast:
He laid him down at last, and late his limbs he gave to rest.
To him the god of Tiber flood, which rules that pleasant place,
In vision showed himself, Tyber a river nigh Rome.
vprising grave with antique face,
Among the Poppler leaves in grisell gown of droppyng weeds,
A sail his shulders spread, his hear beshadowed was with reeds,
Than speaking thus, Aeneas heart with comfort words he feeds.
O heavenly child of gods, that Troy destroyed do now re^ore,
Which bringst us Trojan walls, and lastyng wealth for evermore,
Long looked for of Laurent feeldes, and towns of Latium great,
Here is thy certain house: do thou not shrink thy certain seat,
Nor fear thee not for all these threatenings huge: all breed and yres
Of gods appeased cease.
And now to thee (least fancy vain this dream thou do suppose)
A Sow of mighty sise forth with thou shall see laid in woase:
Beneth a bank, among the roots, with thirty sucklings out,
Al white her self on ground, and white her brats her dugges about,
There shall thy city stand: there is thy rest of labors last:
Where thy Alcanius prince, when ten times three of years ar past:
Shall famous Alba build, and of that surname call this land.
No fables I pronunce, now of this thing thou have in hand,
How thou shall victour be give ear in brief I will thee tell.
A nation on these fronters called Arcadia near does dwell:
From Pallants line they came, and king Euander up they took,
They chase their place, and city builded on that mountains nooke,
Which of his grandsier Pallant slain, now Palanteum hights.
This nation with Latinus folks, discording daily fights.
Take them to thy relief, and league with them compounde and smight,
Myself along these bancks shall thee conduct with passage light,
Against these streams with ores: that nothing let thy speed to stay.
Arise, go to thou goddess son: and first when stars decay
To Juno make thy vow: her threatening mode and wrahtful tene
With prayers meekly please: and when thy conquestes ended been,
Than me thou shall reward: for I am he that fleeting deep
Do strain these bancks thou see, and pastures fat do feed and keep,
Most joyful Tyber blue, best liked stream to heavens on hie,
Here is my mighty house, here cities great my head may spy.
He said: And suddenly his flood, he foltring mixed in lake
From sight. Aeneas eyes both night and sleep did than forsake,
He rose, and with his face upright against the mounting son,
When first his hands he dipped in waters pure that there did run,
He held them up to skies: and thus his voice he straight begone.
O Nymphs, o Laurent Nymphs, o Queen of streams and waters clear
And thou o Tyber o thou blessed flood and father dear,
Receive Aeneas now, and from these dangers last defend.
Where ever sacred lake, that pity such do us extend
In our extreme distress, what ever soil and fountain fair
Conteines thy holy head: unto thy seat will I repair,
Mine honors ever due, and ever gifts thou shall have good,
Hornfronted kingly god, of western streams Imperial flood,
Be with us, o this time, and al thy grace do prosper full.
So spoke he than, and from his fleet two barges apt does cull,
With rancks of rowers twain, and all his camp in armor set.
Behold, for suddenly their eyes a wondrous monster met.
For by the shore among the roots on ground in green wood shawe
This sow was prophesied of before.
A Sow of syse unseen, all color white with brood they saw.
Whom good Aeneas unto thee (o Juno most of power)
Even all to thee he killed, and on thine altars did auowre.
That liuelong night did Tyber flood his streams down couch and calm
With lingryng soft, that neither moouyng made of wave nor walme,
But mild most like a poole, or pleasant ponde of water dull,
So settled smoothe it stood: that nothing lets their ores to pull.
Their way therefore begun with talkyng cherely plied they fast:
Thannoynted Firtree slides, by shelues and fourdes along they past:
The waters wondryng stood, and woods with woondring gasing made
At shinyng sheeldes of men, far glistryng straung of newcome trade,
They gase at gorgious ships, and painted pups aloft that swims,
They pluckyng swift their Ores, that night and day do tire their lims,
And reatches long they win: that trees with bows do hide them often,
And circles wide they cut in waters green of shadows soft.
And through the woods they wade, and gladsom groves that grow a loft.
The flaming sun his compast midst of heaven had entered in:
When tower and walls they spy, They came where Rome now stands.
and from a far the houses thin,
Which now the Romain might, to match the stars have made so tal
Euander king that time, that city kept of substance small,
They swifly turn their ships, and to the town approchinge fall.
That day as Fortune was, Euander king in solemn guise
His patron feast did keep, with honors great to gods in skies.
But unto Hercules most chief, in green wood grove vpstald
Afront the town. His only son with him was, ( Pallas called)
With him the chief of youth, and Senate counsel poor and good.
To gods encense they gave, on smokyng altars moist of blood.
When first the lofty ships they saw, and dark in shadows low
So slydyng through the woods, and swift with ores so silent row:
With sudden sight affraied they rose, and tables troublyng reaue.
Whom Pallas bold forbids that offerings holy they not leave,
Himself with sword outdrawn, against them fast to shore he flew, light?
Then from the bank aloof, how sirs quod he? what causes new?
What mooues you thus these ways unknown to search? where would you
Olive in token of peace.
What people? what place dwell you? bring you peace, or list you fight?
Than lord Aeneas from his puppe on hie this answer told,
And Olive branch in hand betokening peace he forth did hold.
The men of Troy thou seist, and Trojan weapons, Latins foes,
Whom they with armor proud thus wandering still to drive dispose,
Euander king we seek, go carry this and say that knights
Of Trojans strong are come, and pray with him to join our mights.
At such a reverent name, did Pallas then astonished stand.
Come forth (quod he) O prince, what ever thou art, and here at hand
Go speak my father to, and strait his righthand claspinge held,
They landing left their flood, and to the frith they came and feld.
Then lord Aeneas to the king these words did freendly move.
O best of Grecian blood, to whom dame Fortune strong above
Compels me now to seek, and bows of peace and garlands bear,
I nothing fearful was, that thou of Greeks a leader were,
And cousin near in stock, to twain Atridas, Trojan rods,
But me my valiant life, and holy motions great of Gods,
Our Gransiers joint of blood, thy wide renoume in countries spread:
Have knit me thus to thee, and glad by destnies here have led.
How Aeneas and Eua^der are of kin.
King Dardan founder first of Trojan towns and parent old,
That sun to Dame Electra was, as ancient Greeks have told,
To Trojan Kingdoms came, Electras father void of doubt
Most mighty Atlas was, that heavens sustaines on shoulders stout.
Your line from Mercury proceeds, whom May most white of hew,
On old Cilenes Mount, conceyuing bare by story true.
Mayes father Atlas is, if just report has filde our ears.
That Atlas her begat, that stars of heaven on shulders bears,
So both one blood we be, from one good spring our stock departes.
These things considering I, by neither message, friend, nor arts,
Did practice thee to groape, even I my self my person here
I ventred have my head, and to thy court I sue most dear,
That nation proud of Turnus land whose wars does thee molest:
The same does us likewise most deadly vex, were we suppressed
Nothing they think should let, but all Italia lands at eas
They may subdue with yoke, and east, and west possess the seas.
Receive and render faith, we lack no breasts in battle bold,
We lack no fervent minds, and youth well tried in wars of old.
He holdyng still his eyes his tale did hark,
And fixed vewed his face, and lims and countenance all did mark.
Few words at last he said: Most pusaunt lord (o prince of Troy)
How glad am I of thee? how welcome here thou bring me joy?
How well thy parent great thou do present: his words and voice
Me thinks I here, in great Anchises face I do rejoice.
For I remember well, when Priam king in progress went,
To view Hesiones his sisters lands, he was content
From Salamina coast that time this country cold to know,
Then flowing fresh in youth, my budding beard on cheeks did grow.
I wondered at the Trojan dukes, I wondered sore in deed
Such princely states: But ever all most hie Anchises yede,
My youthful mind for love did in my breast with burning sit
Til we acquainted were, and hand in hand conioyning knit.
I led him forth, and to my town of Pheney glad him brought.
He unto me a quiver rich, with arrows finely wrought
At his departing gave, and golden mantel brodrid fair,
And bridle bits with gold (which now my Pallas keeps) a pair.
At your request therefore, confedring fast with you I cling.
And when the morning next, on earth her light shall rendering bring:
With succor home I shall you send, and aid with comfort more.
Therewhiles, this offering feast (which to differ were sin to sore)
This yearly sacrifice divine (since here o friends we be)
With gladness let perform, and celebrate this day with me,
And your confederates fare accustom now your self to bide.
When he thus said, the deintie meats and cups withdrawn aside,
He bids again restore, and Troyans set on green grass bancke.
But chief, on beds bespred with Lions hyde of hear full rank,
Aeneas he receyues, and Maple throne to him prefarres.
Than all the princely youth, and temple priest from the altar bars
Contending bring their meats, entrayles of bulls, and service roast,
And bread in basketts lade, and wynes they skinke with cakes compost.
Aeneas jointly fed, the Trojan youth also did dyne,
With tripes of sacrid steeres, and total backs of oxen chyne.
When hungre staunched was, and last of eating first began slake,
The king Euander said: This cheer quod he, that here we make,
This offering deintie day, this yearly feast religious pure,
This altar great of god, no superstition vain obscure,
Nor error blind began (o curteis gest) but cause extreme,
And due deserts of him that us from danger did redeem,
Delivering fre from pains, as by good signs thou shall esteem.
Now first behold yon rock, The story of Hercules, and Cacus.
which hang thou see with threatening sway,
Like half the mountain fallen, and stones down wrested show decay.
The bulwark broken stands, whom rocks and hill down rattling drew.
A dongeon cave there was, of widnes wast, most deep to vewe.
Which ugly Cacus kept, that half was beast, and half mankind.
A lothly lurking den, whom beams of sun could never find.
Whose floor did always reeke with slaughters new, and ever fresh:
His heavy gates were hung, with heads of men, and dropping flesh.
Vulcanus to this monster father was, whose flamings black
He spued at mouth, and where he went al things he threw to wrack.
At last also for us long looking help, time comfort brought,
And aid at last we found at god. For after conquest wrought
In Spain, (and Gerion triple bodied kilde) with booties brave:
Most mighty Hercules here came, and herds of bulls he drove
This way, with steeres right huge of syse, this river side they fed.
The beasts but settled were, and brook and vale along they spread:
But Cacus fendly sprite that nothing meant but shameless theft,
No mischief left untried, no craft unsought, but al things reft.
Four goodly bodied bulls he from their pasture stealing took,
And four of heifers large, and most of beauty fair to look.
And lest perhaps their feet bewray them should by steps of cleaze,
He by their tails them drew al backward plucking from their leaze.
Their treadings outward showed, and every path did outward guide,
And to his cave them brought, where dark with stone he did them hyde.
When men should seek, no sign they saw, al tracts were outward tried.
This while when Hercules from hence departing would remove,
And gathering took his beeues, that full were fed fro laundes above,
The cattayle rearing cried, and every wood with bellowing filled
Lamenting thence to move, and hills with noise they left ilwild.
One heifer lift her voice, and loud in dongeon sounding shrill:
She yelling answer gave, and Cacus heap dispointed ill.
Than verily sir Hercles furiouse mind for egre pains
Did burn with bitter gall, his armor tools in hands he strains,
His heavy clubbe with knobs, and up that hill he ramps on hie.
There Cacus, shrincking furst and furst affrayed: our men did spy.
With troubled eyes more swifter then: than wind he trudging flings,
Straight to his cave he flew, fear to his tentoes added wings.
When he his lodge had locked, and by his chains a sunder wrong
His huge unwieldy stone down let, that there for rampire hong
With iron and Vulcanes art, his bolts and bars he fastening ramd,
His dongeon mouth he stopped and strong with stuff he stiffly cramd.
Behold, furthwith sir Hercles present was with flaming breast,
And entries al he vewed, now here now there his eyes he kest,
For anger gnashing tethe: three times alone in fervent mood,
Al Auentinus mount he compast round, and thrice he stood,
Attempting still those gates, and strong assaulting bounst thereat
In vain, and three times in this vale he weery resting sat.
A rock right sharp of flint there stood, with crags of cut from sides,
Against the dongeons back vprising hie where clouds deuides.
A nestling fortress fit for birds of spoil, and fowls unclean.
That rock where hedlong next the flood, it partly low did lean,
With shulders shoouing long in vain he tried, yet adding strength:
He shogging still did strive, at last it shook, and quite at length,
He lowsened low the roots, than suddenly where most it swaied,
He ouerthrewt that with the throw, hie heaven rebounding brayed.
The banks with murmour brake, ye stream ran backward wild affraied.
But than the cave, and Cacus ugly court disclosed clear:
His hoale, with all his darksom dens, Hercules brake up Cacus den,
and kennels close appear.
None otherwise, than if by force whole earth should gaping clyue,
And show the infernal seats, and kingdoms pale reueling ryue:
Most hateful sight should be: an endless gulf down reatching deep,
Should foul apear, and crauling souls at light should quaking creep.
When he with day unlooked for was caught, and shrinking low
His depest den he took, nor never erst so loud did blow:
Sir Hercles with his tools on him did prease, and weapons all
He fearcely plied both loggs of tymbre long, and milstones tall.
He grunting foul at mouth (for hope was none to escape by flight)
A cloud of stifling stinkinge smoke (a wondrous thing to sight)
He from his jaws outspued, that all the vaut with darkness stuffed,
Depriving eyes from sight, and through the doungeon thick he puffed,
His fumes as black as night, and mixed with mist he perbrakt fire.
That thing sir Hercles would not bide, but hedlong down for ire,
Even through the flames he lept, where smolthring stremes did most redound
Of smoke, and where most boiling breath did cave most dark confound.
There Cacus black in cloud, and belching fearce his burnings vain:
He groping straightly gript, and round in knot he wound in twain,
Then crushing neck and eyes, his thirsty throat of blood did choke,
Anon the ghastly den wide open is set with gates vpbroke,
The cattle forth are fet, then pyles of pelf and robbery spoils
To heaven are showed, his carcas eke misshapen vile of foyles,
Is by the legs outdrawen, Cacus sleyne.
men's hearts in loking take no rest.
His grisly squeased eien, his lothly face, his bristled breast,
His mongrel members rough, his quenched fire in jaws oppressed.
From that time forth this honor grew, that youth with gladsome game,
This holy day do keep, Potitius first began the same,
And great Pinarias house, that Hercles offering ever serves,
From year to year, and for his worship more that thus deserves:
This grove and altar set, which evermore the chiefest shall
Be called of us, and shall in deed be ever chief of all.
Wherefore come of, o youth, and for the praise of so great gift:
With branches bynd your heads, and cups in quaffing look you lift.
And call our general god, and skinke forth wines with glad good wills,
He said, then twisting Poppler branch, his crown with leaves he hills,
With Hercles Poppler leaves (al dooble huid) his temples tide,
And sacred boll with wine in hand he gripte, then side by side
Al men with feasting drank, and bords they lade, and gods did pray.
The sun this while from skies did near to night discending swaye.
And now the service priests, and furst Potitius led their bands,
Of custom great in skins, and torches burning bare in hands.
Their banquettes they renew, and ionkets courses after meats.
Their presents hie they heap, that every board with bourden sweats,
Than singing measure lays, at the altars burning daunsing round,
The skipping Salii were com, with poppler branches bound,
In raye men set them selves, the young men here, the old men there.
That Hercles praises great, Hercules praises.
and doughtie deeds to heaven may bear.
How first he tender child his stepdaines monsters kilde with eas
By hand, and serpents twain to death he wringing flat did squease.
How stoutful he by war did cities down destroy full strong,
Both Troia, Oechalia with more, how thousand labors long
At king Euristeus request, by Iunos deep despite,
He overcame and bare: thou lord vnuicted most of might,
Thou stewest the mongrel beast, misshapen Centaures gotten of cloud.
Both Hileus, and Pholus foul, thou Cressies monsters proud
Did kill with hand, and Lion bold in Nemee rock did quell.
At thee did Lymbo quake, to thee the Porter huge of hell,
To thee he trembling shook, and left his bones begone vngnawn,
He left his murdering cave, by thee from thence he was forth drawn.
Nor was there never face that ever could thee make affrayed.
No not him self Typhoeus, in burning armor ugly rayde
With hundred hands that fought, nor thee that time thy reason faylde
When Lerna dragon thee with heaps of heads al round assaylde,
Alhayle undoubted child of god, new joy to saints above,
Come visit us with grace, and these thy gifts accept and love.
Such things in hymns they sang, but over all of Cacus hoale
They mention make, and of him self with breath as burning coal.
The woods with song resounds, and hills with carolls aunsweres yield,
Than every man when service al divine was first fulfilde,
Unto the town them drew, the king him self of stoupyng age,
Aeneas next him took for mate, his son him led as page,
With sundry speech of things to eas their way the time they past.
Aeneas wondering much on every side his eyes did cast,
With every place in mind he ravished was, and often enqueres
Each thing, and monuments he gladly lernes of elder years.
Than king Euander spoke, that first the towers of Rome did found.
These woods (quod he) sometime both Fans, and Nimphs, and Gods of ground,
And fairy Queens did keep, and under them a nation rough,
A people saluage strong, and borne in troncks of timber tough:
Who neither nurture knew, nor trade of life, nor bullocks taught,
Nor goods vpstoare they could, nor wisely spare those things they caught.
But bows of trees them fed, and hunting hard them kept from cold,
Furst from Olympus mount (right near the skies) good Saturn old,
When he from Jove did flee, and from his kingdoms outlawd stood,
He first that wayward skittish kind dispersed in hills, and wood,
Did bring to thrift, and gave them laws, and all the land this way
Did Latium call, Latium whi so called.
for saulfly here long time he lurkyng lay.
And under that good king men say, the golden world did dure,
Such pleasant peace he taught, and peoples kept in justice pure:
Till worser age at last, of baser sort by small and small,
With mad desire of wars, and love to have: corrupted all.
Than came Ausonia strength, than Scicil folks and countries strange,
And oftentimes her name, Saturnus land was driven to chaung.
(...) What ever I with craft or cunnyng castyng may invent,
What can be wrought in steel, or silver pliant mixed with brass,
Look what the fire, or breathyng blastes may make (let praiyng pass)
Of me, and all my strength assure thy self, be bold of this,
What ever lies in me, undoubtedly, thine own it is.
These words he spoke, and close imbrasing sweet his spouse he clipped,
And gave desiers of joy, with lap to lap relentyng dipped,
Resoluyng limbs at rest, and senses deep in slomber slipped.
Than first wha^ midnight course with race outrun, him brake from sleep,
As does some wedlock wife, some thriuyng dame that house does keep,
Who life by labor seeks, and distaf work does weaue and spinne:
Her couched harth she steeres, and sturgyng sparks of fire does tin,
Encrochyng work by night, and hard with task her maidens all
By candels early plies, whereby she may her children small
Bring up, and chaste her self mainteyne, and husband help withal.
In likely sort this fiery puissant god, nor slacker wise
From bed full soft that time, to smithie works did earnest rise.
An Isle there is, by Scicill side vplifted large in skies,
Called Liparen where smoke from stones to stars vpsteamyng sties.
There under creepes a cave, and Ciclops chimneis gnawne in rocks,
Through Aetnas thundryng dens, of smiting strokes and bounsing knockes
That wailes, with sighting sounds, such battring beating through ye chinks
Far rendryng aunswers ryng, and yngot gaddes with clashing clincks,
In blustryng forges blown, where dints replied with peyse, and pithes
Done metals dingyng drive, and sturdie steel they stretch on stithes.
Vulcania.
Vulcanus house it is, and Vulcans name that land does bear.
The fiery puissaunt god that time from heaven descended there.
The gyantes in that cave of wydnesse wast their tools did plie,
Pyragmon nakedlimd, and Steropes, and Brontes hie.
A work in hand they had vnfashiond yet, but part made bright
One thundryng burnisht bolt, with many a such from heaven does smight,
When Jove to ground them throws, but part imperfect did remain.
Then store of struglyng winds, and stormful clouds of clodded rain.
Three winter wrested showers, three firyforked flashyng beams.
Three ratlyng tempest bals, three southwind winged lightning leames.
Now glistryng blasing lights, now ghastly sights men's hearts to skeare,
In forgyng fire they shope, with thump thump sound both noise, and fear,
They mingled through their work, and wrangled wrathes of following flame,
Another sort for Mars a charet swift with wheels did frame,
A charet wyld whereby the god vpsteeres both camps and towns.
A sheeld for Pallas eke, in troublous feelds full grim that frowns
All horrible, with serpent skales beset, and fine with gold
Were dragons drawn in wrethes, and poolisht pure in plated fold,
And monster Gorgons head (with neck ofchopt) amid her breast
They put, that men to stones may turn with eyes to death comprest.
Set set aside al things, cast of (quod he) your works begen,
You Aetna lads, let studies all to this one charge now run.
An egre man must valiant armor wear, now show your speed,
Now shifting hands requiers, now masters al of craft is need,
Break hedlong al delays: nor more he spoke. They swiftly than
Besturring strive to stoop, and by their lots to labor ran.
Outgushing flows in streams both gold, and brass, and silver swelts,
And lumps of murthring steel, in furnies glowing softning melts.
A huge hie sheeld they shape, one sheeld alone for weapons all
Of Latins, and against al foes and force resist that shall,
Emboasid broad with hoopes, whom bars in bars entangling binds
Seuenfoldid thick Some thrusting forth from bellows blasting winds
Incessaunt yield and draw, some dips in lakes and troughes of stones
Hot hissing gleads: Al Aetna vauts with anuilds mourning groans.
They still among themselfs their arms in course by force up lift
With numbrings iump, and grasping tough in tongs their mass they shift.
While these things hasting were by Vulcan lord in Lemnos land:
Euander king from bed, the dawning day bad up to stand,
And early songs of birds his roof that filled with mirthfull note.
He rises aged man, and on his limbs he puts his coat,
And thongs in Tyrrhen guise about his feet he wrapped and tide.
Then sword with girdle strong from shulders down he next his side
Did girt, and baldrickwise his wreath he ware of Panthers hyde.
Two waiting dogs also that thentrie door at threshold kept
Came forth, and matching foot by foot their masters pace they stepped,
Unto his gest Aeneas chamber straight, he softly drew,
Remembering former talk, he of his word a lord full true.
Nor morning styrer less, Aeneas then abroad was stalkt.
Son Pallas with Euander, but with him Achates walked.
They meeting join right hands, and in the mids of hal down set,
In speech at last they fall, of causes urgent free from let.
The king thus furst.
Most doughtie Trojan guide (which while thou art alive in health
I never Troy destroyed shall think, nor vanquished void of wealth)
To such a careful war, and for the fame of thy regard:
Small succor we can give, here Tyber stream vplocks us hard.
On this side Rutils wring, and at our walls their harneis sownds.
But peoples huge to thee, and kingdoms rich of larger bounds
I go about to join, whom very now even chance unsought
Does show to thee: even destnies luck this time thee here has brought.
Not far from hence a town there is, with aunciaunt stones vpfraamd,
Which Agillina hight, where people sometime Lydia naamd,
A nation strong in war Etruria downs possess and till.
This land that many a year did flowing reign with wealth at will:
A proud king caught at last, and long by force with arms oppressed,
Mezentius lawles wreatche, The crueltye of Mezentius.
whose mood misecreaunt never ceast.
What shall I tell the furious slaughters foul: to shame to speak
That tyrants odious deeds? god on his head and seed so wreake.
Men's bodies dead he did devise to join to bodies quick
In tortures, hands to hands, and mouths to mouths them binding thick.
(O plague most miserous) and them through filth, and rotting cloied
In wretched claspings vile, with lingering death most lothly stroied.
But weery long at last, when he more mad would worse have wrought:
His subjects weaponed rose, and him in house beseiging sought.
His mates they slew, and to his rafter topps their fire they flang.
He through their slaughter throngs to Rutil realm outskaping sprang.
Where with his host and mate king Turnus fearce him self he fends,
With inst revenge therefore Etruria land al whole ascends.
Their king by war they claim, and him by death they mind to quit.
These milions strong of men I will to thee Aeneas knit.
Their navy furnished full already thick at shore remaynes,
And streamers out they cry, an ancient prophet them restraines
By destny singing, O you chosen youth of lively lust,
You flower of former years, you strenght of men, whom anger just
Prouokes to vengeance due, whose wrath Mezentius does deserve,
No prince Italian borne may for this army capteyn serve,
Seek alien lords for guyds. Than al Etruria sore affright
Did settling stay them selves, and in that field their camp have pight.
Him self ambassadors to me with crown, and scepter sent
Duke Tarchon, and with kingly robes me here he did present.
But view the camp I should, and Tyrrhen kingdoms al possess.
But me my slouthful cold, and worlds outworn in years excess,
Enuies me now to raygne, and feeble strength to late to steer.
My son I would exhort, save he by mother mixed near
Of dame Sabella part that country draws. But thou whose years,
And kindred fortune loves, whom destnies luck and goods requeres:
Go thou o Trojan, and Italian prince, most strong of might.
Besides all this I shall, our only hope and dear delight
My son sir Pallas here to thee commit, Pallas committed to Aeneas.
that under thee
He may the feats of war as with a master learn, and see
Most weighty works of Mars, that from his youth thy worthy deeds
He wondering may conceive, and practice like if chance him needs.
Two hundred horsemen strong of freshest youth take here in hand,
So many more also shall Pallas bring of private band.
These words he scantly spoke, and sixed fast with eyes on ground
Aeneas sadly sat, so did Achates friend most sound.
Much heavy things in heart they through their breasts considring wayed.
Had Venus not from heaven by sign down sent their musing stayed.
For suddenly with whirling noise the skies broad open flusht,
And lightning whistling came, as round about all things had rusht,
And blast of trompet blown in welkin brim was heard to roar.
They look: lo yet again, and yet, two, three, great thundrings more
Bright armor through the clouds in coast of heaven most clear of sun
Readshining rough they see, that back repulsing rombling run.
Al other stood astoynd, but he him self most valiant knight
Aeneas, knew that noise, and what his mother him had hight.
Than thus he spoke. Be you good host, be you no whit appald,
What news these monsters mean: it is I aloft in skies am called.
This token me from heaven my mother said she would down send,
If wars should roughly rise, and Vulcans arms me to defend
She brings me through the clouds.
Alas, what slaughters wild on wretched Laurents hang at hand?
What turments thee (o Turnus) must I give? how mixed in sand
Both sheilds and helms of men, with many a body strong and tall
O Tyber flood with waters troul thou shall? and many a fall
In fight sustain they must, wha^ truce they ask yet break they shall.
These things when he had said, him self vplifting hie from benche:
To Hercles altars first and sleeping fires whom night did quench
He went them to revive, and service left since yersterdaye
He gladly vprestores, and household gods they please and pray,
Both king Euander self, and Trojan youth with whole assent.
Than to his ships furthwith, to visit there his mates he went.
Among which number such as him to warfare should pursue
Most hardy practiue knights he chose, the remnant downward drue.
The groueling streme them bears, and swift they home by water dress
To bring Ascanius news, both of his father, and success.
To Trojans than are horses given, to pass to Tirrhen town.
A royal courser for Aeneas, whom of Lion brown
One hyde al ouerspreds with gilded claws bright pendant down.
The rumor runs, and through that city small is blasid wide,
How horsemen unto Tirrhen coast with swift course postyng ride.
For dreed men's wives with vows do lade their gods, and more and more
Men dangers cast, and face of Mars appears not seen so sore.
Than good Euander old, Aeneas righthand clipping hyld,
And thus at parting spoke, and weeping still could not be fyld.
O if almighty god would me my years of youth restore
Even as I was, when at Praeneste walls (my toupes before)
I fought, when heaps of conquered sheelds I victor offering brent,
And with this right hand than, king Herilus to hell I sent,
Whose mother at his birth him gave three lives in limbs to lag,
(A grisly thing to speak) three weapons he by course did wag,
Three times to death he must down vanquished be, yet breathings all
This righthand him bereft, and souls, and armor thrice made fall.
Not now dear son, from thine embrasings sweet should I be plucked,
O dulcet son: nor so Mezentius borderer, blood had sucked
Dispiting still my head such murdering deaths had not been seen,
Nor such asort of burgeis wifes should widows now have been.
But O you glorious gods, thou chief in heaven that raignst on hye
Most mighty Jove, of poor Arcadia king respect the cry,
The pattern of a kind and loving father.
Give gracious ear this time, and to my prayers piteous bend.
If destnies me by your good grace my son home saufly send,
If looking him I live: and we in one may meet again:
Than crave I longer life, and glad I shall receive all pain.
But if (as god forefend) some sore mischaunce does fortune threat:
Now now let me depart, and cruel life of casting freat,
While doubtful carck me kepes, while hope in mind uncertain is,
While thee my derling child, mine only joy my parting blis,
Thus haulsing here I hold, er tidings worse mine ears may wound,
These things his father shed at leaving last, and flat in sound
With sobbing fainting fell: his pages him to house conveyed.
And now the horsemen band at open gates went out unstayed.
Aeneas with the first, Achates trusty next his side.
Than other Troyan lords, him self in midds did Pallas ride
In glistring painted arms, and gay with cloak embroidred new,
Like Lucifer that gracious dawning siar, whom pure of hue
Dame Venus chiefly loves above al fires in heaven that shine,
Al darkness he resolves, and gladneth skies with face divine.
The women stand on walls with trembling hearts, and far with eyes
Pursue their glittering harneise troops, and clouds of dust that rise.
They through the thornie downs where nearest way no compass makes
In armor jointly ride, hie shoutes vprise, and clustring strakes
They gallup, and under their trampling feet the ground with breaking quakes.
There is a grove of green wood frith, by Cerits river celd,
Religious, long and broad in reverence kept by fathers old,
Whom caves of crokid hills with dales and downs that compass fets
On every side does close, and woods of firtree black besets.
To Siluan god of beasts and fields that ancient Greeks men say
Did consecrat that place, and gave both grove and feastful day,
Which Greeks sometime possessed of Latium country first the lands.
Not far from thence duke Tarchons host, and al Aetruria hands
Encamped saulfly lay, and from the hill their legions strong
Al plain might now be vewed, that broad in fields outstretched long.
Aeneas to that place, and warlike youth, in mind well pleased
Alighting, weary went, and horses trymd, and bodies easd.
But goddess Venus white, from through the clouds descending clear
Was ready there with gitfs, and to her son approaching nere:
When secret him she saw, far from the flood in crooked vale
She offering showed her self, and thus she shortly brake her tale.
Lo here my husbands work, my promise due, cast of thy doubt
O son: nor fear not now to coape with all proud Laurents rout,
And Turnus now to combat call, though he be ner so stout.
She said, and of her son thembrasing sweet forth with she fet.
Than underneath an oak in sight, those glistring arms she set.
He gladful of those gifts, with mind for joys in mirth extolde
With sight could not be filled, but eyes on each thing still he rolde.
He wondreth, and between his arms, and hands he often vpturnes
A helm most horrible, with crests, out spitting flames that burns.
A murthring fatal blade, a brestplate stif of bras most fine,
All bloodread, sanguine, bygge, like many times when sun does shine,
Some blue cloud catches beams, and burning bright with ruddy rays
A loof it self it shows, and streaming light likewise displayes.
Then boots of silver light enameld gorgeous mixed with gold.
A spear also with sheeld, whose wondrous work can not be told.
There all Italia state, The famous deeds of Romans, were engraue^ in the
armor of Aeneas.
and peerles Rome with triumphs all
(Not ignorant of age to come, and destnies that should fall)
The fiery puissaunt god had made: there all Ascanius race
In order fair was wrought, and foughten fields in every place.
He there also had put, where green the cave of Mars begins
A she wolf down was laid, and next her dugs two goodly twins,
Two daggling sucking boys, her flanks between they hanging plaide,
Their mammies teats they lap with hungry lips nothing affraide.
She turning round her neck: now one, now one, them sweetly lyckt
Reforming soft their limbs, and soft with tongue them smothly stryckt.
Nor far from thence was Rome, and Sabines virgins rashly raught
At sight of stately plays, and thence by force for wedlocks caught,
The story all there stood, and suddenly new war did rise
To Romulus and Tatius old, and lords of Sabines wise.
Within a while those kings (their al contencions quenched quyte)
Before Jove's altar came, and holding bolles in armor bryghte
They stood, and with a swyne down slain did leag conclud and smite.
Not far from thence was Metius torn, in quarters plucked by steeds,
But why thou Alban to thy words accordid not thy deeds?
And of that lying lord did Tullus drag those false entrails
Even through the wood, that thorns and briers with blood besprinckling,
hailes.
Than king Porsenna strong commanded Romans eft restore
Their Tarquin outlawd king, and long be seiging wrang them sore.
Aeneas people fearce for freedom fast on weapons ran.
Him angry, threatening like, you might see chaaf disdaining than,
That Cocles durst resist while bridge behind him broken was,
And Cloelia captive wench with broken bands the stream did pas.
Upon the Tarpey rock, and Capitol most lordly brave,
Stood Manlius that champion chief, his country walls to save.
He for the temple fought, and enemies clambryng down did pull
With stubble stark of steel, the Pallas court of Rome was full.
And flickryng there in gold, the silver Gander keakyng cried
At hand, and in the Porches next the Frenchmen entryng spied.
The Frenchmen entryng were, and taking Towers did fearce invade,
By bushes climyng close, and kept with help of dark night shade.
Of Gold their Tresses were, their golden garments trim them decks,
In guarded frocks they shine with roddid welts about their necks,
In partlets knit with Gold, two slingyng spears each one does lift,
In Mountain guise, and shields of length defend their bodies swift.
Than came the skippyng sort, in dance disguised shaking shanks,
The Salij praunsing Priests, with mitred crowns and coppid tancks.
The Luperts naked went, and armor holy liften aloft,
That down from heaven did fall, the matrones chaste in Charets soft
Religious led their gods, and through the town procession brought.
Along way far from thence, the dens of Hell most deep were wrought,
And louryng Limbo gates, with sundry sinful wretches pangs.
Thou Catilin were there, on threatnyng rock thy carcas hangs,
Thy turments there thou bidest, and still do fear those fendly jaws.
But good men by them selves, and Cato them did give their laws.
Among all this there went the salt sea broad with swellyng broth
Of Gold, but green the frisking floods did foam with hoary froth.
And cut in silver clear the Dolphins swimming compass daunst,
The streams with tails they swept, and through ye tides they sheri^g glau^st.
In mids were brazen fleetes of ships, and Actia wars at large
Men might have seen, how battles both conioyning bent their charge.
The seas with harnies shines, that boiling floods with gold did spring.
There all Italia strength Augustus Emprour prince did bring,
Augustus Caesar.
With commons all, with lords, with saints, with gods most great of might,
Aduauncing chief in ship, whose temples twain with flames upright
Outsparkling spoutes a fire, his fathers star his crown bespreds.
Another wing with prosperous winds, and Gods in army ledes
Agrippa lofty prince, whose pendant streamers proud stands out,
His crown courageous shines with garlond wun from topshipsnout.
On the other part with all Barbaria force of diverse arms
Anthonius drags his train of nations thick, in threngs that swarms.
He victour late in wars, from countries far where Sun does rise,
From peoples black of Inde, from redsea shore, from eastern skies,
Cleoparra concubine to Anthony.
All Aegipt and all Asia strength extreme with him he drew,
Whom proudly (fie for shame) his Gygtian wife does next pursue.
Together all they rusht, and plucked with ores conflicting clasht,
The waves with wrestling fumes, and fronts to fronts their ships they crasht
To channel deep they draw, a man would think ye mountains meet
In seas, or iustlyng woods with woods hole rocks, and Islands fleet.
So huge with weight me^ work: from towers, and tops their darts down strikes
Their wildfire Okam flies, and storms outhrown of tools with pikes.
The clouds with cries are mixed, both ships and seas with slaughters spread,
All Neptunes flittryng feelds with bloodshed stremes are darkened red.
The Queen in mids them all with timbrell noise her bands vpcheeres,
Nor yet two deadly serpent snakes, to her at back appeeres,
All monstrous kinded gods, Anubys dog that barkyng slave:
Against all Romain guids (both Venus, Neptune, Pallas grave)
Their weapons up they hold, outrageous Mars among them stamps,
All cut in carved steel, and hags infernal fearcely ramps.
Dame Discord through them runs, with garments torn she joyful skips,
Whom grim Bellona mad pursues at hand with blouddy whips.
These things beholding thus, Apollo shootyng plied his bow,
Aloft from skies, all Egypt than, all Inde down couched low,
All nations wild of South Arabia proud for all their cracks,
All Asia scattryng fled, all Sabey kyngdoms turned their backs.
The Queen her self was seen with winds aduaunst vpliftyng sails
To flee, and still with slackyng shrowds she more and more preuayles.
Among those slaughters, her (for death at hand) with countenance pale,
The fiery god has made be borne with waves, and western gale.
But there against with body great, was Nylus mournyng put,
His bosom openyng broad, and calling home their course to cut.
His garment gown he spread, and wide his lap of waters blue,
And to his lurkyng floods his conquered men alluryng drew.
But Caesar through the Romain walls three times triumphant borne
To great Italia gods he paid his vows eternal sworn.
Three hundred Churches.
Mynsters chief along the town wide open stands,
All streets with mirth resounds, with games, with sports, with clapping hands
In every temple wives, at every altar singyng queeres,
At the altars, every floor with offryng slaughters strowd of steeres.
Him self at Phoebus porch (so white as snow) in throne down set,
Surueys al countries gifts, and garnisht posts with presents fret.
In long arayes they gone, the conquered nations captive sad,
As diverse of their tongs as in their weeds and armours clad.
Three sundry sorts of Moors had Vulcan cast, some tuckt in shyrts,
Some trayling mantels loose, or sirpleys windy wide of skyrts:
Of Cara, Lelega, by south, and archers bred in caves
Of Gelon sands, Euphrates now did fleet with softer waves.
And Flemings furthest out from men, and Rhyne with horns in twain,
Vnconquerd Danes, and flood Araxes (bridge that did disdain).
Such works in Venus gift he wondering saw by Vulcans sheeld,
And knowing not the things, their figures glad he long beheeld.
At last, his childrens chance, and fame he did on shulders weeld.
DEO GRATIAS.
Per Thomam Phaer,
in foresta Kilgerran, x. Septembris. finitum 1558. Opus xl. dierum per
interualla.
The ninth book of the Aeneidos of Virgil.
The Argument.
Whylst Aeneas is busy in Tuscia to seek aid, Turnus is by the Raynbow
admonished not to omit so good an occasion, and speadeth him self forth as
near as he can to his enemies. Who seeing them defensed on every side in their
tents to the intent that he might cut away from them all hope of flight,
assaieth to burn their fleet. But at Venus ernest suit: Jupiter delivered the
ships from present burning, and transformed them into so many Nymphs of the
sea. Toward night, Turnus lays a watch before the town gates for fear of
soddein eruptions of the enemy, in which watch Messapus is chief. Therwhiles
the Trojans take counsel whom to send to Aeneas to make him privy of these
things, which Nisus and Euryalus, a payer of faithful friends take in hand to
do. Who departing forth of the town, and findyng the watch overcome with wine
and sleep: sley Rhamnetes with a number of Rutilians, and lade them selves
with the spoils. But in the morning, being spied of Volscens horsemen: they
fly to the woods. There Eurialus by weight of his armor, and ignorance of the
way much hindered, falls into his foes hands and is by Volscens slain. Nisus
likewise, when he had slain Volscens, and valiently revenged Euryalus death
being struck through with many a mortal wound falls down dead upon his
friends body. Their heads are carried upon spears points into the tents, where
the Trojans knowing them from the walls, a great sorrow rises through the
whole town. Turnus cease not to assault his enemies with all force, and
great slaughter is committed on both parts. There Ascanius kills with the
shoot of an arow Numanus, that over proudly advanced himself: Pandarus and
Bitias proud of their good success, open the gate, and drive back the
enemies entryng in with great slaughter. Whereof Turnus being certefied:
issues into the town through the open gate, and puts the Trojans to
flight, but at length oppressed with multitude, retyreth to the side of the
town which is next the river, and armed as he was, leapeth into the stream,
and so escapes.

WHile these things working were, Juno pricketh forth Turnus by the Raynbow.
on sundry sides with purpose bent:
Dame Juno down from heaven the Rainebow red her servant sent
To Turnus dredeles prince. King Turnus than did seat repose
In great Pylumnus vale, his parents woods whom round did close.
To whom dame Rainbow thus, with mouth bespake as red as rose.
Turnus (quod she) that thing which never god if one had sought
Could grant to thee: lo, tumbling time alone it self has brought.
Aeneas now from home to king Euanders house is gone,
And left both camp and mates; and town, and fleet with sauegard none.
The fines extreme of Corytes towns he seeks, nor yet enough,
But Lydas power he draws, and armor gives to men from plough.
Leave doubting, take thy time, call charets out, now set forth steeds,
Break boldly al delays, go take that camp that al thing dreeds.
She said, and lifting equal wings to heaven she mounted slow,
And huge in flight she spread, and under clouds, cut of her bow.
The young prince her beknew, and holding hands to skies on hie
He wondering her pursued, and as she fled he thus did cry.
O Rainbow beauty bright of heaven, who through the clouds this tide,
Has drawn thee thus to ground? I se, I se, whole heaven deuyde.
I se the straggling stars, that from the poale their course declynes,
Such clearbright storm? I follow fast al these miraclose signs
What ever thou art that me to armor calst, and with that word
Went forth, and from the swelling stream, he water sipt at forde
Requiring much his gods, and air did lade with vows outpowrde.
And now the total host in fields displaied their pace did hold,
Right rich of horse, right rich of broydrid robes, and brave of gold.
Messapus voward held, the rerward kept young princes twain
Of Tirrhus, but him self king Turnus midst in battle main,
Vauntsquaring spreds his arms, and over all by shoulders shynes.
Resembling Ganges flood that ouerflowes seven streams, and fines
In silence burbling broad, or Nylus fresh with waters fat
When couching close he swells, and seasoneth fields with fleeting flat.
There suddenly a darksom dusky fog most like a cloud
The Trojans might behold, that round with rolls the skies did shroud.
Furst from a bank on hie did Caycus watchman cry aloud.
What is you black, o mates? that like a bowl such dust up skralls?
Set swiftly forth your tools, bring weapons out, and clym your walls.
Here is our enmy lo, heylagh, loud clamours than they throw.
The Troyans al about at gates and walls, them close bestow.
For such commaundment them Aeneas best of martial skill
At his departing gave, if any chance should rise them ill:
Not rashly join they should, nor trusting field their strength extend,
But closely keep their camp, and saulf their walls with bancks defend.
Though shame therefore with wrath prouoks to fight disdainful deep,
Yet gates to them they set, and due precepts obedient keep,
And harneyst hye they stand, forstalling foes on rampires steep.
Turnus (as he before the people slow, in post did fly)
With twenty chosen knights, on horsback stout the fortress nigh,
Al suddenly unlooked for is com, whom white with speckes
A Thracian steed vpheaues, and helmet red gold crested deckes.
Is any here good lads, will furst with me provoke our foes?
And to the winds a dart he whirling shook: lo, there it goes
Quod he, this fight begins, and boystous large on field he flies,
His mates with noise pursuen, with grisly shouts vplifting cries.
They wondren at the Troyans dastard hearts, their courage weak,
That neither geeue them dare in open field, nor fearce outbreake
In arms as men, but faintlie keep their fort, now here, now there
He troubous vewes their walls, and ryding seeks each entering where.
Aye watching like some Wolf, that counterwaiting shipfold cots,
Through stormy showers and winds about men's deiries houling trots
At midnight seeking stealth, when careless loud the lambs do bleat
In saulfgard nere their dammes, he fretting false and mad for meat
Does absent tear their lims, so gripes his guts that gathring gnawes,
Long fasting forth him dryues, and thrist of blood vpdries his jaws.
Even so to Rutile prince, as serching walls and camp he turns:
His fumes vpsparkling spreeds, and sore in bones his grief him burns.
What shift invent he shall to give thassault, or where find place
To break the Trojans trench, or drive them down to equal space.
Their fleet that secret lay, even at the side of Trojan wall,
Environed with trench, whom water floods encompast all
He suddenly onsets, and to his mates for fire exclames.
Him self outcasting flings his pynetree bronds with fervent flames.
Than echman stoutly sturres, the kings own presence men forth pricks.
On every side fresh youth for armor takes black burning sticks.
They sparpling spoil their fires. Than blasing cloud with pitch commixt
Does rise, and smoke from torches mount, to stars with sparks betwixt.
Now Muses tell what god did from the Troyans turn this ire
So great: and who then kept their fleet from fumes of fatal fire?
Speak trusting old report, but fame thereof shall never expyre.
A fable of Aeneas ships.
What time Aeneas prince in Ida woods his navy made
At passing first from Troy, and through deep seas should take his trade:
The mother of gods men say, that Berecinthia heavenly hight,
Peticion that time made to Jove celestial great of might
Entreating thus by speech. Give son (quod she) to thy dear dame,
One boon which I must ask, since heavens to thee bin brought so tame.
A Pynetree frith I had, which many a year I favored much,
And in the top a grove there grew of trees, there was none such
For beams of timbre black, and firtree bourds with pitch and tar.
Great offerings there I took, and folks to serve me came from far.
Those trees to Troyan prince, when he so much of ships had need:
I gave with glad good will, now care my heart does grype for dreed.
Releas my fear, let now thy parents words thus much obtain.
Let never surge of seas, nor whirlwynd storm their navy strain,
Nor course of sailing shake, since on my hills sometime they grew.
Her son to her than spoke, whose wind does stars and world subdue.
O mother what thing meanst? or which way destnies woldst thou press?
Can frames of mortal hands immortal state by right possess?
Or should Aeneas prince in doubtful dangers wandering stray?
That certain is of seat? what god so great such maistries may?
Nay when fulfild they have their fatal course, that ports, and realms
Of Latium lands they touch, what ship sometime so skapes the streams,
Their mortal shape from them I will withdraw, and change them all
To maidens bright of seas, like water Nymphs with bodies tall.
Like Clotho goddess clear, or Galatee with members white,
Who through their foming waves with persaunt breast does swimming smite.
He spoke, and by the fens of Stigies flood his oath he took,
By pitch of Lymbo pits, by gulf and banks of Plutos brook.
He gave a nod, and at his beck, whole heaven trembling shook.
The day therefore of covenant present was, and destnies dew
Performed had their time, when Turnus fearce with dredful vewe,
Compeld that lady saint from sacrid ships that fire to drive.
There furst a sudden light before men's eyes did strange ariue,
And huge from morning skies descending cloud down gliding ran,
With queeres of spritual wights, than dredful voice wide air began
To fill in Rutiles ears, and troops of Trojans brym to skan.
Do not affright your selfs to save my ships with labor vain,
You Troyans, nor in armor put your strength, nor take that pain.
For furst shall Turnus waters al consume, and burn up seas
Er he my sacryd trees have power to touch, go loose at ease,
Go saltsea goddesses, your lady biddes, and as it spoke:
Incontinent each ship their bands at shore, and halsers brake.
Aeneas ships transformed into Nymphs of the seas.
And down (as dolphins don) converting sharp their beaking snouts,
In deep sea sands they drown, whence up forth with they rise by routes.
A marvel monstrous much, in virgin shapes and faces trym
On seas them selfs they shooue, and sporting swift in sight they swym.
Like Mermaides ladies light, of number just, and not one more
As they before did stand, with brazen stemmes in ships at shore.
Astonyed Rutils stood, even he him self in mind affrayde
Messapus, and his horses troubled were, the streams eke stayde
Their waters hoarce of sound, and Tyber trembling foot retrayd.
But not to Turnus bold did courage ought relent or hope.
Men's hearts with words he lifts, and cheering chydes with skornes at skope,
These monsters to the Troyans come, lo god him self you see
Has take from them their strength, and wonted shift always to flee,
No Rutile power does need, our fires, our swords, they durst not bide,
The seas therefore to Trojans fast are stopped, no place to ride
Nor hope to skape they have: lo, half the world beraft them is.
As for the land in our possession lies, and over this
So many thousands strong Italian nations armor bear.
The Trojans fatal songs, nor iuggling sights can me not fear,
Nor answers from the gods, if any such the wretches boast.
Enough for Venus is, and destnies past, that once this coast
Of rank Italia land the Troyans poor had leave to touch.
My fortune them withstands, and I likewise may destnies vouche
To kyl that cursyd brood, and for my spouse vproote them quyte.
Nor not alone this grief does Agamemnons kindred byte:
Nor Greeks have only cause for wedlock spoil them selfs to arm.
Yet had it bin enough to stroy them ones, if but one harm
Suffized had their sin, and not with spyte all female kinds
Thus villaynly disdain? what? does this half trench puff their mynds?
Does dichwors give them pride? so near the death? such srufgard thin?
Saw they not Troyan walls in fires down sink with gods within?
But what is he (good mates) will yonder trench with me go tear
With tools, and ouerrun this camp, that trembling sinks for fear?
I need no Vulcans arms, nor thou sand ships, I seek them not.
Let al Etruria rise, and join for help in Troyan knot.
He prefers him self before Grecians.
They shall not fear no dark, by night on them we list not steal.
We will betray no watch, nor keepers kill as Greeks did deal,
Nor blind in horses paunch will we go lurk, but clear by day
Their walls in compass round withfier, and foarce assaulting fray.
They shall not think us Greeks, nor at our youth have cause to skof,
I warrant them, nor such as Hector ten years long kept of.
And now therefore since better part of day from us is fled:
Remaynes no more, but since we have our things thus far welsped,
Provide your self good cheer, and look for fight to give dispatche.
There whiles to set the skoute, and every gate with ward to watch
Messapus charged was, and walls to girt with fires and lights.
Of Rutils seven and seven to guard the siege, most active knights
Elected were by lot, each one his hundred soldiers led,
Carnation creastid youth in burnisht gold gay glittring red.
They stray, they shift their turns, and al along down laid on gras:
With wines them selfs they cheer, and cups vpturne and bolles of bras.
Their fires before them shine, and long with watch ye night they pas,
Avoiding sleep with mirth.
These things beholding brim did from their walls the Troyans spy.
In armor strong they stood, and some their towers did hold on hie,
For dread they grope their gates, and some did bridges clampring join,
And bulwark banks they wrought, and engine tools to fend and foyne
Al weaponed, them sir Menesteus and Serestus sharply plies,
Whom lord Aeneas had, if any fortune hard should rise:
Made masters over youth, and governors al things to guide.
Afront the vaumures long by lots to dangers truly tried
The legion waiting stood observing course, each keeps his charge.
One gate did Nisus keep most egre knighte with spear and targe,
Whom huntresse Ida sent as freende to serve Aeneas part.
A bowman stout with shafts, and swift with stroke of whirling dart.
Next him Euryalus his mate, whose fairer was there non
Through al Aeneas camp, nor Troyan armor did put on.
Fine princock fresh of face furst vttring youth by buds unshorn.
One love between them was, and jointly fought like brethren sworn.
That time also they twain one standing kept with gate beforne.
Sir Nisus first, what is it? god sets thus men's minds on fire?
Sweet friend? or is each man's mind his god forth driven by dern desire?
Some great conflict or famous fact to attempt long while my breast
Incessaunt me prouokes, nor can content with quiet rest,
Thou see how careless now these Rutils bin this watch that keep,
Their lights disseuered shine, and they them selves in wynes and sleep
Resolved slurg on ground, wide Silence walks, now freendly hark
What rising mooues my sprite, and whereupon my thought does carke.
Aeneas home to call bin Lords and people firmly set,
And men they seek to send, that tidings certain soon may fet.
If they will give to thee such benefits as I requier,
(For unto me shall fame of so great fact suffice for hier).
By yonder bank thou see, I could a way me thinks find out
To pass to Euanders court, and by the same reuert about.
Euryalus astonid stood, such love him pricked of praise,
He could him not conteyn, but to his freende thus fervent says.
In things of so great weight my fellowship do Nisus grutche?
Forsakst thou me? should I send thee alone to dangers such?
Not so my father Opheltes beaten in wars did me conduct
Through fearful Graecia frayes, nor so my mind did ever instruct
In tremblyng toils of Troy, nor I with thee such parts have played
Since great Aeneas camp, and destnies me extreme have stayed.
I bear a mind perdee dispising death, I lack not spright
To think this praise well bought, with loss for thee of life and light.
Nisus to this. Such things in faith of thee did I not dred,
Gods forbod so to think, no, me almighty Jove so sped
Or who so else of gods indifferent looks, my head so strike.
But if there should as many things thou see in dangers like,
If any sore missehap or chance or god should backward shooue,
One free^d would save the other from danger.
I would thou should remain, thy years to live don best behooue.
Let one survive that me from foes may take, or my dead corse
For money may redeem, and to enterre have some remorse,
Rewardyng me with earth, or if my luck not so vouchsaue:
Give offerings for my soul, and it set forth with tomb or grave.
Nor cause will I to thy dear mother be of so great grief,
Who thee alone (O ladde) pursues good soul of matrones chief,
Respecting dangers non, and lest Acestes land so lief.
He thereagainst. Excuses vain, in vain thou do but knit,
Nor mine affection first does from my breast ought change or flit.
Let us be gone (quod he) and calls the skoute, they strayt supplied
Their roumes, and kept their turns. They leuing sta^dings both forth hied
In one mind knit like mates, and for their king enqueeryng spied.
All other breathyng souls, on soyles dispersed, than easments took,
Releasing pains with sleep, and cares from hearts forgetful shook.
The dukes of Toians chief, and chosen youth about them bold:
Their counsel than supreme for kingdoms weight did carkfull hold,
What should be don, or to Aeneas now who message bears.
They lean with shields in hands, consultyng sad upon their spears.
Amids the camp in field than Nysus to them fresh of chere,
With mate Euryalus beseekes access, to speak them nere,
A thing of burden great and worthy of thancke they have to break.
Ascanius furst them took, and Nisus quiueryng bad to speak.
Than thus, give equal minds, and ears to us Opryncely peers,
Nor judge not our devise by our apparaunce light of years,
The Rutils silent lien in wynes and sleeps and surfets drownde,
Eke we our selves have vewd for our atempt good space of ground,
Where from our gate the way divided parts, their fires unbroke,
Descries their vacant shore, and to the stars the thick black smoke,
Disseueryng spreades in skies, give us but leave to take our chance.
We to Euanders court unto Aeneas close will glaunce.
Him here with slaughter strong, and spoil more great than we conceive
You shall see strayte return, nor us our way can ought deceive.
We saw from far that town in vales obscure down crookyng low,
Continual hunting there, and all that flood besides we know.
When this Alethes heard right grave in age and ripe of years,
Gods, Gods, O country Gods, in whose protection Troy still steeres:
You mind not (I perceive) poor Trojans yet to quench down rights,
When such coragious youth, such breasts so bold, so liuelike sprights,
It pleases you to send. And as he spoke, he did embrace
The necks and arms of both, and tears down tricklyng filled his face.
What gifts? what worthy gifts for such attempts and ventrous deeds
May recompense you Lords? but for your virtues such must needs
From gods come best reward? your manners eke no worse can gain,
All other things to you Aeneas prince shall pay full feign.
Ascanius also when he to perfect age attaynes:
Such kindness will requite, nor never shall forget your pains.
Yea I my self Ascanius than said, whose only wealth
Depends on you to see my syers retournyng swift in health:
By puissaunt Toian gods, unto you Nysus both I swear,
By mine aduoury saints, by Vestas secrets hoare of hear,
I here protest my faith what ever chance or fortune happes
What ever luck be mine, I put it whole in your two lappes.
Call back my parent sweet, let me of him have once a sight,
No heaviness my mind can in his presence make affright.
Two comely silver cups I shall you give with grauing dressed,
My father wan them both, when he Arisba town suppressed.
Two big threfooted bolles, eke talents twain most large of gold,
An ancient basin broad Queen Didos gift of price untold.
And if our chance prevail, that we our kingdom here may stay,
To take Italia land, and by the lots divide our pray:
Thou saw what palfray steed, what armor brave king Turnus bare
All guilt, what shield? and how his helmet crest did streaming stare?
Even them to thee shall I from out the lots except with cure.
Already thine they be, thou may account them Nisus, sure.
A dosen matrones eke, of thriftie kindred largest limd.
My father thee shall give, with bondmen twelve of al things trimd,
Besides those whole demaines, which king Latinus self does keep.
But as for thee, o ladde, to whom my years more nere do creep.
Thou reverent stately child, how deep in breast I thee receive?
Thou ever art my mate, whom scarce nor chance nor time can weyue,
Shall never pomp to me without thy portion sure be sought,
What ever peace or wars I make, my deeds, my words, my thought.
Shall most remain to thee: And he again made answer thus.
No day shall me disprove, nor of my deeds unlike discus
Fall fortune good or bad, thus much I grant, but one thing thee,
One grant let me require that passing all gifts is to me.
I have a mother here, of Priams stock she comes of old.
Whom neither Trojan soil could after me (good creature) hold,
Nor king Acestes walls, but me at all times following sues.
Pietee and duty toward parents.
She hereof nothing knows, what ever chance may me misuse,
Vngreetid her I leave, this night I take and thy right hand
To my record, that I my parents tears could notwithstand.
But thy relief to her I must needs crave to appeas her woo,
Let me that hope of thee for certain bear, the bolder goo
To dangers al I shall. Than tears of eyes did thick down fall.
From Troyans pierced breasts, and from Ascanius first of all,
Eke print of pure paternall love, his piteous mind began gall.
Than thus he spoke.
I promise al to thee that worthy is for so great fame.
My mother she shall be, and saving only Creusas name:
No diffrence make I shall, nor small rewards does her remain,
Who such a fruit forth brought, what ever chance this fact obtain.
Now by this head I swear whereby my sire did often protest,
What ever grant I gave thy saulf return if things did best:
Unto thy mother sure and al thy kin shall firmly stand.
So spoke he weeping the, and from his shoulders gave with hand
His bright broad golden sword, whom wondrous arts and works did wreath
Of smith Licaons craft fine fitted light with Iuery sheath.
Duke Mnesteus Nisus gives a Lions hyde of roughnes strange,
Vnspoild with paws, Alethes just did helm with him exchange.
Strait armed out they gone, whom lords and captains chief of sway
Conducted through their gates, than youth and age for them did pray.
Eke (...) Ascamus came forth nor vows to gods did spare
Discreet beyond his years, endewed with sprite and manly care.
Much things unto his father tell he bad, but blastes did breath
His words with wind, and scattring vain to clouds, did all bequeath.
They over diches went, and by the shade of dark midnight
Their enmies camp they pearce, there to destroy first many a wight.
On every side lay drink, and strowne on gras all fast on sleep
Men's bodies thick they see, and carts with chardges non did keep.
Here wheels, here halter thongs, and men on traces slurging laid.
Their armor mixed with wynes. Than Nisus first bespeaking said.
Eurialus, now bold bestur thy hands, now time prouokes,
Here lies our way, take heed, look well about, bestow thy strokes.
Let no man rise behind, make al things sure anenst our backs,
I lead thee through this lane, and wide, and wast put all to wrackes.
This spoken, speech he stopped, Slaughters done by Nssus.
and suddenly with foine of sword
Proud Ramnes through he struck, that on his carpet clothes at board
Lay stretched breathing big, outsnorting sleep with puffs from breast.
A king he was, and to king Turnus dear he calkinges kest.
But not with calking craft could he his plague betwitch that day.
Than servant next him three, which by the weapons rashly lay,
With squire of Remus chief he strait suppressed, and strait did fang
His charet keeper there, and cut their throtes that down did hang.
Than he their masters head with sword of chopped, and left his tronke,
Forth yexing belching blood, the soil, the streams the tents vpdronke,
With Lamirus, and Lamus, and Seranus strippling gay,
Which daunsed had that night with amorous face, and prompt did play.
His limbs had Bacchus bound most lucky lad if he that night
Suruiued had his sport, and drawn his joy to broad day light.
Even Lion like, that troubling flocks of sheep when folds are full
(Wod hunger him prouokes) does feed, does fret, does tear, does pull,
The sely soft beast (dum for fear), his bloody teeth does gnashe.
Nor nothing less this while, Sslaughters committed by Euryalus.
Eurialus did slaughters lashe.
He thoroughly waxes mad, and people much not worthy name
With Fabus, Hebesus, and Retus strong he killed for game,
Eke Abaris, unawares they were dispatched, but Retus than
Broad wakened al things saw, and hiding shranke behind a pan.
But following face to face he through his breast did thrust his blade
Even whole as he did rise, and in much death he made him wade,
He spued his purple soul, and as he died his blood did spoute
Vprendring wynes with life, he still by stealth besturres him stout*
And toward now Messapus mates they drew, where fires on ground
They saw did furthest fail, and steedes there stood at maungers bound,
On forage feeding fair. Than thus in ear did Nisus round,
For him he did perceive to sore, to furious set abroache.
Let us now leave (quod he) malicious day does near approach.
They meetely well bin paid, our way is won through mids our foes.
Much plenty silver plate behynd them left they glad did lose,
Good armor, chardgers great, and costly carpets tapstry gay.
King Ramnes trappers had, of gorgeous works that much did way.
With bulions broad of gold, and girdling girthes miraclose fine,
Which old duke Cedicus (men say) when he furst did combyne
In absence freendly league with Remulus of Tyburt coast:
He sent that present then, for he of wealth had riches moast.
Bequethed then from him his nephew kept them many a day.
But after his decesse, the Rutils wan by war that pray.
Eurialus them caught, and on his shoulders strong in vain
He fitly them bestowd, and of his spoil he was right feign.
Than duke Messapus helm with beauteous crestes adorned pure
On head he puts, than camp they leave and pass their journey sure.
This while from Latin town, one troop of horsemen sent that way,
(While all the rest in legion armed stood and did but stay)
Came forth, and answer brought of their estate to Turnus king.
Three hundred shieldmen al, al underneath duke Volscens wing,
And toward now the camp they drew, and walls approached nigh,
When from a far these men take left hand course they might epsy.
And by the glimsing night Eurialus that swift went on
His hie helm him betrayed, that brightsom beams reflecting shone,
Was not for naught espied. Duke Volscens cried amids his troop,
Stand felows, where this way? what be ye so that shrinking stoop?
Where run you armed thus? they not an answer to them gave,
But swiftly through the woods made have in trust that night should save.
The horsemen kest them selfs in crokings known of quainted ground.
Here, yonder, there, each where, and entries al with keepers crounde.
A wood with bushes broad there was begrowne with bigtree bows,
Whom thick entangling thorns, and bryry brambles filled with brows.
No trade but tratling paths, some here, some there that secret straies,
Eurialus the branches dark of trees, and heavy prays
Don let, he clean contrary ronnes beguild by wandering ways.
Nisus went on, and enmies all unawares had scapid quyte.
And past that place which afterward Albanus mountain hight
Of Albas name, king Latin there great pastures did maintain
When furst he stood and for his absent friend did look in vain.
Eurialus poor lad, what countrei now shall I thee seek?
What path should I pursue? strait back again from creek to creek
Through that deceitful wood vnwynding ways perplexed he sought,
Still tracking marking steps through thickets silent straggling blind.
He here is their horse, he here is their rustling noise, and enmies wynd.
Not long between there was when to his ears the cry came hot,
and furst Eurialus he sees whom al men's hands had got,
Through fraud of night and place of troublous tumult wareles trapt,
Vainstrungling working much, but round about him all they wrapped.
What should he do? what strength? how could he shift or dare dispose
To rescue thus this lad? should he run rashly midds his foes?
Enfoarcing fair to death with comely wounds his life to lose?
He swiftly shook his dart, and hie beholding bright the Moon:
He whirling bent his arm, and thus he fervent made his boon,
Thou goddess, thou this time, thou in our labors lend relief,
Thou beauteous Queen of stars in forests virgin keeper chief.
If ever gift for me sir Hirtacus my father gave
Unto thine offryngs feats, if ever I increased have
Thy sacred altars fees, with huntyng daily through my costs,
Or decked my church with spoils, or hanged about thy holy posts:
Give me to break this plumpe, and through the skies now guide my dart.
He spoke: and straining total strength his tool with hand and heart
Rest farth, it whirling flew, and through the shade of shimring night
It past, and into Sulmons back with noise did sharply light,
In pieces there it brake, and to the hartstrings perst the wood.
He tumbling (cold outspued al hot from breast his reking flood,
Farfetching yexing slow, his guts vpgathering smytes his sides.
Each man about them look. Lo, yet again a smarter glydes,
Which he with force outflang, and leauel kest direct from ear.
Whiles al they troubled stood, to Tagus whistling ran that spear,
Athwart his head it came, and thirld him quyte through temples twain
With noise, where fixed fast it stacke warm waxing through his brain.
Duke Volscens storming frets, nor him that did that weapon fling:
He one where could behold, nor whither fervent mad to spring.
But thou this while (quod he) these two men's death shall surely rue,
If any hot blood in thy heart there be. And strait outdrue
Against Eurialus his sword. Than verily in deed dismaide
Did Nisus loudly shryke, nor more to lurcke in darkness staide,
Such torments than him took, he cried amain with voice affaied.
It Is I, it is I, here, here I am that did, turn all at me,
O Rutils with your tools, my only craft here it is, not he,
He nether durst nor could, this heaven, these stars, I witness take.
Only for to much love his wretched friend he nold forsake.
Such words he gave, but deep with dynt the sword enforced furst
Had ransakt through his ribs and sweet white breast at once had hurst.
Eurialus sleyne.
Down falls Eurialus in death, his limbs, his fair fine flesh
Al runs on blood, his neck down fainting nods on shulders neshe,
Well like the purple flower that cut with plough letfalling loppes
In languish withring dies, or like weak necks of poppis crops
Down peifing heavy heads, when rain does lading grieve their tops.
But Nisus to his enmies fearcely ran, and through their mids,
Duke Volscens out he sekes, he only Volscens battle bids.
Whom Rutils clustring close on each side shoues, and stout withstands.
Volscens sleyne. Nisus sleyn.
Yet nerethelesse his sword like lightning bright with both his hands
He swindgyng sturde, and as duke Volscens cried, he smote him so:
That through his throat it went, and even in death he kilde his so.
Than weary digd with wounds, on his dead friend him self he kest
Expyring life at last, and took his death for pleasant rest.
O fortunate both twain, and if my verse may get good luck:
Shall never day nor time from mindful age your praises pluck.
While prince Aeneas house, while Capitol most stately stone
Immovable shall stand, while Romain rules this world in one.
The Rutil victor knights with spoils and pray departed there,
And Volscens dead their duke all weeping sad to camp they bear.
Nor waylyng less there was, when Ramnes king was headless found,
So many Lords at once through all the camp so strowd on ground,
With Neuma, with Serranus huge concourse and preasing strong
About their bodies came, some yet haulf panting stretched along.
Each place of slaughters smokes, and stremes of blood did flushyng some.
Anon they knew their spoils, and duke Messapus helm com home.
King Ramnes trappers eke with no small swet recovered sore.
And now dame Morning furst bespredyng lands with light renewd,
Forsook sir Tythons bed all heavenly painted saffronhewd.
Now sun disperseth beams, now things discouerid broad bin vewd.
King Turnus fresh his folks and strength of men, and armor steeres
In complet harneis bright his brazen troops to wars vpcheeres.
Each captein calls their bands, and rumors run men's moodes to prick.
Besides all this (a piteous grisly sight) on spears they stick
They stick their heads upon speates.
The heads of these two knights, and loud with cries they them pursue,
Euryalus, and Nysus.
The paynefull Trojans tough did on their left hand walls within
Resistyng set their front, for flood their righthand compast in.
Their trenches hie they hold, and lofty towers defendyng keep,
All pensive standing sad, and heads on poales before them peep
Fame.
To well poor wretches known with filthy blood down droppyng deep.
This while does flickeryng Fame on message fly with fethrid wings
Through all the tremblyng town, and swift in moment tidyngs brings.
And filles the mothers ears of that young strippling erst of told. Lament
acion of Euryalus mother.

All suddenly poor wretch, all heat her bones forsook for cold.
Her weauyng web down fell, and spindels scattryng thrown on ground.
She flies forth woofull soul) and howlyng shrill in woman's sound:
Dissheuillid tears her hear, and to the walls in have she speedes,
She neither danger kest, nor men regards, nor weapons dreedes.
But Heaven with moan she filles, and thus through people wailyng spreedes
And is it thus, Euryalus, that I thy face behold,
Mine ages late relief mine only joy, my comfort old?
And could forsake me thus thou cruel heart to leave me alone?
Nor entryng dangers such might I thy mother caytiue crone,
Obtain thy talkyng last, and make on thee my latter stoundes?
Alas, in land unknown, alas, to feed Italian hounds,
To fowls a pray thou lieft, O welaway for evermore.
Nor wretched mother I, thy funerals brought out before,
Nor could come close thine eyes, nor wounds with waters washing bath
With clothyng coueryng soft, which I both nights and days to rath
Did ordain gay for thee, and hourly hastyng did prepare,
In webbing wastyng time to ease thereby mine aged care.
Where should I seek? what country land contains my lims distract?
What nation tears my flesh, my funerals my members ract?
Is this thy gift O son, thou bring me home, thy works of hands?
Is it therefore that I thus followed have such seas, such lands?
Dig, dig me down with darts, throw all on me your weapons keen
O Rutils (if ought pity be) consume me I be not seen.
Or thou most mighty father of gods, have mercy on my unright,
Down thrust this hateful head to Lymbo lakes most lurking light.
Since otherwise my loathsome life to break I have no might.
With sorowing thus men's minds molested shrank, and sad through all
Deep mourning makes them slack, vnuicted strengthes begin to pall,
She blobbryng still, and kindlyng further greit two kinsmen stepped,
Commanded by sir Ilione and Ascanius much that wept,
Between them her they took, and bare to house and there her kept.
But brighthras troop from far, his fearful shiuring sounds expels,
Thick, thick, and thereupon men shout, that hie heaven yalping yels.
The Volscans jointly knit, with targates coueryng close their heads,
The trench attempting tear, and rampire stakes with dich down treads
Some seek their entering breach on skalyng ladders clambring quick
Where few resisters stand, and soldiers round ryng not so thick,
Where wall most entershines. Against the^ Trojans hye from tops,
Al sorts of turments turn, and thick them down they thrust with props,
Expert in long defense, and practice old to keep their town.
Great stones also they weld intollerably tumbling down.
If any where that covered plumpe might break, when they again
Did underneath their shields al chances hard conioynt sustain.
Nor now they more can bide, for where their engine ioynes his iolle:
A huge unwieldy weight the Troyans rumbling did down roll,
Whose fall did Rutils whelme and brake their tortais roof distwynde.
No more with such deceit they care to coape in conflict blind,
Strongharted Rutils bold, but from the trenche they seek to drive
With darts and hurling tools.
On the other side with odious noise a loathsome sight to look,
His fyriesmoking bronds on standardstaff Mezentius shook.
But duke Messapus tamer strong of steeds, god Neptunes brood:
Cuts down their trench, and skales their walls, he cries outrageous wood.
Now muses help, now help, now to my song aspire your breath.
What murthring quars of me^, what heaps down thrown, what toils of death
King Turnus then did give, and who? what man sent down to hell?
Reuolue with me this war, and chances huge what things befell.
You ladies, your remember best, and vttring best can tell.
A tower of steep vpsight there stood, with skaffolds large of length
In place vpframyd fit, whom all the Italians total strength
Incessaunt still did saulte, and foarce extreme of charge at ones
They spent to ouerturne. The Troyans it defend with stones,
And through their launcet loupes their whirling darts do thick bestow.
A blasing burning link of cresset light did Turnus throw,
And to the side the flame did fix, whom wind vpheauing hoysts,
Which fastening caught the bourds deuoring posts and timber ioysts.
They bustling quick within for fear began quake, and as to flee
They sought, and took the side, which of that deadly plague was free,
Whiles clustring close they cling: Than sodeinly the tower for weight
Down fell with thondring foarce, that heaven did rattling roar on height.
Haulf mangled dead to ground men by that building huge oppressed:
Came pecemeale tottring down, some torn with timber through their breast,
Some with their own tools thirlid were, yea scant with much ado,
One Helenor, and Lycus skoope, Helenor borne of Meons concubine.
the elder of them two
Was Helenor, whom bond Lycinia maid to Meon king
Broughtforth by stealth, his father him to wars while youth did spring
Unlawful sent to Troy, his worship win he should in feeld.
Al light with naked blade, yet honourles, yet blanke in sheeld.
He when him self he saw so many thousand men among,
Great armies here, great armies there, on each side Latins strong:
Even as a beast whom hunters round in ryng have gotten in hold,
She sees no way to escape, than willingly to slaughter bold
She frantike runs on death, and bears down tools, and bearesperes edge.
Nonotherwise this lad, where emnies thickest him did hedge,
With will to die did break among the mids constraynyng stripes,
But Lycus better far with feet, even through his enmies gripes,
Even by their weapons swift escapid had, and swift with hands
Endeuouryng climes his wall, his mates to reach on roofes that stands.
Whom Turnus in pursuit did with his weapon thrown arest,
Him catching railing thus. What do thou think thou madbraind beast,
To skape scotfree from us? and as he there did pendant skralle:
He plucked him back by foarce, with great piece following from the wall.
Even as an Egle does some tymrous Hare, Lycus taken.
or near great brokes
Some Lilywhyted swan vpliftyng heave, in talent hooks.
Or sucklyng lamb whom bleatyng long the dame still seeks about,
Which from the coat the rauenyng Wolf has caught. On each side shout
Does rise, invasion hot begins, than rampire banks are brast.
Some other burning bronds to houses tops do flingring cast.
And as Lucetius came with pitche and flame to fire the gate:
Sir Ilione with stone down tumblyng, quite did quashe his pate,
With stone down topplyng great, no little lump of broken hill.
Than Lyger did Emathion, Corynee Asylas kill,
He good at dart, that other chief with shaft that far begyles.
Sir Ceneus Ortagium slew, but Turnus him exyles
From life, and Turnus Ityn kilde, and Clonyus, and with him
Sir Promulus, and Sagar, sir Dyoxip large of lim,
With Ida boystous knight, before the towers that ward did bear.
Pryuernum Capis kilde, him forth before Themillas speace,
Had pinched small with prick, he like a dolt kest of his targe,
And handlyng groapt his grief, an arrow therefore swift with charge
His left side wyng came by, and to his ribs his pawe made fast,
That loongs, and breathing pypes, that mortal stroke with brusing brast:
There stood in armor fine, the worthy son of Arceus duke,
Gay needle wrought in cloak, embroyded brown in Spaniards puke:
Much noble, fair in face, his father him to warfare sent,
Sir Arceus bred in woods, and by the floods of Simeth banks,
Where stands Palycus church, and altars gracious rendryng thanks.
A whistlyng whirlyng slyng Mezentius took, and amnes down flang.
Him self three times the thongs about his head in compass swang,
And level right him struck, that in the mids the meltyng lead
His temples twain did sliue, and large on dust outstretcht him dead.
Than furst, Ascanius first exploit in war.
Ascanius in war his swift shaft (as men say)
Did shoot, which woonted was before wild skittish beasts to affray,
And with his hand sir Numan proud down laid, whose surname hight
Duke Remulus, he Turnus younger sister lately plight:
Than wedded had. He royster furst in forefront raylyng loud,
Things toto bad reviled, of kyngdoms new promocion proud.
All spytefull swollen in breast, and big with noise him self did bear.
Are ye not yet ashamed to lurk in hoales eftsoons for fear?
Twice captives Trojans? what? First by Hercules, next by Greeks.
think ye by walls to save your lives?
These be the princocke bloods, lo how they look that fight for wives?
What devil? what mischau^ce? where were your wits, what madness blind
Italia made you seek, you shall not here Atrydas find,
Nor pratler preaching lier Ulysses fine to teach men speak.
We be a stouter stock, in other sort our sons we break.
Our children furst from birth into the floods we throw to swim,
With waters noumme and frost we harden tough both heart and lim,
Our boys on huntyng run, they study still to beat their woods,
Their plays are Darts of horn, and for disport break horses moods.
As for our youth they wyle, and either ground they tame with rakes,
Contenling minds with small: or towns in wars besiegyng shakes,
We wear our lives in spendyng steel, with spears our breasts we prick
Our droues of herds, our booties daily increase, nor age vnquicke
Enfebleth ought our mynds, nor altreth natures force in flesh,
Our hoare hears helmets hyde, and euermoreour prays afreshe
We fetch from countries far, it does us good to drive and watch,
We warlyke live by spoils, even by the things our hands can catch.
You must have painted weed, gay ioly Ierkins, saffron shirts,
Your slipcoats must have sleeves, your coxcom coiues, bongraces girts,
Your study chief is daunse in pampryng feasts with giglet flirts.
O very Troyan trulles (for Trojans are you non) go fools.
Go fisgigs, frisk your woods with double pype in skipping skooles,
Hark how your mistrels call, your tabrets, bagpypes, shalms of boxs.
Go trim your treslock tyres, get on your gloves, your finest frockes
Give weapons up for men, let wars alone for catching knocks.
Him cracking thus, and iangling more dispyte with odious songs:
Ascanius could not bear, but sinnowy bow of horse hyde thongs
He bent, with pointed shaft, and arms disbukling several ways.
Before hie Jove he stands, and humbly thus with vows he prays.
Almighty Jove give to my bold beginnings good success,
Unto thy temple shall I solemn gifts of offerings dress,
A young steer white as snow, with gilded front of lively lust,
Hyeheaded like his dame, and with his horn desires to just,
Already strong which with his feet vpsparpling spredes the dust.
The father aloft him heard, and under cleeare sky lefthandlowe,
Did sign of thondring show, than with a sound from deadly bow,
The swift shaft whistling fled, and through sir Numans temples twain
If grisly struck. Go go men's manly deeds with mocks disdain,
Twyse captives Trojans lo, these answers Rutils send again.
Ascanius spoke but thus, the Troyans than with joyful voice,
Al jointly gave their shouts, and lifting minds to stars rejoice.
That time as fortune was brightheaded Phoebus for disport
Beheld from ayry coast both Latins hoasts, and Troyan fort,
As hie on cloud he sat, and thus to Ascanius gave report.
That's that's my peereles lad, such virtues new leads lords to stars,
Begotten of gods, and gods engender shall, by right al wars
Must under Dardanes line, in time by destny quite down synke,
Nor Troy can thee contain, and with that worder one could wynke,
Him self from sky down skips, and breathing puffs remoues from air
Than to Ascanius he draws, and changed countenance fair,
Resembling Buten old. Phoebus resembles Buten.
He to Anchises great from child
Was henchman bearing arms, and kept his guard of trust vnfilde,
The old man him to Ascanius than had put, so Phoebus went,
All things like aged man, both voice, and hew he did present,
White heary locks and angrisounding armor, calm of breast.
And to Ascanius thus that fervent was his words he dressed.
Let it suffice thee now that Numan freely vanquished is
Good child: lo now Apollo great commends thy praise for this.
He geues thee chief renown, nor like with tools to match does pass.
Abstain, hencefurth from blows my boy, so Phoebus entering was:
And in the mids his tale, men mortals eyes he clean forsook,
Desserring thin from sight, and flittring form to skies betook.
The lords beknew that god, perceiving strayte his tools deuyne,
His arrow sheues they heard, and rattling noise of boltbag fine.
At Phoebus word therefore, and in respect of his great grace:
Ascanius back they kept that egre was, them selfs in place
Succeds, and ventring lives eftsoon to dangers turn their face.
A clamorous noise vpmounts on fortres tops and bulwarks towers.
They strike, they bend their bows, they whirle from strings sharp shooting
showers:
Al streets with tools ar strowd, than helmets sculs with battrings mard,
And shields dishiuring crack, vpryseth roughnes bickring hard,
Look how the tempest storm, when winds outwrastling blows at south,
Rain rattling geats the ground, or clouds of hail from winter mouth
Down dashing headlong drives, when god from skies with grisly steven,
His watery showers outwrings, and whirlewind clouds down breaks from heaven.
Sir Pandarus and Bitias, two brethren, Pandarus and Bitias.
Troyans stout,
Whom to Alcanor knight dame Hera saluage Nymph brought out
Among Jove's sacred woods, in firtre groves of mountains cold.
Two valiant boystous knights, coragious, strong, and equal bold.
A gate that by their captain damned was they bread set oape,
So trusted they their strength, and bids their foes come near to coape.
Them selfs before their towers, both right, and left hand brave out stepped
Al armed stif in steel, and bright with crests their standings kept,
Hyheaded like two trees, like two great Oaks by Padus banks,
Besides their joyful flood, above their mates they rise by rancks.
Their heads to heaven they lift with lofty tops unshorn they beck,
Beshadowyng broad the bows, and hie surstretching skies they check.
The Rutils in they break when furst they saw their entry free.
Immediately the Dukes in armor gorgious gay to see,
Sir Quercens, and Equicolus either beaten turn their backs:
Or they with all their bands even in the gate went dead to wracks.
Than more and more men's minds disordring chafe co^tempning doubts
And thither Trojans now round gathryng draw, by plumpes and routs,
Conflicting hand to hand, and further salyeng dare run outs.
To captain Turnus fierce, than troublyng folks on backfort side
A post with message runs, how Trojans now have caught new pride,
Great murder stoutly made, and how their gates bread open they set.
He leaves his works begun, and huge with wrath to give the onset,
To that presumptuous gate, and brethren proud, he rushyng runs.
And furst Antyphaten, of king Sarpedons bastard suns.
The chief by Theban dame, for he against him furst did shoue:
He threw down dead with dart, the Italian tronke in skies above
Disseuering, tender air, came through his breast and out at back,
His stomach round it rent, the wound from cave gives out blood black
Permixt with some, and fixed in loongs the steel warmewaxing stack.
Than Merops, Aphidnus, and Erimanth with sword he slew.
Than Bitias that boystous sturd with eyes of sparckling hew,
Not with no dart, for dint of dart, could life not make him yield.
But thrown with strength extreme a troncheo^ spear most strong to weld,
Big like a lightning bolt at him he drove, whom doubled fold
Could neither backs of bulls, nor breast plate faithful strong of gold
Sustain from mortal plague, his members huge down foltring flusht,
The ground at falling groans, and thondring huge his shield he crushed.
Bitias sleyn.
As by the Bayon shore men building havens done for the nones
With laboring long beforn, through engines means lay monstrous stones.
Down sinks the weldlesse weight, and on the ground it settled stands.
Thy wyld seas meeting mix, and darkning skies vpleapes the sands,
Than with the sounds the soyles adioynant shake, and mountains next,
Where whelmd by gods revenge in dongeons deep are giants vexed.
Their army puissant Mars both pricks, and foarce to Latins hearts
Did add, and stings of egre wrath, in each man's breast vpstarts.
He made the Trojans flee, and gave them blackday mixed with dreede,
From every side they flock since now the sight proceeds in deed,
And in their mynds the murdering angel sits.
When Pandarus his brother saw down fallen before his eyes,
In what case fortune stands, and how things now in danger lies:
The gate with much turmoyle converting hinges hooks on rings,
With shoulders shouing broad at last he shuts, and bolts vpwrings,
And many his mates in hard conflict he leaves, and out them locked.
But other he receyues as with the preas they rusiling shockt
Vnprudent man, that when the Rutil king did through intrude:
Could him not entering spy, but in the fort did him include,
Even like a Tiger wild among the flocks of cattailes rude.
Incontinent new light their eyes distraynes, and armor strange
Did grisly give their sound, his quyuering crest with bloodread raunge
Like beams of lightning burns, and from his shield that flames outflew.
Anon their hateful face, and monstrous lyms the Troyans knew,
Distraught with sodein sight. Than for his brother Pandare huge
Ince^st with fervent wrath: Thou shall have here but bad refuge.
This is no ioynter town, king Latyns wife gets here no gage,
Nor she (quod he) thy fathers walls this time empoundes in cage.
Thine enmies for thou see, hence neuermore shall Turnus out.
To him than Turnus spoke, al smyling sober fre from doubt.
Begin (if any manfull mind thou have) approach me round.
Ish make thee Priam tell that here thou have Achilles found.
Thus speaking an unshapen bunchy spear with bark vnpilde,
Sir Pandare whirling threw, Juno preserved Turnus life
with strength extreme it went welwilde.
The wynds vpcaught that stroke, and Juno Queen the danger brake,
Wrong wresting as it went, and in the gate did stick the stake.
But not this tool, of mine which in my right hand here I shake,
Shall thou escape, great difference now shall our two puissans make
(Quod he,) and stretching broad with arms his sword did mounting lift:
His brainpan through it smote, and in the mids it made a cliff,
Dividing chekes, and chaps, and hears vpgrown with gapyng wound.
The soil than shuddring shook, and with the weight did yield a sound.
Down lyueles falls his lyms, and armor mixed with blood and brain
With corpse he strowd the ground, and equal clyuen in porcio^s twain,
His head on shulders hung, one here, one there disseuered slain.
The Troyans than for fear their feet began take with trembling flight.
And if he victor than remembered had, and taken foresight,
Strait ways to break the bolts, and through the gates his folks let in:
That day to Troyan war, and to their lynage last had bin.
But furious fervent mind, and greedy lust of slaughters more
Enforst him for ward still.
Furst Phalarim and master veins of Giges huge he sheares.
And as the people fled he gathering darts, and skattred spears
Bestowed them in their backs, for Juno gave both might and mind.
Than Halim fellow unto them he ioynes, and kylls behind
Sir Phegius with targat pyke down pusht, than up the wall
He runns, and such as fighting there, of this knew naught at all
Neomonus, and Prytanis, with Hellus he down stewe.
Alcander than and Lynceus which toward him stout drew,
Outmustring mates for help, he leaping trench did swift prevent,
And with his glittring glayue he such a stroke unawares him lent:
As hand to hand he fought, that quite from shoulders at one choppe
His head with helmet fell, and far from him did hobbling hoppe.
From thence sir Amycus he slits that wild beasts ever stroyed,
More lucky non there was, nor never man more often them noyed,
With ointments armyng steel, with poisoned tools he still them cloyd.
Than Clytius, and the dulcet friend of Muses Cretea fine.
Sir Cretea Muses mate that evermore with voice divine
Melodious warblid songs, his pastime chief was harp and kit,
By numbryng ran his Rimes to synowy cords concurrant fit:
Always of steedes, of arms, of men, he sang of battails main.
At last the leaders great, when they first heard their men so slain:
The Troyan captains came, sir Mnesteus and Serestus strong,
They saw their straglyng mates, and enmy entered thicks among.
And Mnesteus, what auayles this flight? where run you now (quod he?)
What better bulwark walls? what other towns or trench have ye?
One man alone (O sirs) even in your mids inclosd in camp,
So many slaughters made? in such a fort round skotfree rampe?
So many chieftain knights vnuenged sends to Lymbo dampe?
Make ye no more of country soil remorse? faintharted fie?
What shall we shame our gods? and great Aeneas naught set by?
With such rebukes men's minds vpkindled stayed, and thick with preas
They stood. But small and small from flight did Turnus than surceas,
Retiryng to that side where flood the fortress gyrdes about.
So much the more pursuit the Troyans make with restles shoute,
And clustryng close they shooue. As when sometime men gathring thick
A Lion wild assaylne, and hard with tools oppressyng prick.
But he affraied resists, sowerskowling grim he backward strides,
And neither tail to turn his pride him lets, nor wrath his sides
Will suffryng make him show, nor forward can set forth his joints,
Though fain he would, not able he is yet for men, for weapons points.
None otherwise did Turnus than retracting seek bypath,
With stalking doubtful steps, and deep in mind reboyles his wrath.
Yet notwithstanding twice his enemies mids he did invade,
And twyse conuertyng backs them take their walls in flight he made.
But thuniuersall camp together joining whole did rise,
Nor Juno Queen durst more against such strength so great suffice.
For Jove unto his sister down her ayry Raynbow sent
With message nothing mild, and how that some should soon repent
If Turnus from the Trojans lofty walls did not reyeelde,
The young prince now therefore, with neither right hand yet, nor shield
Enduring can resist, so thick thrown tools on each side pressed
About his temples round big bounsing beats, nor never at rest
His helmet tincgling tings, and stones with bumpes his plates disglosse,
His topright crest from crown down battred falls, nor brazen bosse
Sufficient is for strokes so doubledriuing they not stint.
The Troyans al with spears, eke he him self with lightning dint
Sir Mnesteus forward shoues, than every lim on streaming swet
Does drop down black as pitch, nor gives him time his breath to fet.
Faint panting pulls his joints, and tierd with pains his entrails beat.
Than with a leap at last to Tyber flood in all that heat
He headlong kest him self, in complet armor compast all,
He smooth with channel blew did softly him receive from fall,
And to his mates him glad (from slaughters washed) home sent withal.
DEO GRATIAS.
Per Thomam Phaer,
3. Aprilis finitum 1560. Opus 30. dierum.
The tenth book of the Aeneidos of Virgil.
The Argument.
Jupiter calling a parliament of Gods: exhorts them to concord, Venus
complayneth of the Trojans danger, and Iunos insatiable malice, and requires
at length some end of calamities. Juno lays all the blame in the Trojans, as
ye first causers of war, and in Venus her self. When Jupiter perceived they
would grow to no agreement, to offend neither his wife nor his daughter:
promises to take part with nether, but will put of all to the indifferency of
destenies. This while the Rutilians return to thassault with all their force,
whom the assaulted repel with all their might, and this in Latium. Aeneas
having braught al things in Etruria to wisshed end, being assisted by diverse
peoples: returns to his mates with a navy of thirty sail. There he meets
with the Nymphs that were not long before transformed from ships, and is by
them certefied both of the loss of his fleet, and of the danger of his men.
Then he landeth his power within the sight of his enemies. The Rutilians leave
the sledge, and run to shore to keep the enemy from landyng. There they
fight with great loss on both sides. Where Pallas, after many slaughters on
his enemies: is at length slain by Turnus. With sorrow whereof, Aeneas all
enraged: makes plenty bloudoffryngs on his foes for his friends soul. Then
Ascanius issues forth, and joins power with his father. Juno careful for
Turnus, casts before his eyes a false representation of Aeneas. Which, whilst
he pursues into a ship: Juno breaks the cables, and by force of a tempest,
brings him to the shore near Ardea. Mezentius then, at Jupiters
commau^dment, enters the battle, and sleyth many both Trojans and Etruscans,
until Aeneas have wounded him, and being rescued by Lausus his sun: is scarce
able to depart the field Lausus is also sleyne by Aeneas whylst he endeuoreth
to revenge his fathers wound. Which when Mezentius understood: he returns
into the battle, and is sleyne by the same hand that his sun was.

BRoad open in this while of glorious god thalmighty hall,
The father of gods, and king of men him self does council call
Into the starbright seat, whens kingdoms large in seas and lands
He lofti low beholds, both Trojans fort, and Latins bands.
In parliment house they sat twigated wide: him self begins.
Celestials great, how happens now so soon your sentence twins
Reuolting judgment fixed: why show ye thus with minds unmeet,
Jove's forefended wars should Latins now to Troyan fleet?
What discord now contrarious maks you fearce? what wroth, what fear
Sets these, or those on gog not suffering rest to shield nor spear?
A time to fight there comes, call not to fast for fatal hours.
Punick wars.
Who wild Carthago proud in tract of years to Romish towers
Destruction great shall send, and mountain tops down tearing break.
Than spare not your dispites, than rap and reaue who list and wreake.
Now let them rest, and quiet league compound your selves to smight.
Thus Jove in brief, but not in brief than golden Venus bright
Venus complaint.
Replied as thus.
O father, o thou everlasting strength of god, and man.
For what thing else have we to whom for help now cry we can?
You se how Rutils rampe and with what bravery bolne in pride
King Turnus prosperous rydes, scant in their walls can Troyans bide,
But even amids their gates, even on their bulworks rampire brims:
They bickring daily dye, that trench and dich with bloodshead swims.
Aeneas absent knows not this, will you give never leave
To rest poor souls from siege, must enmies ever still down reaue
The walls of springing Troy? and yet more still with strangers hoasts
Poor Troyans troubled bin, yet ones again from Greekish coasts
Must Diomedes rise? I wene my flesh must yet be cut,
And me your heavenly child man mortal shall to dangers put.
But if contrary to the pleasure of your heavenly grace,
In Italy ben Troyans entered wrong, usurping place:
Than let them buy their sins, nor aid them not, but if they have
But followed your precepts, which gods and spright such mumbers gave:
Why now should any creature dare control or hang down groyne
To bend back your decrees, or destnies now presume to royne?
What should I now reherce our navy brent at Scicil shore?
Or name the king of storms with all his tempest wind uproar
Against us whole vpraisde, and Raynbow clouds so often down strainde?
And now the fends forsooth for that one quarter yet remainde
Unsought besides the world, yet suddenly lo thence to skies
Alecto rear she did, and made by madness towns vpryse.
Supremyty, nor for their empier moves me not such things,
We looked long in vayn while fortune was, but this not wrings.
Make victours whom you favor most, our hope so hie not springs.
If no one corner be that your spouse can vouchsafe to give
To Troyans poor for spite, nor country none, nor place to live:
Yet by the piteous fall of smoking Troy from soil destroyed,
Good father I beseeke let me Ascanius keep vncloyed:
Let me my nephew small withdraw from Mars, as for my son
Aeneas, he shall toss in seas unknown as erst has don.
And what way fortune leads, where ever it be, let him go prove,
Yet let me save his child and him from batails hard remove.
In Cypres land some cities fair I have, I have Cythere,
Idalium, Paphos hie, and Amathus, let him dwell there,
Vnfamous free from wars, and honourlesse lead out his age,
Than may your grace condemn al Italy to great Carthage
In slauedome under Moors, no hindraunce than to Afric towers
Can com, large empier rule they may no Troyans nere their bowres.
What has our service now preuaild, what goodness have we got
By skaping Greekish fires, and mortal plagues of Mars so hot?
So many parlous lands, such wast wide seas with pains outworne,
While Trojans Latium seek, to reise the walls so often down torn?
Had it not better ben, if in their countries reking dust,
On soil where Troy did stand they settled had, than thus to trust?
Yet give them wretches leave to turn their backs, and home retier
Unto their native streams, lord be so good at my desire.
Reuert their former toils, all miseries that erst have been
Iunos repli.
Give ones again to Troyans gracious sir. Than Juno Queen
Enforst with furious rage vprose: why do thou me constrain,
Deep silence now to break, and to disclose my chouched pain?
Did either god or man Aeneas thine to war compel?
King Latin to impugn, or yet his subjects cause rebel?
Italia land he took by destnyes word: admit so were
Through mad Cassandras sprite, yet did we ever tyce him there
To leave his camp unkept? and to the wynds his life commit?
To give his child the charge of walls, and wars did we give writ?
Or make him nations move in rest that sat, or faithes remit?
What god did such deceit? where was that time that power of ours?
So fore or where was Juno than, or bow down sent with shoures?
Is it so vile a thing that springing Troy besieged stands
With fire? and that king Turnus seeks to save his country lands?
Of king Pilumnus blood Venilia Nymph that had to dame?
What is for Trojan thieves, al Itali with bronds to flame,
Subdue their neighbors lands, and robbrie boties riue by snaps,
Compel men give them wives, and spouses reaue from parents laps,
Entreat for peace by becks, and traitors arm their ships for traps?
Thou could Aeneas thine from hands of Greeks sometime withdraw.
Suppliedst his place with cloud, with empty wind of wavering flaw.
Thou could convert their fleet to several ships with storms renewd.
If we help Rutils ought, lo what a sin, what broile is brewed?
Aeneas absent knows not this? nor may he absent know.
Thou have Cithera towns, hie Paphos, and Idalium low,
Why troublous sturrest thou thus men's angry moodes, why do procure
New wars to Latium town that trauayls old could scant endure?
Is It we that will vpturne the flittring state of Troy from soil?
Came it by us, or first by him, that Greeks made Troy a spoil?
Who first began that cause, why rose in armor fixed on wreke
Europa and Asia both? who did their leage by theuedom break?
Was it by my conduct, thaduoutrer stale the Sparta Queen?
Gave I them tools to try, or lovers wars mainteind with spleen?
Then oughst have been afraid for thine, now causles do but square
In vain, and flimflam flirts out throwst at them that nothing care.
Such talkings Juno gave, and heavenly wights with murmor round
All sundry cried assents, as first when blasts begin to sound,
With puffs they wag the woods, and tombling blind with soft uproar
They nere pronostike winds, and tells the seaman storms before.
Thalmighty father than that all thing rules in total some,
Bespake, and at his speech, the court of high gods staggred domme,
And from the grounds the soil contrembling shook, than lofty air,
Than winds laid down their noise, and calm sea surges settled fair.
Take this therefore in mind, and in your breasts imprint my saws,
Since Rutils with the Troyans will not knit nor take no laws:
And forasmuch we se your quarrel striuings make non ends:
Look how men's fortune stands, this day what hope each one pretends,
Be it Troyan or Italian he, no difference find they shall,
Our judgment right shall stand, this is our sentence once for all.
If fatal fortune be that Troyan camp besieged is,
Or Troyans by deceit Italia lands have taken amiss:
Nor Rutils we discharge, each man's own medlings even or od
God is indifferent to all men.
Shall praise or penance bring, Jove sits in different all men's god.
The destnyes will invent a way, yea by our brothers brook,
By pitch of Lymbo pits, by gulfs and lakes so glomme that look.
He gave a nod, and at his beck, whole heaven obedient shook.
This end the talking had, king Jove from golden throne vprose.
Whom home to heavenly court celestials garding al did close.
The Rutils all this while, at every gate their battries plyes,
With dead men ground they strew, and walls beset with fire that flies.
The Troyan garrisons in camp with hard siege be bestad,
Nor hope of flight they have, on towers poor men they stand full sad.
Small furthring round at vamures tops, with strength which thin they had.
Duke Imbras out of Asia land, and duke Tymetes bold,
Assaracus two captains, with sir Castor Tyber old,
At forefront battle kept, with them there stood the brethren twain
Of king Serpedon great, than noble Ethmon drago his train
With lords of Lycia land, him self right huge with total might,
For burden bare a rock, a mountains piece not small in fight.
Sir Agmon at Lyrnesia borne, inferior not in facts
To great sir Clitius his sire, or his brother Mnesteus acts.
Those plye their darts, these other strive to fend with stones and bows.
Their wield fire fast they fling, from synowy strings sharp shafts out
throws.
Him self amids them chief dame Venus darling, iustest care,
Ascanius described.
Their young prince loath proceeds with reverent face headnaked bare.
As perle it precious shynes, or glistring stone bright gold that parts,
Which garnish maidens necks, or set forth heads, or as when arts
Have meddled finely moldes, and Iuery clear enclosd in box,
From tablet semely shows, his milkwhyte shulders lifts his locks,
His hear downshadowing shed, but gold embroyding bynds their docks.
Thee there also coragious knight sir Ismar all men saw,
With cast of canes enuenimed, thine enemies blood to draw.
Thou gentle knight of gentle Meons house, where fields right fat
Been batful wrought with men, where flood Pactolus gold does scrat.
Sir Mnesteus also there was seen, whom proud of all men's praise,
For Turnus hard repulse, much glory hie to heaven does raise,
And Capis, he to Capua town did surname furst derive.
They still among them selves, in hashards hard of wars did strive.
Distressed Aeneas than with ships at midnight streams did cliue.
For from Euander first when to Etruria camp he came:
He met their king, and to their king declared his blood, and name,
What help he seeks, what help also he brings, what peoples mights
Mezentius gathering draws, of Turnus breast the spiteful sprights
He shows, and whereupon man's wit in such case may conclude
He gives advise, with mixed entreating words, al which thing vewde:
Strait Tarchon ioynes his strength, and leage co^pounds, Duke Tarchon.
tha^ free from crime
By destny songs of gods, the Lydian host did navy clime,
With alean lord for guide. Aeneas foremost held with ship,
Her stately stem on streams, with Lions large of Troy does slip,
With Ida mount on puppe most freendly sign to Troyans lost:
There great Aeneas sits, and with him self reuoluing tossed
The various ends of wars. On left hand Pallas next his side.
And now the stars he seeks that ships in dim night serve to guide.
Now call to mind he does, by seas and lands his travails tried.
Now muses move my song, now let me sup your learning stremes,
To tell what manred strong, what company from Tuscan realms
Aeneas armed brought, conveyed by waves on timber beams.
Duke Massicus with brazen ship called Tiger, cuts the floodes,
The names of such as took Aeneas part
With him a thousand hands from Clusa walls, al youthful bloodes,
And they that came from Cosa town armed with shafts, and darts.
Corites with shulders light, and from their bows but death departes.
Grymskouling Abas big, his bands fine harnest gorgeous steames
Reflectes, and Phoebus on his golden pup stood light with beams,
Six hundred valiant lads dame Populon his dame him gave,
Expert in feats of war, three hundred more from Ilua brane,
Where never cessing soil does steelebright stuff send out from mines.
Than don Asila priest, that gods and men can skrie by signs,
Whom secret veins of beasts, whom stars of heaven obeyen at beck,
And thretning lightning fires, and chattring birds with tongue that queck:
His. M. people thick in throngs he draws rough ranckt with spears.
Al these obedient came from Pisa coasts whom Alphe reares,
Their town is Tuscan soil. Than fairest Astur next pursues,
Sir Astur trusting steed, and armor brave of changing hewes:
Three hundred they do add, all issued out with one good will,
Such as Cerites house did keep, or Mymon croftes did till.
Al Pirgus antique brood, Grauisca timeles troops did fill.
Yet will I not neglect thee also lusty Lumbard lord.
Thou Siquus warrior strong, and with thy few of joint accord
Sir Supaue from whose helmet crests rise fethered wings of swan,
Your slaundrindg grew of love, your cognisaunce your sier began.
For Tignus (as men say) when he for Phaeton mourning made
Among the popler bows, and underneath his sisters shade,
Whiles whewling sad he sat, and long lamenting sang for love:
Al fethered white with down, hoar age did him from man remove.
Than Swanne he left his lands, and followed stars with voice above.
His son with equal bands accompanied with fleeting ships,
His monstrous Centaure shoues with ores, she huge with tugging trips,
And to the water threatening stone she shows, with strength men pulle
The unwieldy weight in waves, and deep seas long she sheares with hull.
Eke from his native country coasts great strength sir Ocus took,
Mantua of Mantus.
Of Mantus destnie speaker, and the son of Tuscan brook.
Which gave thee Mantua walls, and of his mother made the name
Of graundsiers Mantua rich, but all of one descent not came.
Three nations rule she does, and under them four peoples good,
She prince on peoples sits, her strength proceeds from Tuscan blood.
Five. C. knights from thence against him self Mezentius arms,
Them Mintius lake, Benacus child, whom gray reeds close beswarmes,
Sent forth to seas in Pinetre ships, full strong to venge their harms.
Than grave Auletes went, and with his hundred beating ores
He topsy turns up streams, the marble fomes reboyles at shores.
Him Tryton combrous bare, that galeon blew with whelkid shell,
Whose wrinckly wreathed flue, did fearful shril in seas outyell,
He swam with swimging sides, and bresled heary rough from haunch,
His face like mankind shows, but foul in fish decaies his paunch.
His monstrous saluage lims through froth, through foam with flushyng launch,
So many chosen lords in threetimes ten of ships did slide
To new Troy fast for aid, and salt sea foam with brass divide.
And now the day departed was from heaven, and hie with wheels
Night wandryng dame Diane did midskie beat with palfreis heels.
Aeneas (for in carke to rest ons lymmes it naught preuailes)
Him self at stern he sits, he guids his helm, he serves his sails.
The ships of Aeneas transformed into Mermaides met him on the way.
To him in mids his way, thassembly fair of ladies whight,
Sometime his mates that were from ships transformed creatures bright,
To whom great power of seas Queen Berecinthia did commit:
They joining sweetly swam, and sweeping salt sea skumme did flit.
As many just as ships with brazen stemmes did stand at shore.
They knew from far their king, and sporting daunst his fleet before.
Of whom the talker best, Cymodocee by name that hight:
With right hand held his puppe, even hard at back, and bolt upright
She breast high shows her self, than fair in sight she clear apeerd,
With lefthand coutching waves, and smoth her self she vndersteerd.
Tha^ him unawares she spekes, now wakest thou? wakest thou gods elect?
Aeneas wake (quod she) and sails to bowling ropes object:
We were thy sacred trees, on Ida mount sometime that grew,
Now salt sea maids we been, thy fleet of late, when force untrue
Of Turnus king, would us, with swords and flames have quite consumed:
Unwillingly thy bands we brake, and thus far have presumed
To seek thee through the streams, in this form us our Lady put,
Lamenting thy mischaunce, and made us Mermaides seas to cut,
In water lives to lead, from whens non age us out can shut.
Thy child Ascanius in walls with deep trench is beset
Amids thy mortal foes, and Latins grimme that armours fret.
Euanders horsemen saufe at place commanded keeps the lands,
Conioynt with Tuscan strength, to set against them half his bands
(Lest force to thee they join) king Turnus full determinde stands.
Arise, go to, and in the dawning first call forth thy mates,
In armor first appear, and take that shield which broad in plates
The fyry puissant god vnuict, gave thee with golden grates.
This morrow morning next (if thou beleuest I speak not vain)
Shall slaughters huge behold of Rutils bloods by heaps down slain.
She said, and in departing she with righthand pup did shoue,
In sort as well she knew, the ship than straight in streams above:
Fled swifter forth then swiftest darte, or shaft that perceth wind.
Than others mend their course, himself unawares astoyned in mind,
The Troyan prince did muse, yet with good luck men's hearts he cheres:
Than shortly thus he prayed, beholding round the zodiac spheres.
Almighty mother of gods, in whose great mercy Troy yet sittes,
That rulst both towns and towers, and lio^s yolkst with brideling bittes:
Thou be my patron prince, my guide in fight now prosperous stand
To Troy good gracious dame, confirm thy signs with mightful hand.
These only words he said, and in this while the gray day light
Returning ripe appeerd, and darkness far did chase of night.
First to his mates he bids, that they their standars shall pursue,
With armor match their minds, and wait for fight in order due.
And now in sight his Trojan camp he has, and vewes their field,
Aduauncing stout on puppe, in lifthand than his glistring shield
Vplifting large he shows, the Trojans gave to stars a cry,
Vpmounting on their walls, hope kindlith wrath with comfort nie:
Joy for succor.
Their weapons up they throw, as in the clouds done herds of craws
With crockling casting signs, when long in are they lau^ch like lanes,
When southwind first they flee, and glad with sounds their joy proclames.
But these to Rutil king, and Latin lords great meruels were,
Till toward shore they look, than fleetes arriving bustling there
They saw, and under ships the seas al covered show no where.
His topright crest it burns, and flame forth sparkling hie from head
Duthelching spouts forth beams, his goldbright shield fire perbrakes read.
None otherwise, than when by nighttime nesh some blasing star
All bloodred sanguine shows, and louring looks on men from far:
He not for creatures wealth, but sores, and droughts, and sickness strange:
Does spring, and sad with frowning sour due light from skies death change.
But not from Turnus bold did courage ought or hope remove
To send them loof from land, or from the shore with force to shoue.
He cheres their sprits which speech, and of him self to his men does cry.
That ye have long desired, so here hit is with swords to try,
Even to your hands is Mars descended sirs, let each man needs
Now thinck on wife, on house, your lives, your lands, the valiant deeds,
And honor of your auncetours, encountre then at land
Whilst fearful they come forth, and their first steps do sag in sand.
Fortune is friend to venturers, and cowards hates most.
When this was said: he does devise, who shall defend the ceast,
And who shall still the Trojan walls beseige with armed host.

Therwhyles Aeneas from his loftye ships his mates to shore
By planks conueies, but diverse stay till flud the sea restore.
And some by setters short, to set them selves to land apply,
And some by oars. Duke Tarchon.
Tarchon, the coast alonge does search, and fry,
Where he ne foord does find, ne noise of broken surges hears.
But when the calmed sea to swell by force of tide appears:
He quickly wendes his ship, and to his mates request does make.
O chosen crew, now to your sturdy oars your selves betake.
Hallawe, set forth your ships, and with the beakes cleave out of hand
This enmies shore, let weight of keele turn up, and cut the land.
My self do not refuse in such a rode my ship to break,
If once the shore I might obtain. These words no sooner speak
Did Tarchon but his mates arise in oars, till Latin grownd
The fominge ships do touch and keeles echwhere dryland have found.
Their beaks do reach the land, and sand with earth theren they sownd.
Where all in salftie sit, save bark, o Tarchon, thine alone.
For whilst on sands it smits, and striks on banks of beach and stone,
Uncertain on which side to fall, and surges sore it beats:
It splittes in twain, and men in midst of waves, and water weetes.
Whom broken oars, batches, and fleetinge stiues of board, and beam,
Do stay, and ebb pulles back their feet again into the stream.
Ne Turnus sluggish sloth does stay, but fierce with speed he bends
Against Troyans all his power, and on the shore against them tends.
They blow alarm. Aeneas first the rusticke sort sets on
For happy hansils sake, and Latynes lays the ground upon.
Where Thereon took his bane, the mightiest man in all the field
That set upon Aeneas, Thereon slain.
whom with swerd through brazen shield,
And through his golden plated Jack he thrust into the side.
Lycas.
Then Lycas next, from mothers womb cut forth whereof she died,
Sacred, o Phoebe to thee, who might in youth have shund before
Wars doubtful haps. And Cisseus hard, not pausinge enymore,
With cruel Gias, who with clubbs the rancks to ground did bear:
He sent to death. Naught Hercles arms which they in fight did wear,
Naught might their valient hands, ne sier help that Melampus, was
Alcides mate, whilst he on earth his traueiles great did pass.
To Pharon lo, with boastinge talk who does him self advance:
Into his gapinge mouth his hugie dart he threw by chance.
And thou lykwyse, with yellowish tender down on cheeks in pryme
While Chtius do pursue, Cydon, in an vnhapie time:
By Trojan hand yslaine, quite carlesse of thy wented love
To boys still borne, poor wretch the force of woeful death shuldst prove,
Had not a troop of brothers rescued thee, sir Phorcus seed,
Who seven were in tale, and seven darts they cast indeed,
Whereof some from his shyeld, some from his helmet back do fly
In vain, and Venus noble dame directs some awrye
As they were thrown. Aeneas then to trusty Achates spoke.
He hartneth him self by remembrance of former
Reach me my darts (for none in vain with righthand he did shake
Against the Rutils) which sumtime in Greetian bodies ran
In Troyan fields, a mighty spear he ketcheth quickly than,
And throws it forth, which flying strikes of Moeons shield the brass,
And percinge through, with breast plate strong into his breast does pass.
To whom Alcanor steps, and brother his from fallinge stays
With his righthand, through whose arm straight ye spear flies forth his
And all with blood imbrued his course he kepes yet still amayne, ways,
The arm from shoulder hanges, stayed up by synewes one or twain.
Then Numitor from out his brothers corpse does pull the dart,
But lefull tys not sure like wound on him again t'impart.
There through Achates thighe he forced it, Achates wounded in the thigh
and forth it flies.
Then Lausus stout of limme, and trusting spears him thither hies,
Where Driopis with sturdy lance full sore he strykes from far:
Right underneath the chynne, the bloody wound his throat does mar,
And with one blow, of language both and life him reues, but he
With forhead beats the ground, and black blood spues that all may see.
And three likewise in Thracy borne in farthest northern coast,
Three also who of Idas sier, and Ismara soil might boast:
By diverse means he throws to grouud. Halesus in that space
Comes on into Aruncas hands, and of Neptunus race
Sprongefoorth Messapus brave with steeds, now these, now they do strive
In very brinke of Latin land each other thence to drive.
Like as contrary wynds amid the aier that roue about
Do fight among them selves, with equal force, and courage stout,
Not one unto the other, not clouds, nor seas do yield a whyt,
The battle doubtful hangs, each thing adverse so close does sit.
None otherwise the Trojan bands, and Latin ranks they ran
Together, settinge foot to foot, and stickinge man to man.
On the other side, where as the stream of peablestones great steare
Together rouled had, and throune down trees upon the shore:
The. Archadians put to flight.
The Archadian band whose wont was not on foot their force to try,
When Pallas saw to Latins turn their backs, and fast to fly,
Whom sharpnes of the place had forced from horses to alight,
The last, and only shift which serves for men in such a plight:
With prayers often, and often with taunts prouokes them unto fight.
O whyther fly ye mates? now by your selves, and deeds of might,
And by your prince Euanders name, and battles won or this,
And by my hope which match unto your country praises is,
Trust not unto your feet, through mydst of foes a way we must
Break forth, whereas the thickest rout of foes upon us thrust.
This way both ye, and Pallas duke, your native soil requests.
No gods against us fight, it is mortal foe that us molests
Mortal like us, as many souls, and hands we have as they.
Behold, we are beset by mighty sea that stoppes our way,
By land we can not fly, shall we to Troy by sea again?
This said: into the thickst of all his foes he thrusts amayne.
And first by cruel destnies thither braught he meets straight
With Lagus, Pallas slaughters after his exhortation.
whom whilst he pulles at a stone of hugy weight:
With bended weapon sticks, in myddle space the rybbes between
As backbone would permit, and forth he pulles the spear ageene
Fast stickinge in the bones, on whom fir Hisbon falls not just
Though so he hopd, for whylst in furious rage to ground he rusht
Unawares of fellows chance: with cruel death him Pallas flewe,
And soon his mighty sword quyte through his wellinge lungs he drut.
At Helene next he goes, of Rhoetes eke ancient stock offpred
Anchemolus, that durst with incest file his stepdames bed.
And you likewise o Twynnes, your fall in Rutil fields you took
Of Daucia impes, Larid, and Timber, who most like did look,
And scarce could be discernd, to parents a most sweet deceat.
But Pallas now unto you both has diffrence given great.
For why o Timber, thy head of, Euanders sword did streeke,
Thy ryghthand Larid, which was stricken of, Tymbes sleyne.
thy corpse did seek,
And fingers half a live do move, and weapons down let fall.
The Arcadians thus hartned on, and viewing therwithall
His valient deeds: both grief, and shame do them to battle call.
Then Pallas soon sir Rhoeteus, which in charret fled him bie
Throughgirdes, and tarience like he gives to Ilus or he die.
For he at Ilus did from far direct a mighty dart,
On Rhoeteus which, (between that came) did light, and struck his heart.
Whiles Teuthra thee, and brother Tyren thine he flies, who reeles
Down from his charret, beating Rutil ground with both his heels.
And like as wisshedly, when winds in summer season blow,
The shepherd does his fires, in diverse parts of woods bestow,
Who quickly taking hold, together jointly run apace
Through largest fields, sir Vulcans power does take his cruel race.
He like a conqueror sits, and lusty fires does look upon:
None otherwise their fellows force together meets in one,
Which Pallas, thee delights. And stout Halesus fierce in field
Sticks such as do withstand, and close defends him self with shyeld.
He Ladon sleyes, and Pheretus, and Domodocus quite,
Strimonius righthand eke he soon strikes of, with sword full bright
Raught to his throat, and Thoas face he batters with a stone,
And goary bloody brains together dasshes with the bone.
The father tellyng things to come: in woods Halesus hid.
But when to ancient sier, cold death his hoary eyes undid:
Destnies.
The destnies hands laid on his twine, and him bequeathed they
Unto Euanders arms, whom Pallas, meetyng: first does pray.
Grant, father Tyber to this Dart, which here in hand I rest,
Goodfortune, and a ready way into Halesus breast.
This armor, and the spoils of this the man thine Oak shall have.
Covetousness cast him a way.
The god did grant. Halesus whilst Imaons spoils would save:
Unhappily his bared breast yields to Archadian steel.
But Lausus, at so worthy man's death suffers nere adeele
His ranks to fear, him self the greatest part of war, and right
Against him Abas sleyes, the force, and stay of all the fight.
Down falls the Arcadian brood to ground, Hetruscan youth is slain,
And you O Trojans of the Greeks unhurt, there take your bayne.
The ranks together run, with captains match, and equal might,
The rerwards fast approach, so that the thronge in midst of fight
Ne weapons weld, Compartson between Pallas, and Lausus
ne hand they can. Pallas fore urges here,
There Lausus, youths, that very much of semblant age appear,
Of passing beuty both, to whom fell fortune had denide
Their countries more to see, and Jove that all the world does guide
Would not consent that they together meet their force to try.
But unto each their chance remaynes throught greater foe to die.
Therwhile Iuturna fayer, Iuturna sister to Turnus.
her brother Turnus puts in mind
To rescue Lausus, he through mydst of routs flies swift as wynd.
When he beheld his mates: leave of from fight, he says, anon,
My self will Pallas match, for Pallas unto me alone
Belongs: whose father present here I wish he were to view.
This says: his mates thus chargd, with speed themselves from field wtdrew
At Rutils quick departure thence, and charge so full of pride,
The youth much marueyling, stoond at Turnus stands, and eyes does glide
His mighty corpse upon, and sharply each thing he does behold
And thus replies unto the king with words, and courage bold.
Either I for princely spoils, will praise deserve, well wooune in fight:
Or for a noble death, my sier esteems of both aright.
Leave of thy threats. Thus said: he forth procee des amidst the plain,
A chilly cold the Archadians hearts do feel through every vain.
From charret Turnus leapes, and forth on foot he draws him nie.
Like as a Lion fierce, when on a mount he stands on hie,
And spies from far in fields a bull prepare him self to fight:
He thither hies, such was the look of Turnus coming, right.
Whom when he thinks within the reach of his darts cast to be:
Then Pallas first drew near, good fortunes aid at need to see,
Although in strength not match, and thus to lofty skies he sed.
By harbor of my fathers, and to thee stranger tables spread
Alcides, I thee pray, good fortune to my purpose give,
Half dead that he may see me of his armor him beriue,
And Turnus or he die behold me stoutely win the feeld.
Alcides heard the youth, and from his heart within does yield
A woeful grievous groan, and frust rate tears lets fall amayne.
Then Jove with freendly words his soonne recompforts thus again.
Each man's day stands prefixed, time short, and swift with curelesie bretch*
Is lotted all man kind, but by their deeds their fame to stretch:
That privilege virtue gyues. Under the loftye walls of Troy
Full many soonnes of gods were sleyne, yea Sarpedons anoy,
My childs was there ywrought. Turnus likewise his desinies call,
And to his sixed term of granted life run forth he shall.
This much he said, and straight his eyes to Rutil fields down bends.
And Pallas then with mighty force an hugie spear forth sends,
And glittrings sturdie sword from hollow scabbard out does pull,
That flies, and where the armor on his shoulders rises, full
It lights, and passinge forth alonge on brym of bucklar bright:
At length it does on part of Turnus hugie body light.
Then Turnus, aiminge long in hand a dart of sturdy oak
Well typt with steel, at Pallas forth it flunge, and thus he spoke,
Lo, see if that our dart be sharper then thy weapon was.
He said: and through so many linings forgd of iron, and brass,
And through so many folds of hydes of bulls there laid about,
The whirlinge head through shield at one blow beats a passadge out.
And gorgets force throughgirds, and glides into his mighty breast.
In vain the warmed weapon he from the wound does quickly wrest,
For by the self same way both blood, and soul their passedge take.
He falls upon the wound, and armor fallinge noise does make,
And dying, Pa^llas is sleyne.
with his blooddy face falls on his enmies ground.
On whom thus Turnus sitting, says:
Ye Archades (quod he) these words see faithfully ye tell
Euander to, I send his sun as he deserves well.
What honor of the grave, what comfort is in burial most:
I grant, no little price Aeneas harbor him shall cost.
He said, and then anon his lift foot to the corpse he reight
Stark dead, and quickly pulles away his belt of hugie weight,
With this foul fact therein expressed, The story of Danaides that slew their
husbands. An admonition not to be puffed up in prosperity.
how on the weddyng night,
A troype of youths were sleyne, and beds embrued with blouddy spite.
Which good Eurytion did sometime engraue in massy gold.
This booty Turnus vaunts him of, and joys he does it hold.
Unskillful is man's mind of chance to come, and future fate,
And knows no mean to keep, once raysd a loft in happy state.
To Turnus time shall come, when he shall wish he dearly bought
That Pallas were untouched, these spoils, and very day in thought
Shall hate. His mates with woeful dole, and bitter tears him lay
Upon a shield, and Pallas thence they carry thick away.
O grief, and honor great that to the father will remain.
This day thee first braught to the wars, this took thee thence again.
Yet do thou leave behind thee hugie heaps of Rutils slain.
By this time had no vain report hereof, but trusty poast
In have unto Aeneas told, in what distress his host
Did stand, that time it was his vanquishst Trojans for to aid.
Each thing next down he mowes to ground, Aeneas waxes wood for the death of
Pallas,
and forth away he laid
Cut with his sword amid the ranks, thee Turnus proud to find
For slaughter new, Pallas, Euander eke he bears in mind,
And still in sight they stand, and tables which in gestred wise
He first approcht, and righthands given. And strait he there espies
Four valient youths at Sulmo borne, and four which vfens bred,
Whom thence he hales alive, and offers up unto the dead,
And burning bonefier flambes he all bedewes with captive blood.
At Mago next, when as a spear he threw a far that stood:
By stouping he escapes, the quiueryng spear forth flies his ways.
Then suppliant on the ground his knees embracing: thus he says.
Now by thy fathers ghosts, and by Iulus hope, I thee
Beseech preserve this wretched life both to my soune, and me.
An haultie house I have, wherein there lies deep hid in ground
Great sums of silver coynd, Aeneas is tempted with money but nothig could
appease him after that Pallas was sleyne.
of gold likewise full many a pound
Some fasshiond, and some not, in me ne Troyane conquest lie
Does not, my selly life can not so great adventures try.
He said, against whom Aeneas thus replies with words full fell.
These sums of silver, and of gold whereof thou late did tell:
Keep for thy children, Turnus first these customs took a way
Of war, when he erewhyles in cruellwyse did Pallas slaye,
This does Anchises soul, this does Iulus understand.
And speakinge thus, his helmet fast he roughly raught with hand,
And bended down his neck by force, and treatinge still for life:
Mago is fleyne.
Into his throat he thrust up to the hilte his fatal knyfe.
Not far, Aemonides, to Phoebus, and Diana priest,
Whose head with myter bownd, and sacred stoales was bravely dreest,
All glittringe in attire, and well beseene in armor fayer,
Whom meetinge: out the field does chase, and standinge on him there
Does offer up, and couers with his shade. Serestus takes
The armor up, thereof to thee a monument, Mars, he makes.
The ranks do then restore sproonge forth of Vulcanus noble seed:
Sir Coeculus, and Vmbro, that came from Marsi hills indeed.
Ganst whom Aeneas stands in rage, and soon stricks of ground
Anxurus left arm and therewith falls to earth his bucklar round.
The same some lofty words had spoken, and those he firmly thaught
In time should take effect, his mind perhaps to heaven he raught.
And promyst to him self hoare hears, and race of many years.
Sir Tarquitus on the other side, that brave in arms appears,
Whom Driope Nimphe sumtyme had borne to Faunus siluane god,
With him thus raginge meets, who with his lance in length full od:
His breastplate, and his shield of hugie weight he breaks in twain,
And strait his head, that now begins to pray, but all in vain
He swappes to earth, and down to ground the corpse yet warm he kest,
Whereon he stoutly stood, and thus he spoke with hateful breast.
O terrible now lie there, thy noble mother shall not have
Thy corpse for to entumbe, or lay thy bones in native grave.
To fowls thou shall be left, or surginge sea shall bear away
Thee to the hungry fish, a very sweet, and deyntie pray.
Antaeus, and sir Lycas eke, king Turnus vowards, he
Pursues strait, with Numa strong, and brown Camertes thee
Of valient Volscens borne, most rytch of ground in Latin land
Of all that were, Amycli, men of few words.
and whist Amicles scepter held in hand.
Like as Briareus, who an hundred arms had, as men say,
And eke an hundred hands, and fifty mouths wherewith always
Fire from his breast he spet, when Jove against him lightninge threw,
So many bucklars up he held, so many swords he drew.
None otherwise Aeneas conqueror chafes the field about,
When once his sword wart warm, but lo against Niphoeus stout,
His charret horse against, and eke his breast his course he took.
But when the horse espied him coming far with egre look:
For fear they do retire, and foundringe backward down full sore
They throw their lord to grownd, and draw the charret to the shore.
In charret drawn with milkewhite steds comes ridinge in that tide
Sir Lucagus, with Liger that his brothers horse does guide.
There Lucagus full fierce his naked sword about does glyde.
Aeneas then no longer could their frantic rage forbear,
But to them hies, and up in sight he holds an hugie spear.
To whom thus Liger speaks:
Not Diomedes horse, not yet Achilles charret here
Thou seist, nor Troyan fields, now end of war, and life so dear
Thou in this land shall find. These Bedlem words of Ligers joy
Abroad fly forth at large, howbeit the noble prince of Troy,
Means not with words to wage but forth a dart at him he kest,
As Lucagus down stoupes to fetch his stroke with weapon pressed,
And forth his horse does beat, and liftfoote quickly puttinge out
Prepares him self to fight: the lance by thutmost brim about
Of glittring shield slydes by, and way into his flancke it found.
He beaten from his charret falls half dead unto the ground.
To whom then good Aeneas prince with bitter language says.
O Lucagus, no slow flight it is of horse that thee betrays,
Ne yet no ghost, nor dreadful shape of foes enforst thee fly.
For thou thy self thy charret lefts, downeleapinge from onhye.
This said: the charret raygnes he takes, the other brother cries,
And holdinge up his hands on earth fallen from the charret lies.
Now by thy self, and parents which thee bred so worthy a wight,
Sir Troyan spare my life (I pray) from dreadful deaths despite.
And praynge more, Aeneas thus replies. Such words of late
Thou did not speak, now die, and part take of thy brothers fate.
The harbor of his soul, his breast forthwith he perst with blade.
And many a valient slaughter more about the field he made,
The Trojan duke when here, and there he ran in furiouswyse,
Much like a rumminge stream, or when a whirlewind black does rise.
Ascanius young at length comes forth abroad into the plain,
With all the youth, and tents they leave that were beseydge in vain.
Then Jupiter therwhiles, Jupiter to Juno.
to Juno speakinge thus he bows.
O sister mine, and eke the same to me most louinge spouse.
As thou did think, dame Venus (for deceaud thou art not sure)
The Troyans wealth sustaynes, else wars they might not thus endure.
In hands no force, in hearts no might they have, no pains abide
They could, unless sum heavenly wight did them support, and guide.
To whom thus Juno lowly then, most fayerest lord, Iunos reply
and king,
Why do thou grieve me still, and aye with words great dreadynge bring?
Such force in love as I have had of yore, or ought to have
If now I had: thou shuldst not stick to grant that I do crave,
Omnipotent since thou art, both Turnus now from fight to take,
And him for ever salf to ancient Daunus sier to make.
Howbeyt now let him dye, and yield his blood to Troyans hands.
Yet in direct descent of kind of gods he rightly stands.
Pilumnus fouerth is from his syer, thy temples largly he
With gifts adorned has, which furnysht well with presents be.
To whom Olimpus heavenly king again does breefly speak.
If stay of present death, or time for mortal youth you seek,
Which so you think I may determe: take Turnus then away,
And do by flight, his dangers pressed which destnies threat, delay.
So long I am content he live, but if you farther crave,
By subtle treaty sure redress of all this war to have,
Or that the fates may altered be: your hope is spent in vain.
To whom the Juno whininge ripe. In word which you ne dayne,
What if you that in heart would grant, and Turnus life prolonge?
But giltlesse now an heavy end him bides, or would I wrong
Did judge, and O with neadlesse fear I were deceived quyte,
And thou which can: these things a new woldst turn to better ryte.
When she these words had spoken, Juno lady of storms and clouds
from heave on hie she down desce^ds.
And with her bringes a winter storm, and clouds about her bends.
And to the Troyan host, and Laurent tents she fast does hie.
And there an hollow cloud, a forcelesse shadow, by and by,
Much like Aeneas shape (a thing most strange, and rare to see)
Even so all those against whom Mezentius has just cause of ire.
None has the heart in equal fight to meet him hand to hand,
But throwinge darts, and raisinge hugie noise aloof they stand.
He fearlesse looks about, and doubts whichway his course to make,
And gnasshes with his teeth, and on his back their darts does take.
From ancient coasts of Coritus, a Graetian Acron hight
There came, who promised wife, and weddinge had forsane by flight.
Whom when Mezentius sees, amyd the ranks move stur, and strife:
In purple plumes full brave, and scarlet weed of promised wife.
Like as an hungry lion, about the forest rownd does praunce,
(So hunger mad constraines) if he a rowebuck swift by chance,
Or else as Sore may find, whose tender horns begin to rise:
He rampes for joy, and wide he gapes, and up his brestles flies,
And falls upon him cloase, and strait he bathes in goary blood
His gready jaws:
Mezentius so him hies against his foes in hasty mood.
Unhappy Acron falls to ground, and earth with heels does beat,
Whilst up he yelds the ghost, and spear not broken with blood does weate.
Ne sir Orodes would he dayne, that thence apace did fly
To cast to ground, ne at his back his tremblinge dart to wrie.
But full in face him meets, and man for man with him does fight,
Inferior in deceat, but not in deeds of martial might.
On him then prostrate on the earth both settinge foot, and spear,
Of war no portion small, lo tall Orodes lies there.
His mates again a dubled sound sendforth with joyful heart,
He diynge speaks: sure vnreuengd my death what ever you art,
Thou shall not find, ne long enjoy, like destnies thee do call,
And where I lie, these very fields shall see thy fatal fall.
To whom Mezentius smilinge, mirt with anger, answered then.
Thou now shall die, as touching me: the father of gods, and men.
Look he to that, and with that word the spear from corpse he drew.
Unto his eyes does bitter rest, and deadly sleep ensue,
With aye continuing night, and never more the day to view.
Then Caedicus sir Alcathous sleies, Hidaspes eke at length
Is by Sacrator sleyne, Parthenius eke by Rapo, in strength
Right rough likewise sir Orses, and Messapus reeues of breath,
Sir Clonius strong, Ericates Lycaonius sendes to death.
Who now by fall offrantike jade lies on the ground, the same
A footeman him now sieyes on foot, and who from Argos came
Sir Lycius, him against of grandsiers force not frustrate quight:
Brave Valerus down does throw, sir Sale Antronius killes in fight.
And him Nealces sleyes in castyng darts of noble skill,
And could from very far strike with an arrow what he will.
The grievous fight like sorrows now, and mutual deaths had wraught,
Each others slew, and they them selves were soon to slaughter braught,
Both conquerours and the conquered sort, ne these will fly, ne they.
The Gods from Jove's supernall house their bootlesse wrath do way,
And pity on both parts takes, and on poor mortals heavy plight.
On th'oneside Venus fayer looks down, on the other Juno bright
And pale Tisiphone frets, and fumes in thickst amid the fight.
Tisiphone which signifies desire of revenge.
Mezentius fierce a mighty dart then shaking in his hand,
Comes fliyng to the field, much like Orion great from land
When he on foot through midst of deepest seas, and surges walks,
And cuts a way through lakes, and to the shoulders in waters stalks.
Or when an ancient Oak from highest hills he home does fetch,
And walkyng on the ground his lofty head the clouds does retch.
Even so Mezentius fierce in monstrous armor in comes he.
Aeneas straight when him within the ranks afar does see:
Prepares against to go, but he awhit not dreadyng stays,
Until his foe approach, his mighty corpse he there does pays.
And measuryng with his eye the space how far his dart could glide:
This righthande this of mine, and fliyng lance which here I guide,
Be happy God to me I pray, and here a vow I make,
The spoils which now from of the corpse of this same thief I take:
Thou for a monument, Lausus, shall enjoy, he said, a lance
Then straight casts forth, that flies, and from Aeneas shield does glau^ce,
And worthy Anthor struck, and twixt his ribs and guts it went.
Anthor to sir Alcides mate, that was from Argos sent,
And to Euander claue, and ancient Itayle town possessed:
With others wound vnhaply falls, and face to heaven he kest,
And yielding up the ghost, sweet Argos often does call to mind.
Aeneas then a dart does cast, that flies as swift as wind.
And where the hollow bosse about with threefold plates of bras,
With linen linings, and with threefold playtes of bulleshide, was
Well linde: the whirling dart through flies, and in his flank does light,
No force might it withstand. He gladly draws his fauchon bright
That hunge down by his side, when Tyrrhen blood he does epsy.
And to him trembling al in rage he quickly draws nie.
Then Lausus for his fathers chance does moan in piteouswise,
When he the deed beheld, and plenty tears ran down his eyes.
This hateful hap of death, and eke those valient factes of thine,
(If later Time thereto to credit give do not repyne:)
Thy passing deeds, O noble Youth, in silence shall not lie.
Mezentius hurt retires, and back unwieldy fast does hye,
And with his shield his enmies spear also with him he drew.
Forth Lausus sprang, and strayt him self amid the weapons threw.
The sun came to rescue the father.
And now his righthand up he cast, his mighty stroke he fet:
When under Aeneas sword he comes, and it with stay does let.
Their mates with mighty noise, and shout, this worthy deed pursue.
And hid with Lausus shield the father him self from thence withdrue.
And darts they thick do throw, and foes from far provoke to fight.
Aeneas ragyng frets, and shields him self with bucklar bright.
And like as when a cloud, fulfraught with hayle to ground does fall,
The ploughmen do from out the fields with speed convey them all,
The husbandmen thence hie, the wayfaryng man some harbor takes:
A rivers bancke, or hollow stony cliffe his succor makes,
Whilst down it poweres, that when the Sun returns again to sight:
To woonted traueill fall, and labor lately left they might.
So stands Aeneas still, with weapons on each side oppressed,
On him whilst that this cloud of war, and ragyng all does rest.
And Lausus then begins to check, and Lausus thus to threat.
Whether desperate runst? and do attempt things for thy power to great?
This foolish love of thine has thee unskillful quite forlorn.
And he likewise on thotherside, no less does brag, and skorne.
Unto the Troyan prince great fury now in breast does reign,
And destnies had the vital thread of Lausus cut in twain.
For through his bulck Aeneas soon his mighty fauchon drove,
And hid it in him whole, his shield, and all his armor claue,
His coat also his mother which of soft fine gold had knit,
And filled his bosom full of blood, his life away does flit,
And sorrowful to the souls does have, and body leaves behind.
Aeneas pitieth him, for he (...) Anchi^ (...).
But when he saw his face which now to ghastly death resignid,
His face which pale in wondrous sort did look: he woeful stands,
And pitifully bewayles, and up with grief does cast his hands.
The semblant deape of fathers love comes eft into his mind.
What praises due o youth, shall I for these thy merits find?
What may Aeneas work so worthy a nature to requyte?
Thine armor keep, wherein always thou tookest thy most delight.
Thy soul unto thy grandsiers gosts, thine ashes to the grave
I send, if that thy friends hereof a due reguard will have.
More honorable to be sleyne by a noble conqueror.
This onethinge yet a comfort to thy doleful death shall be,
That great Aeneas thee has sleine. His fellows staggringe he
Much blames, and up the corpse he liftes, begoaring all with blood
The curious kembed locks, as then the finest facion stood.
Therwhiles his father on the banck of Tyber noble flood.
His wounds with water wipes, and feeble body there does rest
Against a bending tree, his brazen helmet, and his creast:
Far of hanges on a bough, his armor great lies on the grass,
And chosen youths about him stand, he pantes for breath, and as
He feeble was, his neck does ease, his beard hangs down on breast.
And much on Lausus he enquires, his mind can take no rest,
And many forth unto him sendes from fight him to recall,
And of his fathers careful heart him to inform withal.
Then Lausus dead his mates bring home with grief and dubled pain.
Lamentinge sore so mighty a man, so mighty a wound had slain.
The mind that mischief did abode, his sun afar did know.
Mezentius lamentatio^ for Lausus death.
His hoarye hears with filthy dust he daubes, and up does throw
Both hands unto the heavens, and fast unto the corpse does cleave.
O sun, had I such lust here still to live, ne life to leave,
That I should thee to cruel enmies rage objected see,
Whom I begat? and with thy blood preserved alive to be,
Thus living by the death? To me poor wretch does naught remain,
Save exile sharp, a bitter wound my woeful heart has slain.
And I (my sun) thy noble name with foul reproach have staind,
Pulst forth through spyte from princely throne, and place where father raind:
Due punishment have well deseerud, at countries hands to dye
All kinds of death, which (but to gloss) I cannot sure deny.
Howbeit, as yet, I live, ne men, ne light I do forsake,
But shorty so will do, and with that word: he does betake
Him to his wounded thigh, whereon he stands in painful case.
The deaply stricken wound does cause him much to slack his pace.
But naught in courage quaild for steed he calls, his only stay,
And only comfort still that was, whereby he went away
He speaks to his horse.
Still conqueror from the field, and to his steed began to cast.
O Rhoebus, long (if ought to mortal men be long at all)
We lived have, this day with blouddy spoils return again:
Or with Aeneas head thou shall, and so of Lausus pain
Revenger be with me, or else if force no way can find:
With me together shall be slain, since thou of valient kind,
Can not abide (I think) a strange, or Trojan lord to know.
This said: upon the woonted back himself he does bestow.
And each hand strayt he arms with deadly dart, and pearsing spear.
The brazen helmet glittryng shines, and creast of horses hear,
And swift he thronges into the thickst, great shame heart does freat
Deep lodgde within, and madness mixed in breast with sorrow great,
And love incenst with rage, and privy touch of enmies might.
Then thrice Aeneas there with mighty noise he calls to fight.
Aeneas knew his voice, and glad in mind began to pray.
The king of Gods, Apollo eke do grant thou say not nay,
To deal with me in fight.
This much he said, and with an hugie spear him straight does meet.
To whom then he, O cruel wretch with threats why do thou greet,
Since thou my Sun have slain? this was the next, and only way
For thee to frame my fatal fall, and weaue my last decay.
No love to loathsome light I bear, for life I do not care,
He regards not the gods.
Nor is there any of the Gods whom I regard, or spare.
Leave of, I come to die, but first this gift to thee I bring.
He said: and strait a quiueryng dart against his foe does flynge.
Then forth another, and then another he throws, and round does ride
A mighty race, the golden shield can well their force abide.
And thrice the Carrire round about him standing in the field
In castyng forth his darts he rode, the Trojan lord his shield
Thrice carries round, with cruel wood of darts quite ouerspred.
But when he shames so long to stay, so many a sticking head
For he on foot, faught against an horsman. Mezentius falieth.
To pull away, and need compelles unequal fight to try,
And foes incensed rage, aye bent to blood, and death does spy,
Much castyng in his mind: at last breaks forth, and does enforce
A dart into the hollow temples of the warlike horse.
Vpstandes the steed on end, and beats the aier his heels withal,
Then down he tumblyng comes, and faultryng on the man does fall.
He grouelinge on his face with shoulder wrest from joint there lies.
The Troyans, and the Latins eke with clamor touch the skies.
Aeneas fliynge comes, and from the sheath his blade draws out,
And this with all he speaks. Where Is now (I pray) Mezentius stout?
Where now that cruel force of mind, and courage bold in fight?
To whom Mezentius, when he larger breath, and heavens sight
Had drawn, and daunted sprites began refresshed well to be:
O bitter foe, why bragst thou thus, and threatnest death to me?
By slaughter is no wrong ywrought, ne came I so to fight,
Ne did for me my Lausus dear such league, or bargeine smite.
This one thing I request, of lords if vassayles grace may crave,
My body let entombed be, I wot my subjects have
Great hatred me against, their rage defend from me away,
And do vouchsaufe in one self grave, my sun, and me to lay.
He spoke: and strait the sword aduisde into his throat receaues,
And gushinge goary blood the life amid his armor leaves.
DEO GRATIAS.
Inchoatum per Thomam Phaer,
finitum Londini per Thomam, Twynum.
23. Maij. 1573. Opus 7. dierum per interualla.
The eleventh book of the Aeneidos of Virgil.
The Argument.
Conqueror Aeneas sets up a monument to Mars for Mezentius slain. Pallas
corpse is with great pomp sent to Euanders town. Ambassadors are sent from
Latinus, to entreat for truce of twelve days, during which time they yield the
duty of sepulture to their dead, on both parts. And thiswhile Venulus that
was sent at the beginning of the war, to require aid of Diomedes: returns
with denial. Then Latinus destitute of hope calls a counsel, and consulteth
to send Ambassadors to Aeneas with conditions of peace. Drances, and Turnus
upon ancient hatred inueigh one at the other. Therwhiles Aeneas dividing his
army in twain: sends his lighthorsemen before directly to the town: And he
himself, with the rest of his power, marches through woods, and over hills
toward the hiest part of the town, which being once known within
Laurentum town, they leave the counsel, and prepare such things as are
necessary for resistance. Then Turnus understanding Aeneas intent: by spies,
deuideth likewise his power in twain, and gives Messapus, and Camilla charge
of the horsemen. Himself takes the straytes, wherethrough Aeneas must needs
pass to the town, and there lies in ambush. The horsemen on both sides
meet, and the victory is a great while uncertain. There Camilla after many
slaughters, whilst unawarely she pursues Cloreus Cybeles priest, moved thereto
by ye beutie of his armor: is by Aruns strok through with a dart. Whose death
nevertheless Aruns bare not unrevenged. For not long after he was stroke
through likewise with an arrow, by Opis, a Nimphe of Dianas train. The
Rutilians dismayde at Camillas death: commit them selves to flight, the Trojans
prepare to besiedge the town. These heavy tidings being told by Acca,
Camillas mate unto Turnus: leauyng the ambush he hastneth to come succor his
men. Aeneas follows after, and because the night drawinge on, they could not
fight: both pitche their Tents before the town.

THe dawning day thiswhile, ye Ocean sea had clearly left.
Aeneas though some Time on those whom wars of lives had reft,
Care over the dead, the part of a noble
His care constraines him to employ, their graves for to prepare,
Captain and of a good man.
And now his mind, and senses all on funerals fixed are:
To gods yet nathelesse, at risinge of the morninge gray,
For conquest great obtaind, his vows, and service due does pay.
A mighty Oak, whose boughs were quyte shread of from every side,
Upon an hill he se^s, and armor brave thereon he tide,
The duke Mezentius spoils, a monument mighty Mars for thee.
And fittes thereto his creastes, which yet with goare blood droppinge be,
And truncheons burst of spears, his brestplate in twelve places smyt,
And in so many thrust through, and bucklar bright of brass does fyt
To his lefthand, his blade with Iuerie trimd hunge down his nick.
Then there his mates (for all the troop of lords about him thick
There stood) reioycinge he exhortes and thus to them began say.
A mighty deed we ended have, all fear expel away.
Here now remain the spoils, and hansell of the hautie king.
Mezentius lo here lies, whom to his death these hands did bring.
Next go unto the king we must, and to Laurentum wall.
Cheer up your hearts to fight, and hope the war will happily fall.
Let lingringe none unawares, so soon as ensigns we assay
At Gods commaundment to remove, and youth from tents convey:
Us hindre, or else fear from purposd fact us hartlesse stay.
Therwhiles our mates, and bodies which unburied lie: to grave
Let us betake, this only due, departed souls do crave.
And go (quod he) these worthy wightes which with their blood, this land
For you have bought: with last rewards do honor out of hand.
And to Euanders sorrowful town let Pallas first be sent.
Whom not deuoid of courage stout, myshap his life has rent,
A dire, and dismold day has drencht full deep in deadly lake.
These things he weepinge spoke, and forth his way to place does take
Where Pallas body dead Acetes autient fire did tend,
That was Euanders parge in youth, but not unto the end
With like goodluck allotted was companion to his sun.
About him servants all the rout, and troops of Trojans run,
And doleful dames of Troy, with hear of custom quite untrust.
So soon as into lofty doors him self Aeneas thrust:
A mighty skritch they raise unto the skies, Aeneas lamentation at the sight of
dead Pallas.
and breasts they beat.
Wity woeful cries, and plaintes resoundes again the pallaice great.
But when he saw the head of Pallas faier held up, his face,
And wound in breast so smooth, broad gapinge open a mighty space,
Which Turnus lance had made: the tricklinge tears ra^ down his eyes.
O wretched lad (quod he) when lucky fortune began to rise,
Envied she thee to me? that thou our kingdom shuldst not se,
Nor yet unto thy fathers coasts as conqueror borne to be?
Not I this promise to Euander king thy sier did make,
When him I parted fro, and me in folded arms did take.
And to a mighty reign me sent, and warnd me what might fall,
The men were fierce, the nation hard that I should fight with all.
And now deceived much with frustrate hope, and vain desire,
Perhaps he prayers makes, and altars heaps with blood, and fire.
This youth now dead, and to no heavenly power beholdinge, we
With heavy hearts do honors give that naught auailinge be.
Unhappy man, thy dear suns woeful burial shall behold.
These are our glad returns, and triumphs after wars so bold,
This is the trust in me repoasd, yet sure thou shall not se
With shameful dastard wounds thy sun (Euander) sleyne to be.
Ne wish him dead whilst he did live, O grief, and sorrow most,
How great astay Ausonia, and Iulus have thou lost?
A notable description of a warlyke burial as is either of a captain, or some
noble man.
When he for all thease things had wept his fill, the corpse a non
He biddes them up to take, out of his army many a one,
A thousand men in tale does choose the funeral pomp to guide,
And present be at fathers tears, some comfort to provide,
Though small in his so great a grief, which woeful fathers take.
Some hurdles thick with force do frame, some do the coffin make
Of tender twisted twigges of trees, and slendre slyppes of oak.
And on those builded beds, with boughs thick shadows do provoke.
Hereon the lad aloft on wad of country straw they lay.
Much like a flower which virgins thombe from stalk has nipt away,
Whether it be tender violet, or languishinge daffadill white,
Whose glittringe hue not yet is gone, nor passinge beutie bright,
Though mother Tellus yield no sap, and strength is vaded quite.
Two mantels then with purple fine, and gold that stiff did stand:
Aeneas forth did bring, which once Queen Dido her one hand
In happy state for him had made, with web of gold full small.
The one of these upon the youth for honor last of all
He puts on, and locks that shall be burnt therewith does hyde.
And many a worthy spoil reseerud since Laurent war beside,
He heaps thereon, and biddes the spoils be borne in long array.
And horse, and weapons adds, which from his foes he took away.
And certain captives bound for sacrafice therewith he sent
Unto thinfernall gods, whose blood the fires should all besprent.
And truncheons great of spears, with armor taken from foes thereon,
The capteynes biddes to bear, with foes names fastened thereupon.
There goes Acetes sad (good man) with store of years oppressed,
His face eft manglinge with his nails, eft bounsing of his breast
With faintnes down he falls, and corpse alonge on earth does rest.
And charrets also forth they lead, embrued with Rutil blood.
Aeton Pallas steed.
Then Aethon next, his courser fayer, bereeud of trappings stood,
And after weepinge comes, and weates his face with mighty tears.
Some bears his spear, his helmet some, the resdue Turnus wears
Since him he slew, the sorrowful bands of Troyans do ensue,
And Tyrrhen capteynes, the Archads eke, with weapons turned ascue.
But when this goodly train afar, was marched on the way:
There still Aeneas stood, and moorninge wise these words did say.
The selfsame woeful chance of war, does us from hence withcall,
Of many another valient youth to wayle the woeful fall.
For evermore alhayle, for ever, Pallas, now adieu.
He said no more, but to the walls his steps he strayt withdrue.
And now Ambassadors were sent from Latin town so great,
With branch of Olive bough in hand, for license to entreat.
Such bodies as lay dead in fields, with mortal wounds oppressed
For to require, that they in graves might take their final rest.
Against conquered wightes, and wantinge breath, no fight remaynes at all.
His hosts that he would dayne to spare, whom fathers he once did call.
To whom then good Aeneas, since but just, and rightful they
Did ask: does license grant, and more unto them thus does say.
What fortune foul, O Latins, has you to such wars betake,
In such a rash, and foolish sort our freendship to forsake?
And do you leave, and license now for men departed crave?
Whom I do wysh, that when they lieud, the same should rather have.
Ne had I come, but destnies here a place for us did choose,
Ne do I against your nation fight. Your king did me refuse
To enterteyne, and rather claue unto king Turnus might.
For whom more equal it had been to try this deaths despite.
If that with hand this war to end, and Troyans hence to shooue
He do prepare, it better were in arms with me to prove.
Then he should live whom gods, his life, or his righthand would spar^.
But now depart, and for your peoples burials do prepare.
These word Aeneas spoke. They stood astoond, and nothing said.
And each on other glauncinge often their eyes, Drances was great enemy to Turnus.
their mouths they staid.
The auntienst then that Drances hight, for crime, and just desert
With Turnus that offended was, his words thus began impart.
O peerlesse prince of great renown, in arms of greater fame,
How shall I show thy praise, or to the gods compare the same?
Thy laud for Justice shall we first, or martial feats admire?
These things unto our city we will show with great desire.
And thee unto Latinus king, if fortune grant, will join,
Let Turnus in some other place for leagues anew purloyne.
Moreover, and the hugie moles of fatal walls to rear
We shall be glad, and to that work on shoulders stones to bear.
He ended had, with one consent the same they all allow.
And for twelve days they Truce do take, and peace a space do vow.
The Troyans, and the Latins mixed in woods do wandre free,
And rownd on tops of hills they rome, and holtes full huge that be.
And here with stroke of mighty are the brittle ash does sownd.
There lofty Pynes that touch the stars, are thrown unto the grownd.
The mighty oaks, and Ceders smellinge soote the wedges tear,
And sturdie Carts do crack, full heavy laden them home that bear.
And now the fliynge fame of so great grief, Report of Pallas death comes to
Euander, and his town.
and tidings ill:
Euander woeful man, his house, and all his town does fill,
That Pallas was in Latium late a coquerour, did report.
The Archadians run unto the gates, as is their wonted sort:
They funeral brondes do bear, the ways alonge echwhere do sheene
With ranks of flambinge fires, and seuerals make the fields between.
The Troyan rout approchinge fast do join their woeful lay.
Whom when the ancient Dames perceaud to pallaice take their way:
With woeful cries, and piteous shoutes the town they do repleat.
No force Euander then can stay, Euanders woeful lamentation for his sun.
nor reason him entreat.
But forth into the thickst he thronges, and down him self does lay
Upon the bear where Pallas was, and there does weepinge stay,
And scarce unto his speech with much ado could open the way.
Did not, O Pallas, thou to me thy sier this promise make,
That charely thou woldst thy self to cruel war betake?
I knew rightwell the novel pride, and glory first in fight,
And pleasant honor wunne in arms: how much preueyle it might.
O hard beginnings to lad, and sorrowful martial train,
My sacrafice, and prayers fond to gods powrdforth in vain.
And O most holly wife and Queen, by death thryse happy thee,
That have not lyeud unto this day, this wretched sight to see.
But I by saying this, my fatal term have passed quite,
That father yet remayn alive, and see this woeful sight.
More meet had been the Troyan arms I followed had in feeld,
And ouerwhelmd with Rutil darts, my life to death had yield.
And only me this noble pomp, not Pallas home should bring.
Ne should I you, O Troyans, blame, your league, ne yet the thing,
Which we with righthandes given on both parts swore, when in my ground
Most faithful harbor, and in court you incertaynment found.
This chance unto mine elder years, I see, allotted was.
But since my sun by death untimely from this life must pas:
He is glad of revenge.
I comfort take, the Troyans since to Latium in he braught,
So many thousand Volscans sleine, his fatal end he caught.
Nor other funeral rytes shall thou, sun Pallas, get of me,
Then good Aeneas, Phrygians eke, and Tyrrhenes give to thee.
Great monumentes they bring, of such as died by thy righthand.
And thou likewise, a mighty corpse now dead in arms shuldst stand,
If match had been his age, and equal years like strength to thine
Had, Turnus, made: so much thereat I should not then repine.
But why do I you Troyans now so long from battle stay?
Depart, and to Aeneas king from me this messadge say.
That I this loathsome life endure, since Pallas now is dead:
Thy righthand is the cause, which to the fathers hoarie head,
And to the sun does Turnus owe, herin thou may deserve
Alonly well of me, and prove thy chance. Not to preserve
The joys of life I seek, ne does mine age the same requier.
But to the ghostes below to bear those news is my desire.
The morninge had therwhiles to mortal men restord again
The cheerful day, that naught to them but traueiles bringes, and pain.
The custom of burninge the dead in eld time.
Aeneas then, and Tarchon joint, the crooked shore alonge
Great bonefiers build, the bodies thither of all their friends, the thronge
As countries custom biddes do bring, and fire therunder make.
The lofty heaven anon with thick and smutchy smoke looks blake.
And thryse about the burninge fires they ran in armor bright.
And thryse on horsback rode about the fires with hollowinge rite.
And woeful waylinges forth did send, and tears letfall amayne,
Upon their weapons, and upon their harneis like the rain.
The cry of men to heaven ascendes, and ratlinge Trompetes sound.
And some the spoils of such as there lay sleyne of Latin ground:
Their helmets fayer into the fire, and guilden swords they threw,
And bridles brave, and charret wheels yet warm, and some they knew,
By others are cast in, their shields and weapons void of luck.
And many an ox thernigh, they done to death, and thither pluck,
And many a brestled Boar, and cattayle store the fields throughout:
They sley and flinge them in the flames, then all the shore about
Their fellows burninge they behold, and bones half brent do keep,
And scarce from thence can be withdrawn, til moystie night that sleep
Prouokes, the heaven inturnd, and whole with stars replenisht had.
Now on the otherside in semblant sort, the Latins sad
Innumerable bonefiers built, and many a body they
In graves deape digd bestow, and many a corpse they send a way
To neighbors nigh at hand, and to Lauinium town again.
The resdue, and the hugie heap, of such as there lay slain,
Both numbrelesse, and honourlesse they burn, the fields full wide
With plenty flaminge fires, bright shininge show on every side.
The third day had from heaven nights chyllie shade expeld away,
When heauelie the Ashes heaps which there confused lay:
In vrnal pottes they put, They buried the ashes in pots called, Vrnae.
and smoultringe mould theren do flinge.
And now within the walls, and town of rich Latinus king,
The greatest noise was heard, and far the wurst, and wofulst cheer,
Of mothers, and suns wives, mixed with the plaints of sisters dear.
And babes bereft of fathers sweet, this cruel war detest,
And Turnus promised spousals, that it was he above the rest
That was in battle sought, that he his force must try in fight,
That for Italia scepter seeks, and honor due of right.
These things good ancient Drances fiercely tells, and record beeres
That Turnus it is alone, whom Troyan prince in fight requeeres.
With diverse things besides, which many against him did dispute.
Howbeit the coun^ance of the Queen does them at full refute.
Ambassadors return with o^t effect from Diomedes.
The fame of many monuments taken do much his name advance.
Then in these sturres, amyd this tumult hot, by woundrous chance:
Behold, from forth the mighty town of Diomedes king,
Ambassadors with answer do return, that they nothings
With so great trauail spent, with gifts, nor gold to end have brought,
Nor ernest prayers taken effect, new means there must be wrought,
Or of the Troyan prince some league of peace there must be sought.
With sorrow great in soundings then down falls Latinus King.
And that Aeneas Destnies there, and power of gods did bring:
The wrath of gods there shows, and graves fresh digd before his face.
The manner of calling to a princes parliament.
Wherefore assembly great, and nobles all to come in place
By wrytes he warnes, and to his princelye house does them transport.
They all do meet, and to the place each way they thick resort.
Latinus then in mydst amongst them all, of auntienst years,
With careful countnance sittes, and chief in hand his scepter bears.
The legates then, that from Aetola town with answer came,
He biddes declare their charge, and orderly requires the same.
When whust was once proclaimd, and men were bid not silence break:
Sir Venulus with duty due, thus then began to speak.
The Ambassadors answer.
We Diomede, O citizens, and Argiue tents have seen,
And dangers all we passed have which in that Journey been.
And we that hand have touched whereby proud Troy to ground did fall.
His town he by name of the soil hight Argyripe, does call.
Which there he conqueror built, in Garganus Iapix land.
When in we came, and leave was given to speak where we did stand:
Our presents up we yield, our names, and country we declare,
Who war on us have made, and why to Arpos come we are.
When he our message heard: with calmed speech these words began say.
O happy nations, where Saturnus king sometime bare sway,
Ausonians ancient eke, when you your lives in quiet lead,
What fortune causd you then the paths to straungie wars to tread?
So many of us all, as Troyan fields with war did foil,
(Such things I pass, as underneath the walls with woeful toil
Were done, and whatkind men do under Simois water lie)
The same with woeful punishment throughout the wordle we bye.
And all of us great penance for that foul offense sustain.
Whom Priame, if he lived, now of pitye sure would dayne.
This does Mineruas cruel tempest tell, Euboia rocks,
And Caphareus reuenginge hill, and many deadly knockes
Against the shore, to diverse coasts when we dispersed were.
And Menelaus Atreus sun far hence is banysht, where
Done Proteus pyllers stand, to Ulysses: Cyclops all were known.
Neoptolems realm what shall I say, and cities overthrown?
Or else the Ozoly that dwell on shoore of Lybie land?
Yea Agamemnon king, chief leader of the Graetian band,
At first his cumminge home was by his spouse dispightfull slain.
So when he Troy had raisd: Aegisthus in his seat did raygne.
And shall I show the spyte of gods my self I did endure?
When home I came in hope to find my lady chaste, and sure
My city fayer that Calidona hight: Now monstrous sightes
Still conversant before mine eyes: my senses much affrightes.
For why? my mates which I have lost, the air with wings have raught.
And turned to fowls the floodes do haunt, Called Dio medes fowls, se Plini
lib. 10.
(O plagues that I am taught
To know of mine) and hollow cliffes with weepinge voices fill.
And since that time all other things I doubt, and fear as ill,
When like a bedlem beast, celestial wightes with steel I smit,
And into Venus hand a grievous wound did hastly hit.
Do not I pray, my friends, me to such battle ever call.
For never I since first great Troy down fell by fatal fall,
With Trojans would have ought to do, ne does it me delight,
When of these mischeeues I do think, though they be finished quite.
As for the presents which to me you bring from out your land:
Unto Aeneas bear them back, with whom we hand to hand
Or this have fought, and him against in open arms have stand.
Believe me that have tried, in shield with what force he does rise?
And with what deadly dint his mighty spear in fight he wries?
If that besides this man two other such Troy town had bred:
Them selves forth to Inachus town the Troyans sure had sped.
And Graetia with contrary fates should wayle her heavy plight.
For surely what soever stay was made in Troyan fight:
Through Hector, He compares Aeneas with Hector
and Aeneas hand the conquest still was stayed,
Whereby that war to term of ten years complete was delayed.
Of valient courage both, and both in arms of worthy might.
In godliness yet this excelled, do peace with righthandes smigth,
Whilst good occasion offered is, by all means do eschew
In war with him to wage, least haples hap do make you rue.
And thus sir king, the answer of that mighty prince you have,
And of this great, and woeful war the judgment that he gave.
Scarce had the legates done, when mumblynge mu^minge much does rise
A among the Latins all, as when great stones in semblaunt wise.
Some river swift do stay, the stream within does ratlinge sound,
And all the banks about with cracklinge noise again redound.
So soon as were their minds appeasd, and mouths at rest did stay:
The king to gods first praid, and from hie throne these words began say.
Before this time, O Latins, to determine of this case
More meet had bin, and I my self thereof desierous was.
And not thus at this present time, a counsel now to call,
When foes be fast at hand, and enmies rownd besiedge the wall.
A bootlesse war, O Citizens, with stock of gods we bear,
And with a man, whose valient force no wars could ever wear,
Nor weary once in fight, nor cause him leave though he were wunne.
If in Aetolian arms some hope to put you once begun,
Whom now for aid you call: henceforth see that reposed be
Echones hope in him self, which how small it is, you all do see.
For other things, how they on ground do lie with woeful fall
Before your face you see, and in your hands are daily all.
Nor do I any man accuse, echone has done his best.
The body whole of all the realm within this war was pressed.
And now at last what sentence in my doubtful mind does lie:
I mean to show, in few words (give ear) I will descrie.
There lies an ancient field to Tyber river near about,
Forth buttinge on the west, and to Sicilia stretchinge out.
Arunci, and Rutilians till the same, and hillockes smart
With ploughes they turn, and mountains sharp to pastures do conuart.
This region whole, and hilly coast with Pines that does abound:
Lets for the Troyan freendshippe give, and equal leagues compound.
And make them fellows in our land, and place unto them yield,
Since that so great desire they have, and cities let them bueeld.
But if to other coasts to cut, strange nations to assay
They do entend, and from our land they may depart away:
Twyse ten tall ships of Itail Oak lets build them by and by,
Or more, if so they need, the stuff by Tybers side does lie.
Let them the number point, and for their ships the fashion show:
And we the keeles, and workmanship, and tacklinges will bestow.
Morcouer these our words to tell, and leagues of truce to frame,
An hundred legates forth to send to them, in Latins name:
I think it best, Precious gifts of ye Romans,
and Olive boughs of peace in hands to hold,
And gifts of price to bear of Iuerie, with great sums of gold.
And kingly cloth of state, and mantel, badge of all our land.
To public wealth down torn almost, set to your helping hand.
Then Drances wroth, Drances oration.
whom secret hate of Turnus fame did prick
And fame of great exploites atchieud against him causd to kick.
In gooddes right rich, but more of toongue, in war of dastard mind,
But yet in sad, and counsel grave, not far the best behind,
Full fit sedicous seed to raise, whom mothers noble blood
With pride had pricked, but of his father uncertain still that stood:
Stands up, and him in words does blame, and aggrauates with ire.
A thing well known, and no man's help to show that does require,
Most mighty king you do persuade, and all do know full well
What thing the people most desire, but that they fear to tell.
But let him give me leave to speak, and pride lay down a side,
By whose unhap, and dealinges far from honest manners wide,
(For speak I will, though swords to me, and cruel death he threat)
So many valient captains died, and all this city great
With mourninge sittes amoapte, whilst Troyan tents he does assay,
Then takes him to his heels, and welkin winnes with arms to fray.
Among these many gifts to Troyans which you send, one thing
Do cause moreover likewise to be borne, O mighty king.
Let no mad rage of any man so much your mind peruart,
But that unto so worthy sun in law, you would impart
Your daughter bright in marriage, perpetual peace to make.
But if such fear of Turnus in your tremblinge breast do ache:
Lets him entreat, and ernestly to him then let us sue,
That to our king, and country he would yield that is their due.
Why do thou thus our citizens in doubtful danger bring
So often, thou of Latium plagues that art the only spring?
By war no sauftye sure we get, for peace we all do crave
At thy hands Turnus, and the maid Lauinia young to have.
And first my self, whom scarce (I know) thou think thy friend to be,
Nor care to be, for pity lo entreatinge come to thee.
Take pity on thy cuntreymen, lay down thy Peacockes train,
Depart, since thou art vanquished, to many bodies slain
We do already see, our broad wide fields forlorn do lie.
But if such great renown, or courage bold in breast on hie
Thou do conceive, or princess young thou do desire so:
Attempt him then, and with bold heart encounter with thy foe.
That Turnus may by means thereof enjoy a Queen to wife.
We sellie sotiles, unburied sort, and vnbewayled, rife
About the fields shall lie. And thou, if any force remain,
Or sparck of fathers valient virtue in thy breast: again
Look him in face that thee does call.
Turnus replye.
Hereat then Turnus all in rage does boil in burninge breast,
And gives a groan, and from his heart full deape these words does wrest.
Great sloare of talk is ready, Drances, evermore to thee,
When blooddy wars do hands require, and first in place to be
Thou will be sure, to parliament when Senators resort.
But still the court must not be filled with words, and vain report,
Which in abundance great from thee do fly, whilst city wall
Between thee, and thine enmye stands, nor ditches blood withal
Do flow about. Wherefore as is thy wunted guyse persist,
And thoundre out thy twatlinge talk, as long as thou shall list.
And do of fear me then accuse, when thy couragicus hand
So many heaps has sleyn of those that came from Ilium land.
And all the fields about with monumentes brave decked stand.
And there what can thy mighty manhcde do thou may assay.
And as for foes, we need not to go seek them far away,
For rownde the walls they do besiedge. Come on, and let us go,
And still through dastard cowardice continue not so sloe.
What? with thy pratlinge toongue alone thus always will thou fight?
And shall thy foolish feet be pressed always to shamfull flight?
Was I repulst? or is there any (wretched varlet) well
That can avouch the same? with Troyan blood when Tyber swell,
And all Euanders stock, and house to ruin brought to be,
And all the Archadian host, of arms, and force despoild shall see?
Not so did Bitias find in me, nor yet Pandarus fell.
Nor thousands, whom this righthand in one day sent down to hell,
When I was cloasd with walls, and hard with heaps of foes beset.
By war no sauftic shall we get? these vain devises let
Be boded to Aeneas head, and to thine own estate.
Nor cease not still to troble all with foolish fearful fate,
And to extol that nations force, that twice was woonne in fight.
On thotherside for to debase great king Latinus might.
And now the valient peers of Greece the Phrygian arms do dread.
Prince Diomede, and in Larrissa town Achilles bred.
Or else Aufidus river swift runs back unto his head.
See, this dissembler vile great fear does feyne for dread of me,
And aggreuates the crime that it might seem more big to be.
But never thou by me thy life shall lose, hold thee at rest,
Let that abide with thee, and still remain within thy breast.
And now I come to thee, and counsels great thou do disclose,
Most mighty prince, if in our strength no trust thou do repose,
If so we be forsane, and when our force is once subdued,
We quite away ben cast, and fortune cannot be renewed:
Then lets entreat for peace, and yeeldyng hands to him submit.
But, O, if any jot of woonted virtue bide as yet:
The same above the rest for happy pains, He speaks of Meze^tius.
and courage bold,
I will extol, who, cause he would no such thing once behold:
Himself did yield to death, and with his teeth did tear the ground.
But if some sparks remain, and youths vntwitcht may yet be found,
And freendly towns in Italy, and peoples main of might.
But if to Trojans fall with loss of blood, the price of fight,
And equal slaughter they sustain, and like luck them attaynt:
Why should we thus like dastardes vile, at first beginning faint?
And fear before we do begin to fight, does us appall?
Long tract of Time, Time, and Fortune.
and sundry happes, which in our life befall:
Change things to better state, and Fortune whom she did disgrace:
Often times again does raise, and prinkes him up in prouder place.
Though Diomede, Arpenses eke to us no help will bring,
Messapus will, and happy prince in war Tolumnius king.
And Dukes from many nations sent, nor it is no simple praise
The mighty mustars taken through Latium land are like to raise.
And from the noble Volscan blouddes the maid Camilla hight,
A troop of horsemen that conductes in brazen armor bright.
But if the Troyans me alone do seek for hand to hand,
And so you please, and publiqueweale so much I do withstand:
So conquest (as I trust) from these hands will not part away,
That any hazard for this hope I dread for to assay.
With courage gayntst him will I go, though he Achilles pas,
And wear like armor strong, that made by hand of Vulcan was.
This life, I Turnus, to you all, and to Latinus vow,
To any of mine ancestors in prowes that will not bow.
If me alone the Phrygian prince do call, I am content,
Or whether on me (woeful wretch) the wrath of god is bent.
I would not for my sake, that Drances died, or do sustain,
If I the conquest win, one jot of praise won by my pain.
These words among them selves they do debate of doubtful things.
Aeneas then remooues his camp, and forth his battaill bringes.
When lo, into the pallaice strait with dred, and tumult great,
A skout comes in, that does the total town with fear repleat.
That Troyans now from Tyber shore come fast in battle ray.
And Tyrrhen bands in ranks there round about the fildes they lay.
Then strayt amazed were men's minds, and peoples breasts with fear
Astoond, and with no simple flames of ire incenst they were.
They tremblinge then for armor call, the youth for weapons fret,
The sorrowful fathers weep, and mumblinge moninge voices fet.
An hugie noise of sundry tunes into the air does rise.
None otherwise then like a shole of fowls aloft that flies,
And on a thicket lights, or when by Padus river shore
The horcey swannes do lift their lay, the banks the same do roar.
Then Turnus taking present time, O citizens, he says,
Go call a counsel now, and sittinge speak of peaces praise,
Whilst foes into our realms do run, no more thereof he said:
But forth he flinges, and soon him self out of the house conuayd.
He deuideth the charge to his captains.
Thou Volusus, command (quod he) the Volscans, arms to take.
And thou thy self the Rutils lead, Messapus, ready make,
And with his brother Coras joint the coasts about to skoure.
And some to fortefie the gates, some furnish every tower.
The rest with me, as I have told, into the field shall yeede.
They by and by unto the walls do fliynge with fliynge speed.
Thassemblie then, and counsels there begun the king forsakes,
And with unwilling mind them to another time betakes.
Then much himself he blames, that never by his own accord,
He sentfor to the town, and termed sun the Trojan lord.
Some trenches cast before the gates, some pyles aloft do raise
Of wood or stone, alarm the trompets call to bloddy frayes.
Anon with sundry troops, they compass rownd about the wall
The matrones with their laddes, for danger calls to labor all.
Nolesse unto the sacred church of Pallas goddess strait
The Queeene is born, a beuie brave of dames on her do wait.
Great gifts she bare, and next her side Lauinia bright of hue,
The cause of all the strife, and down to ground her eyes she threw.
In thronge the Ladies thick, the church with incense soote does smoke,
And from their lofty thrones, with woeful voices thus they spoke.
O thou that only art of wars, Tritonia virgin, chief,
Do break the weapons with thy hand of this proud Troyan theife.
And strike him dead to ground before our gates that works our grief.
King Turnus raginge then of strives forth to the field is pressed.
His brave Rutilian armor now was buckled to his breast,
With brazen scales right rough, his thies with plates of gold were clad,
His head was yet unarmed, his sword tide to his side he had.
All glittringe bright he shynes, and from the pallaice forth he goes
Triumphinge in his mind, and whole in hope has foyld his foes.
Like as a noble horse that from the stable is start away,
And free does raunge about, in open fields, and pastures gay,
To others leaze, and heardes of mares does headlonge runninge dash,
Or hies him hastly to some woonted stream himself to wash.
His mane then up he liftes aloft, and wanton runs his way.
The crispinge curlinge locks upon his neck, and shoulders play.
Camilla of Volsca.
With whom Camilla meetinge there with gward of Volscan rout:
Against him comes, then there the Queen her self the gates without
Down lights, of whom did all the armed troop example take,
And softly from their horse they leapt, and thus to him she spoke.
If noble hearts may any hope repose in valient hands:
O Turnus, both I dare and vow to meet the Troyan bands.
And with the Tyrrhen horsemen eke encounter on the way.
Let me the onset give of formest fight this present day.
Still stay you hear on foot, and manfully the walls defend.
Hereat then Turnus on the virgin fierce his eyes does bend.
O virgin flower of Latium land, what thanks to yield to thee,
Or kyndnes to requite shall I devise may worthy be?
But since thy valient heart does all adventures great exceed:
I am well pleased (O Queen) to part this pain with thee indeed.
Aeneas, as fame tells, and skoutes sentforth for that intent,
Before him well arayd his troops of horsmenlight has sent,
That ransack should the fields, him self through craggie hills on hie,
And deserts deape, in have unto the town approaches nie.
In secret Ambush I, in yonder wood, in place not wide,
That so both ways I may besiedge, myself entend to hyde.
Do thou upon the Tyrrhen horsemen set with joined band.
With thee shall sharp Messapus yeede, and troops of Latin land,
And strong Tiburtus power, and take to thee the charge of all.
He said, and with like words Messapus forth to fight does call.
Him with his captains al alike exhortes against their foes,
And forth him self anon before them all with courage goes.
There lies a valley low with crooked turns a craftye place,
And fit for sleightes of war, whom thickets black on each side trace.
The sides do narow shut, a little path thereto does lie,
And passadge passinge straight, on ragged cragged entrance hie.
This plain lies quite unknown, and corners saulf to lurck within,
Whether on the lifthand, or the right the battle you begin,
Or on the Hill you list to stand, and storm of stones down cast.
By rediest way in coast well known, does Turnus thither have,
And quickly takes the place, and in thick woods him self he hides.
Therwhiles Diana faier in loftye skies above that bides:
Dame Opis swift to her does call, a chaste and fellow maid,
And one of her untouched troop, and thus to her she said
With heavy cheer, O virgin pure, Camilla forth does pas
Unto a bloody war, armd with our tools in vain, alas.
Whom I do love above the rest, ne to Diana new
This likinge lately sprang, nor joy in mind on sodeyn grew.
Pulst out through spite from native realm, and subjects hauty might,
When Metabus from old Priuerna town did take his flight:
This infant up he snatched, The story of Camilla, and Metabus her father.
when rage of war was thickst of all.
A mate in exile sharp, and her by mothers name did call,
And of Casmilla her by shorter name Camilla hight.
Her in his arms he bare when through the desert tops, his flight
Of wast forlorn hills he took, and darts about him flew,
And him one every side, thick troops of Volscans did pursue.
When lo, in midst of flight Amasenus with water store
Above his banks brakeout, such plenty rain not long before
There fell, wherouer whilst anon to swim he does assay:
He fears (alas) his burden dear, pure love does cause him stay.
Then musinge much in mind at last this practyse best he thaught.
A mighty spear which into hand that time by chance he caught,
When as he fought, of knottye wood shaptforth, and Oak fulstout,
To this his daughter dear in bark of tree encloasd about
He binds, and fitly to the mids of mighty spear he ties,
And shakinge it often in his valient hand, thus loud he cries.
Diana bright, and virgin pure that in these woods do bide,
I vow a servant here to thee, that bound unto her side
Most humbly holding fast a spear, flies from her foes, receive
Her (goddess) to thy charge, whom here in doubtful case I leave.
He said, and strait with bended arm the weapon forth he throws,
The waters sound, aloft the river swift, Camilla flows.
Then Metabus when now the prease began approach him nie:
The river strait he takes, his spear, and babe, therewith does wrie,
Out of a greengrasse turfe, a gift that great Diana sent.
No people house for harbor him, nor walled cities lent,
Nor if they any offered had, he never would consent.
A sheepheardes life among the sole, and savage hills he led.
His tender child in thickest thorns, and beds of beasts he fed
With milk of mares vnmild, and suck of breasts were never caught,
And to her tender lips in milkinge, down their speanes he raught.
But when her pretty foot she first began to set to ground:
Her hands, and every place with sharpened darts he laded round.
A quiver on her shoulders small he hanges with crooked bow.
In stead of golden caulle, and mantel brave should hang below:
A Tigers skin down from her head alonge her back does fall,
With little childish darts her hands he arms to play with all.
Or by a twisted thonge about her head she whirles a slinge,
Wherewith sumtime a Crane, sumtime a Swan she down does bring.
Her many noble dames through Tyrrhen towns whereas she went:
Have wished in vain, their doughterlawe she were, but she content
Alone with chaste Dianas grace: her self preserves still
Vntwight unto her tools, and to maids life bears best goodwill.
Would god she had with no such fond desire of war bin cought,
When first the valient Troyans to provoke in fight she sought,
Whom I do tender much, and yet she here remaind with me.
Now her with destnies sharp, and fatal fall oppressed I see.
Descend, dear Nimphe, from heaven, and Latin fields go visit streit,
Whereas with hapless hap, and blooddie broile this fray they feight.
Take these, and from this quiver, shaftes of sharp revenge address,
And whosoever her sacred corpse with wound shall once oppress,
Where he of Troy or Latium be, his blood shall that repay.
Then in an hollow cloud anon her woeful corpse away,
And armor vndefilde, unto her native soil will bear,
And in a worthy sepulcher my self interre her there.
She said, the^ through ye flickringe aier with wings she downward slides,
And gives a rush, and with a tempest black her body hides.
Therwhiles the Troyan bands unto the walls approached nigh.
Hetruscan capteynes with their troops of horsemen, by and bye
Them selves bestow in good array, the palfries stamping fret
Throughout the field, and rain with sturdie bittes forth softly iet
Now here now there, the field rough sta^des with many a pyke and latice,
And from their lofty helmets far the glittringe Sunbeames glaunce.
On totherside Messapus sharp, and Latins fierce to fight,
And Coras with his brother, and Camillas winge so bright
Standforth against them in the field, and lances fast they make
Within their restes, and points of tre^blinge spears fast charged shake.
Their foes abode, and noise of steedes them sore on fire do set.
But when both armies were at cast of dart together met:
There still awhyle they stayed, a shrichinge shout they sodeyn raise,
Their chaumpinge horse they harten forth, the darts fly every ways
Like snow that thick does fall, black shade the heaven quite ouerlaies.
And first with spiteful spears, Tyrrhenus with Acontius tall
Encountringe fiercely meet, and first with mighty noise do fall
To ground, the steedes echothers breast with breast does squeezinge iolt.
Acontius there unhorsed as swift as thickest thundrebolt,
Or like some stone by engine great of war forthflunge down lights,
And into thin and flickringe aier exhales his vital sprites.
Incontinent the ranks are broke, and Latins put to flight:
Cast back their shieldes, and headlonge horses prick to city right.
The Troyans then, and first A silas sharp the routes pursue,
And now to gates they near were come, the Latins then anew
A mighty noise extol, and horses necks about they wrie.
A doubtful batted.
The Troyans turn their backs, and largely yeeldinge raynes, do fly.
Like as the sea with altringe course that forth does running freat:
Sometime does flow to shore, and rocks with rouling waves does weat,
And fominge on the sand and beach, alonge does tumblinge glide.
Sometime does swiftly ebb, when force does fail, and back does slide
From rocks and shoares with vailinge stream, and failinge flud it falls.
The Tyrrhens twice the Rutils chase in fight unto the walls,
And twice repulst look back, and backs with burklars broad defend.
But when they to the fight a fresh and third assault descend:
The ranks together run, and man to man does stiffly stick.
Then shoutes are heard of such as fall, and in the blood waxt thick
Bot men and armor deeply waultryng fall, and steedes half dead.
The battle grows, when Orsiloch sir Remulus did dread
Himself to set upon: into his horse a spear he thrust,
And underneath the coursers ear the head leaves stickyng just.
Then up the steed enraged stands on end, and up does throw
His legs with breast erect, nor in no wise could bide the blow.
He falls unhorsed to ground, Catillus drives to earth down right
Iolas stout of mind, of stature eke a goodly knight.
And great in arms Herminius hard, whose head with golden hear
Lies bare with shoulders bare, nor of his wounds does stand in fear,
So great in arms he lies, ye spear pricked through his shoulders quakes,
And twice throughgirt his back, his deadly pain twice double makes.
Goare blood on every side is shed, by fight are numbres stayne.
And by their wounds they seek a glorious death for to obtain.
And now this manly Amazon in slaughter much does joy
Slaughters committed by Camilla.
In midst of fight, whose pap, least use of war should her anoy:
Cut of unto Camilla quiuered was in tender years.
Her tender shaftes about she shootes in quiver which she bears.
Sometime her sharpened are unwearied takes into her hand,
Sometime her guilden bow, the tools of chaste Dianas band.
And if perchance repulst, she do retire pursued in chase:
Her bow she turns behind, and strikes her followers in the face.
About her chosen mates do ride, Larina, and Tulla bright
Pure virgins, with Tarpeia that with glittryng axe does fight,
Italian trulles, and chaste Camilla of special purpose those
For honors sake, for time of peace, for trusty service chose.
Like as Amazones of Thracie land when waters they
Of Thermodoon beat, with armor painted passing gay,
About Hyppolyta their Queen, or when the virgin stout
Penthesilea home in charret comes, the femell rout
With shritches shrill rejoicing cries, and shieldes like moons cut out.
Whom do thou first, whom last, O virgin fierce, by force down throw?
Or O, how many corpses slain on ground do lay full low?
Eumenius first of Clytius father borne, whose naked best
Against her there that stood with lance of firstree through does threst.
He fluddes of blood out spuinge, falls, and earth with teeth does tear,
And where he fell upon his wound, lies tumblinge diynge there.
Next on him Lyris she, and Pegase throws, and Lyris while
His bridell reigns he raught: from horse to ground he does requile.
But Pegase whilst he came to aid, and feeble hand forth held:
Both jointly headlong wise with dubled fall to ground she feld.
To these Amastrus near she lays, unto Hippota sun.
And couchinge down unto her spear from far does fetch her run
At Terreus, and Harpalicus, and Demophoon stout,
And Cronius strong, and many a capteyn more of Trojan rout.
And look how many shiueringe shaftes forth from her side she drew:
So many carcases to ground of Troyan knights she threw.
There Ornitus a far in armor strange, and hunterwise,
Upon a proud Apulian steed about the batteyll flies.
Whose neck, and shoulders broad an hyde late hald from Oxes back
Did cover, on his head the large wide gapinge jaws there stack
Of wolf, with threatninge, grinninge, glittringe greedy teeth full white.
A clounish club in hand he weld, he thronges in thickst of fight,
In stature all the rest by heyght of head he does exceed.
Him she (nor was it when their foes retierd a glorious deed)
Strykes through, and thus she speaks with hateful heart as there she stood.
Thoughtst that some beast in chase thou, Tyrrhen, had within a wood?
The day is come when as a woman's armor shall refute
Your boastinge bragges, yet no small fame to this thou may impute,
That by these hands thou die, and with Camillas lance art slain.
Orsilochus, and Butes next, two bodies mighty main
Of Trojan rout, but Butes her against with dart she struck,
And forth a way betwixt his gorget, and his helmet brake
About his neck that glittringe shynes, his shield hanges down his side,
And feyninge from Orsilochus as though she fled, does ride
The Carrire round, and craftily she keeps the middle place,
And whilst he her pursues, therwhiles she follows him in chase,
And through his armor strong, the flesh, and bones, and axe she beats
Highrisinge at her blow, and whilst he twatlinge much entreates:
She dubleth still the wound, and with warm brains his face he weates.
Herewith come in, and at first sight astunned much he stands
Sir Aunus sun of Appenine, a martial man of hands,
And not among the Ligures woorst, Ligures were great dissemblers, and liers.
whilst fates did him permit
By subtle coulered shifts unto each purpose finely fit.
When he perceeud from fight he could no wise escape away:
By treacherous train he thought, and gloasinge guile her to assay,
And thus began. A woman thou if to a trusty steed
Thy self commit, of truth is it a great or valient deed?
Forsake thy horse, and match on ground thy self to me betake,
And unto equal fight on foot thee quickly ready make.
Then shall thou know to whom this glory fond due praise shall bring.
He said, but she enraagd whom grief with sharp desire did stinge:
Unto a mate her steed she took, in arms on ground she stands
With blade on foot forth drawn, and bucklar pure fast hent in hands.
The younker then supposinge that by craft he her had quit:
Away strait swiftly prickinge flies, not lingringe never a whit:
His nimble steed with reigns he quickly turns, and thence him hies.
His peartly prauncinge beast with iron spurs apace he plies.
O Ligur vain, and to no purpose brag, and proud of heart.
In vain sir subtle, thou assayest to try thy cuntreyes art.
No slypprie shift shall thee alive to crafty Aunus save.
These words the virgin spoke, and fierce on foot a spring she gave,
And swiftlye soon outran the horse, and fast the reigns she raught
And at him struck, and glad on enmies blood revenge she wraught.
Much like a faw^on that from lostie tower his flight does take,
And at a twigginge dove unto the clouds swyft winge does make.
When her at souse has taken with talantes sharp her guts pulles out,
The goarie bludde, and feathers plumed flit the air about.
These things the father of gods and men in heaven that sits on hie:
Does heedfully behold, and warly weighes with watchinge eye.
Then Tyrrhen Tarchon stout to enter fight he did provoke,
And with no gentle rage of frantike anger forth him stroke.
Wherefore in thickst of slaughters great, and ranks enforst to fly,
On horsback Tarchon thronges, and sundry voices liftes on hie.
The wings he hartneth on, and each man by his name does call.
And such as were repulst, he makes a fresh to fightinge fall.
What fear is this: that never will repent your foolish flight,
O Tyrrhens dastardes still? what dau^t within your hearts does light?
A woman straglinge you pursues, and does discomfit quight.
Unto what end these swords, or weapons do you bear in hand?
Not so at Venus games, nor wars by night you lingringe stand.
Nor when god Bacchus crooked pipe to dauncinge you does call,
And unto costly cates, and tables lade with wine to fall.
That is your joy, that your delight, when as the prophet good
With sacrafice, and fatted ost, does call you to the wood.
This said, into the thickest foes himself forth thronginge flinges,
And mad he meets with Venulus, whom chance against him bringes.
There raught from of the horse with his righthand he held his foe,
And forceblye him wringinge to his breast, away does go.
A noise unto the heaven they raise, the Latins turn their eyes
Upon this fact, and Tarchon swift about the field he flies,
Both bearinge man and armor still away, and from his spear
The head he wrested of, and every place he searches, wheare
A deadly wound he may bestow, he wrestlinge do^th rebel
To save the sword from out his throat, and force by force repel.
And as the noble Egle which in the aier aloft does fly,
When up a snake has snatched that late a sleep on ground did lie,
And fastened him within his foot, and claspt with talantes round:
The snake about him wriglinge windinge wreades with grief of wou^d,
And scales does roughly raise, and angered with her mouth does hiss.
With crooked beak he wrestlinge nippes her nevertheless for this,
And forth his way he flies, and with his wings the aier does beat:
None otherwise his pray from Tyburt oste sir Tarchon great
Triumphinge bears away, their captains deed, and happy chance
The Lydians followinge forth do run. Camilla swift with lance
Comes in whom Aruns due to death by craftye slight full sly: Aruns murderour
of Camilla.

Does ride about, the esiest side for his behoof to try.
And look through thickest ranks whereas the virgin fiercely flew:
Sis Aruns thither hies, and secretly her steps does view.
What way she conqueresse does return, and foot from foes does bend:
That way the youth by stealth his nimble reigns about does wend.
And now thisway, now that again, and round about the place
With fatal, certain, spear in hand, does followinge after trace.
By chance unto Cybele sacred priest, sir Chloreus hight,
From far above the rest in Phrygian arms did shine full bright.
A fominge courser forth he pricked, whose breast, and buttokes wide
A skin beset with brazen plates, and glittringe gold did hide.
Himself in purple sad, and scarlet pure full fine beseene,
In Lycian bow his shaftes he shot, in Creta made that been.
His golden bow from shoulder twanges, a guilden helm he bears.
The yelowish silken weed, and bosoums wide with bouges he wears:
Those lappets rattling large in knot of costly gold were tide.
His coat with needle embroidred was, his sturdie thies did hyde
A skirt of purple silk and gold in foreyn country wrought.
The virgin him, for cause his armor brave wherein he fought,
And Troyan spoils on temples hang she would for honors sake,
Or else herself in huntresse wise, with gold full brave would make:
With blind desire pursues, and all encenst through thickest rout,
With greadie woman's lust of spoils, she flies the field about.
When Aruns long in wait that lay, had fit occasion spied:
A whirlinge dart he threw, and thus unto the gods he cried.
Most mighty god Apollo guide of drad Soractis hill,
Whom we above the rest adore, to whom soote smellinge still
Of Pinetrees hugie flames we feed, and through whose only might
Thy servants dare to walk on fiery coals hot burninge bright.
O father grant that by our tools this shame be taken away,
Almightye since thou art, not for the virgins spoils I pray,
Nor monument I seek, nor pillage proud from her to take.
Some other deed hereafter this shall me right famous make.
But let this cruel plague faldowne with dint of this righthand,
And I deuoid of fame will hence return to native land.
Apollo heard his prayer, and part to grant he was content,
And part to be dispersed in flickringe aier abroad he sent.
That Queen Camilla fierce with deadly wound downestayn should be,
He granted, but with saufe return his native soil to see:
He did not grant, that voice he bid the winds abroad confound.
Then when the whirlinge dart forth thrown in air had raisd a sound:
Both armies began attend, and eyes unto the Volscan Queen
They all do cast, she minds no whit the things the^ wrought that been,
Nor air, nor yet the sound, nor dart above full wift of flight,
Till underneath her sacred pap the fatal lance does light, Camilla is sleyne,

And deaply entringe in: at full in virgins blood does bayne.
Her fearful femall guard together runs, and does sustain
Their faintinge ladies corpse, fast Aruns flies before them all,
Whom as did joy refresh: so fear admixt did much appall.
And now he dares no more unto her lance himself to truft,
Nor yet into the sight of that Virago himself to thrust.
And like a woolfe, before the hateful hunters him do chase,
Unto the wast for lorne hills forth hies himself a pace,
When he some heardsman has, or heckfer great of grease, and lim
Deuourd, and guilty in heart of that foul fact, and deed full grim:
His tremblinge tail between his legs lets fall, and wooddes does seek:
Sir Aruns so him out of sight withdrawes in semblant leeke,
And with his flight content amidst the thickst him self does hyde.
She diyng draws the dart that in the wound did deep abide,
The mortal blade in wound full wide sticks fast within her side.
She faintes for want of blood, her eyes to death yield up their due.
Strait from her face departes the stained cheeks, and purple hue.
And dyinge thus to Acca, one of her companions says,
A virgin to Camilla true before the rest always,
With whom she woonted was her cares and sorrows all impart,
And thus to her began to speak with failinge faintinge heart.
Until this time, O sister Acca dear, of force I was,
Acruell mortal wound my life abbridges now, alas,
And althinges round, me seems, look rustie dustie dark as hell.
Fly hence, and do with speed, my messedge last to Turnus tell,
That he to batteyle come, and keep the Troyans from the town.
And now farewell, and with that word the reigns she let fall down.
The conflict of death witk life.
Her self to earth not willinge sinkes, and waxinge cold, vntwynes
By small and small herself out of her corpse, and then resignes
Her lithie head and neck to death, and armor does forsake.
Her ghost flies fast with grief and great disdain to Lymbo lake.
Forthwith a mighty noise the golden stars in heaven does touch,
And since Camillas death the battle fierce increases much.
They thick come ranning on, both all the bands of Troyans stout,
And Tyrrhen captains, with Euanders wings the Archadian rout.
And now Dianas dearlinge bright, Nymph Opis sits on hie
Upon the top of loftiest hills, the batteile to descrie.
And when from far she saw in raginge noise of youthful train,
With wound unworthy, and woeful doleful death Camilla slain:
She fet a sigh, and deep from out her breast these words she said.
To dear O virgin, thou to dear a cruel price have paid,
That thou the valient Troyans durstes provoke in open fight.
That thou Dianas grace in wooddes did serve forsaken quight:
It nothing thee auailes, or that our quiver thou did wear,
Or glittringe golden bow upon thy tender shoulders bear.
Howbeit thy noble Queen means not to leave thee voie of fame,
Nor that thy drierie death shall covered sleep for lack of name.
Amongst all nations far and wide, or unrevenged be.
Thy corpse that did defile with mortal wound, what ever were he:
With death deseeurd shall be requit. Beneath on hill full hie,
The tumbe of old Dercennus king raisd up a loft does lie,
With mighty mount of ancient Laurent ground, an Ilex tree
With glummish darkish shade bespreddes the same, that none may see.
Here first this goddess faier, with passinge speadie course does light.
And from this hillock far sir Aruns aims within her sight.
Whom when she glittringe saw in arms, and vainlie puffed with pride:
Why fliest thou hence (quod she) approach, and here thy steps do guide.
Come near that now must die, and due desert receive again
For Queen Camillas death, and with Dianas shaftes yslayne,
So vile a wight so worthy a death for fact so foul must bide?
She said, and strait in Thracian huntreswise, from by her side
A golden flight forth of her quiver pluckes, and bow she bendes,
And draws him deape until the nockes meet just at both the ends,
And hands do equal level stand, and arowehead does twight
The bowhand, and the stringe up to her ear she draws up quight.
Immediately the singinge shaft, and whirlinge air does crack.
Sir Aruns heard at once, and shaft fast in his body stack.
Him yeeldinge up the ghost, and fetchinge deape his final groan:
His mates forgetful in the field abroad do leave a lone.
And Opis strait with wings to lofty heaven does take her flight.
At Camillas death her soldiers were put to flight.
First at their ladies death do fly Camillas horsemen light,
And Rutils run amoapt, and fierce Atinas flies apace.
And captains all are quaild, and standardbearers forced in chase:
For rescue run, and to the town do fast on horseback hie.
None dare the Trojans stout, that followinge after fast do fly,
With settled foot withstand, nor yet in warlyke arms resist,
But bows unbent on shiueringe shoulders bear with faintinge first,
And coursers with their hooues the rotten dustie fields do shake.
Unto the walls and whirlwind black with tumblinge dust does rake.
And matrones tootinge out ye loopes their breasts there beat straitwaies
And forth a woman's shritch up to the stars in heaven they raise.
There those that first into the open gates most swiftly pressed:
The mingled enmies power in thickest routes did them molest.
Nor woeful death they do escape, but at first entrance in,
And even within their city walls, and when as housd they hin:
Throughgirt with spears are sleyne, some shut the gates, and do debar
Free entrance to their mates, nor dare for life the same vnspar,
Though woefully without the gates they wayle, Slaughtes of the Lata^nes.
a direful death
Amongst defendauntes falls, and such in arms as yield their breath.
Such as were shut without before their parents weepinge eyes,
When cruel force constraines, some headlonge into ditches flies.
Some blinded with the dust, and giuinge spur, and yeeldinge reign:
Against the gates, and rampires hard of poastes do run amain.
The matrones from the walls when they beheld Camilla dead,
Their tremblinge darts cast forth (for so their cuntrie love them lead)
And staves of oak ysteeld, and poales of length forebrent at end,
And dare the dread of death assay, whilst they their walls defend.
Therwhiles within the woddes, an heavy messedge Turnus frayes,
And to that valient youth a tumult great does Acca raise.
That Volscans vanquished are, and fierce Camilla sleine in fight,
And enmies fast approchinge come, and all in batteile quight
Have overthrown, that fear unto the city walls does go.
He then enraagd (for why the power of Jove would have it so)
The hills possessed of late, and thickets sharp does strait forsake.
Who scarce was now come forth, and large abroad the field did take:
When lord Aeneas to the forest wide himself does speed,
And hills does ouertrace, and from thick wooddes does forth proceed.
So both unto the walls in have with all their power do fly,
And both the marchinge troops not many paces distant lie.
But when the smoakinge fields with dust Aeneas did behold,
And marchinge bands in batteyle ray of town Laurentum old:
And Turnus did from far Aeneas irefull countnance view,
And tramplinge of their feet, and neighinge of their horses knew:
Immediately they had their armies joined, and batteyle tried,
Had not sir Phoebus bright with purple mantell bravely died
His horses dipped in seas, and bringinge night: expulst the day.
They pitch their tents before the town, and trenches deape do lay.
DEO GRATIAS.
Finitum Londini, Per Thomam Twynum.
14. Iunij. *1573. Opus 20. Dierum plus minus, per interualla.
The twelfth book of the Aeneidos of Virgil.
The Argument.
When the Latins were vanquished, Turnus seeing all his help to be reposed in
him self, contrary to the persuasion of Latinus, and the Queens manifold
tears: determines to fight hand to hand with Aeneas, and sends such
word unto him by Idmon his messenger. Aeneas is therewith pleased, and with
solemn oaths on both sides they make the league, which Iuturna through
persuasion of Juno in the shape of Camertes, disturbeth. First of all,
Tolumnius the southsayer, yt by a false show proficied victory to his side:
strikes through with a dart one of Gilippus suns. Aeneas likewise, seckyng
means to appease the tumult: is wounded by an arow uncertain by whom it was
shot, and is constrained to leave the battle. Which Turnus understanding,
supposing he had gotten a great occasion of good success: makes great
slaughter on his foes. Venus cures her sun with Dyttany of Ida. Aeneas,
amended: comes again forth, and rescueth his mates, and namely calls for
Turnus in fight. But Turnus still withdrawynge him self (for Iuturna his
sister, in shape of Metiscus the wagoner, cariyng him always aside would not
suffer him mecte with Aeneas in battle) he determines to besiedge the town,
and Ieadyng his amny nere to the walls casts fire up to the Turrets, and
houses. Then Amata supposing that Turnus was slain: through extreme sorrow
hangs her self. These things being told unto Turnus by sages seeing that he
must needs fight, or suffer his confederate town come into his enemies hands
before his face: voluntarely provoke Aeneas to the combat according to the
tenure of the league. In which fight Aeneas having the victory, and being
almost moved to take compassion, and grant life to his enemy: yet when he
saw the gyrdle upon his shoulder which he had taken from Pallas, whom he had
slain before, suddenly moved with anger: thrusts him to the heart.

WIth daunted force, and fight unlucky late, when quaild to be
His Latins stout of yore, most valient Turnus prince did see,
Himself a mark to each man's eyes: outrageous began to boil,
And rise in rage, much like a Lion fierce of Affricke soil,
Whose breast, when as with dint of hunters spear is wounded deep:
He then prepares himself to fight, and curled locks does keep
Crect with rage upon his neck, the slickinge lance with paws
Of hunters, bold he breaks, and fominge frettes with bloddie jaws.
Noneotherwise the rage of furious Turnus forth does break,
And to Latinus king with troubled mind he thus does speak.
In Turnus is no stay, why dastard Trojans should forsake
Their word there is no cause, nor yet the bargayne they did make.
I le match him sure, bring sacrafice, our league come understand.
Either I the Dardan lord will send to hell with this righthand:
A runaway from Asia land, let Latins keep them still,
And countries common shame with sword alone cut of I will:
Or quite he us shall overthrow, and wife Lauinia have.
To whom with sober mood Latinus than this answer gave.
O most courageous youth, how much the more thou do exceed
In valient heart: so much the more it is meet I should indeed
Give grave advise, and charely for chances all provide.
Thou have thy father Daunus realms, and many a town beside
Wunne with thine hand, Latinus wealth, and courage has likewyes.
In Latium land and in Laurentum soil right large that lies:
Are many more unmarried dames, and not of basest line.
Now give me leave the truth in open words for to untwine.
And print it deape in mind what I hereof to thee shall show.
On any of her ancient loves my daughter to bestow
I was forbid, so all the gods and men to me have told.
Bold yet for love of thee, and for our kindredsake as bold,
And for our heavy spouses tears: all promise made I brake,
And from my sun his wife, my self to wicked arms have take.
Since which time, Turnus, thou have seen, what chauncee did eusue,
What wars, what pains to thee as chief amongst the rest there grue,
Twice overthrown in batteils great scarce in the town can keep
The hope of all Italia land, and Tybers channel deep
Yet with our blood does warmed ru^ne, and fields with benes look white.
O where turn I so often? what madness moves my mind so light?
If Turnus die, and strayt for them as for my peers I send:
Why rather do I not whilst he does live this quarrel end?
What will my cosins Rutils say, what all Italia land
If thee to death I should betraye (which chance the gods with stand)
Which do our daughter crave, to join with us in wedlock land,
Reguard the doubtful happes of war, and do some pytie take
Upon thine ancient sier, whom woeful wars do careful make,
And Ardea country dear, full far from hence does now disioyne.
But Turnus all these words cannot persuade his rage resign,
Which ever waxes more, and still in healing does augment.
And when he once could speak, these words from out his mouth he sent.
O father dear, this care which you in my behalf do take:
For me do lay aside, nor be so careful for my sake.
And suffer me in steed of praise a famous death obtain.
For we our darts do throw, and swords do draw not still in vain.
And strength in hands we have, and from our wounds blood runs red.
Far shall his mother be, that flying him with cloud shall spread,
And in vain flickeryng shade withdraw her self soon out of sight
But now the Queen at novel guise of battle much affright:
Did weep, and like to die, her son in law in arms she hent.
O Turnus, by these tears of mine, or ever if thou were bent
Amatas honor to preserve (for hope of elder years
Thou art, and rest alone, and honor only which vpbeares
The state of Latin realm, our shakned house on thee does lie)
Grant me this only thing, do not with Troyans battle try.
For whatsoever chance thou in this battle do sustain:
O Turnus I sustain the same, and loathsome life refrain
Therewith I am determd, for sun in law Aeneas see,
I never shall abide, and me my self a captive be.
Lauinia then with tears her mothers talk did understand,
With burning blusshyng cheeks, whom color much had out of hand
Inflamd with heat, which up into her face forthwith did spread.
Like as when Iuery white by chance is staynd with scarlet red,
Or purple roses pure with Lilies white lie mixed in place:
Such was the virgins hue, such were the colors in her face.
Him love disturbeth much, and on the maid his eyes he stays,
And burns to battle more, and to Amata shortly says,
O mother, do not now with woeful tears me thus pursue.
Ne give me cause hereby to dread that luck shall light ascue.
It Is not in Turnus power, if destnies will, his death to fly.
Go Idmon, tell the Phrygian king this messedge by and by
Which will not please him well, when first tomorow in welkin bright,
In purple charret drawn the morning clear shall rise in sight:
His Troyans forth he do not lead against the Rutil bands.
The Troyans still do hold, and Rutils eke their blades in hands.
In that same fight with our two blood shall ended be the strife,
And in that field be tried, who shall Lauinia wed to wife.
When he these words had said, and hied him into house apace:
He calls for steedes, and joys to see them foam before his face.
Orithyia, daughter to Erihtheus wise to Boreas.
Which to Pilumnus once for present gave Orithyia faier,
In whiteness passinge driven snow, in swiftnes nimble aier.
The keepers quick there stand about, and them with hands provoke,
With soundinge blows on breast, and curled manes with co^bes do stroke.
Anon his gorget gay with gold and silver damaskt bright,
And scarlet work ywrought, upon his shoulders fitteth tight.
His sword and targat next, and ruddie plumes of feathers brave.
The sword which unto Daunus old sumtime god Vulcan gave,
And fiery flaminge hot in lake of Stix did deapely quent.
Then strait a mighty spear, that to an hugie pillar lent
Erect amid the house, with valient force in hand he took,
Sir Actor of Aruncans spoil, and fiercely forth it shook
Thus criynge out, O spear, whom never yet I cauld in vain,
The time is come when thou with me this brunt must needs sustain.
Thee mighty Actors hand sometime, but now does Turnus hold.
Do grant his carcas I may overthrow in battayl bold.
And with a valient hand from of his neck his gorget tear
Of that some Cocknie Phrygian knight, and drench in dust his hear,
And locks with bodkins frisled fine, and moist with Mirrhe, and oils.
These furies forth him prick, and from his face with rage that boyles
The sparckles sprinclinge fly, and eyes with flaminge fire do glow.
Like as mighty Bull sendes forth his voice, and loud does low,
When first he comes to fight, and proves his horns in rage to whet.
And spiynge far a tree, himself thereto does cloasly set,
And rough with strokes prouokes the wind, and gravel flinges about.
Nolesse therwhiles in mothers armor strong Aeneas stout,
Himself to war prepares, and sharpneth up himself with ire.
And joys the war with league so ended is, his great desire.
Then next his mates, and to Iulus grief does comfort bring,
Instructinge them in destnies all, and legates to the king
He biddes with certain answer to return, and to declare
The whole conditions of the league, what they in order are.
The next day risinge had the hills with light scarce over spread,
When first sir Phoebus horse forth of the sea did lift their head,
And from their lofty nostrelles wide did blow the broad daylight:
When strait before the city walls they measure for the fight
An equal plain, both Rutilmen, and Troyans mixed a vie.
And fires in midst they make, and altars large they build on hie,
Of earthen turues yframd, unto th'indiffrent gods to stand.
And fast some water fetch, some cracklinge fire bring in their hand,
In surplice white of linen clad, and temples compast round
With wreath of Veruine soote, and holly herbs together bound.
The Latin army issues forth, and bands with darts that fight
In clusters thick to gates do thronge, and Troyans army bright,
With Tyrrhens armd in sundry sort, with speed they forth do fly:
Nonotherwise in armor pressed, then if that by and by
They should to battayll fierce descend, and thick in thousands told
The captains scour about, in scarlet brave, and glittringe gold:
The ofspringe of Assaracus, Mnestheus, Asylas wild,
Messapus eke a tamer stout of steedes, Neptunus child.
And when at certain sign into their place they hie them all:
Their pikes they pitch in ground, and down their shieldes they let to fall.
The matrones then with great desire to see, and rascal rout,
And men unwieldy old: the turrets hie, and tops about
Of houses do bestride, and lofty ridge of gates do clim,
And up the walls they slide, and couch them thick upon the brim.
But Juno from a lofty hill, that now Albanus hight,
(For then it was deuoid of name, renown, and glory quight,)
Looked down, and all the camp at length, and breadth she did behold.
And both the armies viewd, both Latins stout, and Troyans bold,
And Laurent town, and strayt to Turnus sister began to speak,
One Goddess to another, that standinge lakes, and fluddes that creake
Does ouerrule. This honor great, the king of heaven above
For maydenhode bereft. bestowed on her, in dulcet love.
O Nimphe, Iunos talk to Iuturna.
the glory great of streams, beloved most of me.
Thou know before all Latin ladies bright, how only thee,
That to almighty Jove's ingreatefull bed ascended have:
I do esteem, and willingly a place in heaven I gave.
Now learn thy grief, and do not me henceforth, Iuturna, blame.
So far as fortune would permit, and destnies grant the same:
Both Latium state, and Turnus, and thy walls I did defend.
But now the youth with partial fates I see, in sight to wend.
Now fatal destnies day, and cruel force, at hand they be,
Ne may I with mine eyes abide this fight, or league to see.
Thou, if thou can devise some means, thy brother to advance:
Assay, perhaps in time poor wretches may have better chance.
Scarce had she said, but strait Iuturna forth in tears then brake,
And thrice or fouertymes her cumlie breast with fist she struck.
This is no time for tears (quod Juno then) but make some speed,
And Turnus save from death, if such means may be made, indeed.
And do them strait to war provoke, and break the league they make.
Let me be author of the deed, this said: she did for sake
Her doubtful much, and troubled sore with woeful wound of mind.
Therwhiles the kings ( Latinus with an hugie train assignd,
In charret drawn with fouer horse rides, whose ancient temples round
With glittringe beams of gold in number twelve about were bound,
The Su^nes his grandsiers badge, in charret drawn with two horse whight
Forth Turnus comes, with lances twain broad armd with iron bright.
On the other side Aeneas, founder first of Roman blood,
With burninge bucklar bright, and heavenly armor strong and good,
And next Ascanius young, of mighty Rome the second hope)
Forth of their tents proceed, a priest beseene in purest cope,
A younglinge yelt of brestled sow, and twynlinge sheep vntwight
Bringes forth, and hales the beasts unto the altars burninge bright.
They turninge then their faces forth unto the risinge sun:
Do sprincle bran and salt about, the scissers round do run
About the temples of the beasts, and wine on altars lay.
Then lord Aeneas with his fauchon bright forthdrawne: does pray.
Bear witness of my prayer, O Sun, and thou Italia land,
For whose alonly sake these trauayles great I took in hand.
And thou almighty Jove, and thou nolesse, O Juno bright,
More gentle goddess now I trust, and Mars of warlyke might,
Who as it seems most best to thee, all manner wars do guide.
You Springes and Rivers eke I call, and what soever does bide
Relligious due to heavens above, or blueish sea below.
The conditions of ye truce.
If that on Turnus happy luck the conquest do bestow:
It Is meet that to Euanders town we conquered go again.
Iulus shall depart the realm, and from all war refrain
The vanquished Trojans shall henceforth, nor arms herafter take,
Nor yet molest this land with war, that they shall hap to make.
But if through force of arms to us the conquest lotted be,
As so I hope it shall, and Gods us grant the same to see:
I never shall Italians force the Troyans to obey.
Nor do I seek to be their king, but this, that jointly they,
Vnuanquisht nations may in everlasting league abide.
Myself will gods, and relics tend, Latinus wars shall guide,
My father inlawe his woonted crown shall wear, my mates, they shall
Build up a town for me, and by Lauinias name it call.
Thus spoke Aeneas first, then followed next Latinus old.
His eyes to heaven he castes, and both hands to the stars does hold.
Aeneas, by the same both land, and sea, and stars I swear,
And by Latonas impes, The Sun, and Moon are Latonas children.
and Ianus that two brows does bear,
And power of gods infernal grimme, and cruel Plutoes seats.
Let Jove hear that, that breakers false of leagues with thundre beats.
I touch the altars here, and fires that stand before us all,
And all the heavenly powers, hereof for record I do call:
No day shall once this peace disturb, or concord frustrate make,
Howeuer the case do fall, nor cause me willinge it forsake.
Not though the land into the sea he threw, and drencht us all,
Or should enforce the lofty heaven in Lymbo low to fall.
Like as this Mace (for in his hand by chance a mace he had)
Green leaf shall never burgein more, nor spray, nor pleasant shad,
Since first in wooddes it grew, and from the stock was cut away.
Now root it lackes, the knife did cause both leaf, and branch decay,
Sometime a tree, howbeit the workmans hand, the same in gold
Has now incloasd, and given it to the Latin kings to hold.
With suchlike words, among themselves their leagues they stablish sure
Amid the rout of all the lords, the beasts then sacred pure,
Within the flaminge fires they slay, and from them spraulinge quick:
Their tremblinge entrayles take, and altars heap with lances thick.
But now to Rutil crew this match right much unmeet does seem.
And now with waueringe minds in sort perplexed hereof they deem.
But chiefly when more near their far unequal strength they view.
His secret walkinges forth augmentes the same, his eyes he threw
Theimage of one in fear.
Upon the ground whilst he in sacringe was, his heavy cheer,
His hollow cheeks, and palenesse in his face that does appear.
This talk when sad Iuturna saw, now more and more increase,
The common peoples hearts now quailinge from this league to cease:
Into the thickest thronges, and semblant of Camertes face,
Whose stock right noble was of graundsiers old, and fathers race,
And name with virtue fraught, himself in arms of valient might,
Into the thickest ranks she comes, enformd of all aright,
And sundry rumors forth she blabbes, and bablinge thus does say,
Is It not shame, O Rutils, things of such great weight to lay
Upon the life of one? are not in number we, or might
Their matches? lo the Troyans all, and Archades in sight
Here scand, the fatal army, and Hetruria Turnus foe.
Scarce have they man for man, if them against in fight we go.
He to the gods above before whose altars now he prays:
By flickringe fame shall fly, and live in mouth of man always,
But we with loss of native soil, proud lords for to obey
Shall Be constraind, and lingringe now here in the fields we stay.
With suchlike words the soldiers minds with rage she kindles sore,
And murmour great through out the field increases more, and more.
The Laurent peoples minds are changd, and Latins hearts likewise.
And those that late for truce from war, and saulftie did devise:
Wish now for arms, and couenantes all full feign would frustrate make,
And on king Turnus ruthful case compassion great do take.
To this a greater thing Iuturna ioynes, from heaven on hie
A sign she down does send, that nothing could be found, wherbie
A false token frone above.
The Italians minds might more be mooud, or more with monsters guile.
For why, the bird of mighty Jove aloft on winge did toil
Amid the air, and fierce a shole of fowls she did pursue,
And twigginge forth a pace fast on her flight the Egle flue.
When soodenly she stoopt down to the stream, and sousinge feld
A noble Swan to ground, and gripinge fast in talantes held.
The Italians thick their minds herat erect, then all the rout
Of fowls from flight with noise return (a strange sight out of dout)
And heaven with wings they do obscure, and thick a cloud they make,
And on their foe they fiercely set, and round the air they shake.
And still so sore they him assault: till vanquished with their might,
For want of force he faintes, the pray out of his foot he quight
Lets fall in to the stream, and away to skies does take his flight.
This warninge of the gods the Rutils then with shout accept,
And strait their hands prepare to fight, and forth Tolumnius lept
A prophet proud that was, and first this, this (quod he) and cries,
It Is long for which I looked, and with my self I did devise.
I both acknowledge, and embrace the power of gods, come all
O Rutils, and with me your captain strait to battle fall.
Who^ this vile stranger wretch in war like hartlesse birds does fear,
And all your shore alonge with woeful sword, and fire does tear:
Anon shall fly apace, and to salt seas himself betake.
Do you with one consent your ranks strait thick in order make,
And your forlorn king by warlyke prowes seek to defend.
A soodeine tumult.
He said, and runninge forth his dart against his foes does bend.
Forth flies the whistlinge Cornell dart, and air does certain part.
Wherewith a clamor huge does rise, the bands with fear do start,
And stout courageous hearts through tumult great wax fiery wood.
This whirlinge dart nine bodies fayer of brethren, where they stood
Bychaunce direct against, (whom faithful spouse, a Tuscan bred:
Unto Archadian, Gilippe bare of yore that her did wed)
And one of them struck in the midst, whereas his belt did sit,
And now away is torn, where fast the buckle holds thonge in bit.
A noble youth of beutie brave, in glittringe armor strong,
And smit him through the ribs, and laid him down the sand alonge.
Then strait the valient brothers band with grief accenst in ire:
Some draw their naked swords, and some their sturdye darts require.
And forth they headlonge blyndly run, and Laurent bands anon
On the other side do fast approach, and Troyans many an one
In ranks right thick forth flow, Agillini, and Archads brave,
And all this only lust, to try with dint of sword they have.
The altars down they drive, a tempest sore of wepons flies,
A troublous sturdie storm of iron and steel obscures the skies.
The Latins strait snatch up the Boules, and Censers burninge bright.
Latinus takes with gods repulst and foiled league, his flight.
Some steedes from charrets do discharge, and mount on horses hie,
And with sharp drawn swords hent in hand forthwith do have the^ nie.
Messapus there, Aulestes king, that princely crown did bear
Of Tyrrhens all, that passinge greadye was the league to tear:
With courser stout does overthrow, who yeeldinge back, does fall,
And (wretch) against the altars that behind him stood withal
Both head, and shoulders smites, Messapus fierce strait thither flies,
And with his lance much like a beam whilst there Aulestes cries,
And suppliant sues for life: from lofty palfrey wounds him sore,
And thus he speaks: That sure is thine, this sacrafice before
The Gods of greater value is, then that was slain of yore.
The Italians thither ran, and spoils from carcas pantyng raught.
Sir Chorineus a flaming brond from of the altar caught,
And to Ebusus cumming fast, whilst he prepaard to fight:
Into his face the bronde he forced, his huge beard brent a light,
And swealed causd a stink, he follows still, and by the locks
With lefthand held his foe, whom roslyng and amazde, he knockes
Against the ground, and with his knee constraynes him there to lie,
And with his Fauchon strikes him in the side. Then by and by
Sir Alsus that a sheapheard was, and fierce in voward fought:
With naked sword in hand, fast follows Podalirius stout,
And large him lies upon, whom Alsus with his sharpened axe
Raughtbacke, from brow to chinne with sturdie stroke right cleaving packs.
Down strait he falls, and armor large with goarebloud does embrue.
Unto his eyes does bitter rest, and deadly sleep ensue,
With aie continuyng night, and never more the day to view.
But lord Aeneas up his righthand held unarmed quite,
With open head, and to his mates he cried withal his might.
Whether run you sirs? what discord great does thus your minds invade?
O stay your rage, the covenants all are drawn, and league is made.
And I alonly lotted am King Turnus to assay,
Let me therewith alone, and all your fear expel away.
With this righthand the league I stablish shall, and firmly tie,
For by this sacrafice is Turnus due to me to die.
Amid this tale, and when these words scarce yet were spoke all:
Aeneas is wounded with an arowe.
Behold a singyng shaft, with fluttryng feathers down does fall,
Uncertain by whose hand forth shot, or by what force forth thrown,
Or what chance Rutils praise has brought, or else what God, unknown
The glory of so worthy deed lies hid in secret still,
And no man for Aeneas wound himself be praised will.
When Turnus saw forth of the fight Aeneas to depart,
His captains much dismayed: with sode in hope does fierce forthstart,
For steedes and tools he calls, and proud by leapyng mountes on hie
Into his charret swift, and with his hands the raygnes does wrie.
Full many a worthy man to death forth flying mad does send,
And many he leaves fordead, some crushed with wheels he bringes to end,
Or else in fight with darts forth flunge does strike them in the back.
Like as when blouddy Mars, in rage pricktforth does make to crack
The streams of Hebrus cold, and with his bucklar them does tire,
And now to battle pressed sendes forth his steedes incenst with ire.
They in the open playnes more swift then wind, their way do take,
And with their stampyng feet the utmost coast of Thracia shake,
And round about dame Dreads right dririe look, and Angers face,
With Treason jointly joined, the train of Mars, the land do trace.
Such one then Turnus quick in thickst of throngs, his smoking steedes
Hotgoth, and (woeful case) at enmies death vauntes in his deeds.
The swift horshooue a blouddy dew about does sprinkle round,
And stampes the goary blood like mortar mixed with sandy ground.
And now he Sthenelus throws, and Thameris, and Phole to death,
Him meetyng, and with him, him far, far both he reeues of breath.
Imbrasus suns Glaucus, and Lades, whom Imbrasus old
In Lycia fostred up, and with like armor them did bold,
In fight at hand to try, or flight on horse the winds to win.
On th'otherside Eumedes forth flies fast, thickst throngs within,
Right noble Dolons impe, in feats of arms a doughtie knight,
Like graundsier in his name, in heart and hand his father right.
Who once for that to Greekish tents a spy he should be sent:
Achilles charret craaud to have for pains in travail spent.
Howbeit Tytides gave him other hire for ventred pain,
It Was not his chance unto Achilles horses to attain.
Whom Turnus when from far in open field did once epsy,
When first him had pursued with darts right light that fast did fly:
His coupled horse he stays, and from his charret down descendes,
And to him dead almost, and thrown to ground he quickly tendes.
His foot on neck he sets, with righthand forth his blade he drew,
And deeply died it in his throat, and forth these words he threw.
Lo here the fields, and which in war proud Trojan thou have sought:
Italia measure liyng now, such recompense is wrought
To such as me to war provoke, so walls they do erect.
Next him he Brutes lays, at whom a lance he did direct.
Then Cloreus stout of limme, Sibaris valient wight of hand,
Daretus and Thersiloch fierce, that stiff did him withstand.
Tymoetus eke that on his neck from coltish jade down fell.
And as the northern Thracie wind (in semblantwise to tell)
When forth it bloustringe blows; and deape Aegeum sea does raise,
The billows forth do roll, and to the shore do take their ways
As whirlinge winds do drive, the clouds flit fast in heaven on hie:
So Turnus where he takes his course the thronges fast thence do fly,
And headlonge troops retire, a courage fierce him forth does prick,
The waueringe air his plumes bears back that in his creast do stick.
This peartnes Phegeus might not bide, nor pride of stomach bold.
But to his charret steps, and some reigns in hand does hold
Of swift forth runninge steedes, and turns their heads another way.
Whilst thus he forth is drawn, and on their manes does hanginge stay:
A mighty lance forth flunge him groouelinge to the ground does cast,
And armor double lynd with plate through gorget thick does brast,
And pearcinge to the quick, the vpmost skin with small wound rast.
But he with bucklar bent before his breast makes at his lo,
And sharp sword drawn in hand for more assurance, forth does go,
Whom one the charret wheels down dinges, and axle swift in flight
Throws to the ground, and Turnus followinge, soon does down alight,
And twixt the gorget brim, and space whereas the helmet stands:
His head he smites away, and leaves the corpse upon the sands.
These bloody slaughters fierce in field, whilst Turnus conquerours wrought:
Therwhiles Mnestheus with trusty Achates, both Aeneas brought
Still bleedinge to his tent, with young Ascanius by his side,
And leaninge to a lance with limpinge pace does slowly stride.
He frettes, and forcinge strives the shaft, and head forth whole to halle,
And asks their best advice, and feign would know their judgments all,
Where it were best the wound wide open to lance, and arrow hid
To cut quite out the flesh that so to war return they did.
And now Iapis came, to Phoebus dear the rest above,
Iasus sun, with whom surpriso sometime in fervent love:
Apollo gladly gave him gifts his arts that he should know
Physic with out honor in the field, where the destruction not the health of
men is sought.
In things to come, in Music sweet, in skill of shaftes and bow.
But he, whereby he might prolonge his bedred fathers days:
Chose rather skill in power of herbs, and Phisickes noble praise,
And such like knowledge dumb deuoid of honor, to frequent.
Aeneas chaufinge stood, and to a mighty lance him lent,
And youth a troop about him thick, and sad Iule his sun.
He at their tears unmoved stands, as erst he had begun.
Then ancient leach Iapis, girdes an apronne him before
Right Surgeonlike, and forth he fettes his oils, and salues in store.
And eft he tries the powers of herbs, which him sir Phoebus tought,
And tremblinge sundry things applies, but all (god wot) for naught.
And eft the stickinge arowhead with hand he does assay,
With nippers eke sumtime, from out the bones to draw away.
But fortune will no way assign, Apollo does no good.
And now the rage within the field still growinge wareth wook,
And fierce does more arise, and now the mischief is at hand,
And all the air above with smokinge dust full thick does stand.
The horsemen near approach, and darts fast on the tents do fall.
A woeful showte of Soldiers to the heavens flies up withal,
Of some that fierce do fight, Venus cures her sun.
and some in war that now be slain.
But Venus much appauld at this her suns unworthy pain:
Green Ditainie from Ida sacred mount in Creet she bringes,
The stalk with te^dre leaves, and purple flowers full fresh that springes.
An herb to Roebuckes wild, and beasts not tame right welbeknowne,
When as their backs stick full of darts, y^ hunters thick have thrown.
Dysguyso in cloud obscure the same Dame Venus thither bringes,
And into water vessels bright it secretly she flinges,
And makes thereof Infusion large, the virtue forth to take.
And of Ambrosias wholesome iuce therte does sprynclinge shake,
Whereto she adds the fragrant sap that Panax soote does make.
Anon the wound with this by chance Iapis ancient, baynes,
Unawares hereof, and lo in soode in sort, fly all the pains
From out his body quyte away, the blood was staunched straight,
And gently follows forth the shaft with hands alonly wayght,
And by and by his former strength returns to every lym.
Then quickly fetch his armor strong ( Iapis calls) for him,
Why stand you still? and first does him incense against his foes.
Not by man's help ( Iapis cries) this cure thus forward goes,
It Is not, Aeneas, my righthand, that thee thus saufe preserues,
A greater god it is that thee to greater deeds reserues.
He greedy then of fight his legs in golden armor ties
On every side, all lets he hates, then for his spear he cries.
And when he fitted was of shield, and armd in every place:
All complete as he stood, Ascanlus young he does embrace,
And up his beuer lift, and fweetly kessinge, thus he spoke.
A farthers exhortation to the child.
Learn courage shout of me, my child, and perfect pains to take,
Of others happy chance to have, this righthand shall defend
Thee in this war, and after this to greater honors send.
And see that thee, when riper years have made a perfect man:
Thine auncetours most famous factes in mind thou carry than,
Let fire Aeneas, and thine uncle Hector thee incyte.
When he these words had spoke, forth of the doors he walked right,
Of mighty lim, and in his hand an hugie lance he bare.
Then Antheus and Mnestheus both, with thronginge troops forth fare.
And all the rout runs forth, and tents alone they leave unkept.
A smoultringe smoakinge dust, a long the camp with feet is swept.
And all the ground about with weight of steps then treblinge lept.
Then Turnus saw him marchinge toward fast with great array.
The Italians all beheld the same, and through their bones staytway
A soodeyn shiueringe ran, Iuturna first of Latins side,
Perceaud and knew the noise, and sore affright away she hide.
He flies him forth in open field, his host he leads apace.
Much like a bloustrynge storm, that from the sea to land does trace,
When droppinge clouds dissolved fall, then husbandmen do wringe,
When long before (alas) they see what harms it is like to bring.
For down it throws the trees to ground, and corn it lays alonge,
And althinge sweepes to earth, the winds before to shoares do thronge,
And crackynge ratlinge sound do make, as ruff they huffe about:
Even so his bands against his foes the Troyan captain stout
Leads forth, and they themselves in wedges thick do flockinge throw.
There Thymbres with his sword Osirius lent a deadly blow.
Sir Mnestheus then Archetius flew, Achates did behead
Sir Epulo, and Gias sharp sir Vfens left for dead.
Ill counsel, worst to the counselor.
Then falls Tolumnius calcar slain to ground, that first in have,
And furious frantyke mood his dart against his foes did cast.
A yellinge shoute then to the heavens they throw, and all affright
The vanquished Rutils turn their dustye backs in sodeyn flight.
But he none daynes such as he meets with all, on ground to throw,
On horseback none nor to invade, nor yet on foot below
Such as darts flinginge follow after fast, but he alone
In mydst of all the dustie mist, and thick thronges every one:
For Turnus seeks about, and him in combat does require.
Iuturna then Virago fierce, whose mind was set on fire
With pantinge dread, her brother Turnus wagoner, that hight
Metiscus down from out his place, and charge she tumbleth quight.
And from the Summer far away she leaves him on the ground,
And up she leapes, and lithie reigns with hand she turns rownd,
Resemblinge shape, and voice, and armor of Metiscus stout.
Like as the swallow black, that stately courts does fly about
Of lords, and princes great, and lofty buildinges largly tries,
And for her pratlinge young does feedinge seek on gnats, or flies,
Sumtime in entries wide, sumtime about deep slandinge lakes,
With tender houeringe wings her skirringe flight swift forward takes:
So does Iuturna through the thickst of foes her horses beete,
And every place about with fliynge charret swift does meet.
Sumetime her brother here, and sumtime there does vauntinge show
In quarters far and near, nor lettes him give nor take a blow.
No less Aeneas seeks with him to meet through crooked ways,
And through his thickst as^nned host, and quailed Latin rays,
And loud him calls by name so often as him he has in sight.
And look how often he meant him to pursue with horses light:
So often Iuturna strait the charret steedes away does turn.
Alas, what should he do? his heart in vain with rage does burn,
His pensive mind is much distract with diverse doubtful cares.
Messapus then that in his hand by chance, as hapt, that bares
Two lithie quiueringe darts, well tipped with steel, full swift of flight:
The one he shakinge holds, and forth it flinges with level right.
Still stands Aeneas, and strait to his shield him self does fit
Down stoupinge low, howbeit the fliynge darth, his helmet smit,
And down his lusty plume of from his creast to ground it threw.
Then strait his rage arose, and courage great by Treason grew,
When steedes he saw were turned awrie, and charret back was raught:
Then Jove, and altars all of broken league he there besaught.
At last he thronges into the thickst, and there in luckie fight
Right dreadful blooddie slaughter makes, he spares none in fight,
And all incenst with ire, unto his rage he gain the raygnes.
What god to me will now at large this pine, and woeful pains,
And sundry slaughters sore, and death of dukes in verse unfold,
That were by Turnus made in course, and Troyan captayn bold
With such fell force these nations stout, O Jove, was it thy will
They thus should meet that should hereafter live in concord still:
Aeneas pa^ not long but Sucro Rutil, out of hand,
(That only stroke did cause the fliynge Troyans still to stand)
He struck into the side, and where most speed of death does rest:
Between the short ribs deep his sword he drove into his breast.
Then Turnus, turns Amycus down, and Diore by his side,
Two Troyan brothers dear, and forth on foot to them does stride.
And at Amycus when he began approach, a dart he threw.
Diores with his sword he struck bright glittringe which he drew,
And both their heads he cut from corpse, and blooddie sprinclinge yet:
Upon his charret top, with egre mood aloft he set.
Aeneas Tale and Tanais slaies, and next Cothegus strong,
All three at one assault, and sad Onytes lives not long,
Of Thebans ancient stock, and of Peridia mother dear.
Then Turnus brothers sent from Lycia far to Troy yfeere,
Menaetes eke Archadian youth, that war did fear in vain,
And near to Lerna fishie brinckes an handiecraft did train.
A simple house that kept and princes wealth did never know,
His father hired had a little land, and that did sow.
And like as flaminge fires, that kindled are in diverse ways
The Iustie courage of Aeneas and Turnus.
In dry and cracklinge woods, or on the boughs of ratlinge Eayes.
Or when the swift, and fominge streams from lofty hills that fall,
A raginge roaringe raise, and forth to sea they run withal,
Each finds out his way, and down they drive whatso withstandes:
No sloer forth Aeneas flies, and Turnus stout of hands,
And both within the battayl bide, now now they fret with in,
Their breasts with courage brast, whose valient hearts no force can win.
And now to wound echother sore they meet with deadlye food.
Aeneas there, Murrhanus proud of graundsiers great that stood,
And antique names of noble Belsiers old was wont to show,
And Pedigrues far fet from all the Latin kings arowe:
He reeues down with a rock, the stony tempest lays him low,
And under horses feet and charret flinges, the whirlinge wheel
Him prostrate ouerrunnes, and eft with stamp of shoe of steel:
The swift forth flinginge hoof with mighty poyse often strikes hard,
And of their master thrown to ground the steedes take no reguard.
Then Turnus with sir Hilus meets that headlonge runninge ran,
And through his temples armd with gold his dart he forced than,
The dart soon through the helmet flies, and strait in brains it steeke^
No not thy hand stout Cretes, valienst most of all the Greeks
From Turnus could acquight, nor yet Cupentus Gods him save,
When once Aeneas came in place, but soon his breast he gave
Direct against Aeneas lance, the spear on him does fall,
Naught to the seely wretch his brazen shield preuayld at all.
And thee likewise, sir Aeolus, Laurentum fields did see
Quite overthrown, and flatly prostrate on the ground to be.
There now thou lie, whom Graetian host, could never overthrow,
Nor yet Achilles fierce, that Priams kingdom laid full low.
This was thy time of death prefixed, nigh Ida thou wast borne,
In Lyrnesse did thou dwell, in Laurent fields thou lie forlorn,
And now the armies all were bent, all whole the Latin rout,
And all the Trojan crew, Mnestheus, and sir Serestus stout.
Messapus eke a tamer good of steedes, Asylas strong,
And Tuscan ranks, and old Euanders swift Archadian thronge,
Each man now for himself withal his might there does his best.
No stay, nor rest, to cruel fight each man is ready pressed.
There, to Aeneas then his mother faier this mind did send,
That to the city walls with speed he should his army bend,
And with a soodein mischief all the Latins hearts affright.
Then as for Turnus round about the host he cast his sight:
The town he there beholdes deuoid of war, to stand at rest,
A greater shape of war right then does kindle in his breast.
For Mnestheus and Sergestus strait he calls, and Serest strong;
His valient captains all, and all the heap of Trojan thronge
Together runs, he takes an hill, their shieldes, nor weapons they
Lay not aside, he in the midst aloft, thus began to say.
Let be no stay at that I bid, Jove on our side does stand,
And soodeyn though I charge, let none it slackly take in hand.
This town the cause of all the war, and king Latinus land,
Unless they do submit themselves, and grant for to obey:
I Will surely sack, and race unto the ground this present day.
Forsooth shall I attend till Turnus please with me to fight?
And then again his leisure wayt, when he is vanquished quight?
This Town is cheifest cause, my mates, and head of all the sore.
Go fet me fire atonce, and do the league with flame restore.
He said, and strayt with one consent a warlike wedge they make,
The town assalted.
And thick unto the walls in clustringe thronges they forth to rake.
The ladders soodenly appear, and firebrondes burninge bright.
Sum run unto the gates, and whom they meet they stay downeright.
Sum flinge forth darts, and welkin hie with weapons do obscure.
Aeneas there amongst the first his righthand holds up pure
Unto the walls, and much in words does blame Latinus king,
And Gods to record calls, that they to war again him bring.
That twice Italians waxt his soes, and brake their covenants twice.
Then strait among the citizens a discord great does rise.
Sum bid unlock the town, and open wide the gates to set
To call the Trojans in, and king Aeneas in to set.
Sum armor take, and still persist the walls for to defend.
Like as a swarm of Bees that in an hollow Pumice pend,
A shepherd when by chance has found, and bitter smooke applies:
They fearful then within, about through waxen castles flies,
And with hot hummyng sound themselves to anger do provoke.
Out flies from forth their hole apace in heaps, the filthy smoke,
The hollow cave beneath with noise confuesd does rumblyng sound,
And into open air abroad at last does brim rebound.
To Latins over this befell a misaduenture great,
That all the woeful town with tears, and sorrow did repleat.
For when the Queen beheld the foe to draw the city nie,
The walls to burn, and up to lofty houses fire to fly,
No power of Rutils near at hand, nor Turnus to resist:
Unhappy dame, that Turnus had bin slain in fight she wist.
And mated much in mind with grievous fear, she cries, alas,
That of these mischiefs all herself the cause, and worker was.
And all with ruthful rage incenst, she blabbes forth many tales,
And diyngeripe with nails her purple robes in rags she hales.
Amata hangs herself
Then on a beam with in the pallayce he a cord she fies,
And hanges herself thereon, and (fie for shame) there so she dies.
Which woeful chance, when once the Latin women understood,
And first Lauinio bright her daughter dear: as frantic wood
Her golden locks she rent, and roset cheeks with nails she tare,
And all the rout in semblantwise right frantickly do fare.
The houses nie with noise resounde, and all the town about
This woeful feign does flickryng fleet within and eke without.
Their courage they let fall, his princely robes Latinus rentes,
His hoarie head (good man) and ancient beard with dirt besprentes,
Amazed at his ladies death, and at the cities fall.
And much himself he blames, that he before did never call
Aeneas to him prince of Troy, his sun in law to be.
Therwhiles lord Turnus warriar stout, in open field does see
A few poor scattred soldiers, whom he slowly does pursue.
For now his horses he with courage less to run does view.
There to his ears a doubtful noise the whirlyng aier then braught.
He listnyng stood, and with attentife ear the sound he raught
Of Laurent sacked town, and of their pitious clamor thoe.
Alas, why is the city thus dismayed with grievous woe?
Or what great outcrie is the same, that does the city raise?
He said, and therewith welnigh mad, the charret raygnes he stays.
To whom his sister then, as she Metiscus countnance bare,
And of his runnyng charret raygnes, and steedes had taken the care:
With such like words replies. Nay rather let us follow now
The Trojans Turnus here, where conquest ginnes on us to bow.
There others are that with their hands the city will defend.
Aeneas on Italians sets, and cruel force does bend.
Let us likewise with slaughter vile the Trojans make to smart,
So thou with equal number slain, and honor shall depart.
Whereto thus answered Turnus then.
O sister dear, I knew ere this how thou by subtle slight,
The league did overthrow, and threwst thy self into this fight.
And now in vain thou seekst me to deceive, O Goddess pure.
But who from heaven thee down to come, such trauayles to endure
Requested, such adventures wild to bide, and vncoutrould?
Was it because thy brothers wretched death thou would behold?
For whereabout now do I go? what chance may me betide,
That to my rent, and torn estate some succor may provide?
My self Murrhanus saw of late that me by name did call,
Who whilst he lived was to me the best belooued of all,
Of limnie a mighty man, and slain likewise with mighty wound.
Unhappy Vfens, eke lest he our shame should see, on ground
Now dead he lies, the Trojans both his corpse, and arms enjoy.
The houses spoyld (that mischief yet remaynd, and great anoy)
Shall I abide to see? and Drances words not prove untrue?
And shall this ground faintharted dastard Turnus flying view?
Deep desperation.
Is it so vile a thing to die? O hellish hegges below
Come help I pray, for heavenly powers no savor me will show.
To you my soul deuoid of such a crime, shall down descend,
No deal inferior to the graundsiers great of all my kend.
Scarce had he said, when lo sir Sages locked on fominge steed,
Flies through the thickest foes, whose face deep wounded sore did bleed
With dint of arrowe fallinge swift, and thus he criynge spoke.
Turnus in thee is all our hope, on thine some pity take.
Aeneas rages now in arms, and threats he will confound
The turrets of Italia land, and city burn to ground.
And now the fire to houses flies, the Rutils bend their eyes
On thee, and all the seely Latins sure do so likewise.
Latinus king is much in doubt, and murmour great does make,
Whom he may call his sun in law, or what league he may take.
And over this, the Queen most true to thee, her death has wrought
With her own cruel hand, and light of life esteemd at naught.
Before the gates Messapus strong, joint with Atinas stout:
Alone sustain the force, and all the ranks them round about
Do stand full thick, and iron thronges of darts do daunt their face,
And thou thy charret here alone in desert fields do trace.
Then Turnus at the diverse shape of things astunned staid,
And down his eyes he kest to ground, and whustinge nothing said.
And there atonce great grief and shame his heavy heart does freat
Deep lodgd within, and madness mixed in breast with sorrow great,
And love incenst with rage, and privy touch of enmies might.
But when from mind he darkness drove, and brought again the light:
His flaminge eyes with ire unto Laurentum walls he rold,
And from his charret hie the goodly town he did behold:
When lo the flashinge flames aloft the battelmentes had caught
Of Turnus noble tower, and up to heaven they cracklinge raught.
A tower strong, made of wood, the prince himself had built alone,
And choules had vnderlayd, and ladders made to mount thereon.
Ah sister (then quod he) my death draws near hold thee content,
Where gods, and spiteful fortune call, to follow I full am bent,
And with Aeneas hand to hand to meet, and what our pain
Augmenteth else with loss of loathsome life: that to sustain.
And, sister, after this thou shall not see me play the part
Of cowarde knight, but give me license now with all my heart
I thee beseech, before my final rage, to rage a while.
He said, and as his desperate mind with inward wrath did boil:
From charret down into the open fields his leap he takes,
And forth through foes he thronges, his sorrowful sister there forsakes.
And through the thickst of all the host holds on his frantique pace,
And on each side the ray of enmies ranks he does displace.
Like as a rock that from a lofty mount does headlonge fall,
Enforst with rage of wind, or else with shoures, and water gall.
Or when long years with ancient tract of time the hold did lose
The hugie hill falls down with woundrous force, and away it goes,
And proudly springes on ground, and wooddes, and beasts, and me^, and all
Before him tumblinge turns, and roulinge runs forth like a ball.
So through his vanquished host forth Turnus mad in have does fly
Where all the ground about with blood does deeply drenched lie,
And whirlinge deadly darts in th'ayer above do make a cloud.
He beckens with his hand, and with his mouth thus cries aloud.
Stay stay O Rutils now, and Latins hold your hands, no more.
What ever chance befall, it is due to me though it go sore.
It Is meeter I the broken league with smart deserved should bie,
And in your steed myself a lone with blade the quarrel try.
They strayt withdrewe themselves, and wide roomth made him by and by.
But lord Aeneas, Turnus name whence once in ear he took:
The sturdie city walls, and lofty towers anon forsook.
And lingringe lays aside, and all attemptes leaves out of hand,
And leapes for joy, and thundrynge there does great in armor stand:
As much as Athos mount, or Eryx hill, or rough with wood,
And whom with snowie top all year to stand it does much good
Hie ancient Appeninus hill, that to the clouds does rise.
Then Rutils all, and Troyans all do bend their heedfull eyes.
And all The Italian troops likewise, both those the walls on hie
That keep, and those with enginnes great to break the walls that plie*
And armor down from shoulders lay. Latinus mazed stands,
When such two mighty men he sees of limme, so stout of hands,
In places so far distant borne meet there with so great might,
And fully bent their force to try in single handed fight.
Then they when first in empty field each other began to view:
With trauerse swift about, each one his dart at other threw.
Then strait to hand they come, their swords and targates meetinge dash.
There might you hear the ground to groan, their blades with blows do clash
Thickedubled fet, good chance, and prowis together in one are mixed.
And like as when contention falls two mighty Bulls betwixt,
On top of hugie Syla mount, or hille Tabernus hie,
That for dominion evermore, and mastershippe do try:
With horns they do invade, the fearful keepers stand a side,
And all the flockinge heard about deep silent does abide,
The hefers mumblinge soft do make, who now shall rule the roast,
And whom the heard shall follow, as they do feed about the coast.
They with all force, with mortal wound each other seeks to smight,
And with their perlous crooked horns alone is all their fight.
Their foul black reakinge blood, with channel large does fall to ground,
And neck and shoulders bathes, with bellowinge blood the wood does sound.
None otherwise Aeneas fierce, and stout lord Daunius meet
With targates ready bent, and round the air with noise repleete.
Then Jupiter in heaven above in equal balaunce wayghes
Their destnies both, and from his sentence grave a while he stays.
And unto either diverse chance alottes, who shall endure
More travails hard, and who the present death to die is sure.
There Turnus vauntes himself and well he hopes, with all his might
A sturdie blow he fettes, and on his toes he rises right.
The stroke lights home, the Troyans shout, the Latins shake for fear,
And both the armies roundabout amazd stand gapinge there.
But lo, the false and brittle sword is broken, and at that blow
His Master quite deceaud, Turnus sword bro^ in pieces.
and abroad in sliuers small it flow.
And quite undone he was, had not he taken himself to flight.
Thence fast he flies more swift then wind, and sees there in his sight
A strange sword hilt, his stout righthand likewise of weapon void.
Report does go, that when to battle first to go he ioyd,
And mounted first his charret hie forced forth with fear and ire:
His fathers sword he then mistook, and as have did require,
His wagoner Metiscus sword he took in steed of his,
Which long, while Troyans turn their backs in flight, sufficient is.
But when to armor made by god Vulcanus come it was:
The mortal sword at first blow flies about like brickle glass,
And little shiuers round about lie shininge in the grass.
There Turnus in his flight, the broad wide fields does trace about,
Now here he turns, now there, and courses round fettes in and out.
On every side a ringe of Troyans thick incloasd him all,
On this side lay a fenne, on that side stood the city wall.
No less Aeneas then (howbeyt full deep with arrowe smit
His faultringe knees do fail, and to run fast will not permit)
Him after hies, and foot to foot at heels him urges nie.
Like as a Dear, that to the pleasant soil apace does hie,
And there in meash of hugie net entrapt, does quakinge fear.
The hunter comes with howndes, and with great barkinges draws him near.
He at the sturdie toil, and banks full hie right sore aghast:
A thousand ways does turn and wend, the noble hownd does have,
And gapinge comes at heels, and now does pinch, or like to pinche:
He snoppes his jaws, and is deceaud is bit by half an inche.
Then rises round a shout, that shoares, and lakes the same rebound,
And all the heaven about with thumpinge thundre does resound.
Then Turnus fliynge fast does all his Rutils forely blame,
And for his sword well known, he calls to every one by name.
Aeneas present death does threat, and great destruction there,
If any do approach, and them still tremblinge more does fear,
And threats the city down to race, and walls unto the ground.
And still (though wounded) draws him near, and now five courses round
About they had absolu'd, and back five courses they begun,
Both this way now, then that, nor for no trifle it is they run,
But for king Turnus life they strive (alas) and for his blood.
By chance thereby an Olive wild with bitter leaves there stood,
Sacred to Faunus god, to mariners a joyful tree,
Where such as saufe from shipwreck foul, and drenchinge saved be:
Are wont their offringes up to hang, and garments known at full.
This tree without respect at all, the Troyans up did pull,
That without let wherein to fight the whole field they might have.
There stuck Aeneas dart, him force in castinge thither drove.
The root it fast did hold, he bendes him down, and there assayes
Thereout to pull the spear, and it at Turnus cast, his ways
As forth he runs, whom he in runninge could not ever take.
Then Turnus raginge mad with fear, his prayer thus began make.
O Faunus pity take I pray (quod he,) thou worthy Ground
Hold fast the dart, your honors if I ever saved found.
Whom otherwise Aeneas crew by war have made profayne.
He said, and to the gods his suit he did not make in vain.
For though he striued long, and at the clunge stem much did stay:
Yet by no strength Aeneas could his spear pull thence away.
Thus whilst he fiercely forcinge stands, and still does pluck and strain.
Into her brothers wagoners Metiscus shape again
Iuturna chaungd, his sword unto her brother does restore.
That Venus at this Nymphs so bold attempt disdaininge sore,
Drew near, and from the root beneath the dart she plucked out.
Then they with weapons armed both, and waxt with courage stout,
This trustinge sword, the other fierce with spear Aeneas bent:
Against other gone, with marciall might each one at other went.
Therwhiles thalmightie king to Juno speakinge thus he told, Jupiter speaks
to Juno.

That from a yellow cloud above, the batteill did behold.
What shall the end hereof be wife? what now remains? say.
Aeneas is a god thou know, thyself can not denay.
And that to heaven he longes, and to the stars to be extold.
What do thou work? or in what hope abidste in clouds so cold?
Is It meet a god with dint of mortal wound defilde should be?
Or else (for what Iuturna could she do were not for thee?)
The sword restoarde to Turnus be, and force to vanquished grow?
Leave of at last at our request, lay down thy courage low.
Nor let such privy Rancor fret thee more, this care and smart
Let them (good Juno) from thy sweet and pleasant mouth depart.
We to the last are come, the Troyans vex by sea and land
Thou might, and blooddie wicked wars to raise was in thine hand,
And houses to deface, and monefull marriages to make.
But farther to attempt I thee forbid. Thus Jove then spoke,
And goddess Juno with a louly countnance thus replied.
Almighty spouse, Juno answers Iupit^
since first your heavenly pleasure I espied:
Both Turnus, and the earth, and all I left against my will.
Ne should you see me now in air alone to sit so still,
And suffer thus such worthy unworthy things, but armd in fire
In thickest thronges would thrust, and on the Troyans wreake mine ire.
Iuturna I confess, I causd her woeful brother aid,
And for his life (alas) I bid what could, should be assaid.
Yet weapons none I wild her take, nor yet to bend her bow,
I swear by dreadful springes whence stream of Styx alo^ge does flow.
The only true, and reverent Oath that heavenly gods do make.
And now I do give place, and loathsome wars I quite forsake.
But yet this one thing now, which destnies course does not denay:
For honors sake of thine, and for all Latium grant I pray.
That when (whereto I yield) in perfect peace they wedlockes knit,
And wholesome laws appoint, and lasting leagues of frindship smit:
Of Latin old inhabitours thou would not change the name,
Nor Troyans to be cauld, nor Teucers yet command the same.
Nor let the^ change their speech, but wear their weeds they ware of yore.
Let Latium still abide, and Albane kings for evermore.
Let Roman ofspringe be of power through great Italian might,
Troy down is fallen, and with the name now let it perish quite.
To whom the maker of gods and men thus answered smilinge mild.
Thou art my sister dear, and old Saturnus second child,
Why do thou then such hugie waves of rage roll in thy breast?
But go to, from this late sprunge grief set whole thy heart at rest.
I grant thy suit, and wittinge willinge there to do agree.
Ausonians shall their language keep, and customs as they be,
And as it is their name shall bide, in body only mixed
Shall Troyans be, no diffrence more them both shall be betwixt.
Their manners, and their sacred rites I will oppoint them all,
And I will cause all nations still they Latins them shall call.
This stock that of Ausonian blood commixt shall shortly rise:
In virtue men shall pass, and pass the Gods that dwell in skies.
Unto thee honor do no nation shall so much as they.
Dame Juno gave a nodde, and glad, her mind she turns a way,
And from the air departes, and leaves the cloud where she did stay.
When this was done: the father of Gods a new devise does prove,
How from her brothers aid Iuturna Nymphe he may remove.
Two woeful plagues there been, that by right name men Furies call,
Whom with Megaera hellish hegge Night darck, The Furies are children of ye
Night.
and dreadful, all
At one birth brought to light, and with like stinges of serpents fell
Them all did arm, and like wings gave that shift winds do excel.
These Jove before, and in the seat of Pluto dreadful king
Attendinge stand, and woeful fear to mortal men they bring,
If dryrie death at any time, or sickness vile to bear
Jove do command, or cities naught with bloody wars to fear.
Of these then one from heaven Jove down does send with speedy flight,
And to Iuturna with ill luck byddes fly her to affright.
Away she goes, and unto earth with whirlewind flitteth fast,
Noneotherwyse then when a shaft swift forth with bowstringe cast
In deadlye bitter poison dypt, through clouds apace does fly,
Which mortal shaft a Parthian shot, or Cydon man did wrye:
The singinge tool through shadow flies, that none perceive it may.
So went this child of Night, and so to earth she took her way.
When Troyan host at hand, and Turnus hand she did epsy:
To shape of slendre foul herself she chaunges by and by,
Suchas are wont on grisly graves, and desert houses sit
By night, and in the dark their woeful tunes do charm, and chit.
She turns h^self to a Shritchowle.
To this foul form thus turned, at Turnus face she skirringe cries,
And strikes his targat with her wings, as here and there she flies.
This new fear the^ his droupinge limbs with dread did cause to quake,
His hear rose up on end, his tremblinge voice in jaws fast stake.
But when the Furies hateful shritch from far, and wings she knew:
Iuturna woeful wight, her hear from of her head she drew,
And with her nails her face she rent, with hands she beat her breast.
Ah Turnus now (quod she) what may she do that loves the best?
What way may now thy sister work, Inturnas complaint.
or what means is so strong,
That I may practice same, thy woeful life for to prolonge?
Myself against such monsters to oppose am I of might?
Nay nay, the battle now I leave, nor me with fear affright
Do any more you filthy fowls, and hegges of Limbo low,
Your hellish sound, and clappyng of your wings I well do know.
And well I wot the proud beheastes of Jove so great of might,
Now for my Maydenhoode bereft does he me thus requight?
Why gave he me eternal life, and death did take away?
So that by mortal end these lastyng greifs I might delay,
And with my brother dear now down descend to shadows dead,
If like as he (which would to God) a mortal life I lead.
No pleasure of my pleasures all shall pleasant be to me
O brother Turnus dear, and all for lack, and loss of thee.
What ground (alas) will gape below my corpse therein to take,
And bring me down (a Goddess though I be) to Lymbo lake?
This much she said: and strayt her head in mantell blue she hid
Sore sighinge, and anon she threw herself the stream amyd.
Aeneas forces forth, and mighty spear in hand does shake
Of sturdie timber framde, and with great courage thus he spoke.
What tarience now is this? why, Turnus, do thou kingre thus?
In flight we must not strive, but near at hand in fight I was.
Transform thyself to every shape, or else thy best assay.
By force of arms, or else by craft to rid thyself away.
Or wish unto the lofty stars by flittryng wings to fly,
Or covered else within some hollow cave in ground to lie.
He shaking then his head: it is not thy bitter words that me
Do make a feared, but Gods me fray, and Jove my so (quod he.)
He said no more, but strait a mighty stone he there beheld,
A mighty ancient stone, that then by chance within the field
There for a Bound did lie, and strife twixt lands for to appease.
Scarce could twelve chosen men that on their shoulders lift with ease,
Such men I mean, as now a days the earth to light does bring.
This up in hand he caught, and tremblyng at his foe did flyng
Arysing up therewith, and forth his vease he fet withal.
But he nor when he came, nor when he went to mind does call,
Or when he lifted up his hand, or when the stone he threw.
His knees do fail, and through his blood a chilly cold there flew.
The stone then rowlyng through the empty air his way did take,
But forth at full it did not fly, nor yet the mark it struck.
And like as in a dream when sleep by night has cloasd our eyes,
Sometimes in vain great courses forth to run we do devise,
And in the midst of all our force anon begin to fail,
Our tongue is tied, and through our body quite our strength does quayle,
That make no noise we can, nor able are one word to say.
To Turnus so, what ever manfull means he does assay:
Success the cruel Fury does deney. Then in his mind
A thousand thoughts arise, his eyes he back does cast behind,
And on the Rutils, and the Town he looks, and doubts for fear,
And trembles when he thinks at hand to come the fatal spear,
Nor knows which way to wend, nor how against his foe to fly,
His charret nor his charret maid he can no where epsy.
Whilst thus he doubts, Aeneas forth his spear does shake in sight,
And vauntadge watches with his eye, thenstrait with all his might,
Afar he flinges it forth. Not so does cast the hugie stones
The enginne great, that to break walls of towns is made for nones.
Nor with such clappe the lightninge bright out of high heaven does brast.
The murdringe spear flies forth, and whirlwindlike, does flit as fast.
And through his armor brane of proof it heates, and bucklar bright
With seven thick lininges laid, into the thigh it struck him quight.
Then Turnus wounded down to grownd with dubled knees does fall.
The Rutils woeful shoutes do raise, and round the hills withal
Resoundinge make, and all the wooddes the noise beat back again.
He then on grownd, his yeeldinge eyes, and hand of pardon feign
Entreatinge up does hold, and sure I have deserved (quod he)
Nor pardon ask I none, use now thy chance at will on me.
But if reguard of ancient sier, thy mind sumdeale may tuch,
(For unto thee of late thy father Anchises old was such:)
Upon king Daunus ancient years do thou some pity take,
And me, or whether thou meanst deuoid of vital life to make:
Restoare unto my friends, for thou have wunne, these hands of mine
The Ausonians saw to yield, and faier Lauinia now is thine.
No farther let thy rage proceed. Fierce there in arms did stand
Aeneas castinge down his eyes, and still he staid his hand.
And more and more the gentle speech to swage his mind began:
When lo, (alas) th'unluckie Belt that on his shoulders than
Aloft with buckles glittringe bright with gold that garnisht were,
Appeered, which he knew rightwel, that Pallas young did bear:
Whom Turnus with a mighty wound had slain not long before,
And now the pilladge of his foe upon his shoulders wore.
But when with eyes these tokens great of grief he did behold
And spoils, with rage incenst, in fury wood, and uncontrolled:
Ah wretch (quod he) do think that wearinge spoils of mine, from me
Shall so escape? Now Pallas with this wound, now Pallas thee
Does offer up, and on thy wicked blood revenge does take.
This sainge, deep him to the heart with naked sword he struck
Dissolutio^ of life.
All hot with ire, the native heat his limbs does strait forsake,
His ghost flies fast with grief, and great disdain, to Lymbo lake.
DEO GRATIAS.
Finitum Londini, per Thomam Twynum,
vi. Iulij. 1573. Opus. xx. dierum plus minus, per internualla temporum.
Master Phaers Conclusion to his interpretation of the Aeneidos of Virgil, by
him converted into English verse.
THus farfourth (good readers) as well for defense of my country language
(which I have heard discommended of many, and esteemed of some to be more than
barbarous) as also for honest recreation of you the nobility, gentlemen and
Ladies that study no Latin, I have taken some travail to express this most
excellent writer, as far as my simple ability extended. And if god send me
life and leisour, I purpose to set forth the rest, unless it may like some
other that is better armed with learning, to prevent my labors, whereof I
assure you, I would be right glad, contenting my self sufficiently with this,
that by me first this gate is set open. If now the young writers will
vouchesaue to enter: they may find in this language, both large and abundant
camps of variety, where in they may gather innumerable sorts, of most
beautiful flowers, figures, and phrases, not only to supply the imperfection
of me: but also to garnishe al kinds of their own verses with a more clean
and co^pendious order of meeter, than heretofore commonly has been accustomed.
And if any further help I may do to that purpose, I shall more gladly bestow my
travail hereafter, if I may know that these my beginnings be of you gently
taken and embraced. Trusting that you my right worshipful masters, and
students of Universities, and such as be teachers of children and readers of
this auctour in Latin, will not be to much offended, though every verse answer
not to your expectation. For (besides the diversity between a construction
and a translation) you know there be many mystical secrets in this writer,
which uttered in English would show little pleasour, and in mine opinion are
better to be untouched, than to diminishe the grace of the rest with tediousnes
and darkness. I have therefore followed the counsel of Horace, teaching the duty
of a good interpretour, Qui quae desperate nitescere posse, relinquit, by which
occasion, somewhat I have in places omitted, somewhat altered, and some thing I
have expounded, and al to the ease of inferior readers, for you that are
learned need not to be instructed. I mean not to prejudice any that can do
finer, only I desire you to bear with my travail, and among other to pardon
my first book, wherein I found this new kind of fingering somewhat strange
unto me, and to say the truth I had never any quiet from troubles, to co^fer or
peruse that book, or any of the rest, as I most desired. You may therefore
accept them, as things roughly begun, rather than polished, and where you
understand a fault, I desire you, with silence patiently pass it, and upon
knowledge given to me, I shall in the next setting forth, endeavor to reform
it. And if any with this will not be contented, than let him take it in hand,
and do it a new him self, and I nothing mistruste, but he shall find it an
easier thing to controlle a piece or two, than to amend the whole of this
enterpretation. Thus I commit you to god gentle Readers, and I pray you
correct these errors escaped in the printing.

Errors escaped in the printinge.
H 2. page 2. line, 27. read O cuntry land (quod he) Q 3. page 2. line 25. for
feeds, read seeds. Q 4. page 1. line 19. whom the, read whom when the. R 1.
page 1 line 2. for enfeere, read enteere. Ff 1. page 1. line 18. Vulcanus, read
Vulcans. G g 3. page 1. line 29. for parge, read page.

