VIRGIL'S BVCOLICKS ENGISHED.

Whereunto is added the Translation of the two first Satyrs of IVVENAL.

By JOHN BIDLE.

-- Baccare frontem
Cingite, ne vati noceat mala lingua futuro.
LONDON. Printed by I. L. 1634.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL, HIS MOST WORTHY PAtron, John Smith of Nibly Esquier,
Mecaenas of the Wottonian Muses.
Since, when you daigned to restore
Our School deflowered, defaced before,
Your Favorite he did commence,
And hansell your Munificence;
That of his Muse he well may call
You the maine Base, and Pedestall;
And a bad Debtor it is (they say)
That never can resolve to pay:
He, sir, (for his lanke Fortunes poor
Affords him now no better store)
In tender of his Service due,
This Moity presents to you,
(The firstlings of his Fruits) that will Remain
Your grateful Hench-man still, John Bidle.

TO THE READERS.
INgenuous Readers, question you may, with what front I (enlisted (I confess)
among the Rabble of home-bread versifiers) dare thrust upon the world this
abortive pamphlet: shall I tell you? I dreamt nothing less, but was entasked
to undertake this unwilling willing labor. But not to go about the bush, if
you reake not of this Apology, (I pray you) since every capricious brain-sicke
Rimer so pestersthe world with the uncouth Chimaeraes of his own fancy, why
should not I disvellop the flag of my Muse? which though she be homespun,
and savors of Rusticity, yet fearing to rove at random after selfe-plotted and
newfangled tricks; (in which respect she may extort, though not praise yet
pardon) has chosen to confine her-selfe within the precincts of Translation,
and here presents you with these Pastoralls (which were first coated by the
Prince of Latin Poets in a Roman Garb) now shifted into an English habit.

As for the work it self, I could wish I had performed it throughout with
such Dexterity, as might have indeered, and engaged your liking: But since (as I
mistrust) I have not in some places, upon just admonition, none shall be more
ready to agnize his errors, and amend them, than my self.

John Bidle.

VIRGIL'S BVCOLICKS.
THE FIRST ECLOGVE, OR, TITYRVS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Blessed Tityrus his Fautor God does style,
Whilst Melibie deplores his hard Exile.
MELIBOEVS. TITYRVS. THou, Tityrus, in shroud of Beech, do play
On slender Oaten-pipe a Sylvan lay;
Our Native Confines We abandon: We
Our pleasant Granges, and our Country flee:
Thou, Tityrus, in the shade reposing still,
Learn'st the woods to resound fair Amarill.
Tit. God is the Source of this our happy Rest,
O Melibaeus! Him I will invest
Ay with that Name; A tender Lambling, ta'n
From our Cotes, often his Altars shall distain.
My Neat to freely graze (thou see:) and me
On Reed to play my Fill, permitted He.

Me. Sure I Envy not, but Admire thy State:
Through all our Country, every where, of Late,
We by the Soldier are embroiled so.
Far-off I, sickly, drive my Goatlings, lo,
And, Tityrus, can scarce This lug along;
For erst she eaning, the Hazels thick among,
Her twins, the Flock's Hope, on a bare Flint letr.
Often this Disaster (had we not been rest
(Dull Sots!) of Sense!) the Lightning-blasted Oaks
By sure Ostents portended, and the Rook's
Ill-boading Notes from the hollow Holmen Tree!
But tell me, Tit'rus, who that God should be.

Ti. With that Vast City, which they Rome do call,
I (Fool!) did parallel our Mantua Small,
Where often We, Shep-heards, sell our tender Lambs.
Now I have known Thus kidlings like their Dams;
Whelps, like their Bitches: Thus compare I did
Great things with small: But Her cloud-threatning Head
As much 'bove other Cities towreth up,
As Cypresses the Dwarf Shrubs over top.

Me. And what such great cause had Thou Rome to see?

Ti. Sweet Liberty, which re-saluted me
With Later, but with Better Visits far,
After my downy Beard I first did sheare.
She re-saluted Me, and came again
Long after, since that Galataea (when
Me Amarillis had) deserted me.
For (for I will confess) of Liberty
No Hope, no Care of my Estate I had;
While I with Rustic Galataea staid.
Though many a Victim from my Sheep folds went,
And fat Cheese to that thank-lesse Town I sent,
Yet never my Fist well-monied did return.

Me. I mused why Thou the Gods did call and mourn;
And for whose Sake Thou sufferd'st, Amarill
The Ripe Fruit on the Trees to dangle still
-- 'Twas Tityrus went Hence; The Pine-Trees tall,
Thee, Tityrus, the Founts, and Groves did call.

Ti. What should I do? Me from the servile Yoke
I neither could loose, nor, elsewhere, invoke
The like propitious Gods. Here, Melibie,
I did that vn-corrivald Stripling see,
For whose sole Sake twice six days every year,
Our Altars smoke. He First my Wishes Here
Singed with these Answerrs; Boys (as erst ye did)
Yoke your vn-wilded Bulls, your Oxen feed.

Me. Blessed Old Man, therefore shall thy Country Grange
Remain, and big enough for Thee to range:
" Though It an over-peering Hill does bound,
" And a thick muddy Plash bemoat It round
" Tn'vn-wonted Clover shall not hurt thy stock
Of Pregnant Ewes: Nor shall thy Neighbor's Flock
Infect Them with the Scab. Old happy Man,
Here shall Thou' among the well known Rivers than,
And sacred springs, be with cool Brieses fand,
On this side, the Hedge, that parts thy Neighbors Land
From Thine, (which for the blooming willow-Trees
Is always haunted by Hyblaean Bees)
Thee shall invite, with gentle buzzing Noise
To take sweet Naps often. With exalted voice
Sing shall (on to other Side) the Loppers shrill,
Down at the Bases of a lofty Hill.
Nor shall hoarse Ring-doves (thy care) cease to woo;
Nor Turtle from the airy Elm to coo.

Ti. The light Stags therefore shall feed in the Sky,
And Seas leave on the shore their Fishes dry:
(Deserting Both their Native Country's Blis)
The exild Parthian shall drink Araris;
The german, Ty^^is: From his Countenance
Before I my min^^ull Hearts eyes will askance.

Me. But We, some to the thirsty Africans,
Hence quick will poast; some to the Scythians;
To Cretan swift Oaxis some confined;
And Britons quite from the whole World disjoined.
Lo I shall I (wretched Exile) kenning e're
My Native Confines, after many a year;
And Turf thatcht Contect of my Cottage poor,
(My Petty Kingdom) It admire therefore?
Shall the impious Soldier be possessed of These
So-well tild Earshes? The Barbarian seize
These Crops? Lo! Neighbors to what Misery
Discord has brought Us? Lo! for Whom have we
Sown our manured Acres! Pear Trees now
Grafe. Melihoeus; into Ranges bow
Thy Vines! ye bounding Goats, avaunt, avaunt
Ye (sometime Happy) Goats! Far-off: I sha'n't,
(In a green Cave imbowl'd) Hereafter You,
From a Thorn-bristled Mountain hanging view.
To You no war bling Ditties shall I sing;
The flowring Cythisse (I you pasturing)
Nor then the bitter Willowes shall you brouz.

Ti. But yet vouchsafe my shed thy Rendez-vouz.
This Night, and on green Leaves repose with Me;
We (for thy Supper) mellow Apples; We
Fresh-gathered Chest nuts have at Home, and store
Of new-made Cheese: And now bemisted over
With dusky Smoke are the Hamlets Summits all,
And greater shadows from High Mountains fall.

THE SECOND ECLOGVE. OR, ALEXIS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Thril'd with God Cupid's shafts, (though in despair)
Poor Corydon pursues Alexis Fair,
THe Shepherd Corydon loved Alexis fair,
His Masters Darling: but with hope less Care.
He only to the Glades his course did frame,
And' among the tufted Beeches daily came;
There did He to the Woods, and Mountains vent
This moody Ditty, with a vain Intent.
Alexis dire! Thou sleight' st all Lays of Mine!
Relent-lesse art! Make Me to die (in fine!)
Now even the Cattle in the shade reside:
Now thorn-full Brakes even the green Lizards hide.
Thestylis, for the Mowers tired in the Sun,
Now Garlic, and wild-Bettony death pun,
Strong-senting Herbs: But with my warbling sound,
And Grashopper's hoarse Notes the Groves rebound,
As I in Quest of Thee (while Phoebus glowes)
Do roam. Was it not better Me t'expose
To Amaril's sad Ire, and haughty Pride?
Not better was it Menalcas to abide?
Though he were Black, Thou White. Fair, Nonesuch
Be not too-confident on Beauty's Blaze. (Face,
Vnsullied Privet-Flowres do fall (we see;)
Black Violets are cropped. Thou scornest Me,
Nor, who I am, enquit'st; What store I keep
Of Milk; How many snow-white fleeced sheep.
My thousand Ewes stray on Sicilian Hills;
When Summer scorches, and when Winter chils,
New-milke I have: such quav'ring Airs I sing,
As that sweet Hymnist, (the Herds summoning)
Theban Amphion erst to chant was wont,
In Aracinth, that on the shore does front.
Nor am I so deformed, this Face of mine.
I viewd in the Mirror of the calmed Brine,
Late standing on the Beach; Contend I dare,
Thou Judge, (If true's my Counterfeit) for Fair
With Daphnis. O, would it might please Thee well,
In The Country (sor did deemed of Thee) to dwell!
And seat thy Mansion in our low-built sheds;
And Stage transfix; and drive the frisking Kids
To the Marsh mallows, chanting the woods among,
Like Pan, the Diapason of thy song.
Pan many Reeds did First together glue
With Wax: Pan favors Sheep, and Sheep herds too.
Nor ever repent to have worn thy Lip with play:
How toild Amy(...)t for skill in Musick's Lay?
With seven unequal Reeds a Pipe I have
Compact, which erst Damatas to Me gave,
And dying (You Are the Second Owner) said;
He spoke: Amyntus envied, ill apaid.
Besides two Young-Rces, in an vn-safe Vale
Late found, I have; whose yet-py'd Skins are all-
Be-spect with white; They suck dry every day
An Ew's two Teats; which erst to have away
Me Thestylis importuned, and she shall,
Because Thou prizest not our Gifts at all.
Fair Boy, come hither; Lo! in crowded Maunds
The Nymphets bring Thee Lilyes. With her Hands
Spruse Nais, cropping Tops of Poppys stammell,
And Violets, thy Ghirlands does enammell
Made with Narcissus sweet, and lushious Dill;
Then adding other Herbs of fragrant smell,
The Hyacinth she deftly does be-frindge
With the fine Mary-gold of Saffron I indge.
My-selfe I Will downy Quinces pluck with care,
And Chest-nuts, to my Amarillis dear;
Soft Plums I Will add, and Honor shall accrue
To them; And O ye Laurels, crop-off you,
Thee, amarous Myrtle, next; for placed thus,
Perfumes ye mix most odoriferous.
You Are Carydon a Clown: Alexis Fair
Thy gifts does scorn; Iolas Debonair,
(If Gifts enforce thy Claim) will Thee out-vy:
Alas! what meant I wretch? let in have I
To the Flowrs danke Auster, whiffing with his Wings;
Fount-troubling Bores, to the pure crystal Springs.
From Whom, ah frantic Boy, do fling so fast?
Even Gods have in the Woods their Mansion placed,
And Paris: In her selfe-rais'd Turrets bright
Let Pallas dwell; Us the Woods sole delight
The Lioness, the Wolf: the Wole does use
The Goat to follow: the blithe Goat pursues
The Cythisse: Thee, Alexis, Coridon.
All Fancys choice delights attend upon.
The Bullocks, lo, bring home again the Plows;
And Sol departing, 'bout Earth's gloomy Brows
Night' gins to spread her Curtains: yet I glow
With love; For what mean does fell Cupid know
What thus infuriates Thee, Corydon?
A vine Thou have at home half pruned, upon
A leavie Elone; Go, Rather Osiers take,
And pliant Bul-rushes, and quickly make
Vtensils needful. If This prove vn-kind,
A Debonair Alexis Thou shall find.
THE THIRD ECLOGVE. OR, PALAEMON.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Sheep-heards entering Lists with furious Rage,
Are stickled by Palaemon's Vmpirage.
MENALCAS. DAMOETAS. PALAEMON. Me Who owns these Sheep, Damoetas? Melibie?

Da. No, AEgon; AEgon lately took'em Me.

Me Still hap-lesse Sheep! While AEgon (courting Her)
Fears lest Neoera Met' Himself prefer:
The Ewes each hour this Hireling milketh twice,
That both exhausted is the Cattels Juice,
And the poor Lamblings of their Milk beguild.

Da. But, sir, to Men those Feats up-braid more mild.
We know where Thou, looking askew, wast taken,
And (out the gentle Nymphs smild) in what Fane.

Me. It Was Then, when Mycon's Copse they saw Me top
With an ill Cycle, and his new Vines lop.

Da. Or, at the old Beeches, Here, when Daphnis Bow,
And shafts Thou brok'st: which when re-given, Thou,
Perverse Menalcas, sawst, thy choler sweld,
And (He vn-spited) spleen thy Life had queld.

Me. When such Buffons even theevish Servants be,
Then what shall Masters do? did I not see
Thee, Varlet, stealing Damons Goat, when I,
His Mongrell barking, Holla Thief, did cry?
And said; In one my Flocks drive, Tit'rus, Here;
Then did Thou skulke behind a sedgy Peer.
Out sung by Me, should He the Goat, Before
Gaind by my Pipes demerit, not restore?
If Thou know not, 'twas Mine, confessed to Me
By Damon, but surrendered could not be.

Me. Thou, Him, in singing -- had a Pipe ever glude
With wax? wast Thou not wont, Thou bungler rude,
Tinfest the Highways with thy yels, and double
Thy balefull Ditties with a squeeking stuble.

Da. By Turn shalls both our Skills in singing try?
This Heifer I lay down (Left thou deny,
Twice a day milkt, two sucklings fosters she)
Say for what wager Thou will Cope with Me.

Me. Naught of the Flock with Thee engage I must:
A Sire I have at Home, a step-dame cursed.
Both twice a day the sheep; The Kids she tells
Besides. But, what thy self shall say excells,
(Since You Are so peevish) I will bett a Pair
Of Beechen Cups, carved by that Artist rare
Alcimedon: on which a pliant Vine
Most featly turned, does amorously combine
With berry'd Ivy; Embost, midst of All,
Two Figures are, Conon, and (what I call)
He, that with his Iacob-staffe this Mundan Bowl,
When Mowers should py'd Tellus Tresses powle,
Described what Seasons are for Plow-men fit:
Which with my Lips untouched I keep as yet.

Da. So two for Us the same Alcimedon made,
Whose Ears soft twining Bears-foot does o'r shade;
In The midst He Orpheus, and the Woods following set:
Which with my Lips untouched I keep as yet.
The Heifer view, Thou' lt not the Cups inhance.

Me. Thou shall never escape to day. I will advance
On any Terms: Let Us only put it to
Yon' Man's Arbitrament. Palamon lo!
I Will make ye, Sir, never dare again.
Let Us to it; No stay shall be found in Me then,
Nor reake I any. Only this I pray,
Neighbor Palaemon peiz it; it is no Toy.

Pa. Sing, since We in the tender Grass repose,
And now each Meadow, now each Sapling blows;
The Woods Now flourish, the yeare's fairest Now.
Begin, Damaetas, first; Then follow Thou
Menalcas. Ye shall both by Turn rehearse:
The sacred Muses love Alternate Verse.

Da. My Song begins from All-filling Jove:
He Is Tellus Fautor: He my Verse does love.

Me. And Me Don Phoebus favors: His Gifts ay
I have, both sweet red Hyacinth, and Bay.

Da. At me an Apple Galataea flings:
(First eyed by me) Then to the Willow springs.

Me. But Me Amynt, un-woo'd, does visit so,
That our Dogs do not better Delia know.

Da. I for my Minion have got Gifts: for I
A Neast of airy Ring-Doues erst did spy.

Me. Ten Limmons to the Boy, (so stored Then)
I sent: I Will send tomorrow to other Ten.

Da. What Words to Us did Galataea say?
Some part, ye Winds, to the Gods ears convay!

Me. What boots it though, Amynt, Thou love Me,
The Bores Thou chacest, if I keep the Toiles? (whiles

Da. Iolas, Phillis send (my Birthday it is:)
Come Thou, when I to Ceres sacrifice.

Me. She has my Heart: My Going she did rue,
Saying, fair Jolas, Long Adieu, Adieu. (down;

Da. The Wolf, the stals; Ripe Fruits, showrs drizling
Trees, boistrous Winds annoy; Me, phillis Frown.

Me. Withy love teeming Cattle; Corn, a shower;
Kids, Arbuts; I, Amynt my Paramour.

Da. Our Muse (though Rustic) is to Pollio dear;
Ye Muses, for your Reader feed a steare.

Me. A Bull feed for Him, (He the Poet plays)
Whole Horns may grow, whose Hooves the sand may raise.

Da. Let thy Friend, Polli^, come where thou do come,
Let Honey flow There; Thorns bear Amomum.

Me. Who hates not Bavius Rimes, let him love thine,
Rank Maevius: He-Goates milk, and Foxes join.

Da. Ye Boys, that flowers, and Strawb'rys pluck apace,
Fly hence; a cold Snake lurketh in the Grass.

Me. Let not the Sheep approach the Bank too nigh a
Now even the Ram his soaked Fleece does dry.

Da. My Goatlings, Tit'rus, from the River bring:
When time shall serve, I Will rinse'em in the Spring.

Me. Lads, shroud the Ewes: If their milk dried up be,
(As Lare) in vain their Vdders squeez shall We.

Da. How lanke my Bull is in a Pasture battle!
The same Love pines the master, and the Cattle.

Me. Love's not the cause These bare-bon'd are, and flender:
Some ill eye fascinates my Lamblings tender.

Da. Tell (and Thou shall be great Appollo) where
Heaven three Else open (no more) does appear.

Me. Tell where Flowrs grow, upon whose Crowners fine
Kings Names are writ, and Phyllis shall be Thine.

Pa. No such great mutual Fewd compose must We,
You Are worthy of the Heifer, so is He;
And who-e'r Bitter tryes, or Sweet Loves dreads.
Lads shut the Rivers, sated are the Meads.

THE FOVRTH ECLOGVE. OR, POLLIO.
THE ARGUMENT.
Reviving Sibyl's verse, in Golden Rimes,
Our Poet Here presageth Golden Times.
SIcilian Muses Now some Loftier Strain:
Low Tamarisks, and Shrubs do never gain
All Fancies Liking. If we caroll forth
The Woods, the Woods may suit the Consul's Worth,
Lapsed Now Is the Iron Age by Sibyl sung:
A-fresh the Old Worlds Renovation's sprung:
The Virgin Now returns, and Saturn's Reign:
Now a New Off-spring's sent of Heavenly strain.
This Boy (the Period of the Iron Age,
That does, Lucina, Golden Times presage)
His Mother's pregnant Womb as thy Hand lays,
Favor: The Scepter thy Apollo swayes.
This blist-full Age, Thou Consul, shall begin,
Drad Pollio, and the Great Months Usher in.
Then Civill-Wars surviving Relics quel'd,
From Fear to quit the Earth shall be compelled.
He shall be deifide in blessed Abodes,
Seeing, and Seen of Heroes mixed with Gods.
And with his Father's Martial Prowes, the Earth
Composed, rule. But, Sweet Boy, on thy Birth,
Tellus, uncultivated, shall bestow
Green Lady-Gloves and crawling Ivy too,
As her first Gifts; and Beares-foot virent still,
Mixed with Egyptian-Beans of lushious Smell.
Their Vdders stuffed with Milk the She-Goats shall
Bring Home; nor Lion saw the Herds at all.
Most odoriferous Flowers shall proceed
Even from thy Cradle, and each bain-full Weed
Die, with the Serpent: Sprouting every where
Assyrian Amomum shall appear.
But when thy Sire's Exploits, and Heroes Fame
Thou, reading, shall discern true Virtues Name,
The Field shall yellow grow with Ears of Corn,
And red Grapes dangle on the ncultive Thorn;
And fragrant Honey from hard-Okes shall drain.
Yet shall few Seeds of Ancient Fraud remain,
Towns causing to immure, and Thetis sweep
With Keels, and slice the Earth with surrowes deep.
Another famous Typhis shall be Then;
Another Argo, to waft o'r again
Selected Heroes; other Wars befall;
Again great-sould Achilles Illium scale.
When Thou a Man shall be, to sail the Brine
The Mariner shall cease; No Nauticke Pine
Shall barter Wares. All Lands all Things shall bear.
The Glebe Then tooth full Harrowes shall not tear,
Nor shall the Vine abide the Pruning Hook:
The hardy Plow man shall his Bulls un-yoke.
Wool various colors shall not counterfeit:
Their Fleeces Now with Red-mixt Purple sweet,
Now die with Saffron yellow shall the Rams;
Bright Sandix shall invest the feeding Lambs.
The Parcae' greeing by Fates fixed Decree,
Said to their Spindles, Roll such Times of Glee.
Vaut ('twill be Time) into the Regal Throne,
loves great Increase, the Immortal's dearest Son,
The World, lo, reels with Sin's stupendous Freight!
Earth, Seas, Heavens boundless Regio^rs shrink with weight!
See, in the Age-to-come how All rejoice!
May I so long extend my life, and Voice,
Thy Deeds in Strains Heroic to rehearse!
Not Thracian Orpheus should out-shrill my Verse,
Nor Linus: Though Calliope, his Mother,
Should second Orpheus: His fire Phoebus, the other.
Arcadia Judge, strove Pan with Me in Lays,
Arcadia Judge, He should resign the Bays.
'Gin, Little Boy, to know thy Mother's smiles:
Ten months have brought thy Mother tedious Toiles.
Begin: His God (whose Parents have not laughed)
A Board; A Bed, his Goddess never vouchaft.
THE FIFTH ECLOGVE. OR, DAPHNIS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Their Daphnis Death in Swan-like Tunes deplored,
The Swains consorting mutual Gifts afford.
MENALCAS. MOPSVS. Me. Why, Mopsus, do We not (since Both skild meet,
Thou, to blow light Reeds, I, to caroll sweet)
Amid these Hazel-inchas'd Elms reside?

Mo. You are my Senior; You to obey I Am tide,
Beneath uncertain shades while Zephyr blows
Whether We lie, or in some Cave repose;
Lo how a Wild-Vine does this Grot bespread,
His dangling Clusters thinly scattered!

Me. The sole Amynt shall combat in our Hills.

Mo. What if, in Singing, Phoebus He out-shrils?

Me. Sing, Mopsus, first, or Phyllis Loves to raise;
Or scouling Codrus Death; Or Alcons Praise.
Begin; Thy feeding Kidds shall Tit'rus tend.

Mo. Yea (Late which in a Beeches Rine I pend)
These Verses tuned by course unto my Reed,
I Will try; Then bid Amyntas to succeed.

Me. As Pliant Osiars, to Pale Olive Trees;
Low Lavander, to Purple Rosaries;
So much We judge Amyntas stoops to Thee.

Mo. Cease Boy, for We thy Grot are entered, see.
The Nymphs condol'd their butcherd Daphnis dear,
To them ye streams, and Hazels Record bear:
When clipping her dead Son's Ruth-moving Corse,
His Mother blamed the Gods and stars dire Force.
None, Daphnis, drove their full-stuft Near to drink,
Nor any Cattle sipt the River's Brinke,
Nor in those days once touched a Blad of grass.
That Punick Lions did thy Death (Alas!)
Bemoan, the Woods and savage Mountains tell.
He harnest First Hyrcanian Tygres fell:
He First to Bacchus instituted Dances,
And first with soft Leaves wreathed pliant Lances.
As Vines do Trees, as Grapes do Vines adorn,
The Herds as Bulls, as fallow Lands the Corn:
So Thou Thine crownest. When Thee Fates bereft,
Our Fields even Pales, and Apollo left.
Where We plump Barley sowd in Furrows Late,
Base Darnell, and Wild-Oates predominate:
For the soft Vi'let, purple Daffadill,
Our Meadows prickly Furse, and Thistles fill.
Ye Sheepheards strew the Ground with Leaves, and Flowers
Your Fountains seele with enterbroided Bows,
(For Daphnis so commands) and Him interr,
With this Inscription on his Sepulcher,
I Daphnis in the Woods, Hence known to The Air;
A Fair Flocks Keeper, but my self more Fair.

Me. Such is thy Verse to Us, Poet Divine,
As, tired, in Grass to sleep, or to incline
Our Head to quench (in scorching Summer's Heat)
Our Thirst, at some sweet capering Rivulet.
For Thou not only with thy Reeds shrill Noise,
But equallest thy Master with thy Voice.
O happy Lad, Thou shall his Second be!
Yet We However w(...)l re-chant to Thee.
Our Verse, and to the Stars advance thy Pear
We Will Daphnis stellify: He loved Us dear.

Mo. Can any Boon endear Us more? He, young,
Deserved to be enhanced with a song.
And Stimichon erst praised to Us those Lays.

Me. Heaven's Portall deify'd Daphnis does amaze,
And views the clouds, and Stars beneath his Feet.
Therefore the frolic Woods, and Country sweet,
Pan, Swains, and Virgin*Dryads now are rapt
With Joy; Nor does the Wolf (to prey so apt)
Worry the Sheep, nor guilefull Toiles cisease
The fearful Stags: Good Daphnis loves Peace.
The Wood-crown'd Mountains make the Welkin ring
With Shouts of Glee; The Rocks, the Groves do sing,
Menalcas, He Is a God! Propitious be
To shine: four Altars lo! Two recar'd to Thee,
God Daphnis: Two up for Apollo set.
To Thee two foaming Cups with Milk repleat,
With Oil as Many (...)alott each year:
With liberal Bacchus as thy Wakes I cheer,
I'th'Hearth, if cold; If Hot, in shady Bower.
I Will Chian Wine (as sweet as Nectar) power
From turned up Bowls. While I perform this thing,
Damaetas shall with Lyctian Aegon sing.
Alphe sibaeus shall trip nimble Rounds,
Like to the frisking Satyrs. When our Grounds
We expiate, and pay our solemn Vows
Unto the Nymphs, Thou still shall have these dues.
Whilst the Fish loves the Streams, the Boar the Hill,
Bees feed on Thyme; on Dew Grasshoppers shrill:
Thy Honor, Name, and Praise shall still remain.
To Bacchus, and to Ceres as the Swain
Makes yearly Vows, He shall to Thee: and Thou
Shall bind Him with a Curse to pay his Vow.

Mo. How shall I guerdon Thee for such a Lay?
For neither whilstling Auster's Gale (I say,)
Nor b^llow-beaten Rocks delight me so;

Nor R^ls that perle through stony Vallyes low!
Me. But We this slender Pipe will give Thee first.
This [Corydon loved fair Alexis] verst;
This taught [whose sheep, Damaetas? Melibies?]

Mo. Take Thou this Sheeps. Crook (which Antigenes
Often begged in vain* and yet a Lovely Friend)
Near for the equal knots, and brazen End.

THE SIXTH ECLOGVE, OR, SILENVS,
THE ARGUMENT.
Dread Varus Prais^. Silenus, Whittled, sings
The Earths Beginning, and the Change of Things.
TO sport First in a Syracusian Strain,
And Woods frequent, did my Thalia daigne.
When Kings, and horred Wars I loudly sung,
Apollo plucked my Ear, and checked my Tongue.
A Sheep-heard feed his sheep must, Tityrus;
Make slender Verses, not Robustious.
Now I (for, Varus, enough will in Verse
Desire thy Acts, and sad Wars to rehearse)
Will tune on slender Reed a Rusticke Lay.
Infranchiz'd is my Muse. If Any may,
If Any These of mere Love read, thy Worth
Our Tamarisks, each Grove shall warble forth,
Nor ever a Page more dear to Phoebus came,
Than to whose Front prefixed is Varus Name.
Sing, Muses. Cromis, and Mnasylus saw
Silenus yawn, as in a Cave he lay,
Veine-swoln with yersterday's too-liberall Bowls:
His flowery Chaplet from his Temples rowls,
His eare-worne massy Flagon hangs fast by.
Invading Him (for often the old Fox sly,
With Hope of Verses Them deluded had)
Of his soft Anadems Him Bonds they made.
Aegle, as Mate, forthwith accrewes to These;
Aegle, the Fairest of the Naiades:
And Now (Silenus well enough it spys)
His Front, and Temples with red Mulb'ries dies.
He, smiling at the Trick, said, Why do you ty Me?
Wags, loose; It is enough You did epsy Me.
Lo your so-long wisht-Boon! You Verses take;
She shall have some Gift else. And so bespake,
Then Savages, and Fauns, at his Tunes brave
Did dance Levoltoes, and Oaks Summits wave,
Not his Mount, Phoebus so; The Ismarian spire,
Or Rhodope so Orpheus did admire.
For, First, how Atoms met, and did give Birth,
Conjoined in that vast Chaos, unto Earth,
To Fire, to Air, to water: How from all
These Firsts proceeded each Original:
And how the World's unstable Globe complide;
How the Earth it did consolidate, and divide
Salt Nereus from the Fresh, and Things Forms bore,
And Sol's bright Rays amazed, unseene before:
And how by Praecipies the showrs do fall
From elevated Clouds: The Original
Of Woods He sung, and how through Mountains strange
The Animals, at First, did thinly range.
Then Pyrrha's cast-stones; Saturn's Monarchy;
Caucasean Fowl; Prometheus Theevery;
And how the Sailors, fount-drencht Hyle unfound,
Cried, that the Shore did Hylas, Hylas sound.
And (happy, had there never bin Herds) does cheer
Pasiphae with the Love of snow-white steer.
Ah hap-lesse Maid! What madness Thee does sease?
The three infuriated Praetides
Did with false Lowing fill the spacious Fields,
But to such Coiture of Bulls None yields,
Though her Neck feared the Plow, and she was wont
To seek Horns on her smooth un-horned Front.
Ah hap-lesse Maid! Thou Now on Hills do stray,
He on the Hyacinth his white side does lay,
And half digested Grass again does chew
Beneath a Holy-Oke, or does purse
Some Cow in the great Heard* Shut up your Lawns,
Shut up, Dictaean Nymphs, Now: If by chance
Some foot-tracks of the Bull (as 'bout We chase)
Meet our retriving Eyes: With verdant Grass
Or ta'n perhaps, or, the Herds following,
Him to the Cretan stals some Kine do bring.
Then chants Her that the Hesperides Fruit of Gold
So much admired; Then Mossy Films infold
The Heliades, who Spine to Aldars tall,
With such Dexterity he limns em all.
How Gallus, when He at Permessus straid,
One Muse into the Aonian Hills convaid;
And Chants how all the Chore of Phoebus Than
Rose up, and did obeisance to the Man.
How with Divining Verse (his Tresse impaled
With flowery Wreathes, and Parsley Bitter called)
Sheep-keeping Linus Thus to Him did sing.
Thee these Reeds (take 'em lo!) the Muses bring,
The Ascraean Sheep-heards once, whereon he would lay
And sturdy Ash^s from their seasures draw.
Now the Grynaean Wood's Origin chant
With These, that Phoebus more of None may vant.
Why shall I Nisus Daughter Seylla name
How sung by Him? or the other Scylla fame,
That, with dire yelping Monsters hemb'd Below,
Did toss Ulysses Carvels to and fro:
And in the tumid Main's incensed Billows,
With her fierce Sea-Dogs worried all his Fellows.
Or, how He changed Tereus Limbs expressed?
Or for Him Philomela's Gifts, and Feasts?
How, He, Woods haunting, a Bird's Form assumes,
But flies about his House First raised with Plumes?
All which Eurotas (Phoebus turning erst)
Did hear, and bad his Laurels learn, Rehearst.
He sings, with Repercussion of the Sound
The valleys ring, and ecchoing do rebound:
Till in the Foulds the counted Sheep t'inshrine
(Maugre Olympus) Vesper did injoine.
THE SEVENTH ECLOGVE. or, MELIBOEVS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Sweet Corydon, out-shrilling Thyrsis well,
By Melibaeus Verdict bears the Bell.
MELIBOEVS. CORYDON. THYRSIS. Me. BEneath a Whistling Holm-Tree Daphnis sat;
And Corydon, and Thyrsis did of late
Drive both their Foocks together into One:
Thyrsis, his Seepe; milke-stuft Goats, Corydon.
Both striplings; Both You Would think of Arcady;
Both matched to sing, and ready to Reply.
While shrouding Myrtles from bleake Winds I staid,
The Flock-conducting He-goat Hence had straid:
And I see Daphnis: When Me once he spies,
Come hither Melibaeus quick, He cries:
Safe is thy Goat, and Kids, never vex for Those,
And, if Thou can stay, in the Shade repose.
Thy Bullocks, of their own accord, to drink
Will Hither come; Here the green grassy Brinke
Of Gamesome Mince, with quivering Reeds is Crowned,
And from the sacred Oak the Swarms resound.
What should I do? Alcippe, Phyllis I
Had not, at Home my Weaned Lambs to try;
And the Swains did contend in ve'ment sort;
Yet to my work preferred I their Disport.
Then Both strove in Alternate Verses terse;
The Muses craved an Amebaean Verse;
These Corydon; Those Thyrsis 'gan rehearse.

Co. Our loy, Lebethrian Nymphs, Me such a Vain
As Codrus (Phoebus Second) either daign,
Or if All cannot make a Verse Divine,
Hang shall my shrill Pipe on this Sacred Pine.

Th. Arcadian Swains (that Codrus Guts with Spleen
May break) your Poet deck with Ivy green:
Or if He Praise extort, his Forehead wreath
With Lady-Gloves, against Cordrus blasting Breath.

Co. This Boar's Head Mycon to Thee does import;
These Antliers, Delia, of a long-lived Heart;
But grant this Boon, in polisht Marble Now,
Calve-bound with Purple Buskins, stand fhalt Thou.

Th A Bowl of Milk, these cakes (expect no more,)
Priapus, Keeper of our Hort-yard poor.
Now does a Marble Statue Thee infold;
But if our Flocks increase, be All of Gold.

Co. O Galataea, sweeter than the Thyme!
More white than Swans; than Ivy pale more prime,
When our Bulls fed shall to the stals go home,
(For Corydon if ought Thou carest) come.

Th. More Bitter than Sardinian Herbs to Thee,
Than Broom, or Sea-Weeds Baser let Me be,
If longer than a year is not this day.
For shame, ye full-fed Steers, away, away.

Co. Cool mossy Fountains, Sleep-alluring Grass,
Green Arbuts, that with thin shades You embrace,
The Cattle from the Sun-sted fence about;
Now on the Tendrell the Buds burgeon out.

Th. A Hearth, fat Tapers, still much Fire is Here,
And black smoake-collied Posts: as much We care
For Boreas, as Wolves for sheeps numerous Ranks,
Or Rain-incensed Torrents for their Banks.

Co. Our Iunipers, our Chest-nuts rough are full,
Thou Apples under each Tree strow'd may cull:
All now laugh; Let Alexis absent be
From these Hills, you should Rivers stream less see.

Th. Fields rive, the sultery Air the Herbage Kills;
Liber the Vine-Leaves envies to the Hills:
Woods Phillis Coming shall with Verdure crown,
And vegetating love with Showrs bring down.

Co. The Poplar, Herc'les; Bacchus loves the Vine;
The Laurel, Phoebus; Myrtle, Venus fine;
The Hazels Phyllis loves: which while she do,
Yield shall the Myrtle, Phoebus Laurel too.

Th. The Wild-Ash, the Woods; The Pine the Hort-yards crowns;
The Poplar Rivers; The tall Fyrre the downs.
Fair Lycidas, but ofter visit Me,
Wild-ash, and Garden-pine shall stoop to Thee.

Me. This I record; Foiled Thyrsis did put on
In vain: since that Time, for Us, Corydon.

THE EIGHTH ECLOGVE. OR, PHARMACEVTRIA.
THE ARGUMENT.
False fickle Nisa, Damon infamizes:
Alphesibie for Daphnis, Spells devizes.
DAMON. ALPHESIBOEVS. We Will Damon's, and Alphesiboeus Lays;
With whose sweet Chants a Heifer stood at gaze,
And Rivers, ravished, did surcease to glide;
And with whose Verses were Lynxes stupifide:
We Will Damons, and Alphesibaeus Lays
Relate. Assist Thou, if thou passest 'ore
Now great Timovus, or the Illyrian shore.
Lo! that I may eternize with my Rimes
Thy Martial Feats, will ever be those Times?
That thy Verse may by Me be o'r the World
(Sole suiting Sophoclean Buskin) hurld?
From Thee my Rise; To Thee my end I Will make;
Verses at thy Command composed take;
And suffer this my Wreath of lvie small,
Amongst thy conquering Bays, thy Brows to impale.
Now scarce contracted were Nights Curtains sable,
(The Dew to the Cattle Then most acceptable)
Thus Damon, leaning on an Olive Spray.
Da. Rise, Lucifer, and usher in the day;
Whilst I, inveigled with her couz'ning Love,
Of Nisa's Lure complain, and pity moove:
And Now accoast the Gods, in fine, apall'd;
Though I Them often to Record bootlesse called.
Begin with Me, my Pipe, Maenalian Lays.
Shrill Woods has Maenalus, and Vocal Pines;
To Shep-heards Love complaining songs inclines
He his Ears still; And Pan, who Reeds, of yore,
Taught Tunes to vary, rude composed before.
Begin with Me, my Pipe, Maenalian Lays.
Ill-favored Mopsus does Fair Nisa wed.
What is there, that We Lovers may not dread?
The Gryphins, Henceforth, shall with Horses link;
And Stags with Stag-infesting Dogs shall drink;
New Tapers cut, for Thou a Wife do wed;
Nuts, Mopsus, strew, from Oeta Hesper's fled.
Begin with Me, my Pipe, Maenalian Lays.
To Worthy Husband ioin'd! while scorning All
My Pipe Thou slight'st, my bounding Goats as small;
My rough-hair'd Ey-brow, and my Dangling Beard;
And ween'st no God does mortal Things regard.
Begin with Me, My Pipe, Maenalian Lays.
A Goat-heard, I Thee, with the Mother, viewed,
When Little, gathering Aples all be-dew'd,
Within our Hegde fenced Grounds; Then entered had
The second from the eleventh year Me t'invade.
Then under-boughes I could reach o'r my Head:
No sooner seen, How undone! How mislead!
Begin with Me, my Pipe, Maenalian Lays.
Now what the Godling Cupid is, I see;
Or craggy Ismarus, or Rhodope,
Or Farthest Garamants that Rock-born Brood
Produced, not of our Progeny or Blood.
Begin with Me, my Pipe, Maenalian Lays.
Love taught a Mother to distain, for Ire,
In her Son's Gore her Hands; a Mother dire!
A Fiercer Mother, or a Fiercer ^ad?
The Mother Cruel, and the Boy was Bad.
Begin with Me, my Pipe, Maenalian Lays.
Now let the Wolf fly from the Sheep's Pursuit:
Now let hard Oaks be charged with Golden Fruit:
Let the Aldar flourish with the Daffadill:
Let Tamarisks fat Amber Now distill:
Owls cope with Swans: Tit'rus put Orpheus on:
Orpheus, in Woods; amongst Delphins, Arion.
Begin with Me, my Pipe, Maenalian Lays.
Let All now turn to Sea. Adieu, ye Woods.
By headlong Praecipies, into the Floods,
I Will from this towering Mountain's summit fall:
This Gift, as I expire, take last of all.
Leave off, Pipe, Now leave off Maenalian Lays.
Thus He. Alphesibaeus Answer too,
Ye Muses chant: All cannot all Things do.

Al. Maid, bring Me out some Water quickly quick,
Then with soft Anadems, and Ribbands thick
Surround these Altars, and suffumigate
Male frankincense, and oil-smear'd Vervain fat;
TO infuriate with Magicks dire Alarms
Love-flying Daphnis* Naught Here wants, but Charms.
My Charms fetch from the City Daphnis Home.
Charms make bright Cynthia from her Orb decline.
The Incantresse Circe did transform to Swine
Ulysses Mates by Charms: The balefull Snake
Charms in the Meads to break asunder make.
My Charms fetch from the City Daphnis Home.
I with this triple colored threefold Thread
Arround Thee, and thy Feature poutraicted
Three times about these sacred Altars hale;
For God loves the odd Number best of all.
My Charms fetch from the City Daphnis Home.
In three Knots knit three Thrums of Triple die;
Quick, Amarillis; say, Love-Bonds I ty.
My Charms fetch from the City Daphnis Home.
As this Clay Hard, and this Wax Soft does prove
With the same Fire: so Daphnis with our Love.
Sprinkle the Cake, burn Bay smeared with Bitume,
He frys Me; I on Him this Bay consume.
My Charms fetch from the City Daphnis Home.
Let Daphnis be with such a Love possessed,
As is a Heifer, when (tired with the Quest
Of lust-full steer through Groves, and devious Woods)
She, Loue-consum'd, reposeth on the Floud's
Green Marge, nor late at Night does thence depart;
Such Him surprise: Nor let me cure impart.
My Charms fetch from the City Daphnis Home.
As his Love-Pawns, He (Now of trust bereft)
These cast impoverisht Garments whilom left,
Which, Earth, I sacre in the Porch to Thee.
These Daphnis must again restore to Me.
My Charms fetch from the City Daphnis Home.
These Herbs, and Pontick simples erst bestow
On Me did Moeris: store in Pontus grow.
Under a Wolvish Form by These He Would hide,
And skulking in the uncouth Woods abide.
Transplant Crops waving with Mustacho'd Ears,
And raise up Ghosts from their deep Sepuchers.
My Charms fetch from the City Daphnis Home.
Out, Amaryllis, forthwith Ashes bring,
And Them with Head retrait in the River fling.
I will encounter Daphnis with these. Arms:
That reaks not for the Gods, nor Philter-charms.
My Charms fetch from the City Daphnis Home.
The Altars, lo! with quivering Flames have caught;
(Be it Auspicious!) whilst that Fire's unbrought!
(I know not what it is) and the fierce Curre bawls.
Is It true? or Phantick are all Cupid's Thrals.
Leave off, Charms, Daphnis from the City coms.

THE NINTH ECLOGVE. OR, MOERIS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Two Rurals Here bewail, (Disaster strange ^)
In balefull Notes, Menalcas seized Grange.
LYCIDAS. MOERIS. Ly. VVHither, O Moeris? this Way, to the City?

More. We live, O Lycidas, (alas! for pity!)
To hear a Stranger, of our Lands possessed,
(Which We poor Wretches ever feared least)
Say, These are mine; Avaunt ye Ancient Pesants.
Now we cashiered, and sad, (O chance!) for presents
To Him these Kidlings (may They choke him) send.

Ly. Certes I heard, where the Hil's Verge does bend
Down with feasible descent his Bases,
To crankling Mincius, that the Meads inchases,
And the Old Beeches Now-broke Summit tall,
That your Menalcas by his Verse kept all.

More. You heard; 'Twas bruited so; But our Verse proves
Amongst Wars as powerful, as Chaonian Doves,
Jove's Bird assailing. Which Before if Those
Unwonted Garboils quickly to compose,
Did not the Auspicious Rooke Me warning give,
Nor should thy Moeris, nor Menalcas live.

Ly. So desperately bent can Any be?
Ah! were thy solace-giving Lays with Thee
Almost, Menalcas ravished? who should sing
The Nymphs? or the Earth imbellisht in the Spring
With Flora's Pride? or drilling Fountains pure,
O'r-shadowed with Arbours Coverture?
Or (going to our Minion Amaryll)
The Verses Late I stole from Thee by skill?
Tit'rus, while I return (short is the Way)
My she-goats feed; fed, Them to drink convay,
And as Thou driv'st Them to the Rivers fine,
The He-Goat (butting with his Horn) decline.

More. Yea these he sung to Varus yet unfil'd,
Thy Name (We not of Mantua dispoil'd.
Poor Mantua, to Cremona, ah! too near!)
Up to the twinkling stars the Swans shall bear.

Ly. So may thy swarms Cyrnaean Yews decline!
So may with Milk thy Cythisse-brouzing Kine
Their Vdders stuff! Begin (if ought Thou have)
Amongst the Poetic Throng even I am placed;
Me the Pierian sisters did install,
And Me Swains (unbeleev'd) a Poet call:
I mate not Varus yet, nor Cinna's strains,
But gagle like a Goose amongst Vocal swains.

More. I do it, and silent, with my self I scan;
It Is a brave strain, if called to mind I can.
Come, Galataea; in rough Neptune's Wave
What Pleasure is it? Here snaking Rillets lave
Flowr-motly'd Banks; Here is a Purple spring;
A sallow Poplar a Grot shadowing;
Here cool Vine-Arbours shroud Us from the heat.
Come: against the Beach let surly Billows beat.

Ly. Nay those I heard Thee singing one clear Night:
The Tune I know, could I the words hit right,

More Why do Thou, Daphnis, Ancient stars survay?
Lo, Dionaean Caesar's does display
His clinquant Head, Corn-ears with Grain t'indue,
And hil-bred Grapes with their ripe purple Hue!
Imp Pear Trees, Daphnis, for thy Nephews shall
Gather the Pears. Time hurrieth with It All;
Yea my frail Memory. I think how (a Boy)
I spent in singing many a Summers day.
Those songs are now in deep Oblivion drowned.
Impeacht is Moeris hoarce obstructed sound.
The Wolves saw Moeris First. At his Retreat,
Often shall Menalcas Them to Thee repeat.

Ly. Pretending scuses, Thou prolong'st our Loves;
And Now no sea with iustling Surges moves;
The full-mouthed murmuring Gusts are silent, see!
And halfe-way of our Journey come are We:
For you' Bianor's Tomb his raised Top
Begins to show. Here, where the Rurals lop
Their Trees luxurious Boughs, let us caroll: Here
Lay down thy Kids: Or if perchance We fear
Lest the Night gather Rain Before, We may
Sing as We go; Less hurt Us will the Way.
That We may do 't, Thee of this Load I Will ease.

More. More of Me, Boy, Now to desire surcease:
Let Us Rather to an end our Business bring;
When He himself shall come We Will better sing.

THE TENTH ECLOGVE. OR, GALLVS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Scorcht with Idalian Flames; fond Gallus is
Enamored on the Strumpet Cytheris.
THis last Piece grant Me, O kind Arethuse;
Some Verses to my Gallus must Thou, Muse,
(But such as let Lycoris read) rehearse;
(Who unto Gallus would deny a Verse?)
So under Sicil's Seas when thy Flood raves,
May not Salt Doris mix her briny waves!
Cupid-thrild Gallus, Loves begin to rouz,
Whilst that the flat-nos'd Goats the Tendrels brouz.
Not to deaf Hearers We our Airs afford,
The Ecco-ringing Woods our Words re-word.
What Groves imbowr'd You, Virgin- Naiades,
While Gallus perished by such Loves as these?
For neither towering Pindus caused your stay,
Nor Aganippe in Aonia.
Nor yet Parnassus spire. With one accord
The Tamariks, the Laurels Him deplord:
Beneath a lovely Rock reposing, thus
Condold Lycaeus, Pine-clad Maenalus.
The sheep surround Him prized in our Esteem,
Nor Thou Them to be vainly slighted deem,
O divine Poet: Even Adonis fair
His sheep did pasture at the Rills with Care.
The Sheep-heard tardy Cow-heards thither drew;
From gathering Winter Acorns did accrue
Menalcas wet; And Then demand They All
This fascinating Love's Original.
Why art thou Frantic, Gallus, cries Apollo:
For now thy Darling does Another follow
Through the Snow-shirted Alps, and horrid Camps.
Next, pranckt with Flowery Wreathes, Sylvanus ramps,
And came with flowring Feruls in his hand,
And great unsullied Lillys. Ruddy Pan,
The God that swayes Arcadia Then appeared,
With Dane-wort Berries, and Vermillion smeard,
And (quoth He) will there be no Mean, nor measure?
Such Griefs as these to slight Love takes a Pleasure.
Nor Tears dire Love; Nor Streams that gently float
Grass satiate; Cythisse, Bees; Nor leaves, the Goat.
Yet thus He said, Arcadians, ye this Thing
(To sing sole skild) shall in your Mountains sing,
What soft Repose shall Then my Bones enjoy,
If your Pipe shall my Loves Hereafter play?
And would to God I had bin of your Crew
To tend your Flock, or Vintager to You*
Were Phyllis, or Amyntas of Renown
My Paramour (what though Amynt be Brown*
Black is the Hyacinth, and Violet)
Beneath a Willow-married Vine We'd sit:
Me Phyllis Chaplets (while Amynt did sing)
Should gather. Here Is a cool, and pleasant Spring,
Here soft enameld Meadows, Here a Grove,
Here my whole Life, I Would spend with Thee, my Love.
Now moody Cupid, amongst hard Wars Alarms,
And hostile Troops detaines Me, hemb'd with Arms,
Thou, hard Lycoris, from the Country far
(May I, to give no credence to it, care)
Without Me through the Alps, and Rhine do trace.
Let no cold hurt Thee, ah no keen ye race
Thy tender Feet! I Will go, those Lays that erst
Composed were in Chalcidick Numbers First,
I Will tune on the Sicilian shep-heards Reed.
For, rather in the Woods I have decreed
My Mansion among the wild Beasts dens to have,
And in Trees tender Barks my Loves ingrave:
They shall increase: You, my Loves shall increase.
'Bout Nymph-frequented Maenalus I Will chase,
Or Boars intoil. Parthenian Lawns will I
Begird (cold scorching) with the loud-mouthed Cry.
Through Clifts, and ecchoing Woods even Now to go
I seem: Cydonian Flights from Parthian Bow
I Will twang: As though This may my Fury cure,
Or Cupid may to sympathize inure.
But now again not Hamadryades,
Nor Verses Themselves Us impatient please,
Woods yield again; Our Toils Him cannot change.
Though We through Thracian snow in the winter range,
Though Then We drench our Lips in Hebrus Flood:
Though when the Bark rives on the Elm We should
Feed the Aethiop's sheep, under the Crab adust.
Love All subdues, and yield to Love We must.
This that your Poet sung it shall suffice,
Ye Muses, whilst He sitting Wickers ties.
To Gallus make these Lays, Pierides,
Most dear: to Gallus, whose love does increase
To Me each hour as much, as in the Spring
The Aldar sprours. Let Us go, to such as sing
The shade's offensive, the Iuniper's shade:
And shades are hurtful, when they Fruits invade.
Full-fed, my browzing Goats, go home, go home,
For Night-reducing Hesper Now is come.
FINIS.
A SATIRICAL ESSAY, OR THE TWO FIRST SATYRS OF IVVENAL ENGLISHED.

BY JOHN BIDLE.

Est aliquid prodire tenus, si non datur vltra.

LONDON. Printed I. L. 1634.

THE EPISTLE.
Marvel not, Readers, that I set before you but this Pittance: I was loath to
cloy your Appetites at the first, knowing (on the one side) that men's quesy and
squemish stomachs relish better the poinant suckets of a Love-Sonnet, or the
Iulips of a frothy Epigram, than a Homely (though holesom) dish of Satyricall
stuff: And fearing withal (on the other side) lest having cooked a great deal
of this hard and sower-Meat ill, I might have so distasted a truly judicious
Palate, as to have made it even sick with Loathing, being not able by Reason of
the Quality (much more the Quantity) without great annoyance, to concoct it. In
this therefore (in cooking I mean) if I have greatly failed, I will willingly
cry Peccavi, and herein offend no more: if not, (God helping) present you with
the second and third course. In the mean-time, Gentlemen, rest you consent.

John Bidle.

D. JUNIUS IVVENAL, HIS FIRST SATYR.
THE ARGUMENT.
Our Author in his furious Breast
Resolves, in like sort, to infest
The tyring Poets of his Times,
But with sharp-fang'd Satyrick Rimes;
Urged in this rough Career to prance,
By Rome's debaucht Inhabitan's:
As shameless lewd Uiragoes First;
Soft Nice-lings, and Informers cur'st;
Pollers of Wards; Wife-selling Pimps;
Will forgers, and Incestuous Imps;
Chuffs; Dic^rs, with their Boven Lures;
Excessive Builders; Epicures.
WHat? shall I be a Hearer only still?
And never to counter tire 'em try my Quill,
With bawling Codrus vexed, and pestered Thus,
His Poems, of the Gests of Thescus,
So often rehearsing, till He Is hoarse again?
Scot-free shall One troule out to Me amain,
His curious smooth Latin Comedies?
Another his soft amorous Elegies?
And tired thus on each side, never shall I?
Scot free shall that Long tedious Tragedy
Of Telephus, be all-day-long recited?
Or that of mad Orestes, Fury-frighted,
The Book of a huge Bulk; in Folio Writ;
And (the Margin full) Endorst; Nor ended yet?
None better knows his House, than I the Grove
Of dantlesse Mars, sprung from the Strain of love;
And thumping Vulcan's Forge, that does o're-peere
The seven AEolian rocky I lets near.
What Pranks the whiffling Winds are wont to play;
What Ghosts stern wracking AEacus does pay;
From whence Another steals the Golden Fleece,
And bears It, through the surging Brine, to Greece;
What great Wild-ashes Monychus, in Fight,
Vp-rives, and darts against the Lapithite,
Muse-fostring Fronto's walks his Or-thards round,
Seeld with broad-spreading Plane-Trees, still resound.
And's Roof's even shiverd down with often Repeating,
And Marble Columns with the daily Beating
Of yelling Poets cries even broke, record,
As if the had conn'd it over every Word.
The Dog-bolt Poet, and the Artist Rare
On the same subject Descant every where.
And We from the Fcrule have our Hand with drawn
And We, declaiming Fained Theams have taken,
And counseld Sylla, his vast Reach confinde,
And's troublesome Dictatorship resignde,
Unto a Private Life to buckle Then,
And sleep secure. It Is foolish Pity, when
You meet so many Poets every where,
A little worth-lesse paper for to spare.
But why I Rather list This Race to run,
Raked by Arunca's Noble Foster-son:
If you at Leisure be, and like it well;
And of a Reason will admit, I Will tell.
When a soft Eunuch with a Wife shall mix;
When lewd Froes (such as Maevia) shall transfix
The Tuscan Boar upon the Stage, and Bear,
With naked Dugs, a Steel-tipt Hunting-spear;
When one base Scoundrell, Now out-vyes, Himself,
All the Patricians with his ill got Pelf,
Who whilom often with snipping Sissers sheard,
When I was in my Prime, my cumbrous Beard;
When that Egyptian Peasant, (Now so soft)
That Vassal of Canopus, Crispin, often
Calls back his Purple Cloak, and at It chides,
That with the Heft still from his shoulders slides;
And waves his sweating Fingers too and fro,
His light, thin-plated, Summer-Rings to show,
Nor can (for sooth) endure the ponderous Freight,
Of a Gem, in his Ring, of greater weight!
It is a hard thing not to Satyrize.
For who is so stupid, (when he casts his Eyes
On such Deboistnesse in Rome every where)
So steely-hearted, that he can forbear?
When that Guts, Matho, (of an Advocate,
Turned a Promooter Now) is grown of Late
Lo Rich that He in his New Litter rides,
Full with his strouting Panch, and burly sides:
And after Him when That Arch-Sycophant,
The Poller of the Greatest Peers, does flaunt,
That soon of precious Life will All deprive,
Of the devoured Nobles that survive;
Whom even the base Delator Massa fears;
To whom the Pick-thanke Carus Presents bears;
At whom Latinus shudders, and for Hire,
(To stop his mouth) even plays the Apple-Squire,
And prostitutes to Him his own dear Wife,
Lest He accuse Him should, and take his Life.
When They disherit Thee, the Lawful Heir,
Who in the Will invest Them-selves, by their
Night Service; Who soon up to Wealth, and power,
This Way (the best Now to Promotion) tower,
Even by fulfilling the Obsene delights,
Of rich Old Women's Itching Appetites:
To Proculeius one twelfth Part's assigned,
But unto Gillo the eleventh behind;
In the Inheritance every One does share,
As They by prudent Nature furnished are:
Well, much good it Him with his Lot (for me)
And let Him, all his Blood exhausted, be
With such a meager Palenesse still possessed,
As He that with bare Heels a Snake has pressed;
Or the Orator in the strict Solemn Game
At the Lugdunian Altar to Declaime.
What need I to relate with how great Ire
My dry, chafed, glooming Liver's set on Fire?
When that base Termagant does proudly strout,
And prease the People with the mighty Rout
Of his Retinue, that his person gards,
That rose to this vast Power by Pilling Wards,
Whom Now Ill-tempting Need does even constrain
Their lives by Prostitution to sustain:
And Marius, who into Exile went,
Condemned in vain (for what is Disparagement.
If a Man's money still remains safe?)
Now eft-soones, after eight of clock, does quaffe,
And's Genius cheeres more, than Before, by Ods,
And makes a Booty of the Angry Gods:
But Thou, victorious Province, polled sore,
Thy un-reprized Pillage do deplore.
These shall I not think worthy to be jerkt,
And with a Venusinian Satyr yerkt,
That smells o'th Lamp? Shall I not Ferret These?
Why Rather should the Toiles of Hercules,
Or Diomedes Fowl-transformed Men,
Or bellowing Minocaure engrosse my Pen?
The Sea drencht Boy, or that quaint Artizan,
That did the Air with selfe-fram'd Pinions fan?
When a base Pimp the Adult'rer's Goods inherits,
(If his Wife cannot by her Filthy Merits)
That his Crafts-Master is up-right to ly,
And rivet on the Seeling still his Ey;
And, faining Him well whitled, to repose,
And Then snore soundly with a routing Nose:
When he dares canvas for a Regiment,
That has his Goods, in Pampring Horses, spent;
Who wastes his Ancestor's Demeanes away,
While with swift Coach he rakes Flaminia:
For young Automedon the Palfreyes reand,
When as He, vaunting, did Himself commend,
Unto his cloak-invellopt Paramour.
Why, prithee, should I Now not bend my Power,
And fill large Tables in a four-way Leet?
When a proud Princox Lords it through the street,
Pearcht on six Shoulders, to the fleeting Air
On each side open, in a naked Chair,
Even mating soft Mecaenas Garb; that came
Unto this gallant Pomp, this Wealth, and Fame,
By Little forged Wills, and Testaments,
And his wet Signet, that the Wax indents.
While further I proceed in Sin's Survay,
A powerful Matron meets Me in the Way,
Who to her thirsty Husband 'bout to skink
A Cup of lushious Galene Wine, to drink,
It with a Land-Toads banefull Venom blends,
And Counsel to her Ruder Neighbors lends,
(Than that Locusta erst b'ing better skild)
Their Husbands with a Poisonous Potion killed,
Forthwith to carry their black Corses out,
Though it be known, and bruited by the Rout.
If ever Thou meanest to Thrive, some Fact assail
Short Gyaros deserving, and the Iaile:
Praised Virtue sits, and blows her Nails for Cold.
To heinous Crimes they ow, what-e'r they hold,
To Them engaged for their Wealthy State,
Their Hort-yards, Manours, Tables Antique Plate,
And imbost Goblets, on whose massy Sides
Stands Phryxus Emblem that the Goat bestrides.
Whom suffers the Ineestuous Leacher vile,
That his own Brothers Daughter does defile,
(With Money precorrupted) for to sleep,
And's Pen from writing touchy Satyrs keep?
Whom Male-Brides filthy, and Cupidian Boys,
That learn lewd Courtship, yet their childish Toys,
And Purple guarded Coats are laid aside?
If the Ill Genius of a Man denide,
Even Indignation would make Verses Than,
So, so, as I, or Cluvienus can.
Since that Deucalion, (the Rest drencht in Rain)
Imbarquing on the Showr-incensed Main,
Bi-topt Parnassus in a Friggot rought,
And Themis Oracle devoutly sought;
And softened Stones, ensould by vital Heat
Began quicken by Degrees, and Cold defeat;
And Pyrrha showed her Maids (enlived Stones)
To the Males likewise sprung from Tellus Bones:
Men's Actions whatsoever, Fond desire,
Vain Pleasure, Pannicke Fear, Revengefull Ire,
False glozing loyes, and fruitless speeches, look,
Are even the hotch-potcht Subject of our Book.
And when had all deboistnesse ever more Scope?
When lay a greater Receptacle open
To the Prodigious Sin of Avarice,
Than in our Times? when did damned cheating Dice
Ever reign o'r Human Beasts with greater Sway?
For Now, not little Bags, to go to play
A Set at Tables, do our Gamesters take,
But a whole Coffer, crammed with money, stake.
What Bick'rings you will see with the Steward There,
His Master's Squire (forsooth,) that does prepare
His Implements, and Dicing Equipage.
Infuriated with a Simple Rage
Art Thou, lewd Spend-Thrist, for to loose no Less,
At Mum-chance, than an hundred Sesterces,
And not, for Wretchedness, to spare a Groat
Towered buying of thy quivering Groom a Coat?
Which of our Grandsires did, in Elder days,
So many costly, sumptuous Mannours raise?
Which, by Himself Alone, at one Repast,
Did with seven Dishes feast his dainty Taste?
But in the Lobby, Now a little Maund,
To be snatched by the Gowned Rout, does stand;
Yet First he in thy Face does stare, and dread
Lest Thou, false named, come in Another stead.
If known, Thou shall Receive. He summons Then
By a shrill Crier, even the Noblemen,
That vaunt Themselves sprung from the Trojan Strain,
For They infest the Lobby with our Train.
Give to the Praetor, to the Tribune give
They yell aloud, and cry. But by your leave,
Room for a Libertine your Better, Here
(Quoth He) I am, your Better. Should I fear,
Or doubt for to defend, and keep my Place,
Though great Euphrates Verge my Birth embase,
Which the soft Loop-holes in my ear imply,
Although I stiffely should the same deny?
But my five Taverns in the Forum Here,
Yield Me a Knights Revenues every Year,
What greater Boon confers the Purple Vest,
(The Badge of Knighthood) if Corvinus pressed
By Need, turns Hireling, and Another Sheep
Does in the Champains of Laurentum keep?
With a far richer State endowed am I,
Than wealthy Pallas, and the Lucini;
Now therefore let the Tribunes wait a space:
Let Riches bear the Bell! nor Him give place
To sacred Honor, that, prized at a Rate,
With white chalkt Feet came to this City Late!
Since Powerful Riches Now Majestic sit,
Amongst Us deemed Divine, although, as yet,
Thou, banefull Money, dwelst not in a Fane;
As yet, by Us un-godded do remain,
Nor have we any Altars reard to Thee,
As unto Peace, Faith, Virtue, Victory,
And Concord, on whose Temple, with the Beak
The Storks, their Nests saluting, loudly creak.
But when, at the years End the States do count,
To what the Profit of the Sportula opposita caenae recta.
Maund does mount;
How much it does to their Revenues add:
What shall poor Clients do, that Hence are glad
To fetch the shoes They wear, and Hence their Cloak;
Hence Bread, and Wood to make the Chimney smook.
The Nobles, clustring, in their Litters stand,
And crowd together thick to beg a Maund.
The faint Wife, ready to be brought a Bed,
Her Husband follows, and about is led.
One, Subtle, for his absent Wife a Part
Demands will, a well known trick of Art,
For his Wife showing a close empty Couch;
Then to the Almer does the same avouch,
And quick dismiss me, It Is my Galla, cries;
Why staist thou thus, and dallist; He replies?
Lift, Galla, up thy head; Advance thy Crest:
When straight the Impostor, Peace, She takes her rest
Our Roman Gentry with a rare survay,
And exact order, can dispose the day!
For, first to crave a Maund betimes they go;
Then, to Augustus Court of Plea; And so,
Unto the Lawyers Haunt, Apollo's shrine,
Where the Triumphall clinquant statues shine,
Among which, I know not what Egyptian slave,
And Arch- Arabian durst his Image have,
Not only worthy to be well be-pist,
But -- The Old weary Clients then, dismissed
Depart the Lobby, with a Maund content,
(That for a Supper hoped before they went)
And with it (for they quite despair again)
To buy 'em Wood, and Cole worts last are feign,
Mean while the choicest Sea fish, at his Board,
The choicest Ven'son that the Woods afford,
Their Kingly Patron rich does gurmandize,
And by Himself on his Bed empty lies:
For of so many Fair, so Old, and Large,
They but one Table still with Viands charge,
Their Patrimonies there devouring quite.
There will be now no Smell-feast Parasite.
But who' I endure those base Luxurious Chusses?
What Is He, who, when his stanch-lesse Maw he Stuffes,
Whole Brawns before him sets (Prodigious thing!)
A Creature only made for Banqueting?
But Thou do quickly for thy Ravening pay:
For when Thou, stripped, down thy Robes do lay,
And to the Bath within thy strouting Panch
(The which so many Cates before did stanch)
An undigested Peacocks Flesh do bring,
Hence sudden Deaths, and Age Incestate spring.
A Now (nor Balefull) Fame is bruited, Beast;
Of thy untimely Death at every Feast.
And thy last Funeral Solemnity
Is by thy moody Friends performd with Glee.
There will be no Offense, no Crime so bad,
That After-Age can to our Manners add!
Our Nephews will the same desire and do.
All Vice is at the Highest Pitch! Go too,
Launch, Bully, launch, and all thy Sails display;
Ply nipping Satyrs. Here, per chance you will say,
Whence, prithee, will thou have such Wit, and Art,
That Is correspondent to so hard a Part?
Whence the Ancients Liberty (their Minds to write,
And, what their Fury prompted, to recite:)
(I say) The Ancients downright Liberty,
Whose Name I dare not Now to specify?
What matterd it at all, if Mutius, Tho,
Forgave Lucilius biting Taunts, or No?
But Now debaushed Tigellistus note,
And Then, invellopt with a Rozen'd Coat,
Thou shall be kindled for a Taper-Light,
Like Them, with transsixt Throats that blaze by Night,
And in the middle of the Tragic sand,
A broad Trench dig'em, and there burning stand.
Shall He Then, that with banefull Aconite,
Three Uncles poisoned, and dispatcht'em quite,
Upon a Down-stuft Couch be mounted high,
And over-looke Us with a scornful Ey?
Yes; If he chance to meet Thee in the Way,
Straight with thy Finger stop thy lips, I say:
For if it happen but one Word run over,
There will be an Appeacher; St, no more.
Thou safely may adventure to rehearse
AEneas Stowr with the Rutilian Fierce:
Achilles Story, how he got his End,
Transsixt by Paris Dart, does no^ offend:
Or much-sought Hylas, that so soon was quenched,
And with his Pitcher in the Fountain drencht.
As often as wood Lucilius, as it were,
With his drawn Bilbow Thunderd, straight for fear,
The Hearer flushes, whose Heart's cold with Sin;
With Secret Guilt his Fivers sweat within.
Hence they are so testy, and for Anger Whine.
Perpend Thou therefore this Advice of mine,
Before the Alarm: Who has his Murrion hent,
He too-late of the Duel does repent.
Well Then what is granted against Those, I Will assay,
Interred in the Latin, and Flaminian way.
D. JUNIUS IVVENAL HIS SECOND SATYR.
THE ARGUMENT.
False glozing Stoickes naked Stripped;
Their tapess'd sins unmaskt, and whipped.
Obscene abused Cat amites.
Soft Judges. Base Hermaphrodites.
Face-Farthing Otho quipt; his Error
In too much Gazing on his Mirror.
The Gracchi (that not orious Pair)
Unvizor'd, and well-scourged are:
The First, for his Man. Marriage, vexed;
For Fencing on the Stage the Next.
He shows the source, from whence arise
All such uncouth Impieties,
To be,'cause men believe no Hell.
Then does Rome's vast Ambition tell,
And jerkes, with It, her soft-growne State
That Strangers did effeminate.
I Hence from Rome will post, with speedy Motion,
Beyond the Sauromates, and frozen Ocean:
When Sacred Manners are the Chat of Those,
Who, seeming Cury, live like Bacchus Froes.
First are your Art-lesse Pedants: though at Home
They have Chrysippus Image made of Lome
In every Creek, and Corner. For sole He,
Of these Men, the exactest feign will be,
That can the Life-like Statues show to Us,
Of Aristotle, and Sage Pittacus.
And (^s Megazin of Books to guard) that sets
Cleanthes and the Stoics Counterfeits.
The Front's a cozening Mirror: For what street
Is not with Obscene Catoes now repleate?
None more comptrols Effeminacy, than
The most notorious soft Socratian.
Rough Limbs, and Arms all-bristled o'r with Hair.
Are the plain Badges of a Mind severe:
But in thy smooth Posteriors, full of Biles,
The smiling Leach does lance the swelling Piles.
These men have seal'd-up Lips, and take great Pride,
In silence and demurnesse; yea, beside
Then notted Hair does not their Ey-brow busse:
And therefore debaucht Teribonius
Is in a far more tolerable state;
His Nature to Malignant Stars, and Fate
I justly do impute, whose very color,
And lazy Gate are Symptoms of his Dolor.
Such men's simplicity should Us excite
To Sympathy, and Ruth; Their Passion's might
Does plead Them Guiltless: But far worse are They
Who with Herculean Thundering Taunts inveigh
Against these Delinquents, and of Virtue prate
Amid their base Venereous Cringes. What?
For fear of thy drad presence shall I thiver,
While thy Posteriors do obscenely quiver?
Or, Sext us, am I one jot worse than Thee,
Quoth loose Varillus of known Iufamy?
Strait let Him be, that mocks a wry-leg'd Man;
White, that derides an Ethiopian.
The Graccbi plaining fore of Garboiles near,
And Innovation, who can brook to hear?
Who would not, with confusion blending All,
Cry out; Heavens! Earth, and Seas! when Verres shall,
(The Archest Land sharke) be displeased with Thieves;
At Homicides when the Hackster Milo grieves;
The most Notorious leacher Clodius,
Empleads Adulterers; When Cethegus;
(The Boutefeu)'s accused by Catiline;
When three like bloody Tyrants shall (in fine)
Tax Sylla's Table of Proscription?
In which list was Vespasian's Lust-full Son,
Whose Coiture, and late-Adultery,
Might be the subject of a Tragedy:
Who calling back the Inlian Law severe,
All, nay (Mars and his Lemman thrild with Fear:
From Iulia's fruitful (but too son-laid) womb,
When so many Abortives forth did come;
And from Her issued, (in lieu of son)
(Right like their Uncle) shapelesse Embryous.
Therefore do not the most deboist, by right,
Yea even the vicious in the Abstract, slight
These glozing Sca^r^, Who of sin complain.
And, bit by their Invectives, snap again?
Late one of these Abuse-Comptrolers proud
Laronia brookt not, as he yield aloud,
Retreating, where art thou Julian Law?
Fallen in a ^ethargy? with smiling Aw
Who thus acoasts Him; O thrice-happy Age,
Whose Manners Gross are checked by such a Sage!
Let Rome (erst Impudent) Now blush c'offend:
A third sour Cato does from heaven descend!
But whence, Sir, do the Iushious Unguents come?
Whence is this odoris'rous Balsamum
(In thy rough hairy Neck that swells so) brought?
Tell of what seller of Perfumes 'twas bought.
But if the sleep-drownd Laws be rowzed, Than,
Above All, ought the sharp Scantinian.
First canvas Men in your strict Scrutinies:
More palpable are their Enormities:
But their Vast Number does Them safely shield,
And their close Files with Target Fencers stield.
Amongst those Rybaulds there is great Consent;
But no such detestable President
Shall in our Sex be found: Even Taedia
(That Trull) does never Abuse Cluvia:
Nor Flora (that lewd Queen) Catulla Wrong
With the obscene Actions of her beastly Tongue.
Hispo's a Pathick, and diseased no less
With Passive, than with Active Filthiness.
Do ever we Women wrangling causes plead?
Do We the Civill-Lawes peruse, and read?
Or in your strife-full Courts ever scold, and brawl?
Still at your Tournies, Few (or None at all)
Virago-like do combat; Few do eat
The Doughty Wrastlers sole-allotted Meat.
Ye Card Wool, and re-carry back in Maunds
The well-wrought Webb; Ye nimbly with your hands
Roll the Thred-swelling Spindle, Quicker yea
Than feat Arachne, or Penelope.
Like to the Squallid Spinster, by her Dame
Doomed to the Clog for being Tardy taken.
Why wealthy Hister made his Denison,
In's Will sole Heir of all his Goods, it is known;
Why with great Largesses He, in his Life,
Rewarded still his untoucht Virgin-Wife.
Raised shall She be to Wealth, and Dignity,
That in a Pathick's Pallet Third does ly.
This way to Thrive I thee will only teach,
Marry but such a One, and never Appeach.
Rich Pendants guerdon often such secrecy.
On Us a heavy Doom is past, and We
Meanwhile do smart it; The Laws partial are,
That silly Doves infest, and Crows forbear.
These daunted Stoics from Laronia slung,
While such Apparent Truths She boldly sung:
For who can burden her with Forgeries?
What will not others dare to enterprise,
When Thou invellopt art, soft Creticus,
In Robes of Tassetie Diaphanous
And (though the Rout does fleere at this thy Vest)
In it to Death Thou Harlots sentencest,
As poor Polinea, and Procula.
A Whore's Fabulla, and Carfinia,
Condemn 'em (if Thou list;) yet never will They,
Condemned, invest Themselves in such Array.
But Sun-burn't July Sir, most torrid is,
And I even swelt with Heat. I grant you This
Then plead stark-naked: It Is a seemlier thing
To be a Madman, than a Wantonling.
A Garb past all compare! in which Thee clad,
And promulgating Laws (so Life They had)
Even daign to hear the Ancient Romans might,
Returning Victors from some horrid Fight
All gasht, and mangled; And those Mountainers,
Their Plowes forsaking, and their Tillage-Cares!
What would you not exclaim, a Judge to see
So trapped? I demand if A affetie
Become a Witness? Thou undaunted art,
A Patriot stout: yet every Limb, and Part
May be discerned (to thy great disgrace)
Through the small crannies of thy pory Case.
It Is other Loose Men's foul Contagion
Has stencht thy Life, and further yet will run;
Like as one Scabbed Sheep a Flock infects;
One scurvie Swine a whole Heard's Health rejects;
And from sight of one perished Grape that is blue,
Another Grape contracts the selfsame Hue.
Ever long thou wilt Villainies attempt, and dare,
Than those soft Vestments more flagitious far.
None forwith ever extremely wicked grew.
Thee, by degrees, into their filthy crew
The throng of Dapper softlings will admit,
Who 'bout their Fronts at Home do Bonnets knit,
Their Necks adorning with deft Carquinets;
And (like the Froes, that with Sow's tender Tears
Appease their Bona dea) screen'd in Night's
Black collied Mantle, do their beastly Rites
To the Virago; but invert the Guise,
And Women thence cashier, and chase with Cries,
Who dare not to the guarded Lobby venture?
This sacred Temple may Men only enter;
Hence, Profane Women, Hence, They lowdly bawl;
No Cornets Clangor howleth Here at all;
Such Orgies did those Priests Effeminate,
Erst with Night-burning Tapers celebrate,
Wont with their Antique Rounds (obscenely merry)
Cecropian Cotytto even to weary.
He with wet Cole-sleck all his eye-brow smears;
Then curls in curious sort the collow'd Hairs
With a neat Crisping Pin, and lifting up
His twinkling Eyes, does fard'em In a Cup
Of Glass, proportioned like a Virile Wand,
He drinks, and in a Call (with curious Hand
Made all of ductill Gold) his Head he dresses,
Fare't with the Trammels of his braided Tresses;
In Watchet Robes invested, finely wrought
With Cob-web-worke, and in a Whitish Coat
Smooth-shorn, and thin, his very Groom (beside)
Swearing by Juno in a wanton Pride.
In's Hand Another carr's a Looking glass,
(Erst Otho's, born in lieu of Royal Mace)
And It, no less triumphing, does advance,
Than Turnus, when he brandisht Actor's Lance.
In which He viewed Himself in Harness standing,
And His the standards to erect commanding.
In new-made Registers, and a Fresh story
To be recorded is this Mirror's Glory,
Part of the Baggage of the Civil War!
Galba to stay, was like a Chiestain Rare,
And woman-like (forsooth) with curious Art
His Skin to Fucusse, was a Hero's part!
To bicker sharply, at Brebriacum,
For Empire of great Pallace-famed Rome.
And spread on's Face Bread soakt in Asses Milk,
To sleek the skin, and make it as soft as silk!
When Quiver-wearing loose Semramis
Did never in Assyria practice This;
Nor Cleopatra, in her base Retreat
From fatal Actium, sad for her defeat.
All kind of rybauld Talk, and filthy words,
Are Here the parley at their very Boards:
To speak obscurely Here, and make a Noise
With an affected wanton, lisping Voice,
Has the same Liberty, as erst among
Base Phrygian Cybele's lascivious Throng;
And the old dotard, with a hoary Head,
Their Archpriest, Spirit-rapt, and extased,
May for his rav'ning panch. (never cloyed with meat)
Of Gurmandizers be sole termed the GREAT;
And is well worthy to be hired, to be
Their Provost with an Ample Salarie.
But why yet linger These, and daily thus,
Whom (like those Phrygian Priests Venereous)
It is high time Themselves to evirate,
Since they are Now grown quite Effeminate?
The Pathick Gracchus (like a Virgin-Bride)
(As I think) to a Fluter erst affide,
A Trumpeter he was else (I assure ye)
Gave forty Sesterces to him for doury.
In short, the Nuptial Tables both were signed;
To this great Vollyes of loud shouts were joined
All crying out to Both, God give ye Joy!
Large dishes, charged with Viands, in a Ray
Were set upon the Tabler; This New Bride
Lay dandling in her Husband's Lap beside.
O Peers! Of Censours, to Reform with speed,
Or of Soothsayers have We greater need
TO Atone such foul portentuous Crimes as This?
Would thinke'em more stupendous Prodigies,
And shudder more, to see a Cow to a Lamb,
Or to a Calfe a Woman prove a dam?
Long purfled stoles, and Scarfs of Crimson Die
Now habit Him, whose Neck beseemingly
With short Round scutcheons was still charged of yore,
Which Thong-ty'd, nodding with the Weight he bore,
And the Morisco danced, till (chaf't with Heat)
He parboild all his Limbs in scalding sweat.
O Mars, drad Father of all-crushing Rome!
Whence have the Latian upland shep-heards come
To this stupendous Height of Wickedness?
Whence has such tickling Lust (like Netles) these
Thy bastardizing Nephews touched, and slung?
For lo a Man, whose Fame for Riches rung;
Who was innobled by his royal Line,
Does (against Nature) with a Man combine!
And do not (for all This) thy Murrion shake,
Nor cause the Earth, struck with thy Lance, to quake
And, netled with most horrid Indignation,
To thy fire love complain in furious Fashion?
Avaunt Then; leave thy Tilt. yard (erst severe)
Which Thou neglectest Now, devoid of care.
To Morrow, when Sol First shall mount his Carre,
And Heaven's Career to Gallop Him prepare,
I must unto Quirinus Temple wend,
For I Have engaged my service to a Friend.
Pray what is the cause (quoth One) of your Vagary?
When straight Another, Why do you make Enquiety,
As though You know not? His Friend married is
Unto a Man, and with a Few, (for This)
It Is shuffled up: But, if you live, you will see
Such Nuptials solemnized openly,
And in the Public Registers inrold.
Mean while great Teen these Male-Brides hearts does hold,
Because They cannot (be They never so fain)
Bring forth, and so their Husbands still retain.
But Nature well provided that our minds
Should not our Bodies change to other Kinds.
These cannot be with-childed, therefore They
Must barren die, and never their Bellies lay;
Nor yet no pouting hus pust Lydian Dame
With her Receipts can remedy the same:
Nor would it profit, though their Palms they had
By Pans yare running Priests well ferula'd.
But Gracchus in a sleeve-lesse Coat bedight,
(His Gown discarded) has outstripped quite
This uncouth monster with his Trident, and
Turned Fencer, erst did scour the spacious Sand,
O'r come, and chased by his pursuing Fo-man
(I say) the Scoundrel Gracchus, No^ a common
Net-casting Fencer, whose high Royal strain
Dimmed with it is Luster all the clinquant train
Of Capitol-preserving Manlius.
The stout Marcelli, Great-soul'd Catulus,
And life-contemning Paulus doughty Brood;
The Heroic Fabies all of Noble Blood
And all the Senators, with every Peer
Placed in the Fore-ranke of the Theater;
Though I should ad to These the Praetor too,
The Fencing-Nets to cast that hired him tho.
That there are any grizly, hideous Ghoasts;
Realms under ground in Hel's black Ebon Coasts;
And a long shoving Pole (grim Charon's Oar;)
And black Frogs swimming in the Stygian Moore,
And that so many thousand souls do float.
And stem that Sable Sound in one small Boat;
Men, nay even Boys themselves (unless they be
No higher than three Horse-loaves, nor a Fee
Ever to the Bath-guide did for Batting pay)
Are so far from Believing Now, that They
But Silly Old wives Fables do esteem 'em,
And childrens Bugs, and Scare-crows only deem'em
But do Thou count em' true; What do suppose
Stern Curious thinks, and the Two Scipio's?
What grave Fabricius, and Camillus Ghoast?
What all the Fabies, that Patrician Host,
Quite routed at the Verge of Cremera?
And all the Roman Fry, whose Corpses lay
So thick, that Cannae's field was paved quite?
What the souls of so many slain in Fight,
As often as any such polluted Ghoast
As this, descends Hence to their hallowed Coast?
Sure They would eft-soons to be purged desire
With Sulphur (might they have't) and Sacred Fire;
With fat Pine-Tapers, and a clensing Spray,
To sprinkle Holy Water, made of Bay.
Alas, We (Whether we beleeve't, or no)
To the Infernal Kingdoms needs must go!
We have (Indeed) our Guydons born beyond
The Late-ta'n Orcads, and Hibernian strond;
And sea-clapt Britans whose light Hemi-sphere
Is with Nights sable shrouds scarce curtain'd e're.
But the Prodigious sins, which We, at Home,
(Triumphant Victors) do commit in Rome,
Those whom We have surpised, and triumph over
(Sole Conquerours indeed) to do abhor.
But yet One, loose Armenian Zalates,
Softer than striplings All, unnerv'd by Ease,
Was (as 'twas bruited, and by all men se'd)
The Lust-inflamd Tribune's Ganymed.
See what commerce will do! he came to Rome
As a good, simple Hostage did become.
Here they are made Men! But if longer stay
These Foreign Lands make in our City, They
Shall never want a corrupting Paramour.
Their slops, Knives, Bridles, switches swopt with our
Loose Garbles, the Praetext Manners soft away
They will bear with them to Artaxata.
FINIS.

