The Fron^^spice.
Here wounded by her own hand Dido lies.
There with conspiring Winds Aeneas flies.
Is faith so frail? or can no private care
Or friendship stand with Empire? This great pair,
Two bodies that one soul did lately g^ide,
Now the Earth and Seas, even life and death divide.
So the high Pines that equally did crown
The Carthaginian mountain, now cut down
And by new motion carried several ways:
Part rigges his ship, and part her Pile does raise.
What moved these Princes to their fates? behold
A Cypresse-garland and a Crown of gold.
Dido and Aeneas The Fou^rth Book of Virgils Aeneis Now Englished Bij Robert
Stanijston Esgr John Droeshou^t scu^sp



Printed for William Cook at Hurnivalls Inn gate in Holborne

TO MY MOST HONORED Lady, my Lady TVVISLETON, Daughter of Henry Stapylton
Esquire, and Wife to Sir GEORGE TVVISLETON, Baronet.
MADAM,
I Have obeyed your commands, and (as far as my power extends) perfected
them. The Queen of CARTHAGE has learned English to converse with you: be
pleased now to esteem her as a Native, but in the errors of her language,
still remember she was borne a Forraigner. I doubt not but the correspondence
your knowledge holds with Time-past, has truly informed your Ladyship, that
DIDO fell by her own hand a Martyr of CHASTITY, not a SACRIFICE to PASSION:
but let not this move you to suspect my Author, as envious to your Noble Sex,
or ambitious to enlarge the ROMAN Conquest in a Ladies fame, far be it from
your apprehension, as from his: he writes a POEM, not a HISTORY, and draws
not the Picture of DIDO, but of ART to life: I took this Copy for your
Ladyship; pardon me that I publish it, my chief design being to do honor to
so excellent a Kinswoman: in whose natural perfections our Family, in whose
virtues our Time glories. Be constant to your goodness, and the world shall
subscribe, as I,

Your Ladyships True Honorer, Robert Stapylton.

The TRANSLATOR
WIllingly I would omit this entertainment to my Reader; for if he be only a
pretender to conception, he will pretend to conceive me howsoever: If really
ingenious he needs no preparative, unless he be a Crittique, and then he
deserves not any thing, because he will be satisfied with nothing. But
Custom exacts Ceremony, and I pay my tribute, lest I should be thought proud
or foolish, that I either would not, or could not give an account of my
elections.

That I pitched upon the Fourth Book of the Aeneis, and singled it from the
rest, was by such a Comands as (like celestial influences) did not violently
enforce, but strongly incline my will: Reason assuring me, I might justify my
obedience, and quote Virgil for it; himself having first read to Augustus
Caesar, the Second, This, and the Sixth Book; And so entire a work I do
esteem this Book, as while it remains solitary, I presume to: give it the
Title of DIDO and AENEAS: wherein I prefixe her name, and would add my
reasons; but I imagine no man will quarrel with a Lady for place: much less
with a Queen in her own Kingdom.

Opinion the common game that Muses fly at, has not raised mine upon the wing.
Of a noble Fame who covets not the purchase? it is a wholesome air, and
breathes new spirits into a man; but mutable Opinion is wind, and I would not
rashly carve Letters on a Wether-cocke: I write lower, therefore safer,
couching my Name under the learned Maro.

I will not offer to defend my Author, that were to present succors to a
Prince reigning in full peace, the Prince of the Latin Poets. If any should
question him for the truth of History, the verse is transparent, they may only
intend their sight, and look quite through the Fained work: and in the
Founders of the Carthaginian and Roman Empires Dido and Aeneas, they shall read
the mysteries of their Foundations, the Foeminine and Masculine governements of
those two great Cities, by Merchandise, and Arms; And if it be a fiction that
Aeneas ever saw Dido, it is true that Rome fell into the power of Carthage,
till by a Faction growing in the bosom of this State, it was persuaded, like a
love-sicke Lady, to trust it self in the arms and embrace of Rome, that would
seem commanded by Fate to break all mutual ties; till cursing the Roman
false-hood, the reputation and spirit of poor Carthage glided into wind.

In Englishing Virgil, I have given him a Language, not so low as to bring
down his Aeneis to his Eclogues, and level the expressions of his Princes
with his Shepherds: nor so high, that he should not be intelligible to the
Unlearned, as if he still spoke Latin. It is true that wit distilled in one
language, cannot be transfused into another without loss of spirits: yet I
presume such graces are retained, as those of the Noblest quality will favor
this Translation, from an Original, that was sometimes the unenvied Favorite of
the greatest Roman Emperor.

But I have now detained you so long, we shall not ^ome to Carthage in time, to
the Feast made for Aeneas: I can only for the present, bring you to ^eare the
Echoes of his last complement to Dido, having commanded him to relate the
Stratagem of ^he Greeks, and the course of his own adventures, Thus Virgil
brings him off; Hence to your Court some god my passage steered,
Sacred Aeneas, whom all listening heard,
Troy's fate, and his own fortunes thus expressed,
At length here ceased, took leave, and went to rest.


AUGUSTUS

AUGUSTUS CEASAR On the Command of VIRGIL by Testament that his Works should
be burned.
COuld his last breath command so black a sin?
Shall learned Uirgil's great Must perish in
The greedy fire? shall his Art die? oh shame!
And can our Eyes behold it? nor the flame
His honor spare? will he not then permit
The love we owe his works? Prohibit it
Bright Phoebus! Roman Muses speak your charms.
Bacchus, fair Ceres aid, he in your arms
Your soldier was, your husbandman improu'd.
For what would by the working Spring be moved
He taught: what Summer forces, Autumn yields,
Or Winter's age affoords. Reformed the fields.
A match concluded twixt the Elm and Vine.
Ordered the Beasts: did to the Bees assign
Their straw-pavillions. And were all these made
For ruin? should the Parent this have said?
But Law must be observed, his last will stand:
We must obey the power of his Command.
Be rather broken the Law's Reuerenc'd power,
Then one day shall the heap'd-up pains devou'r
Of nights and days so many. On's last breath
His watchful studies blast, Perhaps in death
Rage seized him; and his tongue did something vent,
His spirits strayed: not of his own intent,
But conquered with the languishing vile pain.
If then his Soul were blind, shall Troy again
Her Ruins feel? again be forced to mourn?
After Loves wound and Death's shall Dido burn?
Shall such a sacred work such wars such swords
Turn dust, in one bad hou'r, by erring words?
Come, come, all floods Pierian sisters give,
Andquench these flames; Let Virgil each where liu
T'himselfe unkind, envying the world his wit:
In the grave hurtful. He commanded it he dead
But if my countermaund
His whole Muse sounding shall immortalize suffize,
His name; his verse is by our power approved
Let him be praised, live please, be read, be loved.
On DIDO and AENEAS, Translated by my much honored, much loved friend, Robert
Stapylton Esquire.
THy life and Verse is such, I dare commend
Thee and thy labors, and boast thee my friend
To my advantage: for I good must be
And knowing, if I praise thy wit and thee.
Nor can praise swell thee, who nere hop'st to sit
At the loud-talking helm of seeming wit,
And steer the ship of fools; who take no pride
To have thy name among Ladies glorified,
Or Lords like them judicious: who have wealth
Enough to drink, not mentioning their health.
Thy soul is liberal: not forced to write
Like the gay Pandar, or smooth Parasite
To win oth'sense of man. Thy fanci's find
A virtuous operation in the mind.
But those hereafter to the World you will show
By this Translation you now Print we know
You Latin understand, a Science few
Have reached oth'magnified Poeticke crew,
Who yet persuade the Courtier, Maro's vain
Is Pigmey to their own Gyganticke strain.
And they who have the ancient Latins read,
Or late Italians, will vncrowne thy head
Of its due Laurel, and sharp Critics be
Not against thy work, they cannot, but against thee
Who would not their fine cunning imitate,
Intitling that thy own, thou did Translate.
By this they grew proud minions to fond Fame,
Though like the Moon they shind with borrowd flam^
Cold in themselves: or prodigally spent
Like riotous youth, only on moneys lent.
While thou, as I, how ere they malice it,
Do only spend oth' stock of thy own wit.
Endeavor nobly still. And should the sport
Of us but the gay wonder of the Court,
The perfumed Sir Whisper in the Ladies ear,
That Dido does not in thy language bear
Due state, or copies want the Originals art,
Bid him, play with her Fan and Act his part.
Court not Opinion, and triumphant bays
Will follow Virtue. Even this Piece will raise
Not subject to times rage, or Enuies spoil,
A Pyramid to thee in Dido's Pile.
W. HABINGTON.

THE FOURTH BOOK OF UIRGIL'S AENEIS.
The Argument.
THe queen enamored does her Sister move,
And by her council yields her self to love*
They court the Gods with gifts and Sacrifice:
She hunts, and ioynes with him in Venus ties*
The rumor spreades: for flight Aeneas then
Warned by a God prepares his ships, and men;
Dido perceives it, and intreates delay:
But Fate commands, he has no power to stay.
Her Pile she desperate mounted, her last breath
His falsehood cursed, and with his sword forced death.
But with sad care struck-deepe, her wound the queen
Feeds in her veins, melts in a fire unseen.
The man's much virtue wanders in her mind,
His Troy's great name: his looks and language find
Root in her bosom. Care her rest denies.
Next morning the earth with Sunbeams purifies,
And from heaven's beauty the moist shadow breaks
When, crazed, t'her dearest sister thus she speaks.
My sister Anne, what dreams my doubts affright
Who Is this new Guest that on our coast did light!
Whom speaks his face, strong soul, and force! In lin
Is I believe (nor is Faith vain) Divine.
Fear low minds argues; by what fates (aye me)
Has he bin tossed! what fought-out wars sung he
Were It not a thing within me fixed upon
Immoueably, to match my self to none,
Since Death deceiving me, my first Love fled,
Were I not weary of the Torch and bed:
Perhaps this one lin, might me Captiuate;
For (I confess) since poor Sychaeus fate
My Lord, our house-gods stayn'd by fratricide:
This sole man forced me from my vow to slide;
The path of my forgotten flame I see;
But first I wish earths depth may gape for me,
The Almighty Thunder strike me to the Sprites,
Pale sprites of Hell, and to their darkest nights,
Ere shame I violate thee, or thy laws wrong;
He that first won it, took my love along
To his cold Tomb: there let him keep it still.
Tears, flowing whilst she speaks, her bosom fill,
Anne thus replies, O thou more loved then day,
will thou a Widow wear thy youth away?
Sweet Babes will thou not know? Loves bounties share?
Think thou for that, dust or pale shadows care?
What though no Suitors warmed thy cold desire?
Not Lybians, not Hiarbas scorned in Tire,
Nor leaders great in Affricke, a rich Land
In triumphs, will thou yet pleased love withstand?
Mindst thou not where thou art? Getes never foild
Here girt thee, there hard Syrtis, and the wild
Numidians: a dry Desert here, and far-
Raging Barceans; of Tyre's growing war,
Pigmaleons threats (our brother) what is said?
Sure by propitious gods, by Juno's aid,
The Trojan ships have steered their course to thee;
How great this town, what Kingdoms shall thou see
Rise by this match! Trojans accompanying
In Arms, how high will Punicke glory spring?
Crave thou the gods leave only, sacrifize,
Then intertaine him, cause of stay devise,
Whilst Winter, and Orion swells the Seas:
His ships are broke, and Heaven no Law obeyes.
Thus her fired soul she did with love inflame,
Gave hope t'her doubtful mind, and banished shame.
They go to the temple first, at the Altars pray
For peace: of course they chosen Heifers slay
To Ceres, Phoebus, Bachus: zealously
To Juno, Patroness of the marriage tie.
Fair Dido's self holds the ewre, and poures between
The white Cowes horns, or by the gods is seen
Employed at their fat Altars: crowns the day
With gifts, Beasts opened breasts she does survey,
Consults their breathing intrailes. Ah dull mind
Of Priests what help can vows or Temples find
For her that is mad? This while, a soft flame eats
Her marrow, in her breast a dumb wound beats.
Unhappy Dido burns, strayes wild through all
The Town; like as a Hind, at the arrows fall,
Whom heedles some far darting Shepherd struck
In The Cressian woods, whilst his wingd steel forsook
Him unawares: she flies through lawnes and thickes,
But in her side the deadly arrow sticks.
Now with Aeneas 'bout the walls she goes,
Boasts her Sidonia^ wealth, the townstre^gth shows
Attempts to speak, stops the word halfe-exprest.
Now Evening, hopes for such another feast:
Again prays (mad) to hear Troyes fate, and then
Hangs, ravished, at the Historians lips again.
They parted: when, by turn, the dull black night
Reigned, and declining Stars did rest invite,
She mournes to the empty room, and sits where he
Late sat, does him though absent hear and see:
Or for the fathers sake she hugs his child,
And tries if so cursed Love could be beguild.
Forts halfe-built go not on; the youth forsakes
To practice arms, no warlike Bulwarks makes:
The works hang wildly broken off, with high
And thretning pinacles, that brave the sky.
When Jove's loved wife, saw what a plague had caught
Her Dido, fury setting fame at naught,
She, meeting Venus, to this purpose says,
Large spoils thou and thy boy, sure mighty praise
You win: A memorable name, and great?
One woman conquered by two gods deceit.
Alas I know thou feardst these walls of ours,
And to what hight Carthage might raise her towers
But to what end? why now this great debate?
Rather perpetual peace lets celebrate,
And marriages: thou have thy hearts desire:
Fond Dido burns, her marrow's all a fire:
These Nations then, in common, lets preserve
With equal powers. Let her a Trojan serve,
To thee we Carthage for a dowry leave.
Thus (for 'twas spoke in craft she did perceive,
Romes Empire in the Lybian parts to hold;
Uenus incounters her; what madman would
Refuse this? or in War with thee contend?
If what thou motion'st Fortune can be friend:
But I doubt Fate: if Jove those come from Troy;
With these of Tire, would have one Town enjoy,
Or likes the men be mixed, or leagues be joined:
Thou art his wife, have power to sound her mind:
Proceed, I Will second; thus great Juno then
Caught it, be that my care, now by what mean
This may be done, mark, briefly I Will declare.
Aeneas and poor Dido t'hunt prepare
Ith'Forrest, when to morrow's Sun displayes
His first rise, the orb unfolding with his rays.
I (whilst the horse toil in the chase) will power,
Mixed with a storm of hail, a darkning shower
Upon them: and all Heaven with thunder fright:
The troops shall scatter, covered in black night:
Dido shall with Troyes General find one Cave,
There I Will be, and if thy firm grant I have,
I Will tie them sure, and give her for his own
In marriage. No dislike to Juno known;
Uenus assents, and smiles to find her train,
This while, Aurora rising leaves the maine,
Choice youth bear through the Ports wide nets (now day)
Cords and broad iron toils; then rush away
Massylian horse; flesht hounds. At the Court gate,
For the queen lingering in her Chamber, wait
The Carthage Lords, her foaming Courser (gay
In gold and purple) on the Bit does play.
At length she with a Princely train appears:
A Tyrian robe, the borders staind, she wears.
Of gold her quiver, her hair wound in gold:
A golden button does the purple hold.
Wanton Iulus, and the Trojans are
Now marching for the chase. Aeneas
Above them all) ioynes troops with hers: even as fair
When Phoebus does from Winter Lycia pass,
Or Zanthus: and his mothers Delos greet,
'Bout the Altars dancing Cretans murmuring meet,
Driopes, painted Agathyrsians mix;
He his hair twined in gold with Bays does fix:
On's shoulder arrows clashing; with such grace
Aeneas rides, like Beauty in his face.
When hills they would climbd, and dens vnpathd by man,
Here you might see wild Goats, that down-hill ran,
As cast off from the rocks: in wide plains there
From mountains frighted herds of flying Dear,
Lost in their dust. In his swift horse the boy
Ascanius does amidst the valleys joy,
Now these, now those out gallop,: it is his wish
Among the dull herds, a foaming Boar would rush
Or yellow Lion from the hill descend:
Mean while with horrid noise the heavens contend:
Rain mixed with hail, straight follows. Tyrians fly,
Ascanius and the youthful Trojans hye,
Frighted away: to several shelters all
Now straggling. Rivers from the mountains fall.
Troyes General and Dido took one Cave.
First earth and marrying Juno the Omen gave:
Fire flasht, the ayre's privy to the match: on hills
Nymphs howled: that day of death first, first of ills
Was cause; for neither form does Dido move,
Nor fame, nor now she meditates stolen love,
Wedlooke she calst', pretexting with that name
Her fault; straight through great Lybian towns go fame
Fame, that's an evil swiftest in her course,
That lives by change; by going gathers force.
By fear first little, then through the air is spread:
Her feet the Earth, and Clouds involue her head:
Vexed by the gods, it is said the mother earth
Adds fame to Enceladus and Ceus birth,
Their youngest sister: swift-heeld, winged, a loathd,
Huge monster, as with plumes her body's clothed,
So many sharp Eyes lurk (strange to relate)
So many Ears to listen, tongues to prate.
By night she, scritching, through mid-heaven flies,
And through the earths shade: no sleep does close her eyes,
By day sits watching, and from towers does pry,
Or houses tops, and great Towns terrify.
Speaker of truths, in false reports as bold.
She then with joy things done and undone told.
And filled the people with strange rumors, how
Aeneas came, and Didos love did bow,
That flying Trojan to her bed to take:
Now long, as Winter, their delights they make.
Careless of Empire, in foul lust abused;
This the vile goddess to all men's mouths dis-fus'd.
And straight her course to King Hiarbas turns,
Her words increase his wrath, his soul she burns.
Jove's son, of ravished Garamante borne.
This Prince a hundred Temples did adorn
In his large Kingdom to his Father Jove:
Hallowed the watchful fires, to powers above
Eternal guards: and fatned with beast gores
His soil, with flowery garlands wreathed his door
Madwith this bitter brute inflamd, he is said,
Fore th'altars, midst the powers of gods, to have pray
Complaining much, with hands to heavenward cas^
All powerful Jove, to whom the Moors now ta^
Grape-honors, on beds painted banqueting,
See thou this? Do we fear thee thundering
In vain O father? are those lightnings blind,
And murmurs idle, that affright our mind?
The woman that (straid hither) built a poor
Town, and bought leave, compeld to plow the shore
To which place we gave Laws (our match abhord)
Aeneas ore her Land receives as Lord:
And now that Paris, with his halfe-men, bold in
His Phrygian Miter, his oyld hair and chin,
Wins her by rape: while it is our part to bring
Gifts to thy Temple, vain fame cherishing.
Holding the Altar, praying in this sort,
The Almighty heard him, cast his eyes to the Court
And lovers, of fair fame oblivious:
Then speaks to Hermes, and commands him thus.
Son, call the West-wind, wing thy self, away,
Speak to the Trojan chief, that now does stay the air.
In Tyrian Carthage, mindles to prepare,
For towns fate gave him, bear these words through
Not such his fairest mother t'vs assured him,
Nor therefore twice from Grecian arms securd him,
But to rule Italy, with Empire great,
And loud in War, Troy's blood to propagate,
And to one Law the Conquered World to frame.
If not these glories, nor his care of Fame
Raise his endeavors: sure he envies not
Rome to his son? upon what hope or plot,
Stays he on hostile ground? does he despise
The Ausonian blood: Lavinian Seigniories?
Let him sail, this our charge, thou Herald be.
Jove said; t'obey's great father's Ma^dates he
Prepares, first golden winged shoes he ties
To's feet, with which ore land and Sea he flies,
By a full blast supported; he takes then
His wand, wherewith he calls pale souls again
From Hell, and others sends to woes beneath:
Gives and breaks sleep, and seals up eyes in death.
Thus armed, he swims through clouds, the wind he rides
And flying, viewes the crown, and craggy sides
Of Atlas: whose hard Summit Heaven vpholds:
Atlas, that still his Piny head infolds
In sullyd clouds; beat with the wind and shower.
Fallen snow his shoulders covers; Rivers power
From the old man's chin, his yce-startch'd beard afrights
Here Hermes sailing with even wings first lights:
Hence to Seas headlong does his body throw,
Like to a Bird that nere the Sea flies low,
'Bout fishy Rocks and ports: so he wings ore
(Hovering twixt Heaven and Earth) the sandy shore
Of Lybia, cuts the winds, descending down
From's mothers father. The yet low built town
When first his feathered feet touched, he did view
Aeneas forming Towers: contriving new
The roofes; his sword bright Iaspar starr'd; he glowd
In Tyrian dies: a Robe from's shoulder flowed,
A gift rich Dido wrought, and did implaite
The woofe with thin gold: he invades him straight.
Thy mind foundations of high Carthage lays,
And thou uxorious a great Town do raise:
Ah mindlesse of thy Empire and thy ends!
The King of gods from his high Palace sends
Me to thee; he whose power the heavens does sway
And the earth: chargd me through the air these words convey.
What hope in Lybia idles thee? what plot?
If glory of so great things moves thee not,
Nor love of thy own praise inflames thy care:
Respect Iulus rise, and hopes, thy heir,
Whose birthright the Italian Kingdom is:
And Roman soil. Cyllenius, speaking this,
Ere he replied, left mortal forme's disguise,
And in the thin air vanished from his Eyes.
This sight astonishes Aeneas mind,
His h^ire starts up: his words no passage find.
He longs to fly, and leave that sweetest land:
Mazed at such warning, and the gods command.
What should he do alas? how can he break
With the angry Queen? or with what preface speak?
His quick soul he divides, now here, now there:
Distracted turns his spirits every where.
Then calls (this seems of all the easiest way)
Mnesthes, Sergestus, strong Cloanthus, they
Must closly rig the Fleet: their fellows train
To the shore, arm, cause for preparation feign.
Whilst he (since noblest Dido did not reach
His aim: but hoped such love would know no breach)
Would try to gain access, and times to move
Most soft, and means most fit. They nimble prove
TO obey him, his commands dispatch: the while
The queen found (who a lover can beguile)
The plot: and first of future motions thought,
Fearing all was not safe: vile Fame then brought
Her news the Fleet was armed, and course set down:
Raging she flies like Thyas through the Town,
When sacrifices wildly now begun,
And having heard her Bacchus, she does run
At the Origes sounds: and dark Cythaeron's calls.
At length her fury on Aeneas falls.
And did thou hope, perfidious, to conceal
Such false-hood? Silent from my land to steal?
Cannot our hand, once thine, our love, once dear,
Nor Dido's pitti'd funerals stay thee here?
Will thou by Winter Stars thy Fleet set forth,
And venture through the deep the Wind at North?
Cruel, what if not bound for a strange Land,
And unknown houses? did old Troy yet stand?
Would thou seek Troy through the enraged Sea?
Me fly'st thou? by these tears, this hand I pray,
Since to my self fond I have else left naught:
By our new joys of marriage, if I ought
Deserve of thee: or ought was sweet that is mine,
Pity a falling house: that mind of thine
I pray (if prayers have place) put off. For thee
Numidian Tyrants, Lybians malice me.
The Tyrians murmur: for thee dead is shame,
And (which I climbed the Stars by) my first fame.
To whom will thou leave dying me? O guest!
For of all titles only that does rest.
What stay I for? till down Pigmaleon shakes
My walls? or me Hiarbas captive takes?
Yet had I bin a mother ere thy flight,
If I had playing in my Court, or sight,
A young Aeneas having but thy look:
Not captive I should seem, nor quite forsook.
She said, he warned by Jove, nere moves his Eyes;
Checks struggling grief, and thus, in short, replies.
What favors you so e're can boast of, I
Great Queen acknowledge: nor while memory
I of my self conserve, or life this frame
Shall move, will I forget Elisas name.
Brief for my cause I Will speak; by flight to get
Hence (feign it not) I nere hoped, never yet
Pretended marriage: nor had such intent.
If Fate had left it at my choice to have spent
My life, and might I order my own care:
The ruined Ilium first I would repair,
And our own Relics, Priams towers should stand,
Troy rendered to the vanquished by this hand.
Phoebus and Lycian lots, great Italy
Assign; that must our love, our Country be.
If, being a Phoenician borne, thy sight
These Carthage towers, and Lybian towns delight.
Why then are Trojans envied, if we do
Plant Latium? we may seek strange Kingdoms too.
Anchyses, my dead father, often as night
Rises in shades, and stars show fiery light,
Warnes me in dreams: his troubled ghost breeds dread.
My boy Ascanius moves me, that dear head,
Which I defraud of the Hesperian Crown,
And destined Earth; from Jove himself sent down
Now, even the gods Embass'dor (I attest
Both their bright heads) through the quick air adrest
These Mandates; in clear light the god I saw,
Entering these walls: his voice these ears did draw:
To vex us both with thy complaints forbear,
I seek not Italy a Volunteire.
This said, her eyes (obliquely fixed before)
She roles about, and wanders him all ore:
And then a-fire thus speaks. Thy mother nor
Goddess, nor Dardanus thy Ancestor,
False man; thee Caucasus got on a Rock,
And some Hircanian Tygresse gave thee suck.
Why should I feign? for what worse usage stay?
Sighed he with us? cast he his eyes this way?
Wept he at all? orpittied he our love?
What shall I say? great Juno now, nor Jove,
Do in my cause indifferent appear.
Faith has no safety! poorly shipwrackt here:
I took him up, did with him share estates;
From wrack his fleet I saved, from deaths his mates
Furies, alas, transport me; Phoebus now,
Now Lycian lots, Jove bids his Herald bow
With his so horrid mandates through the Air.
And take the gods such pains? disturbes that care
Their quiet? I nor hold thee, nor refute.
Go with the wind, seek Latium; make pursuit
Through waves for Crowns, I hope (if power there be
In the good Powers) some rock will punish thee,
Often calling Dido. In black fires I Will poast,
And dead thou shall be followed with my Ghost.
Tortured bad man thou wilt be, I it shall hear:
Down to my shadow Fame this news will bear.
At these words breaking off, heart-sicke she flies
Out of the open air: and from his eyes.
Leaves him much doubting, much prepared to say.
Her in a swound her maids take up, convey
There marble chamber: on her bed repose.
Pious Aeneas, though he wished her woes
And cares with sweeter language to remove.
Deep-sighing, his soul fainting in great love,
Yet heavens command fulfilled: surveyed once more
His fleet. The Trojans plied it then, from shore
Halling tall ships, pitched bottomes floating brought
Green oars: and Oaks out of the woods unwrought
For haste. You may behold them trooping down,
And rushing from all corners of the Town.
Like Ants, when they, huge corne-heaps pillaging
Provision home mindful of Winter bring.
The black troop takes the field, through grass amain
Bears prey by narrow ways: the greater grain
Some tug along: some, Marshalling the swarm,
Chastise delay: the work each path does warm.
What horror Dido, viewing this, seized thee?
How sigh'dst thou, from thy tower when thou did see
The shore all flaming? and with various sound
Did hear the Mariners the Sea confound?
O love to what can thou not force our breasts!
Again to melt in tears, to try requests
Again she is forced, and yields to love again:
Least, something left untryd, she diesin vain.
Anne to the shore thou see their swift resorts
From all parts: now the wind their canvasse courts,
And on their poupes crowns the glad Sailers set.
Had I thought sorrow could have bin thus great,
^'d brook'd it sister. Yet this one thing, Anne,
Do for poor me: thee only that false man
Respects, his secret sense he does express
To thee, thou know his times, and best access.
Go sister, suppliant speak to my proud Foe.
I swear not to the Trojan overthrow,
In Aulis with the Greeks: nor with them sent
My Fleet; nor tore his Fathers monument.
Why are his Ears so hard my words can force
No entrance? whether will he bend his course?
This last grant let him make his woeful love,
T'expect safe flight, winds that may friendly prou
Not now the wedlock he betrayed I crave,
Nor that he would loose fair Latium: Kingdoms wau
I ask but vacant time rage to relieve:
Until my ruin teach me how to grieve.
I beg (pity thy sister) this last suite,
And this obtained, Death shall make absolute.
Thus her sad sister does with tears assail
^is pity often, but no tears prevail:
^or easily he any motion hears:
^ate bars, a god has stopped the man's soft ears.
And as an old strong timber'd Oak, to rend
Which blustering Northwinds of the Alps contend,
^ossing its trunk, breathes forth a mournful sound,
and leafes from the highest branches strew the ground,
^ast in the Rock it sticks, as much does spread
^'s root toward Hell, as reares to Heaven its head.
(...) is Aeneas wrested, on this part,
and that, with prayers: care shaking his great heart,
^is soul remains unmoved, tears vainly slide.
But wretched Dido, by fate terrified,
^Vishes for death; even Heaven offends her eye.
^o put her on to end her work, and dye:
Horrid to speak, while the Altars incense burn,
She, offering, sees the hallowed water turn
Black: and the wine changed to foul gore. To non^
Not to her sister speaks this vision.
There was ith house too (which she much adored)
A marble Temple to her former Lord;
With snowy fleeces, and leaves festival
Hanged round: hence voices, and her husbands call
She seemed at dead of night to hear. Alone
The Owl oath house top gave a funeral groan,
And drew forth her slow voice to shriks. Her frigh^
Many an old Prophet also did excite,
With horrid presage. In her dreams she fears
Cruel Aeneas. Left alone sh'appeares,
Still vnattended in long ways to toil:
To seek her Tyrians in a Desert soil.
So in his madness, Pentheus descries
Six Furies: two Suns, double Thebes espies.
Orestes so from's mother in the play
Armed with her Torch, and Snakes, does run away:
Whilst at the door the Furies hold their seat.
Thus spent with miseries, with fury great,
To dye, the time, and manner she provides.
And speaking to her sister, her look hides
Her thoughts: hope shining in her face: I Have now
Sister a way, (thy sister gratulate, thou)
Shall give me him, or from him take fond me.
By The Oceans bounds the farthest Aethiops be,
Nere Sunset. where huge Atlas shoulders turn
Heavens Axle-tree, that seems with stars to burn.
I know a Priestesse in those Countries bred,
Th'Hesperian Temple-keeper, that has fed
The Dragon: and the sacred Tree did keep,
Sprinkling moist honny, poppy causing sleep.
She promises to free the minds she will please,
By charms: but others with sad care to seize.
To stop streams, chase back stars, makeghosts appear
At midnight: you will think, you the earth groaning hear
And from the mountains tree descending see.
You gods, and thou dear sister witness be,
That Magic I unwillingly prepare.
Erect thou secretly a pile ith air.
Lay on the arms, he wicked (when he fled)
In's Chamber left: his robes, the nuptial bed
I perished in; all that was his it is fit
The fire consumes, the Priestesse told me it.
This said, she stops: palenesse invades her face.
But Anne beleives not such wild-furies chase
Her sister, or these rites her Fun'rals hide;
Nor farther fears then when Sychaeus died:
Therefore prepares her charge. Now pyl'd up high
Pines, cloven Oaks inth' inner Court do lie.
The queen with garlands the^ the place hanged round
And her own funerals with Cypress crowned,
Placed his Robes, Picture, and sword left behind,
On the bed: mindful what she had designed.
They circle round the Altar. Chaos, Hell,
Three hundred gods the Priestesse to her spell
Her hair loose called. Of three-form'd Hecat spoke:
And sprinkled waters feigned oth'stigian Lake.
By Moone-light, with brasse-sickles cut, were sought
Young herbs, black venom in a foame: they brought
The Hyppomanes, from a Colt's forhead snatched
In foaling: and the Love oth'Mother caught.
With leaven, and pure hands near the Altar she,
Her robe ungirted, one foot tied, one free,
Dying accused Fate-knowing Gods, and stars:
But if there be a just Power, which the jarres
Of Lovers pitties, prays to that. 'Twas night,
And wearied bodies suck't-in sleeps delight;
To their mid-revolution stars were come:
Woods, fields, the beasts, and gaudy birds were dumb,
Both those about the fennes, and those that keep
The bushes, neasted in still Night, with sleep
Allayed their cares, and hearts from labor free:
But not the afflicted Dido; never she
Takes rest: her eyes, her breast, do entertain
No night; cares double, mutinous, Love again
Rebels; In a rough Sea tossed by the wind
Of rage, she floates, and thus revolves her mind.
What shall I do? deluded, try once more
My Suitors? the Numidians now implore,
Whom I so often have scorned? Trojans by Sea
Shall I attend? and their commands obey?
To have releev'd them helps me much, and much
Their grateful hearts my former favors touch?
But (say I would) who'd let me? or admit
Scorned me to their proud ships? Undone not yet
Feelst thou, nor know thou perjured Troy? shall I
Alone then, with the Sailors triumph fly?
Or backed with Tire, and all my men of War
Follow? and poast those (I scarce drew thus far)
So Sea again: and force them sail? Oh no,
Dye thou deseru'st it, cure with wounds thy woe.
Won with my tears, thou sister down did weigh
Me first with grief, and to my Foe betray.
Might I not, matched but once, have spent my time
Like the poor beast: freed from such care, or crime?
And to Sychaeus dust my vow have paid?
Such sad complaints her breaking heart invade.
Aeneas, in'stall ship, to sail now sure,
All things first rightly ordered, sleep secures.
The god again returning in his sleep,
Gives him new warning, and's old form does keep:
Resembling Hermes all, voice, yellow hair,
And color, and a body young and fair.
Can thou sleep (borne of Venus) in this fate?
Fond man, do thou not see what dangers wait
About thee? hear thou not th'inviting wind?
Plots and foul crimes she quickens in her mind:
Certain of death. Her fury now flows high.
Fly'st thou not hence, whilst thou have power to fly?
The Sea with Engines vexed, and torches, bright
But burning with an inauspitious light:
And the whole harbor shall in flames appear,
If the next morning see thee dallying here,
Go, go, delay not, women are unfix'd.
This said, himself with the dark night he mixed.
Aeneas frighted by the shade, does rise,
Shakes off dull sleep, and to his Mates he cries,
Awake, sit to your banks, let your sails fly
Nimbly to Sea; A God sent from the sky
That we should haste, and cut our Cables he
Urges once more; Blessed God we follow thee
What Power soever: again thy will w'intend;
Be present, pleased, aid, and stars prosperous send.
He said. Like lightning forth his sword does fly,
And cuts the cables which the vessel tie.
All burn with equal heat, catch, rush away,
They Have left the shore, the Navy hides the sea;
They rowing wreath the foame, brush th'azure wave,
To earth new light now young Aurora gave,
Whilst aged Tython's safro^ bed she leaves.
When from her Watch-tow'r first the queen perceives
Day dawne, and with eav'n sails the Fleet proceed,
The naked Ports, and shore of seamen freed.
She often beats her fair breast with her hand,
Tears her bright hair. Jove! shall he pass our land?
She said: and shall a stranger mock our Crown?
Is not war just? shall we, and all the Town
Pursue? Out of the Road lanch Vessels, go,
Be nimble, carry flames, hoist sail, and row.
What Is this? where am I? ah what change distracts
Poor Dido? now thou have sense of thy ill acts,
Thou had not, when it was time. Where Is faith? oh where?
Is this the man his cou^try's gods did bear?
And his old father on his shoulders save?
Why tore I not his limbs? and to some wave
Cast them? or sunk his Mates? or killed and dressed
The Boy Ascanius for his fathers feast.
But fate in war is doubtful, would t'had past!
Whom feared I dying? had I wildfire cast
And burned his Fleet; I had the Father, Son,
Their line extinguished, and my self in one.
O Sun who all the busy World do light!
Thou Juno conscious of these cares! by night
O Hecate howl'd-for in cross ways! and all
Furies and gods conspiring Dido's fall,
Hear this: your justly angered powers now show,
If impious he must reach the Land, if so
Jove have decreed it, and no wish can bar
That end; yet vexed with a bold people's war,
From his own Kingdom he an exile made
Divorced from his Ascanius, may he aid
Implore abroad, see the dishonored ends
Of his associates: and when, forced, he bends
To cruel terms of peace, nor glorious reign
Let him enjoy, nor wished for life retain:
But dye untimely, ith'sands uninterr'd:
This prayer, poured out with my last blood, be heard.
Then you of Tire his Progeny to the end
Hate, and afflict: these gifts to our ashes send.
Be love, nor league betwixt your Soveraignties:
But from our bones may some revenger rise,
Who Trojans may with fire and sword pursue,
Now, long hence: still as time shall strength renew.
Be shore to shore, to waves waves adverse be:
Fight they and theirs for ever, cursed by me.
This says; and turns her thoughts, all ways, to break
The thread of life: then briefly she does speak
To Barce, her Sychaeus nurse, (her own
In her old Country now black dust was grown)
Nurse, call my Sister, waters from the spring
I long should sprinkle me: wish her to bring
The Beasts; and purifying things set down:
So let her come. Thy temples see thou crown
With holy veil, I Plutoes rites prepare:
And those I Will finish, and so end my care.
The Trojans Pile a funeral flame shall waste,
Old Barce mends her pace with limping haste,
But Dido, wild, rolling her bloody Eyes,
Her trembling cheeks all spotts, pale ere she dies
With thoughts of death designed, breaks open the door
Oath Inner court: and furiously mounts ore
The mighty Pile, then draws the Trojan sword
Not given for a purpose so abhord.
Here when his robes, and known bed she beheld,
Here tears and memory awhile compelled
Her stay, she laid her down: her last words spoke,
Sweet spoils (while Fates and Gods permitted) take
This spirit, free me in these cares made fast.
I lived, and what course fortune gave I past.
Now my great soul must to the Grave go down,
I a famed City built, did wall my Town,
Revenge my Lord, my Brothers hopes destroy.
Happy, alas too happy, if from Troy
No ship had ever touched our shore. Thus she,
Kissing the bed, dye unrevenged shall we?
But let us dye, she said, thus, thus it is due.
This fire from Sea may the fell Trojan view,
And our Deaths Omens take with him. She said.
Thus her attendants find her fallen, the blade
Weeping her blood, her hands all stained. Then goes
The noise through Courts, and through the City flows
(All trembling) this sad news. The buildings sound
with groans, and female howlings, th'heavns rebound
The woeful cries. No less then were old Tire,
Or Carthage seized by th'foe: the raging fire
Roling ore Temples and ore men's abodes,
Neither poor mortals sparing, nor their gods.
Her frighted sister heard, with trembling speed,
Beating her breast, forcing her face to bleed,
Breaks through them: calls her dying by her name,
Was this it sister? was this slight your aim.
Have all these sacred rites framed this for me?
Forsook, what shall I say? my company
Did thy death scorn? if not, one fatal power,
One grief had killed us both, one sword, one how'r.
This with these hands pil'd I? invoke did I
Our Country-gods? yet absent thou did dye.
The Tyrian Lords and Commons and I found
Death in thy death: water, I Will bath her wound:
And with these lips, if her, last breath yet spends,
I Will gather it. This said, the steps sh'ascends.
Her halfe-dead fister in her bosom cheeres:
And sighing with her robe the black gore cleares,
Strait Dido opes her eyes, with Death oppressed,
And closes them. The deep wound grates her breast.
Thrice on her elbow leaving, she would rise,
Thrice, turning on her bed, with wandering eyes
Sought high heavens light, and having found it, gron'd,
Great Juno then her tedious pains bemon'd:
And lingering Death, from heaven her Iris sent
T'vnknit her joints, her struggling soul to vent.
For (since by fate, nor Death deserved sh'expir'd
But wretched ere her time, with fury fired)
Yet Proserpine had not taken from her crown
Her yellow hair: nor doomed her head yet down.
So deawy rose-wing'd Iris, having won
Thousand strange colors from the adverse Sun
Slides down: stands on her head, I bear this, charged,
Sacred to Dis: be from this flesh enlarged:
Thus says, and cuts her hair; together slides
All heat, and into wind her spirit glides.
FINIS.

