The most excellent works of Chirurgerye, made and set forth by master John
Vigon, heed Chirurgie^ of our time in Italy, translated into english. Whereunto
is added an exposition of strange terms and unknown symples, belongyng to
the at.

Imprynted by Edward Whytchurch, with the Kings most gracious priuelege for
seven years.

CVM PRIVILEGIO. Ad imprimendum solum. 1543.

engraved title page W R



To the ernest favorer of al good, and godly lernyng, master Richard Tracie,
Bartholomee Traheron wishes true health, and prosperity.
GOd the myghtie gouerner of all things, lo^getyme sythens, has witnessed, by
his excellent prophet Moses, that for the tra^sgressio^ of his holy laws, he
would plage the people with sondrye, and greuouse diseases. Howbeit our blindenes
has been so great, yt in the multitude of most filthy, and shameful botches,
sores, and other pitious maladies we have not perceived, how horrible a thing
sin is, and how present vengeance the dyspisyng, and neglectyng of gods
dreadful commandments, brings upon us, no not when we have be burnte with
fyery carbuncles, nor when our flesh has been toren from the bones, and eaten
up with loathsome cankers, nor when we have been myserably tormented, with yt
most fylthy, pestiferous, and abominable disease the French or spanyshe
pockes. In these I say so manifest punyshmentes of god, for the outrageous
transgression of his laws, we have not acknowleged the exceeding wickedness
of our nature, nether have prayed for the holy sprite of god, which might
change, and transform our corrupt birth, and create in us new hertes, with
ye printe of fere and humble reverence to godward. Yea, we have been so far of
from such a purpose, yt some of us have bragged of our natural stre^gthes, to
our own shame, and confusion. But as this our blyndnesse, and most shameful
wickedness, is of al men to be abhorred and detested, so the unmeasurable
mercy of god is to be enbraced, reuerented and merueyled at, which in the
myddest of our abomination, and deseruyng of al extreme torments, has ever
remembered his natural goodness, both gyuynge virtues to herbs, stones, trees,
and metalles, wherewyth our euels might be eased, and also styrryng up me^ to
note such things, and to practyse them upon our paynfull griefs. So yt we
may playnlyse, yt he delyteth not in our bitter punyshmentes, but rather
leads us to the knowledge of the horriblenes of sin, yt we might hate, and
abhor ye same, and seek the true and certain remedy thereof, in his dearly
beloved son Christ Jesus our only savior. Now as they been to be commended,
which have endeavored the^ selves, with great labor, study, and travail, to
consider the wonderful works of god in ye fyrmament, and heavenly bodies: So
they ben not worthy the lest praise, which have crept upon the ground, and
have thought it expedient, and fruteful to search out such proprieties, and
virtues, as god has given to things in or upon the earth, for the succourre,
and comfort of mortal men. Howbeit of this sort of men, some have studied
only for knowleges sake, and some have applied their knowledge to the right use,
and have there to left in books ye things yt they had noted, observed and
proved to procure ye easement of our myseries and greuouse maladyes. In which
no^bre of good, and studiouse men Iohanne Vigo (whom at the request of my
friend I have turned into our language) obtayneth not the last place. For
though he were not brought up in the knowledge of ye tongues, yet through his
synguler wit, long experience, and diligent study, he has invented, and
set forth more notable things in the art of chirurgerye, than any other
hitherto. And I think that nothing can better testify and prove the
conning of this man, than that he continued so long, with so great praise,
practysynge at rome, in such a multitude of pockye curtisanes, neither
priests, bysshoppes, nor cardinals, excepted, as it plainly appears in
his book. For where such carions ben, the best Aegles will resort. But it is
not so comendable to set forth Vigo his science, and cunnyng, which clearly
shines by it self, and needs no borrowed light: as it is worthy shame and
reprofe, of rasshe judgment, to reprehe^de or find a faut, in so fair a
face. As touching my labor, applied to ye translation of this present work
in consideration of your sondrye benefittes conferred unto me, I dedycate it
unto you, good myaster Tracie. Not that I think it a thing most fyt for
you, for as much as you have bestowed the most part of your time in the
fruitful studies of the holy scripture, but that at this time it may be a
monument and token of my mind, toward you which can not be (except I were
changed in to a worse nature, tha^ any barbarouse Scithian is of) but most
loving. For when I was destitute of father and mother, you conceived a very
fatherly affection toward me, and not only brought me up in the universities
of this and forayne realms, with your great costs and charges, but also most
earnestly exhorted me to forsake the puddels of sophisters and to fetch water
from the pure fountaynes of the scripture. Wherein you have drawn out such a
samplar to al fathers in law (as they be called) as hitherto of few has been
devised, of none welnyghe practiced, and put in use. Wherefore seeing that you
have been the autour and cause of that simple lernyng that I have obtained, I
thought it my duty to render the fruytes thereof unto you. And albeit that
both you desire, and I delight more to travail in the holy wrytynges, yet I
fear not, but that this book, being so necessary for the commune weal, shall
be unto you right pleasant. For after the knowledge of our salvation, which
holy and only restethe in gods anointed king, we may conveniently
procure, not the lusts and pleasures, but the requisite health of our bodies,
that we may be the more able to serve our turn, and to labor in the lords
vyniarde. Yea, and I can not tell whether any man has received the true
knowleage, and spirit of Christ, that pitieth not the great sickenesses, and
diseases, wherein we are wrapped on every side. For this cause, I have thought
it not unprofitable (let some busy speakers, rather than doers babble what they
list) to bestow some labor, and time, in translatyng this book, which
conteynethe so many goodly remedies, for the diseases that communelye, and
iustelye happen unto us. Which thing if it shall plese your right godly
judgment, and such as you be, the barkynges, of other shall little trouble
me. But now I will hinder you no longer from the readenge of John Vigo his
works, trusting that you will take this my dedication in good part, and
have such gentle remembrance of me, as I am ever bound too have of you.

FINIS.
Here begins the table of this present Book.
ADiutorium broken. Fol. clxxvii. ccxlviij Accidents of wounds. Fol. lxxxv.
Affodilles powder Fol. ccvij. Albaras Fol. ccliiij. and. ccxxxix. Algaras. Fol.
lv. Alopetia. Fol. ccliiij. and. cxxx. Alexanders liniment. Fol. cliij.
Amigdals. Fol. v. Anatomy. Fol. i. Anatomye the order of it. eodem.
Anatomy.ix. things to be considered therein. eodem. Anthrax. Fol. xxviii.
Aposteme. Fol. xiii. and. xcl Aposteme has four times. eodem. Aposteme has
four manner healynges. eodem. Aposteme is opened. Fol. xv. Aposteme simple and
cold. Fol. xxxiiii. Apostemes wyndy, Fol. xlv. Aposteme of the eyes. Fol.
xlix. Aposteme of the brows and eye lyddes. Fol. lv. Aposteme under the ears,
Fol. lvii. Apost. of ye jaws and amigdals, Fol. lx. Apost. of the throat and
neck. Fol. lxiiii. Apost. hot in the breasts. Fol. lxv. Apost. through
flebotomye, Fol. 233. Apost. cold of the breasts, Fol. lxvi. Apost. of breast,
rybbes, etc. Fol. lxvii. Aposteme in the back, Fol. lxviii. Aposteme of the
flanks, Fol. lxix. Aposteme of the flank coming of a long fieuer, or of
congeled blood in the bellye, Fol. lxx. Aposteme of the yard, Fol. lxxi.
Apost. of the fundament. Fol. lxxv. Aposteme of the shulders, eodem. Aposteme
of the arm, Fol. lxxvii. Apost. of the hands and fyngers. eode^. Aposteme
sclirotike. Fol. lxxviii. Aposteme of the finger called panaritium. Fol. lxxix.
Aposteme of the hyppes. eodem. Aposteme of the knees, thyghes and legs.
eodem. Aposteme of the feet. Fol. lxxx. Aposteme of the stomach. Fol. lxxxi.
Aposteme of the liver. eodem. Apostemation, to let it. Fol. lxxxv. Apoplexy.
Fol. iiii. Arms, wounds of them. Fol. xcv. Arm broken. Fol. clxxvii. Aroes,
ye drawing out of the^ Fol. cx. Aroe, cure of a venemed aroe. eodem. Artery.
Fol. ii. Arteria trachea. Fol. v. Aschachillos. Fol. xxvi. Aspes, his styngyng.
Fol. cxvii. Attractyue medicines, why they be used. Fol. ciiij. and. cvi.
Auripigmentum, how for to calcinate it. Fol. ccvii. Aeyre, rectifieng of it.
Fol. xxx.
B
Back, aposteme of ye back. Fol. lxviii Backbone, peine therein. eode^.
ccxxxix Basillare. Fol. iii. Bellye. Fol. viii. Bellye, apost. of the belly.
Fol. lxix. Belly wou^des percing through it. Fol. c. Byndyng or lygature. Fol.
cxi. Bytynge, and the cure. Fol. cxvi. Blader, wound therein. Fol. cii.
Bladers, the cure thereof. Fol. xxiiij. Blood when it ought to be stopped, and
in what cause. Fol. lxxxiii. Blood, flux of blood. Fol. lxxxv. Blood sign of
arterial blood. eodem. Blood, sta^chyng of blood. Fol. xciiii. Blood,
staunchynge of blood at the nose. Fol. clxxxjjjj. and. clxxxvii. Blood, the
abundaunce of it in ulcers Fol. cxx. Blood diminutio^ of it in ulcers. eode^.
Boci^^. Fol. xxxix. and. ccxxxvij Bodies tender and moist, Fol. lxxxiij
bolster, Fol. cxiij Bone, Fol. ij Bones are nombred, Fol. xi Bones broken in
general Fol. clxxij Bones broken and dysplased, Fol. clxxv Bone of the nose
broken, eodem Bones, chawbones broken, eodem Bone, canel bone or breast bone
broken, Fol. clxxvi Bones of the neck bruised, eodem Bone, ^umpe bone broken,
Fol. clxxvij Bones of the hands broken, Fo. clxxviij Bone, round bone of ye
kne bro. fo. clxxix Bonchines, Fol. c^xxxiij Boxynge. Fol. xxix Breaking of
the skulle, Fol. lxxx^ij Breyne pan Fol. iij Breyne, Fol. iiij Breyne, of ye
co^motion of ye brey. fo. xci breast, Fol. vij Breast wou^des of it, Fol. x^vij
Breast, fystula therein, Fol. xcix Breasts, hot apostemes in bre. fo. lxv Breast,
aposteme in it, Fol. lxvij Browe, aposteme therein, Fol. lv Bruise and cure
thereof, Fol. xciiij Bruised wounds, Fol. ^xiiij Bub^ a maturatiue for it, Fol.
^xxii Burning and blerednes of ye eyes, fo. liiij B^r^ynge by fire, Fo.
ccxxx^^iij
C
Cancrena and his cure, Fol. xxvi Canker, ye form and division of it, fo.
xliij Can^^^, Fol. vi Capsula cordis, Fol. viij Carbunculus and his cure, Fol.
xxviij Carb^^culus pustules, Fol. lxxi Carolles between the foreskinne and
head of the yard, Fol. lxxij Catarattes in the eyes, Fol xxxv Cause primitive
and antecede^t, Fol. xiij Causes of corruption, eodem Cauteries, Fol. ccviij
Cerote for hardness of ye liver, fo. lxxxij Cerote of minium, Fol. x^^ Cerote
for the head, Fol. cxxxvi Cerote for the gout, Fol. clxviij Ce^^^es in
general, Fol. ccix Chappes of the lyppes, Fol. cxlij Chafynge between ye
thyghes, fo. clvi Children of ye preffynge down of the bone in their heads,
Fol. xci. ccxlvij Child dead how to draw it out of the womb, Fol. ccxxxij
Chilus, Fol. ix Chorde, Fol. ij Chordes, wounds of them, Fol. ciiij
Cicatrizatiues, Fol. ccv Cicatrice, Fol. xvi Clisters, Fol. ccvi Cistis fellis,
Colon, Fol. ix Complexion is good to be known, Fol. lxxxiiij Co^plexio^ of
medicines incarnati, eode^ Complexions the judgment of them in all ulcers,
Fol. cxx C^^craua chilis Fol. ix Co^fideratio^s.iiij. in all cures, fol. xlix
Con^usion, Fol. cxiij. and. ccxlvi Cordial confection, Fol. xxxi Coronale, Fol.
iij Cornea, Fol. vij Cornea and coniunctiua, Apostemes in them, Fol. liij
Corrosiues, Fol. ccvi Cough and short breath, Fol. cxci. cxcvij Crabbe lyce,
Fol. cxl Curing in general, Fol. ccxxiij Enttynge of a cataratte, Fol. cxxxvi
D
Decoction helpyng breathing, fo. xcviij Decoction pectoral, Fol. xcix
Decoction to break wind, Fol. ci Deffenes is cured, Fol. cxlvi Delatation of
the apple of the eye, Fol. cxxvii Derbia, Fol. cxxxix Di^^^^s, Fol. x Diet^
stiptike, Fol. c Digestiues of choler, Fol. liiij.l. Digestiues of sanguine,
eodem Digestive of fleume and melancholye eodem Digest. of salt and gross
fleume. Fo. liiij Digestive of hot cause, Fo. lxxxi Digestive of cold cause,
eodem, Digestive must first be used in wou^des, Fol. lxxxiij Disease of diverse
properties must have diverse curations, Fo. xlvi Dislocation, Fol. c. lxxix
Diuersion of humors, Fo. li drawyng out of arowes, f. cx. and. ccxlix Dugges
cold aposteme of the^, Fo. lxvi Dugges hardness of dugges not cancrous, Fol.
lxvij Dura matter causes of apostemation of it, Fol. xc
E.
Ear, pain wtin the ear, Fo. lviij Ear, apo. under ye ears, f. lvij. and.
lviij Ears, pain in them, Fo. cxlv Ears, worms in them, Fo. cxlvij Elbowe
wounds of it, Fo. xcvi Elbowe displaced, Fo. clxxxij Electuary to resolve
blood, Fo. cxiiij Electuaries lenitiue and resolutiue and their properties, Fo.
ccxiiij Electuary to purge fleume, Fo. cxliij Emoroydes, Fo. cli. and. cclx
Epiglotte, Fo. v Epitheme co^fortati. of the heart, F. xxxj Eschare and the
cure, Fo. xxv Eschare to remove it, Fo. xxij. xxvij. xxx. xxxi. xliiij.
Estiomenos, Fo. xxvi Estiomenos and the cure, f, xxviij. and. ccli
Excrescentes, Fo. xxxix Exiture, Fo. xxxiij Experience of vigo, Fo. xxvij Eyes,
Fo. vij Eyes itchynge, burning and blerednes of them, Fo. liiij. and. cclix
Eyelyddes, aposteme therein, Fo. lv Eye, wound in the eye, Fo. xciij Eyes,
vlceres, spots and webbes in them, Fo. x. xxxij Eyes pani and cicatrizes in
the^, f. cxxxiij
F.
Face, rubies in the face, Fo. xxl Fantasy, Fo. iiij Fatnes cured, Fo.
ccxxxiiij Fevers of maryners, Fo. ccxxvij Fever cures a spasme, Fo. cix Fever
flegmatyke, Fo. ccxxx Flebotomy, Fo. xxix. and. ccxxij. and. ccxliij Flegmon,
Fo. xij Flegmon herisipelades, Fo. xiij Flegmon, the cause thereof, eodem,
Flegmon of a primitive cause, fo. xiiij Fleg. of an antecedent cause, Fo. xvi
Flesh, Fo. ij Fistula cimbalaris, Fo. xij Fistula in the breast, Fo. xcix
Fistula and the cure, fo. cxxviij. and. ccliij Fist. in ye corner of the eyes,
fo. cxlj Fistula of yt fundame^t, f. cxlix. and. cclxij Fistula and his kinds,
eodem, Foyne and his cure, fol. xciiij Foyne through the body fol. cij Formica
his cure, fo. xxi Formica miliaris his cure and signs, fo. xxij Forunculi, fo.
xxvi Frensche pockes, fo. clx Frensch pockes confyrmed fo. clxij Froncle and
his cure, Fo. xxxiiij Formica, Fo. xx Fugilles, fo lxxxij Fundament aposteme
thereof, fo. lxxv Fundamente, ryftes chappynge and clyftes, fo. cl Furcula
broken and his cure, fo. clxxvi
G.
Gargarisme resolutiue, fo. lxij Glandula and scrophula differ, fo. xxxix
Goutes are cured, fo. clxvi. and. cclxij Gratia dei, fo. cclxiiij Grystell, fo.
ij Guidegi, fo. v Gu^mes hot apo. in the^, fo. lx. and. cclviij Guts, fo, ix
Guts hurt and the signs, fo. C Gutte, the loosynge of the great gutte, fo.
cliiij Gutta rosacea, fo. cxli
H.
Hands, tynglyng of them, fo. xlvij Hardness of ye purse of ye stones, f.
lxxiij Health, signs of health in wounds of the head, fo. xc Heed, purgers
of the heed, fo. xcij Heed and his situation, fo. iij Heed, diseases of the
heed fo. xliiij Heed, wound of the heed, fo. lxxxvij Heed pain of the heed,
fo. ccxxviij Heed, apos^emes therein, fo. xl Heed, repercussiues are not to be
ministered about the heed, eodem, H^e^^ displaced, fo. clxxxiij Hemoragia, Fo.
lxxxv Hemora co^sideratio^s thereof, fo. lxxxvi Hemoragia remedy for it, eodem,
Heeres, fo. I Heeres a linime^t to engendre, f xxxxi. Heeres curlynge inward
in the eye ^yddes, fo cxxxviij Heeres to make the^ grow fo. cxxvix Heeres to
preserve them from falling, fo. ccxxxij Hernia, fo. cclx Hernia ventosa, fo.
lxxiij. and cclx Hernia in suckynge children, eodem, Hernia aquosa and ye cause
of it, eodem, Hernia carnosa, fo. lxxiiij Hernia, six kinds of it, eodem,
Hernia humoralis, Fo. xviij Heresipelas, eodem, Herisepel. color and sign
thereof, fo. xix Heresipelas cured, eodem, Heart, Fo. vij Hidropisis, the cause
of it, fo. lxxiij Hyppes wound thereof, fo. clij Hyppe displaced, fo. clxxxiii
Horcenes, fo. ccxxxiij
I.
Jaws apostemes of them, fo. lx Jaws displaced, fo. clxxxi Ie^^num, fo. ix
Iguis persicus, fo. xxiij. and xxl Impe^igo, fo. cxxxix Incarnatiue, fo. xvi
Incarnatiue medicines. fo. ^^i Incarnatiues, fo. cciiij Inflation, fo. xxiiij
Incision to make it, fo. xxxiij Incision how to proceed after it, f. xv
Incisorij, fo. vi Instruments ye making of the^, f. ccxlij Intestinu^ rectum,
fo. ix Inuolutum, eodem, Joints wounds of them, fo. xcv Joints pain in
them, fo. clxvi Joints of the hands or fyngers displaced, fo. clxxxiij
Itchyng of the eyes, fo. liiij. and. cclvij
K.
Kybes, a plaster for it, fo. clvij Kydnes, hurt and signs, fo. C Knee
swellyng in it, fo. lxxx Knee bone displaced, fo. clxxxiii Knobbes and fleshie
knobbes, fo. xxxvij Knottes of the eye lyddes, fo. lvi
L.
Lacuna, Fol. v Legs wound in them, fo. ciij Legs broken, fo. clxxix
Lethargus, fo. iiij Lenitiue of pain, fo. xx Lyce, fo. ccxxxi Ligamentes, fo.
ij Ligature or byndynge, fo. cxi Lynte, a goodlye lynte and the use thereof, fo.
xxxviij Lyntes, fo. cxiij Liniment to engender here, fo. cxxxi Liniment for a
skurfe, eodem, Lyppes, choppes in them, fo. cxlij Liver, fo. ix Liver, a cerot
for hardness of it, f. lxxxij Liver hurt and the signs, fo. C Longes, fo. viij
Lotion for holowe ulcers, fo. cxlviij Lugia, fo. xxxiiij Lu^ges signs of
wou^des therein, xcvij Lupia, fo. xxxix Lupus, fo. xliij
M.
Marula, fo. cxxxij Malum mule, fo. clvij Mammylle, fo. vij Man's body, fo. I
Matrice, fo. x Matrice of a woman with child, fo. xi Matrice itchynge of it, Fo.
clv Matrice ulcers of it, eodem, Matrice wound of it, fo. cij Maturatiues
simple and co^pou^de, f. ccij Mediastine, fo. viij Medicyne how to know his
quality, fo. lxxxiiij Mellinus, fo. xxxvij Melancholy, fo. xliij Membre, Fo.
I Members the division of them, eode^, Members simple, fo. ij Members
compounde, fo. iij Members principal and not principal, eodem, Members
contained, fo. ix Membre putrified, fo. clviij Membre extenuate, fo. ccxxxiiij
Meri, fo. v Meseraice, fo. ix Mesenterium, fo. x Midriffe and mediasti.
wounded, f. xcvij Midriffe, fo. viij Milte, fo. ix Milte hurt and signs, fo.
C Milk to dry it up, fo. cxliiij Mirach, Fo. viij Molares, Fo. vi Morphew,
Fo. cxxxix Mortemale, fo. clxiiij Mouth stynkynge, fo. ccxxxi Mu^dificati of
smalage, f. xv. and. lxxvij Mu^dificatiues in general, fo. ccij Muscle, fo. I
Muscles of the breest, fo. vij Mu^^les are numbered, fo. xi
N.
Natta, fo. xxxix Natural things and not natu. fo. xvi Nails brusynge of
them, fo. ccxxxvij Neck wounds of the neck, fo. xciij Neck Apostemes of the
neck, f. lxiiij Nerui optici, fo. vij Nodes, nodation and the cure, fo. xxxvij
Nodi mellini, fo. lvi Noli me tangere, Fol. xliij. and. cxlij. Nose the
burning rednes, Fol. lvij Nose wound therein, Fol. xcij. Nose stynkynge, Fol.
ccxxxi Nuke. Fol. ij. and. iiij
O
Oleum magistrale, Fol. xciij Oleum de perforata, Fol. cvij Ophthalmia, Fol.
ccxv Ordeolum, Fol. lvi Os laud, Fol. ij Os sacrum, fo. vij Oyntmentes
colynge, Fol. lxxxiiij Oyntmentes heatynge, eodem Oyntmentes for ulcers. Fol.
cxxvij Oyntmentes in general, Fol. ccix Oil for the palsye, Fol. cx Oil of
grain, Fol. cxci Oil of erthwormes, Fol. cxcviij Oils, the composition and
nature of them, Fol. ccxvi
P
Palsye, Fol. iiij Palsye and cure of it, Fol. cix Palliatiue cure, Fol. lvij
Pannicles, Fol. ij Panaritiun, Fol. lxxix Paast conseruatiue of semes, fo. xcix
Pericranium, Fol. iiij Pestilence ye cure of it, Fol. xxxi Pestilence, Galenes
potion against the pestilence, Fol. cxvij Pestilence, Fol. clxxxviij. and.
cclxiij Pessarie, fo. clv Pessaries in general, Fol. ccxvi Petrosa ossa, Fol.
iij Pain a lenitiue of pain, Fol. xx Pain within the ear, Fol. lviij Pain
in the back bone, Fo. lxviij Pain of the joints, Fol. clxvi Pain, medicines
swagyng it, ccv Pain causes of it, eodem Pain.xv. kinds of pain, eodem Pia
matter, Fol. iiij. Pixis, Fol. vij Piles, Fol. clv Pills for the pestilence,
Fol. xxxij Pills for the pockes, Fol. clxiij Pills in general, fo. ccxix
Places apt to receive wind, fo. xlvi Plaster of waybreed, fo. xxiij Plaster
of pomegranades, fo. xxiiij Plaster of an apple, fo.li. and lij Plaster of
oynyons, fo. lviij Plaster mitigatiue, fo. cxv Plaster of dogs turde, fo.
cxxiiij Plaster stupefactiue, fo. cxxvi Plaster to swage pain, fo. clxxix
Pleura, fo. viij Pockes part of all diseases, fo. clx Pockes the book of
pockes, eodem, Pockes confyrmed, fo. clxij Polipus, Fo. l^j Pomegranades
prepared, fo. xvi Porta, fo. ix Portanarium, eodem, Pore vritides, Fo. x Porus
sarcoydis, fo. lxxxiij Powder corrosiue and how to administer it, fo. xxi
Powder conseruyng a seem, fo. lxxxv Powder cicatrizatiue, fo. lxxxix
Pronosticatio^ of deeth or life, fo. xc Pruna and signs thereof, fo. xxiiij
Purgation how it may be given without digestive, fo. xxix Purgatio^s of
choler, fo. liiij. lxij. xcv Purga. of sanguine, fo. liiij. l. and. lxij
Purgation of melancholy, ibidem, Purgation of phlegm, ibidem, Pur. of salt and
gross phlegm, fo. liiij Purg. of a myxte cause, fo. lxij Purgation of hot
cause, fo. lxxxi Purgation of cold cause, eodem, Purgers of the head, fo. xcij
Purse of the stones hardenes therein, fo. lxxiij Pustules carbunculous, fo.
lxxi Pustles in the eye lyddes, fo. cxxxviij Putrefactio^ in ulcers is known,
f. cxx
R.
Ragadie vulue, Fo. cliiij Retifyeng of the air, fo. xxx. and. xxxi Regiment
of health, fo. ccxxi Rhethe mirabile, fo. v Reins, fo. ix Reins pain of
them, fo. ccxxviij Repercussiues perilous in eight cases, fo. xvi Repercussiues
are not to be ministered in the heed, fo. xlvij Repercussiues how to use the^,
fo. xvij Repercussiues may not be ministered in the emunctories, fo. lix
Repercus. simple and co^pounde, fo. cxcix Resolution signs of it, fo. xiij
Resolutiue with repercussio^, f. lxxviij Resolutiues simple, fo. CC Resolutiues
compounde, fo. cci Rybbes, fo. vij Rybbes broken and displaced, fo. clxxviij
Ryftes in the fundament, fo. cl Rotten nails and the cure, fo. lxxx Rubies in
the face, fo. cxl Rupture and the causes, fo. lxxiiij Ruptorie of capitell, fo.
ccviij
S.
Sanguine fever, fo. ccxxx Saphati, fo. cxxxi Scaldynge, fo. ccxxxix scabbes of
ye heed and causes, f. cxxix. cclv Scabbes of the eye lyddes, fo. cxxxiij
Scabbes and his cure, fo. clxv Scipions powder, fo. cxlviij Sciatica and his
cure, fo. clxix Sclerosis, fo. vij Sclirotyke aposteme, fo. lxxviij Scourged
and his cure, fo. ccxxxi Scrophula and gla^dula differ, fo. xxxix Scrophules,
fo. lxxxii, and. ccli Sebell in the eyes, fo. cxxxv Secundiue, fo. vij Sense,
comune sense, fo. iiij Sephiros, fo. xiij Sephiros and his cure, fo. xli
Sephiros and cancer differ, eodem Sephiros cacrous in a woman's breast, fo. lxvi
Serpigo, fo. cxxxix Shulders apostemes thereof, fo. lxxvi Shulders, the wou^des
thereof, fo. xcv Shulder broken, fo. clxxvi Shulder displaced. Fol. clxxxi. Side
bones. Fol. iii. Signs of sharp matter. fol. lxx. Signs of mortificatio^ of
pust. f. lxxi. Signs of resolution. Fol. xiii. Signs of maturation. Fol.
xxxiii. Signs of hot exitures and cold. eo. Signs yt be good in ulcers. Fo.
cxix. Signs that be euel. Eo. Sight, weakness of it. Fol. cxxxvij. Simples
follow in order. Fo. clxxxiiij. Sinnowe. Fol. i. Sinnowes. Fol. xij. Sinnowes
wou^des in the^. F. ciiii and ccxlvi Sinowes, ye peyn of the^. F. clxvi.
Sirupes and their properties. Fo. ccxiii. Skin, roughnes thereof. Fol. ccxxxv.
Skin. Fol. ij. Skull breaking of it. Fol. lxxxvij. Skul how to know breking
of it. Fo. lxxxviij. Sleep Fol. ccxxix. Slepynge. Fol. xxxi. Smellyng
diminished. Fol. ccxxxiij. Solution of continuitie. Fol. lxxxij. Sowyng of a
wound. Fo. xciij and cxiij. Sowynge two manner of it. Fol. cxiii. Sowynge of
guts. Fol. ci. Spasme and the cure. fol. cviii. Spasme, prohibition of it.
fol. xciiii. Spondiles. Fol. vi. Squina^tie of four kinds. Fo. lxi. and
cclviij. Stomach. Fol. ix. Stomach hurt the signs. Fol. c. Stomach, weakness
thereof. Fo. ccxxx. Stones. Fol. x. Stone, for the stone. Fol. cxcv. Stones,
wound of the^. Fol. ciij. Subtiliatiue medicines why they be used. Fol. cvi.
Suffumigation to resolve windines of the ears. Fol. cxlv. Suppositories. Fol.
ccxvi. Swellynge in the knee. Fol. lxxx. Swellynge or loosenes of the eyes Fol.
cxxxviij. Sweat superfluous. Fol. ccxxxv. Syrsen. Fol. iiii. Siphac. Fol.
viij. Siphac. Fol. x.
T.
Table of medicines for a chirurgien. Fol. ccxij. Talpa and topinaria. Fo.
xxxiii. and xxxix. Talpa is cured. Fol. xlviii. Tela aranea. Fol. vii. Tela
vnea. Eo. Tents. fol. cxiii. Tenasmo^. fo. cliii. Terminus comunis. Fol. xii.
Tertian pure. Fol. ccxxviii. Tertian not pure. Fol. ccxxix. Testudo. Fol.
xlviii. xxxix. Tessilus ointment. Fol. cclxiiii. Thighs wound in them. Fol.
ciii. Thighs chafynge between the thyghes. Fol. clvi. thighe bone broken. Fol.
clxxviii. Thryst. Fol. ccxxix. Throat. Fol. v. Throat, Apostemes of it. fo.
lxiiii. Tongue. Fol. vi. Toth ache. Fol. clxx. cxciii. Trachea arteria. Fol. v.
Transuersales. Fol. iii. Trembling of the heart. Fol. xxxi. Trociskes of
affodilles. Fol. ccvii. Trociskes restrictiue. Fol. Eo.
V.
Verrices or swelling veins. Fo. clvii. Ventricles of the brain. Fol. iiii.
Ve^toses and application thereof. Fo. ccix. Ve^toses in three causes. Fol. lix.
Ventoses when they ought not to be ministered. Fol. Eo. Ventoses. Fol. ccxxii.
Virtue imaginatiue. Fol. iiii. Vertigo. Fo. Eo. Verualia. Fol. vi. Vein. Fol.
ii. Vein the manner of byndynge it. Fol. lxxxvi. Vesicatorie. Fol. l.
Vesicatorie medicines. Fo. ccviii. Ulcers in general. Fol. cxvii. Ulcer what
it is, causes and kinds of it. Fol. cxviii. Ulcers in general cured. Fol.
cxxi. Ulcers virulent and corosiue. Fo. cxxiii. and cclii. Ulcers rotten and
filthy. Fol. cxxv. and cclii. Ulcers holow and ye cure. Fo. Eo. and cclii.
Ulcers of the head Fo. cxxix. Ulcers of hard curation. Fol. cxxvi. Ulcers of
the nose. Fol. cxli. and cclviij. Ulcers of the face. Fol. cxlii. Ulcers of the
mouth. Fol. Eo. Ulcers of the throat. Fol. cxliii. Ulcers of the back. Fol.
Eo. Ulcers of the breast. Fol. Eo. Ulcers of the arm. Fol. cxliiii. Ulcers of
woman's breasts. Fol. Eo. Ulcers of the ears. Fol. Eo. Ulcers of the belly.
Fol. cxlviii. Ulcers of the stanckes. Fol. Eo. Ulcers of the yard. Fol. Eo.
Ulcers of the fundame^t not percinge. Fol. cl. Ulcers of the matrice. Fol. clv.
Ulcers of the hanches. Fol. clvi. Ulcers virulente of the thighs and legs.
Fol. clvii. Ulcers moist of the head. Fol. cxxix. Ulcers in the eyes. Fol.
cxxxii. Vndimia. Fol. xiii. and cclxii. Vndimia and his cure. Fol. xxxv.
Vnguentum mixtum. Fol. xv. Vng. egip. Fol. xv. and xxvii. ccvi. cclxiiii.
Vnguentum basilicu^ magistrale. Fol. xvi. ciiii. cclxvii. and cxlvi. Vngue^tum
magistrale for ulcers and cankers. Fol. xlv. Vnguentum apostolorum. Fol. ccvi.
Vngm^. basilicu^ capitale. Fo. lxxxviii. Vngue^tu^ de minio. Fol. cxxix.
cxlviii. Vngula in the eyes. Fol. cxxxiiii. Vomitynge. Fol. ccxxxii. Urine
retained. Fol. ccxxxv. Vuula. Fol. vi. Vuula the falling thereof. Fol. lx.
W.
waking. Fol. xxxi. wartes in ye eye lyddes. Fol. cxxxviii. wartes growing in
ye ears. Fol. cxlv. water right excellent for ye eyes. Fol. cxxxvi. waters
magistral. Fol. ccxx. waters simple. Fol. ccxxi. wyndye apostemes. Fol. xlv.
wind, places apt to receive wind. Fol. xlvi. windy the cause of windy
apostemes. Fol. Eo. wind, medicines breaking wind Fol. ccii. wyndines in the
ears. Fol. cxlvii. wine of pomgranades is made. Fol. cxliiii. wine to a
wound. fo. lxxxiiii. worms called sirones in the flesh. Fo. cxl. worms and
other things in the ears. Fol. cxlvii. wounds. Fol. lxxxii. and ccxlv.
wound of the head. Fol. lxxxvii. wounds of the face. Fol. xcii. wound,
sowynge of a wound. Fol. Eo. and cxiii. wounds of the nose and ears. Fol.
Eo. wound in the eye. Fol. Eo. wounds of the neck. fol. xciiii. wounds of
the shulders. fol. xcv. wou^des of arms and joints. fol. Eo. wounds percinge
through the belly. fol. c. wound in the blader. fol. ci. wounds of the
hyppes. fol. ciii. wou^des of the stones and yard. fol. Eo. wounds of the
thighs and legs. fol. Eo. wounds of sinnowes and cords. fol. cxl. and
ccxlvi. wound the enlargynge of it. fol. cx. wounds bruised and the cure. fo.
cxiiii. wounds made with gunnes. fol. cxv. ccxlix. wounds of mariners, and
soudiers. fol. ccxliii. wrestynges of the wriste and joints. fol. ccxlix.
Y.
Yard. fol. x. Yard a wound therein. fol. xiii. Yard ulcers of it. fol.
cxlviii. and cclx.
z.
zirbus. fol x. zirbus how to cut zirbus. fol. ^i.
The first chapitre treats universally of Anatomy, which is right necessary
for chirurgiens, in the which Anatomy the vtilities and profectes of the same
are declared, and whereof Anatomy is called, what a Synnowe, a Vain, an
Artery, a Chorde, a bone a Cartilage or Gristel, is, and whereof they come.
After this the nombre of Bones, Muscles, and Synnowes of the hole body, of man
been declared.
AS Galene the prince of Physicians witnesses in the.ix. book of the utility
of parts, and in the last chapitre, there ben four vtilities in Anatomy.
The first is to declare the mighty power of god, in yt, that he has created
man's body so parfyte in his qualities. The second is to know the parts of
man's body, to the intent that we may work duly in every part thereof. The
third, to show aforehande the effect of every disposition of the same. The
fourth and last utility is, to heal the sondrye dyseases, which daily
chance. Wherefore it is not only requisite that chirurgiens know Anatomy,
but also phisitio^s. For it is very hard for him, yt is ignorant in Anatomy
to work co^mely and decently, in man's body, as in cuttynge, sewynge,
burning, or applyeng cauteries actual or potentiall and semblable things. By
occasion whereof danger of homicide or man slaughter may ensue for an
ignorant chirurgien often times touches a synnowe instead of a vein. And he
is as a coke that knows not how to choppe his meat accordyngly, and so
wynneth shame and reproach before his master. Therefore it is necessary that
physicians, and chirurgie^s know Anatomy and it is great shame to them which
ben ignorant in the said Anatomy. For every man is bound to know the
subject or matter, whervppon he works, otherwise he shall err in his
workemanshyppe. Seeing then that a chirurgie^ works in ma^s body he is bound
to know, the parts thereof. As Henricus of Ermu^dauilla says in his
chirurgerie, that a chirurgien, which knows not Anatomy is to be compared
to a blind man, that works in a piece of wood. For the blind man fails
often, and cutteth to much or to little, and even so does a chirurgien ignorant
in Anatomy.

Anatomy is a right science, what is Anatomy.
by which the members of ma^s body are known, through division of the same And
it is to be noted that Anatomy is known two manner of ways, as master Guydo
declares a man singulerly learned in the art of chirurgerie. The first is by
books, which is right profitable. The second is more evident, namely by deed
bodies, in which true exeperience consysteth. And here in the chirurgiens have
a laudable custom to require the bodies of men condemned to death. They take
the dead body, and lay him upon a table, as master Mondine a man well
expert in chirurgerie, was wont to do.

And when the body is laid upon the table, The order of Anatomy.
they make four elections or chosynges thereof. The first is of me^bres
nutritive, for they ben more apt to receive putrefactions or rottynges then
other. The second election is of members spiritual, as of the heart, of of the
pannicles or thynne skynnes, of the longes. The third election is, of the
members animale, that is to say of the head, and his parts. The fourth of the
extremities of the body, as of the arms, the legs, and their parts.

To be consydred in Anatomy.
And in every membre of man's body, after the opinion of Auerroys, and
Alexandrinus, and other Anatomistes, nine things are to be considered, that is
to wete, the composition, the substance, the complexion, the quantite, the
nombre, the figure, the combination or knyttynge together, their natural
effects and vtilities, and what dyseases may happen to the said members. Which
dyseases the chirurgien may ease in knowing, in curing, and pronosticating.
And therefore the good auctour Galene came to the knowledge of Anatomy, by
beholdynge of the bodies of pigs, apes, and other beestes, nether did he as
some which paynte Anatomies, wherein we ought not to rest.

Man's body.
What is then man's body? it is the subject or matter whereof mention is made in
all Phisyke, and chirurgerie. Man's body is a thing composed, or set together
according to reason, and garnyshed with sondrye parts, whereof we will make
mention in this book.

A membre.
A membre (as Galene says in the book of the vtilities of parts of ma^s
body,) is a body which is not separated from his hole, and is not joined to
another thing. After Auicenne a membre is a body engendered of the first
co^mixtion of humors.

The division of members.
Of which members, some ben simple, and some ben compou^de. The simple ben ten
in nombre, that is to say the synnowes, the Cartilages or gristelles, the
bones, veins, arteries, pa^nicles, ligamentes, chordes or tendones, the
outward skin, ye flesh that is in the gummes, and in the head of a man's
yard. Also here, the nails, and fat may be nu^bred among the same, though
they be not properly members but superfluities, which nature has brought
forth to garnyshe, and adourne man's body, as other members also, after ye
declaration of Galene in secu^do techne. Heeres.
And seeing yt we have made mention of heeres, we will begin to speak of them.
Rasis says that nature hat^ ^et heeres, on the head to purge superfluous
vapors or fumes which ascend into the brain, by the pores or little passages
of the bones of the head. Another reason is, to deck the body of man or
woman. And they ben more cold, and dry then any other members of man's body.

A synnowe is a simple or syngle membre (as Auicenna says) and gives
feeling, Synnowes.
and mouyng to all the members of man's body. And they proceed all, from the
brain, and ben of a cold and dry quality.

A muscle is a membre compou^de of synnowes, ligame^tes, A muscle.
and fleshie fyllettes or as it were thredes, filled with flesh, and covered
with a pannicle. And it is called muscle for ye sembla^ce and lykenes of a
little mouse. And Auicenna says that a muscle, and a lacert dyfferre not, but
in this point that a muscle has the semblaunce of a little mouse: And a
lacerte has the semblaunce of a little worm called a Lizarde, which been two
beestes, that are somewhat gross in the body, and small in the tails. And as
touching the great parts, they may be nombred among the members compou^de
But as concerning the small parts, they may be called simple members because
of the synnowes, whereof they take part.

The opinion of Galene concercernyng muscles is true, which says that after
the muscles been accomplyshed of synnowes, lygamentes, flesh and Skin, of
the said Muscles there grow chordes, and ligamentes which ben round. And
when they come about ye joints, they compass the joints about in manner of
pellicles or thynne skynnes, and give them mouynge. And when the next ioynture
is well knytte together, they goo from that and come to compass about
semblably another ioynture, and they cease not to bind together, until they
come to the extreme parts of the body. The said muscles been in nombre five
hundred thyrty and one, after Auicenne.

A bone.
Bones been simple members, harder then other, except the teethe as Auicenna
says, and therefore they sustain the other parts, and are of a cold and
dry complexion. And nature has brought forth some of them for the defense of
the noble members as the sculle which defends the brain, and the bones of
the breast and of the back, which ben for the preseruacion of the heart and
of the Nuke, Nuke.
which is the mary in the back bone. And the bones of man's body been greater
in the ends, then in other parts, with an apparaunt roundnes, and some with
hollownes And the bones which been joined to the ioyntures with convenient
hollownes, are not lyghtelye put out of ioynte, for the hollownes of the
ioyntures been filled with the roundnes of the otherbones. And, as Auicenna
says, there ben some naturallye enclyned to have their members soon put out
of ioynte, because the hollownes of their bones is not deep enough. The bones
of man's body after Auicenne been in nombre two hundred fortye and eyghte,
beside the bones called Sisamina, and Os Laud, Os Laud.
which is the fundation of the tongue.

A chorde grows out of a muscle, Chorde.
and is compounded of synnowie matter, and of pellicles, pannicles or thynne
skynnes. And the accidents of chordes, and of synnowes ben like. And as Galene
says upon the Aphorisms of Hypocrates, a Spasme or the cra^pe follows ye
pryckyng of synnowes and chordes or tendons. And even as a chorde is mean
between a synnowe, and a ligamente, so a ligamente is mean between a synnowe,
and a bone. Here follows of ligamentes.

There been two manner of ligamentes, Of Ligamentes.
some grow or descend out of chordes, as we have declared before of muscles,
as Galene recyteth. How be it Guido is not of that opinion, which seems to
vary from the truth, saying that all the ligame^tes grow out of the bones. I
have found no doctor of that opinion. There is another manner of ligamentes,
which grow out of the bones, as Auicenna says in the chapitre De resolutione
continuitatis neruorum. And moreover Auicenne says that ligamentes which
grow out of the bones been insensyble members, and that a man may lay to
them, strong medicines. And this is the cause why Guido said that all the
ligamentes grow out of the bones. And Auicenna says in the same chapitre yt
the synnowes which ben joined with the muscles take part of them, and Haliabbas
is of the same opinion in the second book of the assignation of the
ligame^tes, and chordes.

Pannicles been of a synnowie matter, Of Pannicles
though the hurt of them be not so dangerous as of a synnowe, nevertheless by
reason of the great sensibilite or feeling of the same there is much danger
there in, for sometimes they induce a spasme, that is a co^traction of synnowes.

Grystell.
A gristell is, of the nature of bones, but it is softer. And gristelles were
made for supplementes or fyllinges of bones, and for the garnyshynge of the
parts of man's body, as ye may se evidently in the nose, and in the ears.
And therefore the solution of the continuite of the same (as Hypocrates says)
receaueth not restoration, after the first intencion of restorynge and
consoundynge of members. And Hypocrates says that when the bones or the
grystelles, or the lyppes, or the head of the yeard ben wounded, they grow no
more, neither can be consounded after the way of the first intention.

Veins.
Of veins. A vein is a membre which conteyneth blood, having his beginning
at the liver.

Artery.
Artery is a vessel containing spiritual blood, and spirits having their
beginning at the heart. Galene says in the.xvi. book de vtilitate
particularum, that Arteries dyfferre not from veins, but in the place of their
beginning, and that these two been joined together through all the body
saving that the Artery is sondred in some parts, as in the plyghte of the
arm, and in rheti mirabili.

Skin.
The skin is the first thing, that appears in the outward parts. And
therefore we will begin our Anatomy at the same. Skin is the couerture of
man's body co^pounde of fyllettes or fylmes, or as it were little thredes
procedynge from the veins, synnowes, and small arteries, ordained to retain
the spirits and feeling of the body. And there ben two manner of skynnes, the
one covers the outward members, and the other is a pannicle covering the
members within the body, as the couerture of the bones called almokatim, the
pannicle of the brain, the couerture of the rybbes and other semblable.

Flesh is divided into three kinds that is to wete, Flesh.
flesh Glandulous or Kernellie, flesh full of muscles, and simple flesh.
Flesh simple is only found in the gommes, and in ye head of the yard.
Flesh Glandulous is found in the breasts of women and in the Emunctories, or
clensyng places, and of this kind is the flesh of the stones. The third kind
is flesh musculous which is found through out all the body, in the parts,
where voluntaire mouyng is, nevertheless fat, the nails, the heeres are nombred
co^munely among the simple members which things are superfluities produced
for the profit of the body as we have said before.

Of simple members some have their generation of Sperma or sede, Simple members
therefore when solution of continuite is caused in them, that is when they ben
wounded, they can not be truly restored, as they were before, but they been
repared by some mean, as by a pore called Sarcoides, or by hard flesh, as
for an exemple: the bones of the head, the gristels of the nostrelles Some of
the simple members have their generation of blood, as flesh, fat: the
solution of the continuite where of, may be truly consounded, and restored.
And of these members some ben cold and dry, as gristelles, bones, heeres,
ligamentes, chordes, veins, and pannicles.

The skin is of an hot and dry nature contrary to the nature of al other
members simple. Skin.
For the skin is not only the mean of the parts of the body, but also it
is a mean of all the substance generatiue and corruptiue. The members simple
hot and moist ben spirits, and flesh, as Auerroys says. The mary, phlegm
and fat are cold and moist.

The second Chaptre.
Compounde members.
Now that we have spoken of simple members it is convenient that we traicte of
members compounde The members compounde ben those which ben composed or set
together of the foresaid simple members. And they been called properly Membra
heterogenia that is members made of other and that may be divided into another
kind, or members isntrumental, because they ben the instruments of the
soul, as the face, the hands, the fete, the heart, the liver. And of these
members compounde some ben called members principal, some not principal.

Principal members.
The principal members ben four, the heart, the brain, the liver and the
stones. The members compounde not principal ben all the other except the
simple, Members not principal.
as the eyes, the nose, the ears the head, the face, the neck, the arms the
legs, and semblable, whose complexion shall be declared in the chaptre
following.

The third chaptre of the Anatomy of the head, and of the members contained
in the same.
WE have traicted sufficientlye of the Anatomy of members compou^de, and that
it behooves to consider nine things touching every membre of man's body, but
Auicenna says yt in the Anatomy of the head, The situatio^ of the head.
we must co^sydre aleuen things, and first the situation of the same. The
head was not set in the highest part of the body for the nastrelles, nor for
the brain nor for any other sens, but chiefly for the eyes as Auicenna says,
and for the virtue of seeing. And the reason is this, because the eyes have ye
guard and keeping of the body, so that men may se their enemies afar of, and
avoid that, that is noisome to the body. They were ordained of nature in the
former part, that they might receive the visible spirit by the synnowe called
Optique, and that they might carye visible things to ye common sens, for the
synnowe Optique being divided into two branches enters into ye composition of
the eye, as we shall declare here after. An other reason is this, because the
eyes receive mouynge of the second pair of synnowes, which proceed from the
brain. And for these causes nature has set the head in the highest part of
the body.

The part covered with here, The brain pan.
and containing the brain, and the interior parts of the same, and the
Animal spirits, is called after the philosophers the vessel or pan. It
follows consequently that we consider the ioynynges of the parts of ye same
For from the head the muscles proceed and Lacertes which go to the neck, and
to the face, and ben moved through all the parts of the heed. The brain
pan of a man is greater then of any other living thing, because ye brain is
of greater quantite in man, then in other beestes. The form of the heed is
round as a boole, and as Galene says, a round figure among all other is
most noble, and in lest danger of noisome things. It is also bossie, and
bouncheth out in the fore and in the hinder parts. The composition of the same
is partly bonye, partly full of mary, and is of a cold complexion, and also the
parts thereof, and the dyseases which chance in it, as the tothache, disease
of the eyes, Catarrhes, and like things, as it shall be declared in a chapter
for the same purpose. The no^bre of the parts is known by the parts
containing and contained, Basilare.
and by the bone called Basilare, upon which all the bones of the head have
their seat and foundation. The parts containing ben five, the here, the
skyn, the musculous flesh, the pannicle, which is called pericranium, or
gingiua matter, because it proceeds from dura matter by the commissures of the
bones of the head, after this is the bone named Cranium, or the first table of
the bones of the head. The parts contained ben five. The first is the bone
called the second table. The second is, a gross pannicle called Dura matter.
The third covers the substance of the brain, and is called Pia matter, or
ye Teye. The fourth is Rhete mirabile. The fyfth is the substance of the
brain. Under thies is ye bone called Basilare, which susteyneth ye head And it
is called Basilare of Basis, which sygnifyeth a foundation. There ben in the
composition of the head seven principal bones of which ye first is called
Coronale, Coronale.
and begins after the opinion of Haliabas in the fore part about the eye
brows, and ends at the Coronale co^missure. And in that bone there is some
times a strayte co^missure or seame going dyrectly to ye myddest of the head,
chiefly of women And it is called the bone coronale, because kings bear their
crowns vppo^n that bone. In the nether parts of this bone ben two holes,
which are called Colatories or strayners of the nastrelles, and between the
concauite or hollownes of the two eyes there is a little bonye addition in the
facyon of a cokescombe, upon the which nature has planted the grystelles of
the nastrelles, to divide the nastrelles.

After this ben the two Laterall or side bones joined to the bone coronal on
both sides, Side bones.
Os Laud.
and in the hinder part they ben joined to ye bone called Laud, or occipitall
in the hinder part. And in the top of the head, they ben closed together
like a saw. And they make the commissure called sagittalis For they come
dyrectly from the coronall bone to the co^missure called Lauda, and this is the
commyssure called Transuersalis, Transuersalis.
in this figure of ciffre 7. and ye bone called Lauda is of harder substance
the^ the other, in which there is an hole, and through that hole the marye
called Nuka descendethe from the brain to the end of ye back by Spondiles.

After this ben the bones called Petrosa, or stonye, P^trosa.
which are false co^missures or seames touching the two Laterall or side bones
in the right and the left side. And they ben called false co^missures, because
they ben skalie, and stonye, and harder the^ other. And they are bored through
for the necessity of hearing. And these bones begin at the commissure
called Lauda, and end in the myddest of the temples. The last bone is called
Basilare which susteyneth the head as it is aforesaid. And this bone has
many holes, and spongiositees, which serve to purge the superfluities of the
brain, of these seven bones proceed five commyssures, where of three ben true,
and the other false, as we have said.

The first of the three commyssures, is called the commyssure Coronall. The
second Sagittall. The third Laudale. Nature has produced the bones of the
heed spongious, and full of pores or priuye holes, in the mids of two
tables, that thoroughe their spongiosite they might draw their nouryshment.
And they ben full of pores, that ye moist fumes ascendynge from the brain may
vapoure out, without the hurt of the brain.

The head was made of sondrie bones to the entente that if one part were hurt,
it should not be commucated to the other. And that the Anatomy of members
contained in the head might be more evidently declared, it is profitable after
that ye have taken away ye flesche of the sculle, and of the eyebrowes to
divide the brain pan with a saw circularely. For incontinently, as soon as
it is opened, ye may see the inner table full of pores and glassie, as the
outward, and ye may see also, the said true commissures, to which the
pannicle called dura matter is knyt and joined.

Nature has produced thies commissures, for four causes. The first is that
the veins may enter by them which bring nourishement to the brain. The
second, that the fillettes or thredes of the sinowes procedynge from the
brain may comme out, and give felyng to ye parts lying about. The third,
that the vapoures ascendyng to the brain may have passage. The last that the
pannicle dura matter may be holden up, that it grieve not the brain. By the
middele or sagyttalle commyssure there pass two veins, procedynge from the
liver, and enter in under ye sculle, like wise by the hole of the bone called
basilare their commethe an Artery procedynge from the heart, and ascends in
to the head until he join himself to the sinowes, and veins before said. Of
which the hard pannicle called dura matter is co^pouned, and is joined to the
commissures procedynge without them, by certain little synnowes, and as it were
here is so that those synnowes and heeres or thynne thredes coming out of the
commissures make a pannicle, which covers all the sculle, and is called
Gingiua matter or Pericraniu^. Pericraniu^.
Therefore it was convenient that an Artery should ascend upward from the
heart, for if his pulsatiue mouynge, and subtle blood should have gone
downewarde, it would have descended to hastily. Therefore it is moderated by
mountynge or going upward. Nevertheless it was mete that the vein should go
downewarde from the over part to the nether, that the gross blood might
easily descend.

Also the said veins, synnowes, Pia matter.
and arteries join them selves together again, as it is said, and make a
pannicle very thynne and subtle called pia matter, which couerethe all the
brain. And than the said veins, and arteries go down to the brain, and
give it life, nourischement, and vital spirit procedyng from the heart. And
as much more as the brain receaueth of that vital spirit, so much more
perfect ben the animal spirits.

The brain is a substance full of marye divided in to three ve^tricles of
which there is one in the fore part which is greater than the other three.
The brayn^.
The second is in the myddest. The third has his resydence in the hyndre
part. And therefore after Galenes judgment, it is the foundation of
imagination, and of deuysynge, and of remembrance. Rasis also affyrmethe that
the third ventricle is the fountain of ye senses, and voluntary mouynge.

The Nuke is as it were a stream descendynge from the said party, The Nuke.
and the synnowes that comme from the same are, as it were little ryuers
coming out of a great stream. And moreover the said Rasis says, that when
the head spring that is the brain is endammaged, all the ryuers namely
synnowes descendynge from the same be also endammaged, by the reason of
participation. But if any harm chance to the ryuers, the fou^tayne is not
always hurted, but the places whereunto the synnowes are directed. The
substance of the brain is white, and full of marye, and soft, and of a
cold, and moist qualyte. In which qualytee it differreth from the maryes of
other bones. For it was not ordained to nourishe the sculle, but to conteyne
the brain, and to preserve the same. And the pryncypall vtilyte of it is, to
tempre the heat of the vital spirits procedynge from the heart that the
animal spyrites might be made.

Of ve^tricles.
We said before that the brain has three ventricles, and the former and the
hinder after the opinyon of Anatomistes ben divided in the myddell, that is to
say in the right side, and in the lift, and the sides of them ben wrapped
about with the said pannicles, going here and there unto the fundation by
which the right part is diuyded from the lift. In the fore part, that is
in the first ventricle consysteth fantasy, Fantasy.
which retaynethe the semblaunces of things received by sight, and hearing.
In the hyndre part consists the virtue imaginatiue, Imaginatiue virtue.
which apprehendethe things received and retained by fantasy. In the middel
ventricule rests the commune sense, Commune sense.
which apprehends the semblau^ces of things brouze unto him by particulare
senses, and therefore it is directed to that place, and there is ended. And
hereby appears ye profit of this ventricle, which serves to imagination or
fantasy, and to the common sense, and was produced, that it should give
sense, and animal spirit to all the instruments of felyng.

Also the accide^tes which may chance to this ventricle, ben apparent as
solution of continuite, evil complectio^, the pain of migraime, when there is
any hurt in the ventricle, and some times it sufferethe Apostemes hot and
cold. If the Aposteme be hot, and co^siste in ye pa^nicles it is called
Sirsen. Syrsen.
If the Aposteme be cold it is called Lethargus, Lethargus.
and inducethe forgetfulness. And if by chance there be an Aposteme in the
substance of the brain it is called a mortal Aposteme. There may also
chance to them a disease by reason of the evil composition, with if it be
utterly stoppynge, either it is by vapoures, Vertigo.
and than causes Vertigo or scotome, which is a darckeni^g of the sight, and a
swimming in the head as though all things turned about. Or if it be of an
evil humor than it causes astonishement, and the Palsy. Palsye.
And if all the ventricles of the brain be stopped with the substance of the
brain, Apoplexy.
they cause a continual apoplexy.

Also the brain is divided in to four parts, the former, the hinder, ye
right and the lift: in the former part blood reigns, in the hyndre part
phlegm, in the right cholere, in the lift, melancholy. And therefore the
former part is hotest.

The second ventricle.
AFter that we have spoken of the first ventricle, and of the seat and
complexion of it, and of the vtilities, and diseases that may chance to the
same, it is convenient that we speak of the second ve^tricle. In the end of
the first ventricle there ben two small parts or substau^ces after the manner of
the nastrelles of a man, which ben to the ventricle, as it were a bed, where
upon it stretches it self in length when it receaueth Imagined things. And
afterward it is drawn together like an earth worm which thing it does, wha^
ye virtue extractiue thinks upon apprehended, and determined things, until
the sentence be pronounced. And it prolongethe it self likewise, wha^
remembrance of things declared is apprehended by the third ventricle. Of
these two substaunces, one is as a red worm, as it is before declared, and it
may stretche forth, and draw back. The other is as it were a knockle which
closethe it self, and openethe. And this was ordained of nature, that the
apprehended semblaunces should not pass from one ve^tricle to another, wha^ a
man will cease from exterior operatio^s of the senses, or thynkyng and deuysyng.
The said second ventricle is small and thynne, and it passethe from the
first, to the last, and touches both. And therefore it is an instrument of
two virtues namely of thynkyng and diuidyng, and of inferrynge one thing of
another. And the second virtue is to judge and to discern true things from
false.

Of the third ventricle.
The third ventricle has his seat in the hyndre part of the head. And in
substance it is harder than the other, wherefore the synnowes, which grow out
of it, or out of the Nuke, which is the vicarie of the said ve^tricle ben of
hard nature. And the ryme called pia matter is not joined with this ventricle as
with the other, because it is hard enough of his own nature. The substance of
the other is softer than of this, and therefore nature would that pia matter
should aid the other to co^teyne the brain. It is made after the figure of a
steple that is large beneth, and sharp above, that it mit retayn in his large
part pronounced sentences, and keep the^ secretly, as a chest which covers
a treasure and his co^plection is cold and dry, Complectio^.
and the co^plection of the second ve^tricle is hot and moist. The Nuke
wrapped in two pannicles procedyng from the brain has his beginning of this
last ventricle and goethe down by the hole of the bone called Basilare, and
passethe by the midst of the spondeles, until he touch the end of the
back bone. The said Nuke is like mary, and of semblable substance as the
brain is and has the same accidents that the brain has.

It is necessary to know that seven pair of synnowes have their generation
immediately of the brain after ye length thereof, and thirty pair which pass
thorough the middle of the nuke and one, which has not a fellow. Further more
in the extremite of the first and second ve^tricle in desce^dyng. Lacuna.
There is a hole called Lacuna, yt is a syncke, in the midst whereof there is
a little hole which comes to the rouffe of the mouth, by which superfluites
be^ purged, and it proceeds directly from the second ventricle, and passes
by the bone called Basilare, likewise the pa^nicle named Dura matter is bored
thorough in the fore part under the bone of the foreheade, that by it the
superfluites of the ventricles might be purged by the conduyctes of the nose.

And another reason there was, that by the conduycte of the nose the virtue of
smelling might be made perfaicte. And round about the said co^duycte ben
certain round pieces of flesche standing out, which after Mondine ben
produced to sustain ye veins, and the Arteries, which mount up from rhete
mirabile, to the said ventricles, and therefore there ben glandules or
kernelles hard by the Rhete mirabile. Rhete mirabile.
The said Rhete mirabile is like a net, and is therefore called Rhete, for
this pannicle is compouned only with Arteries, as Guido has declared saying,
that in certain places an Artery is divided from a vein, as in the middle of
the arm and in Rheti mirabili.

The.iiij. Chap. of the Anatomy of the neck and of the throat.
WE have declared in ye former chapter the Anatomy of the head It is now
requisite that we speak of the face, of the neck, of the eyes, of the throat
and their parts. And first we must know that there ben in the throat two
conduyctes. Of which by one the meat and drink pass, Meri.
descendyng in to the stomach, and is called Meri or Oisophagus, in English
the Gulle, being co^pouned of two thynne skynnes, and of synnowie small
thredes or fylmes. Of which skynnes or Tunicles the one is very synnowie in
the part touching the palate or rouffe of the mouth. The other is fleschie
and full of muscles which in the outward part is joined to the pannicle of
the stomach.

Trachea Arteria.
The other conduycte called Trachea Arteria or the wesaunde is that, by which
the wind or Air is conveyed to the longes. The first conduycte called Meri
is situated upon five spondiles of the neck behind, and goth downewarde, till
he be joined to ye middriffe, which is a skin compassynge the longes. And
after ye opynion of Rasis, The throat.
of that conduycte Meri the stomach procedethe. The throat is the beginning of
the said conduyctes in which there is an empty place, where the two
Amigdales ben, Amigdales.
that is to say two pieces of flesche after the facion of two Almondes, one in
the right side and the other in the lift. And these Amigdales ben fleschie and
synnowie, that they may be the stronger, for they give entrance to mete and
drink that they may easily pass in to the conduycte called Meri or the
Gulle, and they help the air to go in to the weasau^d by the Epiglotte.

The Epiglotte is a certain eminence, Epiglotte.
which appears in the throat in the top of the wesaunde produced of nature
for this purpose that in eating, and drynckynge, nothing enter in, but the
air. And when any thing goethe in, it makethe a man to coughe till it be
out again. And the vtilite of this partycle is this, that by the mean thereof,
the body drawethe and retayneth air according as it is necessary, and it
helpethe also to form and fascion voices. In the fore part (as we have
said) is the Trachea Arteria or wesaunde compouned of gristellye rings,
joined one to another, having an inward pannicle which tyeth the said
rings one to another, which ben very rough in the inward part, and are
joined to the throat gulle, being a little separated the one from the other.
The throat gulle is made like a cane compouned of veins Arteries, and synnowes
procedynge of the six pair of synnowes, which come from the fore part of
the brain. And on the right, and the lift side there ben certain instrume^tal
veins called Guidegi upon the which great Arteries are situated. Guidegi.
And therefore the cuttynge and pryckynge of them is dangerous by reason of the
nyghnes, and affinity, that they have with the liver and the heart. For often
times a man dyethe by suffocation or chokynge when the veins of the poulse ben
prycked. Vuula.
Semblably the Vuula was produced chiefly to form the voice, in retaynynge the
air according to the will of man. And also to purge the superfluites of ye
brain, and it hangethe justly between the two Amigdales or almandes as it were
a grain of a Pyne apple, and it is of a spongious, and rare substance.

The.v. Chap. of the Jaws and the Teethe.
AFter the opinion of Anatomistes the teth be^ xxxij. Incisorii.
in nombre. Of which some ben Incisorij that is cuttynge, and they serve to cut
ye meat. Canini.
The other ben called Canini sharp as the teethe of a Dog, and they are
co^munly called the eye teeth, for their roots go welnygh to the eyes.
Molares.
There ben some which be called Molares because they grynde ye mete as a mill
corn, and they begin the first digestion.

There ben.xvi. in the over iawe, and they ben compouned of.xiiij. bones, whose
compositio^ is unknown. And that iawe is covered with a pannicle procedynge
out of the fore part of the foreheade, which pannicle is called Pericranium.
Consequentelye the said iawe takethe part of the synnowes of the third
pair, procedynge from the brain, and of the second part of the Nuke. The
skin of the face commethe of the Pericranium and takethe part of the third
pair, and part of the fourth, and fyfte pair of synnowes procedynge from
the brain with certain veins, and Arteries, and stretches it self over all
the face and therefore the said synnowes cause the felyng, and mouyng of all
the face. It is conuenyent to know that all the teethe ben knytte with
lygamentes, and pannicles procedynge out of the foresaid pannicle. The nether
iawe is compouned of two bones, and about the chynne it is joined together
like a saw, and is knytte to the other. And we will make a chapitre of them,
and of their dislocation, or displacynge.

The.vi. Chap. of the tongue and of the ears.
THe tongue is a member right necessary which nature has produced in the
mouth, Tongue.
and it is spongious, and fleschie, compouned of sinnowes, Lacertes, Veins,
Arteries and Ligamentes. And the root of it is planted in the bone called Os
Laud, and is tied with many ligamentes. The synnowes of it proceed of the
syxt pair of synnowes coming from the brain, and receive felyng thereby, and
mouynge of the.vij. pair of synnowes coming from the brain.

Under the tongue there ben two veins, which appear when the tongue is lyfted
up. The cuttyng where of is very profitable, for many passions of the throat
which we will speak of in the cure of a quynce. And the tongue was pryncipally
ordained to speak and to conueye the meat in to the mouth. And it is very
necessary to the art of Physic. For by taste we obtain the knowledge of
many things called Simples. And the synnowes of tastyng comme from the
fourth and syxte pair of synnowes of the brain. And in that there ben.ix.
lacertes procedynge from the bone called Laud, and from the addytion
sagyttall. There is under the tongue glandulous or kernelly flesche, in which
there are two little oryfices or mouths which purge the spittell like a
strayner.

The Eats.
In the extreme over parts of the jaws the ears ben situated about the bones
called Verualia, and are founded upon the bones called Petrosa which ben hard
and bored thorough. After the bone called Mendosum or False there ben many
innolutions, or inwrappynges in their passage going inward till the fyfte
pair of synnowes of the brain be touched. And by the virtue of them the power
of hearing is given to the ears. And therefore the said Synnowes ben
hollow, that they may the better hear all soundes. And about the ears, and
extremitees of the jaws nature has produced a cartilage or grystell, which
fynyshethe the ears. And at the extremities of the said ears there ben
synnowes and small threedes of veins, and Arteryes produced circlewyse.
Therefore the incisyon or cuttynge of them must be done after the manner of an
half circle.

There ben afterward in the right, and lift side of the Neck behind the
ears two veins procedynge from the liver, under the which there are
Arteryes procedynge from the heart and mount up by the commyssures or seames
of the head (as it is a foresaid) unto the brain. And when they have done
their effect in the head they return toward the ears. And they conduycte
some part of the sede to the reins, and extend to the vessels of sede. And
this is the cause that he can not engendre that has the vein under the
ears thoroughly cut. Likewise nature has produced in those parties of the
neck two as it were little necks, one in the right side, another in the lift,
and their foundacyons ben planted in the bones of the head. And therefore they
ben of the nature of lygamentes, and they proceed from both the sides of the
back bone, unto the end of the same, and they ben called long necks. And so
they ben the resting bed of all the synnowes procedynge from the Nuke.

The seventh Chapter of the Anatomy of spondyles, or of the chyne bone.
A Spondele is a bone bored thorough which makes the back bone and thorough
the hole thereof the Nuke passethe from one end to another. Spondeles.
And the said spondele has many addytions or particles descendynge and
ascendynge, which successyuely join them selves one to another till they come
to the extremyte of the back. And this ordinance of diverse portyons or
pyeces is as it were the conseruatyon of the Nuke.

And out of each side of those spo^diles sinnowes issue, which been dispersed
in to so^drie parts of the body, as we shall show here after.

Moreover there ben four parts of spondiles in the back (as Galene
witnesses) the first is the neck: the second the spondiles of the shoulders
the third the loins, Os sacru^.
the fourth Os sacru^ or the hyppe. In the first part there ben.vii.
spo^diles, in the second xii. in the third.v. in the fourth.vi. But of the
muscles, sinnowes, and veins of the neck we will speak in their propre
chapiters.

The.viii. chap. of the Anatomy and figure of the eyes.
Seeing that the eyes been right profitable to man's body, Of the eyes.
we must search diligently the anatomy of the same, yt when we know the
disposition of them and their co^plectio^, we may more easily help the^.
Their situatio^ is manifest to every body. Nature has ordained two, yt the
body might be guyded the better, and that if one should be put out, the other
might co^duict the body. And they ben me^bres co^pouned of seven skins, and
three humors.

I will declare first their composition after this sort. First from the fore
part of the brain proceed two sinnowes being holowe coming from the first
pair of sinnowes of ye brain, Nerui optici.
which as soon as they been divided from the brayn by and by they join them
selves like a cross, and of two one only concauite or holownes is made: And
depertyng from the sculle they separate them selves from it, and ben wrapped in
two pa^nicles and are called Nerui optici. And these said sinnowes be joined
together ye one thing should not seem two (as Mo^dine says). And each of these
sinnowes when it goes out of the sculle, ends at his proper eye. And there
is a pa^nicle compouned in ye eye called sclirosis. Sclirosis.
Tha^ follows another pa^nicle called secu^dine, Secu^dine.
or second. And about that is the humor called Vitreus so named because it is
clear as glass. After this follows ye third tunicle or thynne skin called
Rhetine, Rhetine.
having the facion of a net. And of that net consequently is engendered a
tunicle called Tela aranea, Tela aranea.
because it has the semblaunce of a cobwebbe, and it comprehends the humor
Cristalline, and acco^plisheth the roundnes of the eye.

After ye tunicle there is another called tunica vuea, Tuneca vuea.
in ye middeste where of, there is a concauite or holownesse out of which ye
apple of the eye proceeds, and opens it self at pleasure. In the said
concauite is the humor Cristalline, apprehe^ding visible things. The same
tunicle co^prehendetth in it self the humor Albugineus or the white of the
eye, which defends the humor Cristalline. After this there is another
tunicle called cornea which covers the said humor, Cornea.
and kepethe it that it go not out. And it is called Cornea because it shyneth
like an horn. And this pannicle is hard and joins with the last pannicle
called coniunctina, and these tie and embrace the eye come^ly beside the apple
of the eye. And the pannicle called coniunctina has his generation of the
pannicle that couerethe the sculle And hereof appears the help that comes
of cutting the vein which is over the eye, when humors descend from the
brain.

And moreover through the hole of the skulle proceed ye synnowes which give
feeling and mouynge to perceive what thing hurts.

The Anatomy of the breast called Thorax. Cap. ix.
The breast.
AFter that we have spoken of the Anatomy of the face, of ye eyes, of ye neck
of the spondiles, of the synnowes, and of the nuke, we will speak of the
anatomy of the breast. The said breast is a station or standing place of the
spiritual members. In which there been some parts that contain, and some
that been contained. The parts that co^teyne ben four, skin, musculous
flesh, ye dugges, and the bones. The parts that been contained are.ix. namely
the heart, the longes, the pa^nicles, the ligame^tes, the sinnowes, the veins,
the arteries, Merry or the throat gulle, and Trachea arteria, or the wesaunde.
we woll begin at the bones.

The breast is co^plete with.vii. bones, and in the end of them there is a
gristle. Pixis.
And in the over part, there is a little thing, like a little box, called
Pixis, in which the forke of the gull is fixed. And in the nether part of the
same there is a soft gristle. And therefore it lies upon the stomach for the
said bones are gathered together, and meet one with another. And to the said
seven bones, Ribs.
seven ribs ben united or joined too, of both sides, and are knytte together
with spondiles. which ribs been crooked, and the fore terminatio^ of them is
called the breast. And on the part of the spo^dyles, it is called the side of
the complete ribs. And after these seven ribs there ben five on each side
which been called the false ribs. And they arne joined together in the hyndre
part with five spondyles on each side, and in the fore part they been joined
with the lacertes of the belly. And they arne called false ribs because they
be not matched with other bones in the fore part, and because they been
pliable, and give and bend them selves, as the bellye will.

Of the muscles of the breast.
THe muscles of the breast after Auicenna been.xviii. Muscles of the breast.
And of them some have participacion with the neck, some with the midriffe,
some with ye ribs, some with the back, some with the shulders, and some been
called properly the muscles of ye breast, and have conjunction with the members
aforesaid.

Of the ma^milles or dugges.
THe dugges been members compounde of flesh thynne, Ma^mille.
kernellye, white and spongious: to the which many synnowes come from the
brain, and many veins from the liver, and arteries from the heart. And
therefore they have great allyaunce with those members.

Of the parts of the breast that conteyne.
Above al thing ye must take heed that ye cut the said bones of the breast with
a sharp instrument, and warely, so that ye cut not the pannicle called
mediastine, and so to come to the heart with diligentie. At which we will
begin, as at the principal.

The heart has a semblaunce of a Pineapple, The heart.
and the flesh thereof is very hard, and full of lacertes, cheifely in the
root. His root and fundation has many lacertes, and hard ligamentes, and
sinnowes compassynge him about. Of which the heart is not touched, saving in
the nether part. And therefore after some men's judgment it is after the nature
of a gristel The flesh of the heart is hard that it might the better resist
noisome things. If the flesh had been thin and soft, man should have been of
shorter life. And therefore Auicenna says that the heart can not suffer
solution of continuite without death. It was set in the midst of the body
that it should be as a king in the midst of a realm. And Galene says that
it is right in the midst of the breast, but Rasis says that it declineth
somewhat to the lift side. And therefore in the lift side greater pulses of the
arteries been felt, than in the right

And after the sentence of the said Rasis there ben two ve^tricles about the
heart, one in the right side another in the lift. Capsula cordis.
In the midst whereof there is a thin skin called Capsula cordis compassed
with little sinnowie pannicles. And it is called of the said Rasis the third
ventricle And in the right ventricle there been two holes of which nature has
ordained one that the veins proceeding out of the liver should conueye blood
to the said ve^tricle. Upon which hole also there ben three pannicles, which
begin without and end within that, that thing which enters may be returned.

And there is another hoole of the vein, which is a mouth, exte^dyng fro the
same ve^tricle unto the longes which mouth though it be of a vein and not of
an artery, yet the tunicles there of are gross and thycke, and therefore it is
called an arteriall vein. And the tunicles or rymes of the arteries ben of
harder substance than the tunicles proceeding from the veins And nature has
ordained them to be harder for a just cause. For as long as the life of man
endures, the arteries move continually. And under the said pa^nicle three little
skynnes grow within, and end without. which nature has ordained to receive
that, yt comes out of the heart.

In the lift ve^tricle there ben found ii. holes. Of which one is the mouth
wherout proceeds the great artery of which all the arteries of man's body have
their generation. Moreover upon the same mouth three pannicles are situated,
which begin within and end without, that they may answer, and be bowed back
to that blood and spirit that comes from the heart which blood forthwyth, is
divided of nature through out al ye substance of the heart in moderate
quantity, and the rest of the blood is sent to the nouryshment of the heart,
and it is thynned in the substance of the heart, and in the middle pytte it is
digested, and purifyed, and when it is purifyed it is sent to the lift
ventricle, where of the blood there is a spirit engendered more pure and
subtle than any body made of the four elements.

And there is another hole which is the mouth of an ample vein going to the
longes. And through the holownes of it, the air is sent from the longes to the
heart. In which second hole there been only two pannicles procedynge without,
and endyng within which God has profitably ordained to conduicte air to the
heart.

In the lift ve^tricle there is found an artery having only one tunicle
named arteria venalis, Arteria venalis.
which conueyeth subtle blood procedynge from the heart, to the longes, by
whose substance it is dispersed, and it is the nouryshme^t of ye longes. And
ye heart has two little particles, additamentes, or pieces like small ears which
susteyn it. One is in the right side the other in the lift.

Of the longes.
THe longes is a membre of rare and thynne substance, Longes.
and spongious, and is tied with a Pa^nicle called mediastyne, which covers
the heart, that the bones of the breast touch it not. And there is a cane or
pype over the longes called Trachea arteria, whereof we have spoken before. The
profytte of the cane is to draw cold air, which air compasses about
man's body until it come to the heart to te^pre his great heat. And by the
same Cane the superfluities of the heart may pass out Wherefore ye coldness of
the air, that compasses about man's body, is of great utility. For it
tempreth the heart. without which the vital spirits should be choked. Therefore
nature has produced inspiration and respiration, that the heart might be duly
blowed upon, and that the air might be puryfyed, by the longes before it come
to the heart.

Diaphragma or the midriffe.
DIaphragma or the mydryffe is one of the members that been contained in the
co^cauite of the breast. Midriffe.
whose beginning procedethe from the over part of the breast, and in descendyng
it stretches it self large and long till it come to the.xii. spondyle of the
back. And it is a gross Pannycle and musculous in the neither part, and
seperateth the spiritual members, from the members nutrityue, and it has
allyaunce with the brain, by the means of the synnowes, which proceed from
the same. Nature has ordained the midriffe, that by his continual mouynge it
might blow upon, and cool the heart, as the belowes of a smyth, when they been
opened they receive air, and when they ben closed they drive the wind to the
fire. And for two raysons, solution of continuite can not be restored in it.
The first is because of his continual mouynge. The second is because it is
full of sinnowes and is subtle.

THe Pannicle called mediastyne is in substance like the mydriffe, Mediastine.
diuidynge the breast after his length, and therefore it passes through ye
midst of the lo^ges. And it is tied with the spondiles of the back, and
susteyneth the longes. This division was made through the myddest that the
hurt of one part should not be communicated al about.

Of Pleura
PLeura is a thynne Pannicle, Pleura.
and sensible which couerethe the ribs. In which often times there is
engendered an aposteme called a Pleuresie.

The anatomy of the bellye and his parts. Chap. x.
Venture or the belie is communely taken in two sorts, The belly.
first for the stomach, and ye throat gulle, secondelye for the region
co^teynyng the nutritive members. And we must know that the conteynyng parts
ben Myrach and Siphac, as perteyninge to the fore part, and as perteyning to
the hyndre part, they ben the bones of the five spondiles, the skin, and the
lacertous flesh

Mirach is compouned of four things of skin, of fat, Mirach
of a fleshy Pannicle and of muscles growing out of the heart. Siphac is a
simple Pannicle very hard co^pouned of synowes, Siphac.
fylmes, or as it were small hears and ligamentes joined with a Pannicle.
Therefore there is a great difference between Mirach, and Siphac. For Mirach
has many parts that may be separated and so has not Siphac.

Members cont^yned.
The members that been called contained arne.vii. the zirbus, the guts the
stomach, the liver, the mylte, the Mese^terium, the reins. Of the blader, and
of the figure of the matryce we will speak herafter in the anatomy of the
hanches.

The stomach.
Stomach
THe stomach is a membre compouned of three sinnowye tunicles, having many
fylmes or as it were small threedes or hears according to his length, and
breadth. And it proceeds from the over part of the midriffe, having the
figure of a round gourde. The neck is long in the over part, leaning to
the lift side, and the botome of it is contained with a gutte called Duodenum
Yea and the botome of the stomach is the beginning of the guts. It is tied
behind to the spondyles of the back, with strong sinnowye ligamentes which
extend them selves according as the stomach requires. And the stomach was
princypally ordained for the first digestion. And there been in it four
natural virtues, that is to say Attractyue when there is appetyte of meat,
digestyue, retentyue and expulsyue. Of which vtilites it should be long to
entreat now

Of the liver
Liver.
The liver is set in the right side Under the over rybbes, toward the hinder
part. And it is a fleshy membre, of thynne substance, having the semblance of
congeled blood. And it is hollow in the inward part, toward the stomach,
and bounchye without after the figure of the moon when she is more than half
full. The concauite is toward the stomach and the bounching toward the midriffe.

And out of the hollownesse, Porta.
there grows as it were a cane or pype called porta. And it is a great vein
made of spermatique or seed mattier. Out of which after Rasis there grow.vii.
veins and of them infinite, as the roots of a tree, which disperse themselves
into sundry places, as to the botome of the stomach, to the gutte duodenum, to
the gutte called ieiunu^, Meseraice.
and rectu^. which being divided in to so^dry parties ben called veins
Meseraice. Chylus.
And the office of them is to carye the juice of digested meat, called chylus
in to the veins of ye liver, and the great vein called porta with his roots
diuidethe the said good juice through all the liver. Of which substance or
juice blood is produced, and gets read color within the said veins.

Also out of the gibbosyte or bou^ch of the liver, Concaua chilis.
there issues a vein called concaua or chilis. which with his rotes, (which
ben many little veins procedyng out of the same) co^ueyeth, and distributeth
the blood through all the parts of the body. In which ye third digestion is
ended. Furthermore (as Galene recites) there been three substaunces created in
the liver, two superfluous, and one natural as in new wine there ben three
substau^ces, the wine, the foam, and the lies. The foam of blood is cholere,
the lies, melancholy.

The guts.
THe guts been six in nombre of which the three upper been small, Guts.
and the three beneth the nauel been great, compouned of two tunicles. Of which
one is within, another without. That wtin is very viscous slymye or clammysh,
that it should not be lightly hurted by the superfluites passing that way. The
first of the small guts is it that is joined to ye botome of the stomach,
and is called portanariu^, Portanariu^
or duodenum. It is called portanariu^ because superfluites pass by it, as by
a port or gate, and duodenu^ because it is twelve fingers long. Ieiunum.
The second is called ieiunum or the greedy gutte. And in that there ben more
orifices or mouths than in other, which give nourishment to the liver, and
these two guts lie streighte after the length of the body. The third and
last of the small guts is called Inuolutu^, Inuolutum.
because it has many inuolutions, and inwrappynges before it come to the
gutte called Intestinum rectu^. And these ben as it were of the same quantity
with the gutte called Duodenu^.

The first of ye great guts is called Monoculum, Monoculum.
because it has but one entrau^ce, as it were in to a purse by which that, yt
goes in, in one hour comes out again in another, and it is set on the
right side. Colon.
The second is called Colon situated toward ye rit side, and is stretched out
a long ye bellye till it come to ye lift side. The third is called Intestinu^
rectu^. Intestinum rectum.
And the office of it is to receive ye superfluites or excrementes of other
guts. And it is more larg tha^ the other. And in ye end of it is the passage
of all the superfluites of ye body, called anus or the arse hole: in which there
is a muscle which retayneth ye excreme^tes, till a man lust to avoid the same.
And in the utter most part of the arse hole, there ben five veins ordained to
pourge the melancholyke blood of all the body, called themorrodial veins.

Of the milt or spleen.
Mylt
THe mylt is a long membre, having the figure of a swynes tongue: The situation
of it is in the left side of the belly with certain ligamentes, by which it
is joined of one side with the stomach, and of the other side with the false
rybbes. And out of the said mylte there grow 2. little pores, of which one
comes to the stomach, to conduict melancholye to the mouth of the same,
which styrreth up appetite And the other pore comes to the liver, to receive
melancholye of the same.

Of the bladder of gall called Cistis fellis.
THe blader of the gall is called Cistis fellis, Cistis fellis.
and cleaves to the liver in the upper part, having two co^duictes, of which
one comes to the concauitie or holownesse of the liver and receives choler
from the same, when the creation of blood is perfect. And the other comes to
the botome of the stomach, and to ye great guts. The said pa^nycle is
co^pouned of a synnowe, an arterye, and a vein: And it is pryncipallye
ordained to cleanse the blood from choler, and to send choler to the botome of
the stomach, to stir up the virtue attractyue.

Of the kydneis.
THe reins or kydneis ben set nigh the liver, Reins.
toward the spo^dyles, of which the right is situated higher tha^ the left.
And there pertayneth to each of them a pannicle, which co^passeth them about,
and susteyneth them. And in that pannicle there grows a sinnowe out of the
midst of the spondiles or chyne bones called Alkatin. And the said kydneys
have also a ligamente growinge out of the said spondyles. And the flesh of
them is firm, and sound, that the vryne should not fret away the skin,
which continually descends through them.

The veins of the kydneis proceed from the vein called Chilis, with ye which
the pores of urine be joined, which ben holowe, and by their concauitie or
holownesse the urine passes into the bladder. And at the entrance of the
blader the said pores join them selves together.

Mesenteriu^.
Of Mesenterium.
THe substance of Mesenteriu^, is co^pouned of pannicles, chordes, and
ligamentes. And it is ordained of nature to bind the guts as it is
necessary. Further it is co^pouned of fat substance, and nature has
produced that fat, that the guts should not be hurted with the bones of the
spondyles. And it was also ordained of nature to sustain ye veins called
mesaraice. And they ben called mesaraiques of this pa^nicle Mesenterium.
Furthermore, it is fat, soft, and kernellish, that through the moisture of ye
fat it might make the guts slypperye, for the better passage of the
superfluities. The over part is kernellysh, where oftentimes a quantity of
melancholy assembleth, because it is nygh the milt And this melancholy is
called, Melancholia Mirachia.

Of zirbus or the caul.
zirbus.
THe last of the members called contained is zirbus, which is a pannicle
compouned of two thynne tunicles, of diverse arteryes veins and fat in good
quantity. It covers the stomach and the guts, it keeps in the heat of
them, and defends outward cold, as Galene declares.

And after the sentence of Mo^dine, it has his generacyon of a fleshy
pa^nicle, which cleaves to the back about the mydriffe. Therefore it is like
that when this pannicle is broken, chefely in the nether part, it comes
lightly to putrefaction, by reason of his fat. Therefore when it issues out by
some stroke, it is discretely done, to cut the altered part: and to
cauterize the cut, that the flux of blood follow not.

The.xi. and.xii. chapter of the Anathomye of Siphac, and of the two didymes,
and of the stoones.
AFter that we have declared the members, called contained, we will speak of
the me^bres in the belly called containing.

And first of Siphac. Siphac.
Siphac is an hard pannicle growing out of the midriffe which descends
toward the spondyles of the back. And the stomach, and the guts been
sustained by the said pannicle, and it ends in the nether part of the
bellye. And of the said Siphac, the two didimes ben engendered, which descend
to the stones, over the bone called os Pectinis. Didimes
And the didymes ben thin skynnes, which compass the stones, and hold them
hangyng. And through the myddest of them certain veins and arteries pass. By
which the seed is conduicted to the stones, and so conveyed to the yard by
these didymes two little branches ascend from ye stones, which are called the
vessels of seed.

Of the stones.
THe stones ben nombred among the principal members, The stones.
which nature has made for generation. And they ben of glandulos and white
flesh. And they are also of great felyng, by reason of the participacion that
they have with the sinnowes of Siphac, and by reason of certain small fylmes,
or thredes procedynge from Mirach. Therefore when the zirbus or caul descends
with the didymes, it stretches them out beneth. And it is the cause of great
pain, so that the paciente thinks that his guts be rent from the fat.

Of the yard and of the blader.
The yard.
THe yard is a membre very full of sinnowie lacertes, with many ligamentes,
veins and arteries. It is hollow, and that holownesse is full of ventosite or
wind engendered in the pulsyng veins, by which ventositie the elevation of the
same comes. This eleuacion proceeds chefely of the arteries which come from
the heart, for the heart gives volu^tary motion to the said arteries. The
ligamentes of the yard proceed from the bones of the thighs. And the synnowes
grow from the nether part of the nuke: and by reason of those sinnowes, the
said yard is of great feeling. The veins of it proceed out of a great vein
descendynge from the liver. And the arteries proceed of a great artery
descendynge from the heart, when the heart gives voluntarye motion to them. And
the said veins and arteryes ben greater, and euydenter in ye yard and under
the tongue, then in any other place of the body. Therefore because of the
synnowes, it has participacion with the nuke, because of ye veins and
arteries it has particypacyon with the heart and the liver. And about the
yard in the extremity thereof, there is found simple flesh as we have said.
And thus the parts of the yard ben euydent, and the profit namelye to
conserve kind. The quality of the said yard by reason of the parts
compouninge it, is cold and dry.

The blader is a vessel compouned of two tunicles ordained of nature, to
receive the urine. It is situated between the over part of the two bones of the
thighs, and the arse hole. And in his mouth called the neck of the blader,
there ben little muscles which draw the neck together, and keep in the urine.
The urine is conduicted from the reins to the bladder by two emunctories, or
clensers, called Pori vritides: which when they touch the bladder, Pori
vritides.
they enter through one of the forsayde pannicles, and afterward they pass
between two tunicles of the blader, till they come to the neck thereof. In
which place they pearce through an other tunicle, and descend to the
concauitie of the bladder, conueynge the urine thither.

The Matrice or womb.
THe matrice is situated between the blader, The matrice.
and the gutte called intestinu^ rectum, it is very synnowye that it may
stretche out, wha^ a woman is with child. It has also two ventricles, which
end at one mouth, and it has little additions of flesh called the two horns
of the matrice, and behind them the two stones of a woman ben situated. And ye
said stones ben smaller and brother than a man's, but they ben not so long And
the seed of a woman descends to them through the myddest of the matrice. The
neck of the matrice is stretched to the wicked of a woman, and this neck is
to the woman as ye yard is to a man. Furthermore, the mouth thereof is
strayte and hard in maidens, having five little veins, which break when a
maiden is defloured.

The matrice.
The matrice of a woman with child is so closed, that the point of a nedle can not
enter in. And therefore the accustomed purgations come not forth For when they
issue out, it is a sign that the child is not in health, as Hippocrates
witnesses. And when the time of deliuerau^ce is come, or wha^ an aborceme^t
chau^ceth, the neck of the matrice so stretches out that the child may pass
through. The generacyon of a child is of Sperma, or seed, and it is noryshed
with menstruall blood. And the form of a male child is sooner fynisshed
than of a woman. while the child is in the matrice, certain veins come to
the same, by which the infaunt receives his noryshment. we will not declare
here how it receives his norysshment, for that pertayneth more to physicians
than to Chyrurgeins. Nevertheless, thus much ye shall know that ye said
veins by which the child receives nourysshmente, break when the time is
come, that the child shall be borne.

The.xiii. and.xiiii. Chapter, of bones, and of the muscles of all the body.
WE said in the first Chapter of simple members that there been in man's body
two hundred forty and eight bones, besides the bones called laud, and
Sisamina, and because ye Chyrurgians name them co^munely in latin, we thought
good so to order them in latin, as it follows.

A Os coronale.i. B Ossa parietalia.ii. C Ossa petrosa.ii. D Os laud.i. E Os
basilare.i. F Ossa paris.iiii. G Ossa nasi.ii. H Ossa colatorii.ii. I Ossa
ma^dibule superioris.xx. K Ossa mandibule inferioris.ii. L Spondilia vera et
me^dosa.xxx. M Ossa furcule.ii. O Ossa vtriusque spatule.ii. P Os vtriusque
adiutorii.ii. Q Os vtriusque focilis.ii. R Ossa rasete manuum.xviii. S Ossa
pectinis manuum.x. T Ossa digitorum manuu^.xxx. V Os focile minus
brachioru^.ii. X Cast vere et mendose.xxiiii. Y Ossa thoracis.vii. Z Os
cordis.i. and Os Epiglottale.i. 9 Ossa ancarum.ii. a Ossa coxarum.ii. b Rotula
genuum.ii. c Minor canna tibiarum.ii. d Os chaab tibiarum.ii. e Os nauicularis
tibiarum.ii. f Ossa pectinis pedum.viii. g Ossa calcanei pedum.ii. h Mayor
canna tibiarum.ii. i Ossa caude.iii. k Os pectinis.i. l Ossa digitorum
pedu^.xxviii. m Dentes.xxxii.
The.xiii. Chapter, of muscles.
WE said before that the muscles of man's body been in no^bre.431. Muscle.
A muscle is a membre co^pouned of flesh synowe, ligamente, synnowye fylmes,
and of a Pannicle covering the said parties. And it is after the doctrine of
Rasis the instrument of voluntary motion: Neither is it possible to make a
distinction of them, as of boones, for they been of one figure, saving that
some ben long, and some greater tha^ other. As the muscles that give motion to
the thyghes, ben greater than they which give motion to ye tongue. And some
muscles have power to extend the membre in which they are situated. And some
have power to draw back as within ye arm. And the muscles which have power
to draw back, ben within the arm. And they that have power to extend ben
without the arm.

Therefore when a man has the muscles cut, which be^ without ye arm he can not
stretche out his arm. And when the muscles within the arm ben cut, he can not
bow his arm. And when the muscles of the arm ben egallye cut without and
within, it can be neither bowed nor stretched out. But it contynueth ever in
one estate. These muscles be^ distributed to the members of the body by nature,
but it would be long to declare the sondrye motions, that they give to man's
body, as of them that come to the neck, some give motion to lift up ye heed on
high, some to bow it down some to turn it on ye left side, some on the right,
and so forth of other me^bres

And generally all the members of the body having voluntary motion have
certain muscles. And customably they ben situated about the ioyntures: And
that the better remembrance of them may be had, I will name them in order
after this sort.

The muscles which move the heed and the neck ben.xxiii. The muscles of the
face ben in no^bre.xlv, of which nature has conveyed.xxiiii. to ye eyes,
and.xii. to the jaws, and the other to other parts of ye face, and there be^
two, which move the nastrels. The muscles of the root of the tongue ben ix. And
they which move the throat, and the epiglote, ben xxxii. The muscles of the
shulders ben xiiii. There been xviii. muscles that give motion to the bones
called Adiutores or helpers of the arms. And they of the part named,
Domestica, or homelike give motion to ye arms, to bow them: And those of the
part called Siluestris or wild give motion to the arms to stretch out, as we
have said. And there been ten in the part Syluestre or wild, and eight in ye
part Domestike or homelyke. And in each hand, on each side there ben.18.
muscles, by which the fyngers move In the breast there been an hundred and seven
muscles: And the muscles of the back ben.xlviii. In the bellye after the over
part of the stomach, unto the thyghbone, in length there ben viii. And to the
yard of a man there been.iiii, and so many to the stoones, and they give
motion to the yard, when it is erected, or falls down. And one goes to the
neck of the blader, which retayneth the urine according to the will of man.
And to the conduicte behind, there belong.iiii. which retain the
superfluities beneth as long as necessity requires And to the buttockes
there belong xxv. which aid the motion of the thyghes. And likewise there
pertayne to the thyghes.xxv. and to the rybbes.xx. which extend downewarde,
and aid the motion of the legs. To the legs under ye knees there
belong.xxviii. which give motion to the feet, and there been.xxii. upon each
foot.

The.xvi. Chapter: of nerves or synnowes in general.
WE said before, that all the synnowes of the body grow from the brain and the
nuke, which is the brains lieutenaunt. Synnowes
The synnowes (as we have declared) be^ simple members, gyuyng feeling and
mouynge to the partis of the body. Of which there been seven pair, symply
procedyng from the brain. And xxxi. pair which proceed from the nuke, and
one without a fellow: and they been thus declared by order. Seven pair grow
from the seven spondiles of the neck. And.xii. pair grow from the.xii.
spondiles of the back, and likewise five grow from the five spondyles called
Catin. And from a bone called Halohanis, there grow iii. pair. And three other
pair from the boon called Alohosos: and one without a fellow which proceeds
from the extreme part of the same bone Alohosos. And the sinnowes of the nuke
ben dispersed into diverse parts of the body. The first pair of the neck, and
the second and the third come to the face, and ioyn them selves with the
muscles of the heed, gyuyng, feeling and mouynge to the said heed.

From the fourth spondyle of the neck, a pair of synnowes issue out coming
to the pannicle, which covers the spiritual members, called ye mydriffe. And
it joins it self with the muscles of the back. The other come to the heart,
the liver, the lo^ges to the pannicles, and ligamentes of the same: from the
seventh pair procedynge from the spondyles of the back, they ben directed to
the arms and muscles of the same, and they come even to the hands. And of the
sinnowes procedyng from the bone Halohanis, they come which desce^d to the
legs. And that synnowe which lacks a fellow comes ^o the yard and to
the muscles of the arse, and to the neck of the bladder. Because of shortness
we will speak no more of them, saving of the seven which proceed from the
brain.

The.xvii. Chapter.
THe first pair of synnowes proceadynge from the brain is directed to the
eyes, as we have declared in the Cha. of the Anatomye of the eyes. And they ben
called Nerui optici, and they are greater than the other: we declared in ye
same place how they carye vysible se^blau^ces to the comune sens. And in them
there been three vtilities.

The first is, that the vysible spirits should be directed to the eyes. The
second, that the vysible se^blau^ces should be sent from the eyes to the
commune sense. The third that the pannicles of the eyes should proceed from
those synnowes.

The second pair of synnowes of the brain come to the eyes, and me^gle them
selves with the muscles of the eyes, to give them felyng and voluntary mouynge.
The third pair is divided in to many parts: Of which some come to the
visage, and the other come to the tongue (as Auice^na witnesses) and the other
part joins it self with the fourth pair which descends down to the
pannicle called Diaphragma or midryfe and is directed to the stomach, and
guts, gyuynge them feeling and mouynge. And the other part of the fourth
pair of synnowes (As Mo^dine says) comes to the palate or roufe of the
mouth, gyuyng it felyng and mouynge.

The fyfth pair descends toward the boones called Petrosa, and under the
ear. And of these synnowes the Pannycles been engendered, in which the virtue
of hearing is received.

The syxt pair is divided in three parts: Of which one joins it self with
the muscles of the throat. The second comes to the muscles of the shulders:
The third comes to the guts, as we said of ye third pair, and partelye
to the muscles of the Epiglotte, and it lyfteth up the grystelles of the
Epiglotte, so that it appears in the myddest of the neck chefely in men. And
when these synnowes have passed the Epiglot, there proceed from them branches,
ascendyng up, which shut the entrance of the pype called Fistula cimbalaris,
Fistula cimbalaris.
or soundyng pype, and they been called Nerui reuersiui, or retournynge
synnowes, and they serve to form the voice. And afterward the said
branches descend by the breast to the heart, and the longes.

The seventh pair of synnowes proceadeth out of the hyndre part of the
brain which comes to the roots of the tongue, and joins it self with the
muscles of the same. Nevertheless, Auice^na says, that it grows from
between the nuke, and the hyndre part of ye heed, which space is called
Terminus co^munis, because it is commune to the hyndre part of the neck,
Terminus co^munis.
and to the brain.

Out of which proceed two little branches which join them selves with the
muscles of the neck. And to end this Chaptre, he says that of the seven
synnowes above said, there ben two which grow out of the fore part of the
brain, and four out of the hyndre part, and one out of the space called
Terminus communis.

The second book entitled of Apostemes.
The first Chapter is of an Aposteme, called Flegmon, and of the kinds
thereof: Of the diffinition of an Aposteme, and how many ways Flegmon may
chance to man's body.
FLegmon is an hot aposteme engendered of blood with great pain, Flegmon.
and great burning, pulsatio^, tention, and redness, with inflation and
infla^matio^ of the places lying about the aposteme. And ofte^tymes it has
part of choleryke mattier, and it is hard, and wha^ it is touched, it has
great resystence under the finger, except it be rotted, and that part of the
noughtye matter be issued.

And of this Aposteme there ben two kinds, that is a true Flegmon and an
untrue. Two sorts of flegmons
The true is engendered of natural and good blood. And the untrue is of three
sorts, according to ye.iii. humors which ben me^gled with blood. Howebeit,
after Auice^na one only humor produces not an Aposteme, but an Aposteme
takes his name of ye humor whereof he has most, as we shall declare
hereafter. If the blood be mengled with choler so that the blood surmounte the
cholere, Flegmo^ herisipelades.
the Aposteme is called Flegmon herisipelades. And if the blood be me^gled with
phlegm so that the fleame surmou^te, the Aposteme is called vndimia
Phlegmonides. Vndimia.
And if the blood be mengled with Melancholy, so that the Melancholy
prevail, the Aposteme is called Sephyros Flegmonides. Sephiros.
If cholere surmounte the blood the Aposteme shall be called Heresipelas
Flegmonides, and so forth of other commixtions. For the humor having
domination, bears the name.

And to know the better what an Aposteme is, we must begin at the
definityon, following Cicero, which says that every thing, that we purpose
to speak of, must begin with a definityon. Definityon after the
Philosophers, is an oratyon or speech by the means, whereof a man may know
what the essence or being of every thing is. Aposteme.
An Aposteme is a disease compouned of three sondrye things gathered together
in one place, that is to say an evil complexion of humors of evil
composityon, that is to wete inflatyon or swellynge and solutyon of continuite.
For the Aposteme that comes not to solution of co^tinuite, is not a perfaicte
Aposteme.

Galene says that an Aposteme is a disease chaungynge the membre from his
natural qualyte, in to another qualyte contrary to the said membre namelye
in complectyon, composityon, and solutyon of continuite.

And Haliabas says that an Aposteme is a swellynge beside nature in which
some fyllyng, and stretchyng mattier is gathered together. Four times in an
Aposteme.
And before we proceed any furthere, it is necessary to speak of the times
of Apostemes which ben divided in to four parts, the beginning the
augmentatyon, the state, and declination. The beginning is known by the
first assemblaunce of mattyer in to some place of the body. The augmentatyon
is known, by the encreasyng and pain of the Aposteme. The state is known by
this, that the pain, and the accidens increase not, nor diminische but
continue in great vehementie. The declinatyon is known by the diminischynge of
the accidents, and decrease of the pain of the patient.

And every one of thies times, may have three parts. For an exemple, the
augmentatyon has beginning, a myddele, and an end of increasynge, and so
likewise in all other diseases.

A Flegmon may chance (for we promised to speak thereof) two manner of ways.
The cause of Flegmon.
The first is of cause primityue, the other of cause antecedent or going
before. Primityue cause.
The primityue is in three sorts. The first is incisyon or vlceratyon: the
second rupture or breaking, and the third, vlceres or sores being in some
sensyble membre. And because of his sensibilyte or perfect feeling it has
great pain, and drawethe humors which cause an Aposteme. And the sore membre
sendethe the mattyer to the emunctoryes or clensynge vessels. The cause
antecedente is diverse, Antecedente cause.
as the repletyon of humors and evil composityon, and qualyte of the same.

Every Aposteme is ended or healed by four sorts and manners. Four manners of
healynge Apostemes.
First by the way of resolutyon. Secondly by suppuratyon, thyrdly by
putrefactyo^, fourthely by induration, of ye first manner Auicenne witnesses,
saying ye know that, that is resolved etc. and the same doctor says that
pulsatio^ begins wha^ the Aposteme increases, and inflammation when the
Aposteme diminissheth, Rasis is not of this opinyon, nether Galene which
says that the diminution of ye pain of the pulsation, and of the
inflammation sygnifye the diminution of the Aposteme.

Signs of resolution.
Thies signs declare true resolutyon of an hot Aposteme. And we must note,
after the words of Auicenna, Pulsation.
that when he says pulsation, we must not understand pulsatyon pulsant or
beatynge, but a certain pulsation, which is in humors wha^ they change, and
comme to putrefaction, and to the proportion of vapoures, which cause a
pulsatyon prurityue that is to say itchyng, cheiflye in hot Apostemes.
Wherefore we conclude that Auicenna vndrestode not pulsation of Arteries caused
by heat, nether pulsation inflammatyue that is to say caused by inflammatyon
of humors, and suppuratio^ of the same, otherwise he should seem to speak
against himself. For he says in another place, when thou shall se great
pulsation with prolonged hardness, know that the Aposteme commethe to rypenes
and suppuration.

Likewise Auicenna declares the second termination of Apostemes, saying. Tu
scis illud quod suppuratur. etc. Also he declares the third termination,
saying, ye know when an Aposteme commethe to putrefaction. etc.

Apostemes often times comme to putrefaction because they can not well digeste
them selves and those Apostemes ben obscure or darck and have a vehemente
tensyon or stretchynge. And he says moreover that when ye se an Aposteme of
great pain, and that the pain seem to diminisch, and the color to wax
grene, or black, ye may say that, that Aposteme inclines to corruption, and
cankerdnes which corruption comes by reason of two causes.

The first is the multitude of the mattier, Causes of corruption.
and often times the malygnyte and small quantytie of the same. Another cause
of corruption is, the inconvenient and untimely application of medicines
repercussyue, and sometimes by the application of things much resolutyue in
the time of the increace of an hot Aposteme. For often times medicines
resolutyue resolve subtyle parts, and the gross remain, and cause
putrefaction of the membre. By reason of abundant mattyer. This corruptyon is
wounte to chance, in an hot Aposteme, for that, that thorough the multitude
of the said mattier, it can not be ruled, and moderated by nature nether by
the way of resolution, nor by the way of suppuration, and so it must needs
comme to putrefactyon, and it causethe oftentimes the hole membre to rotte.

Therefore Auicenne says well, that the Aposteme that commethe not to rypenes
nor to declination is evil, and is the cause often times of ye mortification
of the membre, This corruption also (as we have said) comes ofte^tymes
thorough venomous malignite of humors, which nature can not amend nor
moderate, nor bring to maturation or suppuration nor to true resolution.

We said moreover that corruption of Apostemes may chance thorough
applicatyon of things to repercussyue, in the time of the encrese of hot
Apostemes, and also in the time of declination, as Auicenna wytnessethe
saying: that it chances often thoroughe the applicatyon of things
repercussyue, that the mattier retourneth to pryncipall members.

And often it chauncethe that the Aposteme waxes hard, and causethe the
membre to seem grene, and to corrupt. Furthermore we have seen that corruption
of an Aposteme has chanced thorough defaute of appliynge co^uenyent
maturatyue Medicines. For an exemple put the case that a man has an hot
Aposteme, and to ripe the same, a Chirurgien lays upon it a maturatyue hot
and moist, it should be doubtefull, lest thoroughe his heat the maturatyue
should draw great quantytie of mattier, and cause great pain, nether can
nature moderate or amend the mattyer by the way of suppuratio^, and so of
necessite the mattyer rotteth in the membre, and corrupts the same.

Auicenne warns us to avoid this inconuenientie touching the maturatyon of
hot Apostemes as of cholere with blood, and counsels us, to apply cold
and moist maturatyues. And he says that the head of the Aposteme must be
emplaistred with Psillium, and cold and moist defensyues must be laid all
about, as an emplastre of the decoctyon of mallows, of the said Psillium, of
violettes made according to art and science. Likewise a plaster may be made
of the meal of barley, of Oil of violettes, and the yolke of an egg, with
the leaves before named.

Finally an Aposteme ends by induration, thorough applying of things to
much resolutyue, which resolve the subtyle humor, leaving the gross. And
also thorough application of things to much repercussyue. This by the gift
of God we have ended this Chap. whose name be praised.

The second Chapitre of curing of flegmon procedynge of the cause primityue.
WE have declared in ye former chapitre what flegmon is, and how many kinds
there ben of it, and in how many sorts it may chance to man's body,
furtheremore what an Aposteme is, and how it ends. In this present Chapitre
we will declare the curation of the same.

As we have said, flegmon chauncethe some times when the body is replete, and
sometimes when the body is not replete, but neat and clean. And when flegmon
chaunsethe to a clean body not filled with evil humors (as Auicenna says)
it must be cured with things mollificatyue, and resolutyue, as is a playstre
of the meal of wheat, with water, and Oil of Violettes. And if the body be
filled with humors, the naughtye mattyer must be purged, before medicines ben
minystred upon the Aposteme. For else when resolutyon should be made, always
new mattyer would comme. Wherefore when flegmon chaunsethe to bodies filled
with humors, ye must first make a Phlebotomy that is you must cut a vein,
if the strength and age of the patient will suffer. Or the patient must take a
purgation. Afterward ye must lay upon the Aposteme things mollificatyue, and
resolutiue. And tha^ there is one manner of curing this, and that other which
chaunseth to a clean body, saving that an Aposteme in a clean body
requyrethe not things so repercussyue as that, that is in a body replenyshed
with humors And the reason is, because that the mattier being in a body
replenysshed with humors, can not be so well purged but that some quantyte
will comme to the place of the Aposteme. And it is not so in a clean body,
which has not superfluous humors. And therefore Auicenne said well in the
aforesaid place, that when the Aposteme fyndeth the body without superfluytes
of humors, the Aposteme must be cured only with mollificatyues, and
resolutyues, without repercussyues. And to resolve this Aposteme, when a man
seethe that it commethe to the way of resolutyon, we must make this
prouisyon. We must take of mallows and of Violettes, A resolutyue.
of each an handefull and of the roots of Altea called Holyhocke, or march
mallows some what stamped, a pound. let them boil all in water of
sufficyent quantyte. Of this decoctyon make a playstere with the flower of
barley, and beans, and wheat, and a little branne well boulted, and let them
boil again till they ben thycke, and put thereunto in the end of Oil of
Roses, of Oil of Camomylle of each.. ij. and. ss. and a little Saffran.

A plaster.
Another plaster for the same purpose. Take of the cromes of bread well cerced
a pound, of the brothe of veale, or mutton, or of an hen in which the
roots of Altea or Holyhocke, and the roots of Lyllies were sodden, put the
bread into this decoctyon while it boylethe. Than strain them all
vehementlye, and stamp them in a mortare. And when they ben well stamped put
unto them, of Oil of Comomylle, of Oil of Roses, of each.. ij. of Oil of
Lyllies, of hens grese, and buttyre Ana.. vj. And of the decoctyon as much as
shall suffyce, and set them on the fyere again, stirrynge them about till
they comme to a fyrme and styffe mattyer wherewyth ye shall make playsters, to
be laid upon the flegmonike Aposteme twyse a day.

Another resolutyue plaster swagynge the pain, and confortynge the synnowie
places, in this form. Take of the roots of fresche great mallows called
Althea or Holyhock, li. j. of the roots of white Lyllies. iiij. of Camomylle,
melilote, Ana. m^. ss. of branne. m^. j. let them boil to a perfect
concoctyon, than press them, and choppe the roots of Holyhocke, and the
roots of Lyllies, and stamp them and strain them fynely, and put to the
things under written of Oil of Roses, Camomylle, dyll and of Lyllies Ana..
ij. the marye of the legs of a Calfe, and of a Cow, of hens greece Ana.. j.
of white wax.. j. and. ss. the substance or meat of Apples roasted under
coals.. iij. and. ss. melte them al, and let them boil on a soft fyere and
stir them about half an hour. We have proved this playstre to be of good
operatyon in resoluynge all hot Apostemes. And it is of the composityon of
master Johan de Barnardis which was of great estimatyon among the practysers
of Chirurgerye, which in our time were at Rome. And I have used of this
playstre, and the other above written, and have gotten honor and proffyte
thereby.

The first playstre is of the descriptyon of Auicenne, and it is also very
fytte to resolve I could describe many other but I should be to long. And
the foresaid remedies are suffycyent to resolve any Aposteme be it of a
primityue cause, or of an antecedent.

When ye perceive that the Aposteme enclineth to maturation, which thing is
sone known by thies signs namely by great pulsatio^, and hardness, prolonged
with heat, by the reddische couloure of the place, than you must use
maturatiue things that it may be perfectly ryped.

A plaistre maturatiue for flegmon.
A maturatiue
TAke ye leaves of mallows, and of violettes, of each. m^. j. of the roots of
langede beef tender and fresche.. ij of the roots of holyhocke.. iiij. let
thies aforesaid things boil and sees perfectlye, than choppe them small
stamp them and strain them fynely and afterward take a little lynsede, and of
fenugreke well beaten, and put the^ in the decoction of the said herbs and
roots with barley flower, and make a stiff plaistre, adding in the end of
commune oil.. iij. of fresche buttyre. ij. ss of fresche swynes greece.. ij.
three yolks of Eggs (which done) me^gle them again with the foresaid roots
strayned, and set them on the fire again, and stir them about, and make a
plaster and use it as the other twyse a day. We have proved this plaster to
be good to ripe al hot Apostemes And if you need a stronger maturatiue, use
this under written, which I durst not use but in great necessyte, and after
suppuratio^. This is the description of it. A strong maturatiue.
Take of the flower of linsede and of fenugreke, the cromes of raw and well
leuened bread Ana.. j. and. ss. four dry fygges and five, snailes without
shelles, and of the playstre above ordened.. iij. mengle them, and stamp them
in a mortare and than let them boil a little at the fire, and make a
playstre. I have found it profitable layinge it only upon the head of the
Aposteme, when the Aposteme was well nygh ripe. For it drawethe the matter
outward and makethe the skin thynne. And I was wont to put over the
Aposteme the playstre maturatiue above named, A fomentation.
and to fomente or bathe the place with this decoction, before I applied the
said playstre. The decoction is this. Take of the leaves of mallows, of
violettes, of Holyhoc, of every one. m^. j. branne. m^. ss. boil them in
sufficient quantytie of water, till two parts ben consumed, than strain them,
and put to the decoction a little barley flower, and of fresche buttyre, of
commune Oil Ana.. iij. with the yolks of three Eggs, and let them boil
again a little, and fomente the Aposteme therewyth. Arzi. a learned man in
Chirurgerye sayethe that this decoction or a like is very convenient to
resolve and ripe hot Apostemes, and it swagethe the pain, and thynnethe the
skin, and causethe the mattyere to comme outward.

After the maturation ye must open the Aposteme, The mane^ of opening an
Aposteme.
wherein certain doctrynes are to be observed. First the opening must be in
the rypest place. Secondlye in a low place, that the heyuy mattyere may the
more easelye be purged. Thyrdely the opening must be made according to the
length of the Muscles, Veins, synnowes, and Chordes. The fourth obseruatyon
is, that we make incisyon according to the growing of the hears, and
according to the wryncles of the skin. The fyfthe is that after the
incisyon, ye must not draw out all the mattier at ones, that the strength of
the patient be not affebled. The syxte and last is that the incisyon be made
according to the quantyte of the mattyers. If the Aposteme be great ye must
make a great incisyon, if little, a little incisyon. And also after the learning
of Auicenna when the skin of the Aposteme is lyfted up on high the chirurgien
must open it in the rypest and lowest part that he can. After the incisyon
ye must put in your finger, and prove the hollownes of it and than fylle the
hollownes with convenient medicyne. It is good also to know and assaye the
hollownes with convenient instruments, so that it be done softely and warely
for hurtynge the synnowes, and veins.

I say also that in round Apostemes incisyon must be made in the lowest part
after the figure of a new Moon, that it may be the sooner healed, and to
avoid the danger of a Fistula. Auicenna commaundethe to make two or three
incisyons. We have proved both ways and have found more succurre, in the
incisyon made after the facion of a new Moon. And it is to be noted, that when
such an incisyon is made after the figure of a new Moon, the two points
must be upward, and the middle benethe, that the mattier may be purged more
easily. The order of procedyng aft^r the incisyon.
After this incisyon you must put in tents moysted in the yolke of an Egg,
or in Oil of Roses. And afterward ye must proceed with a dygestiue compouned
of the yolke of an Egg, and a little terebentyne. And if the place be very
paynfull ye must use Oil of Roses in the stead of terebentyne. This digestyue
causethe the pain to cease, and it must be used the space of three or four
days After the digestyue, ye must cleanse the place with a mundificatyue of
Syrup of Roses, cheyfelye when the Aposteme is about very sensible places,
and synnowie, as about the privy members.

The description of the mundificatyue is this. of Syrup of Roses. ij. of
terebentyne. iij. let them boil a little together. When they have boiled add
to them a yolke of an Egg, after that ye have take the said things from the
fire, and put there unto moreover of barley flower well boulted. j. ss with a
little Saffran.

Another stronger mundificatyue.
of Honye of Roses strayned. ij. Mundification de Apto.
of clear terebentyne. iiij. of the juice of smallage, of the juice of
plantayne Ana. ss let them boil together unto the consumption of the juice,
than strain them, and add to the straynynge of barley or wheat flower. x. of
bole armenie brought in to a fine poudre. v. of Minium. ij. of Saffra^ i.
mengle them, and incorporate the^, and make a plaster.

Note that some times the place can not be well cleansed with this
mundificatiue, as we have seen often times in flegmonyke Apostemes being
great, and when the mattyer has tarried long before it was purged, and when
for fault of opening it is waxen hard, for thyes causes I have been
constrained to use a stronger mu^dificatiue, namely our poudre which takethe
away superfluous flesche without pain, or the ointment called Vnguentu^
Egiptiacu^ or Mixtu^. Vnguentum Mixtum.
And ye must wrappe the tente in this ointment, which is made after this sort
of Vnguentu^ Egyptiacu^ after our description. i. of Vnguentu^ Apostoloru^. j.
and ss mengle the^ together. This is the oyntme^t called Vnguentum Mixtum.

Here follows the discriptio^ of our vngue^tu^ Egiptiacu^ of verde griece
Vnguentum Egyptiacum.
otherwise called floris eris. ij. of the honey of roses. ij. and ss of roche
Alumme. ij. of water of plantayne. iiij. braye or grynde these forsayde things
and let the^ boil together till they ben thyck, and stir them always about.
The sign that it is perfytly sodden is when little bubbles of the said ointment
rise up. And this ointment is called Vngue^tu^ Egiptiacu^ of our invention.
This ointment and our poudre, and ye ointment called vnguentu^ mixtu^ applied
with tents myghtely cleanse hollow vlceres, and correct malign ulcers, and
moreover consume unctuous, superfluous and hard flesh. After mundification,
Inca^^tiue.
ye must incarnate the place, after this form. Take of honey of Roses. ij. of
terebentine. iiij. Let them boil a little, then add thereunto fra^kinsence. j.
and ss of mirrhe. iij. of saffran. i. of aloes hepatike, of sanguinis draconis
ana. ij. and ss of barley and fenugreke flour well boulted ana ss of
sarcocolle. i. and ss mengle them and incorporate them. The tente must be
rolled in this ointment, and the playstre must be after this sort of white
diaquilon with out gu^mes.li. i. of cowes and wethers tallowe ana.li. ss of
terebentine. viij. Vnguentum Bass^^^um magistrate.
of the marye of the legs of a cow. i. and ss of the oil of roses.li. i.
and ss of swynes greece melted. x. of litarge of gold. ix. of miniu^. iij. of
ship pytch. vi. of the juice of plantayne.li. ss. let the oil, the gresse,
and ye marye boil with the juice of plantayne, unto the consumption of the
juice. The^ strain them and add to the straynynge the rest and afterward
with sufficient white wax by art and fire make a styffe cerote, ever
styrrynge it about with a stycke. This ointment is called vnguentum Basilicum
magistrale of our invention, and it is of a noble operation. This ointment is
good against vlceres coming of exitures and apostemes. A sign of true
decoction of this oyntmente is, when it is thycke, styffe, and black. The same
oyntme^t is good for vlceres of the legs. Cicatrice.
And finally to make a good cicatrice, wash the place with this decoction. of
redwyne, of the water of ashes and.li. i. of the water of plantaine.. viij. of
roses, of the leaves of wild olives, of mirtilles, namely of the graynes and
leaves thereof ana m^ ss. of the flowers of pomegranates called balaustie.v. in
nombre. Of roche alume ss, braye the things that are to be brayed grossly,
and the^ boil the^ unto the consumption of the third part, and strain them,
and wash the place therwyth. And when it is washed, dry it with a clean
cloth. And after that it is wyped and dried, lay to it the ointment last
written, putting linte under the playstre. And thus this present chapitre is
fynyshed by the gift of God, whose name be praised.

The third chapter treating of the cure of flegmon, when it comes of a
cause antecedent.
WE have treated here before of flegmon coming of a primitive cause. The cure
of Flegmon
In this present chapter we will declare the cure of flegmo^ coming of a cause
antecede^te.

To the cure of this aposteme there ben required.v. intentions. Of which the
first is to order the life or dyete. The second to dygest the matter
antecedente. The third is to purge the matter dygested. The fourth to take
away the matter co^ioyncted. The fyfth to correct the accedens. Things no^
natural.
The first intention is accomplyshed by the administracion of.vi. things not
natural, that is to say of the air, of eating and drynkyng, slepyng, and
waking, of inanition and repletion, and of the accidens of the mind, as
sadness, joy, anger, and such like. And the ordinance of these things must
enclyne to frygidite or coldness. At the beginning he must use a brothe of
stamped and strayned almandes, in the brothe of a chicken with a little suggre,
if the pacient be weak by reason of his dyscease or by reason of his nature
and co^plection, or else ye shall make him a potage of fine flower of barley or
a broth made with barley stamped, and strayned, adding ever strayned almandes
or commune seeds, and it shall be better with fine suggre. At the beginning of
dynner he shall eat cicoree roots and leaves sodden, and some times a little
laictuce. And apples and peers roasted under coals ben good in the end of
dynner, and supper.

Pomgranades prepared.
It is good also to use pomegranades thus prepared. Take of sweet pomegranades..
vi. of the graynes of aygre pomegranades.. i. and. ss. of whyt suggre fynelye
broken, and put upon the graynes when they shall be eaten.. i. Let the patient
use this often cheiflye when he shall be altered. Nevertheless he must use it
moderatlye. For to great quantity may hurt the stomach. The wine of
pomegranades is good in this case. You may give white wine boylled with water,
to weak and stegmatyke persons having this Aposteme. Item you may give
them in the first days chyckens, the flesh of kyddes or suckynge calves.

Sirupe.
The second intention is to dygeste the naughtye matter with this dygestiue. of
the syrupes of vynaygre called Acetosus, of fumiterre, of hoppes ana.. ss. of
the water of endive of hoppes, of fumitterre ana.. i. mengle them. After that
the patient has received of this syrup three days twyse a day, that is to
say in the morning, and euenyng, he must take this purgation, Purgation.
and it is the third intention.. of cassia, of diacatholicon ana. vi. of an
electuarye of roses ordained by Mesue, of diaprunis solutiue ana. i. make a
small potion with a decoction of cordial flowers, and fruits, adding in the
end, of syrup of violettes.. i. and. ss.

The fourth intention is accomplyshed by mynistrynge sondrye things upon the
aposteme. Repercussiues be perilous in. viii. cases.
First by mynistrynge familiare repercussiue medicines, except conditioned
cases, in which by no means you must not mynistre things repercussiue. The
first case is, when the matter is venomous. The second when the matter is in
the emunctories or clensynge places. Thyrdlye when it proceeds by the way of
termination of some disease, as it chances in continual fieuers, and other.
Fourthlye when the matter descends from one membre to another. Fyfthlye when
the matter is gross. Syxtlye when the matter is hardened like a stone.
Seuenthlye when an aposteme chaunseth in a body replenyshed with humors.
Eyghtlye when it comes of brusynge. In these cases we must not apply
things repercussiue, except the first day, for the causes showed in the
chapter before.

Repercussiues been the white of eggs, oil of roses, Repercussiue.
oil of myrtin beaten together. We will describe three kinds of repercussiues
which we have often proved. The first is this, take two whytes of eggs, oil
of roses, Vnguentu^ of roses ana.. i. and. ss. the juice of plantayne or
morell.. vi. mengle all together one after another, and make as it were an
oyntmente, and lay it upon the aposteme with a linen cloute and se that it
be luke warm. The second form is this. Take three whytes and yolks of
eggs, and of oil of roses, of oil of violettes, of woman's milk Ana.. i.
and. ss. let them be mengled together, and be laid to, warm. This
repercussiue is good after the beginning. The third is this, take of the
leaves of mallows, and violettes. Ana. m^. i. and. ss. of roses, of hole
barleye Ana. m^. ss. of the seed of quynces.. v. Let them be sodden al in
sufficient water unto parfyte decoction. Then strain them, and press them
out vehementlye, braye them, and serce them fynelye. And put to of oil of
roses after the recepte of mesue.. iiij. of Vnguentum rosarum.. i. and. ss. of
white wax.. ij. melte them at the fire, and let them boil again at a soft
fire with the things serced a quarter of an hour, and ever stir them
about. And when it is taken from the fire, add there unto of barleye flower
well boulted. ii. and use it upon a clothe as it is aforesaid. This playstre
as ye may perceive by the symples that go in to it, is good in the end of the
beginning, and in the myddest of the beginning, and in the beginning of
augmentation.

These three oyntmentes above named been good for hot apostemes that may be
cured with resolution, How to use repercussiues.
and also in purged bodies. I say that they been profitable after the
beginning of an Aposteme, unto the increase. And in the increase of an
aposteme enclynynge to resolution ye must mengle things repercussyue, with
molifycatiues. For Auicenne says that as long as an aposteme proceeds in
increase, it is necessary to lay upon things repercussyue, and to adioyne
mollifycatiues. And this proposition of the said Auice^ne seems to be against
the opinion of al doctors, chieflye of Rasis, and Galene which say that at
the increase of an Aposteme we must consider two things, that is to say, the
thing done, and the thing to be done. To take away the thing done, there
needs resolution. And to defend the thing to come we must use repercussyon.
And so it appears that an aposteme already made, is not healed by things
mollifycatiue, but by things resolutiue. And the Aposteme that may ensue
hereafter must be stopped by things repercussiue. Nevertheless me thinks
that Auicenne has better weyed the matter then the other, considering the
cure more particulerlye then other auctours. He says that in the augmentation
we must use things mollifycatiue. And it is reason so to do, for in the
augmentation the matter of Phlegmo^ through the layenge to, of things
repercussiue, is waxen hard and is retained within the member. Therefore we
must apply medicines that may mollifye and soften the matter and that may
open the pores. And so doing we prepare to true, and perfyte resolution
egallye, by little and little. For otherwise when sudden resolution is made, the
subtyle humor is resolved and the gross remains. But resolutiues
mollifycatiues, been of this effect that they resolve and mollify by little and
little. Wherefore they arne more convenient, then other that been hot and dry
which resolve the subtyle humor, and leave the gross as we have said.
Furthermore resolutiues mollificatiues, appayse ye pain, as Auicenne says.
The reason is because they resolve by little and little, which thing a medicine
resolutiue hot and dry, does not. For thoroughe heat it draws humors to
the place, and causes pain. Like wise in the augmentation, and in the state,
things molifycatiue and resolutiue ben convenient. In the end and declination
of this aposteme things resolutiue and dry, been agreeable as Auicenne says,
Apud finem et statum. etc.

In this place Auicenne shows that an aposteme has four times as we have
said. And every time is divided into three parts, namely beginning
augmentation, and diminutio^, and he shows what medicine we must use in the
state of flegmon. In the beginning, in the myddest, and in the end of the
state, let the mollifycatiues surmounte the repercussiues, and he says
afterward (fac ea pura. etc.) that is to say in the end of state we must
use things purelye mollifycatiue. we say then that every one of the four
times has in it self three times beginning, augmentation, and end Wherefore
we conclude, that the end of augmentation, has participation with the
beginning of state, and the myddest of state has his true time, and the
end of state has participation with the beginning of declination, and so
forth of other times.

In the state of an Aposteme, that is in the way of resolution we have proved
this composition profitable. Ye must take of the roots of Holyhocke,
Resolutiue.
of the roots of lillies, of Camomil, of melilote of every. m^. v. and put
them in a bag of course lynnen and boil them altogether in sufficient
quantite of water, till they be well sodden. Then stamp them, strain them and
serce them, putting to these things under written, and making a cerote in
manner of a plaster.. of oil of Camomille, of oil of lillyes of every one..
ij. and. ss. of white diaquilon, of the fat or sweet called Isopus, of
Galenes cerote of every one. ij. of he^nes greece, goce greece of every one.. x.
of whyt wax.. i. and. ss. make an oyntmente. Let these latter things boil
together at a soft fire with the things above named, and let them be laid to
warm.

Another plaster for the same entention.
TAke of the cromes of bread steped in a decoction of melilote camomille,
fenugreke, of the roots of Holihocke, of the roots of lillies of every one.
m^. i. of clean liqueritie.. i. of branne. m^. i. and. ss. then strain the
bread, and incorporate it, and sees it at the fire with the benethe written..
of oil of roses, of camomille, of lillies of every one,. i. of butyr.. x. of
saffran.. i. the yolks of three eggs which shall be put to, when the
oyntement is taken from the fire.

Another.. of white diaquilon.. iij. of the marye of the legs of a calfe and
of an ox.. vi. of oil of roses, camomille, and lillies of every one.. i. of
white wax as much as shall be suffyciente, make a cerote of al these at the
fire according to art in good form, adding in the end of barley and bean
flower well boulted of every one.. i.

The fyfte intention which is to correct the accidens is thus accomplished.
The accidents which communelye happen in this aposteme been these, the
beginning of cancrous corruption, and often times great and vehemente pain,
as Anicenne says, procedynge of to vehemente repercussion. For the said
doctoure says thus in the chapitre of the cure of flegmon. When cold things
to much repercussiue been used, they cause that the matter enclosed within
receaueth evil quality, and that the place waxes grene having part of
black color, and it is a sign that the membre enclyneth to putrefaction and
corruption. And he says moreover that when such putrefaction is feared the
place (for the auoydaunce of such corruption) must be playstred with flower
of barleye, and with myldust, communely called Farina volatilis, which been
mollifycatiue. And afterward he sayethe that when the membre seems euide^tlye
to incline to putrefaction it must be scarifyed, and that we must not tarry
till the place be cancrous, for so it might chance that the membre would
grow to utter mortifycation and destruction.

When ye fear this putrefaction: to defend, and preserve the membre from the
same, it is right profitable to lay upon the place this plaster, made of
barley flower and of holihocke with the decoction of commune oil, and a little
saffran. For this plaster mollifyeth, opening the pores, and gives also
moderate heat to the member, which begynnethe to declyne thorough cold to
putrefaction, and so it takes away the malignite procedynge of things, that
are infrigidatiue and do greatly cool. And as we have said, when this
corruption is euydente and manifest, it is right convenient to scarifye the
place with a deep scarifycation, Scarifye.
according to the fleshynes of the place, and the corruption of the same. And
if the corruption be little and in a synnowie place, then the scarifycation
must be light. After the scarifycation, ye shall wash the place with water of
the decoction of Baurach, or of ashes, for it is very expediente.

And Auicenne says in the foresaid place, that we must not wait for the
collection nor maturation of the matter, when it is in great quantite, but it
is necessary to lay upon this corruption, Vnguentum Egiptiacum of our
dyscription. And afterward to playstre the place with a resolutiue and
mollifycatiue, with some exiceation, or dryenge, which is in this sort. Take
of the flower of lentiles, of the flower of beans, and of Orobus, of every
one.li. ss. make a plaster in the decoction of Holihocke with sufficient new
wine, adding of oil of roses, of oil of camomille, of every one.. ij. And
if the corruption be superfyciall, and not deep then it is sufficient to
scarifye the place lyghtlye, and to wash it in lie in which lupynes have been
boiled, and then to playstre the place with barley flower, and with myldust,
which mollifye.

Wherefore to take away the pain we must consydre whether the pain he caused
of hot matter, or of matter pressed, and retained within the membre by reason
of medicines repercussiue. If the pain be caused of evil complexion we must
have recourse to one of these two remedies under written, of which the first
is after this sort,. of mallows and violettes, Plaster.
of every one. m^. i. of the leaves of hen bane. m^. ss. wrappe all in a
wete cloute, and lay them in the imbres, cut them, and stamp them, addyng
of good oil of Roses, of oil of violettes. Ana.. i. of Vnguentum Populeon, of
vnguentum Rosarum, of every one.. i. of white wax, of every one.. x. memgle
them at the fire, and make a plaster. The second descripcion is this.. of
leaves of mallows and violettes, of every one. m^. ij. of apples. vi. in
nombre of the sede of quinces.. iij. of fenngreke. i. of camomile. m^. ss, of
the rotes of Holihocke li. ss let them seth al in sufficient water, then cut,
stamp, strain, and serce them fynely, and put there unto of the cromes of
white bread lythed in the decoction of the foresaid things.li. i. of bean
and barley flower ana.. ij. of oil of roses, and of violettes of every one..
i. and. ss. of fresh hens greece.. i. and. ss. the yolks of three eggs
which ye shall put in, immediatlye after that the said things been taken
from the fire, (for otherwise they would not receive a form of a plaster)
tha^ of the decoction aforesaid to incorporate the flower as much as shall
suffyce, make a plaster with art and fire.

This plaster is of good operation to appayse the pain of all apostemes
which incline to corruption thorough duritees and hardenes, and it is also
resolutiue. Moreover it is good for goutes arthetyke of the fete. And it
appayseth the pain of the Emorrhoides or pyles resoluynge them vehemently.
Breiflye this plaster is very excellent and of synguler effycacite, to swage
all manner of pain, in any kind of hot apostemes and lose the meruaylouslye
the hardness of the matter, ye and it rypeth also with great spedenes. The
later decoction is also profitable for the Emorrhoydes receyuynge the smoke,
and layeng to, the said plaster after the fumigation, Hernia Humoralis.
breif^ye this plaster aydeth greatly the disease called Hernia humoralis
appaysynge the pain, and resoluynge the matter which causethe the disease.

And thus we cease to speak of the cure of flegmon by the way of resolution.
Now we must breiflye declare the cure of phlegmon enclynynge to maturation.
When ye perceive that the aposteme comes to maturation by the signs
aforesaid, and by the accidents which declare maturation you must lay to,
playsters maturatiue declared in the chapitre before. And when the Aposteme is
ripe (which thing is easily known by the softnes of the place and ceasyng of
the pain) you must make incisyon, according to the doctrine of the former
chapitre where we have given the sufficient remedies. And thus ends the
curation of flegmon, procedynge of a cause antecedente, both of that, that
comes to resolution, and of the other that comes to maturation. Wherefore
god be praised, and thanked.

The fourth Chaptre, of Herisipelas.
WE have declared in the former chapitres of Phlegmon what it is, and what
manner curatio^ there to belongs.

In this present Chapitre we will traycte of a choleryke Aposteme called
Herisipelas. Herisipelas
This Aposteme is caused of choleryke blood. The signs of Herisipelas been
these, grefe, burning and inflammation. And they ben without great elevation of
the place. For the matter is not deep.

And therefore Anicenne says, that true Herisipelas ia a pasiyon of the
skin. And this Aposteme is with great heat, and with a greater fyeuer than
is in Flegmon, neither is there great pulsation. And it is with a pryckynge and
bytynge pain, and not so extensyue or stretchynge, as in Flegmon.

Herisipelas begins often in ye face, and sometimes in the nose, and spredeth
throughout all the face.

Sometime it chances in wounds evil cured, or when the patient will not
obey the Chirurgien, nor good counsel. The color of Herisipelas a sign
thereof.
Herisipelas is of red color enclynynge somewhat to yellowe. And the chief
sign of Herisipelas is, that wha^ it is pressed down with the finger, the
redness vanyssheth away, and returns incontynently. The reason is, because
the mattier is subtyle. I could declare how many kinds of Herisipelas there
been, and in what mattiers they are engendered, but of the kinds of Apostemes,
and how they been engendered we have sustyeyently treated in the former
Chapter, in which there are many points very profitable for the doctrine of
this Chapter, and other treatyses of apostemes.

Thus we end this Chaptre.
The.v. Chaptre: of the cure of Herisipelas.
IN the cure of Herisipelas there been four intentio^s required. The cure of
Herisipelas.
Te first is ordinance of life and diete. The second digestion of the mattier
antecedent. The third remedy of the mattier conioyncte. The fourth,
correction of the accide^t.

The first intention is accomplysshed by things enclynynge to coldenesse, and
moystnesse, as ye air, meats and drynckes. The meat of them which have
Herisipelas must be of wheat, or of barlye brayed and sodden in water, and
made with almande milk, common seeds and sugre, and with no broth of flesh.
For they that have Herisipelas must avoid all fat, hot, salt, and eygre
things.

It is very good to abstain from wine in this disease. Let the pacient use
Laictuce, borage, gourdes, purse lane, and other cold things, engrossynge
blood. Furthermore the patient must chose out a cold air, enclinynge to
moystnesse, and rectifyed with a decoction of the leaves of willowes, roses, and
vyolettes, and vineleaues sprinklyng the chamber with this decoction, A clistre.
or keeping in the chamber the forsayde things. Let the patient keep his
bellye souple with this clystre.. of the leaves of mallows, and vyolettes.
an^. m^.ii., of barlye, of branne. ana. m^.i. of the seeds of quinces.. ii.
Let them boil in suffycyent water, to the consumption of ye third part, than
of the decoction, make a clistre, adding of oil of violets.. iii. of honey of
vio.. iii. ye yolks of ii. eggs and a little salt, Syrup
digest ye mattier with this syrup which is for the accomplishment of the
second intention.. of syrup of vyolettes, of roses by infusyon, of hoppes.
An^.. ss. of the water of violets, of hoppes, an^.. i. ss. me^gle them. when he
has used this syrup four days, let him be pourged, with this purgation,
which is the accomplyshment of the third intention. Purgatyon.
. of Cassia of Diaprunis not solutyue. Ana.. ss. of chosen Manna.. i. of
Reubarbe lythed according to art.. i. make a small potion with a decoction of
cordyal flowers and fruits, adding in the end of syrup of vyolettes.. i.
and. ss.

You must understand, that cuttynge of a vein is not conuenyente in this
case, except it be Herisipelas Flegmonides, that is to say an Aposteme
compouned of Cholere and blood, in which Cholere has domynion. And the
morrow after that he has received this purgation, it is a general rule, that
he take a lenytiue clistre. And afterward let the place be Epithemed with this
famylyer resolutyue.

Resolutyue
Take the white of three eggs, of the Oil of Roses after the descryption of
Mesue.. ii. of Vnguentum Rosarum, after the descryption of the said Mesue, of
the iuce of plantayne, or Morell. Ana.. i. of vnguentum Galeni.. i. and. ss.
Let them be mengled together, and make a plaster, wherewyth ye shall
playstre the grieved place. This playstre is very good.

An other playstre resolutyue for the same intention.. of the leaves of
Mallows, and Vyolettes, and clean barley. Ana. m^.i. when they ben all sodden,
stamp them and strain them, and put to the straynynge of the seed of
quynces, of Mucilage of Psillium. Ana.. i. ss. of Oil of vyolettes, of Oil of
Populeon, of Vnguentum Rosarum. Ana.. i. mengle them, and melt the things that
are to be melted, and make an ointment in a leaden mortare, with a little white
wax. This medicine is good in all times of this Aposteme.

An other.. of the oil of vyolettes, of the oil of Roses. Ana.. i. of
Vnguentum Galeni.. vi. mengle them, and make an ointment, in a leden mortare.

An other playstre for the same intention. Take of oil of Roses, of vyolettes.
Ana.. vi. the white of an egg, and mengle them together, with an ounce of the
Iuce of Plantayne, and with common oil, make them after the manner of a
Playstre and lay it upon the Aposteme.

Item, Oil of Roses is very good for this Aposteme. And also Vnguentum
Rosarum of the description of Mesue is well praised of the same auctoure, and I
have proved it often in my self, and in other to be right good, specyallye in
this case of the Herisipelas.

Otherwise, ye may make it this. Take of the Oil of Roses, of Vnguentum
Rosarum, and of oil of Vyolettes, of white Saundres. Ana.. ii. of the iuce of
Plantayne, of the iuce of Morell, Ana.. i. and. ss. of the mucilage of
Psillium, of Mallows, and vyolettes. An^.. iii. Let them boil all to the
consumption of the mucilage, than make a soft cerote with suffycient white
wax. Ye may apply this cerote at all times and it is very good, and proved
in this Aposteme.

The fourth intention is to correct the accide^tes and is thus accomplisshed. A
very cold ointment.
If it chance that through great heat the place comes to vlceratio^ as we
have seen often, and Auicenne says, that some time this Aposteme produces
little bladders. Than (I say) we must apply this ointment,. of oil of
vyolettes, of the oil of Roses. Ana.. ii. of vngue^tum rosarum.. i. and. ss.
of the iuce of Plantayne, of the iuce of houseleke. Ana.. ss. of litarge of
gold and silver. Ana.. x. of Tutia.. ii. of Cerusse.. vi. in the composition
of this ointment, ye must put the mineralles, that is to say, the Litarge
of gold and silver, the Tutia and the cerusse in a mortare ofleadde, and
stamp them well, and put in the oils, and the Juice one with an other, a
drop of oil and a drop of the Juice, so that all be well incorporated, and
ye shall put thereunto, in the end of Camfore.. i.

This ointment is very good for Vlceres of Formica, and Herisipelas, and also
for virulente and venomous vlceres, and hard to cure. There chances often
great and vehement pain in this Aposteme, and chefely in Herisipelas
Flegmonides

FOr the curation we must have recourse to the Chapter of the cure of Flegmon.
In which certain aids appaysynge greifes ben descrybed, but to the
accomplishmente of our fourth intention, we will descrybe one only succoure
appaysynge grief, Alerityue of pain.
and it is in this form.. of the leaves of Mallows, vyolettes, and barlye.
Ana. m^.i of the seed of quynces, of the seed of Psillium. Ana.. ss. sees
these things in suffycyent quantity of water, unto the wasting of the third
part except the Psillium.

And when they have boiled well ye must take the Psillium, and let it boil
alone a while. Than stamp them together except the Psillium, because of his
venimnesse which he has in him. when they have been well beaten together, ye
must put thereunto of Oil of Vyolettes, of Oil of Roses, of Vnguentum
Rosarum. Ana.. i. and. ss. of womannes milk.. ii. and sees them a while upon
the fire again, and styre them about till they be dewlye mengled, and lay
them upon the paynefull place as an Epitheme.

This medicyne is of a right good operation, to take away the pain of
Herisipelas, and also to take away the inflammation, and pryckynge of the same.

And if the Herisipelas wax hard, A molificatyue cerote
as it chances often through the application of things that resolve the
subtyle humor, and leave the gross, or by things that engros the subtyle
humor: This hardenesse must be taken away with things mollificatyue, and
resolutyue together in layinge to this playstre. of the oil of Roses, and
vyolettes, of hens greece and butyre. Ana.. ii. of gootes, and calves tallowe.
Ana. i. and. ss. of the mary of calves legs. i. of the muscilage of psilliu^,
of mallows, of holyhocke. Ana.. vi: Let them boil all unto the consumption
of the muscilage, tha^ put to of litarge of gold.. iii. of white wax asmoch
as shall suffyce, and make a soft cerote. This cerote is of right good
operation to resolve the hardenesse of this Aposteme.

It is here to be noted, that there is a great discord among the doctors in
the curation of a choleryke Aposteme. Auicenne commands to apply at the
beginning things that cool, having great stipticitie, so that the
stipticitie surmounte the coldenesse. And in the state, the coldenesse must be
more than the stipticitie. Rasis holds a contrary opinion, and says: that
in the cure of herisipelas repercussiue medicines must be mynystred at the
beginning of cold, and moist complexion, and not of dry, after Auice^ne.
The repercussiues of a choleryke Aposteme must be cold, and moist, after the
witness of Rasis, except the Aposteme be vlcerated, than it is conuenyente to
use Repercussyues, cold and dry.

And therefore we have ordained in this present Chapter, The experience of Vigo
herin
a syngular remedy to heal Herisipelas vlcerated. And we have often proved
the two opynyons abouesayde of Rasis and Auicenna, and we have found it better
to use repercussyues, cold and moist, than cold and dry. wherefore in our
ordinance the ingredyences been cold, having moystnesse, and a little
resolution. And therefore we must consydre, that ye resolutyues of this aposteme
must not be of hot and dry quality, but contrary wise, they must be cold
and moist, with some exiccation or dryinge quality, as is the flower of
barlye Lentyles, roses, mallows, oil of Roses, making a plaster of these
things according to art, upon the fire.

A playstre of these things appayseth the grief, resolves the matter, and
takes away the infla^mation of the Aposteme.

And we have seen this Aposteme oftentimes to be enflamed, and to become
uneasy to heal, only through the application of oil of Camomyll, though
Auycenne call it, Oleum benedictum, that is, blessed oil, resoluynge without
attraction wherefore we ought wyselye to consydre the wrytynges of the elders.
Nota.
Otherwise we shallbe disceyued, as I was oftentimes when I was a young student.

And it is to be noted, that the doctors speaking of the cure of a true and
pure Herisipelas have made no mention but of the curation of the beginning, and
of the state. The cause is for that, that Herisipelas is of so subtyle matter,
that for the resolution and Repercussyon of the same things, cold, and
moist, with some dryness ben suffycyent.

Thus much we have written, for the curation of a choleric Aposteme, called
Herisipelas.

The.vi. Chapter: of Formica.
WE have sufficyentlye spoken, in the former Chapter, of Herisipelas. In this
Chapter we will brefelye treat of an Aposteme called Formica, and of his
kinds.

Formica is a little pustle, Formica
or many pustles that come upon the skin. Of which oftentimes a pure
Aposteme is engendered, that is to say, inflammation, or Herisipelas.

And there been two kinds, namely Formica Ambulatiua, and Formica Corrosiua.

Formica Ambulatiua is that, Ambulatiua.
that spreads it self upon the body without Corrosion or gnawynge.

Formica Corrosiua is that, Corrrosia^
that spreads it self with Corrosyon. Hereby it appears, that every
Formica is ambulatiue, and not every one Corrosyue. when the humor causynge
Formica is pure choleric the said Formica spreads him self upon the body
without Corrosyon.

But when it comes of burnt cholere, it makes corrosyon in spreding it self
into sondrye parts of the body. when the matter is pure and subtyle, it may
be resolved without vlceracyon.

The signs of Formica
The signs of such a little pustle ben these: the first sign is taken of the
color, the second of the figure, the third of pryckynge.

The first sign is of color declynynge to citrine or yelowe. The second
sign is, that the figure is large, and the heed sharp as a nedle The third
is pryckynge, and it is a sodayn bytyng as it were of an ante whereof it has
his name. And Auicenne saeyth, that every Aposteme walking in the skin, not
having brodenesse, is a Formica.

The.vii. Chapter, of the cure of Formica.
(...) Formica
WE have declared, what formica is and the kinds and all the signs of the same.
Now we will treat of the cure of Formica. And we say, that four intentions
ben required to the cure of Formica. The first is the governance of life: The
second is the digestion of the matter antecedent. The third purgation of the
same. The fourth remotion of the matter conioynct. Diete.
The first intention is accomplysshed in gyuynge to the pacyent, meats
declynynge to coldenesse, and moystnesse, let him use therefore a gruell of
bread, sodde in water, or in the brothe of a chycken, sodden with Laictuce,
and a little clean barleye. And herewyth it is good to use a few Almondes
blaunched, or commune seed called Semina communia stamped with a little sugre.

Also the patient may use at the beginning the brothe of a Chekyn sodde with
Borrage, Endyue, Purselane, Betes, and Spynnache.

For drink he may use the wine of Pomegranattes that is not sharp, but well
mengled with water.

The second and third intention is accomplysshed by taking of this syrup..
of syrup of vyolettes, Syrup
of vynagre, of the juice of Endyue, ana. iiii. of the water of Endine, hoppes
and vyolettes Ana.. i. mengle them.

After that the pacyent has used this syrup three or four days, he must
take this purgation in the morning.. of Electuarye lenitiue, Purgation
of Cassia Ana. ss. of Electuarye of Roses after Mesue. iiii. with the water of
Endyue and hoppes, make a small potion, adding in the end of syrup of
vyolettes.. i. ss.

An other purgation Recipe. of the wheye of gootes milk.. iiii. of electuarye.
De psillio.. ii. and ss. of Diacatholicon, Diaprunis non solutini. Ana.. ss.
mengle them, and make a potion.

If it be Formica Corrosiua, we must digeste the matter after this sort.. of
syrup of Fumiterye, of hoppes, Ana. ss. of water of fumiter, hoppes and
Buglos. Ana.. i.

After that he has used this syrup as it is said of the other, he must take
this purgatio^.. of Cassia that is newlye drawn out, of Diacatholico^ an^..
ss. of the co^fectio^ of hamech. Purgatyon.
. iii. make a potion of fumiter, adding in the end of it syrup of violettes..
i. 7.

The fourth intention which is to take away the matter conioynct shall be
acco^plysshed with the medycines under written, of which the first is this..
one Pomegranade aygre. of Lentyles, A playstre.
of clean barley, of pla^tayn called Arnoglossa, or shepes tongue, or waybredth.
ana. m^. i. of the rotes ofred dockes, called Lapathiu^ acutum. iiii. of
lupines.. ii. sees these things in suffycient water, with a little vynegre,
till the barley be broken, tha^ stamp them and strain them, and set them
again upon the fire, the space of a quarter of an hour, and put to these
things, of oil of Roses omphacine, of oil Mirtine Ana.. ii. of whytewaxe. x.
make a composition which shall be between the form of a cerot and of a
playstre. This plaistre is a present remedy to resolve all kinds of Formica
ambutiua, and Corrosiua.

An other resolutyne for the same intention.. of oil of roses, of vnguentu^
Populeon, Ana.. ii. of oil Myrtyne. i. and. ss. of the iuce of pla^tayn and
nyghtshade Ana.. i. of roch alumme.. i. of the flowers of Pomegranades. m^. ss.
of the seed of roses.. i. of docke roots. ss. of vinegre.. ii.

Let them boil all unto the consumption of the iuces and vynegre, than
stir them about in a mortar of lead an hour, and put thereunto of litharge
of gold and silver Ana.. ii. of cerusse.. i. of Tutia.. ii. if need be of
greater exiccation or drying, ye may well adioyne of the refuse of iron called
Scoria ferri, fynely serced.. ii. of verdegres.. i. and ss. and so much lyme,
that has been ten rymes washed.

This plaistre has so great virtue in his operation, that there is no point
of Formica, but that it may be resolved by the same.

And if it so chance that the Formica can not be resolved, but that it
spreads it self in sondrye places, with malignitye, and vlceracyon, we find
these two remedies under written present and good to mortifye the said
Formica, both Corrosiua, and Ambulatiua.

The first is this. A poudre.
. of Arsenicke of Auri pigmentu^, Ana.. ii. of the juice of Plantayne, of the
juice of Nyghtshade, of the juice of coolewortes, an^.. ii. of ye rind of a
walnut if it can be gotten.. ss. or in the stead of it of Celidonye, otherwise
called Salendyne,. ss. let them boil all in a brazen vessel, unto the
consumption of the iuyces, tha^ stamp them fynely, adding of Camphore brayed
according to art, ss. of Opium.. i.

The second remedy.. of Arsenycke, of Auripigmente. Ana.. i. stamp them well,
and let them boil with a pynte of lie unto the consumption of two parts, and
put there into of Rose water li. ss. and let them sees one boylynge more.

In the application of these two remedies, ye must regard this mean namelye,
that the place be washed with lynte, made after the manner of a bolster,
plonged, and steped in the decoction above written, and laid too, twyse, or
thryse. This water has infallibly virtue to take away the malignite of an
vlceratio^ coming of formica. The form of administration of the poudre.
The poudre above ordained has the same virtue, when it is laid to the place,
in the form following. The vlcered place must be washed with a decoction of
barley, or of rose water, and incontinently you must put the poudre in the
said vlcered place, not wypyng the place, which thing done ones or twyse, if
ye perceive the malignite of the vlcere to be mortifyed, (which thing is
easily known by the swelling of the place) than ye must procure to make the
eschare to fall away and to appayse the pain, To remove an Eschare
and infla^mation by this mean. Take of ye leaves of mallows, and violettes
an^. M. ii. and boil them till they ben perfectly sodden, than sta^pe them with
barley flower. And with ye decoction make a styffe plaster, adding of fresh
buttyre of sweet oil, an^.. ii. and two yolks of eggs, put in to the
foresaid things incontine^tly after that they been taken from the fire.

This plaster is principal to appayse gryefe caused by strong medicines. Ye
may also profitably foment or bathe the place with this decoction before ye
lay to the said plaster, with cloutes weted in the decoction, and it must be
laid too, as hot as the patient can suffer it. And afterward when they
eschare shall be taken away, the said vlcere shall be healed with the ointment
above written, which is compouned of the juice of herbs and of litarge, or
with vngue^tum de Minio, written in our antidotarie, or with the oyntme^t above
named in this present chapter, in the which is tutia. Item our poudre remouyng
superfluous flesh without pain has a prerogatyue above other to take away
the malignite of vlceres, and has like effect in this aposteme

The ancient doctors, and also the later have written sondrye remedies, in
which I have found little vtilite, and therefore I have ouerpassed them, and
have written those only which I have found true.

The.viii. chapter of Formica milliari.
Seeing yt we have spoken sufficiently of Formica ambulatiua, Formica milliaris.
and Corosiua, it remains that we treat of the third kind, called Formica
milliaris because it is like to the graynes of a pulse named milliu^ both in
the couloure and quantity of little pustles. This formica is engendered of
choleryke mattier, and sometime of a mengled humor, that is to say of colere
with fleame. And somtymes it is engendered of burnt cholere, and melancholy.
Somtymes by the co^mixtion of fleame with melancholy, and that is of more
slow resolution, than the other. The reason is because that flematike and
melancholyke humors mengled together obey not digestio^ because of their
grosnesse, and coldness. Somtymes Formica milliaris engendered by a choleryke
humor, and melancholyke aduste or burnt makes corrosion, and ulcers, which
been right hard to cure as it appears to them which consider the nature of
ye humor that causes Formica milliaris.

The signs of this kind of Formica been these, The signs of formica
milliaris.
namely the color enclineth to yelownes because of cholere, and somtymes it
is white enclinynge to a duskesche color. The secunde is that this kind is
more wtin, tha^ without, which sign is not in other formices. And it is
engendered between ye flesh, and the skin, because of the grossenes of the
humors that receive co^mixtion. And upon the skyn there is always the
semblaunce of a grain of milliu^, and between the flesh and the skin (as
learned Arzi says) there is a notable co^cauite. The third sign is that for
the most part this Formica is without infla^mation, because that fleame which
is cold, and moist, is mengled with cholere, and represseth the heat thereof.

The.ix. Chap. of the cure of. Formica milliaris.
THe cure of formica milliaris is accomplyshed with three intentions. The cure
of For. milliaris.
The first is ordinance of life. The second purgation of ye matier antecedent.
Howbeit always digestio^ must go before purgation, as Hipocrates says. The
third intention is to take away the mattier co^ioinct by application of
convenient medicines upon the said pustules. The first and the second
intention been accomplyshed in vsyng things declared in the chap. of the cure
of Formica. And ye must have recourse thither, as touching diete, and
digestion. But that we may work more surely we will ordeyne a digestio^ and
purgation of this humor. The digestion is this. R. of the greater syrup,
Digestive.
of fumiter. of syrup of vinaigre, of the juice of hoppes. ana.. ss. of the
water of fumiterre, of hoppes, of endiuie. an^.. i. After that the patient has
used this syrup three or four days let him be purged with this purgation R.
of diacatholicon, Purgatio^.
diaphenico^. an^.. iii. of ye confection of Hamech, of diaprunis non solutiui.
an^.. ii. with the decoction of hertes tongue, of maiden hear, of Polipodie of
the coddes of seen of the herb called Epithimu^, of cordial flowers and fruits
make a small potion adding in the end.. i. and. ss. of syrup of violettes. In
geuyng purgations we must always consydre the age and strength of the patient.
For when the patient is weak ye must not give so great quantity of a
laxatyue, but ye may well give a dra^me of these pills R. of pills called
agregatiue, of pylles of fumiterre. an^.. i. of agaryke made in trocishes.. ii.
Pales.
of turbit preparate.. i. with syrup of vinaigre called acetosus, make pylles
after the facion of peason. These pylles been good for this disease, as it may
appear to him that considers the co^poundes of this purgation, and they
purge both matier subtle and gross. Auicenna says ye cheese wheye with
sca^mony is good to purge all matier causynge any kind of Formica.

In the stead of this water of cheese we have often proved this medicine, and
have gotten worship by it. The form is this. R. of conserve of roses and
buglosse. an^.. ii. of sca^monie prepared in an apple, or with paste.. ii. of
turbit preparate.. i. and ss. of the juice of roses.. x. of fine suggre.. i.
and. mengle them. The patient must take of this medicine in the morning the
qua^tite of a chestnutte. It has great virtue to purge the matier yt causes
Formica. And the patient must take of it more or less according to his
strength. And he must begin again the said purgation, nether must he be
contented with one only. The third intention which is to take away the matier
conioynct is accomplyshed by the administration of sondrye things upon the
said pustules, which been declared in the cha. of the cure of Formica. And ye
shall resort to the said cha. according to the necessite.

Nevertheless we will declare some remedies necessary to ye cure of this
kind, An oynntment.
which been not written in ye cha. above named. The first is good to take
away the malignitie of vlceres proceeding of Formica as well corosiue, as
ambulatiue, and it is in this form. R. of verdegrise, of roche alume, of
honye. an^.. i. of the water of roses and pla^taine, of the juice of salendine.
an^.. i. of white arsenike well brayed,. i. Let the^ al boil together, and
stir them ever about, and make an oyntme^t. The sign of this oyntme^t, yt
it is perfectly sodden is, when bubbles rise above.

Another oyntmente to this intention. R. of the juice of salendine, of ye juice
of plantayne, and nyghtshade, of the juice of walnutte rindes. an^.. i. of lyme
quenched with water.. ss. of cerusse.. vi. of auripigmentum, of Arsenyke. an^..
ii. of verdegrise.. ii. stamp them, and sees them al together, till the
iuyces ben consumed, and afterward braye them in a mortar, as fynely as may
be, and put too of ca^phore.. i. of the stone called an Ematite.. iii. This
poudre has a prerogatyue in taking away corrosion, and the malignite of al
kinds of Formica.

After that the malignitie is taken away, ye must cause the eschare to fall
away, as we have said about the end of the former cha. Than ye must mu^difye
the place, and incarne it, and seal it up, as we have said. To this intention
our poudre is good, which takethe away deed flesh without pain. The
preparation whereof is written in the chap. of corrosiue medicines in our
Antidotarie. Finally if the said Formica milliaris can not be healed by the
declared remedies, it is good to use our cerote described in the cha. of the
french pox, which is made to be laid upon the arms, and legs. The
profytte of it is, to take away mattier antecedente, that causes ye vlcere
corrosiue venomous and malign, making it to pass away by the belly, by the
mouth and by swette. And know that we have healed herwyth many malign and
hollow vlceres, chiefly which come of the pockes, which by other medicines
could never be healed. wherefore if you need the same cerote you must resort to
that cha. or to our Antidotary where you shall find it.

The.x. cha. of ignis persicus and pruna.
THese two names ignis persicus, Ignis persicus. pruna.
and pruna (as Auice^ne says) may betake^ absolutelye for every pustle ye
bladereth, and causes a burning infla^mation, as if the vlceration should come
of fire, or of a cauterye, and with this bladeryng, and burning it is escarous.
These pustelles differ not, but touching the greater or smaller infla^mation.
The difference betwixt ignis persicus and pruna.
And they ben both of venymous and corrosiue mattier. But ignis persicus hurt
the less than pruna. And therefore pruna is of harder resolution, and
exiccatio^ as Auicenne testifies. The reason is because the mattier of pruna
is more gross than the mattier of ignis persicus. And the mattier of ignis
persicus is of color, enclynynge to purple rednes. And it is called pruna of
the lykenes of a cole, and ignis persicus, of the likeness of a flame of fire.

The color of pruna is more duskishe, and blacker.

The signs of pruna been, The signs.
that the root has a black color with infla^mation of the place, and with
a little rednes. The rote of ignis persicus is always read, and prima has not
so great elevation as ignis persicus. The cause is, that pruna has part of
melancholy. And melancholy of his nature makes not great elevation. Moreover
pruna has a certain rough hardness, as if it were a ring worm or tettre. And
therefore no great eleuatio^ appears, but the one part is some what lyfted up
and the other depressed. And pruna is more enflamed about then ignis persicus.
The signs of ignis persicus ben these it is more eleuate and lift up than ye
other, but it is not of so great adustion or burning, and it has a certain
cruste, and bladers, and mean infla^mation and itchynge. The cure where of we
will declare in the next chapi. as briefly as we can.

The.xi. cha. of the cure of Ignis persicus, and Pruna.
The cure of Ignis persicus pruna.
THe curatio^ of Ignis persicus and pruna has four intentions. Of which the
first is ordinance of life, ye second digestion and purgatio^ of the matteir
antecedent. The third is good governance and remotion of the mattier
conioyncte. The fourth correction of the accidents. The first and second
intentions ben accomplyshed by the doctrine declared in the cha. of the cure of
Herisipelas. The third intention which is to govern the matteir, and to take
it away, is accomplyshed by the administration of conueniente medicines upon
the place of grief after universal purgation, and Phlebotomye of that place
in which the pustles ben. Phlebotomie.
For the matteir of these pustles is ever venomous, though Arzi. and other
hold a contrary opinion.

After a purgation or Phlebotomy let the place be epithemed with this same
epitheme familiar, Epithema.
and pleasant, after the doctrine of Nicolas Florentyne. And it is in this
form. R. of the juice of cole worte leaves, of the juice of plantayne. an^..
iii. of salt.. ss. voyle these things a little together, and stepe a cloute in
the decoction, and make an epytheme, and lay it upon the paynfull place. Item
to this entention it is good to take two pomegranades, one aygre another sweet,
and sees them in vynegre and barley water till they benefully sodde with two
handfulles of lentyles, and as much of plantayne, than ye shall press them, and
stamp them and serce them fynely, and add unto them these things following:
of the meat of roasted quinces, if they may be gotten, or in the stead of the^,
of peers or wardens.. iii. of the oil of roses, of vurype olyues, of oil
mirtine an^.. ii. of white wax.. i. and ss. melt the oils and the wax, and
let the^ boil half an hour, with the foresaid meat of quinces or wardens, and
plaster the place therwyth. This medicine is merueylous good in ye beginning,
and in the time of augmentation.

A good plaster for this intention R. of clean barley, of lentiles, A
plaster.
of beans. ana. m^.i. of weybreide. m^.ii. of flowers of pomegranades, of
roses an^. m^.i. of sumach, of the graynes of mirtilles. an^. m^. ss. of
gauls... i. bray the things yt are to be brayed grossly, and sees them with
sufficient water, till the barley, and le^tiles break, tha^ press them
stronglye, sta^pe them and strain the^, and let them sees again a little,
till the moisture of the straynynge be consumed, whereunto ye shall add of oil
mirtine, of oil of roses. an^.. ii. of the flower of barley and lentiles.
an^.. i. and ss. and let them sees again, till they ben thycke sturring them
ever about. This plaster is good in this case, chiefly in the augmentation.

Ite^ another plaster of plantayne or weybreid written of Galene and Auice^nna
A plaster of weybr^^^
is of good effect and is thus ordained. R. of weybreid of le^tiles, of broune
bread, of each equal parts, of gauls in nombre.x. which are added of
Auicenne, sees them al in water and bray the^ with sufficient quantite of oil
of roses, and make a plaster at the fire.

Another of the description of Auice^ne saying that it is good in the
beginning, in the augme^tation, and in the state. Take two aygre pomegranades,
and boil them in vinegre, than stamp them and make the^, in ye form of a
plaster, and lay it upon the place.


Note that we have often proved ye plaster of pomegranades, and that of
Auicenne last written of aygre pomegranades, and we have found more profitte
in yt of our description of two pomegranades, and other ingredientes then in
Auicennes, which is only of aygre pomegranades and vinegre. And after our
judgment the cause is, that ye venomous matteir, is more strongly holde^ within
the member by that of Auicenna, then by ours. wherefore we must consider well
the cause of the application of every strong medicine, which does mightily
repress and drive back.

Another linime^t. R. of the juice of pla^tayne, of nightshade, of houseleke
an^.. i. of ye leaves of mallows, and violettes sodden and strayned,. iiii. of
the meat of apples roasted, and strayned. ii. and ss. of vngue^tum populeon, of
vngue^tu^ rosaru^, of oil of roses. an^.. ii. and ss. put them al in a mortar
of lead, and labor them with the pestell, ye space of an hour, with the
foresaid strayninges, and put thereunto of litarge of gold, and silver. an^..
ii. Note yt it shall be better to put the litarge with the oyntme^tes only,
and afterward to mengle them, now puttyng in a little oil and now a little of
the juice of ye foresaid herbs, and so fourth till all be well mengled, and
last of all ye shall put in the strayned mallows, and apples.

And note yt this medicine is great and singular, and of our invention and
heals the said Ignis persicus and pruna, in appaysing the grief, and dryyng
the vlceres moderately. And it is good at all times of this disease and
cheiflye in the state, and declinatio^, in which time the matteir has lost his
actiuite.

Another ointment to the same intention. R. of cimolia.. i. and ss. of ye juice
of plantaine.. ii. of vnguentu^ populeon.. iii. of litarge, of gold, and
silver an^.. ii. and ss. of cerusse.. i. of bole armenie of terra sigillata, of
washed lyme an^.. vi. of swynes gresse washed with water of roses, and molte^..
iiii. put the^ al in a mortar of lead, and as it is aforesaid, labor the^ in
ye same, ye space of two hours, and make a liniment. This ointment is of
merueylous operation in this disease, and has the virtue of ye oyntme^t
declared before, but that it is more desiccatiue.

Item. R. of ye leaves of mallows and violettes. an^. m^.ii. of clean barley
m^.i. of wardens or wyldinges in no^bre.x. Sees them al in sufficient water,
til the barley break, than stamp them, and strain them, and let them sees
again a little, and put thereunto of oil of roses, of oil of violettes. an^..
ii. of hens gresse, of white wax an^.. i. and ss. and let them sees again
a little, and take them from the fire, and stere them about, till the linniment
be warm. This ointment is very good in declination.

The fourth intention which is to correct the accidents, is accomplyshed
after the doctrine written in the chap. of Formica. wherefore if Ignis persicus
or pruna come to vlceration ye must resort to the cha. which treats of an
vlcered Formica. we have also there written remedies to take away the eschare
of malign and corrisiue vlceres. wherefore let these two cha. be read together.

The.xii. cha. of bladers and inflation.
Bledees or inflation.
OFten times in man's body there chance little blysters full of water
procedynge of the deriuation of a choleryke and subtle humor. And the said
bladers been full of clear mattier, having the color of water wha^ it has
sodden a little. And this mattier is engendered of the ebullition or boylinge out
of cholere. And by reason of his subtilite it persethe the flesh, whihe is
thynne, and is holden of the skin which is thycke. And hereby this bladerynge
is caused, and is full of water. Inflation procedethe of grosser humors, and
they ben also full of mattier, having the color of water, in which flesh
has been washed, which is blodye. And these inflations been deper than bladers.
There is a difference between bladers and inflatio^s. For bladers been found
between the skin called hyemall, and the true skin, and the inflations ben
not so.

The.xiii. Chapter of the cure of bladers, and inflations.
THe cure of Bladers, and inflations has three intentions. The cure of bledees
and inflations.
The first is the ordeinaunce of life. The second the digestion of ye mattier
antecedente, and the purgation of the same. The third to take away the mattier
conioncte. The first and the second intentions been accomplyshed in the
doctrine of the cure of herisipelas, resort thereunto according to necessity.
The third intention which is to take away the mattier conioinct is
accomplyshed by the ministration of local medicines, that is to say, which
been to be applied upon the place. And the medycines that been good in the cure
of Ignis persicus, are good also in this case.

Nevertheless, that it seem not that I have labored in vain in this present
chapter, I will describe some remedies. The first is this.R. of clean barley.
m^.i. of fumiterre. m^. ss. of mallows. m^.i. and ss. of lentiles. m^.ii. A
plaster.
of Hypoquistidos, of sloes. an^.. ss. Sees them al together with smythes
water, till the barley be perfectly sodde, than stamp them and strain them,
and put thereunto these things. R. of oil of roses, of oil mirtyne. an^..
ii. of white wax.. x. of calves tallow. iii. melte all, and let them boil
at the fire half an hour, ever styrryng them about, and than plaster the
place therwyth. This later plaster is good in all times of bladeryng and
inflation.

Another plaster right good in this case. R. of the middle of bread. iiii.
of weybreyde, of lentiles, of the flowers of pomegranades. an^. m^.i. of ye
leaves of mallows, and leatuce. an^. m^. ss. Sees them al in sufficient
water, than stamp them, and strain them with barley flower well boulted,
as much as shall suffice. Make a styffe plaster, adding of oil of roses..
ii. of hens greece.. i. the yolks of three eggs when they shall be taken from
the fire, of gotes milk.. ii. Lay this ordinance upon the place after the
manner of a plaster. This

causes maturatio^ of blysters, and inflations, and breaks them, and
appayseth the pain, and purges the vesication or bladerynge and inflation.
And if it chance that the place become vlcered malygned, and eschared, as we
have often seen, for the cure of the said vlceres, ye must resort to the cure
of formica corrosina. In which many good remedies for the cure of this disease
ard dyscribed. Another good oyntme^t. of the juice of plantayne, of ye juice of
nyghtshade, and leatuce. ana.. ij. of oil of roses.. iiij. of swynes grese, of
calves suete. ana.. ij. and. ss. boil them to the co^sumptio^ of the half,
and strain them, and put to these things under written.. of litarge of gold
and silver. ana.. ij. of minium.. x. of bole armenie, of terra sigillata. ana..
ss. of tutia preparate.. vi. of cerusse.. i. let them boil again at the
fire with the foresaid straynynge, and stir the^ ever about till they receive
a black form and add of white wax as much as shall be sufficient, and of oil
of roses if need be. In ye end of the decoction, put thereunto of camfore
brayed according to art.

This ointment heals merueylously all kinds of inflation vlcered and malygne
after yt their malignitie is, ones killed.

The.xiiij. Chapitre of Essara.
Essara.
ESsara is a little pustel as it were of the quantite of a blader or blyster,
nevertheless there is a dyffere^ce. For out of a blader some watrines issues.
But of Essara there aryseth a certain carnosite or fleshynes, as it chaunseth
to a man stongen with a waspe, or rubbed with a netle. And these pustles rise in
one place, a few at ones which cause great ytche, so that the patient can
scarcely refrain scratchyng, by the which scratchynge many pustles ben spredde
through all the body. These pustles ben engendered of matter flegmatyke and
salt, and some times of sanguine matter. And this disease comes souer in the
night then in the day, because the pores of the body ben shut in the night.
But when ye pores ben open in the day time, the matter passes and breaths
out. wherefore Rasis says that this disease payneth the patient more in the
night, then in the day. And therefore a bayne of things aperitiue or opening
aydeth the^, which been troubled with this disease.

Note that when the matter is sanguine, and occupyeth a great part of the
body, if the^ ye procure not a vein to be cut it is no merueyle if a fyeuer
tertiane ensue. Wherefore at ye beginning if the strength, and ye age of the
patient will suffer, it avails much to cut the liver vein, or the common
vein.

The.xv. Chapitre of the cure of Essara.
THe cure of this disease is acco^plyshed by two intentions. The first, The
cure of Essara.
is to order dyete. The second to purge the matter antecedent, that causes
the Essara. The first is accomplyshed by those things, that been said in
formica touching dyete. The second is accomplyshed by euacuatio^ of the
naughtye humor.

And if the matter be sanguine, Digestive.
let it be dygested with this syru.. of syru. of fumiter, of ye juice of e^dine,
of a siru. called acetosus si^plex. ana.. ss of water of endive of hoppes of
fumiterre. ana.. i. After that he has taken of this syrup iiij. days,
Purgation.
purge him with this purgatio^.. of Cassia.. x. of an electuarie of roses after
Mesue.. ij. and ss. unto.. iij. according to the strength of the patient with
the common decoction make a potion, adding of syrup of violettes..i. and.
ss. Also it is very good to take of this wine under written every day. iiij.
and. ss. which is of Auicennes dyscription in this form. Take two pou^des of
aygre pomegranades and sweet, with the skynnes that divide one part from
another, and of fine suggre.. vi. stamp them together, and press the^
myghtelye, and use this wine as we have declared. It is a right good medicine
in this case. And if it be set abroad in fair days with suggre it will have
a more laxatiue virtue.

A bayne.
The bayne convenient in this case, co^pouned of things aperitiue, is this. of
the leaves of mallows and violettes, of bra^ne. ana. m^.iij. of clean barley.
m^.ij. and. ss. of sower apples in no^bre xx. of beans. m^.i. of suggre..
iiij. Let them boil all in sufficient water, unto the consumption of the
third part, and wash all the body therewyth in a warm bath. This bayne is
synguler for ye said pustles, and for many other kinds of pustles.

Purgation.
Here follows a purgation very good in this case.. of the flowers of violets,
of ye flowers buglosse, and borage ana. m^. ss. of hoppes of endiuie, of the
croppes of vynes, of mayde^ here. ana. m^. ss. of sebesten of iuiubes of clean
barley. ana.. i. let them sees al, and in the decoction dissolve of cassia..
ss. of diacatholico^.. i. of tamarindes.. ij. of an electuarie of psilliu^.. i.
and. ss. dissolve them al, and add thereunto of syrup of violets by infution..
i. This medicine is of good operation in essare when the matter is sanguine.
And if ye matter be me^gled with gross fleame and salt, the patient must be
purged with this laxatiue medicine, that follows. Digestive.
But first ye matter must be digested with this syrup.. of ye greater sirupe of
fumiterre, of hoppes, of vinegre called acetosus. an.. ss. of waters of
fumiterre, of maiden here, of endiuie. ana.. i. mengle them. And when he has
used this syrup the space of six days, Purgation.
let him be purged with this purgatio^.. of cassia, of diacatholico^. ana.. vi.
of ye co^fectio^ hamech.. ij. and. ss. unto iij. make a small potion with the
decoction of mayde^ here, of gallitricu^, and politrichu^, of polipodie, of
cordial flowers, and fruits addyng of syrup of violets.. i. and. ss. This
later purgatio^ purges ye subtyle humor, ye gross, ye salt and ye adust or
burnt. Pylles.
Another purgatio^ co^me^dable in this case.. of pills aggregatiue, of agarike
in trociskes. ana.. i. ss. of turbit preparat.. i. make pills with ye wine of
pomegranades like pease. The dose of geuynge of these pillules is from.. i.
unto.. i. and. ss. according to ye strength of ye patient and they must by
given in ye morning. Here ye shall understand yt the doctors make no me^tio^
of locale medicines in these diseases. The cause is that when ye matter
antecede^t is euacuated, the matter co^ioyncte is easy to be resolved. we will
follow the au^cientes touching ye curatio^ of ye said dyseases. Nevertheless we
will show one remedy which avails to take away ye itching of the pustles..
of vnguentu^ Galem, fresh buttyre.x. times washed with water of barley. ana..
ij. of ye juice of limmons or citrons.. ij. of water of roses,. ss. of litarge
of gold.. vi. of oil of roses.. iij. me^gle the^ and make an oyntme^t
according to art in a mortar of lead, styrryng it about half an hour with a
pestel. The^ add of ye substance of roasted and strained apples.. ij. of fresh
hens greece melted, of gose greece. ana.. vi. again stir the^ about
altogether in ye forsaid mortar ye third part of an hour

The.xvi. Chapitre of Cancrena and of the dyfference between Ca^crena,
Ascachillos, and Esthiomenos.
Cancrena.
CAncrena is not taken for flesh dead altogether, but for that which
begins to putrifye by little, and little having yet some feeling, with black
color, and intolerable pain, and burning. The skin round about is
bluishe. And it is called Cancrena because it is like a canker. For as a red
canker gnaweth, byteth, and corrupts the places about, Ascachissios.
eue^ so does Cancrena. Ascachillos is an entiere privation of felyng, which
was in Ca^crena and it is called Ascachillos, of Asca which sygnifyeth in the
Arabike tongue corruption, and chilos a Greek word sygnifyeng juice. This
Ascha. is a corruption of the flesh, and synnowes unto the bones. Estiomenos
Estiomenos is a confyrmed adustion or burning of the nouryshynge humors, and
of the spirits, and of the simple and co^pounde members, in whyc it is. And it
is called Esthiomenos of Heste in Arabie an enemy, It comes of a greek word
Esthiomai to eat.
and menos a man so Esthiomenos then is the enemy of man. And the corruption
of Esthiomenos spreads it self upon the membre gnawynge it, and corruptynge
it, as fire consumes dry wood. And this corruption is engendered of one of
these three causes. The first is, because the vytall spirits been prohibited to
come to the hurted place. The second is by reason of the corruption of the
payned member The third, by reason of these two causes both together alleged
before.

This corruption and prohibitio^ of vytale spirits may chance thorough
sondrye causes. Some times through a cause primitive, and some times thorough a
cause antecedent. It comes of the cause primitive thoroughe brusynge or
breakyng. In brusyng it chau^seth because the chirurgie^ proceeds with things
to cold, which engrosse the matter, and so cause putrefaction. Sometimes ye
pores or passages ben stopped, by which nature sends the nourishement and
life to the membre. And by reason of that stoppynge the vytale spirits can not
come to the me^bres. So the members being destitute of the vytale spirits do
corrupt and rotte. It chaunseth moreover some times to them yt go in the snow
Some times thoroughe to strayte tyenge of the membre. For by reason there of ye
spirits can not come to the membre. As we have seen often thoroughe the
strayte tyenge of a broken bone, of the thyghe, the legs, or the arms.

We have seen also Esthiomenos to have chaunsed through indiscreet application
of sharp medicines in which arsenike, realgar, and like enter. And likewise
thorough application of things stupefactiue, and coolynge.

Of the cause antecedent Esthiomenos chaunseth often, as of some venomous
pustle, not well cured at the first of ye chirurgie^, as we have often seen to
have chau^sed in Anthrax, and carbo. We have seen moreover this prohibition of
spirits to have chaunsed through the corruption of some particular member
procedynge of great Apostemes flegmonike, and froncles. Forune^^.
In which oftentimes gross and hard matter is engendered like a synnowe half
rotten. In which apostemes the ways and pores been shut oftentimes, and by
reason there of nouryshement, and life can not come to the membre, and so the
membre rotteth and dies. We have seen this putrefaction in the hands, and
fete of them which have been long in sharp fieuers, so yt their bodies being
destitute of natural heat became lean and dry, and the extremitees of their
bodies cheflye their legs were reduced to such cold, and congelation or
stupefaction, cheflye in the winter, that it seemed, that the members were
altogether deprived of natural heat.

Nevertheless though the members seemed cold, the patient complained of great
pain and heat, and inflammation, as if actual fire had been there. Also we
have seen it chaunse without pain going before, without inflammation, without
inflatio^, without liuidite or bleunes, without black color of the place, as
it chau^sed in Cancrena,
in a noble woman of the city of Genue called Saluagina de Grimaldis, which
fell in to this corruption after a long disease. Thus it is euidente to every
body what esthiomenos is.

Of the cause antecedent Estiomenos chaunseth not often, but by the corruption
and putrefactio^ above named. And it may come by one of these three causes, (as
Auicenne says) that is to say thoroughe the cause that corrupts the
complexion of the membre, and the spirit animal, which is in the same
membre, or by some other cause defending the vital spirit to come to the
membre, or by some thing that gathers together the two intentions, as we
have declared in this present chapitre, and as it chau^seth often by applyenge
some local medicine that is not convenient, and likewise by some venomous
pustle corrumping the natural complextion of the membre, and dystroyenge the
animal spirit which is in the membre so that the vytall spirits sent of
nature to conserve the natural heat of the member can not come to the membre,
because the place is mortifyed, and eschared. And thus necessarelye follows
prohibition of the vytall spirits that they can not come to the places, and
also there follows mortifycation and corruption of the complexion of the
members and of the vytall spirit remaygnynge therein. If Esthiomenos may come
by one of the three causes aforesaid, it may much more come by two knytte
together. etc.

The seuententh chapitre of the cure of Cancrena, Ascachilos, and Esthiomenos.
AFter that we have sufficientlye declared what Cancrena, Ascachilos, The ^ure
of Cancrena.
and Esthiomenos is, and the dyffere^ce of the same, in this present chapitre
we will make mention of the cure of them. The curation of these three dyseases
dyfferre not but in the greater or smaller corruption, for the one is a way to
the other. We will declare after our power, the cure of these three dyseases
which is accomplyshed by three intentions. The first is the ordinance of
life. The second to purge the matter antecedent The third is to take away the
matter conioyncte, and corrupt, and to keep the hole parts from corruption.
The first intention that is to say the dyaete, is accomplyshed according to
that, that is spoken in the chapitre of Herisipelas. This one thing I say
that in this case the brothe of a chekyn with herbs, as beetes, laictuce,
borage, buglosse, cicoree, is very good. The second intention shall be
accomplyshed with cut tynge a vein called commune, or the liver vain, or some
part over against the hurted place, so that the strength and the age of the
patient be considered. Digestive.
Afterward the matter shall be digested with this syrup taken warm in the
morning.. of syrup of vyneaygre called acetosus symplex, of syrup of the
juice of endiuiae and of fumiterre. ana.. ss. of water of fumiterre, buglosse,
and hoppes. ana.. i. when the patient has used this syrup the space of four
days, Purgation.
let him take this purgation minoratiue.. of cassia, of diacatholichon. ana..
i. make a small potion with a decoction of cordial flowers and fruits, and put
there unto syrup of violettes.. i. and. ss. This I I say if ye disease make
truce with ye patie^t, and give time to euacuat ye matter.

After that he has taken the said minoratiue, two days after it shall be good
to euacuate the naughtye matter with this potion.. of cassia fistula, of
diacatholicon. ana.. vi. of an electuarye of roses after Mesue.. ij. make a
small potion with the common decoction, and add of tamarindes.. i. and. ss.
of syrup of violettes.. i. The third inte^tion which is to take away the
matter antecedente, and to keep the place from rottynge is accomplyshed in this
manner. At the beginning when the place waxes black, then there is no better
remedy then to scarifie ye black place, Leeches.
with sondrye scarifications and deep, layenge leeches or bloodsuckers about
the place corrupted. And then to wash the place with lie wherein Lupines have been sodde^ in good qua^rite. For as Galene and Auicenne say, ye virtue of them
takes away and rooteth up all cancrous vlceres. And we have often proved this
decoction in this case, and have found it good for the patientes with the
application of vngue^tu^ Egyptiacum of our description, washing the vlceres
with ye said decoction. The description of vnguentu^ Egyptiacu^ is after this
sort.. of verde griece of roche, alume, of honye. ana..ij. of white vinaygre,
Vnguentum Egyptiacum
of the foresaid decoction, namely of lupines sodde^ with lie. ana.. ij. and.
ss. sees them al together and make an oyntme^t. This oyntme^t has virtue to
take away al corruption in Ca^crena, and Ascachilos, and preserves the hole
parts from corruption.

And Auicenna says that the propriete of this oyntmente is to take away evil
flesh, and to co^serue good, which we need in this cure. We may also
conuenientlye lay this defensive upon the hole part, and not upon the
ulcers.. of oil of roses omphacine, A defensive.
of oil mirtine. ana.. iij. of the juice of pla^tayne, and nyghtshade. ana..
ij. let the^ sees altogether till the juice be consumed, then strain them and
put to the straynynge of white wax.. i. and. ss. of flower of beans,
lentiles, and barley well boulted. ana.. and. ss. of all the sandres. ana.. ij.
and. ss. of Bole armenie well brayed.. i. of the pouldre of the leaves and
graynes of myrtilles.. i. when they be melted labor all with ye oils and wax,
and make a defe^siue in a good form addi^g or minishing the said oil if need
be.

Note that this defe^siue is of good operation, and comforts merueylously ye
membre, whereupon it is laid, and keeps it from receyuynge corrupt matter and
suffers it not to increase, co^fortyng the hole parts, with some resolution
and dryeng. Moreover it is very good with the application of vnguentu^
Egyptiacum, layeng upon the corrupt place a great piece of this plaster.. of
the flower of beans of orobus, of lentiles, and lupines. ana.li. ss. of the
juice of wormmoode, and so much salt make a styffe plaster with sufficient
sodden wine called sapa. The effect of this oyntme^t is, to keep the member
from putrefaction, and to resolve and dry a member corrupted.

Sapa.
Note that Sapa which goes to this plaster suffers it not to dry, but
kepethe it soft, so that ye may stretche it upon the membre. And we have
found this plaster of greater effect then that to which nothing goes but
lie. And we have also gotten worship by this plaster. It takes away the
eschare caused by vnguentum Egyptiacum, and swageth pain.
Here it is to be noted touching vnguentum Egyptiacum and other aforesaid,
that they must be applied so often till ye shall know the corruption of
Cancrena or Ascachilos to be removed which thing is easelye known by the
apparaunce of lyuelye flesh, and when the stynke is dyminyshed. If the
corruption can not be taken away by the means here declared, then ye must
take away this putrefaction by an actual cauterie, or by the water of the
decoction of Arsenike or by our poudre. Of which remedies we have spoken in
the chapitre of Formica corrosiua.

After that the place is mortifyed and purifyed from all putrefaction, ye must
procure that the eschare fall away with swynes greece, Remotion of an Escare.
or fresh buttyre or with one of the playsters descrybed in the chapitre of
flegmon for maturation. When the eschare is taken away cleanse the place with
this mundifycatiue. Mundificatiue.
. of clear terebe^tine. iiij. of honye of roses strayned.. ij. of the juice of
plantayne, and smalage, of every one.. i. Let them boil al unto the
consumption of the juice, then take them from the fire, addyng these under
written, namely the yolks of two eggs, of the flower of barley, of the flower
of beans well boulted. ana.. i. of saffran.. This ointment in this case is a
good medicine to mundifye, and we have proved it.

After that the place is mundifyed it is convenient to incarne it with this
incarnatiue, Incarnatiue.
which does both incarne and mundifye with some abstersion.. of honye of
roses strayned.. i. of clear terebentine.. iij. Let them boil ones, and
put there unto of the flower of wheat, of the flower of fenugreke, of every
one.. iij. of frankencense of myrre, of every one.. i. of sarcocoll, of aloes
epatike brought into a fine poudre. ana.. ij.

After that the incarnation is done, ye must seal up the place, and make a
good cicatrice this wise. If the flesh be unctuous, and soft it is good to
take it away with the ointment called vnguentum mixtum, which is co^pou^de
with one part of vnguentum Egyptiacum, and of two parts of vnguentum
apostolorum, adding some time a little roche alum burnt and ever layenge to the
place this ointment under written.. Of wethers tallowe, Ointment.
of calves tallowe, of ox and gotes tallowe ana.. iij. of terebentine.li. ss.
of goose grese.. ij. of litarge of gold and silver..iiij. of ceruse, of
minium. ana.. i. seethe them all, and stir them about and with sufficient wax
make a styffe oyntme^t.

The vtilite of this ointment is, to heal al vlcerations, after that the
corruption is taken away. But before ye lay to this ointment, it shall be good
to wash the vlcered place with this decoction.. of white wine, of ye water of
plantayne, of lie. ana.. vi. of roses. m^. ss. of the flowers of pomegranades..
ss. of myrobalanes citrines.. i. and ss. of honey of roses.. vi. of roche alume.
ij. Those things yt ben to be brayed let them be brayed grossly, then let
the^ boil unto ye co^sumptio^ of ye third part, then strain them, and wash
ye vlcered place therewith. This water is sovereign in making a good cicatrice
in any vlceratio^ we could declare many other remedies for ye curatio^ of
thies diseases, as many doctors have done but we have described the most
profitable remedies, which we have proved to our own worship, and the ease
of thies maladies.

The cure of Esthiomenos
Finally if this cancrena pass into the disposition of Esthiomenos which
corruptethe the membre, in which it is, so that oftentimes the bones rotte,
than it is necessary to separate and divide the hole part from the corrupted
with a sharp rasure, and the bone must be sawed with a keen saw, and after
that it is cut with a saw it must be cauterised with an actual cauterie.
After which cauterization ye must procure that the eschare fall away and
that the place be mundifyed. Than ye must incarne it, and cicatrise it, as it
has been declared in this present chap. of the cure of Cancrena, and
Ascachilos.

Also the defensive above written is good, to be laid upon the hole part. And
the corruption of Esthiomenos would be taken away by aygre and strong medicines
before rehearsed. But in the cure of Esthiomenos we allow better an actual
cauterie than a potentiall.
Moreover it is to be noted that in ye application of a caustique medicine
potentiall to the disposition of any of thies three diseases, that I say it
must be strong or weak according to the strength of the patient, and
according to the disposition of ye membre, as in the eyes, and in the stones
which can not suffer strong medicines, and quyckely receive putrefaction.

Wherefore when the body is weak, of a disease not furious, and in a membre of
delicate complexion, and of easy putrefaction, than the aygre medicines ought
to be of small mordication or bytyng. And likewise in contrary dyspositions
they must be strong. And as Cornelius celsus says: we must cure an
immoderate qualite of a disease, with a vehemente remedy, a mean with a
mean. Hypocrates says, that to extreme diseases, extreme remedies ben
necessary. etc. Thus ends this present Chapitre for which the name of god be
praised.

The.xviij. Chapitre of Carbunculus and Anthrax.
CArbu^culus is a little venomous pustle burning the place where it is.
Carbunculus
And it makethe at the beginning a blader, and than an eschare as if it had
been made of fire, or seethynge water, and it is with intolerable pain,
burning, and inflammation, al about which pustle is some times read or
yelowe, and some times grene or blewe, and sometime black. And every one of
thies after the opinyon of Rasis is mortal, because of their venime,
nevertheless that, that is read or yelowe is not so dangerous, as that, that
is grene or black. Auicenne says that they which have a black carbuncle
escape not death, howbeit we have seen many to have escaped. And thies
pustles carbunculus, and Anthrax differ not, as old and new writers
testifye, but in gretnes and smalnes.

For (as Guillermus placentinus says. Anthrax.
) Anthrax is nothing else but a Carbuncle turned in to malygnite, which has
not been well healed. And the color of it is first changed from read in to
grene, and afterward becomes black, and by that change we see often that
the place commethe to a corrosion, and great mortification of the membre, in
which Anthrax is. Thies pustles ben multyplied in the time of pestilence, and
in pestiferous regions (as Auicenna says.) And those ben more suspected in
the time of pestilence than in other times, by reason of the infectyon of the
air. They chaunse often in the emunctories or clensynge places, by the way of
termination ad Crisim. For the noble members send the infectio^ to places
less noble. And Auicenna says that every Crisis is grod, Crisis.
but in a fieuer pestilentiall.

Carbu^culus.
This pustle is called a Carbuncle, because the place where it is, becomes
read, and burns with great pain, as if a coal were laid upon the membre.
Anthrax.
Anthrax is a greek word and sygnifieth also a coal, for it gnaweth and eats
the flesche as a burning coal. And ye must note that Anthrax is a malygne
pustle, having about it certain little yelowe veins of the color of the
rain bow. For the said veins ben sometime read sometime grene and black.
And at the beginning the pustle is no greater than a lentile, having the
point fyxed inward. It causes intolerable pain with cruel accidents, with
great ponderosite or heaviness, as if lead on the place did oppress it, and
the patyent has great lust to sleep. We will write a special Chapitre of
Carbunculus and Anthrax, and of the Aposteme which chaunseth to them that have
the Pestylence called Bubo. Now it is euydente what dyfference there is
between Carbunculus, and Anthrax, namely in greatness, and smalnes

Signs of death in Carbunculus.
After this knowelege. We must comme to the signs which ben five. First ye
shall note that if the Carbuncle appear, and than depart, and hyde himself
without great alyenation or change of the patient, it is a sign of death.
Secondly, if the place in which the Carbuncle was, dry up without raysonable
causes, it sygnyfyeth that the patyent is nygh death after the sentence of
Hypocrates. Thyrdlye, if it be right over against the heart, or the stomach,
for the most part it is mortal. The fourth pronostyke is, wha^ the
Carbuncle commethe to the clensynge plases, it is mortal because his
venimousnes comes easelye to the pryncypall members. The fyfthe is that
among the emunctories those of the heart are most suspected of death. The
reason is euydent to the^ that consydre the poysonned nature of the mattyer.
For it is always the nature of Venomous mattyer to assaute first the heart, as
the captain of man's body. Thus this present Chapitre is ended for which ye
name of god be praised.

The.xix. Chapitre of the cure of Carbunculus, and Anthrax.
IN the cure of Carbunculus, The cure of Carbu^culus and Anthrax.
and Anthrax five intentions ben required. The first is to order the life. The
second to purge the mattyer antecedent. The third to take away the mattier
conioyncte. The fourth to purifye the air of the house, and to rectify it
from day to day, and to counforte the heart as well within, as without. The
fyfthe to correct the accidents.

Diete.
The first is accomplysshed by the syx things not natural declinynge to
coldness and dryenes, as the air and meats. etce. Wherefore the patient must
eat the meats declared in the chapitre of herisipelas, as laictuce, a ptisane
of barley, wine of Granades, and al aygre things as Limmo^s, Veriuyce and like
things me^gled with his meats. Semblably ye must give him in the first
days a brothe of a chickin, and flesche altered with veriuyce, with commune
seeds brayed, Almandes, and the cromes of bread well leuenned. Ye may give
him also delayed wine of small strength, and that is of the nature of wine of
Pomegranades.

Nevertheless this I admit only if the body be weak, and the disease
furious, and the accidents evil. For Auicenne says in the chapitre of a
fieuer pestilentiall. They that eat stronglye, perchaunse escape the daungier
of so great a disease. Finally they that have a Carbuncle or Anthrax, let
them be governed, as they that have a Pestilentyall fyeuer.

The second intention is to purge the mattier antecedent. And it is
accomplished by purging the humors by convenient medicines, Flebotomye of the
same part.
and by flebotomie. As Soon as ye shall perceive this disease to be euydente,
incontinently cut a vein in the sydewhere the Carbuncle is, and not in the
opposyte or contrary. And before ye cut a vein, ye must always use a
Clister lenityue howbeit some say, that ye must cut a vein in the part
opposyte or over against, regardyng more the daungyer of drawing the venomous
mattyer to the sore place, than the peril of the venomous mattier passing
over the pryncipall me^bres.

They that been of this opinion do evil as a learned Chirurgien Antonius
Gainereus testifyeth saying that in the curation of a Carbuncle, or of a
pestiferous kernel or botche called Bubo, a flebotomye must not be made but in
the same part, where the Aposteme is. And it must be done without any
tariynge. For when nature perceauethe that a pryncypall membre is hurt she
enforces to send the infected blood to the emunctores, as her enemy.
wherefore if ye let blood copyously at the beginning, according to the age
and strength of the patient, The profit of flebotomy
there comme thereby two great profytes to nature. The first is that the
corrupted blood is drawn from a principal membre to the emu^ctories, which
thing nature enforced her self to do. The second is that nature has
discharged her self of this venomous mattyer, so that afterward such
corruption can not extend it self upon the membre. wherefore ye ought to be
ware that ye let blood none otherwise than we have said.

For if the Carbuncle be found in the emunctories of the brain, as in the
right side, if now ye open the vein cardiake or basilike in the lift side ye
shall draw the infected blood to the heart or liver. And if the Carbuncle be
under the right arm hole, and ye open the lift Cardiake, or lift Basilyke,
ye shall draw the venomous mattyere to the pryncypall members. If the Aposteme
be in the flanks, and ye open the vein called Basylyke, it draws the
mattyer to the liver. Therefore when the Aposteme is in the Flanks, it is
better to open the vein Sciatyke, or Saphena. For in drawing the said
blood, ye shall aid nature greatly. Wherefore it appears that in this case
to commit any error is the cause of death.

Furthere it is to be noted, that if ye can not let blood thorough the
weakness of the patient, or for some other cause. Than in the steed of
Flebotomye it is good to box, or cup the place with deep scarificatyon,
Boxinge, or application of Ventoses.
as for the emunctoryes of the head ye must box, and make scarificatyon upon
the neck. For the emunctoryes of the heart, ye must lay the same ventoses
upon the shulders. For the emunctoryes of the Liver, box the buttockes or the
thyghes. Thus we conclude, that we must ever let blood in the sore place
for the alleged causes.

After lettynge of blood, dygeste the mattyer after this sort, Digestyue.
if the disease give leisure to take a medicine.. of Syrup of vinaigre, of the
juice of endiuie and of Syrup of vinaygre called Acetosus symplex, or
fumiterre Ana.. ss. of the waters of Endiuie, buglosse, and hoppes Ana.. j.
Purgation.
mengle them. After that the patient has used this Syrup four or five days,
let him take this potyon, yerlye in the morning. of Cassia of diacatholicon
Ana.. v. of electuarye of Roses after Mesue.. ij. and. ss. with the decoctyon
of cordial stoures, and fruits, adding of Syrup of Violettes.. j. and. ss.

The next day after the taking of this medicine it is very good to take a
clyster Lenityue. When the mattyer is malygne and furious, so that it is not a
Carbuncle, but Anthrax, the mattyer must be purged, without digestion because
Anthrax gives no leisure to the patient to digeste the mattyer. Wherefore
Hypocrates said well that we should purge things digested and not move raw
things, except it were very expedyent.

Ye shall note that there ben four cases, How a purgatyon may be given
without a digestive.
in which ye may give a purgatyon without digestyon going before. The first
is when the mattyer is in great quantyte. The second, when the mattyere is
furyous. The third when the mattyer is venomous, as in Anthrax, and other
diseases procedynge of venomous mattier. The fourth is when the disease is
caused of mattyer deryued of a pryncypall membre hurtynge the same. As it
chaunseth in the pestilence, when a noble membre is touched of infectyon, it
sendethe the same infectyon to the emunctoryes, and ingendreth in them a
Carbuncle or Aposteme by the way of mutation or chaungynge.

When the mattyer is minished ye may comme to the dygestion of evil humors,
and afterward to purgatyon. Here follows a purgatyon very good for him that
has Anthrax.. of Cassie of diaprunis non solutiui, Purgatyon.
of Diacatholicon Ana.. ss. of the confectyon of hamech, of electuarye de
Psillio Ana.. j. and. ss. with a decoctyon of cordyal flowers, and fruits
wherein has been sodden of Terebentyne, and dittanye. Ana.. j. of scabiouse,
of sorell, and of the juice of Pomegranades make a small potion adding of
Syrup of Vyolettes. j. and. ss.

The third intentyon which is to take away the mattyer conioynte, is
accomplysshed through applicatyon of conuenyent things as well in the hole
parts, as in the sore. And when the Chyrurgyen has perceived the Carbuncle
or Anthrax by euydent signs, Cornelius Celsus sayethe that there is no greater
remedy, nor surer way than incontinentlye to burn the Carbuncle with an hot
Iron, comprehendynge the corrupted part, Cauterie.
unto the hole or else to use a potentyall cauterie, so that ye may see a
cyrcle round about the Carbuncle. For a cyrcle about the Carbuncle, is a
sign of the termynatyon of the venimnes after the opinion of Arzi.

But we ought ever to be ware that the nygh and sanguine parts be not touched
of this cauterye. For it would grieve the place without profytte, and as Galene
says, that shall not help that has hurt in it self. Pain.
The great pain caused by aygre medicines upon the hole place, is an euydent
cause of drawing mattyere to the said hole part, without any succoure, yea
it is a cause that malignyte is joined to malygnyte. For pain is as a cuppynge
glass, drawyng humors to the paynfull place.

And to comme to practyce it is conuenyente to ordeyne the manners and forms,
which be required in the curatyon of a Carbuncle or Anthrax. First lay upon
the hole part this defensive. Defensive
. of Oil of Roses, of Oil Mirtine. Ana.. ij. of the juice of plantayne and
nyghschade, of white vynegre. Ana.. j. and. ss. let them boil all together
unto the consumptyon of the juice, than put to of white wax.. j. of all the
faunders. Ana.. j. of bole Armenye, of terra Sigillata. Ana.. ss. of white
Coralle and read. Ana.. j. mengle them.

When ye have laid this defensive upon the hole part, lay upon the sore
part a playstere of flowers with sodden wine, and a little lie, which is
described in the Chapitre of the cure of Cancrena and Ascachilos. Also use the
corrosyue medicynes, which shall be rehearsed in this Chapter, until ye
perceive that the venimnesse of the Carbuncle is mortifyed.

We have found thyes corrosyue medicines, to be of great utility. Corrosyue
medicines.
When the body is strong, ye may use an actual cauterye, so that the
Carbuncle be not in a Synnowie place. Ye may also use a potentyall cauterye
beginning at the easyest, as is Vnguentum Egyptiacum of our descriptyon,
written in the Chapter of the cure of Formica Corrosyua, or with Vnguentum
Egyptiacum, which has in it the virtue of Arsenyke, and is declared in the
same Chapter, or with Trocisques of Minium descrybed in our antidotarye, in
the Chapter of corrosyue medicines or with a ruptorie of lie described in the
same place.

One thing is to be noted before ye lay to, the foresaid sharp medicynes,
that is, that ye scarifye the Carbuncle or Anthrax with a deep scarificatyon,
only upon the eschared place, and to lay about the place leechees or
bloodsuckers. And after this scarifycatyon ye must wasche the place with the
decoctyon of Baurac, or hot lie. Scarificatio^.
This deep scarifycatyon has two vtilitees. The first is that it draws the
venomous mattyer, from the inward parts to the outward. Another vtilite is
that the medicine caustyque, and corrosyue worcketh the better.

Likewise when the escare is broken the applycatyon of a caustyque medicyne is
good for two things. The first is that it drawethe the infected blood from
the pryncypall membre to his emunctorye. The second that it mortifyeth, and
consumes the mattyere drawn to the sore place.

Afterward ye must cause the eschare to fall, To remove an Eschare.
layinge upon it hot buttyre, To remove an Eschaire.
or swynes greece, or this plaster.. of the flower of barley, of the flower of
wheat. Ana.. iij. with a decoctyon of mallows, violettes and rotes of
Holihocke make a styffe plaster, adding of buttyre of swynes greece melted
Ana.. ij. the yolks of two Eggs, when the playstere shall be taken from the
fire, mengle them together again with the foresaid roots and leaves well
stamped and strayned.
This plaster may sooner cause the eschare to fall in one day, than buttyre,
and swynes greece in three, and it appaysethe the pain caused with the
caustyque medicyne, and moreover resoluethe merueylously the mattier of the
Carbuncle.

Mundificatyue.
When the eschaire is fallen of, ye must mundifye the place with this pleasant
mundificatyue the space of three days.. of clear terebentyne. iij. of a
syrup of Roses.. j. of honey of Roses.. ss. let them boil al at the fire a
little, and put in a yolke of an Egg when ye take the foresaid ordinance from
the fire, of barley flower of wheat flower well boulted. Ana.. vj. mengle them
and incorporate the^. This mundificatyue avails much at the beginning by
reason of the pleasauntnes of it. For communelye after that the eschare is
taken away the place is very paynfull and enflamed. And this mundificatyue
appayseth pain, as ye may know by the symples that enter in to it.

Another mu^dificaty^e.
When ye have used three days this mundificatyue, ye must comme to a stronger
mundificatyue, as this is.. of clear terebentyne.. iiij. of honye of Roses..
ij. of barley flower well boulted.. j. and. ss. of the juice of smalage.. ij.
and. ss. boil them all at the fyere unto the consumptyon of the juice, than
take them from the fire, and put in barley flower, and incorporate the^ al
together till the same be luke warm. This mundificatyue is praised of Guydo,
and Bischoppe Theodoryke made it.

When the place is mundifyed incarne it, and seal it up, as we have taught in
the Chapitre of the cure of flegmon and of Formica Corrosiua. Here note that we
would not write the cure resolutyue of this disease,
because that it ever endethe by the way of putrefactyon and suppuratyo^. And
likewise we have not written maturatyon with attractyon, as some doctors have
done. For maturatyon is caused by hot things, and moyest in hot Apostemes.
The rayson why we have not written it, is, because the mattyer is venymous, and
malygne, and some thing vlcereth within. And if we should apply moist
things we should add putrefactyon to putrefactyo^. For moystnes is the mother
of putrefactio^, and heat the father.

This witnesses frauncis of pedemounte a renoumed Phisityon in the Chapter of
the cure of Anthrax, and we affirm the same of medicines to much attractyue,
and maturatyue. For in drawing the mattyer immoderately, they cause the
retained mattyer to be more aygre, and more malygne as Theodoryke says in the
Chapitre of the cure of Anthrax, Proved remedies only written.
wherefore we could declare more aids, but because we have found little
profytte in them, we leave them wyllynglye, and write the remedies that we have
proved.

The fourth intentyon is to conforte the heart, and to rectify the air of
the house, where the patiente is. Rectifyenge of the air.
And it is thus accomplished as it follows. First sprynkle the chamber with
water mengled with vinaygre. And set in ye chamber wyllowe bows, roses, vine
leaves, and other cooling things according to the time. A cordial confection.
Conforte the heart with this cordial co^fection. R. conserve of roses, of
buglosse an^.. iii. of al ye sau^ders. an^.. iii. of coralles white and red.
an^.. i. and ss. of al fragme^tes.. ii. of syrup of ye juice of sorell, of the
juice of an orange called de acetositate citri, of syrup of roses by infutio^.
an^.. i. and ss. me^gle the^ and gyld them. The patient must use this
confection every morning, and every hour when he felethe him self to be
touched of pestilente infection.

Outwardly it is good to comfort ye heart with this epitheme, Epitheme,
confortatiue of the heart.
in the manner of a cerote. of oil of roses omphacine, of vnguentu^ rosarum.
an^...iiii. of white wax.. i. and ss. of vinaigre of roses.. ii. and ss. of
the water of roses. ii. Sees them all, except the wax, till the vinaigre and
the water ben consumed, than put to, the wax, and the things under written.
R. of all the saunders. an^.. ii. of coralles white and read. an^.. i. and ss.
of saffran.. ss. me^gle them al together, and make a cerote. This epitheme is
after the manner of a cerote, and ye must sprede it upon a large cloth, and lay
it upon the heart. For it comforts the heart merueilously. It is of our
invention, and we have proved it with worship and profitte.

Item it is good to smell to rose water to vinaigre, and to wine of good odor
mengled with a little ca^fore, and saffra^. Further more it is necessary to keep
the patient waking by cryeng or by delectable words, that the venomous mattier
may be brought from the inward parts to the outward. For as Galene says
wakyng calls out natural heat, wakyng.
and slepyng calls it in. A wise chirurgien must always comfort the patient,
and bring him in hope of health.

The first inte^tion is to correct the accidents, and it is this
accomplished. There chau^seth often in this disease tre^bling of the heart,
vomit, sounding, and a sharp fieuer, and great pain in the place of the
carbu^cle and an evil vlcere. To take away the tre^blyng of ye heart, the
patient must use this composition. Tremblyng of the h^rt.
R. of the maw or runnyng of a kydde called coagulu^, of a la^be, of an heart,
of a calfe. ana.. ii. and ss. of odoriferous wine.. ii. of the stones of a
cockke sodden with the water of buglosse, and a little vinaigre of the three
sau^ders.. i. and ss. of suggre, of roses.. vi. bray the^ al, and make a
confection, with syrup of roses, and the juice of an orange, and a sponful of
odoriferous wine, addyng of a coulise of a capo^, and of all the fragmentes.. i.
and ss. let the patient take of this every morning a sponful. This composition
avails much to preserve the heart from tremblyng, and soundyng, and
comforts the stomach, and defe^deth vomityng.

Furthermore it is good to use rubbynges, and to bind the extreme parts of
the body, and likewise to box the buttockes, and thighs. we have found it
good to wash the arms, and thyghes with a decoction of camomille, of
wormewode, of sticados, of rosmarye, of sage, of wine, of hydromel.

To take away the fieuer the patient must be governed after the curation of a
fieuer pestilential, the vlcere, the grief, and the burning must be cured
after the doctrine declared in ye cha. of Ignis persicus and of Formica. Thus
we end this chap. of the cure of Anthrax, for which the name of god be
magnified.

The.xx. cha. of ye cure of a carbu^cle, of a pestiferous aposteme called bubo,
and of anthrax, which comes with a fieuer pestilenciall, and with a very
pestilence, and of the cure of a very pestilence.
IN this present cha. it is convenient to declare the cure as well of the
pestilence as of pestile^tial apostemes. Cure of the pestilence.
which if they ben not spedely succurred, the cure for the most part is
vain, and lost. For this disease works so swyftly in man's body, that if it
be confirmed in the body a little while, it is of so great actiuitie, that
without regard of medicines it rauysheth his pray, yt is to say, this
co^tagious disease as soon as it enters in to man's body, it assauteth some
principal member, and chiefly the heart, and with his venimme it corrupts the
blood and the spirits, and vanquysheth the hole body.

You will than demand what is to be done in this co^tagious sickness. Galene
answers saying a strong disease must be cured with a strong and swift
remedy. In the curation of these contagious diseases, four intentions ben
required. The first is to order the life. The second to euacuate the evil
mattier by medicines yt have virtue against venim. The third to comfort the
heart and to rectify the air. The fourth to euacuate the mattier co^ioynct,
mortifieng it incontinently with sharp medicines, if it be a carbuncle or
anthrax. Guydo says that carbuncles must be burned, and pestiferous apostemes
must be ryped.

The first and the second intentions ben accomplyshed according to that,
Rectification of the air.
that is said in the former cha. of the cure of anthrax, and of a carbu^cle
not pestferous. Nevertheless note that it is convenient to have two chambres in
which the foresaid things been spryncled as water with vnaigre. etc. Further
it is good to make fire of sweet wood as of cypress, Juniper, rosmarye,
Laurel, sage. etc. Let the patiente lie one night in the one chamber, another
in the other. And we have known this rectifycation of the air to have been
very good as well for the suertie of the patient, as of the familiars, and
physicians.

And though we have declared in ye chap. before, many things available for
the said intentions, nevertheless we will show here some necessary points for
the cure of a carbuncle and Anthrax, The cure of a pestile^te sore.
which come of the pestilence. wherefore wha^ ye know that it is a pestiferous
carbuncle, incontinentlye cauteryse the said carbuncle with a deep
cauterisation. Or open the carbuncle with a lancette, and in the midst of the
eschared place, put one of our trocisques of miniu^ in the quantity of a
grain of a pyneapple, or of an almande, with a little piece of vnguentum
egyptiacum having in it the virtue of arsnike. Be thou assured yt these two
remedies ben sovereign among other.

After that the carbuncle is mortifyed, you must cause the eschare to fall and
apayse the pain, layenge this plaster upon it. To remove an eschare.
R. of mallows beans, and violettes, of lilly roots. an^. m^.ii. of the
roots of holyhocke.li. ss. sees them al, stamp them, and strain them, and
make a plaster with art and fire, with the flowers of barley, wheat linseed
and fenugreke. ana. as much as shall seem sufficient, adding of buttyre and
swynes greece ana.. iii. the yolks of three eggs, which must be put in when
the decoction is taken from the fire, of saffra^.. i. This plaster may be
laid on, after the operation of any strong or caustique medicine. The rayson
is because it suffers not the pain to extend it self upon the membre, and
permitteteth not great quantity of humors to come to the sore place, and
swageth pain merueylously, and resolves the mattier that is come to ye place,
and preparethe it to come out by the eschared mouth.

In the hole part ye must apply about the carbu^cle the defensive written in
the chapi. before. Plaster.
Also ye may make a good plaster of the yolke of an egg with as much beaten
salt and a little scabiouse, and co^ferie and dayses, which ye shall stamp
together and incorporate them and lay them upon the carbuncle or anthrax. For
it is of good operation.

Likewise it is convenient in this case to lay to a vesicatyue, bladering or
blysterynge medicine, as if the carbu^cle be under ye arm holes, ye must lay
the vesicatyue upon the pulse of the arm, A vesicatory.
if it be in the flanckes upon the bowynge of the leg. This is the form of
it. R. of the herb called apiu^risus.. i. and ss. of the seed of viarbore..
ss. of cantarydes.. ss. bray them fynely together with a little leue^, and
vinaigre and lay it on the foresaid place. After that the eschare is taken
away, ye shall mundify the place, and incarne it and seal it up, with the
remedies written in the chapter before.

It remains that we speak somewhat of a pestile^tial aposteme called bubo.
Bubo
A pestilentiall bubo or botche after the said vesication must be ryped with
this plaster. R. of the roots of lyllies, Maturatiue
of ye roots of holihocke an^.li. i. when they are sodden stamp them, with
two onces of dry figs, and half an once of nutte kernelles and half a
pound of swines greece, and in the decoction, with the flour of fenugreke,
linsede, and wheat, make a plaster, adding of buttyre.. iii. and the yolks
of two eggs.

Another stronger maturatyue. R. of the heads of garlyke.. iiii. of white
oynions or read, if ye can get no white.. viii. of the roots of lyllyes and
holihocke. ana.. iiii. roast the oynions, and garlyke, and sees the rest, and
stamp them altogether addinge of the plaster above rehearsed a pound, of
swynes greece.. i. of triacle.. i. Note that before this plaster be laid to,
it shall be very good to lay upon the botche cloutes steped in the decoction
of holihocke, and lyllyes sodden in a little water with a little wheat flour and
sweet oil of olives and buttire. This decoction helps much to maturatio^.

When the botche is ripe, perce it with an instrument of iron or a cauterye
actual, or potentiall, as it shall seem good. Afterward ye ulcer must be
ordered concerning digestion, mu^dification, incarnation and cicatrisation, as
it is written in the cha. before, where unto ye shall resort as necessity shall
require.

Now that we have declared the cure of carbunculus, Anthrax, and of a
pestiferous botche, The cure of the pestilential fieuer.
let us come to the fieuer pestilentiall. And first we will declare the cure
of a true pestilence, which cure is acomplyshed by the ministration of the
electuarye beneth written, which we have often proved with worship, and
profitte. His virtue and operation is right noble, and it dryueth venomous
mattier from the principal members, and causes it to be derived to the
emu^ctories or cle^serres. And it is of our invention, Electuarium magistrate.
in this form that follows. R. of the graynes of juniper, of cloves, of
nuttemyges of the roots of Enula campana an^.. i. of Aristologia lo^ga and
rotu^da, of gentiane. an^.. iii. of the seed of purcelane, of the rotes of
tuneceis, of doronike, of the seed of sorell, of white ben, and red. an^.. ss.
of spodiu^, of the bon of a stagges heart, of lignum aloes, of all the coralles,
of the shauing of euory, of laurel beryes, of mastike, ana..iii. of rue.. ss.
of nuttes, of dry figs, of dates, of raysines. an^..iiii. of saffran..ii.
and ss. of tereben, of cardus benedictus, of dittanye. ana..i. and ss. of the
commune seeds, of sweet almandes, of the kernelles of the pyneapple, of hasell
nuttes. ana..iiii. and. ss. of sinnamome of liqueritie. ana.. ii. of agaryke in
trocisques..ii. and ss. of Peucedanum..i. of terra sigillata, of bole armenye.
ana.. x. of corianders prepared, of mumia. an^..ii. of zedoarie..vi. of
ca^fore..i. of yt three saunders, of the spices, of diarodon abbatis..i. of the
rindes of an orange, and the seed of the same, of the fragment. of Saphyr.
an^.. iii. of musk..i. and ss. of tamaryndes.. vi. of the triacle of
Mithridates.. two. and ss. of the leaves of ermolyne..i. and ss. bray them all
fynely and make a magistral electuary with the under written syrup. R. of
vinaigre of roses, Syrup.
of water of scabiouse, of sorel, of roses, and buglosse. ana.. viii. of red
roses, of all the saunders. ana.. ss. of bole armeny, of terra sigillata, of
terebentyne, of dittanye. ana..vi. of the leaves of Hermolyne or albyne.
ana..x. of syrup of the juice of sorell, of the juice of an orange, of rybes,
of granades, ana. li. ss. of the juice scabiouse, of the juice of the leaves
and roots of smalage, of the juice of fenell, of rue, of purcelane, of the
juice of sower pomegranades, of the juice of sower apples, and limmons.
ana..iii. and ss. Let them sees all together, with sufficient suggre, and make
a syrup.

This electuarye made with this syrup is an excellent medicine. And the
electuarye alone is sufficient to heal a man that is infected with the
pestilence

Also these pills under written ben of noble operation, and must be taken in
the morning twyse a weke in the quantity of a dram, with a little rose
vinaigre, and as much sorell water, and in other days he must take but one
pille every morning, Pills for the pestilence.
and this is the description of them. R. of the foresaid poudre against
venym..i. and ss. of aloes he patyke.. iii. of myrre..i. and ss. of saffca^..i.
make pills of all these, with as much of the foresaid syrup, and electuary
as shall suffice.

Here follows a description, Electuarie laxatiue
of an electuarie laxatyue. R. of the confection of Hamech, of an electuarie of
roses after Mesue. ana..i. of diacatholicon, diaprunis non solutiui. ana..i.
and ss. of an electuarye magistrall a foresaid or against the pe^tilence..
iiii. mengle them.

The manner to heal a man infected with the pestilence is this.

As soon as a man feleth him self to be touched with the venimme of the
pestilence, let him take this remedy under written, that is to say two white
oynions, and make an hole in the top, and put in an once of the electuary
before named, and than bake them in an oven, till they been sufficientlye bake.
Than stamp them, and strain them, and put to the strayning of the electuary
laxatyue above written, of cassia, of manna. an^.. ss. with water of sorel, of
scabiouse, by equal parts as much as shall suffice. The e^fect of this potio^
is to so^drye the venym from the principal me^bres, and to send it to the
emunctories and to cause it to pass away by swettes, and by the belly And
as soon as it is possible ye patient must use this potion without regard of
digestion, because this syckenesse gives no leisure to use digestion.

If it shall be necessary to take the potion again, ye must always consydre the
strength of ye patient. Also it is a sovereign good aid to take three graynes
of our poudre above written washed with rose water, and incorporated with half
an once of suggre of roses making of it three morselles with white suggre to be
received in the morning. Puiuis precipitatus.
This poudre provoke sometime swette, sometime vomyte, and sometime purgation
by the bellye. And it is called puluis precipitatus.

After that the patient has taken this potion, the next day it shall be good
to use this syrup. R. of syrup of the juice of orange, Sirupe
of the juice of endive. an^.. ss. of ye waters of endive, of sorel, of
buglosse. an^..i. me^gle the^. wha^ he has taken of this syrup the space of
three or four days, Purgation.
it shall be good to take this purgatio^. R. of chosen ma^na, of diaprunis non
solutiui an^..i. of cass^a.. ss. make a small potion with the water of sorell,
endive, and violettes, addyng..i. and ss. of syrup, of violettes.

For the co^fortation of the heart it is good to use the composition written in
the cha. going before, which is called electuariu^ cordis co^fortatiuu^. Also
ye may give the patient a little triacle with a little of the electuary written
in this present chap. with syrup of vinaigre, or syrup of the juice of
orenges, in the qua^tite of a chestnut, vi. hours before dinner. This medicine
preserves from the pestilence, and heals the pestilence.

Also at the beginning it avails much to rub the extremities of the body,
and likewise to minister clysters lenityue. As concerning the regiment of the
six things not natural, the patient must be ordered, as it was declared in the
chap. going before. Thus we have ended this chapi. by ye grace of god: whose
name be praised.

The.xxi. cha. of the signification of a perfect maturation of exitures, and
of their incisio^ after the manner of ye au^ciens, and how they may chance
from the head to the fete.
AN Exiture is every kind of an aposteme, in which saniouse or fylthy
mattier is found and that commethe to suppuratio^, Exiture.
by ye aid of medicines, and nature. There ben sondrye kinds of them. Some
are called camerate, because they have many concauites and chambres, Camarate.
and wha^ incisio^ is made, mattier is found in one place, and evil flesh in
another, and under the said flesh other corruption is contained. Albir.
Topinaria.
There is another kind called albir, or topinaria, and we have seen it often
in the heads of children. There is yet another kind, called talpa, which also
chances in the heads of children. And sometime this Talpa has a large
concauite, Talpa.
so that it corrupts the bones of the head, as wyllyam de saliceto
witnesses.

we have seen this kind come with a new disease, which in our time is spredde
in to all the world, and is called Morbus gallicus, or the French pockes. All
other kinds been absolutely called exitures, and come somtymes of hot mattier
sometimes of cold, or mengled mattier, of which we woll not speak much, for
as good Guydo says, we need not to pass of the names, so that we have the
right intentions of curyng.

The signs of perfect maturation in all exitures, Signs of maturatio^
ben these, after Auicenna, saying: when ye se that the aposteme waxes soft,
and pleasant, and that the pain cease and the pulsation, than ye may judge
that the aposteme is perfectly ripe. It is therefore an evident thing in an hot
aposteme that when the pain is swaged, and the pulsation cease, yt the
aposteme is ripe, and the softnes of the place, and thynnes of the skin
declares the same.

The signs of an hot exiture be these. Signs of a hot exiture.
The first is that by the aid of medicines, which gather together that
matier, it comes quickly to suppuration. The second sign is, wha^ the place
is read. The third, when the aposteme is much elevated, and grows to
sharpenes, as a pyneapple. The fourth is, wha^ the pain is vehemente and of
great actiuitye, for that is a sign that the evil mattier is sharp. The
fyfth is, yt always a fyeuer follows an hot exiture, specially at the
beginning, and increase, unto a perfect rypenes.

The signs of cold apostemes ben these. The signs of a cold
The first is, when the mattier greatly resists maturation, because of his
coldness. For every quycke maturation as well of the part of ye heat of the
mattier, as of the part of the natural heat of the membre, and of the
medicines causynge quytture, comes not to pass, but by heat and moystnes,
as Galene wytnessethe. The second sign is the whytenesse of ye place, in
which the aposteme is, and it is long ere the place come to redness, because
the cold mattier obeys not digestio^, and therefore can not be lygthlye
ryped. The third sign is swellyng, and eminine^ce, or standing out, of the
place. But in a cold aposteme the place is not much elevated, but rather
seems platte and and plain. The reason is because the mattier is heuye of
nature, and therefore seeks low places. For every heuye thing goes
downewarde. The fourth sign, is small pain The fyfthe sign, is a fyeuer.
For lightly a fyeuer chances to them that have cold apostemes. The syxte
sign is taken of the co^plectio^. For they which have exitures, for the most
part ben mela^cholike, or flegmatyke persons. wherefore when ye se a cold
exiture having a gross skin, so yt ye may perceive yt it will not be purged
nor break out by the said thycke skin, ye must open it accordyngly. And
Antyllus says that if the exiture be in the head, the incision must be
equal, How to make incision in every part.
after the length of the roots of the hear, and not tra^suerse or
overthwart, that the hears growyng again cover not the incision, and he
wylleth yt the openyng be large, when the aposteme is deep.

And if the exiture hape^ in the nose open it equally, after the length of the
nose. If it be about the eyes open it in the figure of a new moon, so that ye
crokyng be downwarde. If it be in the jaws open it with equal incision,
because of ye equality of the place, which thing is known in the bodies of
old men that be lean. And if it be behind the ears, perce it equally, and
when it chances in the arms, elbowes, hands, fingers or flanckes, it must
be opened according to the length. Antillus says also: that if the exiture
be about ye thighs, round incisio^ must be made, and not crooked, for when it
is crooked, it has part of length, and part of breadth, and as the same
Antillus witnesses, wha^ ye openinge is not round, it is merueyll if some
fistula chance not, by the reason of gatherynge of mattier to the place.

The exiture that chances in the foundement must be cut after the figure of a
new moon. In the sides, and rybbes the incisio^ must be made according to
the length of the rybbes. In the stones and the yard incision must be made
equallye, according to the length of the same. The forsayde autour says, that
we must be attentyfe, that the incision follow the figure of the place of the
exiture as much as is possible. Let the hippes, and the bones called
Adiutores, be always cut after the length. But we must take heed, that we
cut not the synnowes, the synnowe fylmes, veins, and the chordes. In the
legs we must make incision, after the length. In the lacertes of ye back and
of the bellye, and under the arm holes, ye shall perce it with an incisio^
that comprehends largeness, lest there should be some concauitie, in which
a fistula might be engendered.

After the incision of the said exitures, keeping the doctrynes noted in the
chapter of the cure of Flegmon, touching the incision of Apostemes, if ye fear
not flux of blood, ye must fill the place with lynt, or cotton, or cloutes,
moysted in the white of an egg, and the yolke beaten together, with a little
oil of Roses, though Brunus forbid to put moist things in exitures. After
the incision, let the exiture be digested with a dygestyue made of clear
terrebe^tyne, with the yolke of an egg, the space of three or four days, or
instead of terebentyne, of oil of roses, with the yolke of an egg.

A playstre.
It shall be right good to apply this playstre after the digestyon. Take of barlye
flower, wheat flower, beanefloure, and of the flower of lentyles. an^.. iii.
and with a decoction of mallows make a styffe playstre, adding in the end of
the decoction of oil of roses, of oil of Camomil. Ana.. ii. of buttyre, of
common oil. ana.. i. and. ss the yolks of two eggs, put in wha^ the
decoction shall be taken from the fire. This playstre is of good operation in
appaysing grief, in drawing matter to the incision, or opened place and
suffers not the sides thereof to be raw.

After digestion ye must mundifye the place, and so incarne it, and seal it up
after the doctrine declared in the Chaptre of Flegmon, whereunto resort as the
case shall require.

The xxii. Chapter: of Fro^cles, and of their cure.
A Froncle is a little Aposteme, A Froncle
engendered of gross blood, causyng grief when it comes to maturation, and
it is with pulsation, having the accidents like to the accidents of Flegmon.
Nevertheless it has one sign that is not in Flegmo^ and that is, that there
issues out of it, without openyng a gross mattier like a rotten synnowe.
Note that if a froncie be not spedelye remedyed, it will be changed into a
carbuncle.

To the cure of a Froncle there belong three intentions. The first is, to
order diete. The second, to purge the mattier antecedente. The third to take
away the mattier conioynct The first, and second intention ben accomplysshed
after the doctrine declared in the Chaptre of the cure of Flegmon. The third
intention which is to take away the mattier co^ioynct is accomplysshed by
application of medicines maturatyue. For this aposteme comes ever to
maturation, and never to resolution.

A maturatyue.
This is the form of a good maturatyue. Take of the rotes of white lyllyes..
vi. of the rotes of tender buglosse.. ii. of mallows and vyolettes. an^. m^.
i. when they been sodde^, press out ye water, and sta^pe them, and afterward
in the decoction of the foresaid things make a styffe plaster at ye fire with
the flower of wheat, and barley, addyng in the end of the decoction of
buttyre.. ii. of sweet oil.. iiii. of swynes greece.. ii. and ss. the yolks of
two eggs, of saffran.. i. tha^ me^gle them with the foresaid things stamped,
and lay it to, after the manner of an hot Playstre. when ye change this
playstre, lay upon the sore this liquide Cataplasma.. of the foresaid
decoction. li. iii. of the flower of barley, It is.. i and ss. in the French.
and wheat. ana.. i. and ss. of common oil, of buttyre, of swynes greece
melted. ana.. ii. with the yolks of four eggs: let them sees all together,
except the yolks of the eggs, to the consu^ptio^ of the fourth part, than
put to the said yolks of eggs. This cataplasma is very euaporatyue, and it
must be applied hot with cloutes steped in the said decoction. It helps
maturation, and procures the mattier to issue out, and appayseth the pain.

when ye perceive that the froncle is come to maturation, and that the gross
matter is purged, that with the fornamed plaistre, it is good to aid digestyon,
Amfidificatiue.
laying a little piece upon the openyng of the froncle of this abstersive.. of
clear terebentine.. ii. and. ss of honey of roses.. i. of the iuce of smalage..
vi. Let them sees al together unto the consumption of the iuce, tha^ put to of
the flower of barley, wheat, and veanes. an^.. ii. and. ss. of saffron.. ss.
the yolke of a new laid egg. This mundificatyue with ye plaistre above named
is very good to purge gross matter engendered in froncles.

After that the grefe is apppaised, and the infla^mation has ceased, so yt the
gross matter be somewhat purged perfectly to heal the froncle use this
ointment. An oyntme^t
. of white Diaquilon without gu^mes.. ii. of clear terebentyne, of swynes
greece. ana.. ii. and. ss of litarge of gold and silver, of minium. ana.. ss.
of Cerusse.. i. of oil of roses.. i. and. ss. stir them about at the fire,
and make a cerote, adding of white wax asmoch as shall suffice. A sign of
perfect decoction is, wha^ the ointment receives a black color. This is our
short curation of froncles, which we have often proved with good luck. Thus we
end the first part of the second book: for which god be praised and thanked.

The second treatise of the second book of cold Apostemes in general.
The first Chaptre.
OF cold humors Apostemes are wont to chance in every part of man's body,
Symple^ cold apostemes.
of sundry qualities and quantityes, as well in composition, as in symplycitie.
Simple cold Apostemes been these, gla^dules, or kernelles, scrofules, nodys,
or knobbes, sephiros, vndimies, a canker, wyndy apostemes and full of water.
Nevertheless, some of these through adustion been made compounde, as it
chances in a canker, and in sephiros. Some of these also are made compounde
through the admixtio^ of humors, as it chau^ceth in Vndimia.

These hard Apostemes, scrophules and glandules, been engendered of gros
steame, or of indurated melancholy. Sometimes certain cold Apostemes ben
engendered of subtyle matter as vndimious Apostemes. Sometime an imposteme is
engendered of subtyle watrye fleame, as the hydropsye. Sometime of vaporous
fleame a wyndye aposteme is engendered.

And oftentimes in the bodies of children there is engendered a kind of cold
exitures, in which mattier is found like the iuce of flower tempred with
water. And oftentimes it produces quytture without pain, and without
pulsation of the place, and without chaungyng of the place from his
proprecolour, which thing is against Auicenna, saying: be ye assured, that
out of an Aposteme in the exterior parts, in which there is no pulsation,
never comes any corruption. But ye must understand Auicenne of hot
Apostemes, and not of cold. For as we said before, we have seen many cold
apostemes vtterynge quytture or fylthe without pain and pulsation. Of which,
one after an other, we will speak in this present Chaptre.

The second Chaptre: of Vndimia.
Vndimia.
VNdimia (as Galene witnesses) is a Flegmatyke apostem of white color, soft
in feeling, without heat, chefelye, when it is pure. How this aposteme is
compounde, it is suffycientlye declared in the chaptre of Flegmonyke Apostemes.

A true and simple Aposteme called Vndimia, is engendered of natural fleame,
which as Auicenne declares in the chaptre of humors is nothing else but
blood vnperfectlye decocted, this Aposteme is with little pain, chefelye when
it comes of a cause antecedent. Sometimes after Auicenne this Aposteme is
engendered of a cause Primitive, and than it is not without pain, howbeit,
vndimia comes not often of a cause prymitiue. The reason is because the
humors that resort to ye hurted placebe not cold but hot. For nature sends
blood or cholere, and spirytes as seruitoures to succor the hurted place. Of
which humors, an hot Aposteme is engendered.

Note that the truest sign of simple Vndimia is, Sign of Vndimia
if when ye press it down with your finger a concauitie or holownesse
remains, which thing follows not in an Aposteme elevated, that is engendered
of gross vapors and flegmatyke, and than that vndimia is of the kind of
elevation, that is to say, of the kind of wyndye apostemes by elevation.
Vndimia is co^menty resolved.


This Aposteme for the most part is ended by the way of resolution, and
comes not often to suppuration, if the patient be well handled, as we will
declare in the Chaptre following. This Aposteme has four times, beginning,
increase, state, and declination. And it is engendered of a cause primitive,
antecedent, and conioynct The primitive cause is, a fall, a stroke evil
regiment. The cause antecede^t is, repletion of flegmatyke humors The cause
conioynct is a flegmatyke humor gathered to the place of the Aposteme.

The.iii. Chapter: of the cure of Vndimia.
The cure of Vndimia
THe cure of a soft Aposteme, called Vndimia, which is engendered of fleame has
four intentions. The first is accomplisshed, by governance of diete. The
second by purgation of mattier antecedent. The third by resolution of mattier
conioynct, and for the most part, as we have said, it ends by the way of
resolution, as old and new doctors testifye, so that convenient things be
laid to. The fourth intention is accomplyshed by correction, of the accidents.

The first intention, which is to order diete, is accomplysshed by the
administration of the six things not natural as is the air, meats, drinks
and other. Diete.
The meats must enclyne to hotenesse, and dryness, and therefore the patient
must eat mutto^ rather roasted than boiled, and also veale, capons, hens,
birds of the wood, and not of ryuers: his wine must be claret delaied, or
white wine of good odoure. And as I said, the meats which the pacient must
use, must be somewhat bendynge to hotenesse, as Rise sodden with the broth of
flesh, or grated breed with ye broth of the said flesh. Al kinds of poulse,
as beans, peasen. etc. must be avoided, and likewise rotes, except carat
roots, fenel, and parselye roots, which ben admytted in this case.

The second intention which is to digest the mattier antecedent, and after
digestion to purge it, Syrup.
is thus accomplyshed. First let the mattier be digested with this syrup.. of
syrup of the iuce of endyue, of oximell compositu^, of syrup de duabus
radicibus. an^.. ss. of the water of fenell, scabiouse, and cicorie. Ana.. i.
me^gle them. After that he has used this sirupe the space of four days,
Purgatyon
let him be purged with this purgation. of Cassia, Diacatholicon. an.. vi. of
electuarii indi maioris, diafinicon ana.. i. and. ss. make a small potion with
the common decoction, addyng. i. and. ss. of syrup of viol. Pills
Also to this inte^tio^, ye may use pills of hermodactiles, or called pil.
fetide. The dosis or gyuing of them is.. i. and sometimes ye may take before
dynner a morsel of pure Casia, or ye may make such pylles.. of agaryke in
trosisques of pylles called fetide, et aggregatiue. Ana.. i. make.v. pylles
with the water of fenell. These pylles must be taken at one time.

The third intention, which is to take away the matter conioynct, is
accomplysshed by mynystryng things conuenyent upon the aposteme. If the
vndimia proceed of a cause antecedent, without pain and co^mixtion of an hot
humor, it avails much in the first days to lay this oyntement upon it.. of
the oil of camomyl, dyll, of mixte and roses. An^.. ii. Oyntement.
of the nuttes of cipres, of wormwod camomylle, dyll, of squinantu^, sticados.
ana. m^. ss. Let the things that be to be brayed, be brayed after a gross
manner, than let them seethe with a suffucyent qua^tite of wine of good odor,
unto the consumtion of half the wine: than strain them, and let the straynyng
boil again with ye foresaid oils, and a little vynegre, unto the consumptio^
of the hole s^raynynge. This done, make a linime^t with suffycyent white wax
adding in the end of litarge of gold and silver. ana.. iii. of bole armenie..
i. ss.

Note, that before ye apply this oyntmente, it shall be good to wasshe the place
with this decoction that follows after four days of the beginning of the
Aposteme.. of camomyll, roses, myrtil, wormwood, sticados. m^. i. and. ss. of
squinantium, sauyn, rosemary. ana. a little, of salt, of roche alu^me. ana.. i.
and. ss. of honye.. iii. These said things must sees with a suffycyent
quantitye of lie made with okeasshes, and a little vynegre, unto the
consumption of the third part. These two foresaid remedies may begin
after the beginning unto the increase.
Moreover, if ye add a little branne, and fresh soap in the said decoction, it
shall be very good in the state, and declinatio^ of this aposteme. we have
moreover proved it good to take a sponge, A sponge
and to dip it in the said decoction, and bind it upon the Aposteme with a
large band, so that it embrace the hole aposteme: Auice^ne says, that in the
sponge there is a virtue resolutyue, and deficatyue, which two things been
required in the cure of this aposteme.

An oyntme^t.
An other stronger unction.. of ye oil of dyll, camomyl, and lyllyes. an^. ii.
of the oil of rue.. i. of the nuttes of cypress in no^bre.iii. of sauine..
iii. of cyperus.. i. of quenched lyme.. vi. of roche alume.. i. and. ss. of
wine of good odoure one cyath, of white vynegre.. i. stamp the things that
be^ to be stamped, after a gross manner, than let them sees together unto the
consumption of the wine, and than strain them, and add to the straynynge of
white wax as much as shall suflyce, of Litarge of gold, of Bolearmenye.
Ana.. i. mengle them

If it chance, that the Vndimia is with grefe, ye must consydre whether it be
engendered of a cause Prymityue, or antecedent. If it proceed of a cause
primityue, ye must lay to somewhat that appayseth pain, and resolves mattier
with exiccation, as this playstre following.

. of the flower of beans, barleye, and lentyles, A playstre.
of branne well boulted Ana.li. ss. with suffycyent new wine and a few great
Mallows, make a s^yffe Playstre at the fire, adding in the end of the
decoction of Oil of Roses, Camomylle, and of Oil Myrtyne. Ana.. ii. and. ss.

This Playstre has virtue to swage grief, with resolution and exicration, and
comfort the Apostemed place.

An other Playstre for the same intention.. of the roots of great
Mallows.li. ii. sees them in water and strain them, and let that that is
strayned seethe again, and add in the end of Oil of Mirte, of oil of
Camomylle. Ana.. ii. of white wax.. ii. and. ss. of Bean flower boulted, of
Barley flower. Ana.. i. and ss. mengle them. Of these foresaid make a Playstre,
in the manner of a Cerote.

If the Vndimia be with pain, of a cause antecedent, than it must needs be
either Flegmonides or herisipelades. If it be Herisipelades, it is necessary
to appayse the grief, and to take away the Herisipelas. For except ye take
away the pain and the Herisipelas, the Vndimia can not be taken away.

The reason is, because the remedies required to this Cure of true Vndimia,
been hoote, and dry, and contraryewyse,
the remedies required to the Cure of Herisipelas been not hoote and dry,
neither fytte to swage pain caused of Flegmon or Herisipelas.

Therefore Galene sayethe, that when two diseases been joined together, the
intention of the medicine must be to the pryncipall, without the which the
less can not be cured, respect had also to the other.

The fourth intention which is to correct the accidents, is accomplisshed as
it here follows.

The accidents that chance in this disease been itchynges, chefelye when the
Aposteme comes of solution of continuitie, or by breakyng of a bone, or
dislocation, and when this Aposteme is healed by resolution, or when the pain
was in the Aposteme, through commixtion of an hot humor, with fleame.

If this Aposteme come to ryping it must be ryped with a Playstre of Holyhocke,
written in the Chaptre of the Cure of Flegmon, whereunto ye may add a little
fenugreke, and lyneseede.

A cerote.
To take away the pain of Herisipelas, or of Flegmon chauncinge with Vndimia,
ye may use this cerote.. of the leaves of Mallows, and vyolettes. Ana. m^. i.
of the roots of Langedebeefe.. ii. of the roots of Holyhocke, half a pound,
of the seed of quynces.. iii. of clean barlye. m^. ii. Let them sees all
together with suffycyent water, till the barlye break, than press them, and
cut them after the breadthe, and afterward stamp them, and strain them, and
to that, that is strayned, add of oil of roses, of oil mirtine, of oil of
vyolettes and Camomylle Ana.. ii. of hens greece, of vnguentum Rosarum, after
Mesue, of vnguentum Galeni.. i. of calves, kyddes, and gootes tallowe. ana.. i.
and ss. and let them al boil again together a little while, and than with
suffycyent white wax make a soft cerot, addyng in the end of the decoction
of bean flower well boulted, and of barlye flower. ana.. i.

This cerote is right good to swage pain, and has strength to take away
Herisipelas, and to comfort the place. And it is somewhat resolutyue of the
mattier, that causes Vndimia. All which virtues been required to the curation
of the same.

After that the grefe is ceased, and the inflammation of Herisipelas, or
Flegmon taken away: For the remotion of Vndimia ye must proceed with gentle
resolutyues and confortatyues, having virtue to comfort, to dry, and to consume
the vnctuositie that is in vndimia, howbeit, ye must do this wyselye, and you
must beware, that Herisipelas return not, and cause new inflammation and
pain

In this case the descryption following, is conuenyent.. of vngue^tum rosarum
Mesue, of vnguentum Galeni. Ana.. iiii. of oil of roses co^plete, and of oil
mirtine. Ana.li. ss. of oil of camomyll, and dyll. Ana.. ii. of lambs or
kyddes, and calves tallowe. Ana. l. ss.. of the juice of morell, of the leaves
of mirtilles, and graynes of the same stamped al together Ana.. iii. of a
decoction of holyhocke li. i. Let them boil al together, unto the consumption
of the decoction and Iuyces, than put to these under written.

Take of litarge of gold and silver, well brayed. Ana.. iiii. of bolearmenye..
i. and. ss. of Cerusse.. x. of Tutie preparate.. six, of quenched lyme, and
ten times washed. ss.

A sign of the perfect decoction of of this cerote is, when it begins to
be black.

we have proved this cerote with the other above written, A proved cerote in a
cardinal.
in the cardynall of Alexandria, which long time trauayled with Vndimia
me^gled with a wyndie Aposteme, and with a choleryke humor. And it did hold
him from the flanckes unto the legs and fete. And for this cure we received.
c. lxxx. ducates of gold. It resolves flegmonike mattier, which causes
vndimia, with exiccatio^, and confortatio^ of the place, so that ye hot
mattier which is sharp, as we have said, and cause the pain and itche, and
sometime heresypelas, and inflammatyon, can not join him self with the
mattyer conioyncte. Moreover it resolves ventosities or wyndines of flegmatyke
Apostemes.

When this Aposteme is comme to maturitie or rypenes, incisyo^ must be made
according to the doctrine declared in the former cha. After incisyo^ ye must
digeste, mundifie, and incarne the place with the remedies declared in the
foresaid chapitre.

An ointment for an ^^che.
If itche chance in the place, ye must anoynte it with this vnctyon.. of oil
of roses, and of oil myrtine, of vnguentu^ Populeo^. Ana.. ij. of vnguentu^
rosarum, or instead thereof of Vnguentu^ Galeni infrigidatinu^.. ij. and. ss.
of the juice of plantayne, and nyghshade. Ana.. ij. let them leeth all
together unto the consumptyon of the juice, tha^ stir the^ about with a
pestil, in a mortare two hours, so that they be all strayned before, adding
of litarge of gold and silver. Ana.. ij. and. ss of bole Armenie.. ss. of
cerusse.. iij. of camfore.. j. we have proved this unction to be excellent in
taking away itchynges of what soever sort they be. If the Aposteme comme to
hardness, for mollifycatyon, and resolutyon ye must resort to the cha. of
Sephiros.

The fourth Chapter of Knobbes.
NOdi or knobbes after Auicenne ben hard eminences, Knobbes.
having within a pannycle as it were a purse, called Cistis, in which the
mattyer is contained. And this mattyer is sometimes like a chestnutte half
chawed, and sometimes there issuethe out of them a mattyer like honye,
Mellinus.
and than it is called Mellinus. When the mattier is like a chestnutte as we
have said, some call it Lugia. Lugia.
Somtymes there is found in the said knobbes a mattyer like the muscilage of
Holyhocke, and sometimes with corrupted quytture, oftentimes there ben found
knobbes, which only are full of carnosyte or flesshines, and than they ben
called carnal or flesshie knobbes. Furthermore there is a kind which
commethe upon the synnowes, Fleshie knobbes.
and is called nodatyon.

This appearethe the dyfference that is between nodes or knobbes, Nodes and
nodatio^ diffe^^e
and nodatyon. For nodes be in the flesh, and nodatyo^ in the synnowes. Nodes
grow in synnowye places, and about the joints and move from place to place,
but nodatyon remains fyxed: knobbes ben engendered of a cause primityue:
antecedent, and conioyncte. The primityue is, a fall, a stroke, or evil
regyment. The cause antecedent is a gross humor, and flegmatyke sent of
nature to the weak place. And by reason of the weakness of the place, the
subtyle part of the fleame vaporethe out, and the gross remains, and of
that, knobbes be^ engendered. The cause conioyncte is the mattyer gathered and
contained in the place. Note that ye need not to care greatly for names, so that
ye have true curations

The.v. chapitre of the cure of nodes, or knobbes.
The cure of nodes,
THe cure of nodes, has three intentio^s. The first is the ordinance of diete,
that a good humor may be engendered and ye evil destroyed. The second is,
purgation of the mattier antecedent. The third is, to take away the mattyer
conioyncte.

Diete.
As touching the first they that have nodes, must eat mutton roasted, and
veale, and hens, pertriche, and faysantes, ever rather roasted, tha^ boylled.
And in the brothe of the said flesh, ye may sees persley, fenel, rise, and
grated bread. The patyente must obstayne from all poulses called in Latyne
Legumina. Likewise al disshes made of paest ought to be avoided. Let not the
wine be sharp, but of good odor, and moderatly delaied The second intentyon
which is to purge the mattier antecedent, is this accomplisshed, as it
follows. First let the mattier be digeste by using certain days this
digestyue.. of Oximellis simplex, of Syrup deed duabus radicibus, of honye of
Roses.. vj. of the waters of fenel, cicoree and Fumiterre. Ana.. j. mengle.
After that he has used this digestyue three or four days let him take this
purgatyon.. of Diacatholicon.. j. of electuary indi maioris, of Diafinicon.
Ana.. ij. make a short potion with the commune decoction, addyng of Syrup of
violettes.. j. and. ss. It is good also, to take every day a little of this
confectyon.. of Diacatholicon.. j. of honye of roses.. x. of Diaturbit.. ss. of
Agarike in Trocisques. j. of suggre, as much as shall suffyce, make a
confectyon adding a little Gynger.

The third intentyon which is to take away the mattyer conioynte, is
accomplished by one of the four means under written. The first is, by way
of resolutyon. The second by pressyng, made with a place of lead, and
convenient byndynge. The third is, by incisyon. The fourth is, by applicatyon
of some caustique medicyne upon the nodes.

The node Melline is that, Mellyne
that produces a quytture like honye, and ye must mollifye the place, and lay
upon it a playstere of Diaquilon magnum. Oftentimes it is holy resolved in
laiynge upon the place, plates of lead with good co^pression, and convenient
ligation or byndyng, as we have said before. After that the nodes ben
mollifyed, it is good to assaye to break the said nodes, pressyng your thombe
upon them. For the resolutyon of nodes Melline folowethe oftentimes the
breaking of the blader called Cistis.

If the said nodes can not be resolved, Incisyon.
it is necessary to cut them after longytude or length, and that warely,
lest the skin, which is like a purse be cut. For if it be possible ye must
draw it out hole, with the mattyer that is in it. For when any part of that
remaynethe, the node will return. Wherefore it is necessary to fylle the node,
when it is opened, with Vnguentum Egyptiacum of our descriptyo^, or in the
stead of this ointment ye shall put in of a trocisque of Minium the quantyte
of a grain of Pinapple, and it shall take away the hole node with the skin
called Cistis.

After this ye must procure that the eschare fall of, with buttyre, or with a
digestyue made of Terebentyne. Afterward the place must be mundifyed incarned
and cicatrised, as we have often said in the Chapter before. The same cure
may be used in nodes, in which there is a mattyere like a chawed chestnutte,
and also in them, which ben filled with sanious or fylthie mattyer.

Fleschie node
But for fleschie, and knottie nodes we have another curatyon. In the curatyon
of a fleschie node, after a purgatyon and good regiment, as we have showed we
must comme to the rootynge up of the same, with some caustique Medicyne. In
this case the descryptyon of the caustyque following is very good. A caustyque
Medicyne.
Take a pound of Capitell, or of lie wherewyth soap is made, of that, that is
called Magistra, and droppethe first in to the vessel, of Vitriol Romayne or
coppresse.. j. of sal Armoniake.. ij. of roche alume.. j. and. ss. boil thyes
things together in a little brazen posnette till they ben as thycke, as salt.
The manner of appliynge this caustique we will declare hereafter, as we have
proved it the year of our Lord. M.CCCCC. and. vj. in the curatyon of such a
fleschie node that Iulye. ij. had, about the greatness of a chestnutte in his
right hand, between the ring finger and the little finger.

That node was hard at the beginning, and of a round figure, and of a
duskysche color. And it continued.vj. months without pain, or encresment,
and without the applycatyon of any medicyne. But in the end when the
Bischoppe took his journey to Bononye, in the city of Castellane, the said
node began to ulcer of him self, and nothing issued out but black blood,
with virulente or venymous mattyer. The french pox was homelye with the most
holy Father.
And by reason of iorneyinge we differred and palliated the cure, till we came
to Foroluue, nether could we so handle the node but that it came to a paynfull
vlceratyon, and augmentatyon of carnosyte unto the bygnes of a great chest nut.

Than we began the rootynge up of the node in this manner. First we applied
Vnguentum Egyptiacu^ which of his virtue gnaweth evil flesche and conseruethe
the good, as Auicenna testifyeth. Howbeit that ointment could not take away
the superfluous flesche of the node, but caused great pain and as much as the
ointment, took away in one day, nature restored in another. And he feared the
application of the oyntme^t, because of the pain.

When I perceived that his holiness could not endure the medicine, I began to
despeare of the cure, and of necessyte sout some new remedy, to avoid the
danger of the sinnowie place. At the last I ordained this remedy which is of
our inuentyon. A goodlye lynte.
Take of fine lynte of old cloth. ij. of the cromes of white bread well
leuened.. iij. of sublymate brought to a fine poudre.. ss. of water of
plantayne, of water of Roses, of each a pound, seethe them in a brazen vessel,
to the consumptyon of two parts of the three. Than press the lynte, and let
it dry in an ouem metely hot, and toose it again and keep it i^ a box of
wood well stopped. With this remedy we healed ye said carnosyte of the node
perfectly, in the space of a monethe without great pain which thing the
chirurgie^s of Julius merueyled at, and cheyfely master Archangel, which would
not co^sente to take away the said node by incisyon, allegynge the text of
Auicenne, which says that glandules that been like to Arsilac, and ben
certain kinds of nodes, if it be possible that they may be drawn out without
incisyon, they must be ordered as Arsylac, so that no hurt be done to the
synnowes or the next members.

And when the node is in the foot, or in the hand among synnowes, and
chordes, ye ought not to draw it out. For it should be a merueyl if the crampe
followed not, by reason of the synnowes, but ye must mollifye it, and resolve
it, laiynge upon it a plate of lead well bound and pressed down.

The application of the Lynte.
The manner to apply the foresaid lynte is this. We took the lynte, and
moyested it with spettell, and laid it upon the node, and superfluous flesche,
laiynge upon the lynte, Vnguentum Tutie refrigeratiuum, and all about we
applied a defensive of litarge, which is written in our Antidotarie. And we
renewed this medicyne until the superfluous flesche, was clean taken away.
Which thing we perceived easily by the appearaunce of good flesche, and by the
feeling.


A great Escarre was upon it, without great pain, which was easelye removed.
When the flesche was taken away, we laid upon the lynte Vnguentum Mixtum
written in the Chapter of the cure of Flegmon. Also we laid upon the Lynte
mundificatyues made of honye of Roses, and sealed up, at the last, the vlcered
place with Vnguentum de Minio, washing the place every day with water of
alu^me. Thus Iulie was heled before he came to Bononye.

If the node be fleschie, Fleschie node not vlcered.
and not vlcered ye must proceed in the cure, as it folowethe. First lay to
a plaster of Vnguentum refrigeratiuum, and some what cleauynge, as vnguentum
cerusse well sodden. Than perce it in the midst, and put in the hole, of
the caustique medicyne above mentyoned made of lie, the quantytye of a lentyle.
And upon thyes things ye must lay a plaster of Vnguentum de Tutia
refrigeratynum. Let the place be well bound and suffer not the Medicyne to
abide upon it, but an hour.
For this caustyque Medicyne has strength, to break the node in the space
of an hour, even to the chistis or purse. To root up the node clearelye, you
must use Trocisques the Minio, or the foresaid Linte putting it in to the
hole, as we have taught before, or with Vnguento Egyptiaco, of our descriptyon.
When the carnosytie is taken away, ye must mundifye, and cicatrise the place,
as it is said before.

But if the node be knottye, A knottie node.
ye must not proceed in no wise with a caustique Medicyne, (we call a knottye
node that, that growethe upon the synnowes) for the said Medicyne might bring
the place to a cancrosyte or cankerdnes. The reason is, because the place is
sinnowie, and paynfull, and the mattyer gross. Therefore if a caustyque
Medicyne should be laid to it, it were to be douted, lest the place would
comme to a Canker. For the nature of caustyque Medicynes is, to leave in ye
place, where it has wrought, some malignyte, and evil complexion.

In the cure of this nodatyon, we must proceed with familiare resolutyues,
having some virtue of mollifiynge, as this descriptyon. of the roots of
Holyhock sodden, and strayned.. iiij. of the oil of lyllies, Camomil, and
roses. Ana.. j. of capo^s greece, and gose greece, Resolutiue.
of the oil of sweet Almandes. Ana.. vj. of calves tallowe, of the marye of an
ox legs.. x. of clear terebentyne. Ana.. j. and. ss. of white Diaquilon
without gummes.. ij. of lytarge of gold.. ij. and. ss. boil thies forsayde
things upon the fire, stirrynge them ever about till they becomme some what
black, tha^ put to of white wax as much as shall suffyce and make a soft
cerote. For it is merueylous good in this case, to appayse pain and to
mollifye with resolutyon.

If ye see that this nodatyon will come, to a cankerednes, it shall be good to
boil with the foresaid cerote two onces of the juice of plantayne strayned,
and as much of the juice of nightschade unto the consumptyon of the juice,
addyng of Camphore.. j. and. ss. of tutie.. vj. we have noted many other
remedies in the chapi. of the cure of Sephiros, which ben good for the cure of
this nodation.

The.vj. Cha. universal, in which breifely, and distinctly is treated of ye
true knowledge of all exitures flegmatike, which may be contained under the name
of an Aposteme.
WE have plainly declared of al kinds of nodes, and nodatio^ in the two former
chapitres. we will speak in this present cha. of scrophules, and other
excrescences like unto them.

All thyes kinds Scrophules, Excrescences be^ outgrowynges.
Glandules, Bubo, Natta, Bocium Scphiros, Lupia, and Testudo ben engendered of
gross mattier, and flegmatike.

Scrophules ben hard, Scrophules
engendered for the most part of gross mattyer and flegmatike. And they that been vexed with this disease, be me^ give to much eating, and flegmatyke
persons, and that use flegmatike meats. And they may be engendered in all
the parts of man's body, cheifely in the neck, under the armeholes and in the
prive members. Some say that scrophula is named of scropha that sygnifieth a
sow, which is a gloutonouse and flegmatyke beast, and scrophules grow often
in them by reason of their much eating.

Scrophules differ from glandules in many things. Scrophules (...)
glandules differ.
First in nombre. For scrophules ben many ha^ging one after another, after the
facyon of a cluster of grapes upon the skin, and they ben not without pain.
And Auice^ne says that wha^ scrophules come to Cancrosyte, it chances, by
reason of the pain. For pain in every hard mattier is a sign of ca^ker.
Glandules ben few in nombre, and without pain in touching metely soft, but
scrophules ben harder, and have their roots more fyxed, than glandules, and
move not from their place as glandules do, which move as easily as if they
were separated from the flesche, and therefore we say that they have no roots.

Testudo dyfferethe from all other, Testudo.
and it is a kind of great Exitures, and takethe his name of the place where
it grows and comes often to mattier, for it is full of humors. Moreover it is
soft of nature having largenes, and great appearau^ce, with pain of the body.
And it is called Testudo, because it is like a snayle, called in Latin Testudo.

Bocium.
If it grow in the neck it is called Bocium, Talpa.
if in the head, it is called Talpa, Hernia.
and if it chance in the stones it is named Hernia Fistulosa and carnosa.

Lupia.
Lupia is a little knobbe, like a Lupine and it is round, and soft. They
begin often in the places of the ioynctures, and in the eye lyddes.

Natta.
Natta is a great fleschie eminence like soft flesche, and it is in sondrye
forms, and comes sometimes to the quantytie of a Melon, and some times to
the greatness of a courde. And it has sondrye names, according to the places,
in which it is engendered as we have said of Testudo, but we need not to pass
for the names so that we have the true intentyon of healynge.

All thies kinds of eminences, ben engendered of a cause primityue, antecedente
and conioyncte. The cause primityue is evil regiment in eating and drynckynge.
The cause antecedent, is the multitude of fleame hardened, and dried. The cause
conioyncte, is the humor gathered to the place.

Scrophiles.
As concerning Scrophiles some ben paynful, and have part of an hot humor and
ben read, and not very hard. Thies may be healed by resolutyon, or by
suppuratyon. Sometimes they ben great, and old, and have coniunctyon with
synnowes, and veins and are of evil color. Take no cure of the^, for they
comme often to a Canker. Ye may have the same judgment of glandules when they
comme to malignitie, and cancrosytie. Consydre well their signs, that ye may
know, when they ben evil. There chance in the emunctories certain hard
emynences called Bubo and fugile, and they have conjunction with the synnowes.

The seventh Chapitre of the cure of Scrophiles, glandules, and like emynences.
THe cure of glandules, The cure of glandules. etc.
Scrophiles and excrescences of the same nature, is accomplisshed by four
intentyons. The first is good regiment of diete. The second is to take away
the mattier co^ioyncte by medicines resolutiue. The third, to purge the
mattyer antecedent. The fourth, to take away the mattyer co^ioyncte by handye
operatyon, or by the applicatyon of a caustyque medicyne, when they can not
be healed by resolutyon.

The first intentyon is accomplisshed according to that, Diete.
that is said in the Chapitre of the cure of nodes. In this case the patyent
must endure ho^gre, as much as is possible, and keep him self from eating
unto vomit. He must have his head laid high nether must he sleep
grouelyng, wha^ he slepeth, likewise he must not speak much, nor laughe when
he speaks.

For the accomplisshement of the second intentyon let the mattyer be thus
digested.. Oximel compositu^, Digestive.
of Syrup of Sticados, of honye of Roses. Ana.. ss. of the waters of
scabiouse, Endiuie, and Fumiter. Ana.. j. mengle the^. After yt he has used
this digestife, let hi^ be purged with this purgatio^. Purgation.
. of Diacatholicon of Diaphenico^, of electuarij indi maioris. ana.. ij make a
small potion with the common decoction adding of syrup of violettes.. i.
and. ss. Eight days after that he has used this medicine to euacuate the
matter antecedent, it is good to take every day in the morning one of these
pills, Pills.
by the space of fourtye days, except the two days when the moon
changes.. of Euphorbiu^ of ginger, of turbith, of the juice of ye roots of
Ireos, of Agarike. ana.. i. make xl. pylles with the said juice.

Also it shall be very good to take every evening a little of this compositio^.
of honey of roses, of syrup of sticados. ana.. iiij. of suggre.. iij. of
agarike in trocisques.. ss. of salis gemme, of spike, of cinnamome, of
galangale. ana. ij. of cloves, of macis. ana.. i. of polipodie.. i. ss. of
turbith preparate.. ij. of long pepper.. ij. make a confection of al these
with the wine of quynces. The receyte of this is.. ss. It is of excellent
operation to take away an euel flegmatyke complexion in any body, it
rectifyeth the evil qualite, and purges the gross humor.

The third intention which is to take away the matter conioynct is
accomplyshed by the administration of locale medicines, which may resolve this
matter and mollifye it. Of which this is one of good effect. A cerote
resolutiue.
. of ye muscilage of holyhocke of fenugreke, linsede, of dry fygges.li. i. of
common oil, of oil of lillies, and camomille.. ij. of capons greece, gose
greece, and swynes greece melted, of clear terebentine of wethers tallowe
melted. ana.. ij. and ss. of lytarge of gold well brayed, and cersed.. viij.
Let the^ boil al together to the consumption of the juice and muscilage, the^
with sufficient new wax make a cerote, cla^mysh and cleauynge, adding of
armoniake, Iris sygnifyeth a flouredeus.
of galbane dissolved in vynegre. ana.. i. of new ireos well brayed.. i. and.
ss. sees them altogether, and make a cerote after the manner of diaquilon. This
cerote is sovereign to resolve scrophules and all other glandules, procedyng of
flegmatyke matter.

Another remedy to this ente^tio^. Plaster.
. of white diaquilon, of great diaquilo^, of ye swette of shepes woulle, called
isopus humida. ana.. i. of ysope of galenes cerote.. x. of the juice of
flouredelys.. ss. of the juice of affodilles.. i. of ye muscilage of
holihocke.. iiij. Let them boil altogether, unto the consumptio^ of the
muscilage, then put to, of clear terebe^tine.. vi. of whyt wax, as much as
shall suffice, make a cerote. Item to the same inte^tion.. of galbanu^, of
serapine of Opopo. armoniake. ana.. ss. of the decoction of flouredelis.. ij.
of white vynegre.. ij. and. ss. dissolve the^ altogether, and boil them unto
consumption of the juice, and decoction, then add of oil of lillies, of
clear terebentine of white wax. ana.. iij. let them boil again one boylyng,
and put to of brayed flouredelis.. ij. Another. of the roots of lillies.. iij.
of the seeds of water cresses, of ireos cut according to breadth. ana.. i.
boil the^ in sufficient water till the sede of ye watercresses be broken, then
press them, and stamp them. Which thing done make a plaster in the muscilage
of the foresaid things, with branne well brayed, and sodden wine, as much as
the muscilage shall be.

This plaster is excellent to resolve scrophules, so that they be not paynful
and suspected of a canker. A cerote.
To the same inte^tio^.. of armoniake, and galbane dyssolued in vynegre, and
add a little terebentine and a little mastique gu^me and a little of the roots
of flouredelis well brayed, of oil of lyllies, of he^nes greece. ana.. iij.
reduce these things to the form of a cerote upon the fire, according to
art. It is a good remedy for scrophules.

If it chance that the scrophules ca^ not be resolved by the medicines
aforesaid, but that they come to the way of maturation, it avails much, to
help ye maturation forward. Maturatiue.
The maturatiue of scrophules must be such. of the roots of holihocke, of
lilly roots. ana.li. ss. when they ben sodde^ in sufficient water sta^ped,
and strained, put unto them of garleke headdes roasted under the coals.. iij.
and as much of whyt oynions roasted after the same manner: of oil of lillies,
and buttyre. ana.. ij. of swynes greece, gose greece. ana.. ij. and. ss. which
done in the decoction of holyhocke with the flower of wheat, fenugreke and
lynsede make a plaster at the fire, adding in ye end, the yolks of.ij.
eggs. These things well incorporated help meruaylously to the maturation of
scrophules. Ye must use this plaster a great while before ye open the
scrophules that all the matter may be turned into quitture, and be purged by
the opening.

When they ben ripe ye must open them, with a caustique medicine made of
capitell, after the doctrine written in the chapitre of nodes. Or ye may open
them with a crooked lau^cette called, ga^mauth, or with fire, so yt it be done
without hurt of ye synnowes or veins.

After ye openyng, for the mu^difycation, the dygestion, incarnation and
cicatrisation of ye place, it is convenient to do according to that, yt is
declared in the chapitre of the cure of nodes.

The fourth intention, which is to take away ye matter co^ioynct, by ha^dy
operation, is accomplished as it follows

If ye perceive yt scrophules, or gla^dules can not be healed by the way of
resolution, nor by things maturatiue come to maturation, ye must use handy
operation, to attain to the true cure But ye must beware that ye cut not,
the great veins. Cut the scrophules wisely according to ye le^gthe,
Incision.
beginning at one end and going to the other, and cut the skin above till
ye come to the carnosite of the said scrophules, and glandules. The^ draw them
out with your nails, or with some convenient instrument, roots and all. To
which busynes there needs an expert chirurgien. Furthermore ye must know yt
when ye scrophules ben in places nygh to great veins, and that they ben fixed
in them, as in the neck and under the jaws, it is best not to meddle with
them. For it is a divine thing and not of man, to heal them as ye French
king, in touching only did heal the^. This is in the French only.
For after that he had touched them they dried and came to good cicatrisatio^.

After that ye have plucked them up by the roots, join ye parts together in
a low place, ever leaving a little conduycte, or hole beneth, and then heal
them up after ye cure of fresh wou^des.

Thus we have healed many to our worship, and profit of the patie^tes The
curation is after this form. we did lay to a dygestiue four days, and then
we mundifyed, it after mundification we used, an abstersive of honye of roses,
finally we filled it up with vnguentum de minio.

If it chanced that there remained in the place any part of the scrophules
then we used for the extirpation of the same our pouldre precipitate, or
vngue^tum Egyptiacum of our dyscription, or we did put in the place a grain of
arsnike, or of sublimate between the superfluous flesh.

The manner to apply this remedy is this, cut the scrophule well nyghe to
the mydle, or else unto ye root with a sharp instrument, as with a lau^cette
or a prouuet, and in the hole, put ye qua^tite of a wheat grain of arsnike or
of sublimate, or of a trocisque of minium and renew the said remedies, as need
shall require. These ben the remedies that we would write, for the cure of
scrophules, and glandules.

The.viij. of an Aposteme sclirotike or hard called Sephiros.
Aposteme sclirotyke.
IN ye former chapitre. we have declared the cure of scrophules, glandules, and
like eminences, now we speak of an aposteme called Sephiros. Sephiros as
Auice^ne says, is an hard aposteme without pain, chefly when he is pure.

He is pure (as the said doctor testifyeth) when there is nether pain nor
feeling adjoined to him. But when it is with feeling, Sephiros vnpure
or pain, it is called Sephiros vnpure. So then there ben two kinds namely
pure, and not pure. A Sephiros not pure is, of two kinds, cankreous and not
cankreous.

Not ca^crous.
Sephiros not ca^kreous is double, that is to say, that it is some times me^gled
with some other kind of an aposteme, as Herisipelas, or flegmon and then
necessarely it causes pain. And it is more easily cured by the way of
resolution then the other. And it has feeling, and causes grefe, when it is
touched, and when it is not touched and it is not cankreous, which is against
the opinion of Dinus saying, that an aposteme that has pain, and feeling by
him self or by accident, is cankreous. There is yet another kind of an
aposteme not pure, and not cankreous, having feeling when it is touched. And
this kind of Sephiros receaueth curation by the way of resolution, and
nevertheless it is with dyfficultie.

Moreover there is another not pure and cankreous, of which these ben the
signs, pryckynge, beatynge, and enflamynge pain, Signs.
and it has round about it, certain little veins full of melancholyke
blood. To verifye that, that we have said Auicenne says, some times
Sephiros is cankered. etc.

The approchynge of Sephiros with a canker is known, by the infla^mation, and
pulsation, and by the appearau^ce of veins that been about. Rasis testifyeth
this thing saying, as often as ye find the accidents of an hot aposteme as
pain, inflammation, and pulsation, then ye may judge that the aposteme is of
the kind of ca^kers. Thus it appears that Sephiros called cankreous must
have the forsayde accidents, as inflammation etc. Auicenne says that Cancer
and Sephiros ben so like together, that they dyfferre not but only in the
accide^tes, and they are caused of one matter.

There ben five things, Cancer and Sephiros dyfferre.
in which Cancer dyffereth from Sephiros, namelye pulsation, inflammation,
pryckynge, sharp pain, and appearaunce of veins. And therefore when Sephiros
is not well cured, it comes easily to a canker. For as Aristotle says,
things that been of such affinite pass easelye the one to the other. This
aposteme is engendered of gross fleame, and it is of a whytyshe color.
Sometimes it is engendered of natural melancholye, and then the color is
palyshe or blewysh. Sometimes of two cold humors that is of fleame and
mela^choly, and then the color is between white and blewe. We have
sufficientlye showed how apostemes ben compounde.

There are three causes that induce sephiros, primitive, antecedent, and
conioyncte. The primitive is a dyete that engenders fleame, and melancholye.
The cause antecedent is, a multitude of evil humors gathered in the body The
conioynt is the said humor melancholyke, or flegmatyke gathered in the place
of the aposteme. Thus we end this chapitre concerning the co^templation of
Sephiros, for which the name of god be praised.

The.ix. chapitre of the cure of Sephiros.
The cure of Sephiros.
IN the former chapitre we have declared what an aposteme sclyrotyke is, and
what been the kinds of the same. In this present chapitre we will speak of
the cure of Sephiros, which has four intentions. The first is to order dyete.
The second is to dygeste the matter antecedente, and to purge the same with
convenient medicine. The third is, to take away the matter conioyncte by
application of agreeable things upon the aposteme. The.iiij. inte^tio^ is, to
correct ye accide^ts

The first intention is acco^plyshed by the administration of good meats and
drynkes.
The patient therefore must use meats that engendre good, and subtyle blood,
as veale, kyddes flesh, mutton of a year old, hens, pertriges, chyckens,
faisantes, and birds living in bushes, and trees. He must abstain from
water foul, and such as have great bodies, as cranes, geese, bittardes, and
such like. For they engendre gross and melancholyke blood, ye may sees in
the broth of ye forsayde flesh herbs yt enge^dre good and subtyle blood, as
laictuce, borage, buglosse, endiuie, persely in small qua^tite. Likewise ye may
give the patient potage made of wheat or rise sodden with the foresaid flesh.
In like manner al brothes made with borage ben good in this case. He must abstain
from all poulse that engendre gross and melancholyke blood, as peasen,
beans, lentyles. etc. Also from marryshe fyshes and fe^nie, and dry oystres,
and all other fyshe, except them that have read color, and them that live
among stones, as perches, and other living in stones or rocks of the Sea,
which ben of a bright color and have little bodies, nevertheless creuises ben
permyted. Finally he must forbear all meats that engendre gross blood as
beef, porcke. etc. Ye may moreover give to the patient mean wine, well
delayed, and it ought to be white and of good odoure. The patient must not use
to great exercise and watchinges Brefly let him live moderately in all things.
For as we have said, there is nothing better then to live honestly, and merely.

The second intention, which is to digeste the matter antecedent, is
acco^plyshed in using this dygestiue. Syrup.
. of syrup de duabus radicibus, of honey of roses strayned, of syrup of
vynaygre called acetosus symplex. ana.. ss. of the water of fumiterre, and
buglosse. ana.. i. After that the patie^t has used this syrup ye space
of.viij. or.x. days, let him be purged with this purgation.. of diacatholicon,
Purgation.
of cassia. ana.. ss. of agaryke in trocisques of diaphinicon. ana.. i. and ss.
with the decoction of epithymu^, seen, polipodie, hertes tongue, and of cordial
flowers, and fruits make a small potion, adding of syrup of violettes.. i.
and. ss Item it is good to use these pylles, after that the patient has used
the foresaid digestive.. of agarike in trocisques.. ss. of pylles aggregatiue,
of pylles called fetyde ye greater. ana.. i. me^gle them, and make.v. pills with
aqua vite

In this case we have found it good to use this electuary following. Electuary.
. of agaryke in trocisques.. i. of turbith preparate.. ij. of the coddes of
seen, of epythymu^. ana.. i. of the spyces of diarodon abbatis.. iij. of
mirobolanes calied kebuli, emblici and bellirici. ana.. i. make an electuarye
in morselles with sufficient suggre. The patie^t must use this electuarye ones
a weke, taking in the morning the quantity of a nut, and that after
digestion.


Note that in this case the physician must not be contented to use one or two
purgations, but must renew the same, and beware that he give no strong
purgation. Mesue says, following Galene, yt it is a point of a wise
physician, not to purge exquisitly in melancholyke, and gross matter, but ever
moderatly to proceed, and by little and little. The same doctor says also that
it is a general rule, in melancholyke dyseases, not to purge ones or twyse
only, but oftener by interpositio^ of time, and by moderat medicines, that
nature may rule the euacuatio^, and not contrary wise the euacuation nature.
Pylles. lazulus.
Pills of the stone called Lazulus in this case ben praised of doctors.

The third intention which is to take away ye matter co^ioynt shall be
acco^plyshed, in layeng upon the aposteme resolutiue medicines, having virtue
to mollifye. and comfort the sore place, as Auicenne testifyeth. The reason is
because that if we proceeded in this case only with things mollifycatiue, there
should be danger, lest the moystnesse might bring the aposteme to a ca^ker
Likewise if we should proceed with things pure resolutiue, there might ensue
danger of resoluyng ye subtyle matter, the gross remaining, and turnynge to
lapidifycation or stonines. Wherefore to avoid these accidents, it is better
to use remedies having virtue resolutiue with some mollifycation, and
co^fortation of the place, then to use things of one only virtue. And Arzi. a
man of great authorite says, yt to proceed with one inte^tion, without error
should be very hard. Wherefore those medicines ben better that have two
effects, that is to say, to resolve and to molifye, with some little
repercussion at the beginning, and in the increase as this cerote under
written, Cerote both resolutiue and mollitiue.
which he must use from the beginning of sephiros, to the increase.. of the
roots of holihocke li. i. and. ss. of quinces, hole fenugreke, and lynsede.
ana. m^. i. when they ben al sodden in water, cut only the roots of
holihocke, and strain the^, and to that, that is strayned add of oil of
camomille, dille and roses. ana.. ij. of the marye of the legs of a calfe, of
duckes grese. ana.. i. and. ss. of the oil of sweet almandes.. x. make a soft
cerote with sufficient white wax.

This cerote is a sure medicine in this case it resolves by little, and little
and mollifyeth, and comfort ye sore place, as it appears to him, that
consydereth the ingredientes.

Another remedy for the same intention.. of the flower of barley, beans and
wheat. ana.. iiij. of camomil, of mellitote well sta^ped, of fine bra^ne ana.
m^. ss. of lensede, and fenugreke well brayed. ana.. i. make a styffe plaster
at the fyear, with the decoction aforesaid in the first ordination, with as
much sodden wine called sapa as the decoction is, adding in ye end of the
decoction, of oil of camomill, and dil, ana.. ij. of oil of roses.. i. and.
ss. of calves, and wethers tallowe. ana.. iij. of buttyre.. i.

When this aposteme is in the state ye may use this cerote.. of the roots of
holihocke.li. i. of the roots of buglosse.. ij. of the roots of flouredelis..
ss. of lillye roots.. iiij. sees them all in sufficient water, the^ stamp
them and strain them, and add to the straynynge of oil of camomill, and
dill. ana.. ij. and ss. of oil of lillies, of oil of agrippa, and of
Dialthea. ana.. vi. of Isopus humida, of isopus of ye cerote of Galene. ana..
x. of white diaquilo^.. iij. make a soft cerote with white wax, and if you
will have it of greater resolution add of armoniake dyssolued in vynegre..
iij. in the end of ye decoction. We have found often this plaster to be of
sovereign operation to resolve al hard apostemes, with some mollifycation.

Also to the same intention we have proved this cerote following to be of like
efficacitie, of which we have gote^ worship, and have profyted poor
patientes.. of the decoction of mallows and holihock, of the roots of la^ge
debuefe, of fenugreke, and lynsede, of ye sede of quynces, of psillium, of dry
fygges, of dates, and raysins. ana. as much as shall suffyce, of lytarge of
gold and silver, of calves tallowe, cowes tallowe, and bores grese. ana.. iij.
of buttyre.. x. of duckes grese, gose grese, capons grese, and he^nes grese.
ana.. x. of oil of camomille, dille, and lillies. ana.. ij. of oil of
violettes, roses, and of sweet almandes. ana.. vi. make a soft cerote at the
fire, and stir it about with sufficient quantity of the foresaid decoction
and with white wax.

Another good plaster.. of ye fat called ysope of Galenes cerote.. iij. of
plaster of mellilote.. iiij. of great diaquilon.. iij. and. ss. of calves
tallowe.. i. and. ss. of the marye of calves legs, of hens grese, and
duckes grese. ana.. x. mengle them, and make a soft cerote with sufficient
white wax.

Also in this case a plaster of melilote, of diaquilon magnum, of ysope of
Galenes cerote, been right good in ministrynge them one after another. Likewise
after application of ye foresaid playsters, and cerotes, it shall be good to make
embrocation with clouttes weted in the foresaid decoction and to lay them on
hot. For this euaporatyon before the applyenge of the plaster, or cerote, it
preparethe the matter to resolution, and maturation.

The fourth intention which is to correct the accidents, is accomplyshed, by
the administration of local medicines, which remove accidents namelye pain,
infla^mation, beatynge grief, and pryckyng, and appearau^ce of veins full of
melancholyke blood which accide^tes as we have showed in the former chapitre
sygnifye the coming of a cankreous matter.

Item great hardenes chaunseth in this aposteme, A mollitiue cerote.
for the mollification whereof, we have used this cerote.. of the roots of
Holihockes.li. i. of fenugreke, and lynsede, of every one. m^. ij. the head
and the fete of a wether, two fete of a calfe, and half his head, bruise them
all a little, and sees them in suffycient water, till the bones ben sondered
from the flesh, and let the Holihocke only be stamped, and strayned, to the
which straynynge add of oil of lillyes, camomill, and dille, of ysope of
Galenes cerote, of clear terebentine, of every one.. i. and. ss. of hens
grese, duckes grese, and gose grese of every one.. i. of diaquilon magnum. ij.
make a soft cerote of all with sufficient white wax with the forsayde
straynynge. The said cerote is very good to mollifye all stonye hardness.
But ye must always foment the place with the decoction that remains, of the
forsayde things in the cerote, namelye with clouttes weted in the said
decoction.

And if it chance that the aposteme come to quytture, ye must ripe the place
with a plaster of march mallows written in our antidotayrie, and make
incision after the doctrine declared in the chapitre of incision of apostemes
in general. And digeste the aposteme, mundifye, incarne and cicatrise it, as
it is written in the same chapitre.

when it chances that an Aposteme comes to a cankerdnesse, it must be cured
after the curation of a canker, which we will write hereafter by the grace of
god, whose name be praised.

The.x. Chaptre: of a canker.
A Canker (as Auicenne says) is an Apostem of adust or burnte melancholye,
through the adustion or burning of cholere, and not of pure feculent or
dreggysh melancholye, as Brunus says. The melancholy that causes a canker
comes to adustion two manner of ways. The one is by adustyon of subtyle
cholere. For when pure cholere comes to adustion, the subtle part is
resolved, and the thycke, and erthye remains and receives a burnte quality.

Melancholye
This melancholye is called malign melancholye procedyng through adustion of
cholere. Otherwise melancholye is called aduste, when it proceeds of natural
Melancholye, and so comes to adustion. And that melancholy comes to
adustion by the co^mixtion of choler with melancholye, and of that melancholye
aduste, a kind of a Canker is engendered, which has little pain and little
vlceration.

The form of a canker
A canker is at the beginning a little Aposteme, and for the most part round,
and sometime it begins through a pustle like a bean. It is hard, and of
duskyshe color round about, with the appearau^ce of veins full of
melancholyke blood.

And there been two kinds of ca^kers, Two manners of cankers.
that is to say, a canker vlcered and not vlcered. At the beginning, (as
Auicenne says) it is of an hid and priuye disposition, and for the most
part at the beginning, it is to be doubted, what it should be, but afterward
the signs of a cankered aposteme appear. Auicenne teaches us in this place
how a ca^ker begins and when it is confyrmed by signs, as by grefe. and.c.
And Galene also, saying: we may have a reason and way to know a canker, as
we have to know herbs, growing out of the ground. For when herbs grow out
of the earth, and been small, it is hard to know them. And as these small
herbs can not be known, at the beginning by vnexperte gardyners, so a canker
at the beginning is not known of an unlearned Chirurgyen.

A canker is divided after three manners. It is first divided after the
dyuersitie of the cause. For some canker is caused of melancholye, which is
adust by adustion of melancholye natural. And it is of slow vlceracio^ of
small pain, and of small increasement. That that is called of adustio^ of
cholere is of vehement malice, of great grefe, and corrupts swyftly. wherefore
Auicenne says, that this melancholye burnte, by adustyon of choler, is more
malicious, and vehementer than any other kind of melancholye. And that
chances by reason of his sharpness, and caliditie or heat. wherefore this
melancholye induces stronger, and vehementer accidents, than the other
melancholye aduste, procedynge of natural melancholye.

Moreover, it is divided according to ye diversity of me^bres. For one is
e^ge^dred in soft me^bres, as in ye flesh, an other in mean, as in synnowes,
and ligamentes, some in hard members, as in boones and grystles. Thyrdly, it
is divided, according to the diversity of time. For one is new, an other
old. It is sone known when it is old, by the time, and color, for it is
blewe, and black, and also by the borders, which ben gross and hard, and by
the greatenesse of the place vlcered.

A canker after the later doctors is only divided acordynge to the dyuersitie
of kinds, taking name of his place. For according as it is engendered in
sondrye places, it receives sondrye names. As when it chances in the face,
Noli me tangere.
it is called, noli me tangere. If it chance in the thyghes or in the legs,
it is called lupus, Lupus.
in other parts it is called a ca^ker. And they assygne an other dyfference,
and quality of complexion, and they say, that a canker called lupus or
woulfe, is caused of more burning choler, than Noli me tangere. But touching
the distinction of the later doctors, we have found nothing in ancient
writers.

A canker takes his name, for one of the two causes following (as Auicenne
says) namelye, because it stycketh to the members of the patient, as a
creuyce or a crabbe called in latyne cancer, in the hand of him, that holds
it, or it is called cancer, because of the round form, and because that all
about there been sondrye veins, as it were the feet of a crabbe or creuyce.

This canker (as Rasis writes, to king Almansor) is a disease in which is
great labor, and werynesse. Fynallye of the dyfference between a canker and
Sephiros, we have plainly written in the Chaptre of Sephiros. Note this one
thing, that a canker is engendered by ye way of co^mencement or beginning,
Sephiros by the way of co^sequution or following. Thus ends this chaptre for
which god be praised.

The.xi. Chaptre: of the cure of a canker, and his kinds.
WE have showed in the former Chapter what a canker is, The cure of a canker.
in this chaptre we will speak of his cure as well eradicatyue as palliatyue.
There ben four intentions necessary in this disease. The first is
accomplysshed by the ordinance of diete. The second, by digestyon of the
mattier antecedent. The third. by purgation of the mattier antecedent. The
fourth by a gentle resolution of the matter conioynct, with a comfortation of
the sore place.

The first and the second intention is accomplysshed after the doctrine
written in the Chaptre of the cure of Sephiros. The third intention, which is
to purge the matter antecedent, after digestion, is accomplysshed by medicynes
that purge evil humors. First let ye matter be thus dygested.. of syrup of
fumiterye, Digestyue.
of the iuces of sorell, of buglosse. Ana. ss. of the water of fumiterre,
Buglosse, and maydenheere. Ana.. i. mengle them. when the Pacient has used
this Syrup the space of ten days, let him be purged with this purgation..
of electuarie lenitiue, of Diacatholicon. Ana,. vi. of the co^fection of
Hamech.. iii. Make a small potion with the decoction of cordyal flowers, and
fruits of myrobolanes called Kebuli and emblici.

Note, that ye ought not to be contented with one purgation (as we have said)
for the matter is melancholyke: Neither must ye proceade with a strong
medicyne (as Galene testifyeth) saying: when the matter is melancholyke, ye
must purge it by little and little. wherefore we have written sondrye remedies
to digest and purge melancholye in the Chapter of Sephiros. Haliabas is of the
same opinion, touching the purgation of this matter, saying: be not content
with one purgation, in the mattier that causes a Canker, but purge it often,
till ye perceive, that the said mattier is clean euacuated.

Flebotomie
Galene and Auicenne say, that we may sometime use Phlebotomie chefely in a
young and strong body. And in this flebotomie large incision must be made,
that the gross melancholy blood may easily issue out.

Purgation
we have proved the purgation following in this case, and afterward the
purgation above named. And this is the form of it.. of the coddes of seen, of
epithimum. Ana.. i. of the confection of Hamech.. ii. of iuleb, of vyolettes,
of roses by infusion, of Buglose. Ana.. ss., of gootes whey. ii. mengle them.
Give this to the patiente in the morning, and this small purgation must often be
renewed.

The fourth intention which is to take away the matter conioynct, shall be
accomplysshed by the administration of conuenyent medycynes upon the canker.
And those shall be gentle resolutyues, resoluynge by little and little the
mattier conioynct, and they are pryncipally good when the canker is not
vlcered. Resolutyne
The first ordinance is this.. of the oil of Roses omphacine, of the oil of
vyolets Ana.. ii. of vnguentum rosarum, of Vnguentum Populeon. Ana.. x. of the
iuce of Plantayne, and nyghtshade. Ana.. ss. of the decoction of malowes,
vyolettes, and holyhocke, of the seed of Quynces, of Psillium sodden
according to art. li. i. of calves tallowe.. iiii. of the mary of calves
legs, and of an ox leg, of duckes grese, of oil of camomylle. Ana.. i.
Let them boil all unto the consumption of the iuce and decoction and than
strain them, and put unto the straynynge of white Diaquilon.. iii. of lytarge
of gold well brayed.. iiii. of tutia Alexandrina.. x. And make a soft cerote
with white wax by art and fire, styrrynge it about. This cerote is very good
in this case resoluynge matter, and comfortyng the place, with some
mollification.

Also to the same intention the descryption following is commendable. An other.
. of Oil of Roses.. ii. of Oil of Vyolettes.. i. of calves grese.. x. of the
iuce of nyghtshade and pla^tayne Ana.. i. let them boil unto the consumption
of the juice, than strain them, and stir them about in a mortare of lead
two hours.

If it chance that the canker be engendered in such a place, that it may be
roted up without cuttyng of great veins, and synnowes, and if it be in a
strong body, you may use incision, or cauterisation, and it shall be a true
curation.

Anicenne says, that a canker at the beginning may be healed, but when it
is confyrmed, it receives not true curation. And it chances often in the
inner parts, so that his generacyon is hyd, and than it may be easily
rectifyed.

The rectification is, that it be not moved with a strong medycyne. For if it
be moved with a strong medicyne, it may bring the pacient to sudden death.

But if ye proceed with gentle medicynes, it is possible that the life of the
patient may be prolonged, and some health recovered in palliynge the canker.

It is euydent by the authority of ancient men, that an old and malygne
canker can not be healed by true cure, that is to say, by incision or
cauterisation, or application of medicynes. wherefore Albucazar cou^sayleth
this, when a canker is old and confyrmed, meddle not with it. And he says
moreover, that he never saw nor heard that any body was healed of an old
canker. This it appears that Hipocrates doctrine is true,
which says it is best not to take cure of them that have hydden cankers,
but to use a cure palliatyue. If ye stop the canker, the humors which were
wont to come to the vlcered place, will go to the princypall members.

If it chance, that ye will make incision in this disease, ye must do it
wisely. For as Auicenne says, if the canker can not be cut to the roots,
it must not be cut at all, for incision brings the canker to vlceratio^ and
malignitie. But if the canker be tretable in the beginning, and of small
vlceration, and in such part of the body, that it may seem possible to be
rooted up by the way of incision, Incision.
than the Chyrurgien after a purgation made by conuenyente medycynes, or by
Flebotomye, as we have said, may cut it up by the roots. After incision and
extirpatio^, and that the melancholyke blood is taken away: ye must lay an
hoote iron upon the sore place, till ye touch the quycke flesh. For as Ouyde
says all things are first to be attempted but an incurable sore must be
cut away, that the sincere part be not infected.

After this ye must procure the fall of the escarre, To remove an eschare.
with buttyre or swynes grese, or with this playstre. Take of the decoction of
holyhocke, mallows, and vyolettes. li. ii. of barlye flower as much as shall
suffyce, to be incorporated with the said decoction, than let them boil at ye
fire a little while till they been thycke, and add of oil of roses and
vyolettes. Ana.. ii. and with the yolks of two eggs, and a little saffran,
make a playstre. This playstre appayseth pain as it appears by the simples,
of which it is co^pounde. And it mollifyeth and resolves the matter that is
about the sore place, and was drawn thither by cauterisation, or incision, and
it has also virtue to comfort the place.

Note that in all times of this disease, ye must beware of to much humiditye
or moystnesse. For humiditie (as Aristotle says) is the mother of all
corruption, and putrificaction. wherefore it seems better to make the eschare
fall away with this Playstre, than with butyre or swynes grese.

After that the escharre is fallen of ye must mundify the place with this
mundificatyue. A mu^dificatyue.
. of clear terebentin washed with barlye water.. iii. of oil omphacyne, of
syrup of Roses by infusyon. Ana.. i. ss. of the juice of plantayn, and
nyghtshade, which is morell. Ana.. ii. of the juice of smallage.. ii. Let them
boil al together unto the consumption of two parts of the three of the said
iuyces, than strain them, and add thereunto the yolke of a new laid egg, of
barlye flower, and lentyle flower well cersed and new. Ana. ss. of Saffran..
i. mengle them.

This playstre mundifyeth without mordication or bytyng, and it is abstersyue
with exiccation, and co^fortation of the place.


Note, that in all the time of this Aposteme, it is not conuenyent to use
things incarnatyue, or things ouermoche abstersive, and desiccatiue which
been of hot complexion. But the oyntmentes and linimentes in ye cure of a
canker vlcered, must be of cold and dry quality, as been the pryncipall
oyntmentes compounde of mineralles, and with the juice of herbs which must be
labored a good while in a mortare of lead, which mortare of lead is praised
in this point, of al auctours.

Now will we show some receytes, and oyntmentes. And first vnguentum
magistrale of our invention, Vnguentu^ magistrale
which heleth vlceres, malign, cankerous, corrosyue, and other like, howbeit,
we admonyshe you that ye observe the doctrine universal, and particular above
named. This is the form of the said ointment.. of ointment of Roses after
the descryption of Mesue.. ii. of Vnguentum populeon.. i. and. ss. of oil
myrtyne, of oil of roses, made of unripe olyues. Ana.. iii. of calves
tallowe.. iiii. of the juice of plantayne and nyghtshade. Ana.. ii. and. ss. of
the juice of houseleke, These been kinds of mayde^heer
of gallitricu^ and politricu^, of the croppes of briars. Ana. m^. i. of
wodbinde, and grounswell or penygrasse. ana. m^. ss. stamp the things that been to be stamped with the said calves suette, than let them abide together the
space of a day, and afterward let them be boiled together until the juice
be consumed. Than strain them, and add to the strayning as much white wax as
shall suffice and tha^ take them from the fire, and stir the^ about til they
be but warm which thing done, add of litarge of gold and silver well
brayed. Ana. ii. of burnt lead.. i. of cerusse.. i. of tutia Alexandrina, of
the poudre of fresh water creuyses dried in an oue^ ana. 3. x. of camphore. 3.
ii. of the stone called an amethist.. iii. mengle them and labor them in a
mortare of lead.

An other liniment for the same intention.. of oil of roses, A liniment.
omphacine, of vnguentum rosarum. Ana.. i and. ss. of ye iuce of plantayne,
laictuce nyghtshade, and purselane. ana.. ii. of litarge of gold and silver.
an^.. i. of tutia alexandrina.. ss. make a lynime^t of all these, according to
art, laboryng it and styrryng it in a mortar of lead the space of a day.
This liniment is marvelous good to defend the canker from encreasynge, and
swageth pain, and avails as well against a canker vlcered, as not vlcered.

An other, An other.
. of the muscilage of psillium and quinces.. i. ss. of the iuce of coriandex,
or in the stead thereof, of sorel.. ss. of oil of roses.. ii. of litarge of
gold and silver.. ii. of tutia. 3. ii. of cerusse.. ss. of burnt lead.. iii.
ye yolke of a new laid egg, of womans milk. v. of opium grains.iiii. of
camfore grains.ii. mengle them and labor the^in a mortare of lead six
hours.

we have found it good to wash the vlcered place with this decoction of the
water of roses, of the water of playntayne, of the water of night shade. Ana..
ii. of Myrobolane citri. of flowers of Pomegranades. Ana. 3. ii. of roche
Alumme.. ss. braye first the things that been to be brayed, than boil them
all together a little, afterward strain them, and wash the place often.

An ointment to the same intention. of oil of Roses, of oil mirtine. Ana. l.
ss. of calves suette, An other.
and cowes suette. Ana.. iiii. of the juice of plantayne and nyghtshade. Ana..
iii. let them boil all together till the juice be consumed, than strain them,
and add to the straynynge of litarge of gold and silver. Ana.. ii. of
cerusse, bole armenie, of terra sigillata of minium. Ana.. i. set them to the
fire again, and stir them ever, and with suffycyente white wax make a soft
cerote, adding in the end of the decoction of camphore.. i. A sign of
perfect decoction of this unguent is, when it waxes black or blakish This
unguent put upon cloutes, and laid upon the canker, is a good remedy.

Furthermore, if it chance after the incision of a canker, or cauterisation,
that there remayn any malign or superfluous flesh which must be taken away,
there is nothing better than our poudre of mercury or quick silver, which is
of excellent operation and byteth away all malign, super fluous, and corrosiue
flesh, and the lips or bourders of the ulcer which ben hard, and shellye
without any pain of the patient.

That, that I say of this pouldre, seems incredible, because we find in no
writers of corrosiue medicines that say, that there is any corrosiue medicyne,
which may take away superfluous flesh without pain. Nevertheless, this
pouldre does so, of which we will speak in our antidotarie (by the grace of
god) in the Chaptre of medicines corrosiues.

Thus ends the doctrine of this Chaptre, for which the name of god be blessed.

The.xii Chaptre: of wyndie Apostemes.
OF a Flegmaryke and mela^cholike humor, W^ndye Apostemes
there is engendered a gross ventosite or windiness, which being me^gled with
Flegmatike moisture engenders a wyndye aposteme by eleuatio^, which Aposteme
(as Auicene says) is like a soft Aposteme, that is to say, to Vndimia. And
because it is like vndimia, it is cured after the cure of vndimia, and it is
known by the signs of vndimia written in the chaptre of the same Aposteme.

Among other signs this is one, that if ye press your finger upon it, there
remains an holownesse in the place as in vndimia, but not so great. when any
membre comes to this Aposteme through gross vapors only. Auicenne calls
it a wyndye Aposteme by inflation. And the signs been these, when ye press
your finger upon this wyndy Aposteme, such holownesse is not caused, as in
Vndimia, but when ye touch it, it dryueth back the finger, and the holownesse
does not continue, as in the other. The reason is, that in Vndimia there is no
ventositie, or wyndinesse. And in this the ventositie is gathered into one
place, which refuses the pressynge of the finger, as when a man touches a
blader full of wind. And therefore Auice^ne says, that it goes, and comes
by courses.

And sometime because of the multitude of the wyndye mattier, and by cause of
the place, in which this mattier may be easily assembled, when the matter is
touched, it souneth like a taborette, and therefore Auicenne says trewlye,
that it resysteth the preassynge or strykyng of the hand, and chiefly when
this ventosite fyndeth space, in which it may be gathered in great quantity,
it exte^deth the place, and sou^deth wha^ it is touched. wherefore the said
Auicenne has right well declared the nature of this aposteme, saying: this
soundynge is caused by some ve^tosite gathered together in some place, apt to
receive the same, Places apt to receive wy^de.
as in the stomach, the guts and in the place that is between the pannicles
which compass about the bones, and between bones compassed about with
lacertes. For in all these places there is a certain vacuitie or e^ptie space,
in which ve^tositie may be assembled, and moreover in the room, which is
about the chordes. Furthermore there chau^ceth somtymes, so great ve^tosite in
certain great ioinctures, that often it makes the ioinct to go out of his
place. And this ve^tosite abides in the place of the ioincte, and it is not
easily resolved, which thing chances by reason of his grossenes, and by
reason of the thycknes of the membre, in which the ve^tosity is contained, and
because the poores ben shut. And Auicenne says that it is not lightly
resolved, and that it is enclosed between the ioinctures and thynneth, and
deuideth the members conioyncte or knytte together, and puttethe them out of
their propre places, as we said before.

we have often seen this ventositie assembled in some place in so great
quantity that when a man thrusts it down, pressynge one finger, and lyftyng
up another, he shall perceive the said ventositye to heave up between his
fyngers, as we perceive the redoundynge of quytture in certain apostemes. we
have seen this thing to have chanced in cankreous sephiros, and in windy
apostemes, by the inflation of great ioinctes.

Auicenne declares the foresaid signs in the cha. of a wyndy aposteme, and
says moreover, that a man thinks oftentimes, that he has an aposteme upon
some membre, as upon ye knee, that needs to be persed, but when it is persed
nothing comes out saving wind. wherefore in such case make no insition without
good co^syderation, lest ye be deceived as other have been. Thus we end this
present chapter, for which the name of God be praised.

The.xiii. chapi. of the cure of a wyndye aposteme by inflation.
WE have sufficientlye declared in the former chapter, The cause of windy
apostemes.
what wyndye apostemes been, in this present Chapter we will speak of the
cure thereof, which conteyneth.iiii. intentions. The first is to order diete,
that ye evil humor may be distroyed, and a good engendered. The second
intention is partly to digest the mattier antecedente, and partly to consume
the same. The third to purge the mattier being digested. The fourth, to correct
the accidents. The first which is to order diete, is accomplyshed by the
things written in the cha. of vndimia. Syrup.
The second which is, to digest the mattier is accomplyshed by vsyng this
syrup the space of a weke. R. of syrup de duabus radicibus, of honey of roses.
an^.. vi. of ye water of fenell, maiden hear and scabiouse. ana.. i. After
that he has used this syrup the space of a weke let him be purged with
this purgation. R. of diacatholicon.. i. Purgation.
of diaphenicon.. ss. make a small potion with the water of fenel, and
fumiterre, addyng of diacyminu^.. ss. It is good also to give the patient a
little triacle, with a little Diaciminum, so that he fast seven hours after.

And forasmuch as this ventosite is engendered by the error of the virtue
digestive, it is good to comfort the virtue digestyue with aromatyke spices of
diacyminu^, and diacalamentu^, or with this dredge, which takethe away
ventositie.. of Cumine carwaies, A dredge powder.
Anise, fenell, of the beryes of laurel. ana.. ss. of liqueritie, of
Gala^gale, of white ginger. an^.. ii. of long pepper, of cubebes, of cloves, of
the sede of rue. ana.. i. of anise, of sweet fenell, of coriandre. an^.. i. and
ss. of sugre tabarzet.li. ii. of cynamome.. v. poudre those that may be
poudred, and make a dredge of al, and take a sponefull at ones, with a little wine
of good odor. we have found this dredge to be of good operation in consumynge
ventosities, chieflye those that been in the stomach, and in the belly.

Note also yt the purgation above written, is right convenient in this case,
for it purges mattier, that chau^geth it self into ve^tositie. Or ye may
purge the patient with some other solutiue, as it shall seem good to you, after
the strength of the patiente, and of the place in which such ventosite is
engendered, so yt ye comfort the strength of the membre, wherein the ventolite is
found, chieflye if it be in the stomach.

The third intention which is to take away the mattier conioyncte, is
accomplyshed by the administration of resolutiue medicines upon the parts in
which the ventositie is contained.

And first we have found this remedy to be very good. R. of the oil of
camomyll, Resolutiue
of dyl, of rue, and of lillies. ana.. i. of oil of laurel.. ss. of white
wax.. v. mengle them together. Ye must rub the place with these foresaid
things, and afterward lay upon it, an hot sponge weted in this decoction that
folowethe. R. of camomille, melilote, A decoction.
and dylle an^. m^. i. of sweet fenel, of anise. an^.. ss. of cumine.. ii. of
branne, of beans somewhat broken, an^. m^. i. and ss. of millium. m^. ii. Let
the^ boil all together with sufficient lie, and red wine, to the consumption
of the third part. The sponge weeted in this decoction is a great remedy in
this case.

If this aposteme be in the knee, or any other great ioyncture of the body, it
shall be good to apply to it, A plaster resolutiue of ventosites.
this plaster yt follows. For it is of excellent operation, to resolve and
consume ventosities.. of cromes of broune bread.li. ss. of the flower of
beans, of the flour of orobus. an^.. vii. of camomille, mellilote well sta^ped,
of branne an^. m^. ss. make a styffe plaster at the fire with the foresaid
decoction, and as much new wine, adding in the end of the decoction of oil
of camomille, dylle, and lillies. an^.. ii. mengle them together, and lay it
upon the apostemed place after the manner of a plaster.

Also to the same intention we have found the plaster that follows to be
very good (chieflye when the aposteme has dured long time) in all cold
mattiers which come to the knees. This is the form thereof. Plaster.
R. of gotes dunge well brayed.. iii. of camomille, melilote, and dylle. an^.
m^. ss. of branne, of the flower of beans, of the flower of lentiles. ana..
iii. of the flour of orobus.. ii. make a styffe plaster at the fire with
sufficient sodden new wine, and barbers lie, and thick red wine, adding of
oil of camomille, and dylle. an^.. ii. If ye will have a stronger virtue to
consume windines, wha^ the place is not enflamed nor paynfull (for oftentimes,
as Auicenna says it is found with infla^mation, and pain) ye may add of
cumine.. v. of sweet fenell of coriandres. ana..ii. of oil of rue.. i. ss. we
have often proved this plaster with worship and profitte.

Here follows another to the same intention, Another
take of the flour of beans.. iiii. of bra^ne well ground. m^. i. make a
plaster at the fire with sodde^ new wine, addyng of oil of camomil, of dylle.
an^.. ii. of oil of roses, and violettes. ana.. i. and ss. This plaster is
very good, when bysydes inflation of the place, there is inflammation, and
pain. For it swageth grief, and resolves ventositie.

And likewise this plaster following has the same virtue. Another.
R. of camomille, melilote, dylle. ana. m^. i. of bra^ne. m^. ii. of hole
fenugreke, and linsede. an^.. iiii. of corianders, of sweet, fenell. ana.. vi.
of holihocke.li. ss. Let them boil all to gether with sufficient water, and
make a styffe plaster in the decoction, with bean flour, addyng of oil of
roses, myrte, violets, and camomille. ana.. ii. of dylle.. ii. and ss. Also ye
may make in the decoction a plaster with the cro^mes of broune bread only, and
the oils above named, which appayseth grief.

Note that the remedies in this disposition ought to be hot. For actual cold
annoyeth greatly wyndye apostemes.

If it chance that gross ventosities been engendered in ye stones, An especial
plaster.
or in ye belly, than to succourre the pain and torsions or grypynges caused
by the same, ye may use this remedy under written, which we have proved often
to be good. R. of camomille, melilote, dylle. an^. m^. i. of parietorie, of
branne ana. m^. i. and ss. of sweet fenel, namely of his leaves and seeds, of
anise, and coriandres. an^. m^. ss. of cumine, squinantu^, sticados. an^. a
little. Of the asches of vinebraunches, of a figgetre branches. m^. i. of
millium. m^. ii. let them boil all together with sufficient water, and a
little white wine of good odoure unto the consumption of the third part.

The manner of ministrynge this remedy is, to take good quantity of flax or
hurdes, and to moist it in the decoction, and to lay it to, hot upon the
belly, or upon the paynfull place, and ye must always keep it hot, layenge
upon it, hot cloutes.

Also before the aplication of the said flax, it shall be good to rub the
place with this ointment. R. of oil of camomil, of dylle. an^.. ii. of oil of
rue.. i. make a liniment with sufficient white wax. Item in the stead of the
foresaid flax, ye may use the decoction before named with a large sponge.

Furthermore we have found it good, to lay upon the bellye an ox blader,
full of the said decoction, in the^ which ben vexed of ye colyke procedynge of
wyndye mattier. But ye shall understand that ye ought to remove and chaung
your remedies often.

The fourth intention, which is to correct the accidents, is accomplyshed by
administration of things, ye resolve moderatly, Accidentis.
and appayse griefs. And the accidents that chance co^munely in this
aposteme ben these namely pains, and inflations of the place, chiefly wha^ the
aposteme chau^ceth in a place nygh the ioynctures of a cause primitive.

wherefore Auice^ne said well in the cha. of a wyndye aposteme, that ventositie
procedyng of breaking, or brusyng the lacertes, must have a difference from a
wyndy aposteme caused of a primitive cause, and must be succourred with
resolutyue medicines, having somewhat mengled unto the^, that appaiseth grief.
The reason is, that when compounde diseases been coupled with some evil
accident (as pain is) than the remedies of these diseases, must have virtue of
sundry things put in composition, because of the sundry accidents.

Galene also mainteyneth the same opinion in his book de ingenio sanitatis.
wherefore we have of Auicenne a general rule, A disease of diverse properties
must have diverse curations.
that when sundry diseases ben joined together, for the curation of the same,
we must considre one of these three properties. There is one property, that
can not be healed, till the other be healed, as when an aposteme is joined with
an vlcere, we must begin at the curation of the aposteme. For the vlcere can
not be healed, except the aposteme be healed first. The second is, wha^ one
disease is caused of another. The third when the tone is more paynfull than
the other.

Now in this wyndye aposteme caused by the breaking, or brusyng of lacertes,
we must considre the malady and the accidente of the maladye, that is to say,
the ventositie, the attrition, and the pain. And we must conclude that in
these things joined together, we ought to begin at that, whereof we have
most fear. The perilousest first to be healed.
If it be evident that pain is the principal accident, of the disease, and
most suspected, we must begin by the administration of things that swage
pain, and nevertheless we must not leave of, the cure of the disease.

Than the remedies that must be laid upon this wyndye Aposteme ought to be
moderately resolutyue, and have some virtue to comfort the sore place, Plaster.
as this that follows. R. of camomil, melilote, dylle, roses. an^. m^. i of
mallowe leaves, of wormewoode leaves. an^. m^. i. and ss. of branne. m^. ii.
let them boil al together with sufficient water, and than stamp them, and
make a styffe plaster by art and fire, with the cro^mes of bread, and bean
flower in the decoction, addyng of oil of roses, myrte, camo. and dylle, ana..
ii. mengle them again with that, that was stamped.

This plaster in this case is a sovereign remedy to swage pain with
resolution. Furthermore for the acco^plyshmente of this cha. after that ye have
swaged the pain, ye may profitably apply the remedies written for the
accomplyshment of the third intention. Thus we end this chapi. for which the
name of god be praised.

The third treatise of cold apostemes, and hot perticulerly, from the head
to the fete.
THe first cha. in which the cure of all pustles is contained, and the
generation of apostemes, and excresce^ces in the heads of children, chiefly of
the water in the heads of children, and of the passion called Talpa, and
topinaria, and of carbunculouse pustles. In the head many kinds of diseases
may chance, Apostemes or pustles in the head
as apostemes, cold, hot, quytterous, full of water, gla^dulous, and knotty.
which may be easily known by the doctrine declared in the former cha.

Howebeit we must note one doctrine touching the apostemes of the head, that
is, Repercussiues are not to be ministered about the head.
that we never apply upon the said apostemes repercussyue medicines, because
of the nerenes of the commissures. For repercussion might grievously hurt ye
brain.

If the apostemes in the head, ben hot they must be ryped according to the
doctrine written in the cha. of fiegmon, chieflye when the said apostemes ben
of a sanguine mattier. Incision.
After maturatio^ ye shall open the aposteme, making triangulare incision, or
after the manner of a new moon. Than you must digestethe place, mundifie,
incarne, and cicatrise it, as it is said in the fore alleged cha.

If the aposteme be choleryke, for the cure thereof, resort to the doctrine
written in the chap. of the cure of herisipelas. Moderation of cold medicines
to the head.
Nevertheless ye must note, touching the administration of medicines, that ye
ought not to apply so cold things as in Herisipelas, because it chauncethe
in another place more noble. For I am wont ever to rub the place, wherein
the herisipelas is, with oil of violettes, and with an ointment of roses after
Mesue, and have had good success.

Furthermore ye shall note, touching the purgation of the humors of the
head, what things be appropriate after the qualities of the evil humors.
Purgations of hot humors of the head.
If they be^ hot, they must be purged with an electuarie de succorosarum, by
pills of fumiterre, and pills of myrobalanes. For these purge the hot
humors of the head.

If ye mattier be cold, ye shall purge it with pylles of hiera, with pylles
called cochie, Of cold humors.
and with pills named aurce or golden. Moreover sometime there grow in the
head certain gla^dules, and knobbes, for the curation whereof, ye shall
resort to the chap. of nodes and glandules.

wha^ there grow in the head talpes, or topinary (though Roger, lanfrancke,
and certain later wrytters say, yt it is better to appalliate them)
nevertheless mine opinion is (which thing Petre of Arzilata a chirurgien
excelle^tly learned affirms also) that they must be healed after the cure of
a broken sculle, The cure of Talpes.
in ministryng universal things, according to the age, and strength of the
patient. First you must open the place, in which the disease is, making a three
cornerde incision, or after the figure of a cross, as you lust, and if it be
possible ye must make the incision of such quantity, that all the bone be
discovered, and than you must take away the corrupted part of the bone, with
a sharp raspatorie, Incision.
or some other convenient instrumente. After that the corruption is taken away,
it shall be good, to cauteryse the place with a hot iron, if it may be done,
without hurtynge of the brain or pannicles thereof. And forasmuch as in this
disposition it chances oftentimes, that an vngtuous, and soft flesh is
engendered upon dura matter, and likewise about the vlcered place, to take it
surely away, our poudre of mercury is of merueylous virtue.

After yt ye have laid to, the said poudre, Ables sig. a fur tree or sapinne
tree.
ye may apply this oyntme^t which both mundifyeth, and incarneth. R. of
clear terebentyne, of abietis. ana.. iii. of honye of roses strayned.. ii. and
ss. of the juice of plantayne, of the juice of smalage, of the juice of
centaurie the less. an^.. vi. of wine of good odor being two or three years
old one cyathe, let them boil al together unto ye co^su^ption of the juice,
and the wine, than strain them, and add to the straynyng of barley flour well
boulted.. x. of saffran.. ss. of sarcocolle, of myrre. an^.. ii. mengle them
together, addyng in the end of aquavite.. ss. incorporate the^ al together.

This oyntme^t in this case is a great remedy. Also vngue^tu^ de minio written
in our antidotarie may be profitably administered in this case, chiefly in the
somer.

A poudre.
when the intention is to cicatrise, we have found this poudre that follows
very good. R. of burnt alume. ss. of roses, of the leaves of myrt. an^.. i. of
hermodactiles.. i. and ss. of bolearmenie.. vi. of myrobalanes citrine.. iii.
bring them all to a fine poudre.

Finallye if ye find the Talpe or Topinarie not vlcered, but bendynge to the
way of apostemation, let it be ryped with some good maturatyue. And after
maturation, it is convenient to make incision, in the rypest place. And if ye
find that the bone is not corrupted, the place must be digested with a
digestion of terebe^tine, and afterward let the place be mundifyed, incarned
and sealed, as we have said in this present cha.

Furthermore there chances in the head a kind of an aposteme called
testudo, Testudo.
and it is large, white, and soft, having a little blader, as nodus has. For
the curation thereof, there is no better remedy, Incision.
than to open it making incision, after the figure of a cross, of such
quantity that the skin or blader may be clearly taken away.

But if it can not be taken away, at the time of incision, by the reason of
the issuynge of blood: in such case it is convenient, to fille the place with
vnguentum egyptiacum of our description, or with a trocisque of minium, or
else rub it with a ruptorye of capitell, of which we will speak by the
grace of God in our Antidotary. Afterward when the blader is taken away, the
vlcered place must be cured, as we have said before.

Furthermore there chauncethe in chyldrennes heedes an aposteme full of water.
The cause is, after Guilhelmus Placentinus, the multitude of me^strual
moystnesse, which could not be rectified by the mother, nor by the child,
because of his evyll qualitye, and nature could not drive it from the head.
This watrinesse sometimes is between the sculle, and the skin, and causes
often so great elevation that the chirurgien can not feel the sculle, pressynge
his fyngers upon it. Sometimes this watrines is between the dura matter, and the
brain pan, and tha^ it is of harder cure than the first, and of greater
danger

The doctoures have showed no great remedy of this watrines. willyam
Placentyne, and La^francke cured it with oil of camomille, and of dylle,
wherein the strength of branne is. Some command to open the place with an
actual cauterye poynted, applyeng it in sundry places, and causynge the water
to come out by little, and little, not dryenge it suddenly. They lay upon the
cauterysed place wolle weeted, in the foresaid oil.

We will describe our curation of this aposteme, Epitheme.
which we have often proved with the profitte of the patient, and our own
honor, making no incision, after this sort. R. of camomylle, and melilote.
ana. m^. i. and ss. of sticados, of the leaves and graynes of mirtilles, of
roses ana. m^. i. ten nuttes of cypress, of branne, and beans. ana. m^. ss.
boil all these things together with red wine, and lie of vine ashes, unto
ye co^su^ption of half, tha^ strain the^, and with two large spo^ges dipped in
this decoction and somewhat pressed let ye head be epithemed in the place where
the aqnositie or watrines is, the space of a quarter of an hour, taking away
one, and layeng one another.

After this euaporation, I applied the unguent following, layenge on again the
said sponge strongly pressed and wrounge. And so remouynge the sponge from six
hours to six hours, and renuynge it, within a few days I healed the
aposteme. Ointment
The form of the linime^t is this.. of oil of camomill, roses, and myrte.
ana.. ss. of oil of spike.. i. oil of dille.. i. ss. of bra^ne.. x. of camo.
melilote, dille, sticados, squina^tu^. ana. a little, of nuttes of cypress in
nombre. ij. braye ye things that been to be brayed grossly, then boil them
with a cyath of wine, of good odoure being two years old, unto the
consu^ption of the wine, the^ strain them, and add to the straynynge of
saffran.. i. of white wax.. i. Let them boil again a little. This liniment
has a merueylous effect, in dryenge the water with resolution, and
confortation of the place.

If it chance that there be engendered in the head a pustle or carbuncle, for
the cure thereof, resort to the chapter of a carbuncle. One thing is
diligently to be observed in the application of all remedies, that is, that ye
sore membre be conserved in his natural complexion, Four consyderations in
all cures.
and as Guido says, there ben four consyderations by which the
demonstration of the cure of al dyseases is taken. The first.
The first consideration is taken of the complexion of ye member For Galene
says that hot members desire hot aids, dry members, dry aids for their
conservation, and likewise moist members will have moist preseruatio^s. etc.
For every member desires to be conserved by his semblable or like. And as a
disease will be healed by his contrary, so every part will be conserved by
his semblable: fleshye members desire no great desiccation or dryeng, because
of their moisture, but the dry desire to be more dried.

The second.
The second consyderation of curing is taken, of ye complexion of the body.
For some bodies ben of thynne conuerture some of thick, and we must proceed
otherwise in them that have rare or thynne bodies, then in them that have
thycke. For thynnes declares that the matter may easily come forth, and
thycknes contrarywyse. And Auicenne says (speaking of humidite in hot
places, and in cold places) that humidities in cold places are of greater
actiuite, and dygeste better. The reason is because there strengthes been
greater: And he speaks contrary wise of humidities that chance in hot
places saying: these men are sone resolved, the other not lyghtlye. Wherefore
the country or region is to be observed, of which Cornelius Celsus speaks,
in the preface of his first book, saying: that the kinds of medicines
dyfferre according to the dyuersite of the places, as one medicine is good at
Rome, another in Egypt, another in France. And if the causes of dyseases were
semblable, and egall in all countrees, semblable remedies should be in all
countrees. Wherefore it is euidente by the reasons alleged, that we must use
diverse medicines according to the dyuersyte of members and after dyuersyte of
time, and countrees.

Thyrdly, The third.
the co^syderation of ye cure of a disease is taken of the virtue, and
complexion of the medicine, and of the sensibilite or felyng of the membre For
sensyble members, as the pannicles of the eyes, synnowes, pia matter, can not
endure strong and sharp medicines. The members that have no feeling as bones,
and ligamentes procedyng of bones may sustain stronger medicines. Wherefore
Auice^ne said well, as a synnowe dyscouered needs alleuiation or easynge of
the pain, so ligame^tes that grow out of bones need strong medicines because
they have no sensibilitie.

The fourth.
The fourth consyderation is taken of the making or position of the membre. For
some members are set in superfyciall places, some in deep. Dyseases yt ben in
superficial places must be cured with light medicines. But those that are in
deep places require strong medicines. The reason is that before the operation
of the medicine can come to ye deep place, it loses a great deal of his
virtue, wherefore the medicine must be strong, and penitratiue.

Concerning the foresaid dyseases, it is to be noted, that some take their
denomination, after the places, where they grow. As if a quytterous and
flegmatyke aposteme, be engendered in the head, it is called Talpa, and if this
matter come to the eyes, it is called Ophtalmia, if it come to the throat, it
is called Squinantia or a quince, if to the hands, a chyragra, if to the fete
Padagra, if to all the legs Vndimia and so forth of other humors.

Thus ends this present chapitre for which the name of god be praised.

The second chapitre which treats of the apostemes of the eyes, as well hot
as cold, and of their curation.
IN the former chapitre, we have sufficientlye declared al apostemes, and
pustles, and other dyseases, yt chance in ye heed. In this present chapitre,
we will treat of a kind of an aposteme, which chau^ceth to ye eyes, called
Optalmia. Optalmia as Galene says, He would say Ophtalmia
is a flegmo^, and passion of ye skin in ye eye called co^iunctiua, and after
his accide^tes, it is a disease of the eye. And here in all doctors agree that
Optalmia is an aposteme of the skin called Coniunctiua. There chance
sondrye, and dangerous dyseases, to the eyes. And for as much as they be most
necessary, noble, and profitable to man's life, they ought to be kept with
great diligence, and the dyseases ought to be healed more studiouslye.

The causes of optalmia dyfferre not from the causes of other apostemes
universal, and particulare, Causes of ophtalmia.
seeing that the humors or reumes which cause obtalmia come more from the
brain, the^ to other apostemes of other members.

For the most part this disease comes of a cause primitive, and is
augme^ted by the same, as by smokes, winds dust, the son, sharpnes of
things yt go into the eyes, chyefly when the body is replenyshed with humors.
Two kind of ophtall.
There ben two kinds of optalmia, of which one is of little appearau^ce, and
little infla^matio^ with some humiditye, and his action is in the superficial
part of the eyes, and is called of Auicenne conturbation. There is another
kind which is deper in the substance of the eye, in which the white of the
eye, being full of rednes covers some times the apple of the eye.

The signs of Obtalmia proceeding of a sanguine matter ben these that follow,
namelye heat of ye eyes, Signs.
rednes with infla^mation of ye same, and of the veins, the fulness of ye skin
called co^iu^ctiua the heaviness of the head chyeflye about the temples and
brows, blerenes of the eye lyddes, and tears dropping down with heat. There
ben other signs declared in the chapitre universal of a sanguine aposteme.

If the obtalmia be caused of cholere then these ben the signs, Opthtalmia of
choler.
sharp grief infla^mation, and great rednes of ye eyes with plenteous tears,
which be somtymes so hot, that they scalde ye corners of the eyes, and cause
the heeres of ye eye lyddes to fall, and the patient feleth certain
pryckynges, and bytynges within the eyes, as there were sand or duste in the^.
The foreheade also is very hot and the parts about ben heavy. The eyes ben but
a little blere, because the matter is hot, Of phlegm.
and dry. The signs of optalmia procedynge of flegmatyke matter ben these,
great inflation of the place, little infla^mation, and little rednes, little
pain, few tears, but great heaviness of the head. Melan^holie.
Likewise the signs of Optalmia procedynge of melancholy ben these, little
rednes, little heat, little inflation, and little moystnes, and the eyes ben of
duskyshe color, and very heuye.

Optalmia has four times as other apostemes, namely beginning, augme^tatio^,
state, and declination. And every one of these times conteyneth three times, as
we have said in the cha. of flegmon, as augme^tatio^ has beginning, mydle and
end. etc. And these four times, and ye three of every one of them are
diligently to be noted, that things may be administered according to the
dyuersitie of the times.

Moreover it is to be noted, that optalmia is sometimes caused by co^munite and
somtymes by essence, Ophtal. of essence.
or being when it is caused by essence, or being, it proceeds from the head,
and is called Optalmia capitalis, which thing is easily known, by the heaviness
of the head, Ophtal. capitalis.
and pain of the same. But when there is rednes in ye eyes, and heat in the
foreheade with pain, and beatynge, and the temples ben stretched and the
veins full, Ophtal. of gingiua matter.
and the place enflamed, these signs declare that the optalmia proceeds of
gingiua matter.

And if there be continual runnyng of matter from the brain to the palate, or
roufe of the mouth and nastrelles with neesynge and itchynge, ye may know
that it proceeds out of the inward parts. And if it proceed out of the
stomach, it comes with vomit

Furthermore it is convenient to know, Paroxysmes
that optalmia has certain paroxysmes or fyttes, and periodes or courses,
which follow the nature of humors, that cause optalmia. And as Gordon says
we must not be negligent in obtalmia. For if it be not cured diligently, it
leaves euel accidents, as cornea, ruptura, pannus, macula, which ben of
hard curation, and cause vlceration of the apple of the eye.

And Optalmia after the ancient, Contagious.
and later doctors, is a contagious disease and passes from one eye to anoher.

To the cure of this disease, there ben required six inte^tions. The first is
dyete. The second digestion of the evil matter. The third purgation of the
matter digested. The fourth prohibition, and diuersion, or turnyng away of the
catarrous matter, which comes to the eyes. The fyfth is accomplyshed by
administration of sundry locale medicines, according to the dyuersite of the
time of this disease. The last is to take away the accidents of it.

The first intention, when the matter is hot, Dyete.
is accomplyshed by the administration of the six things not natural
enclynynge to coldness, and to dryenes, or moystnes according to the nature of
the evil humor. If the matter be cold, let the patient be governed, after
the ordinance of the six things not natural, as we have declared in the
former chapitre of apostemes, that is to say, if the matter be flegmatyke, ye
must resort to the chapitre of vndimia. If the matter be melancholyke,
resort to ye chapitre of Sephiros. If it be choleryke, to the chapitre of
Herisipelas. If it be sanguine, to the chapitre of Flegmon. Laictuse.
But we must consider that laictuces be not convenient in this case, all
though they may be permytted in herisipelas and in the cure of flegmon.

In the first days, when the matter is hot, let the patient abstain from
drinkyng of wine, and eating of flesh, which engendre gross matter, and gross
vapors. It is sufficient for him, to eat grated bread sodde^ with suggre, or
flower of wheat with suggre, or grated bread with the common seeds, let his
drink be a ptisane, or water boiled with a piece of bread, and let him drink it
with suggre, or with a iuleb of violettes. Also ye may give the patient wine of
pomegranades at the beginning, unto the augmentation. In the state and
declinatio^ he may use wine of good odoure, moderatly tempered with water. In
obtalmia that proceeds of cold matter, let the parie^t drink wine of good
odoure and somewhat sweet. For Hypocrates says, that ye drynkyng of good wine
swageth the grefe of the eyes.

The second, and third inte^tion which ben to digest the matter, and to purge
the same being digested, are acco^plyshed as it follows, yt is to say, when
the matter is cholerike, it must be digested with a syrup of roses by infusion,
Digestiues of Choler.
and of violettes, and with syrup of buglosse co^pou^de, with water of buglosse,
violettes, and endiuie. If the matter be sanguine let it be thus digested.
Digesti. of sanguine.
. of syrup of fumiter. of buglosse, of roses by infusion ana.. ss. of the
water of fumitterre buglosse, endiuie. ana.. i. If the optalmia be engendered of
a flegmatyke humor or melancholyke, let it be digested after this sort, Of
phlegm and melancholyke
namely if ye humor be flegmatyke.. of syrup de duabus radicibus, of honye of
roses, of syrup called acetosus simplex. ana.. ss. of the water of fenell,
buglosse, and endive. ana.. i. If the humor be melancholyke let it be digested
thus. Melancholy.
. of syrup of epithymu^, of fumiterre, and violets. ana.. ss. of water of
fumiterre, of violettes, and buglosse. ana.. i. let him use this syrup a weke.

If the matter be choleryke, let him be purged with this purgation. Purgation
of choler.
. of chosen manna.. i. of diapru. non solutiui.. vi. with the decoction of
cordial flowers, and fruits, make a small potio^ adding of syrup of
violettes.. i. and ss. Another purgation for the same intention.. of electua.
lenitiue, Another.
of cassia ana.. vi. of an electuarye of roses after Mesue.. ij. make a small
potion with water of endiuie, and fumiterre, adding of syrup of violettes..
i. ss. If the matter be sanguine, Purgation of sanguine.
let the patient be purged with this purgation.. of diacatholicon, of cassia.
ana.. vi. of an electuarye of roses after Mesue. i. and. ss. The pills of Iera
with the pills of Assagerette ben good in these two dyspositions. If the
matter be melancholyke let it be purged thus. Melancholy.
. of diacholicon.. ss. of the confection of hamech.. ij. of chosen manna, or in
the stead thereof of an electuarie lenitiue.. ss. make a small potion with the
decoction of maiden here, seen, epithymu^, hertes tongue, polytrichum,
polipodie, prunes, sodden with the water of buglosse, adding of syrup of
violettes. i. and. ss. If the matter be flegmatyke let it be thus purged.. of
diaphenico^, Phlegm.
of cassia. ana,. vi. make a small potion with the common decoction adding of
syru. of violets.. i. and ss. In these two kinds pills of iera cu^ agarico,
and pills aggregatiue ben good. Here it is to be noted yt for ye most part
optalmia is not engendered of one only humor. wherefore when ye humors be
me^gled together dygestion, and purgation must be done according to the
qualite of the mengled humors, and diverse medicines must be administered
after ye diversity of ye same. The.iiij. inte^tion which is to turn away ye
catarrhous matter, and to keep it from flowynge to ye eyes, is acco^plyshed.
First when the matter is hot, let it be diuerted or turned away, Diuertion of
the humor.
by cuttynge the vein called cephalica, in the contrary side of the sore eye.
And the next day, ye may make a flebotomie in the same side, and vein
considering the age, and ye strength of the patient. Thus ye must do from the
beginning unto the augmentation. In the state and declination, ye may open the
vein of the forehead, to purge the matter conioyncte, but universal purgation
must go before the flebotomie: likewise to turn away the same matter
conioincte, it is very good to apply leches, or bloodsuckers under the ears.
Furthermore by the authorite of old and new doctors, and chefly of Galene,
when the matter comes from the brain it is good to open the veins of the
temples. Mesue shows the manner of cuttyng them, unto who^ ye must resort.
Nevertheless I have found little profit in it.

Note this, that when the matter is choleryke, and little, in the stead of
flebotomie, Ventoses.
we have found succoure in applyeng ventoses upon the shulders, or else in
layenge blood suckers under ye ears. And albeit that ye doctors say, and
cheflye Mesue that flebotomie is convenient in every kind of optalmia, yet if
the matter be choleryke, or mela^cholyke, the disease may be cured without
flebotomie as Gentilis, and sondrye other doctors testifye treating of this
matter. Yea it is the part of a wise chirurgien to make scarifycation in this
case, in the stead of flebotomie lest the patient fall into another disease.

But if the body be full of evil humors after the doctors, the common
vein, or the vein of the liver must be cut in the opposite side of the
sore eye, Phlebotomie
or else the vain called Saphena in the same side. The next day the vein
Cephalica must be cut in the contrary side. Thus flebotomie must be made by
little and little, that ye strength of the patient be not to much weakened.
Afterward the matter must be turned away by rubbing, and tyeng the extreme
parts before dinner and supper two hours, with application of ventoses.

Likewise the decoction following is good, to wash the extreme parts
wythall.. of the water of ashes, li. x. of odoriferous wine, Decoction.
and rain water of each pyntes.vi. of camomille, melilote, dille, sage,
rosemarye. ana. m^. i. of coriandres, of sticados, of wormemoode, of
squinantum, of every one a little, of honye.li. ss. Let them be sodden all unto
the consumption of half. After this, the application of ventoses without
scarification is good, upon the shulders, or upon the buttockes.

Also this vesicatorie following laid upon the neck is convenient.
Vesicatorie.
. of raw bread well leuenned.. ij. of cantarydes.. ij. of vynaygre.. i.
first take away the wings, and heads of cantarides, and the^ stamp them
altogether in a mortare and make a vesicatorie. Lay this vesicatorie upon the
neck fast tied, for it turns away humors marueylouslye and purges
watrines coming from the brain to the eyes.

After the foresaid universal purgation, it is good to apply these three
descriptions following upon the forehead of the patient. The first is this which
is very gentle. Plaster.
. the white of three eggs, of the water of roses, the flower of beans. ana..
ij. of the oil of roses omphacine.. iij. of terra sigillata, of bole armenie,
of every one.. iij. beat them al together, and lay them upon the foreheade
of the patient after the manner of a plaster.

The second is this. Another.
. of ye oil of roses ompha. of oil mirtine. ana.. iij. of white vinegre.. ij.
let them boil al together unto the consumption of the vynegre, then add of
bean flower.. ij. of the leaves of a mirte tree brought to a poudre, of roses.
ana.. iij. of bole armenie, of terra sigillata. ana.. ij. and ss. of all the
sau^ders. ana.. i. and of frankencense, and aloes. ana.. i. mengle them and
make a cerote with sufficient white wax. This cerote is very good to be laid
upon the foreheade. But when ye matter is hot, take away the franken sense,
and aloes. And if the matter be cold, join them thereunto.

Furthermore there is sometimes found an optalmie caused of gross matter with
aggrauatiue or heuie pain of the temples and of the head. For the curation
whereof we have found repercussiue medicines with euaporation, and hot
resolution to be convenient. But it is contrary, when things only repercussiue
ben administered, as we have proved in the right eye of the cardinal vulterane,
which was vexed a long time with an optalmie cause of gross matter and
catarrhous descending from the brain as we and the chirurgiens yt were present
judged. The pockets has not spared all the spirituality.
But in deed the matter that caused this optalmie, was gross and came of the
french pockes, and therefore we perceived yt cold repercussiues laid upon the
forheade profyted nothing. But it was nedeful to drive back the matter with
some resolution and co^fortation of the place. Resolutiue.
Which resolutiue was ordained after this sort.. of camomille, melilote,
fenugreke, of roses and mirtilles. ana. m^. ss. of squinantu^, of wormewoode,
of each a little. Sees these things with water, and wine till half be consumed,
and make a styffe plaster in ye decoction, with the flower of lentiles and
beans. This plaster laid upon the forehead (as it appears to him yt
co^sydereth ye simples that go into it) when ye matter is gross has virtue to
resolve and swage pain with confortation, and defends ye said matter to come
to ye place. An other.
This description that follows is good in like case. of the oil of myrte,
roses, and camomille. ana.. ij. of bean flower.. iiij. of branne well ground..
i. of roses, of myrtilles. ana.. ss. of bole armenie, of terra sigillata. ana..
vi. of all ye sau^ders. ana.. i. of white wax.. x. make it after the manner of
a cerote at the fire, with sufficient new wine. Here ye shall note that,
though Auicenne has forbydde^ all remedies,
in which oil enters in the disease optalmia, to be laid upon ye foreheade,
nevertheless we have proved often the foresaid remedies with the profit of ye
patie^tes, and our own worship. The fyfte intention is accomplished by the
administration of diverse medicines upon the sore place, as we have said,
after ye dyuersite of the time, and disease. we have found, that at ye
beginnynge when ye matter is hot, it is good to take the white of an egg
somewhat sodden and beaten with a little rose water and a little tutia preparate,
To be ministered in the eyes.
Tutia.
and to strain it through a cerser, and put into the eye a little of the water,
that comes out of the pressyng or straynyng luke warm

Also at ye beginning white Sief without Opiu^ put warm into ye eye, Sirf.
the space of three or four days (being dyssolued with rose water upon a
barbiers whette stone,) is a present remedy.

Furthermore besides these two remedies, we have proved this good that
follows. A plaster of an apple.
Take an apple roasted under the coals, bruise it and strain it with a little
rose water, and woman's milk, and the yolke of a new laid egg, mengle them
all together and sees them a little, and make them after the manner of a
plaster, and lay it to the eye. It swageth merueylously ye pain and
conforteth the sore eye.

In the augmentation, and cheifely at the beginning of the said augmentatyon,
unto the end, we have proved the remedy following to be of great efficacite.
Mandificatyue.
. of Rose water. vj. of the seed of quinces.. j. let the^ boil in a glass,
till they receive a muscilaginous, or slymie form, tha^ strain them, and add
to the straynynge of white Sief without Opium.. ij. of womans milk noursyng a
wenche.. ss. of Tutia preparate.. j. and. ss. of suggre candie of Syrup of
roses.. j. mengle them all together strain them, and keep the^ in a glass
with a piece of flax. If you would have the water more mundificatyue, add a
dram of Myrobolanes Citrines. And if the place be greatly enflamed, ye must
put to.. j. of Camphor for it causes the pain, and the inflammation to
cease.

Further more in the mids of augmentatyon, and in the end thereof and
during the state of optalmia, it shall be conuenyent to minister this remedy
following.. of muscilage made of the seed of quinces, Collirium.
and fenugreke in rose water.. j. of white Sief without Opium.. ij. of suggre
candie of syrup de duabus radicibus.. j. of suggre candie of syrup of Roses..
j. of sarcocolle in woman's milk.. ss. me^gle them al to gether, and make a
collyrye according to art. We have also found it good in this case, to wash
the eyes with the water of a decoction of barley being warm. Decoction of
barley.
For it scoureth away the blerenes of the eyes and quenches the heat of hot
mattyer. Also we have proved the mylk of a woman noursyng a maid child to be
expedient in the time before said.

Item in the said time ye may profytably lay upon the eye to resolve, and
swage the pain, the cromes of bread steped in rose water and in the water of
Endiuie. Also the foresaid plaster of an apple is good in this case, and in
the said time. We could declare many other remedies written by the ancient,
and later doctors touching the cure of the said two times of this disease,
but because we have found but little profytte in the^, we have written those
only, which we have proved to be true.

After that the augmentatyo^ is passed, we have found good operatyon in this
remedy following.. of sarcocolle dissolved in woman's milk.. j. A water.
of aloes hepatike thryse washed in water of roses.. ij. of white Sief without
Opium, of Tutia preparate Ana.. ss. of cloves.. j. of sugre candye of syrup of
roses.. ij. of water of roses.. iij. of odoriferous white wine having moderate
strength.. j. and. ss. braye ye things that been to be braied. after the manner
of arcolfol, tha^ me^gle the^ al together, with the wine heated, and rose water,
and put it in a glass, styryng it about ones a day, that the strength thereof
may be quyckned. Note that if ye strain this water thorough a thycke lynnen
clothe, and keep the residue that remains in the said clothe, in the glass,
in a little bag, and afterward press it, till three or four drops issue
out and put it warm in the eye, it shall be merueylous good.

For the same intentyon we have proved this remedy following which resolves
mattyer conioyncte, and conforteth the sight. Another.
. of Fenugreke thryse washed in barley water.. ij. of melilote, of the leaves
of sweet Fenel, or else of the sede thereof, of each a little, of rose water..
iij. of Fenel water.. ij. Seethe them all in a glass unto the consumption of
the third part, than strain them, and add to the straynynge of sugre
candie.. ij. of sarcocoll dissolved in woman's milk, of Tutia Ana.. j. me^gle
them all together, and use them as it is said before.

Furthermore with thyes two remedies aforesaid, it is good to apply upon the
eye the same hour thies two descriptyons following, in making often
euaporatyon, Resolutyue.
of which the first is after this form.. of fenel leaves, of melilote. Ana.
m^. ss. of Roses, sticados, Camomil, of every one a little of fenugreke washed
as is aforesaid.. ss. let them boil all with a sufficient quantyte of fenel
water, and as much rose water, and a little odoriferous white wine, unto the
consumptyon of the third part, than strain them, and lay on the eye, a fine
sponge weeted in this decoctyon being hot.

Another.
The second is this.. of melilote, of branne. Ana. m^. j. of camomyl, of roses.
Ana. m^. ss. of fenel leaves. m^. j. and. ss. of sticados a little. Cut thies
things, small and make two little light bags, and boil them with sufficient
quantytie of water of fenel, and odoriferous wine, until the third part be
consumed, and lay them upon the eyes with a sponge, as is aforesaid, and let
them be actually hot. Thies two remedies, as we have said, be^ of good
operation in resoluyng of gross mattyer, and confortyng the sight, and they be
the remedies, that we have proved in the cure of optalmia, caused of hot
humors.

Against cold humors.
It remains that we describe with like breifnes, remedies against optalmia
caused of could mattyer and gross, for the accomplisshement of the fyfte
intentyon. Wherefore when optalmia is engendered of gross mattyer namely
flegmatyke, or melancholyke, or of melancholy mengled with fleame, in the
beginning, for the curatyon thereof, (some purgatyo^ going before) put this
collyrie being actually hot in to the eye. Collyrium.
. of rose water and Fenel. Ana.. j. of woman's milk.. iij. of sugre candie of
syrup of roses.. i. and ss. of white Sief without opium.. j. mengle them, and
make a collyrie according to art.

To this intentyon it is convenient to take an apple roasted under coals and
strayned, and than to put to, A plaster of an apple.
a little Rose water, and the yolke of an Egg and a little saffran, setting it
on the fyere, and laiynge it upon the eye after the manner of a plaster. It
appayseth pain, and heuines of the eye Thyes two remedies ben good, after the
beginning, unto the time of augmentatyon and of state.

Also in this intention it is good to take the white of an Egg, A water.
somewhat roosted under coals, and than beaten, addyng of rose water.. j.
offenell water.. j. and. ss. and as much of the water of mirtille flours, of
tutia.. ss. beat the^ al together ye space of two hours, than let them
stand, and afterward strain them thorough a thycke cloth and put the liquour
in to ye eye. This remedy is good in the beginning of optalmia.

Also to cease the pain of the place, To cease pain.
it is good to take the cromes of bread, and to dippe it in the brothe of an
hen, or of other flesh being fressh and to put it between two pieces of
flax, and lay upon the sore eye being actually hot.

In the state, and in the declinatyo^, ye may conveniently apply the remedies
under written within and without, A decoctyon.
of which the first is this.. of fenel water, of rose water. Ana.. ij. of
odoriferous wine, of water of Eufrage. Ana.. j. of Tutia.. j. of aloes
hepatyke, of cloves. Ana.. ss. of sarcocolle dissolved in woman's milk.. ij. of
suggre candye of syrup of roses.. ss. beat thyes foresaid things to gether,
and mengle them with the said wine, and waters being somewhat hot, and strain
them thorough a thycke linen clothe, and keep the liquor in a glass, and put
it in the eye hot.

Anoth^r resolutyue.
To this intentyon avails a decoctyon of fenugreke, of melilote, of sweet
fenel and fresch, with a suffycient quantytie of water of fenel, and with
suggre candie of syrup de duabus radicibus, let them boil to the
consumptyon of the third part, and put to, in the end of odoriferous white
wine, so much as shall amou^te to the third part of the decoctyon, than let
them boil again a little, and strain them and use thereof, putting it hot
in to the eye. This water as ye may know by the symples, that go thereunto
has great virtue to make thynne, gross mattyer, and to resolve the mattyer
being thynned, and it appaysethe the gryefe of the place, and conforteth the
sight.

Furthermore ye may conveniently admynystre the two remedies above written, at
the beginning of the fyfthe intentyon, appliynge them upon the sore part, the
one with a sponge, and the other in the form of a little bag. We have found
the grene water of our descriptyon to have great efficacyte in the
declinatyon of optalmia, caused of a flegmatyke mattyer, and that it resoluethe
the mattyer that could not be resolved by the effect of other medicynes
desiccatyue, and resolutyue, and it is in this form.. of rose water, of the
water of Fenell. The g^ene water.
Ana.. j. of the water of eufragye and selandyne. Ana.. ij. of odoriferous, and
clear white wine.. j. and. ss. of sarcocolle dissolved in woman's milk, of
verdegres. j. mengle thyes things together, (the water, and the wine being
first heated till they begin to sees) and than strain them. This water
mundifyeth all gross mattyer engendered in the eye, and clarifyeth the eye from
all rednes procedynge of gross and cold mattyer.

The syxte intentyon which is to correct the accidents, shall be accomplished
by the applicatyon of sondrye remedies according to the diuersyte of the
places, in which the accide^tes be, and according to the dyuersyte of the
said accidents. Accidents.


The accidents that communelye chance in this disease are these vehement
pain, cheifely when it is caused of an hot mattyer, vlceratyon of the eye
lyddes, and of the skin called Cornea, and of the skin coniunctyua, and
spots of the same, and also quytture retained between Cornea, and
coniunctyua. To take away the pain caused of an hot mattyer, if the remedies
above written of a roasted Apple, and other be not suffycient, it shall be
conuenyent to proceed with medicynes in to which Opium entrethe, whereof our
descriptyon has been ever as it folowethe.. of the muscilage of the seed of
Quynces, of Psillium, made with barley water, of womans milk noursynge a
wenche, of white Syef with Opium.. j. An opiate medicyne.
mengle them together, and make a collyrie with a barbyers whettestone. We have
proved that the applycatyon of a warm Collyrie within the eye is very
synguler, to swage the pain thereof.

After that the pain is appaysed ye must proceed with the aforesaid
remedies, according to the time. Also the decoction of fenugreke made with
Rose water, and barley water, is right good to appayse gryefe, which thing
Auycenne testyfyethe.

If it chance that the eye lyddes or Cornea, or Coniunctiua be vlcered
thorough an antecedente cause than the Chirurgien must succoure that accidente
with a convenient medicyne, A water of Galenes inuentyon.
as this is.. of Rose water, of the water of the leaves of Myrte Ana.. j. of
suggre candye of syrup of Roses.. ij. of Tutia preparate.. j. and. ss. of Syef
of lead, of a white Syef without Opium. Ana.. j. braye the things that been to
be brayed fynely, unto the lykenes of alchoholl, than the waters being
somewhat heated mengle them together. This water is merueylous to heal
vlceratyon caused of hot mattyere. And it scourethe away gross mattyer, and
dryethe up subtyle mattyer that causethe vlceratyon, and it is Galenes
inuentyon which auctoure sayethe that in the ulcers there ben two superfluytes
engendered, namelye a gross, and a subtyle. Wherefore the Chyrurgyen must
ordeyne a medicyne having two prerogatyues, one to dry subtyle mattier, and
another to scour away gross mattyer.

If ye will that the said water shall be more desiccatyue, and mundifycatyue
add unto it, the third part of the grene water of our inuentyon. Also ye
may lay to the said vlceratyon, when the place is not very paynfull, nor
enflamed, the said grene water actually hot.

Fynallye we will entreat of the mattyere or quytture retained between Cornea,
and Coniunctiua in the next Chapter and of the cure thereof by gods grace.
Thus endethe this present Chapter of obtalmia. Written in the City of
Bononye, the year of our lord. M.ccccc. and x. ye.xiiij. day of Noue^bre. For
which the name of god be praised.

The third Chapter of quytture engendered and retained between the skin of
the eye called Cornea, and between coniunctiua.
WE have often seen quytture engendered and retained between the skin of the
eye called Cornea, Aposteme of Cornea or co^iunctiua.
and the skin co^iunctiua, cheifely in an optalmie caused of an hot mattyer,
which accident if it should not be quyckely succored, euapored, and purged by
the applicatyon of resolutyue and gentle maturatyue medicynes, it would be no
merueyl if the eye should comme in danger of evil and hard curatyon, and
that the apple of the eye should be vlcered, or that the Crystallyne humor
should utterly be lost. To avoid thyes accidents a wise Chirurgien without
delay must prepare some convenient remedy, and he must procure an opening
between the skynnes, by which the quytture enclosed may issue out, by the
co^missure that is between Cornea, and Coniunctiua, for which purpose this
descriptyon following is of good operatyon. Decoctyon.
. of fenugreke. ss. of clean barley. m^. j. of the sede of Quynces.. ij. of
the roots of holyhock somewhat stamped, of ye roots of langdebeef. ana.. j.
boil thies things together with a chickyn in sufficient water, till they comme
to such a gelye as calves fete make, than strain them, and put of it often
in to the eye being actually hot, adding some time a little fine sugre. If
perchance the quytture issue not out by this remedy, after the said
suppuration, ye must open the place with a lancette making a little hole. And
if it be possible, let the opening be, between the commissure of the two
skynnes cornea, and coniunctyua. After the opening, ye must proceed with the
remedy last written, the space of two days, adding a little suggre candie of
syrup of roses, and a little of other fine suggre.

When ye perceive that the quytture is mundifyed, which is sone known by the
mitigation of the pain and by the clearenes of the eye, this remedy following
may conveniently be used. Coll^eye.
. of water of roses, of water of Mirtilles, or in the stead thereof, of
plantayne. Ana.. j. of Fenell water, of odoriferous white wine. Ana.. ss. of
sarcocolle dissolved with woman's milk, of Tutia preparate. Ana.. ij. of suggre
Candie of syrup of Roses.. j. of Myrobalanes cytrins.. ss. of white Sief
without opium, of Sief of frankencense. Ana.. j. and. ss. let thies foresaid
things be brayed fynely and cerse them, and make a collyrie according to
art, which ye must use till the place be mundifyed, and incarned, and for
the cicatrisatyon add to the said collyrie.. ij. of Sief of lead.

And note that in the time of maturation to appayse grief, and to cause the
mattyer to issue out, ye may conveniently apply the foresaid plaster of a
roasted apple. And as we have said before, thyes remedies must be applied
after purgatyon. Likewise in the cure of pustles, or spots that chance
thorough an Aposteme, being in the apple of the eye, ye must proceed, as in
cornea, and coniunctyua but with more spedines, and with lyghter and gentyller
medicynes, because of the nobilite of the eye. Thus ends this present
Chapter for which the name of god be praised.

The fourth Chapter of the burning, and itchynge of the eyes, and of the
cure of the same.
IN the corners of ye eyes there chau^cethe often itchynge, Itchyng and blerenes.
and burning, and some remenaunte of blerenes, cheifely toward night,
procedynge, of catharrhous, and salt sharp mattyer. For the cure whereof the
two foresaid remedies (a purgation of the mattier antecedent presupposed) ben
convenient.

The first is this, A water.
and it is of our inuentyon.. of rose water, of plantayne water. Ana.. j. of
Tutia preparate.. j. and. ss. of the water of the flowers of Mirtilles.. j.
and. ss. of the leaves of housleke.. x. of the whytes of Eggs somewhat roasted
under coals, in nombre. iij. of white Sief without Opium.. j. and. ss. of
camphore, graynes.iij. set the foresaid waters upon the fire, till they ben
hot, and beat them all together, and so leave them the space of four hours,
than strain them, and keep the lyquour in a brazen vessel well stopped.
Apply this to the corners of the eyes, for it is a present remedy, and
easethe spedelye the burning, and the itchynge of the eyes.

If ye perceive that abstersyon will be good in this case, by reason of the
blerednes, which some times commethe in great quantytie, it shall be good to
proceed with this water, adding a little suggre candye of syrup of Roses, and
so much of other fine suggre. Here follows ye second remedy, which is good
in every mattyer, and of merueylous operatyon (for it takethe away quycklye
the burning and itchynge without any euacuatyon, which thing is against
the opinyon of Doctors) when the patyente goethe to bed,
put in to the corner of his eye a drop with the top of your finger, for it
heals undoubtedly in the space of a weke.

Some times we have seen the burning, Another water.
and the itchynge to be taken away in three days by this water, and it is in
this form.. of Rose water, of odoryferous white wine of mean strength. Ana..
iiij. of myrobalanes cytrins brayed.. j. and. ss. of Tutia.. ij. let them
boil all together unto the consumptyon of the third part, than put
thereunto immediatlye of verdegrese..ij. of Camphore graynes.ij. keep it in a
glass well stopped. Note that this water is precious above all other medicynes
in this case, and it ought to be esteemed more than gold and silver.

But that we may follow the rules of Phisycke, or Chirurgerye, it is right
conuenyent to purge the mattyere antecedente, after the dygestyon of the same.
First if the mattyere be choleryke with some adustyon, let it be dygested
with syrup of Roses by infusyon, Digestiues of Choler.
with Syrup of Violettes, or of Nenufar, or with Syrup of vinayger called
Acetosus symplex, and with water of endyue, vyolettes, sorelle and like.

If the mattyer be gross and salt, Digestiues of salt and gross fleame.
as salt fleame, let it be dygested with honye of Roses, and with Syrup of
vynegre simple, and with a Syrup of Fumiterre simple, with waters of
Fumyterre, of buglosse of Endyue, of maiden hear.

After that the patyent has taken this Syrup according to the qualytie of
the evil mattyer, Purgatio^ of Cholic.
let the patyent be purged with this purgatyon, when the mattyer is
choleryke.. of an electuarie lenitiue, or in the steed thereof of diaprunis
non solutiue.. vj. of cassie fistula.. ij. of an electuarye of Roses after
Mesue.. j. and. ss. make a small potion with the decoctyon of Cordyall flowers,
and fruits adding of Syrup of Violettes.. j. and. ss. Item the patyent may
be purged with pylles of assagereth, Pylles.
receauynge a dram three or four hours before day.

If the mattyer be gross, Purgatio^ of gross.
and salt or sharp let the purgatyon be after this form.. of
Diacatholicon, of Diaphenicon. Ana.. iij. of cassie.. j. make a small potyon
with the decoctyo^ of polipodie, maid herre, and of cordyall flowers, and
fruits, adding of syrup of vyolettes.. j. Pylles.
To this intentyon pylles of Fumiterre called minores and pylles of Iera with
agaryke ben convenient.

It is also good after purgatyon to apply a cerote written in the chapter of
the cure of obtalmia, which kepethe back mattyer, descendynge from the head
to the eyes. We suppose thyes things declared to be suffycient for this
present Chapter.

The.v. Chaptiter of an aposteme, which chances in the corners of the eyes
called after Auicenne, Algaras.
IT chances often that a catarrhous mattier disce^dethe from the brain to
the corners of the eyes, Algaras.
and taryeth there, by reason of the co^cauitie of the place, and it is sone
healed. But if it be not taken away quycklye, by pressynge the outward part
of the eye, it will come to a flegmatyke aposteme.

To resist this apostemation we counsel to administre this collyrye
following, Collyrie.
which purges the mattier gathered in the place, and conforteth the said
place. R. of rose water, of white wine ana.. ii. of a Myrobala.. i. of Aloes
hepatyke.. i. and ss. of sarcocoll, of sief of Memyth, of tutia preparate.
ana.. ii. braye the things that been to be brayed most fynely, and mengle them
all together (the waters, and wine being first heated) Use hereof, putting
one drop in to the eye.

A maturatiue plaster.
If the place be come to apostematio^, it shall be good to lay this plaster to
the place. R. of the meat of apples roasted under coals.. iiii. of mallowe
leaves soddenin sweet water. m^. ii. shake these things together, bruise them,
and strain the^, and add thereunto a little of barley flower, and the yolks of
three eggs, of fresh buttire.. ii. set it again on the fire, and make a
styffe plaster, putting in the yolks, when ye take the decoction from the
fire. This plaster, as ye may perceive by the symples that go thereunto, is
resolutyue, and maturatyue if nature will bring the mattier to maturation, and
it swageth also grief.

when ye perceive that the aposteme comes to rypenesse (which thing ye may
know by the redness, and beatyng which continues with elevation of the part,
by reason of the quytture multyplyed in the place, and likewise by the
redoundyng and rysynge again, when a man presses thereon his fyngers, liftyng
up one,
and thrustynge down another) than it is conueniente in the rypest place with
a sharp lancette to open the said Aposteme. Than, when there is no corruption
of the bone rymaynynge, ye shall cure the vlcere after the doctrine declared in
the chapter of the cure of flegmon. For we have written in the said chapter
the manner of digestyng, mundifyeng, incarnyng, and consoundynge convenient in
this curation.

Nevertheless we will add one thing, which is that in the time of
mundification the place may be mundifyed without perturbation of the eye,
putting in three times in the weke, a little of our poudre of mercury, which
takes away superfluous flesh without pain, and is written in our Antidotary.

If the place be vlcered with curruption of the bone, it is necessary to use
stronger medicines, and of greater actiuitie, to take away the corruption, of
which we will make mention in the chapter of a fistula in the third book,
whereunto ye shall resort according to necessity.

Moreover we have found it good for purgation of the humors descendynge from
the brain to give to the patient five pylles of iera with agaryke, Pillos.
and sometimes pylles of assagereth.

Likewise we have proved it very good, to give the patiente in the morning of
honey of roses, and syrup of roses made by infusion, and also a myrobalane
citrine co^fitte with cassia. These been the remedies, which we would write for
a short curation of this disease, for which the name of god be praised.

The.vi. of hot apostemes, and carbunculous pustles in the brows and in the
eye lyddes.
WE have seen that hot Apostemes flegmonyke, Aposte. of the brows or eye
liddes.
pustulous, and carbu^culous have chanced upon the brows, and eyeliddes. For
the curation whereof we will declare conueniente remedies according to our
power.

First when ye se a flegmonyke aposteme in the brows, after convenient
purgation, as it is declared in the cha. universal of flegmon, there is no
surer remedy than to procure maturation, and resolution without any
repercussion, A maturatiue with resolution.
and that by this plaster following. R. of the leaves of mallows, and
violettes. ana. m^.ii. of apples roasted under coals.. iiii. sees in
sufficient water the mallows, and violettes with. m^. i. of barley, than
stamp them, and strain them, and add to the strayning of barley flower. i.
and ss. of buttyre.. ii. of fresh hens grefe.. i. let them boil again
with a sufficient quantity of the decoction, and make a styffe plaster,
adding in the end the yolks of three eggs, and a little saffranne. This
plaster has great virtue, as ye may know by the symples of which it is
compounde, that is to say, it has power to ripe flegmons and fro^cles, and to
resolve the^, if nature will that they be resolved, and it draws not humors
to the place.

When ye perceive that the place is come to good rypenesse, it is conueniente
to open the place, with a lancette, making a little incisio^, of which incision
we have spoken sufficientlye in the chapter of incision of exitures having an
hard skin, whereunto resort according to necessity. After this incision
digeste the place, mundifye, incarne, and seal it up, by the remedies written
in the chapter of flegmon.

Touching the carbuncle we say, because of the nobility of the place, and
because the disease gives no truce, Carbuncle.
and is of great actiuitie, that there is no better remedy, than to cauterise
the place with an hot iron, so that the eye be kept unhurt.

Thus ye carbu^cle may be easily mortifyed. Or else in the stead of
cauterization ye may make scarification, and wash it with lie, and than lay
Vnguentum Egyptiacum upon the carbuncle after the description of Auicenne,
whereof the effect is to byte away the evil flesh, and to conserve the good.
But lay ever about the defensife of bole armenye written in the cha. of the
cure of obtalmie.

After that the carbuncle is mortifyed, which thing is sone known by
alienation of the accidents, and by the appearing of a circle round about,
than procure that the eschare fall by the administration of this plaster. R.
of mallowe leaves, Plaster to remove an eschare.
and violettes ana. m^. i. of the roots of holyhocke, of Langdebeefe. ana..
ii. of the seed of quynces.. ii. of apples in nombre.iii. Sees them all
perfectlye in sufficient water, and than make a styffe plaster at the fire,
after that ye have sta^ped and strayned all the foresaid things, adding the
yolks of three eggs, of buttyre.. iii. This plaster takes away easelye the
eschare, and the evil complectio^ that is above the eschare, and it does more
about ye eschare in one day (if ye annoint the eschared place with buttire
before ye lay on the plaster) than other medicines do in many days.

After yt the eschare is taken away, for the mu^dificatio^, incarnation and
sigillatio^, ye must proceed according to that, that is written the in cha. of
a carbuncle, where we have written many remedies, for the curation of this
disease, and also of a purgation, and flebotomy to be used in this case.

The.vii. cha. of Ordeolum.
Ordeolum.
ORdeolu^ is a little Pustle caused of sa^guine mattier, which chances often in
ye end of ye eyelidde and it is co^munelye no greater than a barley corn. And
for as much as this pustle is caused of benign mattier, and is of a small
quantity, it is easily healed.

At the beginning, for the maturation of it, ye may use this plaster. R. of
raysines. Plaster.
. i. of ye leaves of mallows, and violettes. an^. m^. ss. of apples. iii. in
nombre. Sees them well in sufficient water, than stamp them, and strain them,
and add unto the strayning the yolks of two eggs, of buttyre, of barley
flower. an^.. ss. of saffra^ a little. Let them sees again. This plaster
breaks the said pustle, and purges it, and apayseth the pain.

Here follows another plaster to the same intention, which is more maturatiue
than the foresaid. Another. plaster.
R. of the meat of apples roasted.. iii. of raysenes cleansed, and without
stones.. vii stamp them al, and strain them, adding to the strayning of wheat
flour, of woman's milk, of fresh buttyre an^.. ss. me^gle them, and make a
styffe plaster puttyng to, in the end of the decoction the yolke of an egg.

Two days after the opening of this pustle, ye must lay upon it a plaster of
white diaquilon, without gu^me, of our description. whereof we will speak by the
grace of god in our Antidotarie. we suppose these remedies to be sufficient for
the cure of ordeolu^. Thus we end this cha. For which the name of god be
praised.

The.viii. cha. of knobbes that chance in the eye liddes.
THere are often engendered upon the eyelyddes certain nodes or knobbes,
Knottes upon the eye liddes
of flegmatik or melancholyke mattier, and they ben somtymes fleshye, and
sometimes full of quitterous mattier, like a chestnutte half chewed. Sometimes
they are full of mattier like honey, and therefore they are called nodi mellini.

For the curation whereof (so that the general rules be kept) there is no
greater remedy, Nodi mellin.
if ye perceive that they ca^ not be healed by reasolutiues declared in the
cha. of nodes in general, Incision.
than to make incision in such largenes that the matier and thynne skyn
co^teyninge it, be utterly taken away. If the said skin can not be taken
away, at the time of incision, put in to the place where the node was, a
little of vnguentum egyptiacum, or a little of caustyke of capitel, and ye
warelye, and in such time as the said node is in the outward part of the
eyelidde. If it be in the inward part, turn the eye lidde outward, and cut
the node with a conueniente instrumente, and draw out that, that is contained
in it. Tha^ rub it with an yro^ called a style, or a poyntell, wrapped in
cotton, and dipped in the foresaid ruptorie, holding it upon the place where
the node was the space, of a creed saying, and afterward incontinently wash
the place with barley water, and rose water together, and that often, for it
swageth pain caused by the incisio^, and by the applycatio^ of the said
ruptorie. This is the doctrine of this present cha. for the curation of nodes
for which the name of god be praised.

The.ix. of a disease in the nose called polypus.
THere is often times en gendred in the nose a superfluous flesh, of
catarrhous, Polipus.
flegmatyke, or melancholic mattier, which is called of ye doctrous polypus.
Of which polypus there are two kinds, after Auicenne, C^^kerous.
and Rasis, one is cankerous hard, and cleauynge to the grystelles of the
nose, and it is large in his place, of duskische color, without moystnes, and
for the most part vlcered, and it stynketh sore, chiefly when it is vlcered,
and it causes the nose to swell in the top, which swellyng is of blewysch
color with a certain malignitie.

The other kind is of red or white color, and is not so hard, it is hangyng
and small about the root, with out pain and styncke, having some humidite.

The cure of polypus is this. First the catarrhous mattier procedynge from the
head must be purged with pills of iera, with agaryke, Pills.
or with pills called cochie, or assagereth, and the vein called cephalica
must be cut (as Rasis says) if the body be sanguine and strong. After this
it is convenient to apply things mordificatyue, or biting, or to cauterize the
roots of it with a silver instrumente, made like a pype.

There be medicines which have strength to root up polypus surely, as a
ruptorie of capitell, vnguentum egiptiacu^ of Auice^nes description, in a
styffe form.

After that the polypus is roted up with small tenacles, or with some other
sharp instrument, or by tyenge a sylke threde to consume the root of it, our
poudre is merueylous good, which takes away superfluous flesh without
pain. It is good also to apply to it vnguentu^ mixtu^. Afterward for
cicatrisatio^, use the poudre made of one part tutia alexandrina, and the
other part of terra sigillata, with burnte roche alume, or our vnguentum de
tutia.

If ye perceive that the polypus is cankreous by ye signs aforesaid, tha^ a
wise chirurgien must in no wise assaye to root it up by sharp or strong
medicines, but as Rasis says, it is better to appalliate it by gentle
medicines. For the use of sharp medidicines shortenethe the life of the
patiente. And Auicenne says by the auctority of Hypocrates it chances that
a canker sometimes may be healed at the beginning, but if it be confirmed it
can not. And often a canker chauncethe within an hid place and that the
rectification is that it be not touched with instruments of iron, or sharp
medicines. For so the patiente might dye sodaynlye. But if ye proceed with
palliatyue cure, ye may prolonge the life of the patient without great pain,
as Rasis opinion is.

Palliatiue cure.
Palliatyue cure is accomplyshed by the administration of the remedies following.
The first is, that ye wash the place often with the whey of gottes milk
adding a little sugre, or with the decoction of barley, and lentiles in to
which the virtue of lentiles entrethe by the decoction of plantayne, and
nightshade with a little sugre candye. This lotion purgethe, and takes away the
sharpnes of the mattier.

After this lotion, it is good to lay upon the polypus this linimente
following. A liniment.
R. of the oil of roses omphacyne.. iii. of vnguente of roses, or in the stead
thereof, of vnguentum Galeni.. ii. of the juice of plantayne, and nyghtshade.
ana.. viii. of litarge of gold and silver. ana.. i. and ss. of tutia
alexandrina, of cerusse. ana.. ss. Let the iuyces with the foresaid oil,
and ointment boil unto the co^su^ption of the said iuyces, tha^ strain them
and add of white wax.. vi. and let them sees again a little, and put in
the remnaunte of the ingredientes one after another, styrrynge them about in a
mortarre of lead the space of two hours, and than add of camphore brayed
according to art.. ii.

Oil of yolks of eggs.
To this same intention the oil of yolks of eggs is very good. For it
swagethe pain merueylouslye. It must be labored a great while in a mortar
of lead, and if ye put to the said oil a little litarge of gold, and
silver, and a little of tutia Alexandrina, and of the preciouse stone called an
Ematyte, with a little juice of plantaine and morelle or nightshade, it shall be
of greater efficacitie, and more desiccatyue, and shall better defend
putrefaction. If ye add in the end a little camphore, it shabe more
refrigeratyue.

Note that if the polypus be vlcered with such an vlceration that enflameth
not the place, nether payneth it vehementlye, for the removing and corrosion,
ye may use our poudre adding to it, some of our ointment of tutia
aforesaid. Moreover we have found the remedy under written of good operation,
which is in a liquide form, as it follows. R. one sower pomgranade, and one
sweet, of myrobalanes citrines.. ss. of ye leaves of plantayne, and nyghtshade,
A decoction.
of the leaves of wyld Olyues, and of ye herb called cauda equina, or
horsetayle. an^. m^. ss. of consolida minor the third part of an handful, of
sugre taberzet.. ii. of sodden new wine.. iii. bray them all fynely, tha^
sees the^ one waulme, and let them stand al together the space of two
hours, than strayn the^, and press the^, and set them on the fire again,
till they begin to be thycke, as liquide honey, and use thereof with coton
dypped in the liquor, and put in to the nose, in those days when ye use not
the foresaid poudre.

Furthermore it is to be noted, that in this place sometimes there grow
carnosities or fleshye pieces of the nature of emoroides, and been called of
the doctors emoroides of the nose.

which been healed with the curation of polipus not cankreous declared in this
present cha. For which the name of god be blessed.

The.x. cha. of the rednes and burning in the top of the nose, as well
within as without, procedynge of a little aposteme.
THe burning, and the rednes which chauncethe in the top of ye nose, The
burning ridnes of the nose.
is ever caused of an hot, and catarrhous mattier. The cure whereof, after
conueniente purgation with cassia, and diacatholicon, may be accomplished by
the administration of the remedies under written.

The first is this. R. of the leaves of mallows and violettes, of clean
barley. A decoction.
an^. m^. i. of the roots of langedebeefe. m^. i. of the seed of quinces..
iii. of sweet apples.iii. Sees these foresaid things with sufficient
quantity of the broth of fresh, or with rain water, and than press them, and
strayn them, and put into the nostrelles oftentimes some of this decoction
being actually hot. This decoction is sovereign good for maturation, and
mitigatio^ of the mattier that causes the burning and bytyng. Item to the
same intention we have found this plaster good. A plaster maturat^^^.
R. of the leaves of mallows and violettes. ana. m^. i. of clean barleye. m^.
i. and ss. of raysines.. i. Let the^ boil in sufficient water, til the barley
break, than stamp them, and strain them, and add to the straynyng of the
inward parts of roasted, apples.. ii. of fresh buttyre. i. and ss. of oil of
sweet almandes, of oil of violettes. an^.. i. let the^ boil again at the
fire, and make a styffe plaster, adding in the end the yolks of two eggs.
This plaster rypeth and breaks, without drawing of mattier to the place.
when the aposteme is broken, ye must proceed after the doctrine written in the
cha. of ordeolum, layenge to a little of white diaquilon of our description.
Thus we end this present cha. etc.

The.xi. cha. of apostemes cold, and hot, saniouse, and not saniouse, which
chance in the ears.
ALbeit yt we have spoken in the former cha. of the pains procedinge of
apostematio^, and vlceration of the ears, The cu^^ of Apostemes under the
ears.
and of apostemes which chance under the roots of the ears by way of
termination, nevertheless for a surer doctrine and acco^plyshmente of this
chap. we will here write of the said apostemes. After universal purgation,
and good regiment of diete according to ye quality of the evil humor, we will
therefore write convenient remedies to be laid upon the paynfull place. First
when the mattier is hot, and will not be cured by the way of termination, use
oil of roses, omphacine, boiled with wine of pomegranades, and a little saffran
till they be thycke.

If the intention be to resolve, take oil of roses, complete with oil of
camomyll, and oil of sweet almondes boiled together with a little white wine,
and a little saffran, let them boil to the consumption of the wine, and put
some of it warm into the ear. It resolves with mitigation of the pain. And
upon the ear ye shall lay the playstre of melilote.

If ye perceive that the Aposteme comes to maturation, the maturatyue
medicines declared in the former Chapters, may be admynistred. After maturation
ye shall open the place without hurt of the sinnowye part, if it be possible
(that is to say) if it come not to breaking out by it self through the help
of the said medicynes.

For the cure of the vlcered place, and for all the other intentions, that is
to say, digestyon, mundification, incarnation, and cicatrization, ye must
proceed according as it is written in the Chapter of ulcers in the ears.

Resolutiues.
If the Aposteme be caused of a cold matter, ye must use oil of camomyll and
spyke. And if ye will resolve more effectuously, you must proceed with oils of
lylyes and dyll, and with a decoction of ground worms sodden in wine, with a
little saffran: These things must seethe together unto the consumption of the
wine. Pour hereof into the ear, and lay upon the ear a playstre of melilote.

If it come to maturation, apply a playstre of oynio^s after this form.
Playstre of onions.
. of roasted white onyons.li. ss. of roasted white garleeke heedes.. iiii. of
fresh buttyre.. iii. of ye oil of sweet almandes, of hens grese, and gose
grese. an^.. vi. with the yolks of three eggs. Make a styffe playstre of all
these at the fire, with the flour of Fenugreke, with a little camomyll, and
melilote brayed, and with a decoction of holyhockes. This playstre rypeth a
cold Aposteme of the ears, and swageth pain. when the aposteme is ripe, it
must be cured according to the curation declared in this present book of an
hot Aposteme. we have noted many remedies in the former Chaptres, which be
good in this case. Thus we end. etc.

The.xii.. Chaptre. Of the pain caused in the inner part of the ear
procedynge as well of an hot Aposteme, as of some vlceration of the said
place.
THere chances often in the ear a vehement pain, Of pain wtin the ear.
by reason of the sensibilitye or quycke feeling of the place, chefely when
there is some Aposteme that comes to maturation.

To take away this pain there is no better remedy, A suffumigation.
than twyse a day to use this suffumigation following, so that we keep the
universal rules, as it is said before. The effect of this suffumigation is,
to ripe the place, to swage pain, and to prepare the matter, that it may issue
out wherefore when the mattier is hot, the fumigatio^ must be after this sort.
of the leaves of mallows, and violettes, of clean barley, of the roots of
holyhocke. ana. m^. i. of branne, of melilote. ana. m^. ss. of wardens, or instead of them, of sweet apples somewhat broused, in nombre.iiii. of the seed
of quynces.. ii. Sees them all together unto the co^su^ption of half. A
liniment.


Item to the same intention this liniment that follows, is good to be applied
both within and without. R. of the oil of yolks of eggs, and of sweet
almandes, and violettes. ana.. ii. of fresshe buttyre. ss. of snayles the
shelles being taken away in no^bre.ii. of worms called porcellions or
chestwormes.xii. in nombre. of saffra^.. ii. of sodde^ new wine.. i. Sees them
all together with.. i. and ss. of the roots of holihocke somewhat sta^ped, unto
the co^su^ption of the wine. You must use this liniment, rubbyng the ear
within, and without, and applienge it actually hot.

Item we have found this remedy under written of great efficacitie, to ripe
and to swage the pain of the said aposteme without drawyng of matteir to the
place. Note that the remedies before rehearsed ben admynystred for the mitigation
of pain caused by some vlceration. The form of the playstre is this.. of
roasted apples.. iiii. A plaster
of the cro^mes of breed steped in chekins broth and strayned.. iii. of fresh
buttyre.. ii. of fresh hens grese.. i. Let the^ boil all together, and add
in the end the yolks of two eggs, and a little saffran. This plaster beside
rypyng swageth pain maruelouslye, and prepares the mattier to issue out of
the ear.

After suppuration the ulcer must be healed with this liniment that follows,
which we have proved to our profit, and worship in an vlceration caused of a
little Aposteme, which chanced, by the way of termination ad crisim, A liniment
approved.
in the inner part of the right ear, of Iulie.ii. The ordination was after
this sort.. of the oil of yolks of eggs.. ii. of honye of roses strayned..
iiii. mengle them together. Lay this liniment upon the vlcered place, with
cotton dypped in it, being actually hot. It mundifyeth and heals the
vlceration perfecly.

Note, that if need be in this case of greater mundification, ye may
co^uenyently add to the foresaid liniment, the third part of sarcocolle
washed in the water of a decoction of barlye. we will speak of this ulcer in
special, after that we have treated generally of ulcers. Thus we end this
Chaptre. etc.

The.xiii. Chaptre. Of hot and cold Apostemes, which chance under the ears,
and of the cure of them.
OFten times there are engendered under the ears certain apostemes saniouse and
not saniouse. Apostemes under the ears.
Sometimes by ye way of termination ad crisim, somtymes through abundaunce of
humors descendynge from the brain. For the cure whereof we will ordeyne
brefely certain conuenyent remedies.

First when you perceive that an Aposteme is engendered in the said place by
the way of termination ad crisi, ye must consider whether ye said aposteme be
in the way of resolution or maturation. If it be in the way of resolution, you
shall proceed with the resolutyues following, of which the first is in this
sort.. of the roots of holyhocke.li. ss. of camomyll, Resolutiue
melilote, fenugreke. m^. i. Sees these things in suffycyent quantity of
brothe of fresh flesh, until they be perfectlye sodden, than cut them, stamp
them, and strain them, and with the crommes of breed make a stiff plaster in
the decoction, adding of oil of camomyll, and dyl. ana.. ii. of buttyre, of
hens greece. ana.. i. the yolks of two eggs. Lay these ordinances upon the
aposteme actually hot, after the manner of a plaistre. This plaistre resolves
all hard matter, and swageth grefe, chefely if the matter be mengled with
cold humors.

If the mattier be hot, ye must not proceed with so strong a resolution (for
the general rule is against it) but by a gentle resolution, as is this
ordinance following.. of mallow leaves. m^. ii. of the roots of holyhok li.
ss. boil them together in suffycie^t quantity of broth of fresh flesh, and
strain them as it is said before, and in the decoction with the flour of
barlye, beans and wheat. ana.. ii. make a styffe playstre at the fire,
adding of oil of camomyl, of hens grese, of buttyre. ana.. i. ss. of
saffran.. i. and the yolks of two eggs. Let the playstre be actuallye hot,
when it shall be laid to.

These two foresaid playstrs resolve, and resyst not maturation, if nature
will that the matter come to maturation. wherefore if ye perceive that the
mattier can not be resolved by the foresaid remedies, and that it requires to
come to rypenesse, which thing may be known by the signs of maturation,
incontinently when the matter is me^gled with so^dry humors, for the
maturation of the same, A maturatiue
use this playstre following.. of white lylly roots, of ye roots of holyhok.
an^.li. ss. sees these things in suffycie^t water, cut them, sta^pe the^ and
strain them, and set the said decoction upon the fire, and make a playstre
with suffycient quantity of the flour of fenugreke, of the flour of line
seed, and of wheat, addyng of buttyre, of melted swynes grese. ana.. ii and
in the end of the decoction put in the yolks of three eggs, and lay it hot
upon the Aposteme.

Note, that if you take of this plaistre.. i, and add two snayles with their
shelles, and three fat fygges, and of confyte raysines.. ss. well stamped
together and laid upon the point of the aposteme, when it is ripe, the saynne
shall be made thynne, and the aposteme shall be opened by the virtue of the said
playstre.

But if the aposteme be caused of hot humors, it shall not be convenient to
use so strong a maturatiue, but it shall suffyse, that in the decoction ye add
only the flower of barley and wheat, til it be brought to the form of a
playstre, and than you must put to, of buttyre and of swynes grese a suffycyent
quatitie.

Item, Embrocation
it is a general rule for maturation and mitigatio^ of the pain of this
Aposteme, to make often embrocation with the decoction aforesaid sodden with
wheat flower, and fresh buttyre.

Afterward, when the Aposteme is ripe, ye shall open it in the rypeste place,
after the doctrine declared in the Chapitre of exitures, that have gross
skynnes, to which chaptre resort, for the knowledge of making incisions from
the heed to the feet, according to the sondrye parts of man's body. After
incision, for the cure of the ulcer ye shall proceed with the remedies given in
the chaptre of the cure of Flegmon in general. Aposteme of catarhous mattier


If the Aposteme be caused of a catarchous matter, and of a cause antecedent,
and comes not by the way of termination ad crisim, ye shall use the remedies
declared in this chapitre touching resolution and maturation. Here is to be
noted, that though these apostemes under the ears ben of the kind of Flegmon
(which Galene, and Celsus call parotides) nevertheless in the beginning we
use not the intentions prescrybed in the cure of Flegmon, but contrary wise we
use attractyues, and resolutines.

The reason is this (as Auicenne says) that if the membre apostemed be an
emunctorie or a clenser, Repenssiues may not be applied.
of a pri^cipal membre, we ought not to apply repercussyue things upon the
Aposteme at any time.

It is true that a repercussyue medicine is conuenyent for an aposteme
nevertheless, because the aposteme proceeds by the deriuation of a princypall
membre, it is better that the mattier be drawn to the emu^ctories than that it
should be driven back, for the danger that might ensewe thereby.

Ye may lawfullye apply ventoses and playstres attractiue wha^ the aposteme
comes by the way of terminatio^ ad crisim. And therefore Auicenne says: let
the malice be derived with ventoses to a vile membre, with the safegarde of a
principal. So that we must ever study to draw ye matter to a membre less
noble, and cause the said membre to be apostemed. For if we should apply
repercussyue medicines, the matter would return to the principal membre, and
would cause some disease that cannot be corrected by medicines.

Ventoses in three cases.
He says moreover in the chaptre of apostemes under the ears, that in three
cases, ventoses, and things attractyue may be applied. The first is, when the
maitter is venomous. The second, when there is fear, lest ye matter by a
repercussyue medicyne return to a principal membre. The third, when the
aposteme is by the way of termination ad crisim.

Nevertheless, when the mattier is in great abundaunce, when ventoses are not
to be used.
and comes by sudden deriuation, and with great pain, than during the time of
his beginning, ye must beware of applyinge ventoses, or things much
attractyue. For they would draw to great quantity of mattier to ye place, and
would increase the pain and also the fieuer, wherefore it suffices tha^ to
euapore the mattier by the decoction of things anodyne (that is to say) which
take away pain, and with resolutyue playsters before rehearsed.

Cauterie actual.
It is also to be consydred yt the chirurgyens which command to open the place
with an actual cauterie, not lokynge for maturation, and afterward in all
times apply things much attractyue, work folishly. wherefore Auicen says,
yt if the aposte^ be of swyft coming, and attractio^ or drawyng, namely if it
be with a sodeyne deriuation, the matter being apt to flow abundauntly to the
sore place, than we must leave him to his own nature. For this intent that ye
medicyne very much attractiue cause not vehement grefe in the place, and that
the pain cause not a fieuer, or cause the patient to be choked: which thing
we have often seen to have chanced.

wherefore in the stead of attraction we must be content with mollification,
and gentle resolution, Resolution
chefelye when there is vehement pain, yea, the same doctor says, that if
the beginning be with vehement pain we must be content to euapore the matter
with cold water. Howbeit, Gentilis expounyng the text of Auicenne understood
hot water, and not cold. And I say, that if the foresaid water be a
decoction of mallows, vyolettes, barlye, melilote, it shall be more
conuenyent, than simple water, and of greater operation in swaging grefe.

In this case a flebotomie diuersyue is conuenyent at the beginning, Flebotomie
as Auicenne teaches, saying: ye must diminisshe the matter by cuttynge a
vein if it be needful. wherefore (as we have said before) the unlearned
chirurgiens do very evil in this case, applying in all times attractyue
medicines. For by great attraction somtymes the matter is multiplied in the
place, into so great quantity, yt nature can not rectifye it, neither by way
of maturation, neither by the way of suppuration, and so we have often seen the
matter in the place to be corrupted, or come to stonye hardenesse.

when this aposteme is brought to maturation by the forsayde maturatyues, ye
shall open it, and after yt ye have opened it, and suppressed the blood, you
must proceed three or four days with medicines, which are co^uenyent to make
matter fluide or flowyng. Afterward for the mundifycation, incarnation, and
cicatrisatio^, ye shall proceed after the doctrine declared in the Chapitre of
the Cure of Flegmon in general. Thus by the aid of god, we have ended this
chaptre, whose name be praised.

The.xiiii. Chaptre. Of an hot aposteme, of the gummes and palate, or rouffe
if the mouth.
Hot apostemes in the gu^mes, etc.
AN aposteme of the gu^mes, and of the palate is engendered often of hot, and
catarrhous matter. It comes also sometimes of the pain and putrefaction of
the teeth.

But of whatsoever matter it come (presupposed that the antecede^t matter be
purged, after as the humors shall require) there is nothing better, than to
admynistre this remedy under written, which is of this effect, that it
procures quyckly the issue of the matter, and swageth pain.. of fat dry
fygges, of dates. an^. in no^bre.iiii. of raisines.. i. of iuiubes in
nombre.xx. of clean barley somewhat broken, A decoction
of branne. ana. m^. i. of the roots of langdebefe.. ii. Seethe these things
together, with suffyciente quantity of the brothe of an hen without salt,
unto the consumptio^ of two parts of the three, and let the patient use often
thereof, holding it hot in his mouth. Also ye may dyp cotton in the
decoction, and lay it upon the aposteme, for it ripeth greatly and appayseth
the pain

when the aposteme is come to maturation, ye shall open the place with a
lancette. Afterward for mundifycation, and incarnation, it shall suffice to
lay often upon the Aposteme, honye of roses. If the place can not be mundifyed
therebye, ye may apply vnguentum Egiptiacum, which is of such effect, that
it mundifyeth the place from corrupt flesh, and conserueth the good. And
afterward ye may well apply honye of Roses, with litiu^ and with a little
sarcocolle. Thus we end this cha. etc.

The.xv. Chaptre. Of the falling of Vuula, and of the corruption and
infla^mation of the same.
Uvula (as the Anatomystes say) is a spongyous membre, Of the falling of Vuula.
which nature has produced for.ii. causes. First that it might give
modulation or tunynge to the voice. Secondly, that it might receive the
superfluities of the heed. The Vuula is oftentimes loosed, and depressed by
flegmatike matter. And oftentimes it is inflamed, corupted, and loosed by hot
matter.

For the curation of the losing of Vuula by flegmatyke matter (a convenient
purgatio^ presupposed, Cure of flegmatike cause.
of pills of Iera with agaryke) there is nothing more convenient, than to
draw back the vuula with a poudre made of one part of pepper, and two parts
of myrobalanes citrins, applyinge it twyse a day.

Furthermore, it is convenient before dynner and supper, to wash the feet and
the arms in a decoction of things confortatyue, with wine and water equallye
mengled. Also it is good to apply ventoses upon ye shulders with scarification.
Item towe somewhat kyndled, and suffumigated with frankencense, may well be
laid actuallye hot upon the heed. Immediately after purgation or cuttyng of
the vein called cephalica, if the strength of the patient will suffer it, the
place must be epithemed, and gargarised with this gargarisme following.. of
clean barleye. m^. i. of lentyles. m^. ss. of mirtiles, of the graynes and
leaves of the same, A gargarisme
of wild olyues of each a little. Let them boil all together with suffycient
quantity of water unto the consumption of two parts of the three, than strain
them, and add to the straynynge, of white vynegre.. iiii. of syrup of roses..
ii. and. ss. Let them sees again a little. This gargarisme takes away the
evil hot complexion of vuula, and comfort it, and is somewhat resolutyue,
because of the barley. To this intention wine of the two kinds of pomgranades,
with rose water, pla^tayne water, and syrrupe of roses me^gled together, is
very good.

Afterward if ye perceive that it can not be restored into his place, by the
foresaid remedies, but that it comes to the way of corruption, it is very
convenient to rub it of with vnguentum Egiptiacu^, after the descryption of
Auicenne, vsyng always the forsayde gargarysme. And if ye perceive, that by the
application of vnguentum Egiptiacum, and of the remedies above written, the
corruption will not be taken away, you must cut it unto the root, and lay
an hot iron upon the corrupted place or cauterize it with some potentiall
cauterie. For this is the curation of ancient and later doctors, chefelye of
Albucasis.

Note that wha^ the matter is hot, Purgation
for a purgation it is good to use pills of assagereth, or an electuarye of
the iuce of roses, with diacatholicon, and tamarindes in convenient quantity.
Also Cassia with the forerehersed solutyues, is expedient, and likewise this
descryption following.. of cassia, of diacatholicon. ana.. ss. of an electuarie
of the iuce of roses.. ii. and. ss. with water of endyue and sorel, make a
small potion, adding of syrup of vyolettes.. i.

It is very necessary at the beginning to keep a good diete. Diete.
Let the diete be such as is declared in the Chapitre of Herisipelas, when the
mattier is hot, when the mattier is cold, let the patient keep the diete
written in the chaptre of Vndimia. we judge this doctrine declared to be
sufficient for the curation of Vuula. For the which the name of God be blessed.

The.xvi. Chaptre. Of the apostemes of the jaws, and of the two almandes, and
of the cure of the same.
AMigdales been two flesshie particles or pieces situated in the.ii. Of the
apostemes of the laws and amigdales.
sides of the vuula, after the facyon of two almandes, and therefore of the
Anatomistes, they are called amigdales, that is to say alma^des. And
oftentimes they receive apostemation, by reason of the catarrhous mattyer that
descendethe from the brain. For the curation whereof (after convenient
purgation of the mattyer antecede^t, as well by laxatiue medicynes, as by
flebotomie, and application of ventoses upon the shulders with scarification,
and after ordinance of diete as is declared in the former chapitres) it shall be
right expedient to use some of thyes remedies under written.

Gargarisme.
First at the beginning ye shall use things of familiare repercussion, as is a
gargarisme compounde of one part of water of roses, and two parts of wine of
Pomegranades, and an half part of vinegre of roses. To this intention a
decoction of barley, in which a little of sumach has been boiled avails
much, if ye add there unto a little of Diamoron. This decoction dryueth back
the mattier merueylously, and conforteth the place and is good in the
beginning, augmentation, state and declination.

A gargarisme resolutiue.
When the Aposteme is in the way of resolution. This gargarisme following
helpethe greatly resolution, cheifely in the state.. of clean barley, of
raisines, of dates. Ana. M. j. let them boil all together with suffycient
quantity of water, unto the consumption of half, than strain them, and add
to the straynyng of honye of roses.. ij. of syrup de duabus radicibus.. ij.
let them sees again one boylynge. Item the things under written ben very
good to turn aside the mattier, namelye byndynge of the extreme parts,
wasshyng, and rubbyng.

Item to retain the reume of the head, the application of towe somewhat burnt
and suffumigated, with the smoke of encense, is very expedient. It is good in
this case to pluck the hear of the patientes head upward vehemently, after
the doctrine of Mesue.

When the Apostemation can not be resolved by the foresaid way, if it grow
to maturation, Maturatiue.
ye may conveniently apply within, and without the remedies following for the
full rypyng of it. First ye must apply this remedy without.. of roasted
apples.. viij. of buttyre.. ij. of hens grese.. j. and. ss. of woman's milk..
iij. of the flower of barley well boulted.. j. let them boil at the fire
till they be thycke, adding in the end of the decoction, the yolks of two
Eggs. This plaster applied to the throat, rypeth the almandes easily, and
swageth the pain. This decoction following we have often proved, and it is to
be ministered within the mouth.. of dry fygges, of dates, of each in
nombre.xij. of raysines.. j. of ye roots of holyhock.. iij. of clean barley,
of branne. Ana. M. j. of the sede of quynce.. ij. of iuiubes in nombre. xx.
Seethe them all with suffycient quantytie of the broth of an hen not salted,
unto the consumptio^ of two parts of the three, than press them strongly, and
strain them, and add to the straynynge, of suggre.. ij. of honye of Roses..
j. and. ss. and let them seethe again one boylynge. The patient shall
gargaryse often this decoction which must be hot when he uses it. It is
maturatyue, and swagethe pain.

When the Aposteme is ripe, you must open it with a lancette, and mundifye the
vlcere with the water of a decoction of barley, mengled with honye of roses, in
gargarysyng the same. Thus we end this cha. for which the name of God be
praised.

The.xvij. Chapi. of an Aposteme of the throat called Squinantia or the quynce,
and of the cure thereof.
Squinantia.
IN the throat there is often engendered an Aposteme of a catarrhous mattier
co^munely called of the doctors squinantia. Cornelius celsus calls it
Angina, and it is a dangerous disease, causyng the patient sometime to dye by
suffocatyon or chokyng in the space of.xij. hours, and sometime of syx, or
four, or two Wherefore Hypocrates sayethe, that if the quynce turn to the
pype of the lunges, the patient shall dye within seven days, or shall spette
out rotten and corrupt gear. Squynantia is an Aposteme in the throat, which
keeps the air from entering in to the pype of the lunges, and suffers not
the meat to pass to the stomach, which things ben necessarelye requisyte in
man's life. And after Galenes opinyon, there are four kinds of Squinantia.

Four kinds of squina^tia.
The first is with great pain, and there appears no swellynge nether within
nor without. And it is between the lacertes of the throat. Ye shall know it by
the difficulty of breathynge, and swallowynge of meat, and for the most part
it chokethe the patient in the space of four days. When a man is vexed with
this kind of squinantia, he puttethe his tongue out of his mouth, and holds
his mouth open, drawing breathe by courses, like a weryed dog thoroughe the
heat of the son. This kind for the most part is contained in the inner
part of the Epiglotte, Squinantia Canina.
and Auicenne callethe it squinantia canina, that is dogs quynce.

The second kind is contained between the lacertes, and appears toward the
spondiles, so that wha^ the tongue is pressed down with some instrument, it may
be seen betwixt the almandes swollen, and read though no swellynge appear
outwardlye. This kind is not so dangerous as the other.

The third kind is that, yt is manifested by swellynge inwardly, and
outwardly, and is longer than ye other, that is to say, it choketh not so sone
as the other.

The fourth is that, that shewethe his generation in the outward part only,
and it is of surer curation than the other.

Squina^tia is ended by one of thies three means following. First by
insensyble resolution. For seeing that the mattyer is little, and subtyle,
cheifely an universal, or particular flebotomie had, and some convenient
gargarisme exhibyted, the patient is sone healed. For after that the mattier is
purged, the rest which is subtyle, and of small quantytie is resolved
insensibly, or without feelynge.

Secondely it is ended by the way of suppuration, and so this Aposteme ca^ne
never be turned to any quytture nor ended in four days, cheifely wha^ the
mattier is gross.

Thyrdely it is ended by permutatyon, or chaungynge to some other part of the
body. And sometimes it is ended in the breast, sometimes in the head, but for
the most part in the stomach. Wha^ it ends in the breast, and that the
mattyer commethe toward the heart, trembling of the heart, and a great cough
ensues. If the mattyer turn to the lunges, it causes diffycultie of
breathynge. If to the head, it induces perturbatyon of the use of reason. If
to the stomach, it causethe vomyte and perbreakynge. For every permutatyon of
a chokyng Aposteme is evil, as Auycenne witnesses.

Sign of permutation.
A sign of permutatyon or chaungyng is, when the tokens of an Aposteme appear,
and incontinently after depart, some pryncipall part being hurted. Dangerous
signs.
Dangerous signs in squinantia ben thyes, sharp fieuers, no appearaunce of
swellynge, or rednes within, difficulty of breathyng, and swallowynge meat,
and sometimes the tongue is swollen, and the jaws and when the voice can not
be well formed, but it seems that the patyent speaks thoroughe the nose, it
is an evil sign, and also wha^ the face is pale and the eyesmoue hither, and
thither, oftentimes there chauncethe with the said signs a yowxynge. Thyes
are the signs that follow an Aposteme of dangerous terminatyon, and this last
termination is wurst of all.

A Sanguyne Squinancye.
Furthermore this disease is sometime engendered of sanguine mattier, somtymes of
Choleryke, and seldom of Flegmatyke, and most seldom of Melancholyke mattyer.

The signs of a sanguyne Squinantia, may be taken out of the Chapter of
Flegmon in general, and likewise of other humors, according as it is
declared in their propre Chapytres, at the beginning of Apostemes after the
dyuersyte of the four humors. The cure of Squinantia.
To come to the cure of Squinantia, there ben four intentyons required
thereunto. The first is to order dyete. The second partlye to turn aside the
mattyer antecedent, partlye to purge by the nether parts. The third, to take
away the mattyere conioyncte. The fourth to comfort the place, from which
the mattyer is descended. The fyfthe to correct the accydentes. The first is
accomplysshed by the adminystration of the six things not natural, Diete.
of which we have abundantly treated in the former Chapter, of hot Apostemes
in general. Wherefore for his drink as good Mesue sayethe, let the patient
use at the beginning water of suggre, and Hydromell, and successyuelye he must
comme to the water of clean lentiles, or barley, mengled with a iuleb of
violettes, or Roses by infusyon. Thies take away thyrst and swage inflammation.
Furtheremore for his meat, he may comme by little, and little to a potage made
of the flower of beans, and barley sodden in water. If the patyent be strong,
let the foresaid things be sodden in the brothe of a lean chyckynge, if he
be weak with the addition of oxymell, and suggre. Last of all give the
patyente rear Eggs, with the brothe of an hen. Thus by little and little we
must fortifye nature, and so doing we may restore the patient to his first
estate. Item at the beginning ye may give the patyent wine of Pomegranades
with a little suggre, and water of barley. For it is both drink, and a
remedy of the Aposteme. For it resoluethe familiarly and gentilly, and
moreover it quenchethe the heat of the place Apostemed, and kepethe the meat
in the stomach from corruptynge, as Auerrois testifyeth, which virtues ben
necessary in the cure of this disease.

The second intention, which is partly to purge the mattyere antecedent, and
partlye to turn it aside, is accomplysshed by an v^yuersall purgation, as well
by flebotomie, as euacuation of the belly, and moreover by rubbing the
extremites of ye body, and byndynge them, and laiynge ventoses upon the
shulders, and upon the neck without scarificatyon, or with scarification as
the case shall require.

All thyes things must be done spedely (for this disease sufferethe not
delay) and waiting to work after the rules of Phisyck. When you come to the
curatio^ of this disease, Phlebotomie
if ye strength and age of the patient will suffer, it shall be conuenyent to
cut the vein called basilica in the contrary side, presupposed that the
patiente be purged first with a clyster leuiti^e. And.xij. hours after you may
cut the vein named Cephalica in the same side so that no let be.
Afterward to take away the mattier conioyncte after the doctrine of all
doctors, it is convenient to cut the veins under the tongue. For it is a
synguler remedy, when the strength of the patient ca^ne endure it.

Item it is good to turn away the mattyer, plungynge the legs up to the
knees, and the arms to the Elbowes, Decoction.
in this decoctyon following.. of Camomille, Melilote, Roses, sticados. m^. ij.
of branne. M. iij. of rosmarye, sage, wormewoode. Ana. M. j. of squinantum a
little. Let them boil all together with a sufficyent quantytie of rain water,
and as much odoryferous wine, unto the consumptyon of the third part. This
lotion ministered as it is said before, and as hot as the patyent may suffer
it, only twyse a day, aydethe much the quynce, drawyng the humors from the
sore place, unto the inferyour parts.

After this you may diminishe the mattyer with conuenyent laxatiue medicynes,
according to the dyuersite of the evil humors. If the mattyer be sanguine,
after flebotomye, as is said, you must purge the same without digestion,
Purgatio^ in a Sangui^^ cause.
in this form that follows.. of cassia of chosen ma^na Ana.. ss. of
tamarindes.. j. and. ss. dissolve the^ all together with the decoctyon of
cordyall flowers, and fruits, and make a small potion, adding of syrup of
violettes.. j. and. ss.

But if the mattyer be Choleryke, Purgatio^ in a Choleryke cause.
ye may conuenientlye give the patyent this purgation following before
flebotomye.. of chosen manna.. x. of Diaprunis non solutyue,. vj. make a small
potion with the decoction of cordyall flowers, and fruits made of water of
violettes, and night shade adding of syrup of violettes.. j. and. ss.

If ye perceive that blood is mengled with fleame, Purgatio^ in a mixte cause.
than give the patient pylles called Cochie, and pylles of Iera with agaryke,
or in the stead of pylles purge the patient with this purgation.. of cassia, of
Diacatholico^. Ana.. ss. Diaphinicon.. iij. make a small potion with the
decoction of cordial flowers and fruits, addyng of syrup of violettes.. j.
and. ss. In this case suppositories and clysters having some acuite or sharpnes
seem more convenient, tha^ medicynes received by ye mouth. For in this case the
patientes abhor to receive medicynes by the mouth.

The third intention which is to take away the mattier co^ioyncte, is
accomplished by the administration of sondrie things upon the said Aposteme
according to the diversity of the times of this disease. At the beginning of
this Aposteme, you must beware that ye lay not on it, things vehemently
repercussyue, before a purgatyon. For in retaynynge the mattyer in the place,
and by inducyng of reumes it may cause great pain, and consequently draw
much mattyer to the place.

Wherefore before the purgatyon, incontinentlye as soon as ye perceive this
Aposteme to begin, it is good, to administer this gargarisme following,
which is of such effect that it conforteth the sore place, and quenches the
heat of the mattyere with mitigation of the pain, and resolves somewhat the
mattyer co^ioyncte, and kepethe the mattyer antecedent from coming to the
Apostemed place. And it is in this form following. A gargarisme
. of the water of barley sodden until the barley break.li. ss. of the wine of
sweet Granades and sower. Ana.. j. syrup of Roses by infusyon.. iij. Let them
seethe together one boylynge. At the beginning after euacuation, according to
the foresaid doctrine, you may proceed with stronger repercussyon. Good Mesue
praysethe in all kinds of squynantie a gargarysme of Rose water, and vinegre.

Another.
For the same intention, you shall use chys gargarysme following.. of sower
apples in nombre four, of sumach, of roses. Ana. M. ss. of the sede of
quynces.. ij. Let the^ boil all with sufficient water unto the co^sumptyon of
half, and add of the wine of both ye kinds of pomegranades. Ana.. ij. of
diamoron.. iij. of dianucu^.. j. let them boil again a little. This gargarisme
is good from the beginning unto the augmentation.

Another.
Here follows another gargarisme, which is of a merueylous good operatyon.. of
the water of roses.. ij. of ye wine of sweet, and tarte granades.. iij. of
veriuyce.. j. of ye water of night shade, and plantaine. Ana.. j. and. ss. of
roses, of sumach of each a little of ye juice of apples sower, and sweet. ana..
ij. of the juice of wyldinges, and medlars, if they may be gotten. Ana.. j. of
syrup of roses,. ij. of diamoron.. j. letthem boil all unto the co^sumptio^
of the third part and Gargaryse this decoction often, as it is aforesaid.

Wha^ the aposteme is in ye augme^tatio^, In augmentation.
the medicines must be mengled with things resolutiue, after this ordinance..
of roses, of sumach. ana. m^.j. of barley, of raisines. ana. M. ss. of dry
figs in no^bre.vi. of iuiubes in no^bre x. Sees the^ al with sufficient water
unto ye co^sumptio^ of the third part, adding of diamoro^.. iiij. of the honey
of roses.. j. and. ss. Note that if fleame surmounte other humors, you may
add to the foresaid remedies a little alume, and a little vynegre, and saffran.

Ite^ to this intention it is good to gargarise a little of cassia with water of
nightshade, and pla^tain. Also it is expedient to gargarise warm gotes milk, to
appayse ye pain, and to souple ye throat, which propretie is good in this
case, Gargarisme.
Likewise ye gargarisme following is alowable in this case.. of the brothe of a
chickin sufficient quantity, of barley. m^. ss. of the sede of quynces.. ij.
of the roots of la^gedebeefe.li. iiij. of dry fygges.iiij. in nombre of
liqueritie.. j. let the^ boil to the co^sumptio^ of the third part, tha^
add of diamoro^, of honey of roses, of dianucu^. Ana.. j. and. let them
boil again.

In the state of this disease when ye Aposteme is in the way of resolution,
you may apply this resolutiue. In the state.
Resolutyue.
. of the roots of Holihocke.. iiij. of dry fygges in nombre.x. of raisynes..
ij. of branne. m^. ss. of barley. M. j. of liqueritie.. x. of ye nest of a
swallow.li. ss. of the birds of swallows, if they may be gotten in
no^bre.iij. or in the stead of them, take of dried swallows, and laid up in
salt, in no^bre.ij. Seethe them all together with the brothe of wethers flesh
or of hens, unto the consumptyon of the third part, and add of honye of
roses.. ij. of read suggre.. j. and. ss. of saffran.. j. of syrup de duabus
radicibus.. x. If the mattier be gross, add to the foresaid things of
oximell.. ij. and ss. Note that if ye seethe in this decoctyon a dogs torde
with a little wine of sweet granades, it shall be very expedye^t in the
declinatyo^ of this Aposteme.

If the Aposteme comme to maturatyon, the Chirurgie^, must further the
rypynge, appliynge maturatyue things both within, and without, This plaster
following causes terminatyon of all kinds of squinantia merueylously, either by
maturatio^ or by resolutyon, and it must be applied in the outward parts
upon the Apostemed place. Plaster maturatine.
. of the roots of holyhock.li. j. of mallows, and violettes Ana. M. ij. of
horehounde M. ss. of white lyllie roots.. iiij. of dry fygges.. ij. of
dates.. iij. the nest of a swallowe. Seethe thies things in water until they
ben perfectly sodden, and after that they be sodde^ choppe them, stamp them
and strain them, and make a styffe plaster upon the fire with the flower of
fenugreke, barley, and wheat, and lynsede, adding of buttyre.. iiij. of
hens grese, and duckes grese, of oil of violettes. ana.. j. and. ss. of
saffran.. j. and the yolks of three eggs, and with the foresaid strayned
things make a playstere and apply it, as it is said. To the same intentyon,
a plaster made of roasted apples written in the Chapter of the apostematyon of
the two almandes, is very good, cheifely when the mattyer is hot, likewise
for the maturatyon of every Squinantia lette^ the patient gargarise often, a
decoctyon of the things before rehearsed with read suggre, and syrup of
violettes.

After the maturatyon, you must open the Aposteme by subtyle mean. A certain
learned man commands to open the Aposteme with a soft wax candelle,
putting in to the mouth, unto the Aposteme, or in the stead of it with a
leeke blade. Some command to swallowe down a morselle of beef, tied to a
threde and to pluck it out again sodaynely, and vehemently. Some have assayed
to search the Aposteme with certain instruments, and to open it with a little
sharp instrumente made after the facyon of an hankes talande.

After that ye have opened it you must mundifye it, incarne it, and seal it
up, according to the doctrine under written. First for the mundificatyon, you
may use a decoction of fygges, of raisynes, of barley mengled with honye of
roses. Semblably for incarnatyon, you may add to the foresaid decoctyo^, a
little sarcocolle, and a little frankencense. For the sigyllatyon or sealynge up,
use a decoctyon of barley, of le^tiles, of roses, of olyue leaves boiled in
suffycient quantytie of water with a little alume. Let ye patyent gargaryse it
often with syrup of roses.

The fourth intentyon, which is to comfort the membre manda^t, that is to say,
from which the mattier comes by deriuation, is accomplished by the
administratyon of ye poudre, yt follows upon the top of the head, with towe
somewhat burnte, with which ye shall receive ye fumee of ence^se. By the effect of
thyes two remedies the head is greatly conforted, and the humors ben kept
from the sore place. The descryptyon of the poudre is this. A poudre
. of Roses, of wormoode. Ana. M. j. of franckencense, of mastyke. Ana.. ij. of
Calamus Aromaticus.. ss. of squinantum of sticados of each a little.

The fyfth intention which is to correct the accide^tes, is accomplyshed by
the administration of certain things that have strength to take away the
said accidents. Accidents.
The accidents that are wont to chance in this case, are chiefly two,
namely vehement pain, and suffocation, or chokynge with difficulty to take
breath. For the mitigation of pain, it is most expedient to administre a
gargarisme made of hot cowes milk, of syrup of popie, and a little oil of
violets, and a little saffra^. Let the patie^t gargaryse the said composition
being actually hot. Also the application of ventoses under the chinne is
good, after the opinion of Celsus, for it keeps a man from suffocation,
because it draws the matter to the outward parts. To the same intention
many doctors command to apply a ventose upon the neck without
scarification. We suppose the foresaid medicines to be sufficient for ye cure
of this dangerous disease, for which God be thanked.

The.xviij. chapitre of apostemes of the neck, and of the throat, and their
parts.
THere are often apostemes engendered in the neck, Apostemes of the throat
neck. etc.
or in the throat of catarrhous matter being cold, or me^gled And likewise of
hot matter in children by reason of the co^munite, that ye neck has with ye
head This aposteme comes somtymes by rupture, or breakyng, by an hard crust
or shelly scabbe that chances in chyldre^s heads, or by some stripe or wou^d
And it grows in short time to maturation or resolution.

The signs of this aposteme, may easily be known by ye doctrine of the
universal chapiters. Signs.


The curation of these apostemes (observation of general rules and purgation of
the bellye presupposed) is accomplyshed by the administration of convenient
remedies according to the place. At the beginning, when the matter is
mengled, and the aposteme hard, you shall rub the aposteme with oil of
camomill, being hot, and with oil of lillyes and hens grese, and duckes
grese layenge it upon unwashed woulle well toosed taken from between the legs
of a sheep.

If the matter be hot, rub the place with oil of roses and violettes being
hot, and with oil of camomill, and hens grese, applyenge it, as it is said
before.

If this aposteme chance in chyldrens necks thoroughe the foresaid causes,
it shall be convenient only to anoynte the place with oil of roses, and
violettes being actually hot. And if the said aposteme come to the way of
resolution, A plaster resolutiue.
then ye shall proceed with a gentle resolution, as is this plaster following..
of the crommes of bread steped in the decoction of mallows, camomill,
melilote, holihocke about.li. i. then bruise well the bread, and incorporate
it with the foresaid decoction, and sees it at the fire with oil of camomil,
of roses and a little buttyr, unto a styffe thycknes, adding in the end the
yolks of two eggs, of saffra^. i. which done, take it forthwyth from the
fire. This plaster resolves the said aposteme, and resysteth not the
maturation of the same.

If it come to maturitye, ye shall help the rypynge with such things, as are
declared in the chapitre of the cure of Flegmon. In which we have taught the
manner of making incision from the head to the feet. Item for digestion,
mundifycation, incarnation and sygillation, you must proceed as it is written
in the chapitre of flegmo^.

A maturatiue
Nevertheless we will descrybe here a maturatiue plaster, which is after this
form.. of the leaves of mallows, and violettes, of every one. m^. i. of white
lillye ^ootes.. iij. Sees ye things in the broth of an he^ne, or of flesh
not salted, with the crommes of bread steped in the said decoction, and
afterward pressed, and strayned. So make a plaster with fresh buttyre in
suffycient quantity, and commune oil.

Sees them until they be thycke, adding in the end two yolks of eggs and
setting them again upon ye fire al together, and make a plaster. This
plaster is of right good effect for maturation, and resysteth not resolution.
If the aposteme be catarrhous, and hot, the cure is in manner all one,
touching maturation, and resolution.

If the matter be mengled with grossenes, and heat, and the chirurgiens
intention be to resolve, then he may use this resolutiue following. Resolutiue.
. of ye roots of holihocke sodden, and strayned.li. ss. of the oil of
camomill, dille, of every one.. ij. of oil of roses, of duckes grese.. i. of
oil of lillyes.. x. of white diaquilon gummed.. iij. and. ss. of ye marye of
the legs of a cow, and of a calfe ana.. vi. of cowes tallowe.. iij. make a
cerote at the fire, nether to hard, nor to soft with sufficient white wax.
This cecote resolves merueylouslye all hard matter, without drawing of
matter to the place.

To this intention the plaster of melilote is good, and likewise the plaster
of diaquilon magnum. How beit they are not so much without danger of
drawing matter to the place.

But if the aposteme come to suppuration ye shall proceed with this
maturatiue.. of lillye roots, Maturatiue.
and Holyhocke roots, of every one.li. ss. Seethe them in water, stamp them
and strain them, and then make a stiff plaster at the fire in the decoction
with ye flower of fenugreke, lynsede and wheat, of every one as much as shall
suffyce, adding of buttyre, of swynes grese melted, of every one.. iij. and.
ss. the yolks of two eggs, mengle them, and with the forsayde straynynge
incorporate them and make a plaster. When the aposteme is ripe let it be
opened, and let it be digested three or four days, and afterward mundifye it
with the mundifycatiue de apio or of smalage, or with the mundifycatiue of
syrup, of roses after our description.

After mundifycation use an incarnatiue of honye of roses, and sarcocoll
because of the synnowes which are in the place. Finally for other intentions,
if it be needful, resort to the chapitre before rehearsed. Note this, that the
quit ture must not tarry long in the aposteme, because of the multitude of
the synnowes, veins, and lygamentes which be in the place. Thus we end this
chap. For which the name of God be praised. Amen.

Here ends the third treatise, and the fourth begins.
The fourth treatise speaks of the apostemes of woman's breasts and it
conteyneth four chapiters of which the first treats of hot apostemes
engendered in the dugges.
Hot apostemes in breasts
THere is engendered in a woman's breasts an hot aposteme through sondrye causes
sometimes of a primitive cause, by a stripe of the fyste, or of a staff, or by
to hard lasyng of their garments. Sometimes of a cause antecedent, that is to
say, by to much abou^daunce of hot humors, and by the curdynge of milk,
and that for the most part.

The cure of an aposteme of the dugges caused by curdynge of the milk
(observation of the universal rules presupposed, according to necessity)
shall be acco^plyshed by the administration of mollifycatiue, and resolutiue
medicines, having for this cause a little resolution that matter be not drawn
to the place.

An aposteme of the dugges desires not repercussion, because of ye curdynge of
milk, which is in the veins. Wherefore things euaporatiue, and that open the
veins, with sedation of pain, are very expedient at the beginning, as we
have often proved

Mollificati.
Here follows a mollifycatiue very expedient in this case.. of the leaves of
mallows and violettes, of every one. m^. i. of clean barley. m^. ss. of
smalage leaves, of camomill flowers, of each a little. Let them boil altogether
in sufficient water with.. iij. of fresh buttyre, and as much oil of
violettes unto the consumption of two parts of the three. This mollifycatiue
must be laid upon the place apostemed, receyuynge the fume with hot cloutes,
moysted in the said decoction. Last of of all let the place be rubbed with the
forsayde buttyre, and oil of violettes sodden. It is of good operation, for by
his virtue of opening, it causes the humors to breath out with gentle
resolution, and sedation of pain.

To the same intention, Another.
this mollifycatiue following is convenient, but it is more resolutiue the^ the
other.. of fine branne. m^. ij. of camomil. m^. ss. of melilote well brayed.
m^. i. of the flour of beans.. iiij. of ye oil of camomill, roses, dille, of
every one.. i. and. ss. of hens grese, of oil of violettes, of every one..
x. make a styffe plaster of all, with sufficient sodden wine, adding of
saffran.. ij.

You may use this that follows when the place is not enflamed. Another.
. of sodden wine, of honye, of every one.. viij. and make a styffe plaster on
the fire with barley flower. Semblablye gotes dunge sodden with honye purges
the milk. Item the flower of beans, and lentylles sodden with lie and sapa,
that is to say: sodde^ new wine, and with a little myntes, and oil of
myrtilles, and oil omphacine mengled together, and laid on after the manner of
a plaster, dries the milk merueylouslye.

To the same intention you may take the crommes of bread, plunged, and
moysted in the said decoction, making a plaster at the fire with the
foresaid oil and buttyre, and the yolke of an egg, and a little saffran. And
here with ye must plaster all ye dugge. If you will make greater resolution,
add to the plaster last rehearsed, of the flower of barley, and beans of
every one.. iij. and a little camomil, and melilote well stamped.

If ye perceive that this aposteme comes to maturation, which thing is
easily known by the rednes of the place and by the hardness, and pulsation or
beatynge, then ye shall proceed to the maturation with this maturatiue. A
maturati.
. of mallowe and violette leaves, of every one. m^. i. of the roots of
Holihocke.. iiij. Sees them al in water, stamp them, and strain them, and
make a plaster in the decoction, with the flower of wheat and barley, adding
of fresh buttyre.. iij. of swynes grese melted.. ij. the yolks of two eggs
put in, when ye take the plaster from the fire, then mengle it again with the
straynynge, and make a plaster. This plaster is of merueylous operation in
rypynge.

If the aposteme be very hot and choleryke with participation of blood, then
ye must proceed with some maturatiue, of a cold and moist complexion. The
descryption of this maturatiue is written about the end of the chapter of
the cure of flegmon Note that we have often found this aposteme to be of hard
maturation, chyefely when it is about the head of the dugge, vexynge the
woman with vehement pain, and causynge fyeuers, so that somtymes it induces a
phransye. Wherefore when such peril is doubted, we must proceed wyselye to
maturation, and incision of the place.

The incisyon must be made after the facion of the new moon, Incision.
that the vapors of the milk, and of the matter which hurts the brain,
may issue out by the said opened place. Afterward for the dygestion, and
mundifycation you shall use the medicines written in the former chapiters.

Note that it is convenient, to apply a mollifycatiue and resolutiue plaster,
at that time when the incisyon shall be made, because of the spongiosite of the
dugge, and of the humors which be yet in the matter conioynct, that the place
may be mollifyed, and some part of the matter resolved. Plaster.
which plaster may be after this sort that follows.. of the cro^mes of
bread steeped in the decoction of holyhocke, and then make a plaster at the
fire in the forsayde decoction with buttyre and oil of roses, and camomill,
adding the yolks of two eggs and a little saffran.

Item to the same intentyon this descryption following is very expediente.
Another.
. of the leaves of mallows and violettes, of every one. m^. i. of camomill,
and roses, of every one. m^. ss Sees them al in water, stamp them and strain
them, and put in the decoction of the crommes of bread.li. i. then bruise, and
strain the forsayde bread, and with the forerehersed things being strayned
and with a little of the decoction, make a styffe plaster at the fire, adding
of oil of roses.. ij. of oil of camomill, of buttyre. ana.. i. and. ss. the
yolks of two eggs. This plaster is of great efficacite in resoluynge matter
conioyncte, and mollifyeng the place and swagyng pain, as we have often
proved. Item to this intention it is good to make a plaster of ye flour of
barleye, and beans, in the forsayde decoction, with things like wise written
in the said descryption.

Here you shall note, T^^ti (...) not be to lo^^
that your tente must not be to long, because it might cause great pain, and
it must be hollow made of lead or silver or of the root of dyttanie well
pyked, Canullaia.
or of a leaf of colewurtes dried in the shadow you may moreover make one of
a gourde dried in the son and it is the best of all.

If it be needful to use a stronger mundifycation, then weete the tente with
spettell, and wrappe it in our poudre, and put it in the mouth of the
vlcered place. For it mundyfyethe myghtelye, and purgethe the matter
conioyncte. When the time of incarnynge is come, which thing is easelye known
by the mitigation of pain, and by the diminution of the matter, and swellyng,
then put in, this incarnatiue with a tente. Incarntiue
. of honye of roses.. ss. of terebentyne.. v. of Sarcocoll well brayed.. ij. of
frankencense. i. and. ss. mengle them.

After that incarnation is accomplyshed, which thing is known by ye matter
that issues out, like the slymynes of holihockes, ye must come to
cicatrisation, which may be after this sort that follows.. of the flowers of
pomegranades, A sigilllatiue
of myrobalanes citrins, of roche alume co^bust or burnt of every one.. i. of
terra sigillata, of bole armenie, of every one.. i. mengle the^ Item the water
of alume is of good operation, with the foresaid things. Note that from the
day that ye begin to mundifye, unto parfyte cicatrisatio^, is good to use our
ointment of miniu^. And for as much as after this aposteme is healed,
communely there remains great hardness in the place, where the aposteme was,
you must resolve it dyscretelye, that the hardenes come not to a cankreous
Sephirous. For this resolution ye shall administer diaquilon magistrale, written
in our Antidotarie, which resolves all hardness, without drawing of matter
to the place.

If this aposteme proceed of great abou^daunce of humors, you must use a
convenient purgation at the beginning and proceed with things some what
repercussiue, as is the oil of roses, the white of an egg, and a little of the
juice of plantayne. In the augmentation ye shall proceed with greater
resolution, and greater repercussion.

Touching the rest of the cure, ye shall do after that, that is written in
this present chap. of the curdynge of milk. Semblablye if it come by one of
the causes primitive declared at the beginning of this chapitre it must be
healed after the doctrine taught in the chapitre of the cure of Flegmon,
coming of a primitive cause, and in manner ye must proceed as we have said
in the first cure of this chapitre. For the which the name of God be praised.

The second chapitre of a cold aposteme of the mamilles or dugges.
THe curation of a cold aposteme chaunsynge in the mamilles (the observation
of an universal purgation presupsupposed) shall be acco^plyshed by the
remedies vnderwrytte^. The cure of a cold aposte in the dugges


At the beginning ye shall anoint the mamille or dugge, with this unction.. of
the oil, of camomill, roses, and dille, of every one.. i. of the oil of
lillies, of the oil of lynsede, and sweet almandes, of hens grese, Ointment.
of every one.. vi. of white wax.. x. make a lyniment at the fire. After this
unction, it is good to lay upon the place, unwashed woulle taken from between
the legs of a sheep, or towe well kembed, with the foresaid things. For they
resolve with some confortation.

If there be need of greater resolution, the cerote ordained in the chapitre of
an aposteme in the neck, is convenient in this case.

But if this aposteme can not be resolved, but semethe to come to the way of
maturation, then ripe it with a plaster of holihockes, and flower of lynsede,
and fenugreke. etc. After maturation it shall be convenient to open the place,
according to that, that is aforesaid of incisyon, after the dyuersite of the
parts of man's body. After incisyon, for the dygestion, mundifycation,
incarnation, and sigillation ye shall proceed, as it is declared in ye chapitre
before. Likewise touching resolution, and mollifycation of the hardenes, that
remains after the curing, ye shall resort to the said chapter as need
requires. Thus we make an end. etc.

The third chapitre of an hard aposteme in a woman's breast called Cankreous
Sephiros.
Cancrous sephiros in a woman's breast.
IN the first doctrine of apostemes, we entreated of Sephiros, and of all the
kinds thereof. In this present chapitre I have determined to dyscrybe a
Cankreous sephiros. A Cankreous sephiros in a woman's breast, is a great
hardness of duskyshe color, which can not be moved hither, and thither. It is
more angrye at one time, then at another, and often times of such malignitie as
causes Herisipelas, and induces pryckinges, and inflammations, so that the
woman which is vexed with this disease, can nether eat nor drink, and has
always a little fieuer. And sometimes there appear round about, certain
veins full of melancholyke blood.

The cure of this aposteme (the observation of dyete and of purgation, as we
have appointed in the chapitre of Sephiros presupposed) shall be accomplyshed
after ye custom of a noble woman dwelling at Arras called lady Godinne, This
we tok out of the french book.
which daily heals a great multitude of women, having this disease, and
cankreous, and hard vlceres. First when the hardness begins she is wont to
prove if by the way of resolution she may resolve ye matter. And the^ she
applies a cerote of oil of roses, oil of camomill, oil of dille, and white
wax in sufficient quantity Somtymes she resolves it with a decoction of
parietarye, camomill, melilote, laid to with the crommes of brown bread. And
when she seith, that the aposteme will come to maturation, she is wont to
apply a plaster made of the oil of sweet almandes, fresh buttyre, lillye
roots, swynes grese, barley flower, and fenugreke flower. And when the
aposteme comes to vlceration, or to a canker, she proceeds with things
mundifycatiue, that is to say, with things that mundifye moderatelye,
mu^dificatiue
and chiefelye with this mundifycatiue.. of clear terebentyne.. ij. of honey
of roses strayned.. iij. ye yolke of an egg, of myldust as much as shall
suffyce, make it after the manner of a plaster.

In great dyfficulties of cankers, and malign ulcers, as well in the
mamilles, as in the legs, the greatest remedy that she uses, is a
fomentation made with an herb called clymenon of which mention shall be made
in the chapter of Malum mortuum. After this fome^tation always she applies a
black plaster, A black plaster.
made after this form.. of commune oil.li. i. of lytarge brought to a
powder, and of burnte lead, of every one.. iij. of black wax.. ij. Let them
boil three hours, and ever stir them about, and add in the end of clear
terebentyne.. ij. of the juice of clymenon clarifyed.. iiij. stir them well
about, and proceed to perfyte curation, with this plaster. For the
cicatrisation, use the water of alume, and water of plantayne.

By this curation the said woman has acquyred great honor. For she has
healed many women of this disease, and in a manner infynite other, of malign,
and corrosiue ulcers, so that she is now called the mother of poor folk,
because she heals them only for the honor of God. Thus ends this
Chapitre: For the which God be praised, and thanked.

The.iiii. Chaptre. Of the hardenesse of the mamilles not cankerous.
IN the mamilles (as we have said before) after the cure of Apostemes,
Hardness of ^ugges not concious.
there remains a great hardness, which if it be not cured by a good
Chirurgyen, may come to Sephiros. In this case things of much drawyng have no
place.

wherefore a cerote of march mallows written in the Chaptre of an Aposteme in
the neck, is conveniently admynistred, which maruaylously resolves by little
and little all hardenesse with mollification.

Item to this intention the cerote following is good. A cerote.
. of white diaquilon gummed.. ii. of hens grese, of the mary of the legs of
a calfe, and of a cow. ana.. vi. of the oil of sweet almandes, of fresshe
buttyre. ana.. v. of oil of camomylle, dylle, lyllies. ana.. ss. of Duckes
grese, and gose grese. ana.. vi. and an half, of of the muscilage of
holyhocke, and lyneseede. l. ss. melt them all at the fire and let them boil
with the said muscilage, and than strain them, and make a soft cerote with
suffyent white wax. Item, we have proved a playstre made of rise sodden til it
be thycke, with the brothe of a shepes heed, or of an hen, and incorporated
with suffycient buttyre, and oil of camomylle, and have found it good: which
I did boil in a pos^et, adding in the end the yolks of.iii. eggs, and of
saffran.. i. It mollifyeth the hardenesse of the mamilles merueylouslye.
Likewise crommes of breed steped in a decoction of holyhocke, and afterward
stamped with oil of roses, camomyll, and dyl, and set on the fire, with a little
of the forsayde decoction, and an ounce of duckes grese, and boiled together,
and having added in the end the yolks of three eggs, and of saffran.. ss. is
of good effect. Thus ends this present Cha. for which the name of God be
blessed.

Here ends the fourth treatise of Apostemes: and the the fyfth begins.
The first Chaptre. Of apostemes of the breast, and of the rybbes, and that
chance upon the pa^nicle called diaphragma, or midriffe.
IN the regyon of the breest, Of apost. of the breast, eybbes etc.
and ribs, there are engendered hot, and cold Apostemes, as in other parts
of the body. And they come sometimes, of a primityue cause, but for the most
part of a cause antecedent.

If they come of a primitive cause, than the cure may be after the cure of
flegmo^ engendered of a primitive cause For most commenly these apostemes are
of an hot nature, and been engendered of blood or cholers. wherefore I will
recite the order of a mattier that chanced at Genua, when I was in that city.

An experience.
There was a labourer, which satte upon a wall. And he had a son of three or
four years of age, which came unto him upon the wall, whom, as the father
saw, he rose up to mete him, and by an evil chance, they fell down both.
And the said labourer was sore hurt in the rybbes, so that it came to a
great apostemation. And when the Aposteme began to enclyne toward
maturation, he was vexed with a sharp fieuer. wherefore it was necessary to
open the Aposteme, acccordynge to the length of the rybbes. The incision was
made very great and deep, for the Aposteme was great, and there issued out
great quantity of matter. And one day, at the time of his dressynge, nature
voyded at ones in one instante, a great quantity of matter by the opened
place of the Aposteme, by the Patientes mouth, and his bellye.

we saying this chance, ordained conuenyente potions, wasshynges,
incarnations, and mundifycations, (whereof we will speak in the chapitre of a
wound that pearceth into the breest) so that by the aid of God, we restored
the labourer (being an old man) unto his health again.

At which curation, the excellent Physician James Baroia a Geneuoye greatly
meruayled.

If the Aposteme be engendered of a cause antecedent, we must consydre how we
proceade to the curation of it, either by resolution, or by an other mean. For
if the said Aposteme come by the way of termination ad crisim, as we have
often seen after long fieuers, than ye wise Chirurgyen ought to consydre
whether the Aposteme be come to maturation. If it so be, he may conuenyently
make incision, after the length of the rybbes (as we have said.) But if the
place be not yet come to maturation, let it be ryped with a playstre of
colewortes made with buttyre, and the brothe of flesh unsalted, or with a
Playstre of holyhockes, and other, written in the Chapitre of the cure of
Flegmon.

And because this aposteme shows no exiture, nor swellynge outwardlye, so
that uncunning Chyrurgyens perceive not the collection of the said aposteme,
there is great need of an expert and learned Chyrurgyen. wherefore for the
verifycation of this Aposteme, when it is grown in the said place, and that
there is gatherynge of corruptyon in it, it is necessary to know the signs,
that are wont to come before maturation, that is to say, Signs of maturatio^
heaviness and ponderositie of the place without swellynge, chefely when it is
percynge, and for the most part without redness of the place. And it has
always a little fieuer. And the patient eats with great dyfficultye, and can
not sleep.

And if the Chirurgyen press the place with his finger, where the matter is
gathered together, there remains in the pressed place a concauitye or
holownesse: and moreover ye may feale a pulsation or beatyng Likewise, ye may
have knowledge, by the relacyon of the Patient, for this Aposteme bryngethe
great pain.

To conclude, when the foresaid signs be observed by a wise Chyrurgyen, and
when the Aposteme is come to maturation, let deep incision be made after the
length of the rybbes, and after the quantitye of the mattier. For when the
mattier is in great abundaunce, the opening must be the greater.

At the first ye shall not suffer much fylth to issue out, that nature be not to
much feabled. Therefore the quytture must be retained, in laying tow and hurdes
upon it, with the white and yolke of an egg mengled together. The next day
lettte it issue out in good quantity. And because this Aposteme is penetrant,
or persynge. we ought to proceed, as it shall be declared in the Chapitre of a
persynge wound.

If ye perceive that ye aposteme perceth not, than must the place be digested
with a dygestyue of terebentine, by the space of three or four days. After
digestion let the place be mundifyed with honey of Roses, and terebentyne, and
with a mundificatyue of smallage.

And ye shall consydre, if the Aposteme have many hollow places, that before
the incarnation, the said hollow places must be mundifyed with vnguentum
apostolorum laid upon a tente, or with vnguentum Egiptiacum, or with vnguentum
mixtum, or with a lotion of lie, or pouldre of Minium of our descryption,
which takes away superfluous flesh.

Afterward, for the incarnation, and sigillation, ye shall use the remedies
written in the former Chapytres. If the Aposteme chance in the fore parts of
the breasts, ye must proceed, as it is declared before of an Aposteme in the
rybbes. Thus ends this Chapitre: For the which God be praised. etc.

The.ii. Chaptre. Of an Aposteme in the back, as well hot, as cold.
THe Aposteme ye chances in the back, Aposteme in the back.
because of the nobility of the place, where the nuke is situated, and by
reason of the multitude of synnowes, is dangerous, as the doctors say.

The curation of it is this. If the Aposteme be hot (the universal rules
presupposed) ye shall annoint the place with oil of camomyll, oil of Roses,
and oil of vyolettes by the space of two or three days. And if ye perceive
that the Aposteme bends to the way of resolution, than it is conuenyent to
proceed, with the remedies resolutyue noted in the chaptre of an Aposteme in
the neck, like wise touching maturatiues, ye shall use them, that are declared
in ye said Chapitres.

After maturation open the place after the length, Incision.
and after the quantite of the Aposteme (as we said in the former chapter.)
Afterward if need require, digest the place, with a digestive of terebentine,
and of oil of roses hot, and a little Saffran, the space of three or four
days.

The rest of the curation shall be accomplysshed, as it is written in the
Chaptre of the cure of Flegmon.

Ointment if the matter be cold
If the mattier of the Aposteme be cold, ye shall annoint the place with this
ointment following.. of oil of Camomylle, Roses, Dyll, lyllyes, ana.. i. and.
ss. of oil of spyke.. i. of white wax, as much as shall suffyse, make a
lyniment, adding, of Saffran.. ss. annoint the place herewyth, laying upon it
unwashed wol taken from between the legs of a sheep. And thus proceed three or
four days.

An other.
Item, ye may apply the Playstre following, which is more resolutiue than the
other.. of the crommes of breed steped in things that resolve, as coriandre,
melilote, camomylle, dylle, holyhocke, a little organie, squinantum, and
sticados. Let all these things be sodden in water and wine. Than with the oil
of Roses, Camomylle, and Dylle, and with breed lythed in the said decoction,
and brosed make a styffe playstre, according to art, addyng of bean flower..
iii. To the same intention a sponge moysted in the same decoction, and laid
hot upon the Aposteme is very good.

If ye perceive, that this aposteme can not so be resolved, than ye may ripe
it with this maturatyue.. of the roots of white lyllyes. A maturatiue
. iiii. of the roots of holyhocke. half a pound. Seethe them all in water,
and than stamp them, and strain them, and in the decoction, with the flower
of wheat, Fem^greke, and lyneseede, make a styffe Playstre, adding of
buttyre, of swynes grese. Ana.. iii. of Saffran.. i. and the yolks of three
eggs.

Incision.
Note, that this Aposteme must be opened between the maturation, that
begins, and perfect maturation, that the mattier, may not pearce unto the
nuke, and the synnowes thereof. After incision let the Aposteme be dygested
with a dygestyue of terebentyne, and the yolke of an egg, the space of three or
four days. For the accomplysshement, of all other intentions, ye shall
proceed, according to the doctrine written in the Chaptre of Apostemes in the
neck.

Note this, that if the ulcer touch a synnowye place, or the Nuke, and
corrupt the boones, than (though true cure be despeared) nevertheless, as
much as is possible, ye shall take away the corruption with raspatoryes, and
after convenient instruments, and not with actual cauteries, by reason of the
danger, that there is to touch the nuke, or the synnowes.

For a gentle mundification we counsel to use the oil of the yolks of
eggs, and honye of roses, and a little sarcocoll and myrre. If ye place be full
of little holes, mundifye it with lotions, and with the remedies declared in the
former Chapitres.

Thus ends this Chaptre: for the which God be praised. etc.

The.iii, Chaptre. Of the pain of the back bone.
IF the pain that chances in the back bone, Pain in the back bone.
be caused of an hot matter, ye shall anoint the place with oil of Roses
omphacine, and with a little oil of Camomylle, being actually hot.

If the pain be caused of an evil hot complexion, ye shall use only oil
of Roses omphacine. And after the unction of the said oil, ye must lay to a
sponge dypped in a decoction of roses, of Myrtiles seed and leaves, of barleye,
and white saunders.

Purgation
If the pain be caused of cold mattier (after a Purgation of the heed, by the
taking of pylles de Iera cum agarico, or pylles called sine quibus esse nolo,
of each.. ss. or with pylles aggregatiue) Annoynte the paynefull place with
this unction.. of the oil of Camomylle, Ointment
of lyllyes, spyke, and dyll. ana.. i. of squinantum, wormewoodde, sticados,
Camomylle, of every one a little, of odoriferous wine one Cyathe, of ground
worms, washed with wine.. i. Let them boil all together till the wine be
consumed, than strain them, and add to the straynynge of Hipericon,. vi. of
Saffran,. i. of white wax.. x. Let them boil again, and than make a
liniment. Item to, this intention, the oil of white lyllyes, with the oil of
Roses, A decoction.
and Camomylle, is very good.

Also ye may conuenyentlye apply a sponge dypped in this decoction.. of
Camomylle, Melilote, dylle, Roses. ana. m^. i. of sticados, wormewoodde,
squinantum, maioram, mugworte, of every one a little Let them boil all
together, unto the consumption of the third part, in suffycyent water, and a
little wine of good odoure. Dip the sponge into this decoction, being hot,
and renew it often. For it appayseth pain maruaylouslye.

And we say likewise, that these things be good to take away the pain that
comes of an evil cold complexion.

Thus ends this Chaptre: For the which God be praised, and thanked.

The fourth Chaptre. Of the Apostemes of the bellye.
THe Aposteme of the belly must be diligently cured, Aposteme of the belly.
and by a descrete Chirurgien. For oftentimes it vexes with evil and sondrie
accidents, chefely about the maturation, and when it is engendered nyghe the
nauyll.

The curation of hot and cold apostemes in the belly (the universal rules of
Purgatyon presupposed) is dispatched as it follows. First, if the Aposteme be
hoote, for the repercussyon, resolution, and maturation, it is conuenyente, to
resort to the Chaptre of the cure of Flegmon.

when this Aposteme comes to maturation, Incision.
and when it is about the nauyll, ye shall make incision after the figure of
the new moon. In other places ye shall make incisio^ according to the
doctrine given in the Chaptre of incisions, and exitures. And because the
matter sometimes perceth unto ye place of the intestines or guts, ye shall
resort to the Chaptre of a wound that perceth in to the belly. But if the
matter pearce not, than (because of the great sensibilitie of the place,
which comes of the filmes, muscles, and ligamentes that end about the
nauyll). Let the place be digested at the beginning with oil of roses
emphacine, or with a digestyue of the yolke of an egg me^gled with oil
omphacyne, and a little saffran.

a plaistre swagyng pain.
And while the degestion endures, you may conuenientlye lay to some playstre
that swageth pain as this. of a decoction of mallows, violettes, holyhocke,
camomyll, and melilote, as much as shall suffyse, a little barleye, and with
half a pound of bean flower, and as much barlye flour make a stiff
plaistre at the fire, addyng of oil of camomyl, and Roses. ana.. ii. and the
yolks of two eggs. This composition made in the form of a plaistre, and
laid upon the paynefull place, swageth ye pain and prepares the matter to
suppuration.

mu^dificatiue
After digestyon let the place be mundifyed with this mundificatiue under
written (chefely when the Aposteme is about the nauyll). of clear
terebentyne.. x. of Syrup of roses.. ss. the third part of the yolke of a
new laid egg. Let the syrup of roses boil with the terebentyne one
boylyng, and than add the part of the foresaid egg, a little barleye flower,
and a little saffran.

And for incarnation, it is good to add to ye foresaid mundificatiue of
sarcole.. ii. of myr.. i. of frankensence. ss. when incarnation is fynyshed,
seal up the place with vnguentum de minio, and with the water of decoction of
alume, spryncklynge often upon it this stiptyke poudre. A poudre.
. of bole armenie, of terra sigillata. ana.. ss. of roche alume burnt.. ss. of
flowers of Pomegranades, of Myrobalanes, citrines fynely brayed. ana.. ii.
mengle them, and make a poudre.

If the Aposteme of the bellye becaused of a cold matter, or mengled, for the
resolution, and maturation, ye shall proceed after as it is declared in the
Chapitre of Apostemes in the neck.

The rest of this curation shall be accomplysshed according to that, that is
written before in this present Chapitre. For which the name of God be praised.

The.v. Chaptre. Of the Apostemes of the flanks.
THe apostemes of the pryuye members, Apostemes of the flanks
proceed of one of these three causes, namelye of evil complexion, of
vlceracyon of the yard or vlceration of the extremities. we will speak in the
next Chapitre of an Aposteme, caused in the said place after some long
fyeuer, or by blood of a wound in the bellye, driven of Nature to the flanks.

The foresaid Apostemes (which way so ever they come) for the most part,
they be caused of hot mattier, which we have ever healed as it follows.

First (the obseruacion of the rules prescrybed in the Chapitre of flegmon,
touching Flebotomie, and Purgation by the bellye presupposed) we did annoint
the place with oil of Camomyll hot, with a little of oil of Roses omphacine,
layeng upon the place, vnwasshed wolle, taken from between the legs of a
sheep.

To this intention, and for greater resolution, a plaster made with the cromes
of bread, with oil of camomille, and a little oil of roses, and with a
decoction of mallows, and holihocke, camomille and melilote. This plaster
must be made at ye fire, in a styffe form. It is of good operation in
resoluynge.

A cerote mollificatiue.
Item to the same intention this cerote mollificatyue, and resolutyue that
follows, is of great efficacitie. For bisydes the said properties, it swageth
pain. R. of the roots of holihocke. li. ss. of lilly roots.. ii. Let the^
be boiled together with ye broth of flesh unsalted, unto perfect decoction,
than stamp them and strain them, and set them on the fire again, adding of
oil of camomille.. iiii. of oil of roses.. i. of hens grese.. vi. of
vnttyre.. ss. of calves grese, of white diaquilon. an^.. ii. set them again
on the fire, and make a cerote in good form. This cerote mollifyeth, and
resolves, and swageth the pain, and resists not maturation, if nature has
brought the aposteme to the way of maturation.

A plaster.
Item to this intention the plaster following is convenient. Take wheat flower,
and barley flower, and put the^ in the foresaid decoction, and boil them till
they be thycke, adding of oil of camomill.. ii. of oil of roses. i. of
saffra^.. i. and the yolks of two eggs.

If the aposteme cannot be resolved, but comes to the way of maturation, than
ye shall apply maturatyue things, as the plaster following. R. of the leaves
of mallows, Maturatiue
and violettes. an^. m^. ii. of the roots of holihocke being cut according to
breadth li. i. ss. of white lilly rotes.. iiii. tha^ let them boil with water
until they be perfectly sodde^, and afterward stamp the^ all, and in the
decoction with the flower of wheat or barley (if the mattier be very hot)
make a styffe plaster at ye fire, addyng of oil of sweet olyues, of buttyre.
an^.. iii. of swynes grese.. ii. and ss. ye yolks of two eggs, mengle them,
and incorporate them, with the said decoction.

Note that ye must often make euaporation, dippyng cloutes in the said
decoction being hot. For it appaiseth grief, and prepares the mattier to
maturation, likewise ye may use the maturatyues written in the cha. of flegmon.

And when the said aposteme is come to maturation, ye shall make incision in
the rypest, and lowest place, after the figure of a moan, Incision.
according to the breadth of the belly. After the incision, put in a tente
rolled in the white, and yolke of an egg mengled together. Let not that
tente be to long. After this make a digestyue with the oil of roses, and oil
omphacine, and the yolke of an egg, chiefly when the patient is of a choleryke
co^plection, and wha^ the mattier is sharp. But when the place is not paynfull,
proceed with terebentine, the yolks of eggs, and a little saffran.

After digestion, which is known by good quytture, mundifye the place with a
mundificatyue of syrup of roses, after our description (wha^ the body is
choleryke) or with a mundificatyue of honey of roses, if the body be
flegmatyke. Note that a plaster swaging pain, may conveniently be applied,
after the day of incision, till the third or fourth day following, which also
has virtue to resolve, and to molifye.

In this case we have always used this plaster. A plaster swaging pain.
R. of the flower of barley, and beans. an^.. iiii. with a decoction of
mallows or violettes, or else with fat broth unsalted. Let them sees till
they be thycke, and than add thereunto of oil of camomill.. i. and ss. of oil
of roses.. i. the yolks of two eggs, of saffran.. i. This plaster is of good
operation. For it resolves the mattier co^ioyncte, and appayseth grief, and
prepares the mattier to suppuration. when the pain after incision has been
great, and has vexed sore the patiente, by reason of the great sensibilitie of
the place, and because the mattier is sharp, so that it scorcheth the lips
or borders of the vlcere, we have been constrained in this case, to take away
the tent, and instead thereof to wasshe the place oftentimes in a day with
this lotion. R. of clean barley, A lotion.
of roses. an^. m^. i. of plantayne leaves. m^. ii. of sumach of lentiles. an^.
m^. ss. of the sede of quinces.. ss. Let them boil in sufficient water, unto
the co^sumption of half, wash the place with this decoction, for it takes
away the sharpness of the mattier, and swageth the pain.

A sign that the matier is sharp this shall be also, Signs of ^^^^pe mattier.
namelye it will be like water, wherein flesh has been washed. To return to
ye remedy, it is good to lay upon the aposteme, a cerote of minium without
gu^me, after our description.

If this remedy be not sufficient to correct the malignitie of the vlcered
borders, of the corrosion, and inflammation, than ye shall apply our
corrosiue poudre, and put it in to the vlcere, and upon the borders, so that
they be covered therwyth. This poudre so applied three or four days, is of
merueylous operation to take away the malignitie of ye borders being hard, and
hollow. Ye shall use it so long till all the superfluous flesh be taken
away, layenge always upon the vlcered place, a plaster of vnguentum de minio,
until the cure be finished.

If the borders be so hardened that they can not be amended, with this poudre,
than ye may apply a cauterie of capitell, written in our antidotarie, which
is of such efficacitie, that it takes away in half an hour superfluous
flesh, and the malignitie, that is in the borders of the ulcers.

After that the malignitie is removed, mundifye the place with a mundificatiue
of smallage, mu^dificatiue
or of honye of roses, which is after this form. R. of clear terebentyne.. i.
and ss. of honey of roses.. vi. Let them boil a little, and add as much barley
flower as shall suffice, to make it thycke. After this mundificatio^, for the
incarnation, ye may add to this last mundificatiue of sarcocolle.. i. and ss.
of frankencense, of myrre. an^.. ss. when the incarnation is finished, seal up
the place, with the water of decoction of alume, and with linte, and vngue^tum
de minio. Thus ends. etc.

The.vi. chap. of an aposteme of the flanckes, which comes by termination of
long fieuers, mattier being derived from the liver, to the said place. It
treats also of an aposteme, that porcedeth of co^geled blood in the belly,
caused of a percynge wound, which blood nature sends thither.
AN aposteme of ye flanckes, which proceeds by termination, Aposteme of the
flanks.
or by co^geled blood, comes to suppuration. wherefore the Chyrurgien ought to
proceed to the cure, with things maturatiue, and actractiue. Somtymes the
mattier of this aposteme, is in the inner part of the belly, and appears
not in the outward. Than a wise chirurgien must make deep incision, Incision.
with some crooked instrument, until he come to the place, where the matter is,
and there he must open it, with an actual cauterye, well poynted, and
afterward with another sharp instrument, taking head that he touch not the
sinnowes. After the cauterization, it is convenient, to fill the place with the
white and yolke of an egg, mengled with oil of roses.

The next day buttyre must be laid to, mengled with the yolke of an egg, to
cause the eschare to fall. After that the eschare is removed, he shall proceed
with a digestive of terebentyne, and the yolke of an egg, if the place were
opened with a cold iron. The other intentions, namely mundification,
incarnation, and sigillation, shall be accomplyshed after the doctrine given in
the former chap. Thus ends. etc.

The.vii. cha. of the aposteme of the yard.
THe apostemes of the yard, Aposteme of the yard.
for the most part, ar caused of hot mattier, which apostemes by reason of
ye continual flowing of humors to the said place, and because of the heat,
and exercitation of the same, they come quyckly to maturation. Li^^^en^.
wherefore at the beginning (the universal rules observed) it is good to apply
to the yard, this liniment following. Take an egg, and beat it well, with
the oil of roses, and juice of plantayne and laictuce.

A defe^satiue
And lay upon the place, called pecten which is the nethermoste part of the
belly above the yard, this defensive. R. of ye oil of roses.. ii. of white
wax.. vi. of bole armenie.. i. mengle them.

And two or three days after, if ye perceive that it comes to maturation, than
ripe it, with this plaster. Maturatiue.
R. of the leaves of mallows, and violettes sodde^ in water. an^. m^. ii.
press out the water, and stamp them, and in the decoction with barley flower
make a styffe plaster, addyng of oil of violettes, of buttyre. an^.. ii. the
yolks of two eggs. Me^gle them with the foresaid things. This ointment
rypeth, and swageth pain.

when the aposteme is ripe, open it in the ripest place, according to length.
The rest of the curation, shall be done after as it is written in the chapi. of
the cure of flegmon. If the aposteme be cold, ye shall proceed after the
doctrine given in the chapi. of cold apostemes. Thus we end. etc.

The, viii. cha. of carbunculous pustles which be engendered between the fore
skin and top of the yard.
THese Apostemes proceed for the most part, by having company with an
unclean woman, Of carbuncles and pustles in the yard.
yt has her secret place vlcered with some malign ulcer, or yt has had the
flowers lately. For the curation whereof, (ye universal canons of purgatio^
presupposed) there is no surer remedy tha^ to cauterize ye place of ye pustles,
with an actual cautery, in the form of an olyue, or to scarifye the place with
a deep scarification, in the middeste of the eschare, making in every pustle
one hole. Afterward ye must put in to the hole a trociske of minium after our
description, and a little of vngue^tu^ egyptiacu^, of our invention, with an
addition of arsenyke, made in an hard form. These two remedies kill the
pustles merueylously.

A sign that the pustles ben mortified, A sign of mortification of pustles.
is this: there appears about them a round circle. To remove the eschare, ye
shall use the foresaid remedies. Nevertheless, I will not passover this one
thing, that it is a present remedy, to anoynte all the yard with the white of
an egg mengled with the oil of roses, and the juice of pla^tayne, and
nyghtshade in a little quantity. Likewise the defensive written in the former
cha. laid upon the place called pecten, with a cloute dipped in vinaygre and
rose water, is good in this case, and keeps the mattier from arriuynge to the
said place.

And because we have seen two evil, and dangerous accide^tes to happen in this
disease, The accidents.
a diligent cure thereof, must be had. The accide^tes ben these, flux of
blood, and corruption of the ligame^t, so that the corruption of the ligament,
comes often unto the place called pecte^, in so much yt I have been
constrained, to cut the yard according to length, unto the pecten, and have
taken away the rotten ligame^t with a sharp actual cautery, and have gotten
worship thereby.

Se^blably ye shall restrayn ye flux of blood after the doctrine, declared in
the cha. of the flux of blood. Incision.
If it can not be remedied thereby, it is necessary to cut the skyn unto the
place, from whence the blood issues. And though this way be hard,
nevertheless Galene says, if there be but one way to health, be it never so
hard, we must use it.

After incision, you must lay some convenient medicine upon the vein. And if
this flux of blood be caused, by some putrefaction, you shall not apply
things incarnatyue, but ye shall mundifye the rotten place with vnguentum
egyptiacum, or with fire, or with our poudre of mercury. And if you will have
a strong mundificatiue, you may use a trociske of miniu^ in a little
quantity. But if this abundau^ce of blood, came not by putrefaction, but by
remouyng of the eschare, because the place could not be well bound, tha^
things incarnatyue ben very profitable, as this ordinance that follows,
which is good for the flux of blood coming of incision of veins. R. of
alloes he patyke, An inc^^atiue.
of frankencense, of sarcocolle. ana.. ii. of terra sigillata, of bole armenye,
of lytarge both of gold and silver. an^.. ii. of myrre.. i. of hares hears
cut as small as can be.. i. and ss. of mylduste, of flower of beans, barley
and lentyles an^.. i. mengle them together, and springle them upon the pustles.
Also beat the white of an egg, and apply a good quantity thereof, with this
poudre upon the vein, and bind it well thereunto. when the blood is
staunched, purify the place again, with a mundificatyue of smallage,
Mu^dificatiue.
which is compounde after this sort. R. of clear terebentine.. x. of honey of
roses strayned, of syrup of roses by infution an^.. vi. of the juice of
smalage, and pla^tayne. an^.. ii. Let them boil a little, and tha^ put to, of
flower of barley well boulted.. vi. strain them all, and add of sarcocolle..
i. of saffran.. i.

After this mu^dification, for an incarnatyue, put to the said mundificatyue
of fra^kencense.. i. of aloes.. ii. of myrre.. i. Finally for cicatrisation use
this poudre. R. of litarge of gold, Poudre.
and silver. an^.. i. of rutia.. ss. of bolearmenye, of terra sigillata. an^..
i. and ss. of Myrobalanes citrines, of roche alume conbust or burnt. an^.. ii.
Me^gle them, and bring them to a poudre. This poudre is of good operation in
this case, and also in apostemes of ye neck, and other places full of synnowes
and veins.

Moreover besides these two accidents, there chances in the said place, a
great infla^mation, so that about the pustle venomous mattier is retained,
which through his poyso^ned nature, chauseth away the skin, and perceth unto
the outward part, in so much that the heed of the yard seems to come out of
the hole.

For the curation of this infla^mation, you must cut all the skin circle
wise. And if there rest any cankerrous corruption, ye shall remove it with an hot
iron, or with vnguentu^ egiptiacum. After the incision of the skyn, lay upon
the place, a digestive made with the yolke of an egg, and oil of roses, or
with terebe^tine. Afterward for the mundification, and other intentions, ye
shall proceed, as we have declared in this present chapter. Thus ends. etc.

The.ix. cha. of chaufynges, and vlcerations called caroles, which chance to
young men, between the skin, and the head of the yard.
Of caroles between the skin and the head of the yard.
THe chaufynges, and vlcerations called in latin caroli proceed, for the most
part by having company with a filthy woman, or yt has had lately the
flowers. For the cure whereof, Liniment.
ye shall use this linime^t, three or four days. R. of the oil of roses.. ii.
of the juice of plantayne.. vi. of litarge of gold, and silver. an^.. v. of
tutia.. iii. of cerusse.. ii. of burnte lead.. i. make of al a linime^t in a
mortar of lead. If they can not be quenched by this mean, tha^ mortify the^,
with our poudre of mercury, or with vnguentum mixtinn.

After mortificatio^, ye shall proceed with the linimente before written, or with
vngue^tu^ de minio without gu^mes, A lotion.
washyng the place always with this lotion. R. of ye water of pla^tayne and
roses. an^.. ii. of white sief without opiu^.. ii. mengle them, and make a
collyry, for it is of good operation. Likewise the linimente written in the
cha. before made of the white of an egg, water of roses, and the juice of
herbs, is a present remedy, layeng it upon all the yard with cloutes. Thus we
end. etc.

The sixth treatise of apostemes of the stones.
The first. cha. of hot apostemes of the stones, and of osseu^ or the purse of
the same, called hernia humoralis.
THe cure of this Aposteme, is acco^plyshed by cuttyng a vein in the arm
called hepatica in ye contrary side. Of hot apostemes of the stones.
Some doctors commau^de to make a flebotomy minoratyne in the same side, and
the next day in the contrary side (so that ye considre the co^plection,
repletion and strength of the patient) In the state they cut the vein Saphena
in the same side, to purge the mattier conioyncte.

Semblably ye may give the patient purgation by the bellye after this sort. R.
of cassia, and diacatholicon. Purgation.
an^.. ss. of an electuarye de succo rosarum. ii. with these things and water
of endyue make a potion

Likewise for the acco^plishment of this aposteme, it is nedeful to apply
sundry remedies upon the same. At the beginning, when the place is enflamed, ye
may apply conveniently the white of an egg beaten with ye yolke, and with
oil of roses, and a little juice of plantayne, by the space of three or four
days.

Resolutiue
Item to this intention, the plaster yt follows, is profitable, which
quenches heat with resolution. R. of roses, camomil, melilote, mallows. an^
m^. i. Let the^ boil with sufficient water, until half be consumed, and in
the decoction, with bean flour make a styffe plaster at the fire, addyng of
oil of roses, camomille. dylle, an^.. i.

Another plaster to the same intention. Another.
R. of the leaves of hennebane, of the leaves of mallows. an^. m^. i. Sees
them al in water, and stamp them, and in the decoction with the flour of
barley, and beans make a plaster, addyng of oil of roses.. ii. of oil of
camomil.. i. Mengle the^ with the foresaid stamped things. This plaster
resolves al hardness in ye stones, that comes of hot mattier, and it
que^cheth inflamatio^, with mittigato^ of pain, as we have often proved, and
as Auicenne witnesses.

Item to the same intention, with greater resolution, Another.
this plaster following is convenient. R. of the leaves of black colewortes,
of the roots of holihocke, of camomille. an^. m^. i. of corianders.. ss. Sees
all in fat broth either of hens or of other flesh, and afterward in the
decoction of beans, or Cicers, make a styffe plaster, adding of oil of
camomil, of dylle. an^.. ii. of oil of roses.. i. of saffran.. i. of cumine
(if the place be not much inflamed).. i. and ss. This plaster is a singular
remedy, to resolve, and to remove the ventositie of this aposteme.

Mat^^atiue
But sometimes it can not be resolved, but comes to maturation, than ye shall
proceed, with a mollificatiue plaster, as this is. R. of the leaves of
mallows. m^. ii. of the roots of holyhocke, of the roots of white lyllies.
an^.. ii. Sees them all in water, stamp them, and strain them, and in the
decoction with barley flour, make a styffe plaster, adding of buttyre.. iii.
the yolks of two eggs. of the oil of sweet olyues.. i. and ss. Mengle them,
and make a plaster with the foresaid strayninge. If need be of greater
maturation, add to the fore named things the flower of linsede. when the
said aposteme is come to maturation, open the place discretly, for touching
sinnowes, or ye stones.

For digestion, mundification, incarnation, and sigillation, ye shall proceed,
according as it is written in the aposteme, of the yard.
Note that the remedies which ben good in hot apostemes of the dugges, may
safely be applied upon this aposteme. wherefore it is good to peruse these two
cha. one after another. Sharp suppositories in this case ben profitable. For
they turn aside the mattier. Thus by the grace of god. etc.

The.ii. cha. of a cold aposteme in the stones.
A Cold aposteme engendered in the said place, must be cured as it follows, Of
cold apostemes of the stones.
a purgatio^ of the ill mattier presupposed, after this ordinance. Digestive.
First let it be digested with this digestive. R. of syrup of the juice of
endiuie, of syrup de duabus radicibus, of honye of roses strayned, of syrup
of vinegre, called acetosus simplex. an^.. iii. of ye waters of fumiter.
buglosse and maide^ hear. an^.. i. Purgation.
After yt the patient has taken this sirupe three or four days, let him be
purged with this purgatio^. R. of cassia, diacatholicon, of every one.. vi. of
diafinicon. iij. make a small potion, with the decoction of cordial flowers
and fruits, adding of syrup of violettes.. i.

After purgation, the cure shall be accomplyshed by the administration of sondrye
medicynes, upon the place. First let the place be anointed, with oil of
camomill, dille, roses, mengled with hens grese, and then apply this
plaster. Resolutiue.
. of bean flower.li. ss. of the crommes of bread.. iij.

Sees them with a resolutiue decoction, namelye of melilote, dille, camomill,
and a little cumine, and make a styffe plaster at the fire, adding of oil of
camomill, and dille, of duckes grese, of every one.. i. and. ss. of cumine. i,
and. ss.

If ye perceive that this aposteme can not be resolved, by the forsayde
remedies, and that it enclyneth to maturation, ye shall apply a maturatiue
plaster in this sort. Maturatiue.
. of white lillye roots.. iij. of the roots of Holihocke.. iiij. of the
leaves of black colewurtes. m^. i. of mallows as much. Sees them all in
water, and stamp them, and in the decoction, with equal portion of the flower
of whete, lynsede, and fenugreke, make a styffe plaster, adding of buttyre..
iiij. When the said aposteme is ripe, open it according to the doctrine
written in ye former chapitre. Likewise let it be dygested, mundifyed,
incarned, and sealed up acordynge to the same doctrine. Thus ends this
chapitre. etc.

The third chapitre of the hardness that chances in the purse of the stones.
Of hardness (...) the purse. of the stones.
THere chau^ceth often in ye purse of the stones, and in the stones themselves, an
hardness after the curatio^ of an hot aposteme of the place. For the
mollifycation, and resolution whereof, it is right convenient to administer the
remedies ordained in the chapitre of the hardness of the mamilles. Likewise the
cerote written in the chapitre of an aposteme in the neck, called Cerotum de
maluauisco or match mallows is conuenientlye administered. We judge those
remedies to be suffycient, for the accomplyshement of this present chapitre.
For which the name of god be praised.

The fourth chapitre of Hernia ventosa, or wyndye.
HErnia ventosa (the observation of an universal purgation presupposed) is
accomplyshed according to the doctrine written in ye chapitre of a wynoie
aposteme, Of hernia Ventosa.
and in the chapitre of vndimia. Nevertheless that we pass not this chapitre
without declaration of some remedy, we will proceed as it follows.

First at the beginning ye must use oil of camomil, and oil of dylie. And
if they ben not sufficient ye shall add oil of Rue, and oil of cherui. To
this intention, with more resolution, and breaking of wind, ye plaster
following is convenient.. of the flower of beans, cicers, orobus, Resolutiue.
bra^ne well ground, of every one. m^. i. Sees them all with Sapa, and a little
barbers lie, until they be thycke, the^ add of oil of camomil, and dylle.
ana.. ij. of cumine.. ss. of oil of laurel.. vi. mengle them together.
Another.. of camomil, melilote, dille, branne well ground, of every one. m^.
i. of bean flower.li. i. of cumine, of coriandres, of fenell, of every one..
ss. of gotes dunge well dried and beaten to poudre.. iij. make a styffe
plaster of all, with suffycient sodden new wine called sapa, and red wine,
adding of oil of camomill, of dille, of every one.. ij. of oil of laurel..
vi.

This recepte following is of the same virtue, Cerote.
and it is in the form of a cerote.. of oil of camomill and dille, of every
one.. iiij. of oil of rue.. i. of camomill, melilote, dille well brayed, of
every one a little, of minium of coriandres, of every one.. i. and ss. of the
flower of beans, as much as shall suffyce make a cerote with whyt wax.

Hernia in suckynge children
If this hernia ventosa chance to young suckynge children, then it shall be
convenient to use this plaster.. of bean flower.. iiij. of red wine as
much as shall suffyce, and make a styffe plaster of them all at the fire,
adding of oil of camomill, and dille, of every one.. i. and. ss. and a little
cumine, let them boil again one boylynge. Item you may make an unction
only of oil of camomill, and dille with a little white wax.

Note that in every disease of the stones, it is requysyte, that the stones
hang not, but that the patientlye, with his thyghes higher, then his head,
that the matter being heuie fall not down. Thus much shall suffyce for this
chapitre. etc.

The.v. chapitre of hernia aquosa or watrye.
IT chances often that the purse of ye stones, Hernia aquosa.
is apostemed, with a flegmatyke, and watrie aposteme, which is sent from the
liver, to that place. wherefore the principal remedy is, to rectifye ye membre
that sends the matter to ye said place, namely ye liver, touching his virtue
digestive

For vndimia hidropisis, The cause of vndimia hidropisis and hernia aquosa.
and hernia aquosa, for the most part (as the doctors say) proceed through
the error of the virtue dygestiue of the liver. Wherefore it is necessary to
comfort the liver, that it may make good dygestion, and sequestration of ye
humors

And to begin, Syrup.
the patient must use this syrup the space of a weke.. of syrup of the juice
of endive.. i. of syrup of cicoree.. ss. of water of endiuie.. ij. of
buglosse.. i. mengle them. when he has used this syrup, let him be purged
with this purgation. of manna.. i. Purgation.
of diacatholicon.. ss. of reubarbe steeped in water of endive. ij. make a
small potion with the decoction of cordial flowers, and fruits. Also ye may
give the patient pills of reubarbe, and assagereth.

After purgation ye shall use local medecines, for it may be healed at the
beginning. Plaster.
First apply this plaster following.. of the flower of lentyles beans and
barley, of every one.li. ss. Let them boil all with barbers lie, and
sufficient sodden wine, called sapa tylit be thycke.

Item to the same inte^tion this plaster following is convenient, An other.
being of greater efficacite then the other.. of roses, balausties or flowers
of granades, nuttes of cypress, of every one. m^. i. of the flower of beans,
and orobus.. iiij. of gotes dunge.. iij. make a styffe plaster at the fire
with sodden new wine, and lie.

Also to this intention it is profitable to use a sponge dypped in a decoction
of roses, of flowers of pomegranades, of nuttes of Cypress, of roche alume, of
calamus aromaticus boiled with lie and stiptyke wine, which you must bind
conuenientlye upon the stone.

If the hernia be full of water, and old, Incision.
then there is nothing more expediente, then to draw out that water twyse a
year, namelye in the spring time, and in harueste, by cuttynge a vein with a
lancette in the side where the aposteme is, or toward the myddest of the
purse, or a little higher.

Signs of hernia aquosa.
The signs, where by ye may know that the hernia is full of water, been these.
The place swells by little, and little, and is heuie, and when ye behold it
with a candell, ye shall perceive it to shine, as a blown bladder full of
water. Likewise when ye press the place ye shall feel a certain rysynge,
swellynge, and redoundynge between your finger, and it. Thus by the grace of
God. etc.

The.vj. chapitre of Hernia carnosa or fleshie.
HErnia carnosa is always engendered, by an aposteme in the purse of the
stones, Hernia carnosa.
by way of termination, or by an humorall aposteme of the same stones. And it
comes, because the matter taryeth long in ye purse, and the subtle part is
resolved, and the gross remains, and becomes clammyshe and cleaves to the
stone, and corrupts it. And nature resystynge it brings it at length to a
carnositie, or fleshynes, and to an hard dysposition, called of the doctors
hernia carnosa. The causes of this hernia ben declared in the chapitre of an
hot aposteme in the purse, and in the stones.

The signs of this hernia may be known, Signs.
by the long time of the disease. For by way of incision, a true hernia
carnosa is very seldone and scarcelye healed. Also ye may know the said
hernia, by touching. For ye shall feel an hard thing upon the stone, having
some softness within, and mouynge of the stone. Also ye may know it by the
heaviness, and aggrauatyue pain of the place. And when ye lay any thing upon
it, it profits nothing. Some call it herniam neruosam or synnowye, some
verrucosam or warty, because there cleaves a piece of hard flesh to the stone,
like a wart. It is called synnowye, because it cleaves to the stone, and to
the little conduyctes called didymes.

The cure of hernia confirmed, the cure
chieflye when it is with vlceration of the purse unto the stone, is impossible
by the way of resolution, as al doctors teach. After ye observation, of the
universal rules, touching diete and purgation, declared in the chapter of an
hard Aposteme, in the first treatise, ye shall make incision, after the
doctrine of the excellent physician wyllya^ of Plaisance, or after the
doctrine of Albucrases, in the chapter of hernia carnosa. Incision.
The custom of these doctors, is to make incision of the purse called osseum,
unto the stone, with a rasoure, or some other sharp instrument.

After that ye have opened it, you must look whether ye stone be corupted or
not. If it be not corrupted, ye shall divide all the carnosite with a
convenient and sharp instrument, and then reduce the stone into his propre
place. Then ye must sewe up the place of incision, and cure it as wounds ben
cured, chyefly with things incarnatiue and desiccatiue.

If ye perceive that the stone is corrupted, the^ ye must bind the co^duyct
called dydimus, and cut it in the nether part of the place that is bound, and
take away the stone with the carnosite, and then cauterize the dydime.

The rest of the curation shall be accomplyshed, according as it shall be
said in the cure of relaxation, or burstynge, caused by incisyon in the next
chapitre. Note that this kind of hernia, is not cured by the way of
resolution, nor by the way of incisyon, without great diffycultie, and
danger of death. Wherefore a wise chirurgien must admonish the patie^tes
friends of the danger.

vi kinds of hernia.
There been six kinds of hernia, namelye Humoralis, Aquosa, Carnosa,
Verrucosa, zirbalis, and intestinalis. And though hernia zirbalis, and
intestinalis be not in the nombre of apostemes, nevertheless that ye may
easelye find the chapiters of all the kinds of hernia, we will write a
chapitre of the cure of hernia zirbalis, and intestinalis, which is communelye
called Crepatura or else burstynge.

The seventh chapitre of rupture or burstynge.
Of rupture.
THere are three kinds of ruptures or burstyng after the opinion of doctors.

The first is called relaxation, loosynge, or mollification. This relaxation
comes, when the pannicle called Siphac is mollifyed, with certain relaxation
or losyng by some wyndenes, or some other cause, that induces rupture or
breaking. And this kind is called a little rupture, because it shewethe a
little swellynge about the flanks. If this relexation be increased, so that it
becomes so gross, that it cause the pain, and a swellynge about the
flanckes like an Egg, it is called a rupture not complete. If the swellynge
wax bygger, and the guts fall into the purse of the stones, then it is
called a rupture complete.

The causes that engendre a rupture, been sometimes primitive, The causes of
rupture.
and somteymes antecedente. Primitive been these, a fall from an high place, a
strype with the fyste, with a staff, with a dagger, with the foot. The causes
antecedente been for the most part, humors flegmatyke, gross and wyndye
sent to the nether parts, from the members nutritive. And this cause
procedethe most, of evil dyete, and meats that engendre gross humors, and
great cowghynge. Also of coldness of the feet, and great cryenges as syngers,
preachers, trompetters, and other mynstrelles use. All these forsayde things
cause rupture or burstynge. Likewise to leap or lift heuye burdens, causethe
rupture, and many other things which may chance, when a man forces himself
to much.

Now seeing that we have serched out the kinds of rupture, and the causes of
the same, it is time to come to the cure, by the way of exiccation, or dryenge
and conglutination or gluynge together. The cure.
The curation of a rupture not complete and complete unto the age of.xxx.
years, and above, is accomplyshed by regyment universal, and partyculer.
Universal regiment, shall be accomplyshed by good ordinance kept in eating,
Dyete.
and drinking. Wherefore the patient must use to eat flesh of good
nouryshme^t, rather roasted then boiled with coriandre, and fenell strong, and
sweet. Let the flesh be of mutton of a year old, of veale, of a kydde, of
chyckens, of hens, of capons, of faysannes, of pertriches, of birds that
live in myddowes, and hills. Also ye may give the patient eggs, how so ever
they been dressed, chiefelye with cynnamon, and maioram, or with a little
perseley, or a few myntes, likewise a suppynge or show of borage with the
leaves of conferye with perseleye, and a little myntes, with eggs or without
eggs, and the brothe of the good flesh aforenamed, is very conueniente in
this case. Also rise, wheat, and grated bread been profitable, when they are
sodden aparte, with the said brothe. The wine must be of good odoure of mean
strength, and moderatelye delayed with good water, also of mean color,
neither to read nor to white, but clarette, or yelowe.

Item this curation is accomplysshed, by the regiment of an universal
purgation, which may euacuate evil matter, and conforte the membre, from
which the matter is deryued. First let the patiente take this syrup,
Syrup.
the space of a weke.. of syrup de duabus radicibus without vynegre, of a
syrup of cicoree, or in the stead of it of the juice of endive, of every one..
vi. of the water of endiuie, fumiterre, maiden here, of every one.. i. Let the
patient take it warm in the break of the day. When he has used this
syrup, let him take this purgation.. of diacatholicon.. vi. Purgation.
of diafinicon.. iij. and. ss. of reubarbe infused or steeped.. i. mengle them,
and make a small potion with ye commune decoction.

The particular regiment is accomplyshed, by the administration of sondrye
convenient remedies, upon the place. First if the rupture be complete, when ye
have shaven of the heeres about ye privy member, ye shall reduce the guts
and the zirbus with your hand into his place, and the^ ye shall bind a fine
sponge upon the rupture, according to the quantity thereof, or more, dypped in
the decoction following, and let the sponge be bound upon a trusse made by a
good artificer.. of stiptike red wine.li. iiij. of roses, of balaustyes or
flowers of pomegranades, of the leaves of myrtilles, and graynes thereof, of
sumach, of the leaves of plantayne, of hypericon, or saint John's wurte, of
woodbynde, of every one. m^. i. of the roots of the greater consolida called
conferie, and the less, and their leaves, of every one. m^. ss. of the roots
of holihocke.. ij. of the nuttes of cypress, in nombre.xij. of hipoquistidos..
ss. of roche alume.. ij. of vynegre of roses.. ij. and. ss. of licium.. iij. of
myrre, of frankencense, of every one.. v. of fyshe glue.. i. Let these
foresaid things be boiled together, with the said wine, until half the wine
be consumed, then strain the decoction, Decoction.
and with the sponge apply it upon the rupture and use a trusse, chaungynge
it twyse a weke. It is requisite, that the patiente keep his bed, and use
none exercise of the body. When you have used this spou^ge, ye space of fyfte^
days, other fyften days, ye shall use this poudre following ones a day, and
shall make a fumigation of the foresaid decoction, and when ye have sprynckeled
the poudre upon the rupture, bind on the sponge, after the manner aforesaid.
Poudre.
The ordinance of the pouldre is this.. of frankencense mastyke, myrre, of
every one.. ij. of aloes, of sanguinis draconis, sarcocolle, mumie, of every
one.. i. and. ss. of bole armenie, of terra sygillata, of every one.. ij. and.
ss. of white dragagantum brayed, of fyshe glue. ana.. i. and ss. of balausties,
or the flowers of pome granades, of the nuttes of cypress, of a myrobalane
citrine, of hipoquistidos of every one.. iiij. of laudanu^ well brayed.. iij.
and. ss. bring them al to a fine pouldre. This pouldre is of good operation in
this case, it draws together the loosed part, it dries, riueleth, or
wrynkeleth, and incarneth not a little.

After that these days been passed, and that ye have used the said things,
ye shall proceed with this cerote following, which ye must sprede upon a
lether, and tie it to, with a trusse chaungynge it from weke to weke. Thus you
must proceed, unto fourtye days, countynge the days passed. Cerote.
The form of the cerote is this.. of the foresaid pouldre.. iij. of the juice
of the root of co^solida the greater or conserye, and the less.. x. of clear
terebentyne.. ij. and ss. of oil of mastyke, and oil omphacine, of every
one.. iij. of oil of terebentyne, oil of myrtilles, of every one. ss. of
lytarge of gold and silver, of every one.. vi. of gotes talowe.. v. Let the
foresaid oils be boiled with the lytarge, and a little strong vynegre of
roses, until the vynegre be consumed And then let them boil again with the
juice of conferie, and afterward add the terebentyne, and boil them again a
little with a softer fire, and stir them ever about and with the foresaid
pouldre, and white wax make a cerote in a styffe form which we have proved
to our worship, and profit, and have healed many therwyth.

Now that we have seen the cure of a rupture, by the way of conglutination,
and exiccation, it is convenient, that we describe the cure, that is by handye
operation, that is to say by incision, which must be done, by a man well
exercised therein.

First (a convenient purgation by clisters presupposed) let the patient lie
upon a benche, the head downward, Incisyon.
and let him be tied hands and fete, and under the arm holes to the bench his
head downewarde. Return the guts with the stones, into their places, and
let all the part called pecten, which is about the privy members, be shaven,
and cut the place of the pecten toward the grynde, so that the stone may come
out. And if there be any gutte, within the conducte called didyme, you must
put it into his place again, with your two fyngers. And afterward tie the
didyme, enlargynge it a little with an instrumente, made after the likeness of
a cranes beck. Then sewe it up with cered threde, as taylours sewe garments,
or else tie it with the said threede. After that, cut the dydyme, a finger
under the seame, and incontinentlye cauterize the place with an actual
cauterie, unto the seame, or knotte of the didyme exclusyuelye. Then let the
fleshye place be cauterized, and leave the end of the threede hanging out,
and also leave an hole in the basse or lower part of the incisyon.

The rest of the curation, must be handeled, according to that, that is
taught in the chapter of solution of continuite. Note that this cure must
not be practysed in them that have a great cough, nor in the^ that begin to
wax hole of some sycknesse, nor in old men cheifely if they pass.lx. years,
nor in a time to hot or to cold. Also the patientes fryndes, must be
admonyshed of the danger. It is tha^ convenient that this cure be enterprised
in ye spryngtyme or in the harvest. Thus ends. etc.

The.viij. Chapitre of an Aposteme in the fundement.
Apostemes of the fundame^t
THe Apostemes of the fundement ben engendered for the most part of the pain
of hemorroydes, and of corrupt, and hot mattyere, which is sent from the
members nutritive to the said place, and therefore they comme al most ever to
suppuration.

The cure of this Aposteme is this. After euacuation caused by medicyne
laxatiue, and by cuttynge the vein called Basilica in the same side, when the
body is full of humors, ye shall at the beginning lay upon it, things that been nether to much repercussiue, nor to much maturatiue. For if the things
should be much repercussyue, it were to be feared lest the mattyere should be
enclosed within, though a purgation went before. For this Aposteme is not
engendered by mattyer gathered together by little, and little, but, as you would
say, by deriuatyon. Likewise to great maturation, is to be feared. For the
place sone receauethe putrefaction, wherefore things maturatyue, being hot,
and moist might lightly further the same. For thyes causes, it is good, to
anoynte the place with Oil of Roses omphacyne, with Oil of Camomyll, and Oil
Mirtyne. Afterward ye shall use ye white, and the yolke of an Egg beaten
together with Oil of Violettes and vnguente of Roses, and a little Saffran.

If the Aposteme comme to maturation, Maturatiue.
than ye shall use this maturatiue.. of mallowe leaves. M. j. of the roots of
Holyhock, and white Lillies. Ana.. iij. Sees them all in a brothe, or in rain
water sta^pe the^, and strain them, and than in the decoction with wheat
flower make a stiff plaster, adding of oil of Violettes, of fresh buttyre.
Ana.. ij. This plaster rypeth without drawing of mattyer to the place, and
moreover it swageth pain. When the Aposteme is ripe, without lokynge or
tariyng for perfect rypenes, make incisyon after the figure of a new moon.

And for the digestyon, mundifycation, incarnation, sygillation, Incision.
and cycatrisation, ye shall proceed after the doctrine declared in the former
chapitres of hot Apostemes.

And because this Aposteme engenders often a fistula persynge, and not
persynge to the gutte called rectum, because of his greatness, or because of the
malignyte of the mattyer, or because the Chirurgien has bynne to slow in the
opening of it. For the cure of a fistula not persynge, ye shall resort to the
Chapter of a fistula, and for a persynge fistula go to the Chapter of a
Fistula of the fundement. Thus ends. etc.

Here ends the.vi. treatise.
Here folowethe the seuenthe treatise of the second book, which treatethe of
Apostemes from the shulders unto the hands.
The first chapter of Apostemes cold, and hot, mattury, and not matturye
engendered in the shuldres.
Apostemes in the shulders.
THe Apostemes which are engendered about the ioynctures, must be diligently
cured, by dyscrete Chirurgiens, lest the synnowes be hurt, and the membre
leese his mouyng.

After observation of the universal rules concerning purgation, flebotomie,
and diete, the cure at the beginning, is accomplysshed, by the application of
local remedies, as with oil of roses Omphacine, and with a decoction of
ground worms, for they conforte greatly synnowie places at the beginning.

Linimente.
Item this liniment following is profitable, at the beginning, unto
augmentation.. of oil of roses co^plete of oil Omphacine. Ana.. ij. of oil
of Camomyll.. x. of ground worms washed with wine.. j. and. ss. of saffran..
j. of odoriferous wine.. vi. of Camomill, of melilote of each a little. Let
them boil all together until the wine be consumed, than strain them, and
make a liniment with suffycient white wax. You must rub the place with this
liniment and lay upon it vnwasshed woulle taken from between the legs of a
sheep. And if ye put to, this liniment of the roots of Holyhocke sodden and
strayned the quantytie of.. iiij. it shall be very good, from the beginning
unto the end of augmentation, in resoluyng, and appaysyng pain.

If the Aposteme comme to maturation, and is flegmonyke, let it be cured
after the curation of sanguine Apostemes. If it be engendered of mengled
humors, let it be cured according to the commixtion of the same. If it be
Coleryke, let it be cured with the cure of a Coleryke Aposteme.

Merueyle not good reader, that for the accomplysshement of some intentyon, I
send you from one chapter to another, for one Chapter aydethe another, and I
do it to avoid many words, and hereby ye shall have an occasyon, to read
sondrye chapytres, and to learn by that mean, things which other wise
perchance you would not have sought for.

After that the place is comme to maturation, Intisyon
ye shall open it without lokynge for perfect rypenes, so that it be not to
grene, nether must the incisyon be to deep that the synnowes be not touched.
After incisyon let the place be digested, with a dygestyue of terebentyne,
and of the yolks of Eggs, adding of the oil of Hypericon.. ss.

For the other intentions, ye may proceed by the remedies written in the
chapter of solution of continuite of synnowes. Nevertheless we will add some
profitable thing, for the cure of this Aposteme which is that from the day
of incysyon, unto perfect digestion, this plaster be applied.. of the leaves
of mallows, of the leaves and roots of Holyhocke. Ana. M. j. of Comomyll and
melylote. Ana. m^. ss. let them be sodden with sufficient quantity of water,
until half be consumed, and with a decoctyon of the flower of beans and
barley, or with cromes of bread, make a stiff plaster, addyng of Oil of
Camomill, and of Oil of roses, with a decoctyon of earth worms. Ana.. ij. the
yolks of two Eggs, of Saffran.. j. This plaster preparethe the mattyer to
issue out, and swageth pain, which things ben convenient at the beginning.

Furthere if ye perceive, that the Aposteme is cold, after purgatyon, and
ordinance of diete, as it is declared in the chapitre of vndimia, the place
must be anointed, with the oil of Camomyll, Dille, Lillies and roses, and
than you must lay on unwashed woulle well toosed.

If greater resolution need, ye shall proceed with a plaster of sodden new
wine, with resolutiue farines or flower of our description, in the Chapitre of
synnowes, and of ye cure of vndimia, or with a plaster called magistrale,
compounde of things that swage pain, named Anodine.

If this Aposteme can not be resolved, but that it comes to maturation,
than ye shall procure, and further maturation with a plaster magistrall of
Holyhocke, and of farines or meals, prescribed in the former chapytres.

After incisyon, dygeste the place, mundifye, incarne, seal up, and cicatryse
it, as it is written in the Chapitre of hot Apostemes. Here ye shall note two
things necessary for the cure of this Aposteme. The first is, that in the
plaster which you will apply, in the time of digestion, it is profitable to
put to, the flower of beans, and in the decoction a little lie. The second
is, that in mundifiynge, ye may (if need be) apply vnguentum Egyptiacum
mengled with vnguentum Apostolorum, or with our poudre of mercury, cheifely
wha^ the mundifycatiue medicynes be not sufficient, to mu^difye the place.
Thus. etc.

The.ij. chapter of an Aposteme of the arm and of the bone called adiutorium.
THe Apostemes of the arm, Apostemes of the arm.
and of the adiutorye ben not so dangerous, as the Apostemes of the shulders.
For those parts be not so synnowie as ye other, but more fleschie and
musculous. And therefore they ben of easyer resolution, and maturation, than
the Apostemes, that are engendered in a synnowye place, and about the
ioynctures. You must proceed to the cure as it follows.

At the beginning, if the Aposteme be hot, The cure of an hot Aposteme.
ye shall anoynte the place with this liniment following, that is to say, with
oil of roses hot, and white wax melted with the Oil, whereunto ye shall add
a little bole Armenie, and a little saffran. Item to the same intention this
ordinance is good. Resolutyue.
. the white of two eggs with the yolks, of Oil of Roses Omphacine, and of
oil of roses co^plete and odoriferous. Ana.. ij. of the juice of plantayne..
x. shake them all together, and add of the flower of barley, and beans. Ana..
vj. mengle them, and make them after the manner of a plaster.

And if the foresaid things are not sufficient for the resolutyon of the
mattier, but that it will comme to maturation, than let it be ryped with this
maturatiue following. Maturatiue.
. of the leaves of mallows, and violettes. Ana. M. ij. of white lilly
roots.. ij. Sees them al in water, stamp the^, and strain them, and with
wheat flower make a plaster, addyng of buttyre.. ij. of swynes gresse.. j.
and. ss. and if you will have it more maturatiue, put to, of the flower of
fenugreke, and lynsed sufficient quantity. After maturation, open the place
according to length depelye, if the mattyere be deep, and than fylle it with
a tente anointed in the white, and yolke of an Egg, and over that lay stoupes
moysted in the same.

Afterward let the Aposteme be dygested with the yolke of an Egg and
terebentyne, unto perfect dygestio^, and mundifye it with a mundificatiue of
smalage or of honye of Roses, Mundificatiue of smalage.
which is in this form.. of clear terebentyne.. j. and. ss. of honye of
Roses.. vj. let them al boil a little, and than put to the yolke of a new
laid Egg, of Saffran.. j. of barley flower cersed.. ss. mengle them. This
mundifycatiue is very convenient, and it must be applied with a tente. And
because thies places thoroughe the thycknes of the flesh, and greatness of
muscles, and of Apostemes, are wounte to be turned in to hollow ulcers, weak
mundifycatiues are not suffycient. Wherefore it is convenient that ye resort
to the Chapter of hollow ulcers. After mundifycation, for incarnation, ye
shall put to one of the foresaid mundifycatyues, thyes things following..
of frankencense.. ij. of myrre, of aloes. Ana.. j. and. ss. It incarneth by
little and and little in mundifiynge.

Finally when the place is incarned, ye shall apply Vnguentum de Minio, which
must be ever administered, after the beginning, of mundifycation unto perfect
sygillation.

For cicatrisation, the poudre magistrall declared in the former chapytres
shall be sufficient. If the Apostemes of thyes parts ben cold, ye shall resort
to the Chapter of cold Apostemes, for the resolution, and maturation of the
same. And for other intentions after maturation, and incisyon ye must proceed
according to that, that is taught in this present chapter which by the grace
of god thus endethe.

The third chapter of hot Apostemes of the hands and fyngers.
THe Aposteme of the hand must be diligently cured, Aposteme of the hand.
because of the profit thereof. For the hand is called organu^ organorum,
that is, the instrumente of instruments, whereby all other instruments are
made. And it is a membre very sensyble, or feeling, and therefore causes
sometime great pain. Wherefore in the cure of this Aposteme, being hot,
(the observation of universal rules presupposed) sondrie remedies are
required, according to the diversity of the times of ye Aposteme.

At the beginning let the place be anointed, Choler mir^ with blood.
with oil of Roses omphacine, and a little oil of violettes (if choler be
mengled with blood) and a little white wax melted, and a little saffran, and a
little of the three kinds of saunders, with a little bole armenie.

Epitheme.
Item to the same intention, this decoction is good.. of oil of roses complete,
of oil omphacine. Ana.. ij. of woman's milk.. ss. of the juice of Plantayne..
vj. the whytes of three Eggs with their yolks, shake them all together, and
add of barley flower. j. let them boil one boylyng and let this Epitheme
be applied hot with cloutes, renuynge it often. It is good from the
beginning, unto the augmentation.

In the augmentation, you must use things repercussiue with some
mollification, and gentle resolution. And Auicenne says, that as much more,
as the Aposteme growethe to the beginning of augmentation, and approaches
toward the end of the said augmentation, things mollifycatiue, and
resolutiue, ought to surmounte the virtue of repercussiues, after this
ordinance following. A resolutiue with repercussion.
. of Roses, of mallows. Ana. m^. j. Seethe them all in fat brothe, sta^pe
them, and strain them, and in the decoction with the flower of barley, and
wheat make a styffe plaster, adding of oil of Roses, of Camomyll Ana.. ij.
the yolks of two Eggs, of Saffran.. j. This plaster has mollifycatiue and
resolutiue virtue, with some repercussion, which intentions ben necessary in
this curation: cheifely in the time of augmentation.

Resolutiue.
In the state, when the Aposteme inclyneth to the way of resolution, ye may
well use this plaster.. of the cromes of bread sodden with a decoction of
Camomill, Melilote, Holyhocke until the decoction be thycke, addyng of oil of
Camomyll, and dyl Ana.. j. and. ss. of the oil of white Lillyes.. vj. of
Saffran.. j. mengle them.

In the declination, use this cerote. Cerote.
. of white diaquilon.. iij. of gotes tallowe, of oil of Lillies, and Camomyll.
Ana.. vj. of clear terebentyne.. iij. make a cerote at the fyere, with
sufficient white wax, adding of Saffran.. ss. of bean flower.. x.

When thies Apostemes can not be resolved, and will comme to maturation, ye
shall apply a plaster of the leaves of mallows, and vyolettes made with
flower of barley, as we have declared in many chapi. When the said Aposteme
is comme to maturation, ye shall open the place, after the length of the
synnowes. After incisyon, ye shall fylle the place with the white, and the
yolke of an Egg beaten together, and a little Saffran.

The next day, you must procure digestion, with a digestive of terebentyne,
laiyng on this plaster, three or four days, after incisyon. Plaster.
. of barley flower.li. ss. and as much bean flower Seethe them in a decoction
of mallows, violettes, Camomyll, and a little Holyhocke unto styffe thycknes,
adding in the end of the decoction, of oil of Camomyll, and roses. Ana.. ij.
the yolks of two Eggs, a little Saffran.

Finally if in the said parties, there chance some cold Aposteme saniouse, or
not saniouse for the cure thereof ye shall resort to the chap. of the cure of
cold Apostemes, as in the shulders, Elbowe, neck. etc. Thus ends. etc.

The fourth chapter of Apostemes sclerotyke, of the fyngers and toes.
Aposteme sclirotyke in the Fyngers and toes.
IN the joints of the hands, and of the fete, flegmatyke, and Melancholyke
Apostemes are often engendered, cheifely in young children from four years of
age unto.xiiij. etc. The subtle humors whereof, turn some times in to
venime, so yt, that venime corrupts the bones, the ligame^tes, and the
flesh.

The cure of thies Apostemes is accomplished by the observation of three
intentions. The first is dyete. The second purgation of evil humors,
communely called causes antecedente. The third is administration of sondrye
remedies upon the said Apostemes.

Diete.
For the first, let the patient eat flesh that engenders good, and pure
blood, as capons, hens, pertriche, veale roasted, kydde. He must avoid
fowls of the river, and gross flesh of beef, and swynes flesh, and all
other that engendre gross and mela^cholyke blood. He must rather eat the
foresaid flesh roasted tha^ boiled.

Purgation.
The second intention, which is to purge the mattier antecede^t, shall be
acco^plysshed by this ordinance.. of diacatholicon. Syrup.
. ss. of diafini.. ij. me^gle them, and make morselles with suggre. But before
ye administer this purgation, ye must give the patient, this syrup the space
of six days.. of syrup of vinaygre, de duabus radicibus, de sticados, of
honye of roses strayned. Ana.. iiij. of waters of fumyterre, of maydenherre.
Ana.. j. mengle them. Item this confection is very profitable to the same
intention, Electuarium.
which purgethe humors by little, and little.. of syrup of sticados, of syrup
of violettes. Ana.li. ss. of honye of Roses.. ij. of turbith preparate.. iij.
agaryke in trocisques.. x. of polypodie of the oak.. vj. of the coddes of
seen.. j. poudre them all fynely and with white suggre make an electuarie upon
the fire, adding of long pepper, and round, of cynamome. Ana.. j. of anise..
j. and. ss.

Note that the receite must be according to the strength,
and age of the patient, in the quantity of half a sponeful unto a sponeful.
And it must be taken in the break of the day, and the patient must fast.vj.
hours after.

The third intention, which is to administer sondrye remedies upon the
Aposteme, shall be accomplysshed after the doctrine following. First you shall
apply things mollifycatiue, and resolutiue. For we have seen this Aposteme
for the most part to comme to saniositie, mattier, or fylthe The resolutiue
shall be this. Resolutiue cerote.
. of the roots of Holyhock.. iiij. of the roots of flower delis.. j. Seethe
them all in water, stamp them, and strain the^, and with the things under
written make a cerote.. of white diaquilon gummed.. iiij. of hens gresse, of
duckes gresse. Ana.. ss. of oil of Camomyll, oil of Lillies. Ana.. vj. of
oil of dille, and spike. Ana.. v. of Galenes cerote.. x. mengle them and melte
them all at the fire, and with the foresaid straynynge, and new wax make a
cerote, sufferynge it to boil a little. This cerote is a synguler remedy, in
this case.

Also the application of a sponge dypped in this decoction following is very
good.. of red wine. Decoction.
li. ss. of barbers lie.li. iiij. of vinegre.. ij. of the roots of Holyhocke..
iiij. of flower delis.. j. and. ss. of Camomill, Melilote, dil. Ana. M. ss. of
branne, of roche alume. Ana.. ss. of honye.. x. of gotes dunge.. j. let them
boil all together until the third part be consumed, than strain them.

And if this Aposteme can not be resolved by these foresaid remedies, and will
come to maturation, let it be ryped with maturatiues written in the chapiters
of cold Apostemes before rehearsed. And tha^ open it with a cantery actual or
pote^tial, or with some sharp instrument. Howbeit cold iron is not so
convenient as cauteries, because of the cold mattier.

Afterward let the vlcere be cured as other burnte ulcers, by things
mollificatyue. If the bone be corrupted, ye shall proceed after the doctrine
given in the chapter of the corruption of bones. wha^ the corruption of the
bone is removed, for incarnation, mundification, and sigillation, ye shall
proceed after the doctrine often declared in ye former chapiters. Nevertheless
in this case Vnguentum egyptiacum mengled with Vnguentum Apostoloru^, is a
right good mundificatyue. Also the incarnatiue of sarcocolle is convenient in
the purpose of incarnynge. For sigillation, use our poudre cicatrisatyue, with
Vnguentum de Minio, washing the place with water of Alume.

Thus ends. etc.

The.v. chapter of an Aposteme of the fyngers called Panaritium.
PAnaritium is an Aposteme of a very hot nature, Apostemes of the finger,
called Panaritium.
and it is venomous so that through his veninositie, and heat, it corrupts
the synnowes, and sometimes the bones, causynge great and sharp pain. Also
somtymes it engenders a sharp fieuer. And sometimes (as wyllyam Placentinus
says) it bryngethe the patient to death, which thing we have seen also.

It is a rule in this cure, that we use at the beginning styptyke things (the
cuttynge of the vein called basilica in the contrary side and a purgation with
the juice of roses, or cassia, or Diacatholicon presupposed) The first
plaster must be in this form. Plaster.
R. the two kinds of hole pomegranades sodden in a decoction of barley, Roses,
balaustyes, and sumach, than stamp them, and strain them, and with the flower
of lentiles, barley and beans, with a little quantity of the foresaid
decoction, and the said straynynge make a styffe plaster, adding of oil of
roses omphacine, and oil myrtyne. ana.. i. and. ss. of saffran.. i. or make it
thus. R. of the flower of Lentiles, barley and beans ana.. i. of myrobalane
citrine.. i. of diers gauls.. ss. let them all be boiled with the wine of
granades, and a little vinegre of roses unto styffe thycknes, adding of oil of
roses, of oil omphacine.. ii.

Note yt if these two plasters swage pain, ye may proceed with them, but if
after the application of the same, the pain daily increase, than ye shall use a
maturatyue of mallows, and violettes, and the flower of barley, sodde^ in the
foresaid decoction, made with buttire, and yolks of eggs. This must be
applied, the space of two days.

Afterward there is no greater remedy, than to open the place with an hot iron
in the top of the finger. This cauterizatio^ (though it be done before
perfect maturation) saves ye finger from corruption of the bones, and
sinowes, and oftentimes appaiseth grief. But because many will not suffer
cauterization, it is necessary to use a stronger maturatyue. And when it is
ripe, you must open the place with a sharp instrumente, or with a caustyke of
capitell, when the mattier is about the skin. Than afterward let the
place be mundifyed, with Vnguentum egyptiacum, mengled with Vnguentu^
apostolorum, or with our poudre of mercurye, or with a trocisque of minium.
And than let the place be purified, with honey of roses, and with a
mu^dificatyue of Smalage, and incarned with our poudre incarnatyue, Poudre
incarnatiue.
the description whereof is after this sort. R. of Aloes Hepatike.. iii. of
myrrh, of frankencense, of Sarcocolle. ana.. i. mengle them. And if you add
of clear Terebentyne.. v. of honye of roses strayned.. ii. it shall be very
profitable. Let the place be sealed up, and cicatrised with our poudre
cicatrisatyue, and with water of Alume, and with vnguentum of miniu^ which ben
written in our antidotarie, whereunto resort.

The.viii. treatise speaks of the apostemes of the hyppes, thighs, legs.
And of the apostemes of the liver, and scrophules and fugilles, which chance,
under the arm holes.
The first cha. treats of apostemes, of the hyppes hot, and cold, saniouse
and not saniouse.
Apostemes of the flanckes etc.
OF Apostemes of these parts some are engendered in the outward parts as in the
stones, the flanckes, the fondement, of which we have spoken. we will here
speak of an Aposteme that is engendered in the inner parts. The curation of
this aposteme, differs not from the comune cure of other Apostemes, whereof we
have spoken, in the former chapiters. wherefore if it be a cold aposteme, for
the resolution, and mollificatio^, and other intentions, ye shall proceed as in
the cure of cold apostemes. And likewise if it be hot and come to maturatio^,
let it be opened, mu^dified, incarned, and sigilled. etc. as is declared in the
former chapitres.

Nevertheless this is to be noted, ye it requires a discret chirurgien, wha^
there is mattier or corruption in the place or not, because of the thycknesse
of the muscles and of the flesh. wherefore good wylliam Placentine in his time
resisting chirurgiens, that said, that this aposteme was not sanious obtained
great worship, and profit. For he made incision in the presence of
chirurgiens, and found great quantity of mattier or corruption in the
aposteme. Thus ends. etc.

The.ii. chapi. of hot, and cold Apostemes of the knees, thyghes, and legs.
THe Apostemes of the thyghes, Apostemes (...) the thyghe^ knees and legs.
knees and legs, have no difference, (touching the curation) from apostemes
of the shulders, elbowe, and of the bone of the arm called adiutoriu^.
wherefore for all the intentions of the cure, of the same, ye shall resort to
the former chapitres. Nevertheless they differ in one thing, that is, that the
patientes must not exercise them selves, in going and cominge, as much as
shall be possible. Thus. etc.

The.iii. cha. of the swellyng of the knee.
THere ben often Apostemes engendered in ye knees, Swelling of the knee.
hot, and cold sanious, and not saniouse, wyndy, and humorall, or full of
water.

If the aposteme be hot, it must be cured after the curation, of an Aposteme
of the elbowe hot or cold. wherefore ye shall peruse that chapter.

Of the curation of this Aposteme, when it is cold we will here speak
according to the truth. First (a convenient purgation presupposed) if the
swellyng be old, and not very hard, it is profitable, Plaster of gotes dunge
to apply a plaster, of gotes dunge, made with new grape shales, or husks,
water, and barley flower. The auctoure of the pandectes merueyleth (in the
chapter de stercore caprino) how he healed a man so quyckly with this
plaster, which had, long time, been vexed, with the swellynge of the knee.

Howebeit we have found a more excellent remedy in this plaster following
for an old swellynge of the knee. Plaster for an old swellynge.
R. of bean flower, and barley flower. ana.. iiii. of branne well ground.
ana. m^. ii. of goats dunge brayed. li. ss. of Camomylle, Melilote stamped.
ana. m^.i. make a styffe plaster with lie and sufficient sodden wine, adding
of oil of Camomyl, and dylle. ana.. ii. This plaster resolves easelye al
wyndie swyllynge, with resolution of the humoral mattier, and mitigation of the
pain.

And if this swellynge be caused by cold humorall mattier, with commixtion of
hot mattier, it is very profitable, to use in the stead of lie, the
muscilage of Holihocke. Also a sponge dypped in a decoction resolutyue, and
breaking of wind, laid and bounden upon the knee, has a merueylous virtue.
And if this aposteme be watery, for the cure thereof, ye shall resort to the
chap. of the cure of hernia aquosa. Thus. etc.

The.iiii. chapi. of apostemes of the fete hot and cold, and of the
medicines, that cause rotten nails to fall, and of the superfluous flesh
growyng in the lift, and the right side of the nails and of the incision of
the same.
THe cure of the apostemes of the fete, Apostemes of the fete.
differreth not from the cure of other apostemes as well hot, as cold,
declared in the chap. of the hands, and of the fete. wherefore ye shall resort
to the said cha.

It chances often that the nails, of the hands, Corruption of the nails
and of the fete come to corrupcyon, cheffye in the lower parts, and cause
great pain. wherefore it is necessary to give some remedy. For if it be in the
toes, it hyndreth the going. And if it be in the fyngers, it distroyeth handye
workyng. wherefore if the nail be greatly corrupted in the croune, or in the
sides with old vlceration, there is no surer aid, than to attenuate or make
thin the nail with raspatories. And than ye must pearce it, in sondrye
places with a sharp instrumente. Afterward let the place be softened with
this mollificatyue the space of three days. Plaster mollificatiue.
R. of the leaves of Violettes and Mallows. an^. m^. i. Sees them in water,
stamp them, and strain them, and in the decoction with wheat flower, and the
foresaid straynynge, make a styffe plaster at the fire adding of the
substance of roasted apples.. iii. of hens grese, and duckes grese, of oil
of violettes, of buttyre ana.. vi. mengle them. This plaster mollifieth the
nail, and prepares it to fall.

Afterward ye shall apply this plaster. Plaster
R. of Apium risus fynelye brayed.. i. of cantarydes (their heads, and wings
being taken away). i. of wheat leaven.. ii. mengle the^, and braye them
together, and make them after the manner of a plaster.

Apply this plaster upon the nail until ye perceive the flesh under the
nail to be corrupted,

Than procure the nail to fall, with playsters of Mallows ordained before, or
with hot buttyre. when the nail is removed, let the place be washed with
water of barley, and Sugre, and apply a plaster of miniu^ the space of four
days. Tha^ a little new wax, and oil of roses with a little terebentyne, after
the bygnesse of the nail, may conuenientlye be laid on, to make the nail to
grow again.

But if the nail be corrupted only in one side, or in both with superfluouse
flesh, ye shall cut it away, or root it out with a caustyke medicyne, or
with our poudre of mercury, or with a spo^ge, somewhat burnt.

And if these been not sufficient, ye may use a ruptorye, of Capitell, or a
trocyske of minium after our description.

After that the deed flesh is cutten away, or removed, cut the nail also
unto the hole part, with little cizars sharpelye poynted. After incision, ye
shall wasshe the place with a decoction of roses, Myrtyles, Alume and stiptyke
wine, and seal up the place with our poudre cicatrisatiue, and a plaster of
Minium. which things we have proved often, with worship. Thus. etc,

The.v. chappi. of an Aposteme cold, and hot in the stomach, as well in the
outward part, as in the inner.
THe Apostemes of the stomach been very dangerous, Aposteme in the stomach
chieflye those that been engendered in the inner part, but they that are in ye
outward part been not so dangerous. Ye shall know when the Apoemes of the
stomach are cold or hot by the signs declared in the chap. of apostemes
universally.

The cure shall be accomplyshed, as it follows. If the aposteme be hot, and in
the outward part (the observation of the universal rules of purgation, and
diete presupposed) it is conueniente to proceed, with resolutyues, having
sum virtue to conforte the place, as is this description. R. of oil of
Camomylle.. i. and ss. of oil of roses co^plete odoriferous, of oil of
Quynces. ana.. vi. Mengle them, and at the fire make a liniment with white
wax, adding of all the Coralles. ana.. i. and ss. of Alabastre, of Saunders
white, and read. ana.. i. mengle them. This linimente is of great efficacitie
in this case, for it co^fortethe the stomach, and resolves gentelye.

Note that in this place medicines much repercussyue are not to be applied,
because of the nobylytye of the stomach, and of the liver, This composition
following is good also, and more resolutyue. R. of Camomylle, of Dylle. ana..
i. of oil of Roses complete, of oil of wormoode. ana.. vi. make a lynymente
at the fire, with sufficient white wax, addyng of saffranne.. i. of
Cynnamome.. ss. Annoynte the Aposteme herewyth. And if you will, that it be more
resolutyue with some mollification, ye shall add to the foresaid things, of
the roots of holihocke sodden, and stamped.. ii. of raisines bruised.. i.

If the said aposteme can not be resolved, Maturatiue.
with the foresaid things, than ye shall use this maturatyue. R. of the leaves
of mallows and violettes. ana. m^. i. of the meat of wardens, or great
peris, or of sweet apples, or of quynces roasted.. iii. of raysynes.. ii. of
wormwoode. m^. ss. Sees the things that been to be sodden, in water, than
stamp them and strain them, and with barley flower make a styffe plaster, in
the decoction at the fire, adding of oil of violettes.. i. of oil of sweet
Almandes, of hens grese. ana.. vi. the yolks of two eggs, of saffranne.. i.
of buttyre.. x. make a plaster with the foresaid straynynge, and the
substance of apples, menglyng the^ al together.

when the Aposteme is ripe, cut it after the length and never after the
breadth. Incision.
Than digeste the place, with a digestyue of terebentyne, the yolke of an egg
and a little saffranne. And if the place be paynful, because of the sensibilytye
thereof, ye shall add to the said digestyue, oil of roses omphacyne hot for
it digesteth and appayseth grief.

mu^dificatiue.
After digestion, let the place, be mundifyed with this mu^difycatiue R. of
syrup of Roses, of honye of roses. ana.. vi. of clear Terebentyne. ii. and
ss. of the juice of Smalage, wormwoode, playntayne, horsetaile ana.. ii. boil
them a little with a soft fire, than add the yolke of an egg, of barley flower
well cersed.. x. of saffran.. i. of sarcocolle.. iii. Let this mundificatyue
be applied, with a tente, and if ye put too, of frankencense, drammes three,
of myrre, of mastyke. ana.. ii. it will be a good incarnatyue.

Finallye let the vlcere be sealed up, with Vnguentum de Minio of our
description, washing it with water of alume, or use our poudre cicatrisatyue.

If this Aposteme be engendered in the inner part, the cure differs not, The
cure of an aposteme in the inner part.
from the cure of the outward Aposteme, touching resolution, maturation, and
co^fortation, of the place, but the inner Aposteme can not suffer, so strong a
laxatyue medicyne, as the outward. wherefore we will order the purgation
according to the evil humors.

First after yt we perceived what mattier it was, Digestive of hot cause.
we were wont to use this digestyue when the mattier was hot. R. of syrup
of roses by infution, syrup of Violettes, syrup of hoppes. ana.. ss. of the
water of buglosse, of hoppes.. i. and ss. mengle them.

when the patiente has used this syrup ye space of three days, Purgation.
twyse a day, he shall take this purgation. R. of chosen manna, of
Diacatholicon an^.. v. make a small potion with the decoction of cordial
flowers, and fruits, adding of syrup of Violettes. i. and. ss.

If the Aposteme be cold, that is to say, Digestive of a cold cause.
if it be engendredde of cold mattier, let the said mattier be digested
with this syrup. Take syrup de duabus radicibus, syrup of the juice of
endyue, of honye of roses an^.. iiii. of the water of maide^ hear, of
buglosse, of worwood. an^.. i. mengle them.

when the patient has used this syrup a weke, Purgation.
let him be purged with this purgation. R. of cassia, of diacatholico^. ana..
vi. of Diafinico^.. i. and ss. Make a small potion, with decoction of cordial
flowers, and fruits, adding of syrup of violettes.. i.

It is expedient to apply upon the outward part, unctions and linime^tes
confortinge the place, Ointment.
as these following. R. of oil of camomille, and dylle. ana.. i. of spike oil,
of oil of quinces, of laudanum. an^.. iii. of oil of terebentyne.. i. make a
Linimente with sufficient white wax, addyng of saffran.. i. of frankencense of
mastyke. an^.. i.

Item to the same intention, this linimente following, is good with more
resolution, A another more resolutiue.
and mollification. R. of oil of camomyll, of oil of wormwoode, of oil of
nardus or spike an^.. x. of oil of quynces and roses. ana.. vi. of hens
grese, of duckes grese, of oil of lillyes. ana.. ss. of muggewurt. m^. ss. of
the flowers of rosmarie, of squina^tum, of each a little. Of calamus aromaticus,
of cinnamome. an^.. i. of romayne myntes a little. Let the^ sees all, with a
cyathe of odoryferous wine, unto the consumption of the wine, than strain
them, and with sufficient white wax, make a cerote, adding of saffran.. ss.
Annoynte the stomach with this oyntmente, for it conforteth and resolves cold
mattier of the stomach, and swageth pain.

But for as much as these Apostemes for the most part have not their
termination by the way of resolution, Maturatiue.
and will come to maturation, ye shall further the maturation, with this
plaster. R. of the roots of holihocke, of white Lyllyes ana. li. ss. of
clean raisines.. iiii. of muggewurt, of wormwoode. ana. m^. ss. of squinantum
a little. Sees them all in the brothe of fat flesh, stamp them, and
strain them, and than in the decoction, with wheat flower make a styffe
plaster, adding of buttyre.. ii. of hens grese.. i. the yolks of two
eggs, of saffran.. i. This plaster is maturatiue, and confortatiue, because
of squynantum, wurmwood and mugworte.

when the said Aposteme is come to maturation, Incision.
ye shall make incision, according to that, that is said before in the
chapter of hot Apostemes. And for the other intentions namely digestion,
mundification. etc. Ye shall use the remedies of the alleged cha. Thus. etc.

The.vi. cha. of Apostemes of the liver both hot, and cold, and of the
hardness thereof.
THe liver is a principal member which nature has produced, Of the liver
hot and cold.
for the necessity of all the body. wherefore the diseases thereof, must be
diligently, and discretlye cured. For every disease of the liver is to be
feared, because of his necessary office of digestion. The signs of apostemes
of the liver been known to be hot or cold, as the signs of other Apostemes
in the universal chap. Howbeit somtymes there chau^ceth in the liver a
singular aposteme, yt is to say, an aposteme engendered of one only humor, but
for ye most part they are all engendered of mengled humors.

The cure of this Aposteme differs not from the cure of other declared in the
former Chaptre of apostemes in the stomach. wherefore let it be cured after the
same. Nevertheless I will speak somewhat of purgation and diete. Flebotomie
Let the vein of the liver be cut in the contrary side, if the strength
and age of the patient will suffer it, and let the patient be purged with
conuenyent purgatio^s, according to the quality of humors. Diete.
As touching diete, if the patient have a fieuer, he must forbear wine and
flesh, and must eat a sup or show made with grated breed, and almandes, and
a little sugre, and common seeds. If he be weak, he must eat of a broth of a
chickyn sodden with laictuce, and confyte raysines, and with clean barlye. Also
ye may give him a brothe of read cicers sodden with raisines, and mengled with
ye brothe of a chyckyn, having added suffycie^t quantity of sugre. The said
brothe boiled with laicture, spynache, and hoppes, is very profitable in this
case.

As concerning local medicines, we will make no long oration, because the
remedies declared in ye former Chaptres, be convenient in this present cure.
Some doctors say, that this composition following, is very good, which we
also have proved to be true. Ointment
. of oil of roses omphacin^, of oil of camomyll, of quinces, mirtilles,
wormewod, ana.. i. let them all boil with the iuce of nightshade, alkekengi,
and laictuce, till the juice be consumed, than add of red saunders and white..
i. a little saffra^, and with suffycie^t white wax make a liniment.

And because the liver and the milt oftentimes weaxe very hard, we will
declare conuenyent remedies, for the mollification, and resolution of the same.
First to mollifye and resolve the hardness of the liver, it is a synguler
remedy to apply this cerot upon the place.. of the roots of holyhocke sodden
in water, and strayned. li. ss. of raisines sodden in ye broth of a chyckyn,
and strayned. A cerote for the natives of the liver.
. iii. of the substance of quynces roasted, or in ye stead thereof, of wardens
and peers. iiii. of oil of camomyll, and dyll.. ii. of oil of wormwood, of
quynces, of sweet alma^des. ana.. vi. of oil of roses, of vyolettes, of duckes
grese, of hens grese. ana.. i. Let them boil all together in a decoction
of camomylle, melilote, mugworte, holyhocke, unto the consumption of the
decoction, than strain them, and add to the straynyng of diaquilon, gummed..
iii. and ss. of Galenes cerote, of ysope.. i. and. ss. mengle them together,
and make a cerote with suffycyente white wax, adding of saffran.. i. of white
and red Saunders. ana.. i. This cerote mollifyeth and resolves the hardenesse
of the milt. An other.


Here follows an other cerote, good for the same purpose.. of the roots of
holyhocke.. iiii. of the roots of white lyllyes.. ii. of the rotes of
langedebefe.. i. and. ss. Seethe the^ all in fat brothe of capons, he^nes, or
other flesh, than stamp them and strain them, and add to the straynynge of
oil of camomyll, of dyl. an^.. ii. and. ss. of oil of cappares.. vi, of
he^nes grese, of duckes grese. ana.. x. of calves grese.. ii. and. ss. of ye
mary of calves legs.. i. of buttyre.. iiii. of the leaves of Rue. m^. ss. of
the flowers of rosemarye, of smalage leaves, of every one the third part of an
handful, of vynegre one cyath, of the foresaid decoction. li. ii. Let the
grese, oils, and marye boil again unto the consu^ption of the decoction and
vynegre, than with suffycyent white wax, and the foresaid straynynge, and
diaquilo^, make a cerote at the fire in good form, adding of saffran.. i. and
ss. use it upon the milte, after the manner of a playstre. Thus ends. etc.

The.vii, chaptre. Of scrofules, and fugilles, which been engendered under the
arm holes, and in the flanks.
Of scrophules and fugils.
SCruphules and fugilles ben often engendered under the arm holes. and.c. For
the curation whereof, the remedies written in the Chaptre of scrophules are
sufcyent.

Nevertheless, for a more ample doctrine: The cure of a fugill.
we will brefely declare the manner of curyng a fugille. First ye shall make a
deep hole in the myddest and put in it two grains of arsnyke. For it
mortifieth the carnositie, with the thynne skin that contains it, if it be
applied ones or twyse. Also quycksyluer sublimed, is of the same virtue. when
the place is mortifyed, ye must procure the fall of the escare, and so proceed,
as in the cure of scrophules.

The cause of fugylles.
Fugilles are engendered of gross and flegmatike matters, and they be^ little
deep swellynges of red color, immovable in toutchynge, and of little pain.

Sometimes they come to fylth, or corruption. we have healed them often, after
their vlceration, separatynge the good flesh from them round about,
Incision.
with a sharp instrument, and putting into the incision of our poudre of
mercury every day a little, until we se the botome. Afterward we were wont
to pluck up the fugyle, with little sharp tenacles, having some hollownesse
like a spone. If any thing remained afterward we mundifyed it, or rather
rooted it up, with a trocisque of minium, after our description, or with our
poudre of mercury, or with a ruptorie of capitel. Thus we end this present
chaptre: for which the name of God be praised.

Here begins the third book.
The first treatise is of wounds, from the heed to the feet.
The first Chaptre. Of flesshye wounds, and of the commune disputation of
wounds in general, and of the cure of the same.
A wound (as ancient and later doctors testify) is a solutio^ of continuitye
fresh, A wound.
and blodye, and with out putrefaction, chesti made in soft parts.

Solution of continuitie is a passion common to me^bres simple, Solution of
continuitie.
and members compounde: nevertheless, more proprelye to members simple, than
compounde, as Auerrois testifyeth. The other parts of the diffinition, yt is
to say, fresh or new, blody and without putrefactio^, ar put for a dyffere^ce
of ulcers, with putrefactio^ And we added (in soft parts) for a dyffere^ce of
breakynges or brusinges in hard members. wherefore Iohannitius says in the
diffinition of chyrurgerie, that chirurgerie is double, one works in soft
parts, the other in hard.

The kinds of solutio^ of continuitie, take their dyffere^ces of three things.
The first takes his dyfference of the nature of the membre in which it is, as
Galene testifyeth, saying, Some wounds are in se^blable parts, some in
isntrumental. Of those that are in semblable parts, some are in soft parts,
some in hard, some in mean. where as he said (in soft parts) he understood
in the flesh, and in the fat. And by hard parts he understood the bones
and the joints, and grystles, by the mean parts he understood the sinnowes,
ligamentes, arteries, and veins:

And of wounds that chance in isntrumental members, some are in the
principal members as in the heart the liver, the brain, some in me^bres seruyng
to the same, as trachea arteria, meri, the blader: Some in isntrumental
members not serving to ye principal members, as in the ears, the nose, the
eyes.

Causes of (...) solution of continuitie.
The causes of every solution of co^tinuitie (as Haliabas witnesses) are
things sensible, or insensible. Things insensible are these staves, swerdes,
stones. etc. Things sensible are the bytynges of serpents, or other venomous
beasts, or of men. etc.

Seeing that we have suffycyentlye spoken of the kinds, and causes of solution
of co^tinuitie in me^bres simple and co^pounde, it is convenient, that we
declare the deuysion of the said solution of continuitie.

Solution of continuitie is double, namely simple, and compound. The simple is
that, that is without loss of the substance of the part where it is. For the
cure whereof one only intention is required, that is to say unition or
conioynyng of the parts separated or sondred. Compounde is that, that is with
the loss of the substance of the part where it is. To whose cure there are
necessarily two things required. One is generation of the lost substance. The
other is to join the parts that been sondred, when the lost substance is
restored, by convenient medicines.

Likewise we say generally that every wound is compounde, Wounds compounde.
that has any thing joined unto it, without remotion, whereof the wound can
not be healed, as wounds caused by brusynge, which are apostemous, and be
with solution of continuitie: and therefore for their curatio^ you must not
proceed by the way of the first intention at the beginning, because of the
bruise. For Galene says, that every bruised wound must be putrifyed, A
digestyue (...) wounds.
and turned into quytture, or mattier.

For the curation of these wounds at the beginning, ye shall use a dygestiue.
For that swageth pain and seperateth ye matter altered through contusion or
brusynge from the hole parts. After the same manner, a wound that is altered
by the air, must be handled.

Furthermore, there are wounds co^pounde that been payneful, apostemous,
altered through the air, and all other in which any thing not natural is
conneyted, as a piece of iron, a piece of wode, or a stone, which can not be in
the wound without hurt thereof.

And of these flesshye wounds, some are superficial, some deep. The
superficial are easily healed, for they require only conuenyent byndinge. The
deep are either according to the length of the place, or according to the
breadth.

They that are made according to the length are more easelye cured, tha^ the
other, and be^ caused by cuttyng things, as swerdes. etc. Some by brusynge
things as by staves, stones. etc. Some by poynted things as by a darte: an
arowe, and like.

Furthermore solution of continuitie in the flesh (as the doctors say) may be
restored, by the way of the first intention, but that, that is in ye bone can
not be restored, Porus sarcoidis.
but by the way of the second intention, that is to say: per porum
sarcoidem. Nevertheless the bones of young children may be restored by the
way of the first intention, for two causes. First because of the tenderness
of ye bone. Secondly because of the virtue of seed remaining yet in the
members of young children.

Some doctors say that the sinnowes, the veins, and the arteries can not be
restored by the way of the first intention, but by the way of the second
intention, as bones be. Some say yt this is true only in arteries, which
thing Galene witnesses, saying: many have thought that it is impossyble,
that the substance of an artery should be consounded, and their probation
rested, in consyderation and experyence. The consyderation was, that one of the
skynnes of an artery, seems to be grystellye, for grystels and extremities of
bones ca^ not be consounded, neither receive incarnation.

The experience was, that they never saw an artery to have received
incarnation. Arteries may be consou^ded
But Galene reproves their opynion, saying: that arteries ben incarned both
by reason and experience. By experience, for we see, (says he) often the
arteries that been under the vein called basilica in the temples, and in the
legs to be consounded. By reason it may this be proved. The bones receive
not consolidation, because they be hard in an extreme degree. But the arteryes
being of a mean substance between a bone, and flesh, may receive incarnation
by the way of ye first intention.

But before we come to the universal curation of wounds, it is expedyent, The
first doctrine to be observed in curyng of wou^des.
that we declare certain doctrynes touching the cure of wounds. First when
ye begin to cure a deep wound, ye shall put your finger into it, to assay,
whether there be any part of the bone separated. If there be, you must draw
it out softlye, for otherwise you can never come to the true cure. Secondly, if
there chance great affluence of blood in the hurt place, incontinently you
shall stau^che the blood according to the doctrine written in a propre Chapitre
of the cure of the flux of blood. When blood ought to be stopped.
But if the blood be not in great abundaunce, ye shall not staunche it, which
thing is approved by Auicenne, saying: yt if the blood run not to abundantly
it is good to keep the wound from apostemyng, from oppilations, and fieuers.
wherefore we may conclude that blood coming in a small quantity ought not to
be restrained. But if it run abundauntly, ye shall stop it, for blood is the
treasure of life.

The third doctrine is, that the lyppes of a grene wound must be sewed
together incontinentlye, that they be not altered by the air. Also ye must take
good head that thycke and congeled blood remain not within the wound, for it
may cause pain, and putrefaction, and hyndre incartion.

The fourth is, that you must beware that no here nor unctuous thing nor dust
enter into the borders or lips of the wound. For these things let true
consolidation. Howbeit wha^ the wound is deep, it is very good to leave an
hole in the lower part of it, and to put into the same a tent rolled in a
digestive of yolks of eggs, and terebentine. It is profitable for two causes.
First to purge the moisture, and fylth coming out of the depth of the wound.
Secondly to appayse pain, and to keep the place from apostemation. For the
mattier that might cause an aposteme is purged by the said hole.

The fyft doctrine is, that after the unition of the sondred parts by a
co^uenyent seame, When the points of the seame must be removed.
the points of the said seame be taken away after the syxt day, although
Arzilata, commands to leave the^.x. days. For the flow remouynge of the
points causes many evil accidents, as fylth engendered within them, pain,
and apostemation. wherefore it is more co^uenyent to remove the^ ye third, the
fyfth, or at the leest the syxt day, and instead of them ye shall retain the
borders of the wound by the admynystration of a piece encolled, Enrolled what
it is read ye.vi. cha. of this book of wounds.
whereof we will speak in the chaptre of wou^des of the face.

But to come to the curation of flesshie wounds, we say that thereunto there
been four intentions required. The first is accomplyshed by ordinance of
life, or diete. The second by purgation of the body. The third by application
of sondrye remedies, upon the sore place. The fourth by defending accidents
that they come not, and by remouynge those that be come.

Concerning the first intention which is keeping of diete, Diete.
if the patient be choleryke, or sanguyne, it is necessary that he eat no
flesh, nor drink wine unto the fourth or seuenthe day. Also he must abstain
from meats that engendre great abundaunce of blood. But flegmatike and
mela^cholyke persons may eat flesh, and drink wine, namelye at the
beginning. wherefore these chirurgiens ye command a strayte diete to all
patientes, as though they had a contynuall fieuer, do evil and vnlernedly. For
wine given in due time to wounded men (as the Philosophers say) furthereth
much the generacyon of flesh in flesshye wounds. wherefore the excellent
doctor Arnolde de villa noua says that a spedye consolidation of a wound
chances not, but by pure blood without watrynesse.

wherefore in this case what thing is worse, than to defraude nature of blood,
by the means whereof that, Wine to a wounded.
that is lost is restored, and that, that is sondred is united and conjoined,
and the wound that is hollow is filled with flesh. Yea, we say with Galene
that wine is co^uenyent to any wounded man. For when it is dronken it
engenders good blood, and when it is laid upon ye wound it dries and
mundifyeth it, which things ben requisyte in this case. And it is as it were
the artifycer of nature. And therefore we say (whatsoever other think) that
the true cure of wounds consysteth in two things. First in him that quykneth,
and mortifyeth all things. Secondly in nature. And nature can not work
ryghtly without the noryshmente of of good blood, neither in great nor in
little wounds. wherefore we must conclude, that meats which engendre good
blood, may be given to wounded men, that nature may be able to engendre the
lost substance, for the consolidation of the wound. who is ygnoraunt that,
that medycine is not convenient nor restores flesh which dries humiditie
notably and gives moisture to dry places, cools superfluous heat, and
heateth cold parts?

Complexion is necessary to be known
wherefore it is necessary to know the complexion of bodies, and consydre
whether they ben tender, moist or dry. For it is expedyent to dry the wound
of a tender body, because of his humiditie. Desiccatiue or drying medicines ben
good concerning the disease, but not concerning the co^plection of the membre.
For hot me^bres require hot aids, moist, moist aids, as we have declared
before in the second book by the authority of Galene, saying, hot members
ask hot aids, cold, cold aids.

Te^dre bodies are moist.
Tender bodies ben moist, as the bodies of children, women, gelded men, and
flegmatyke persons. The bodies of laborers, Dry bodies.
and of the^ that journey on foot, are very dry. wherefore we must note both
ye quality of the body and of the hurted membre. For if the body be dry to
conserve his natural complexion, it is convenient to use dry things, but
not concerning the cure of a disease that chau^ceth in a dry body. But because
some me^bres ben dry, as bones, lacertes, chefely their tops, synnowes, and
grystles, therefore when they are hurted, the medicynes must be dryer tha^ in
moist members.

Likewise in moist members there needs not great exiccation. Galene was
content only to apply terebentine in the wounds of women, children, and
flegmatik persons as we will playnelye declare in the chaptre of wounds of
synnowes. Now it is euydent, the co^plection of icarnatiue medicines
that every medicyne incarnatyue of wounds must be desiccatiue, and must a
little excede the natural complexion of the membre, and the said desiccation
shall be greater or smaller according to the natural complexion of the
membre where the wound is. wherefore in what degree of dryness a medycine
incarnatiue of wounds should be, and how much it should surmounte the
natural dryness of the membre, I will declare when I shall entreat of
medycynes that engendre flesh.

It is not unprofitable to consydre whether your medicines been calefactyue, or
refrigeratyue, desiccatyue, or humectatyue, beyond the natural complexion of
the membre. which thing is known by the color of the wounds. how to know
the quality of the medicine.
If ye se the wound to be to much heated, ye may say that your medycyne was
to hot, and to dry. Contrary wise if the wound be to much cooled, you may
judge that the medicynes were to cold.

You must cole the wounds that been to hot, Colyng oyntmentes
and heat them that are to cold. These oyntmentes cool: vnguentum de tutia,
vngue^tu^ de cerussa decocte, vnguentu^ de cerussa made in a liquide form,
with the juice of plantayne, and nyghtshade, Heatyng oyntmentes.
vnguentu^ albu^ ca^phoratu^. The oyntmentes ye heat coled wou^des are these:
vngue^tu^ basilicu^, vngue^tu^ de resina pini, of which by the grace of god,
we will speak more largely in our a^tidotary.

The second intention which consists in the euacuation of the body is
accomplished by loosing of the belly, and flebotomie (ye common circu^stau^ces
co^sidred) and in the stead of flebotomie ye may use rubbi^ges, bindyng of ye
extreme parts, and ve^toses in the contrary side. And because the
complections of the body ben sondrye, the chirurgien must make ordinances
according to the nature and dyuersytie of the body for which ye shall resort
to the.ix. book to a propre chapter of purgation.

The third intention consysteth in the administration of local medicines. And
first when a chirurgien is called to heal a wound (the observation of the
foresaid doctrines presupposed) if the wound be deep he shall make a
convenient seame with a cered threede, ioynynge the borders or lyppes of the
wound together, and observing yt between two points there be but a finger
space.

Afterward the wound must be washed with wine and a decoction of Roses, A
poudre conseruynge the seame.
laiynge on this read poudre which conserueth the seame, and incarnethe the
lyppes of the wound.. of terra Sigillata of bole armenye. Ana.. vj. of
frankencense, mastyke, sarcocolle. Ana.. ij. and. ss. of myrre, Aloes. Ana.. j.
and. ss. of dragagantum brayed of sanguinis draconis. Ana.. j. of the flower of
barley, and beans. Ana.. ss. mengle them, and make a poudre. Also it is good
to apply at the beginning Terebentyne incorpored with the foresaid poudre.
For it conseruethe the seame. It must be applied so long till the points be
taken away.

Item it is profitable to wash the place every day with aqua vite, and to
sprynckle on this poudre following after the lotion. A poudre.
. of myrre.. iij. of Aloes Hepatyke.. iiij. of franckencense.. ij. mengle them
and make a poudre. Also a cerote of Minium written in the cha. of a broken
sculle is expedient in this case.

And forasmuch as we have said in this present chapter, that a tente put
in to the hole of the wound is good, after mundification, Mundificatiue.
ye shall apply the said tente rolled in this mundifycatiue following.. of
honey of Roses.. ij. of clear terebentine. iij. of the juice of smalage, and
plantayne. Ana.. ss. let them boil all together a little, and than add
thereunto of the flower of barley well cersed, of bean flower. Ana.. ss. of
saffran.. ss. of sarcocolle.. j. and. ss. and if ye put to this
mundifycatiue, of the foresaid read poudre.. ss. of good myrre.. j. and. ss.
it shall be a very good incarnatiue.

The fourth intention which is to remove the accidents, is accomplysshed as
it folowethe. Accidents of wounds.
The accidents which chance in this case are griefs, Apostemes, pain and
fieuers which must be looked to, for they hyndre the true cure. And Auicenne
sayethe that one of the best things that a man can do in a wound, is to
order it so, that no Apostemation chance in it.

Apostemation may be kept of, To let apostemation.
by byndynge of the extreme parts, by rubbynges, and by application of this
defensive.. of oil of Roses, Defensive.
of oil myrtine. Ana.. iij. of white wax. j. and. ss. of barley flower, of
bean flower Ana.. vj. of bolearmenie, of terra Sigillata. Ana.. ss. of all the
saunders, of sanguinis draconis. Ana.. ij. Melte ye wax with the oils at the
fire, and incorporate the rest.

Ye shall note moreover, that the things which take away pain and
apostematio^ of the wound, take away the fyeuer. For the fieuer is caused by
thyes two things. And the cause being removed, the effect is removed. To
take away the pain and also the Aposteme that will come to maturation or
resolution, ye shall use the remedies written in the chapter of the cure of
flegmon. Furthermore if superfluous flesh be engendered, ye shall resort to
the same chapter for the mundifycation thereof. This has been ever my manner
of curing. Whereby I have gotten wurshepe, and profytte. Thus we end. etc.

The second chapter of the flux of blood, and of the cure thereof.
IT is euydent after the doctrine of ancient writers, Of the flux of blood.
that blood flows out of the veins thorough two causes. The first issuynge
commethe by cause primytiue, the second by cause antecedent. The flux of
blood called Hemoragia proceeding thoroughe a cause antecedent, Hemoragia.
may chance three manner of ways. First by resudatio^ or swetynge out of
veins. Secondly by openyng of ye mouths of the same. Thyrdly by corruption of
the veins caused by some sharp, venomous, and bytyng matter. But because we
will treat only in this present chapy. of the flux of blood that chauncethe
in wounds and vlceres, we will declare the cure thereof as briefly as we
can.

First ye shall note that the flux of blood which chances in awounde, is
great, little, or mean. When it is little or mean, it is sone restrained. And
it is a sign that the veins ben not very great. If blood flow out of the
wound abundauntlye, and if ye perceive that the wound, is in a place of
great veins or Arteries, than incontinentlye with all diligence ye shall
remedy it. For (as the Philosophers say) blood is the treasure of life.

A sign that the blood issues out of an Artery, is this, Sign of arterial
blood.
the color is purple, and it commethe out by leapes. The blood that commethe
out of the veins is grosser, and redder than the blood of the Arteries, and
therefore leapeth not. Furthere it is to be noted, that if ye flux of blood
be with putrefaction of the wound and continuethe many days, than there is
danger of death, as we have seen in little fluxes of blood in the hands,
fete, or arms. And Auicenne says that yoxyng, the cra^pe, and perturbation of
rayson follows this flux of blood.

As touching the blood flux of the inner members, as of the liver, the
lunges, the reins and the blader, we will not treat of them in this present
chapter, but hereafter particulerly.

The curation of the flux of blood has a double intentyon, namelye a
particular, and universal. The intention universal is accomplisshed by
purgation of the body, and regiment of life which may engrosse blood. And
more over by rubbynges, The cure of Hemoragia.
and dyuersions in the contrary side. The patyente in this case shall eat
Lentiles, Rise, Quynces, Layctuce, Purcelayne, breyfely all stiptyke fruits as
aygre Pomegranades. etce. For his drink, he shall use cold water with a
iuleb of Vyolettes and Roses, which in this case is very good. For it
engrosseth blood, and alters humors and quenches thirst. Also water of
simple barley, is not to be discommended. The body is dewly emptied in this
case, by flebotomie in the contrary side, having a little orifyce or mouth,
and made by a diametre, as from the ryghthande to the lift.

Phlebotomie
But if the wound be in the lift side of the head ye shall cut a vein of
the foot in the same side. And if it be in the right side, ye shall cut a
vein in the right foot, after the sentence of Galene, and Hypocrates.

Item this digestive is sovereign to alterre, Digestive.
and engrosse blood.. of syrup of vyolettes,. j. of syrup of roses.. ss. of
the water of violettes, sorell, and purcelane. Ana.. j. mengle them. Moreover
co^serua of roses and vyolettes may be conveniently permytted.

Dyuersyo^s by rubbynges, and ve^tosations, without scarification, and some
time with scarification, must be practysed in the contrary side. And
incontinently plonge those contrary parts in hot water, and weete the sore
membre with water, and vynegre.

Likewise it is good to lay a ventose upon the liver without scarifycation. It
is profitable also to lay upon the stones the white of an egg, Rose water and
vynegre, with a cloute, so that it be actually cold.

The particular intention of hemoragia of wou^des and ulcers, is acco^plyshed
by the administration of sondrye locale medicynes, according to the sondrye
intentio^s required in this case. Co^sideratio^s in hemoragia
First you must consydre whether the wound, out of which the blood
runs, be with putrefactio^. or without putrefactio^. And if ye wound be deep,
without putrefaction, and loss of substance, than it is expedient to sewe the
wou^d depely, that the sides may be joined together, provided ever that no
congeled blood remain within the wound.

Aterwarde immediately ye shall lay this poudre upon it, with the white of an
egg.. of the flower of beans, and lentyles, and of mylle dust. Ana.. iij. of
Sanguinis draconis, of frankencense. Ana.. ij. and. Powder.
ss. of Myrrh, of Aloes. Ana.. ij. of terra sigillata, of bole armenie, of
gypsum. Ana.. j. and. ss. of hares hear cut in as small pieces as may be..
vj. of a cobwebbe cut in pieces.. iiij. of spong of ye see somewhat dried at
the fire or burnt, and brayed.. iij. and ss. of coralles, of all the saunders.
ana.. j. and. ss. of the juice of the herb called lingua passerina or knot
grass, of the juice of conferie. Ana.. v. of dragagantum braied.. iij. the
whytes of two new laid Eggs. Note that to the said whytes of Eggs it is
sufficient to put of the fore rehearsed poudre.. j. of burnt cotton.. x.

The manner of appliyng this poudre is this. You must mengle the said poudre
with the white of an Egg, and put thereof within, and without the wound.
After this ye shall fylle the wound with lyntes, and stowpes or towe dypped in
water and vinegre, than let the wound be bound, with a convenient manner of
byndynge and boulsters, which thing is requisite in this case.

Furtheremore it is a synguler remedy to lay the said poudre so prepared,
upon the mouth of the vein, with the top of the finger holdyng it a good
space upon the vein, and pressynge it down by little, and little, so that the
patie^t be not payned there with, and incontenently afterward let it be
bound as we have showed before. For this thing is profitable for two
purposes. First it kepethe the blood from runnynge. Secondelye it causethe
the blood that flowethe out of the vein to congele upon the mouth of the
same by reason whereof it stoppethe the way of blood, cheyfely when the
veins ben small.

Furtheremore sometimes it is necessary to cut the veins, and ye Arteries,
yt their orifices or mouths may be in the depthe of the membre, and covered
with flesh, and by this mean it is restrained, without the mother of blood.

The manner of byndyng a vein.
Sometimes also it is necessary to tie the vein, and cheyfely the arterye. For
when it is tied the place is sone incarned. The manner to tie it is as it
follows. You must put a nedle under the vein with a cered threede and
draw it together softly, or else ye shall bind the vein above, and tie the
mouth with a threde.

Item in this case, it is a present remedy to apply an actual cauterye upon
the place, if it be possible without touching the synnowes. But if the
bleedynge be with putrefaction, than it is necessary to apply such medicines
as have mordication or bytynge, and which may take away evil, and
superfluous flesh with some incarnation, as this ordinance. A remedy for
hemoragia coming of corruption.
. of aloes hepatyke, of myrrh. Ana.. ij. of franckencense, sarcocolle,
dragagantum, mumye, terra sigillata. Ana.. j. and. ss. of gypsum.. j. of poudre
precipitate.. x. mengle them with the white of an Egg. It worcketh as much as
vnguentum Egyptiacum without pain. The manner of appliynge this remedy is,
to put a long tente in the wound, until it touch the orifice of the
vein, rolled in the said poudre mengled with the white of an Egg. For if ye
should use in this case a mundifycatiue and incarnatiue having great
mordication or bytynge, you should hurt the patiente more than profit him.
For it would draw mattyer to the place which should hyndre the restraynte of
blood.

And the foresaid remedy may be called a medicyne of a noble and excellent
operation, which incarnethe the place, mundifyethe, and staunchethe the flux
of blood, likewise this poudre following, which restrayneth the bledyng of a
wound that is with putrefactyon. Poudre.
. of the foresaid poudre called precipitate.. ij. of Trocisque of Minium.. j.
of franckencense, of Aloes. Ana.. ss. of bole armenye, of terra sigillata.
ana.. j. Ye shall use this poudre as ye fore said, which is of great
effycacitie in this case.

Two or three days after the administration of this Medicyne, you may apply
things incarnatyue, as the remedies written in this present Chapter. Item to
the same intentyon.. of vitriole rubifyed or made read.. ij. of frankencense,
mastyke, Poudre.
Aloes, Sarcocolle. Ana.. j. of precipitate.. vj. mengle them, and use them, as
is aforesaid.

It is right good in this case, howebeit it has some mordicatyon by reason of
the vitriole yea and his Eschare fallethe more slowly, which thing profyteth
much.

Moreover we have proved the applicatyon of a sponge somewhat burnte in the
form of a tente until it touch the orifyce of the vein.

If it chance that the flux of blood can not be restrained by the
foresaid remedies, it is necessary to apply an hot iron upon the vein,
making a deep eschare, or in the stead of the said canterye to put upon the
orifyce of the vein a Trocisque of Minium in the form of a tente. And it is
the most sovereign remedy that can be found.

Note that in the time of the administratyon, of this corrosiue medicyne,
because of the pain of the place, ye must apply things that swage pain, as
this liniment.. of the flower of lentiles, Oyntement.
beans and barley. Ana.li. ss. make a solyde plaster at the fire with the
decoction of Holyhocke and a little lie, adding of oil of Roses Omphacine, of
oil Myrtine. Ana.. ij. of Saffran.. j. Or else make it after this manner.. of
oil myrtine, of oil of roses. Ana.. ij. of white wax.. j. and. ss. of
saffran.. j. of all the saunders.. j. and. ss. make a liniment at the fire.

Plaster.
Item to the same intention this description following is profitable.. of sweet
and aegre Pomegranates, in nombre. ij. of roses, lentiles. Ana. m^. ss. Sees
them all with lie and water, than stamp them, and strain them, and add to
the straynynge of the flower of beans, and lentiles. Ana.. ij. let them
boil again, till they comme to thycknes, and put to of Oil of roses, of
oil myrtyne. Ana.. j.

For the same purpose a plaster of flower after the form following is not to
be disalowed.. of beanefloure, of the flower of orobus, of the flower of
lentiles, Ana.li. ss. make a styffe plaster at the fire, with a sufficient
quantity of lie, and of syrup of roses with a little vinegre. Thus we end
this present chapter.

The third chapy. of the wounds of the head as well by cuttynge as by brusyng
unto ye end called Almocatim.
Of the wou^d of the head.
THe head is often hurt by cuttynge things and brusyng, the cure whereof we
will declare as breifely, as we can. The wounds of the head caused by
cuttynge or brusynge unto the pannycle called pericraneu^, are cured as other
wondes, that is to say by the administration of things desiccatiue or driyng.
Wherefore it is good to use aqua vite, and the poudre made of one part of
Aloes Hepatyke, and the other of myrrh addyng a little fra^kensens. Moreover a
cerot of betonie, and of minium written in the next chap. is to be allowed.

Note that if the wound be large, and the incarnation doubtefull, and the
skin eleuate or lyfted up, than ye must sewe together the sondred parts,
leaving in the lower part of the said wound a convenient orifyce or hole,
to purge the blood, and quytture which is in the botome of the wound.

For the other intentions namelye for digestion, mundification, incarnation,
and sigillation, ye shall proceed with the remedies written in the next
chapter of the breakyng of the sculle.

But if the wound be caused by brusyng, The cure of a wound of brusynge.
ye shall in no wise use a desiccatiue medicyne, for a wound caused by brusynge
comes necessarely to matture and corruption. Wherefore at the beginning you
must apply things digestive, as a digestive of Terebentine with a yolke of an
Egg, and a little Saffran. And if the body be Cholerycke ye shall apply a
digestive of oil of roses with the yolks of Eggs, and after digestion it is
convenient that you mundifye the place with this mundificatiue. Mundifycatiue.
. of clear terebentine.. ij. of honey of Roses.. j. of the juice of smalage..
ss. let them boil all together a little while, and put to the yolke of an
Egg, of barley flower well cersed.. ss. of Saffran a little. And if ye did
add to the said things of myrrh.. ij. and as much of aloes hepatyke, and a
little sarcocolle, it would be a good incarnatiue for the said wound. Also for
incarnation and sygillation, ye shall use the oyntmente of Minium written in
the chapter of the breaking of the sculle. Thus we end. etc.

The.iiij. chapter of the breaking of the sculle, and cure of the same.
Oftentimes by a fall, or by some stroke the scull, Breakyng of the sculle.
or brain pa^ne is broken in sondrie sorts. For somtymes the breaking is
little so that it seems a rieft or think like an here, and this breach is
caused by a fall, or strype of some brusyng thing. It chau^ceth also, yt in
this manner of brusyng ye bone is broken, with depressyo^ of ye bone of the first,
and second table so that there comes out of the inner table certain little
pieces which do prycke the ryme called dura matter. Accidents.
Which prickyng has evil accidents following as apoplexia, vertigo, and
great astonisshement of the members, and sometime loss of speech with many
other evil accidents, which few escape, except they ben succored with
handie work, and the bone taken away that hurtethe the said pannicle.

Likewise the bone of the head is broken by cuttynge things as swerdes. etce.
and by poynted things as by a darte. etc. Here you shall note, that sometimes
it chauncethe that the sculle is broken by a bruise, and not the skin, and
that in ripe age. Certes in children of two or three years of age we have seen
the bone bowed with ye skin, as a vessel of thynne brass is easily thruste
in with a man's finger, howbeit in the cyrcuite of the bruise in the ouerparte,
we have seen some crack, whereof we will make a peculier chapter.

Furtheremore we have seen the inner table of the sculle to be opened by the
way of contusyon or brusyng, as by a gonne, and yet the first table was hole.
And thus we may conclude that the inner table of the sculle may be broken,
and opened without breaking of the outward.

The breakinge of the sculle is known by vomitynge, Signs of breaking of the
sculle.
which happenethe incontinentlye after the stroke, and the patient thinks
that he sees many candelles, and is deesie in the head, and often fallethe
down. When thies accidents happen at the beginning of a wound in the head,
they prove plainly that the sculle is broken.

The later doctors assygne many accidents in the breaking of the sculle,
cheyfely Guido and Arzelata, which deceive the Chirurgiens oftentimes. The
said doctors allege ix. tokens, namely that the patyente can not see light,
that he can not break the knotte of a straw between his teethe, also that
he can not abide the pluckyng of a knottie chorde from between his teethe,
and other things which we for cause of breuiete passover. The former
accidents assygned by ancient doctors chance all, or most part of them in
a notable breaking of the sculle the first day, whereof great quantity of
blood fell upon the ryme called dura matter.

And if the said breaking of the sculle be with the hurt of the pannicles of
the brain, and of the substance of the same, the foresaid accide^tes, namely
apoplexia, scotoma, vertigo, and astonyshment of members with a continual
fyeuer and cold, chance infallybly, yea and blood also yssueth out of the
nose and ears. And when the stroke is great it seems yt the substance of the
brain comes out of the wound.

Note also that (as Cornelius Celsus says) the foresaid accidents happen
sometime in wou^des of ye head though the sculle be not broken. For when some
vein is cut, and by some co^myssure there enters a certain quantity of
blood up on dura matter, and co^geleth, and corrupts so that it brings the
said accidents with great pain, and causes the patie^t to dye. But this later
case happens not often. We have seen the said accide^tes to happen in the
first days, and somtymes a good while after the breakinge of the sculle, and
that when ye blood that is fallen upon dura matter comes to putrefaction
which thing is true, when the blood is in little quantity, and when the breach
was but little. Nevertheless (as we said before) when the breach is great, the
foresaid signs either all or part happen the first days, at the lest within
seven days, in the summer, or ten in the winter.

A little breach.
But if ye breach be little namely after the bygnes of an here, and but very
little blood descends upon dura matter, we say that the said accidents, and
signs written by Guydo and Petre de Arzilata, happen not. It follows then
that the sculle may be broken, and yet the said accide^tes chance not at the
beginning, but a good while after the stroke they will appear. And we have seen
yt these accidents have chanced slowly, by little and little, so that vnexperte
chirurgiens have thought, that those accide^tes proceeded of some other cause
then of the wound. How to know the brekyng of the sculle.
wherefore yt ye may have knowledge of every breach how little so ever it be, as
Auicenne, and Cornelius Celsus say, you must consider the stryker, and the
thing wherwyth he stroke. And also whether the stroke came from afar, or
nyghe, or from above, or whether it was done by anger, by a cuttyng thing,
brusynge, or poynted, or whether he that stroke were not holden of them that
stood by, whether ye man that was stricken was bare headed, or covered, by such
discrete inquisition ye may have knowledge of the breach. wherefore if a man be
grievously strycke^ and some of the said signs follow, though the chyncke or
ryft be not found in that place, where the skin is rased away, ye shall
co^sydre whether there be any swellyng, or softnes in some other place, and open
it, if perchance the cut bone may be found.

For if the broken bone be not eased, it causes grievous apostematio^s which
afterward can not be cured with out greater pain of the patient, then he
should have had at the first.

And ye said doctor affyrmeth that some times the wound is in one side and
the breach in an other. wherefore in every stroke, in which breaking of ye
sculle is feared, it is a most sure way to open the place largely. For ye
skin is sone healed again.

The same doctor says moreover, that for the searching out of a privy
chyncke or ryft it is convenient to lay black ynke upon the skulle, and then
to take it away with a convenient instrument. For the ynke enters into the
clefte or chyncke, and there remains black. Dinus also says that when ye
have laid yncke upon the bone, ye must not cease to remove it, until no
appearaunce remain of the same. Seeing that we have declared the signs and
the accidents of a broken sculle, it rests that we declare the cure thereof
by ha^dy operation as briefly as we can

The cure of a broken sculle may be Cure.
accomplished two manner of ways, namely by the way of incision or elevation
of the bone, and by the way of exiccation, and incarnation. First to come to
handye operation, we say that when a chirurgien is called for the cure of a
broken sculle, there is no surer operation, the^ to enlarge the wound with a
sharp raser. Make incisio^ crossewyse, or three corner wise, until ye may se
the broken bone plainly. And in ye time of incision, ye shall separate with
your nails the pannicle called pericraneu^ that the said pannicle be not hurt
by touching, and rubbing of the instruments of iron. For ye rubbing of the
said pa^nicle (as Cornelius Celsus witnesses) causes great pains,
inflammations and fieuers.

After this incision (the here being first clypped of) the chirurgien must
lay upon the bone lyntes, dypped in warm wine, somewhat pressed or wrong.
And let the concauitie or hollow place of the wound be filled with tents, and
bolsters of hurdes of flax dypped in the white of an egg. If it chance that
great quantity of blood issue out, then it is convenient to put to the
white of the egg some of our poudre that restrayneth blood, with the heeres
of an hare small cut, putting the said lynte in the corners of the wound,
so that the next day, after the remouynge of the first medicine, the lyppes
or borders of ye wound be found reflected or bowed back to the outward
part. Which done, if the crack perce unto ye inward part, it is necessary
to raze or scrape upon ye bone, and to pluck up the same unto dura matter,
workyng first with great raspatories, and so to come successively to little
ones, so that diligente head be taken that the commyssures be not touched. For
through scrapynge and raspynge, the panicle called dura matter might be caused
to fall upon ye brain

After that ye bone is removed with raspatories, and other convenient
instruments unto the second table, the^ ye must remove the same with an
instrumente of silver or iron, conynglye made. Then remove all roughe and
sharp pieces of bones with instruments called lenticula and ranula, which
might hurt pia matter. This done, take a little piece of sylke named syndall,
smothe or fine, and odiferous, cut after ye manner of a rosemary lefe, or in
the stead of syndall ye may take a piece of fair smothe lynnen, and moysten
it in oil of roses Omphacine being actually hot, and put it between dura
matter, and the bone with a prouette of silver, and again put of the said
syndall weted in the oil until the bare bone be covered. And after that fylle
the wound with lynte dypped in a digestive made with yolks of eggs and the
oil of roses omphacine, and a little saffran, laynge on a large piece, dipped
in ye said digestive.

Note that after the second day of the elevation or remouynge of the bone, in
the stead of the said digestive, we have found this oyntemnt following to be
of a merueylous operation in digestynge, mundifyeng, and swaging grief, when
lintes are rolled in it, and so applied. Vnguentum basilicum capitale.
And it is called vnguentum Basilicun capitale, which is of our description..
of oil of roses.. vi of oil of mastyke.. ij. calves suet, swynes grese, ana..
iiij. ye leaves of pla^tain woodbynd, betonie, pimpernel, mouse ear, of the
flowers of rosemarye, Philozel.
of every one. m^. ss. brose them altogether and let the^ boil with a cyathe of
odoriferous wine until ye wine be consumed, then strain the^, and add there
unto, of mastyke, of gum elemy, of the rasine of a pyne tree. ana.. i. of
lytarge of gold, and silver. ana.. ij. of minium.. x. Let them boil again at
the fire and stir the^ about until they ben black of color, then put to of
clear terebentyne.. iiij. of white wax as much as shall suffyce, make a
soft cerote. This oyntmente is pryncipal and above all other oyntmentes in
this case.

To this intention also vnguentum de minio ordained about the end of this
chapter is expedient. Moreover it is good to apply a defensive about the
wound, which is made of oil of roses, of bolearmenie, and a little whyt wax.
Note that it is convenient to proceed with ye foresaid things, as long as you
shall be sure of non apostematio^ For in this case, because of humors boylynge
out thorough the touching of iron instruments, there chances often an
aposteme in the wound. wherefore it is not good to use medicines attractiue,
and cerotes though some of the ancient, and later doctors be of a contrary
opinion.

For Auice^ne says thus, when thou have rubbed the place, administer ye
capital poudre, and it suffyseth. Nevertheless, Dinus a man of great authorite
in the art of chirurgerie, expounynge the text of Auice^ne, says that ye
poudre must not be administered, but after that the danger of apostemation is
passed. In this cure it is expedient to have seen ye workyng of cu^nyng
chirurgie^s.

After that you have used the forsaid remedies, four days after the elevation
of the bone, ye shall use these remedies following. First ye shall apply upon
dura matter the mundifycatiue yt follows, which is gentle, and swageth grief.
The manner of applyenge of it, is none other wise, mu^dificatiue.
then we have said of a syndal dipped in wine.. of clear terebentyne.. i. of
oil of roses omphacine.. ss. of honey of roses strayned.. iij. of saffran.. i.
of fine grain.. i. of odoriferous wine.. iiij. Let them boil altogether until
the wine be consumed, then add of the sede of saint John's wurte.. ij. Let them
boil again one boylynge, and strain them. In ye same case ye may use honey of
roses strained. And to work more surely, with honey of roses, it is better to
proceed with this lyquor following.. of syrup of roses by infusion.. x. of ye
flowers, and leaves of saint John's wurte, of ye flowers of rosemarie, of fine
grain, of every one a little, of terebe^tine.. iiij. of odoriferous wine.. ij.
let them boil altogether, until the wine be consumed, and then strain them.

Here you shall note, that after that the bone is removed with raspatories, and
that some blood is found upon dura matter, altered or enclynynge to
putrefaction, so yt the hurt of the same is to be doubted, then ye shall lay
upon the said pannicle honey of roses with a little oil Omphacine, chiefly when
ye said alteration is but small. For if the pannicle be full of corruption, and
matture, then you must only apply honye of roses, and afterward the cerote
vnderwrytten, which is of excellent operation, to draw matter from the inner
parts to ye outward, and moreover to mundifye and incarne, with confortation of
the place.. of betonie, woodbynde, saint John's wurt, milfoile, mouse ear. ana
m^. ij. of rosemary, sage, A cerote.
ce^torie the greater, and ye less, pimpernel, verueyne, arsmarte. ana. m^.
ss. of consolida the less. m^. i. ss. of clear terebe^tyne.li. iij. of oil
of roses odoriferous made of ripe grapes.li. i. and. ss. of mastyke.. iij. of
rasine of the pynetre, of gu^me elimi.. iiij. The manner to make it is this. You
must cut the foresaid herbs small, and then stamp them in a mortar, and
incorporate the^ with the other foresaid things melted upon the fire, styrryng
the^ ever about, and adding three pound of good odoriferous wine. And after
yt the wine is put into the vessel with the said things, they must boil
again a little. The^ set altogether a sonnyng, in some vessel yt space of seven
days, styrryng it every day a little. And after the eight days you must set
ye foresaid things upon ye fire again, and boil them until the wine be
consumed, the^ strain them through a thycke clouth with strong pressynge, and
set them on the fire again, and adding a sufficient quantity of white wax
make a cerote in a good form. And when you will use it, you shall malaxe or
softe^ it with gotes milk, or cowes milk, and with the juice of the forsayde
herbs, and last of al with aqua vite.

After that you have used these things the space of fouretene days, it is
profitable to apply stouppes dypped in this decoction following.. of red wine. Decoction.
li. iij. of roses, of myrtilles, of wurmwoode. ana. m^. i. of the flowers of
pomegranades called balaustie. m^. ss. of squina^tu^ a little, of the nuttes of
cypres, in no^bre.xij. of rosemarie, of saint John's wurte, of madder, of fine
grain, ana. m^. ss. of honey.. ij. let things yt are to be brayed, be braied
grossly, the^ boil them unto ye co^su^ptio^ of ye third part, and strain
them. This decoction must be applied actually hot after the manner aforesaid.

Note this, that a piece of syndall must be put between the sculle and dura
matter (as it is said before) after ye day that ye bone is removed, until ye
blood or quytture, which was under ye bone, be clearly mu^difyed, and until
ye said pa^nicle be incarned with ye sculle. The application of a syndall
between the sculle, The cause of application of the syndall.
and dura matter is profitable for two things. First for purgation of blood,
and quytture, which was under ye bone, and that easily, depressyng dura matter
from the bone, without any hurt of the same. Secondly, it keeps ye ryme dura
matter that it be not hurt through the roughnes of ye bone, when the said ryme
moves and makes pulsation, or beatynge.

After that the fouretene days been passed, Incarnatiue
ye shall fill the wound with this incarnatiue, for sufficient incarnation of
the ryme dura matter with the sculle. of clear terebentyne.. ij. of honey of
roses.. i. of odoriferous wine.. iij. of saint John's wurt, of betonie, of
pimpernel, of centauree ye greater. ana. m^. ss. stamp the foresaid herbs,
and me^gle them al together, and boil them unto ye wine be consumed, then
strain them through a thycke cloth, and add to the straynyng again of clear
terebentin. ss. of honey of roses.. iij. of myrrh.. ij. of sarcocolle, of aloes
hepatike. ana.. i. of saffran.. i. of sersed barley flower.. ij and. ss. If it
chance that in the wound superfluous flesh be engendered, as we have seen in
many, then ye shall lay upon it vngue^tu^ mixtu^, or roche alume burnt, or our
poudre of mercury. And if any unctuous flesh be engendered upon dura matter,
the application of ye poudre of hermodactyles, is a sure remedy among al
other. And a spo^ge somewhat burnt has the same effect.

After incarnation let the place be sealed up, with vngue^tu^ de minio, A
poudre sicar^izatine.
which is written in the end of this present chapitre, putting this poudre
following into the wound.. of bole armenie.. ss. of roche alume burnte.. ij.
of the flowers of pomegranades called balaustie, of mirtilles, of myrobalanes
citrine. ana.. i. and. ss. Likewise to this inte^tion, it is convenient to
wash the wound with red wine, in which roses, mirtilles, flowers of
pomegranades, and a little alume have been boiled. we have ever used these
foresaid remedies with our own honor, and profit of the patientes. Ancient
doctors have declared ye form of sundry instruments of iron, as trepanes,
ha^mers, molinels. etc. which are perilous. But it is our custom to describe
those means of healynge patie^tes, that been lest dangerous. Auice^ne also
says that many have reproved ye use of trepanes and other instruments of
iron.

Seeing now that we have declared the cure of a broken sculle, as well by
handye operation, as by local medicines, we will speak hereafter of things
concerning dyete, and convenient purgation to defend apostemation, and
sondrye accidents, with other observations which must be kept in the
procedynge of handy operation. The dyete of a wound with a crack in ye sculle
must be slendre. Diete.
The patie^t shall eat grated bread sodden in water with almandes, and a little
suggre. And if the patient be weak, he may eat of the brothe of a chycken
altered with barley, he may also have a potage made with wheat flower or grated
bread. Further more it is good yt the patient eat after meat a confection of
quinces, that vapors ascend not into the brain.

Likewise when the patie^t is weak, at the beginning he must abstain from
drinking of wine, and he must drink water of barley with suggre, or with a iuleb
of violets, chiefly when he has a fieuer, and if he be very weak, ye may give
him wine of pomegranades. After that eleue^ days ben passed ye may give the
patient a chycken to eat, and to drink wine moderatly delayed. And after
fourtene days ye may ordeyne his dyete somewhat grosser, yt the incarnation
of dura matter with the sculle, may come to pass more easily. The^ ye may give
him the extreme parts and inwardes of beasts of good nouryshment, as the
trypes of an heyfare, the head and the fete of the same. Also he may eat
rise, sodden in ye foresaid brothe of laudable flesh. How be it he must not
eat to saturitie or fulness, for there is nothing wurse in this disease the^
the superfluity of meats, and drynkes. Causes of Apost^mation of dura matter.
Wherefore Auicenne says, that an aposteme of dura matter comes through five
causes, namely by multitude of wine and meats, by the air, (wherefore he
says, beware of cold even in the summer) by aggrauation of tents, or other
things put in to the wound, or by the bone, which is sharp and roughe, and
hurts the ryme called dura matter, and by some pryuie cause.

When the cause of the aposteme is manifest, then cure the aposteme with his
contrary. If the cause be hyd, study in the remouinge of it to search out the
secret cause, as if it came of drinkyng wine, you must forbid wine to ye
patient: If it came of to much eating of fumous meats, ye shall forbydde the
same, and cause him to keep a slender dyete. If a pryckyng sharp bone stand
out, ye shall labor to remove it. And if it proceed by aggrauation of tents,
you must take them away and also the medecynes, that aggreue the said
pannicle. If the cold air be the cause of the apostemation, the patient must
be kept in a warm chamber, and you must often lay upon the head of the
patient hot cloutes.

To take away the aposteme of dura matter, Playstes.
it is very expedient to apply this plaster.. of the roots of holyhocke.li.
ss. of camomill, melilote. ana. m^. i. of roses. m^. ss. Let them boil al
together with a fufficie^t quantity of water unto the consumption of half,
and make a styffe plaster in the decoction with barley flower well cersed,
adding of oil of roses complere.. ij. and. ss. of oil of camomill.. i. and.
ss. of saffran. i. the yolks of two eggs, which must be put in, after that
the forsayde things be taken from the fire. This plaster is resolutiue, and
swageth pain, and is not contrary to maturation, if nature will that the
aposteme come to suppuration.

Note that dura matter is sometimes hurt,
wounded, and rent by some piece of the sculle, for the consolidation whereof,
ye may conveniently lay on this poudre.. of colofonia.. iij. of myrrh,
Poudre.
aloes, mastyke, of every one.. i. of saffran, of sarcocoll, of every one..
ss. mengle them together and bring them to a poudre. The air of the patientes
chamber must be hot in all times, chiefllye in winter, so that the wind come
not in. wherefore let ye chamber be kept dark, unto ye one and twentye day.

Note that ye may conuenientlye hold over the head a brazen vessel full of
coals, yt the reuerberatio^ of the heat may touch the wound, chieflye in
the first days. we will speak somewhat to keep of the aposteme of dura matter,
and a spasme. For the prohibition of these two things is very profitable in
this case.

The apostemation is defended by drawyng of the matter from one place to
another, which thing is done by a diuersiue flebotomie of the vein called
cephalica. Item by rubbynges of the extreme parts, and bynding of the same,
and by application of ventoses with scarifycation, always the age, and the
strength of the patient considered You must keep the bellye soluble or loose
by suppositories, or clysters.

And for the prohibition of a spasme ye shall rub often the nuke or marye of
the backebone with oil of camomil, and of dille with he^nes grese, layenge
often upon the neck hot cloutes. Likewise the patient ought to have a cappe
furred with lambs skynnes. Pronostication.
For it defends outward cold.

Touching pronosticacion, you may judge of death or life after the quality
of the quytture, which comes out of the wound, and by the accidents, and
not by the poulses or vryne. For they that lose their speech, and whose wounds
become dry, and the borders thereof fall down with some of their mouths, and
swellyng of their eyes, these I say are wont to dye. Likewise when the
patiente abhors meat, and is vexed with cold, and has the palsye and spasme,
it is a sign of death.

Note that, (as Paul says) if the blacknes that chau^ceth in the ryme dura
matter, be not removed by the application of honye of roses, it sygnifyeth utter
consumption of natural heat. This black color is caused sometimes at the
beginning, with blood retained upon the pannicle, dura matter, and some time
by a bruise of it, and also by the dyenge or colourynge of medicines applied
upon the said place. And when this black color procedethe of the three
causes last named, it is not so dangerous, as when it procedethe of
putrefaction.

The signs which sygnifye health in this case, been these, Signs of health.
good digestion of the borders of the wound, good color of the sculle, as
white without to much dryenes, and with some moisture, likewise when the
patient abhors not meats, and drynkes. And when the flesh that grows
between the bone, and dura matter is of red color. Ite^ when ye patie^t has no
fever after ye.xiiij. day, but is of good courage.

Furthermore, before ye come to handye operation, ye shall note the observations
following, Observation
which are declared by sundry auctours. The first is, that you must admonysh
the patie^tes friends of ye danger, that you may escape an euel name, if ye
patie^t chance to dye. The second is, that if the patient be weak, you shall
not take cure of him as Galene by the authority of Hipocrates sayethe: where
feblenesse is, there you shall not meddle.

The third is to avoid the touching of the commissures. For if you touch
them, you may cause the ryme Dura matter to fall upon the brain. For it is
sustained thereby.

The fourth is, that if it be possible, you work not in the time of the full
of the moon. For the brain increases at that time, and approaches to the
sculle. The fyft is, the remouinge of the bone. For the bone must be taken
away from the lower place, if there be no let. For when the bone is taken
away, toward the lower part, the mattier is the more easelye purged. The
syxte is, that you must note the quantity of the elevation of ye bone, which
is declared by Galene and Paul, which doctors say that the bone must not be
taken away after the quantity and length of the crack, when it is great, but
it suffyceth only to eleuate the bone in the lowest part of the crack. But
if the bone be depressed, or diminisshed, it is neadefull to take away the
bone all together. The seventh is, that if you assaye to pluck away the bone,
and it will not come out, you must rub the said bone with oil of roses,
that it may the more easily, and with less pain be drawn out.

The eight is, that with all speed, you come to handye operation, chefelye when
there is pryckynge, or depressyon of the pannycles. For they cause
apostemation, and evil accidents. The nynth is, that in summer the handye
operation be fynysshed within seven days, and ten in the winter: for the sooner
the better, for the auoydaunce of accidents.

And Auicenne says, that when there is necessity of rubbing, cutting or
drawing out some part of the bone, or to take them up when prycking pieces be
fallen upon dura matter, than you must make haste without lokynge for the
parfyte generacyon of quytture. But if the said pannicle be not hurt, you may
look for the generacyon of quytture.

Seeing yt we have declared the curatio^ of a broken sculle by handy operation,
it is convenient that we speak somewhat of the same by the way of exiccation,
and incarnation, which is touched of Auicenne in the Chap. de incisione cutis
capitis, and likewise of Celsus about the myddest of the Chapitre of the cure
of the sculle. Nevertheless, Auicenne in ye alleged place, after the opinion
of some ancient writers, understands, that desiccatiue medicines must be
applied after the elevation of the bone, and not digestiues, and mittigatiues
of pain, as he commands in a peculier cha. of the fracture or breakyng of
the sculle. And it is no merueyl, for the bones and the pannicles are of dry
complexion.

And Cornelius Celsus says, ye au^cie^t doctors healed more by ye way of
exiccation, and incarnation, than by the way of incision and elevation of the
bone.

To come to the foresaid way of curation of the breach of the scul
(observation of diete as we have taught in this present Cha. and rubbing of
the extreme parts. etc. presupposed) at the beginning ye shall fyl ye wou^d
with this water following, and afterward ye shall lay on the poudre following,
and cover the said wou^d with a playstre of minium, or in the stead thereof our
cerote of betonie. The description of the water is this. The description of the
water.
. of aqua vite.. x. of myrrh.. i. of aloes.. ii. of saffra^.. i. of
sarcocolle, of

It rests, that we speak of ye cure of the co^tusion, or brusyng of the
heedes of children, with depression of ye sculle, without breakyng of the
second table, or hurt of the skyn. For ye bone of the first table is sometimes
cracked without the brech of ye second table.

In the cure hereof three intentions been required. The first consysteth in
ordinance of diete. The second is to preserve the bruised place from
apostemation. The third is, to resolve the mattier, and to reduce the
depressed bone to his propre place.

Diete.
The first is thus accomplysshed. You shall give the patient grated breed made
with the broth of a chyckyn to eat. His drink shall be ye wine of sweet
granades delayed with water, and a little sugre. If the patient be weak, the
chirurgien shall give him at the beginning chyckins and wine moderately
delayed. For if natural strength fail, there can be no curation.

The second intention is acco^plysshed, by rubbyng of the extreme parts,
Plaster
and by the administration of this composition following.. of oil of roses, of
oil of myrte, and camomyl ana.. ii. the white, and yolks of two eggs. Shake
them al together, and let them boil together a little, with the flower of barley
and beans, and a few myrtilles, and make it after the manner of a playstre.
This ointment must be used the space of three days only. If the child do
suck, it shall be good, that the nourse be purged with some gentle laxatyue, as
with manna, cassia, diacatholicon. And about the bruise, ye shall lay the
defensive written in the former Chaptre. For these two remedies defend
apostemation of the place.

The third intention, which is to resolve the bruise of the bone, and to reduce
it into his own place, shall be accomplysshed by the administration of the
remedies under written, of which the first is after this sort. Playstre
. oil of mirte, roses, and wormwod. ana.. i. of oil of camomyl.. ii. of red
poudre restrictiue.. x. of bean flower. i. of branne well brayed.. ss. of ye
nuttes of cypress well brayed, of calamus aromaticus. ana.. vi. of camomyl,
wormwood, mirtilles, both of ye grains and leaves thereof. ana. m^. ss. of
cumyne.. i. and. ss. of white wax.. i. and. ss. Let them be all brayed
together as fynely as may be, and with suffycient sodden wine make a styffe
plaster at the fire. This plaistre, as ye may perceive by the symples, has
virtue to resolve the blood with confortation of the place.

But if it chance that the blood under the skyn, Decoction.
can not this way be resolved, ye must daily use a sponge dypped in the
decoction following.. of red wine. li. iii. of barbars lie. li i. and. ss. of
the nuttes of cypress so^what brayed in no^bre.x. of mirtilles, roses,
wormwood. an^. m^. ss. of roch alume. ss. of coria^ders, cumine, calamus
aromaticus. an^.. ii. let them sees until the third part be consumed. And
than let a sponge weted in ye same be daily bound upon it, for it resolves
meruelouslye, and dries up the blood issued out of the veins, and brings
the bone again into his place.

But if the blood be so much co^geled, that ye forsayde remedies ca^ not
resolve it, tha^ ye shall make deep scarification, and apply one of ye
resolutiues before written. And if these remedies will not suffice, it is
necessary to open the place, to digest, mundify, incarne and cicatrise it, with
ye medicines declared in the cha. of wounds caused by contusion or brusynge.

But if this contusion chance in the heed of a child that is passed.x. year
old, and if ye perceive that the bone is broken, than you must make incision
of the place, according to the doctrine given in the former Cha.

But Auice^ne says, that it chances often that the sculle is broken, and
not the skin, yea that it is apostemed, that is to say, that at the time of
the strype, the place swells with an apostemous swelling, by reason of blood
ye comes thither in the forsaid co^tusion. And he says moreover, yt when a
man is occupied in the curation of the swellyng, and comes not to the
curatio^ of ye crack of the bone, it chances that between the lowest table,
and the rhyme dura matter, there is engendered a putrefactio^. And therefore he
says, that before the swelling be resolved, ye patientes amend: And after the
resolution they wax worse at ease, and evil accidents come upon them, as
fevers, tre^bling of the heart, and loss of the use of reason. etc. wherefore it
is necessary that the place be opened and cured after the curation of a broken
sculle. He says also that the said accidents happen sometimes before the
generation of matture, and sometimes after the same. Thus to avoid many
words, we end. etc.

The.vi. chaptre: of wou^des of the face, and parts of the same.
Of wounds of the face
THe wounds of the face are not dangerous, for they may be restored by the way
of the first intention, chefely, if they ben without loss of the substance
and without contusio^ or brusing and depenes.

The curation thereof is acco^plisshed by three inte^tions. The first is by
unition, or co^iunctio^ of separated or sou^dred parts. The.ii. is to co^serue
the parts joined. The third shall be acco^plisshed by subtle and slendre diete
at the beginning, that the said wounds come not to apostemation. For ye
acco^plishment of the first intention, ye shall wasshe the wound at the
beginning with wine of decoction of roses, and a little frankensence. After that
you have washed the wound with the foresaid wine, incontinently ye shall sewe
it with a convenient seame, Sowyng of a wound.
remembering that ye make no great distau^ce between the stitches, that ye
cicatrice may be little and fair. wha^ ye seame is made, ye must cover it with
cloutes moysted in ye white of an egg, and oil of roses omphacine me^gled
together.

For the second intention, A paste.
the next day after the making of the seame, ye must apply cloutes after the
length, and breadth of the wound playstred with this composition.. of mastike
brought to a poudre, of sa^guinis draconis. an^.. i. and. ss. of frankense^ce..
i. of dragaga^tu^ brayed.. iii. of bole armenie.. iii. and. ss. of mil dust, of
bean flour. an^.. i. and. ss, ye white of an egg, of rose water.. ss. mengle
the^ all together, and bring them to the manner of a paste, and use them as
aforesaid. This done, renew again the cloutes, and lay the^ upon the wound
being moysted in ye foresaid white of an egg, and oil of roses, and lay it
upon with feathers.

The third day you must take away the stitches, and instead of them, you must
sewe of cloutes incoled or cheuerned, and lay them upon ye wound with the past
aforewrytten. The seame must be after this figure. Consequentlye unto the fytth
day, ye shall proceed with ye foresaid remedy.

Note, yt by the menes of this seame made as it is here figured, ye cicatrice
is much fayrer. If ye doubt whether there be any humiditie in ye botom of ye
wou^d: ye may loose according to necessity the said seame, and draw the
blood out of the wound daily. After five days ye may conveniently apply upon
the wound vngue^tum de minio written in the cha. of a broken sculle, or else
this cerote. Aterate.
R. of the oil of roses, oil myrtyne. an^.. i. of clear terebentyne.. ii.
talues sewet melted.. x. mastyke.. i. and ss. of odoriferous wine, one cyath,
yarrow, cosmary, pla^tayn, consoli^a the less, re^taurye the greater. an^. m^.
ss. Sees them together until the wine be consumed. Tha^ strayn them, and make
a cerote with white wax, Diete.
and malaxe it in cowes milk.

The third intention, which consists in the ordinance of dietie, is thus
accomplished. First at the beginnynge unto the fourth day the patient must be
co^rent with grated bread sodden in water with almandes and a little sugre, or
he shall have a supping made with barley flower, water and sugar, and he shall
use sugre of violettes and roses with water in the stead of a syrup. For the
purgation of the patientes body, Syrup.
ye shall proceed, as it follows. First let the patient take this syrup the
space of four days. R. syrup of roses by in^u^ion.. i. syrup endyue.. ss.
mengle them, and with water of endyue and vnglosse make a syrup. Afterward
let him be purged with this purgation. Purgation
R. of chose^ ma^na.. i. electuary lenitiue.. vi. with the comune decoction
make a potion adding of syrup violettes.. i. and ss. for his dri^ke he may
use water alone, sodden with fine sugee, or a i^^e^ of violettes.

Item you may use scarification, and vento^es applied upon the shulders at the
beginning, to turn away the ma^tier. And when the body is sangaine, and full
of humors, ye may cu^^e the beyne called caphatica in the opposite side. For
it is good to turn aside and euacuate the mattier, which might cause
apostemation.

The wou^des of the nostrilles, The cure of the wounds of the nose and ears.
and ears ben duly cured by the foresaid remedies, except only, that the
seame must not so lightly be taken away, as in other parts. For by reason of
the gristles, those parts receive not a seame so lightly. The wounds of the
eyeliddes ben cured semblably.

If the wound be in the substance of ye eye, A wound in the eye.
ye shall apply unto the coueth day a collyry made with the white of an egg,
water of roses, and white sief without opium. After the fourth day unto
the.vii. it is expedient to use rose water with ye white of an egg, and white
sief without opiu^, and a little aloes he patike washed with rose water, and a
little sarcocolle.

After the.vii. Collirye incarnatiue.
day you must incarne the wound, by the administration of this colliry. R. of
rose water.. ii. of odoriferous wine.. ii. of Sief of frankencense.. i. of
sarcocolle, of aloes hepatike, of sugre candy. an^.. ii. mengle them together,
and make a colliry according to art. Finally ye shall seal up the place with
this collirye. R. of rose water.. ii. and. ss. of Sief, of lead. Collirye
s^gillatiue.
. ii. of tutia preparate.. ss. of Myrobalane citrine.. i. the white of an egg
somewhat sodden. Braye these foresaid things, and leave them together the
space of a day. Than strain them and put thereof into the eye only a drop at
ones, and it shall sone make a good cicatrisation. If there chance great pain
with the wound ye shall put in to the eye woman's milk. To the same intention the
white collirye dissolved in ye muscilage of quyncesede, made with rose water
may well be used. Thus we end. etc.

The.vii. cha. of the wounds of the another throat, and of the cure of ye same.
THe wou^des of ye neck, and of the throat are very dangerous because of ye
great issui^g of blood when some vein is cut, Of wounds of the neck and
throat.
and also by reason of the concatenation or linckynge together of the synnowes,
chordes and other parts, and also by reason of the nuke, and trachea arteria.
wherefore I will briefly declare the cure of the^.

The foresaid places are often hurt by a bruise, as with a stone, a staff. etc.
And sometimes by cuttyng things, as with a swerd, a knife. etc. Sometimes by
poi^ted things, as by a dart, an arow etc. The curatio^ of ye wou^d caused of
a cut is acco^plyshed as it follows. First you must considre whether the
wound of the neck be with the hurt of the nuke or not. If the nuke be not
hurt, ye shall make a seame incontinently, leaving an orifice in the lower
part of the seame. And wha^ ye wound is deep, it is convenient to proceed with a
degestyue made with terebentyne, and the yolke of an egg, and a little saffran,
putting in to the said mouth a tent rolled in ye said digestive, Defensive.
with oil of roses hot, or oil of hyperico^ unto the fourth day, layeng also
round about a defensive made with oil of roses, bole armenie and white wax.

And when quytture is engendered in the said place you may in no wise apply
things digestive. But instead thereof you must administer this mu^dificatyue.
R. of clear Terebentyne. ii. of honey of roses.. i. of the juice of plantayne,
Mu^dificatiue
and smalage. ana,. ss. Let them boil all together one boylyng, and wha^ ye
take it from the fire, add thereunto the yolke of an egg, and of barley flower
well cersed.. vi. of saffra^. i. And if you did put to this mundificatyue of
myrrh.. ss. of frankencense.. i. and as much sarcocolle, after mundification,
it would be a good incarnatyue.

For sigillation, and cicatrisation you may conveniently administer vnguentu^
de minio, after our description written in the chapi. of the breach of the
sculle. To the same intention it is good to use stoupes dypped in wine, as it
is declared in the rehearsed cha.

But if the nuke be hurt, and the synnowyes, and chordes of the neck, it is
necessary to defend a spasme, and to study for the mitigation of ye pain. The
accidents that happen by the hurt of the nuke been like unto them which come
by the hurt of the brain.

A spasme is prohibited by the unction of oil of Camomylle, Prohibition of a
spasme.
and dylle with hens grese, with a decoction of earth worms, rubbing the
nuke with the said things mengled together.

The wound of the nuke is cured by the^ administration of the liquoure
following, The cure of the nuke.
the wound being left somewhat open. R. of oil of roses omphacine.. i. oil of
terebe^tine.. ss. of clear terebentine.. x. Oleum magistrate
of earth worms washed with wine.. i. and ss. of Mastyke. iii. of the flowers
of rosmarie. m^. ii. of the sede of saint Ioha^nes worte. m^. i. greater
centaury and the less, of mylfoyle, of hounds tongue. an^. the third part of
an handful, of plantayne. m^. ss. of saffran.. ss. of odoriferous wine on
cyathe. Let them boil all together unto the consu^psion of the wine, than
strain the^ with a thycke cloth, and add of oil of hipericon.. i. and ss.

Note that if these said things were set in the sun the space of a
monethe with the seed of saint Ioha^nes wurte, called hipericon, renuynge
from weke to weke the said sede, it would be a good medicine for all wounds
of the synnowes.

Also it is commendable to apply upon the wound of the nuke vnguentum
basilicu^, with the foresaid unction.

Diete.
Touching diete, we say that it must be subtyle, and slender, till you be
sure, that the place will not come to an aposteme. The patient must be content
at the beginning with grated bread made of almandes, and with sugre, or with a
dyshe made with barley, or fine wheat flower, or cromes of bread made after
the same manner. And he must drink a ptisane with sugre, or with a iuleb of
violettes, chiefly when he has a fieuer. Also it is good before dinner, and
supper to bind the extreme parts, and to rub the^.

Item ye may cause flebotomye to be made, and ventoses to be applied upon the
shulders with scarification. If it chance yt the throat be hurt, and trachea
arteria, and that there be some vein cut, than incontinently ye shall sewe
the wound with a convenient seame, and deep, to restrain the blood,
administrynge the foresaid remedies, in time and place, as it is before
declared.

when blood flows out abu^dau^tlye, Staunchyng of blood
ye shall restrain it by this ordinance following (presupposed, that ye put
a tente in the wound rolled in the oil of hypericon) R. the whytes of two
eggs, of Hares hears fynely cut.. iiii. of read poudre restrictiue.. vi.
of frankencense myrrh, aloes, sarcocolle, terra sigillata. ana.. ii. of bean
flower.. vi. of brayed dragaga^tum, of sanguinis draconis an^.. ii. and ss.
These said things must be mengled together, whereof you must make a
confection after the manner of aplayster, and apply it with stoupes moysted in
water, and vinaygre of roses. And let it be bound straightly, if no accident
let it.

Note that if ye tarry two or three days before ye take away the medicine, it
shall be very profitable, so that no bledyng appear. For all the other
intentions, that is to say mundification, incarnation, and sigillation, ye
shall proceed, after the doctrine declared before, in this present cha.

Furthermore if the wound be caused by a foyne, purgations premised, The cure
of a foyne.
you must enlarge it, taking head yt ye cut not the veins nor arteryes.
And after this ampliation or enlargynge, cauterize the place with oil of
elders, or in the stead thereof with comune oil and the decoction of earth
worms. And so ye must proceed unto the seventh day, layenge upon the wound
vnguentum basilicum magistrale. For the mundification, incarnation and other
intentions, ye shall do after the doctrine declared before.

The wound of ye neck caused by co^tution or brusynge, The cure of a bruise.
must be cured at the beginning with a digestive made of terebentyne, the
yolke of an egg, and a little saffran. And for the other inte^tions, use the
foresaid doctrine. The wound of the gulle, and wesande ben cured, as we have
taught before that is to say, by sewyng the sondred parts together, and by
incarnation. Nevertheless we will describe two remedies conueniente in this case.
One without, another within, because of the difficulty of breathyng, or
swalowynge.

The first must be applied after that the seame is made. It digesteth,
mundifieth, swageth pain, and aydeth breathinge, the form thereof is this. R.
of the roots of holihocke sodden in water and wine, and well strayned. li. ss.
of he^nes grese melted, of oil of roses, oil of camomylle. an^.. ii. of
calves tallowe, of wethers tallowe melted. an^.. iii. of most clear
terebentyne.. iii. and ss. of barley flower cersed.. ii. and ss. of saffran..
i. make it at the fire after ye manner of a plaster according to art.

Gargarisme.
The remedy to be received within, is this gargarisme following. R. of clean
barley. m^. ii. of roses. m^. ss. of rasines, iuiubes. an^.. i. ss. of clean
liquirice.. x. Let them boil al together with sufficient water unto the
consumption of the third part, and add of honye of roses.. iii. of syrup of
roses.. iiii. Let them boil again a little, and put to of penidies.. ii. tha^
strain them. The patient must often gargaryse this decoction, for it swageth
pain, and cleanses the place, and aydeth respiration, or breathing, and opens
the way of meat. Thus. etc.

The.viii. cha. of the wounds of the shulders and cure of the same.
Of wounds of the shulders.
THe wou^des of ye shulders are suspected to bring death, because of the
conjunction, or lynckyng together of the synnowes procedinge from the brain,
and the nuke, and likewise the wounds of the ioynctures of the arms.

The said wounds receive often apostemation, because of the great sensibility
of ye place. For great pain draws to the said places great quantity of
mattier, which when it ca^ not be rectifyed or brought to perfect digestion by
the aid of medicines, engenders necessarelye reumes, and spasmes, causynge
cold upon the synnowye parts. To resist these accidents the best thing
that ye can do, is to defend the sore place from apostemation, studiynge with
all diligence to swage the pain. For as Galene says, pain is as a ventose,
drawing mattier to the place.

The curation of wounds of the shulders has four intentions. The first
consists in the ordinance of diete. The cure.
The second in purgation as well by laxatyue medicine, as by flebotomy. The
third in the administration of so^drye remedies upon the sore place. The
fourth in the correction, and remotion of accidents.

The first is accomplyshed by the doctrine written in the former chap. The
second by flebotomy of the arm contrary to that, that is hurt. More over
let the patient be purged according to his complexion with a gentle
laxatiue, as with cassia, with diacathol. or electua. de dactyles.

It is good also to use this syrup under written because of a fieuer, which
chances often, by reason of the boylynge, and co^motion of the humors. R.
syrup ros. by infusion.. i. syrup of the juice endiuye. Syrup.
. ss. of the waters of Endyue, hoppes, and violettes. an^.. i. mingle them.

The third intention which is to administer local medicines is accomplyshed
as it follows. First if the wound be large, it is conueniente to join
together the sondred parts, with a decent deep seame, discretly for touching the
sinnowes, leauyng an hole in the lower part. when the seame is made, for the
co^seruation of the same ye shall apply the poudre following the space of two
days. Poudre.
R. of frankencense, sa^guinis draconis, mumy, barley flower well cersed. an^..
ii. of aloes, hepatyke, of mastyke. an^.. i. of bole armenye, of terra sigil.
an^.. iii. Mengle the^ together, and make a poudre. And upon the said poudre
put this, that follows. R. the white of an egg beaten with oil of roses
omphacine, and a little oil of mastyke, of saffran. i. of barley flower, of
bean flower well cersed, of each as much as shall suffice. Make it after the
manner of a digestyue. You must cover all the wou^d with this composition.

And you must put into the wound by the orifice (which ye shall leave) a tente
rolled in a digestyue of terebentyne with the yolks of eggs, and a little
saffran, and with hot oil of roses, or only with a digestyue of the yolks
of eggs, and oil of roses. After two days, in ye stead of the fore said
things, it is very profitable to use vnguentum basilicum magistrale, ordained
in the chap. of the cure of the sculle.

And when you come past digestion, for mu^dification, incarnation, and
sigillatio^ ye shall use the remedies written in the said cha.

The fourth intention which is to defend apostemation, and to correct the
accidents, is accomplyshed by diuersion, or turnyng away of the mattier,
through rubbyng, and byndynge of the extreme parts. Also it is uerye expedient
to apply ventoses upon the buttockes with scarification, and without
scarification.

Furthermore it is to be noted, that pain is the cause of evil accide^tes, as
of apostemation and spasme. wherefore ye shall diligently swage ye same. And in
this behalf ye shall proceed according to that, that shall be said in the
next cha. If a spasme chance in these wounds, it is right expedient to rub
the nuke with the unction written in the former chap. for the cure of a spasme.
Also ye must rub the back bone with oil of dylle, or camomylle being
actually hot. Furthermore it is good before dynner to go in to a bayne, in
which there is a great quantity of oil, with a decoction of things
anodyne, yt is to say, which take away pain, as of camomylle, melilote, dylle,
rosmarye, sage, Neppe, Stecados, squinantu^, wormwoode, organye, arssmerte.
Item a bayne of sweet water, with odoriferous wine, and a little honey, is
commendable. Thus. etc.

The.ix. cha. of the wounds of the bone called adiutorium and of the arms,
and ioynctures of the same.
THe wounds of the adiutorye of the arm, Of wounds of adiutorie arms and
joints.
and of the ioynctures are daungerouse, though they be^ cured by good
chirurgiens, as well for the lynckynge together of the synnowes of the same, as
for the multitude of muscles, which (as Galene says) knytte the ioynctures
together.

And for as much as the foresaid members accord together, we will treat of
the cure of them in this present cha. sufficiently. To which cure there are
required four intentions. The first is ordinance of diete. The second,
euacuation of the body being full of humors. The third is to heal the said
wounds, by the application of convenient medicines. The fourth consists in
the prohibition of accide^tes, and remouyng of the same.

The first inte^tion is accomplished, after the doctrine declared in the former
chapiters. But it is to be noted, yt if the patient be weke, and has be^
accustomed to drink wine, being of a delicate complexion, you may give him
the wine of granades delayed with sugre, and sodden water.

The second intention shall be acco^plyshed by the administration of this
purgation if the body be cholerike. Purgation (...) choler.
R. of chosen manna.. vi. Diaprunis non solutiui.. ss. electuarii rosati.
mesue.. i. reubar.. ii. with the comune decoction make a potion, addyng of
syrup of violettes.. i. and ss. And if the body be sanguine, let it be
purged with this purgation. R. of cassia, diacatholicon. an^.. vi. electuarye
of roses after Nicolas.. i. and. ss. make a potion with as much water of
endyue, fumiterre, and hoppes as shall suffice, adding of syrup of
violettes.. i. If the body be flegmatyke, it must be purged, with diacatholicon
and cassia, or with electuary de dactilis Likewise if it by melancholye. It
shall be purged with diacatholicon, and with the confection of hamech, made with
the decoction of polipodye, epithimu^ and cordial flowers and fruits.

Furthermore ye digestive following is good in all wounds. R. syrup of
buglosse, of the juice of endyue, of roses. an^.. ss. of waters of endyue, hops
and buglosse. an^.. i. And when his strength is great, and the age and
complextion convenient, it is a general rule to make flebotomye in the
contrary arm, or in the stead of a flebotomye, you may scarifye the shulder,
and the buttockes, drawyng sufficient quantity of blood.

And you must keep his belly loose by a clister, or some suppository. Likewise
the rubbyng of the extreme parts is convenient, for it turns away the
mattier from the sore place.

The third intention is accomplished by the application of diverse remedies
according to the diversity of the wounds. First if the wound be great and
in a great muscle of the adiutorye thoroughly cut (which thing may be known
when the ioynct of the hand leseth his mouynge) than ye must sewethe so^dred
parts depely with a double thread cered, leaving an orifice or mouth beneth.
And to co^serue the seame you must use the poudre written in the chap. of the
wounds of the neck, by the space of two or three days.

For the digestion, mu^dification, incarnation, and sigillation, ye shall
proceed with the remedies written in the said cha.

Howebeit because of the veins of this place, which ben large and because of
the conduictes, and passages of the arm, it is very convenient to apply
about the wound some defensive, as this following. Defensive.
R, of oil of roses, of oil of myrtyne. ana.. iii. of oil of Camomylle.. ii.
of bean flower, and barley flour ana.. i. of bole armenye, of terra sigillata.
ana.. vi. of all the saunders. ana.. ii. of Roses, of myrtilles. an^.. i. and
ss. of white wax. i. and ss. of vinegre of roses.. iii. of the juice of
Playntaine, Laictuce, nightshade, if they may be gotten. an^.. ss. melte the
oils and the wax, and let them boil with the foresaid iuyces one boylynge,
mengle all together, and make them after the manner of a plaster.. This
defensive (as it appears by the ingredie^tes) has virtue to conforte the
place, and to keep it from receauynge mattier antecedente, and moreover it has
part of familiare resolution. Briefly it is a singular remedy in all wounds,
to defend apostemation.

when the wound is made after the length of the said membre, you may soon
judge, that the wound is without danger of death.

And in this case it sufficiceth, beside the remedies above noted, to make a
ligature or byndynge incarnatyue of two ends, to join together sondred
parts, leaving ever an hole open in the nether part.

If the said place be hurt with appointed thing, as with a darte. etc. you
shall consider whether the wound be upon the muscle, For we have often seen
that by incisio^ made after the breadth of the muscle, the hand has lost his
natural mouynge, but wha^ the said wound is large enough, than it suffices
to apply a digestive of the yolks of eggs and oil of roses hot, unto a
perfytte digestion. And afterward let it be cured according as it is declared
in the former chapiters.

But if the wound be so strayte that deriuation of mattier to the said place
is to be feared, which might cause great pain, and apostemation. Than you
mustenlarge the said wound, after the sort declared in the chapter of the
wound of the neck, caused by some poynted thing.

The cure of the wounds of the elbowe
The wounds of the arm in other parties must be cured as we have said
before. Now we will come to the wounds of the elbow and the hands, which
been very dangerous, and more in the part within the arm, than without,
because of the multitude of great veins and synnowes, whereby great pains
happen to the said places, and great apostemations with great abu^dau^ce of
blood, which cause rigours, fieuers, spasmes, youxinge, and perturbation of
reason. wherefore to avoid the said accidents, we will give a profitable
doctrine.

First beside the intentions before said, there be two intentions required.
The first is to apply convenient things upon the said places. The second
to defend and remove accidents. First if the wound be large, study to
staunche the blood, and to join the sondred parts together, as it is said
in the chapter of the wounds of the throat, then cure the wound unto the
fourth day with this oil following. R. of oil of the yolks of eggs.. vi.
oil of Roses omphacine, clear Turpentyne. ana.. ii. saffranne.. i.
odoriferous wine. i. and. ss. seed of S. Ioha^nes wort, flowers of Rosmarye.
ana. m^. i. Mastyke.. ii. and ss. the juice of Plantayne. i. of woman's milk..
ss. calves tallow.. x. oil of Elders.. ss. oil of roses odoriferous.. i.
earth worms washed with wine.. x. Sees them all together with a soft fire
until the wine and juice be consumed. And use this oil within in the wound.

But in the vtterpart of the wound ye shall apply this cerote following. Cerote.
R. oil of Roses, Violettes, Camomylle. ana.. ii. calves tallowe.li. ss.
swynes grese.. ii. hens grese, mary of the legs of a calfe. ana.. i. earth
worms washed with wine.. ii. of fresh buttyre.. i. ss. Muscilage of
Holihocke.li. i. Sees them all together, till the Muscilage be consumed: tha^
strain them and put to the straining of Litarge of gold and silver. ana.. ii.
ss. Minium.. vi. make a cerote at the fire with sufficient white wax, adding
in the end of clear Turbentyne.. ii. ss. Mastyke.. i. and let them boil
again a little. when ye have used the said oil in the wou^d, four or seven
days (if no accidente let) It shall be very good to mengle with it, a little
honye of Roses, and a little syrup of Roses. For the other intentions, ye shall
proceed as it is before said. But that the pain may be swaged, and Aposteme
removed, we will speak of some necessary remedies, according to the situation
of the members. For if ye perceive that the mattier which causes pain is
hot, ye may take cromes of white bread and dip it in the brothe of an
hen or of flesh, and afterward press it, and incorporate it with oil of
Roses, and yolks of eggs, adding oil of camomill, and a little saffran. Let
these things be boiled together till they becomme thycke. This is a synguler
remedy to swage the pain of the synnowes being hurt, and of apostemes
caused by the same.

Item the cromes of white bread lythed in cowes milk and prepared as the
foresaid things, is expedient for the same intention.

Likewise a plaster composed of things anodine, that is to say, which remove
pain, Plaster.
is commendable, after this description following.. of the roots of
holihocke.li. ss. of branne, camomill, melilote, of every one. m^. i. of
barley, of lentyles, of every one. m^. ss. of lynsede.. i. of parietarie. m^.
ss. Let them boil all with sufficient water unto the consumption of half, and
then with the flower of barley, and beans, and a little camomil, and melilote
stamped, make a styffe plaster, adding of oil of camomill.. ij. of saffran..
i. the yolks of two eggs. This plaster appayseth grief resoluynge matter,
and moreover it is maturatiue, when the nature will that the matter shall come
to maturation or rypenes.

Furthermore ye shall note that if the matter which causes pain, be greatly
enflamed, then for the mitigation of the pain, it is expedient to apply a
plaster of the flower of barley, and beans, made in a decoction of barley,
mallows, and violettes with a good quantity of oil of roses, and violettes,
and a little saffran. Let them boil al together, and add in the end two
yolks of eggs. For this plaster quenches infla^mation. If the forsayde
place, chance to come to an apposteme called vndemia, ye shall resort to the
chapitre which treats of the cure of Vndimia.

Touching the situation of the arm, it must be sustained toward the breast,
that the humors may not easelye descend. When there is incisyon of the bone,
you must splinte the arm, and bind it conveniently and keep it up on high.
Also a tablette of wood, if the hurt be in the hand or arm, vndrelayed with
stoupes and cloutes, and situated under the hand and arm from the elbowe to
the tops of the fyngers, is very convenient. Thus ends the chapitre of the
wounds of the shulders and cure of the same.

The.x. chapitre of the wounds of the breast, called Thorax, and cure of the
same.
IT chances often that the breast is hurt by poynted things, The wou^des of
the br^ste.
as daggars, darts. etc. And of them some perce unto the inner parts. Some
been only superficial, and not percynge. Some are with hurt of the contained
me^bres, and some with out hurt of the same. Moreover of these wou^des
persynge, and not persynge, some been in the former part, and some in the
hinder. They that are in the hinder part, ben more dangerous then the other,
for many causes namely because of the multitude of great veins, and arteries,
that pass by the length of the back, and also for the multitude of the
synnowes, which descend from the nuke, and moreover because of the lygamentes
which have conjunction with the heart, and because also that the pannicle
called Mediastinum, and the mydryffe ben nyghe to that part. Sometime a wound
in the said part, though it be not penetraunte or persynge is deadlye. But
it is not mortal or deadlye in the former part, if it perse not within the
breast.

The signs of the penetration or persynge of such a wound without the hurt
of the inner members, been these. Air comes out of the wound, the patiente
has great pain to breathe, and felethe grief in the sore place with
ponderositie or heaviness, chyefelye about the small rybbes. You may moreover
know whether the wound persethe, by the applycation of coton well toosed upon
the orifyce of the wound, and by the holding of a little candell burning
nyghe to the wound, for the flame thereof shall be moved, and likewise the
coton, if the patiente hold his breathe, stoppynge his mouth, and nostrelles.
The signs also by which you shall know whether the heart be hurt, ben these:
there issues out of the wound black blood, the extreme parts been cold,
and death follows incontinently after. For Auice^ne says, that ye heart can
not endure solution of continuitie without the approchynge of death.

Signs of the wou^dyng of lunges.
The signs that chance when the lunges been hurt, are these effusion of
blood full of foam, continual coughe, dyfficultie of breathynge, and pain of
the rybbes.

Midriffe.
The signs that declare the midryffe to be hurt, Mediastinu^.
or the pannicle called Mediastinum been these, dyfficultie to fetch breathe,
continual coughynge, sharp pryckynges in the sore place, heaviness of the said
place, and perturbation of reason, which can be restored by no medicine, and
moreover the patiente fyndethe him self worse and worse every day, and with
fieuers.

Also you may know the putrefaction of the blood in the inner part, Signs
of putrifyed blood.
by the stynckynge of the patientes breathe, by the continual inquietnesse of
the patient, and by the increasynge of the fieuer, and other evil accidents
before rehearsed. Galene says, if blood be shed in to the belly beside
nature, it comes necessarely to putrefaction. When it is putrefyed, it is
wont to engendre great pains, fieuers, and heaviness of the place. wherefore we
affirm that the said accidents chance according to the quantity of rotten
blood in the inner part.

Now that we have knowledge of wounds percynge, and of the hurt of the inner
members, it remains that we come to the curation of the same, whether they
been persynge or not. But before we speak of the curation, we will declare the
dyscorde, that is between the doctors of this time, concerning the same.

There ben many that command to shut incontinently the penetraunt wound,
and to proceed with desiccatiue things, as well within, as with out to cause
incarnation, saying: that if the said wound be not shut, the air wol enter
in, unto ye heart, and more over that the vital spirits woll issue out by the
wound, which thing might hurt the patient. Again many ben of a contrary
opinion, and command to keep the wound open. And if the wound be not large,
they say it must be enlarged that the blood may issue out, affyrmynge that if
the blood which is in the inner part issue not out by ye orifyce of the
wou^d, it may engendre many evil accidents, and corrupt the inner members.
Wherefore to avoid such accidents, they command to keep the wound open.

Vigo his judgment.
In my judgment, they which command to keep the wound open, maynteyne a
surer opinion then the other, for many reasons. First because of the commune
bruyte. For if the patient should dye, the people would say, that the
retaynynge of blood caused his death, which is true. Likewise because the
blood being retained causes some fistula, and other accide^tes, which bring
the patient to death

To come to the curation, we say that the curation of a wound penitraunt is
accomplyshed by four intentions. The cure
The first is ordinance of diete. The second euacuation of matter antecedent.
The third purgation of the blood, which is entered in to the inner part. The
fourth mundifycation of quytture cause by the said blood, and after
mundification, incarnation of the place.

Touching the first, and the second intention, ye shall proceed as it is
declared in the former chapitres, except that if the patie^t be very weak,
and has euel accidents, as sou^dyng, in such case you may give him wine, and
other things that comfort nature. Furthermore because that difficulty of
breathynge happens to the patiente, ye shall give him meats sodden with
roots of perseley, and fenell. And for the comfortation of his heart, and
stomach, ye may mengle with the meats of the patient a little cinnamome and
saffran.

Item it is very profitable to use often at the beginning, A decoction that
helps breathynge.
this decoction which helps respiration, or breathynge and keeps of
catarrhous matter which happens in the sore places.. of clean barley. m^.
i. of the roots of langdebeefe.. ij. of clean liquerice somewhat stamped.. x.
of the commune seeds.. i. of iuiubes, and rasines ana. x. of penidies.. ij.
and. ss. of suggre ca^dy, of syrup de duabus radicibus. x. of fine suggre..
iij. Let them boil altogether, with suffycient rain water, until ye barley
break, the^ strain them. Let the patie^t use here of, as we have said, for it
is merueylous good. Provided always, that the patiente have convenient
digestiues and purgations, according to the quality of the humor, as is
before declared.

Item seven or eight days after the wound, beside the meats declared, ye may
give the patient flesh, and wine of good odor, mengled with sodden water of
ye decoction of cinnamome, and coriandre. If the patient have a fieuer, he must
eat the flesh of chyckens, and hens, kyddes flesh, and veale boiled with
perseley, and altered with the foresaid things.

Likewise you shall proceed, when you will purge the quytture of the inner
part. Also you may give the patient potage made of the brothe of the foresaid
flesh with perseley, buglosse, borage, laictuce, and beetes. It is good for
the wound, for the breath, and for the taste, and engenders good blood.

When you will mundifye the wound, and dry up the quytture, the^ the said
flesh is better roasted, the^ boiled. Also birds that live in woods, and
meddowes may well be suffered, but not waterfoule. Item there been some which
commend that the patient use stiptike meats, but not at the beginning, but
when the blood, and quytture are purged. For if you give them at the
beginning, ye shall retain the blood and the quytture, which thing might
increase difficulty of breathynge, a dangerous thing in this case. wherefore
at the beginning ye shall not apply stiptike, and clammyshe things, nether
within nor without.

Furthermore you may use flebotomie in the contrary part, and scarifycation
upon the botockes, and rubbynges, and byndynges of ye extreme parts, to keep
of apostemation at the beginning.

Item it is commendable to use a clyster, having virtue to dyssolue wyndynes,
and blood.

The third intention which consysteth in purgation of blood in the inner
part, by the mouth of the wound, shall be accomplyshed as it follows. First
when the chirurgien comes to the patiente, he must consider the signs. And
when he is certain, he must diligently search means to cause the blood,
which is in the inner part, to issue out by the orifyce of the wou^d, which
thing may be brought to pass by convenient situation of the body, that is to
say, that the head be laid downewarde, the feet being raised up, or that
the patientlye upon a bed his head hanging downward, leaning upon some
form or stool lower then the bed, that ye blood with in may easily issue
out. He must lie thus the first day. For it is good for two causes. First to
purge the blood that is within. Secondly that blood and other humors, ye
communly chance in wounds, fall not into the body. And the patient must lie
grouelynge as much as he can, upon the wound.

Some give certain things by ye mouth to cause ye blood to come forth, which
thing is very commendable, so that the medicines be not to sharp and to
strong. Furthermore it is to be noted, that if the wound be very large, so
that the spirits come forth aboundauntly, then you must sewe the sondred
parts, leaving an hole beneth, that the blood, and quytture may easelye
issue out.

And after that the blood is issued, and the wound mundifyed, you must
begin to apply tents of lynte dypped in ye white of an egg, or in wine.
And let the said tents be great in the outward part, that they fall not
in, or else tie them to a threde that if they fall in, they may be drawn out
again.

Here it is to be noted, that ye must not in any wise lay upon the wound
poudre restrictiue (as Albucasis says,
) for it would drive matter toward the heart, or derive blood, which might
sone choke the patient. Item if ye be sure that there is no blood entered in by
the way of the wound, then it shall be convenient that ye sewe the wound,
and proceed with things incarnatiue in the first days.

But because a man can not have true knowledge at the beginning, whether the
blood be entered or no, it is the surest way to keep the orifyce of the wound
open at the beginning, how be it the second day ye shall put in a tente
dypped in oil of roses hot, and in a digestive of terebentyne, and a yolke of
an egg, and a little saffran, unto the seventh day, layenge about the wound
a defensive of oil of roses, of bole armenie and a little white wax.

And for as much as in the first days there happen evil accidents as pain
in the side, Accidents.
dyfficultie of breathynge, and a great coughe, it is good to apply this
plaster following upon the sore side.. of camon il, Pl^yster.
melilote, dille, wormewoode. ana. m^. i. of dried branne and cersed. m^. ij.
and. ss. of the flower of barley, beans, and le^tiles ana.li. ss. of roses.
m^. ss. stamp them all, and with sufficient sodden wine, and a little
odoriferous wine, by art and fire make a styffe plaster, adding of oil of
roses.. iiij. of camomill, dille, of every one.. ij. of white wax.. ij. and.
ss. Set the foresaid things again on the fire with the oils and the wax
melted, and put to in ye end, of saffran.. ss. This plaster as ye may know
by the symples, has virtue to swage pain, and is resolutiue, and
co^fortatiue, and prepares the blood, and the matter to issue out.

When the patient is come to ye third or fourth day, no euel accident
happenynge unto him, as a spasme, trembling of the heart, and difficulty of
breathynge, and other like, and when the patient fyndeth him self in good
dysposition, a man may judge and know, that the wound is not mortal. Wherefore
at the beginning unto ye seventh day, for resolution and purgation of blood
this poudre with his waters hereafter prepared, Poudre.
may well be given to the patient.. of reubarbe.. ss. of madder, of mumie, of
every one,.i. of terra sigillata.. ss. of ye water of stabious, the water of
buglosse, of the wine of granades, of every one.. i.

Some doctors give at the beginning, potions or drynkes made with wine, and
hot things as cloves, and madder, which things may greatly hurt the
patientes. For they cause fieuers, and dyfficultie of breathynge. Wherefore at
the beginning pectoral decoctions are better, as diadragantum, and
diapenidium, or as this description. A pectoral decoction.
. of penidies, of suggre candye, of syrup of violettes, of every one.. i. of
the nuttes of pyne apples, of sweet almandes, of common seeds, of every one..
iij. of diagragantum.. ss. me^gle them, and with syrup of violettes make a
loch, addyng of the juice of lyquerice.. ss.

After that the wound is come to manyfeste quyture, for the mundification, and
purgatio^ of the same, we say that ye must often wash the wound with
convenient lotions. And though sondrye lotions ben written of the doctors as
of Guilhelmus placentinus, and other, which are composed with wine, and with
the decoction of flower delice, lupines, myrrh and other hot simples, mine
opinion is, that such medicines are not convenient (as I have often proved,)
for two causes. The first is the inflammation of the foresaid things. The
second is because that when blood putrefyeth, great heat always happens.

Wherefore to mu^difie the quytture, and to take away the evil complexio^ of
the place, it is a more sure way to proceed with this lotion. A lotion.
. of clean barley, of lentyles. ana.. ij. of roses. m^. ss. of the herb
called horsetayle. m^. i. let them boil with water of plantayne, and rain
water, and a little wine of granades unto the consumption of the third part,
and add of read suggre.. ij. of syrup of roses by infusion.. iij. of
saffran.. ss. The quantity of water must be five pound, which must boil
till it come to three. Ye shall wash the wound here with all, and bind it
conveniently, and so proceed until there issue out matter like clear water.

when the patient has used the said lotion, and has no fieuer, and when the
wound is rectifyed, and the quytture mundifyed, then ye may add to the
former decoction of honye of roses. iij. And when the quytture is altogether
mundifyed, then ye may conuenientlye administer stiptike lotions, A stiptike
lotion.
as this that follows.. of roses, of the flowers of pomegranades called
balaustie, of the croppes of brambles called cyme rubi, of myrtilles, of
sumach, of every one. m^. i. of hypoquistidos, of myrobalane cytrine. ana.. ij.
of honey of roses.. ij. let them boil with water of plantayne, and wine of
pomegranades in sufficient quantity, unto the consumption of the third part.
Let this decoction be spouted into the wound that perseth with a syrynge. For
so Auicenne teaches.

Item in the same time (if the patient be not troubled with the coughe and the
quytture dried or mundifyed) consoundyng and stiptike things are permitted to
be received by the mouth in a liquide form, or in meats: as terra sigillata,
with the juice of quinces, sumach, hypoquistidos, roses, flowers of granades.
etc. Galene affyrmeth the same with like words.

Furthermore we will descrybe a plaster abstersive and mundifycatiue, which
shall serve for those intentions when need shall require.. of honey of roses
strayned. Plaster.
. ij. of clear terebentyne.. iiij. of the juice of smalage.. i. Let them boil
altogether a little, and take them from the fire, and forthwith add the yolks
of two eggs, of wheat flower well cersed.. ij. of the flower of fenugreke,
and barley, of every one.. ij. of saffran..i.

For the same intention, ye may apply our cerote written in the chapitre of
the cure of the sculle being bruised. It is more attractiue the^ this plaster.

When the intention is to consou^de and to dry, you may use a cerote of
minium, descrybed in the foresaid chapitre. Item if the said wound resyst
greatly true curation, and endures long time, ye may know that the said
wound is turned to a fistula, which receaueth seldom true curation, how be
it we have healed many which had fistules, and did cast out quytture
long time by the orifyce of the wound, after this sort. The cure of a fystle
in the breast.


First we washed the wound with this decoction. Decoction.
. of honye of roses strayned.. iiij. of the croppes of brambles, of the leaves
of wild olyues, of every one. m^. i. of balausties, of the ryndes of granades,
of every one. m^. ss. of lentyles as much, of the herb called horsetayle in
latin cauda equina. m^. i. of saffran..i. Let these foresaid things be boiled
in the lie of vynebraunches, and fygge tree branches, and a little wine of
granades unto the consumption of the third part, then strain the said
decoction, and apply it often within the wound.

After the said lotion I used vnguentum de minio, and I caused the patiente to
use drynkes that dry and purge quytture, as is the potion descrybed by Mesue
destinctione eleven, where he makethe mention of playsters, and oyntmentes, and
the said potio^ is called a mixture to heal wou^des. The form there of is
this. A potion of Mesue his description.
. of cloves, of the roots of motherwurte, of pimpernell, of camomill, of
synckfoyle, of the herb of violettes, of the herb of read coalewurtes, of
hemp, of every one. m^. i. of madder to the quantity of all. Let these
forsayde things be boiled in sufficient quantity of wine, till half be
consumed, then strain them, and add unto them as much of clear and clean
honye, as the third part of the said decoction shall be. The dose of it is
in the morning.. iiij. with water of maiden here, and scabiouse.

Here ye shall note, that if in the stead of wine, the said potion were made
with water of mayde^ here and scabiouse, and wine of granades, it might
conveniently be given to the patient in a fieuer.

And briefly to fynyshe this chapitre, we will give two doctrines profitable
in this case. The first is, that when the chirurgien is called, he must dress
it as quyckelye, as may be. And the chamber must be very warm and many hot
clothes about the wound lest the air enter in, and if it enter, that it be
hot and not cold. The second is the chirurgien must pronosticate,
according to the signs that he shall see, that he may save his name.
Nevertheless the Chirurgien shall not refuse to cure, any hurt of the members
contained in the inner part, except the heart. For nature by the Chirurgiens
aid workethe so well, that oftentimes it bryngethe that to pass, that seemed
impossyble. Thus. etc.

The.xj. chapter of penetraunt or persynge wounds of the belly.
Of wounds persyng through ye belly.
THe wounds of the belly, as the Doctors affirm, ben dangerous, cheyfely
those that persewyth the hurt of ye members contained. The wounds of the
belly communely are caused of cuttynge things as by a sword, or poynted
things, as with a darte. etc.

When the Chirurgien is called to the cure he must consider the place of the
wound, and whether the contained members ben hurt or no, which thing may be
known by the signs that follow. signs of stomach hurt.
The signs that declare the stomach to be hurt are thies, the patient
spettethe blood and his meat commethe out by the wound. That the guts ben
hurt it is known by the great pain, Of ye guts.
and torsyon or grypynge of the belly, and when the superfluites of the meat
commeforthe by the mouth of the wound. Of the small guts.
The signs that the small guts ben hurt are known by the place where the
wound is, namelye when the wound is above the navel. If the wound be
benethe the nauel, it is in great guts, we have declared in our Anatomy,
how that there ben three great guts, and three small, of which the three
great are under the navel, the three small above the navel. Wherefore by
the place of the wound ye may know what guts are hurt.

You may know when the liver is hurt by this, Of the liver.
that the wound is about the false rybbes of the right side, and the blood
that issuethe out of the wound is read, and the patient has great pain,
from the said rybbes unto the flank, by cause the blood is deryued from the
liver all a long unto the grynde.

When the mylte is hurt it is known by this, Of the milte.
that the wound is between the false rybbes of the lift side, and the blood
that issuethe out of the wound is gross, Of kydnes.
and very black. The hurt of the kydnees is known by the place, when the
wound is somewhat lower than the navel, and the blood also that issuethe
out is clear, and watrishe.

It is to be noted, that sometimes the wounds of the belly not penetrant or
persynge ben not without danger of death, namelye when they are about the
navel, within three, or four fyngers, because of the great muscles, that are
knytte to the navel.

Furtheremore the wounds which are in the hyndre part are dangerous,
because of the Nuke, and the synnowes growyng out of the same. But the other
parts of the belly, in which there is a wound not penetraunt are seldon
dangerous except it be through the fault of the Chirurgien.

Likewise of wounds penetrante some ben very dangerous, as those that are
with the hurt of the inner members, as Hypocrates affyrmethe, sayng the
bladder being wounded, ye kydneys and small guts are mortal for the most
part. The most dangerous of them are those, which ben in the former part
after the length of the belly, because that the guts, issue out by the
wound more easily.

The cure.
The curation of the said wounds, shall be accomplisshed by three intentions,
namely by the ordinance of diete, by euacuation, and by application of
convenient things.

Concerning the first intention, when the wound is penetraunt or not
penetraunt without hurt of the inner members we say that the patiente must
use the diete ordained in the former chapter.

Diete styp^^ke.
But if the said wound be with hurt of the inner members, than the patient
must use stiptyke things in his meat, as a brothe made with the juice of ye
herb called horsetaile, or with roses, sumach, mirtilles, juice of quynces,
frankencense, sarcocolle, Saffran, litium, syrup of roses, honye of roses,
dragagante. Finally all stiptyke things are convenient in this case. The
patient must drink water boiled with the foresaid things, cheifely at the
beginning to avoid fieuers and apostemation. And when peril of apostematio^
is passed, ye may give him the said symples or some of them, for his drink
with wine or water. But if he be very weak you may give him wine at the
beginning, and also confortatiue things.

The second intention shall be acco^plysshed, by the purgation written in the
former cha. when the wound perseth not, and also when it perseth without hurt
of the inner members.

But if the said wound be with ye hurt of ye inner members, ye shall not give
the patient a strong laxatiue me dicyne, or rather ye shall give him no
purgation, because of the hurt of the guts and other inner me^bres, and
moreover nature is ever wekened, wha^ the inner members be hurt. Wherefore it
suffices for the accomplishement of this second intention, only to euacuate
by cuttynge of a vein, by convenient scarificatio^s, and by lenitiue clysters,
and suppositories, which can not hurt the guts, nor weake^ nature, and yet
may furthere the cure of the said wounds.

My custume is ever at the beginning, to minister to the^ which ben hurt in
the guts a lenitiue and abstersive clyster, to purge the superfluous mattier
which is in this sort. Take of the broth of hens or capo^s, of a wethers
head, A clyster.
as much as shall suffice, and let it boil with a little camomyll, dille, barley
and bra^ne, tha^ strain it, and add to ye straynyng the yolks of two eggs,
of honey of roses.. ij.

After yt this clyster has done his operation, ye shall minister this, that
follows, which is stiptike, and co^sou^deth or joins together ye wounds in
the guts.. of clean barley, of lentiles, of roses, of sumach, Another ^^ster.
of every one a little of ye herb called horse tail, of ye leaves of
pla^taine. ana. M. j. of the sede of quynces.. j. and. ss. of liquerice.. vij.
of liciu^.. j. of franke^cense, of sarcocol. ana.. iij. of bolearmenie.. ij.
and. ss. let thies said things be boiled together with sufficient quantity of
water unto ye consumptio^ of half, and add to ye decoction of honye of
roses.. j. a little of read suggre and of Saffran.

The third intention, is acco^plisshed as it follows. First the chirurgie^
must consider wether the wound be in the region of ye stomach, or belly, and
whether it perse or not, and when it persethe not, he shall sewe it with a
convenient seame, leauyng a little orifice in ye nether part, laiyng upon the
seame our poudre which conserueth the seame, and to put in to the orifice
thereof a digestive made with terebentine, the yolke of an egg, oil of roses
omphacyne, and a little Saffran.

If the wound be strait, it shall not nere to make a seame but with ye said
digestive, the Chirurgien shall apply about the wound a defensive made of
oil of roses, white wax, bolearmenie, and the poudre of read saunders, and
white.

For mundificatio^, incarnation, and other intentio^s, the doctrine written in
the former chapi. shall suffice Furthermore it is to be co^sydered whether the
wound perce the stomach unto the inner part, or whether it be only
superficial, that is, in the over part of the stomach. When the stomach is
but superficially hurt, the chirurgie^ shall proceed, as it is said, and shall
apply a tente moysted in this decoction following, which comforts ye sore
place, and draws out by ye orifice mattier that might cause apostemation, and
moreover it is mundificatiue, A decoction.
and incarnatiue.. of oil of ^oses omphacine.. j. and. ss. of oil of
terebentine.. ss of clear terebentine.. x. of mastyke.. iij. of the herb
called horsetayle, of Rosmarye, of wormoode, of centaurye the less, of
plantayne, of saint Johannes wurte. Ana. M. ss. of earth worms washed with
wine.. j. of saffran.. j. of odoriferous wine cyath. ss. let them all boil
together unto the consumption of the wine, than strain them, and use them.

In this case things repercussiue are not convenient, but in the stead of
the^, ye shall use things confortatiue. Ye shall wurcke likewise when the
stomach is persed, admonisshynge the patientes friends of the danger, and
allegynge the foresaid aphorism of Hypocrates. Here follows the composition
of a soft confortatiue cerote, A cerote confortatiue.
to be applied upon a sore stomach.. of oil of wormmoode, oil of quynces,
oil of roses. Ana.. j. and. ss. of oil of mastyke.. vj. of neppe, of myntes,
of roses, of wormoode, of every one, a little. Let them all boil with
sufficient odoriferous wine unto the consumption of the wine, than strain
the^, and make a soft cerote with sufficient white wax, addyng of saffra^..
j. of all the coralles, and saunders. Ana.. j. and. ss. let it be applied on
ye stomach in the manner of a plaster, it conforteth the stomach merueylously.

But if the wound perse unto the substance of the Liver, or of the mylte, it
is mortal, because the flux of blood ensuethe by the incisyon or breakyng of
some vein. Howebeit sometime in the extremity of the liver, or mylte it is
not mortal.

The said wounds ben cured as it follows. The cure of ye liver or milte.
First if the liver or mylte come out of the wound, ye shall wash the wound
of the sore membre, with wine of a decoction of Endiuie, plantayne, horse
tail, roses, mirtilles, sumach, franckencense, dragagante, terra sigillata,
and a little read suggre. This decoction restrayneth blood, and consoundeth
the wound.

Afterward you must reduce the said fore membre in to his place, and than
sewe up the wound, and incarne it, and leave the cure to nature. For communely
nature sends the blood to the grynde, and produces an Aposteme, which
commethe often to maturation, or else nature resoluethe it insensibly.

It is time now to come to the cure of ye guts, The cure of the guts.
which shall be accomplished by the doctrine following. First if the guts be
comme out of their propre place, you must wash the^ with red wine of the
decoction of Camomyll, melilote, dille, roses, wormmode, muggewurte, of every
one a little. And after that they ben washed ye shall reduce them, in to their
own places. And forasmuch as the said guts ben often filled with wind, ye
shall sometimes use things that break wind, as this decoction following. A
decoctyon breaking wind.
. of cumine.. ss. of coria^dres, of anise. Ana.. iij. of honey.. iij. let
thies things be boiled with sufficient quantity of red wine, unto the
consumption of the third part, and let the place be fomented with a sponge.

And if ye can not easily reduce the guts in to their place, you must
enlarge the wound with a rasore and so reduce them. But ye must note that if
the small guts ben hurt, A wound in ye small guts is mortal.
ye wound is mortal, because they are tender, and can not suffer a seame,
and for the multitude of little veins, which ben in them, cheifely in the
gutte called Ieiunum intestinum. Moreover because they ben synnowie and full of
cholere, by reason of the nyghnes of the Liver.

The great guts (as Auicenne says) touching their substance are flesshie,
A wound in the great guts curable.
and therefore they are often hurt without danger of death. Wherefore as we
have said, when the great guts are hurt, after they be^ washed with the said
decoction, ye shall sewe the^ with a cered, and wrethed threde, after the
glouers or skynners seame. Also ye may attempt to sewe ye small guts, for
though they are seldom co^sounded, yet the chirurgie^ must not forsake the
cure.

Some command to join together the sondred parts, with the heads of antes,
or pismares, which thing is reproved of all doctors. After that ye have made
the seame, you must wash the same with the foresaid decoction, and reduce the
guts in to their places. And immediately afterward, you must sewe up the
wound of the bellye.

The ancient doctors say, that there ben four manners of sewyng up the
pannicle called mirach, and other pannicles of the belly, but we will speak
only of two principal, two manners of sewynge.
and most used. One is yt ye take only Mirach of one part, and leave the
pannicle Siphach, and of the other part you must take both Siphach, and
myrach successively, one after another until the seame be ended. This manner is
written by Auicenne in the chapitre of the cure of the wou^des of the guts.

The second is that ye take first only myrach, and secondlye myrach, and
siphach of both parts, and so finyshe the seame. Thyes two seames are used of
ye later doctors, and they ben more sure than the other, because myrach, and
siphach are easily incarned, and joined together, and tha^ the pannicle zirbus
can not go out of the wound, which is a profitable thing. For when zirbus
commethe out of the wound, putrefaction must needs ensue, though it remain
out but a little while. Hypocrates affyrmethe the same thing.

The liver and the guts putrefye not so quiclye, though they remain a while
without the wound. And when they are conveyed in to their own place, they ben
easily reduced in to their nature. Wherefore a wise Chirurgien, when he seethe
the pannicle zirbus to comme out of the wound, shall cut it incontinentlye.

The manner of cuttyng of zirbus.
The manner to cut it, wha^ it is altered, or rotten is this. You must bind
it in the hole, and incorrupt part, than cut it within a finger of the
place that is bound, and incontine^tly cauterize it welnygh to the said
knotte, than with hot cloutes co^ueye it in softly, leaving the threede
hangyng without the wound, that wha^ the eschare shall be removed, you may
draw it out.

After that the said seame is made between Myrach and Siphach, the wound
must be cured by things that dry, and conserve from putrefaction, as is our
poudre co^seruatiue of seames. Item vnguentum de Minio written in the chapter
of a broken sculle, is very convenient in this case, and likewise terebentine
mengled with our read poudre. Also a plaster of sodden wine, and things
anodyne, that is to say, which remove pain, ordened in the chapter of the
wounds of the breast is very confortatiue, and swageth grief. Furtheremore to
rub the belly with an unction made of oil of Camomill, dille, and a little
white wax swagethe pain merueylouslye.

Besides this it chances that the flancke is hurt by poynted instruments,
The cure of a wound of a ^inied thing in the flanche
as by darte, or dagger. etce. Than you must consider whether the wound be
penetrante, and if the blader, or the neeke thereof be hurt or the matrice, or
the gutte called intestinum rectum, for thyes three have great adherence
together, so that sometimes they ben all hurt at one stroke.

The blader p^sed is does
Than I say when ye know that the bladder is hurt, that you must
pronosticate death by the auctorytie of Hypocrates. Nevertheless if the hurt
be but small, ye shall not omit to succurre the patyente. Wherefore
(observation of diete presupposed) we say that ye must proceed in the
outward part with desiccatiue things.

Moreover it is good to have a crooked syrynge, such a one as seruethe to make
the vryne issue out, and to spoute in to the bladder twyse a day with this
syrynge of the decoction following, and ye must put it in warm, and in
sufficient quantity so that it enter in to the concauitie of the same, and
remain within, a certain space. The ordinance of the decoction is this.. of
the water of Roses.. iiij. of water of plantayne. A decoction.
li. ss. of the herb called horse tail.li. ij. of clean barley, of lentiles,
of Roses. Ana. M. ss. of myrobalanes citryne, of Hypoquistidos, of balausties,
of myrtilles. Ana.. j. of sumach, of the croppes of branbles, of the leaves of
the wild Olyue, of conferie, Ana. M. ss. of clean liquerice.. x. of read
Suggre.. ij. of Aloes Hepatyke, sanguinis Draconis, of bole armenye, of terra
Sigillata. Ana.. ij. let the foresaid things be boiled together, unto the
consumption of the third part, and strain them.

Note here that in this case you must not give the patiente things diuretyke,
that is to say, which cause pissynge, and do open, for they would bring down
humors to the blader, but it shall suffyce to give him Syrup of Roses with
water of the herb called horsetaile, and water of barley. For it engrosseth
the mattyere and conforteth the members, and so they keep the mattyer that it
be not deryued to the blader.

If the hurt be only in the neck of the blader, The cure of a wound in the
neck of the blader.
ye may have confydence that it is not mortal, as the experience of them
declares, which cut stones out of the blader. And this has been proved in
the cure of an Almayne, which was a familiare frynde of Iulie the second, and
was hurt in the lift flancke with a mauryse pyke, so that ye blader was
hurt. And the space of. vij. days his vryne issued not after his natural
course, but only by the wound. We seeing the blader to be perced, and that the
vryne issued out by the wound, made answer that the man was in great danger
of death, nevertheless that we would not omit the reasonable cure, which we
have declared in this present chapter. And by the help of God the said
Almayn became as hole, as if he had never ben hurt. Howebeit the wound was
only in the neck of the blader and not in the substance of it, otherwise,
seeing that the wound was great he could never, have escaped death.

Eight days after the wound, there came out of the wound a piece of a
pannicle, as large as the patientes hand, which we judged to have been cut
from the pannicle called Siphac, wherefore if such wounds ben with incision
of the pannicle Siphac, it is necessary to join together the sondred parts
with a convenient seame, lest the guts fall in to the purse of the stones
called osseum.

The cure of the matrice.
And when the matrice is hurt, ye shall proceed as we have said of the
bladder, except that two, or three days after the wound, you must give the
patiente more abstersive things, as honey, and the water thereof, and honey of
roses.

Moreover ye shall apply upon the belly (when the bladder, or matrice is
hurt) the foresaid plaster of sodden wine, and make an unction as is said
before. For the plaster and unction are very profitable to ease pain, and the
grypynges of the bellye, to resolve also, and disperse ventositees.

It remaynethe, The cure of a wound persyng through the body.
that for the accomplyshement of this present chapter, we speak breyfelye of
the wounds which perce thorough the body. First when the Chirurgien sees,
that the body is perced thoroughe with an arowe, maurise pyke. etc. He must
consider whether the inner members be^ hurt or not, before he draw the
instrument out of the wound which may be known, by the strength of the
patient and the poulses, and other evil accidents, that communely happen, as
soundynge, spasme, trembling of the heart, and by the pale or blackysshe
color of ye face. If these accidents ensue, the patient is nygh death. But
if they ensue not, nether the patient is weak, it is a sign that the inner
members are not hurt. And than you must anoynte the instrumente, with oil of
roses being hot, and proceed with tents moysted with hot oil of Roses, and a
digestion of terebentyne, until digestion be acco^plysshed.

For other intentions, that is to say, mundification, incarnation, and
sigillation, ye shall proceed, as is before said. And for as much as nature
co^munelye sendethe the blood that remaynethe within the body, to the
emunctories of the flanckes, and an Aposteme thereby is engendered, which must
be cured as flegmon, therefore I say ye shall resort, to the chapter of the
cure of Apostemes in the flanckes. Thus. etc.

The.xij. Chapitre of the wounds of the hyppes.
THe wou^des of the hyppes must be cured, as the wou^des of the shulders.
wounds of the hippes.
For the hyppes ben synnowie and full of ligamentes, and great muscles, as the
shulders. wherefore ye shall resort to the cha. of the same.

Nevertheless that ye may have a certain doctrine for the cure of ye said
wou^des. we say ye thereunto three inte^tions are required. The first is regiment
of diete. The second euacuation of the body. The third consists in the
application of convenient things upon the said wounds.

As concerning the first, and second intentions, ye shall proceed as it has been often declared in the former chapiters. The patient must abstain from wine
and flesh, till the danger of apostemation be passed. Also ye must cut the
vein called basilica, or the comune veyn in the opposite side. Item it is
convenient to keep the belly always soluble or loose by lenitiue clysters. For
most comunely the said wounds cause great pains, and the mattier that is
derived to the hyppes engenders apostemations. Moreover at the beginning, ye
may give the patient a medicine minoratyue de cassia, diacatholicon, and de
electuario lenitiuo, or of other according to the complextion, and strength of
the patientes.

The third intention shall be accomplished by the administration of local
medicines. First the chirurgien must consider whether the wound be deep or
not, large, or strayte. For when it is deep, and strayte it must be wisely
enlarged, that the veins, sinnowes, ligamentes and muscles be not hurt. And
afterward let the wound be healed with oil of roses hot, and a convenient
digestyue. And lay about the wound a defensive magistral, which is written
in the cha. of the wounds of the shulders. And if the wound cause great
pain, ye shall put in to the wound oil magistral of Hiperico^, whereof we
have spoken in the former chapiters.

Ite^ to swage pain we have found it good, to use an embrocation made of oil
of roses, oil of camomylle, and dylle with the decoction of earth worms.
Likewise in this case, a plaster made with the cromes of bread and with
milk, written in our antidotary is profitable. And a plaster of sodden wine,
written in the chap. of the wou^des of the breast is of the same operation.

After digestion, for incarnation, and other intentions, ye shall proceed after
the doctrine written in the said cha.

If the wound be to large, you shall sew it co^uenie^tly laye^g a large orifice
in the nether part. Note yt these wounds must be diligently cured, and by a
wise chirurgien, for we se, it often comes to pass, yt through the fault of
the chirurgien, the patientes halte al their life long. Thus. etc.

The.xiii. cha. of the wou^des of the stones, and of the yard.
THe wou^des of the stones, and the yard ben not mortal, wounds of the stones
and the yard
if it be not through ye error of the chirurgien. Nevertheless because they are
necessary to generation, they must be healed with all diligence.

To come nere to our purpose, there are required to the cure of the said
wounds three intentions. And concerning the first, and second intention ye
shall proceed according to the doctrine of the former cha.

The third shall be accomplished by the administration of local medicines. First
if the wound be made after the length of the membre, ye must join together
the so^dred parts with a convenient seame, and proceed with things moderately
desiccatyue. Also you must digest the wound, with a digestyue made with oil
of Roses and yolks of eggs, the space of two or three days, layeng about the
same a digestyue magistral ordained in the chap. of the cure of the wounds of
the adiutorye.

wha^ the digestion is ended, ye shall mundifie the wound with a mundificatyue
of syrup of roses, of our description. And if need be ye may put a tent in the
lower part that ye mattier may be purged the better. After mundification, ye
must incarne it, adding to the said mu^dificatiue a little aloes hepatike, and a
little sarcocolle.

And for the sigillation, you may conveniently use, Vnguentu^ de minio
described in the cha. of the fracture or breaking of the sculle. Ye shall
proceed likewise, when the wound is made after the breadth of the membre.

when the wound is caused by co^tusion or brusyng, it is convenient that the
wound be digested a longer time, because that every wound that is made by
co^tusion, necessarely comes to putrefaction. As Galene says, oe^ vnlnus.
etc. For the other intentions ye shall proceed after the doctrine written in the
former chapiters. Thus. etc.

The.xiiii. chap. of the wounds of the thyghes, and of the legs, and of
their parts, with the cure of the same.
wounds of the thighs, legs and their parts.
THe wou^des of the thighs, and legs must be cured as the wounds of the
arms, and of the bones called adiutoria. But ye pronostications ben diverse.
For the wounds of the thighs, and the legs are more dangerous, than the
other, because of the multitude of ye great synnowes, veins, muscles, chordes,
and ligamentes, which bind together the ioynctures. And in the former part of
the knee there been two synnowes very sensible, which descend from the
brain, and when they chance to be hurt, great pain, and evil accidents
ensue, as a spasme, a fieuer, aposteme, perturbatio^ of reason. etc. which
oftentimes bring the patient to death, because of the comunion and coniunctio^
that they have with the brain.

wherefore Auice^ne says in the cha. of wou^des that induce a spasme, there ben
ulcers in the nuke, and ulcers in the higher part of the knee. And the lacertes
of those parts be^ very sinnowie, and therefore the wou^des induce a spasme and
sudden death. Likewise within the leg, and without they ben very dangerous,
because of ye great veins, which being cut, issewe of blood follows. For the
stau^chyng whereof you must resort to the cha. of the flux of blood. For the
blood of those parts can not be easily restrained.

Moreover they are more dangerous, than the other, because they been lower, and
the higher me^bres send humors to the lower, that is to say, to the thyghes,
and legs, and cause often apostemation in ye said places, which thing
chances not in ye arms. And therefore it is profitable to hold ye member
eleuate, and lyfted up with the rest of ye body. wherein the comune proverb of
Italia^s is verified, namelye, Lamano al pecto, la gamba al lecto, yt is to
say, the hand on the breast, the foot in the bed.

Likekewyse wha^ the wound is under the knee, and yt the danger of
apostematio^ is passed, it is expedient to bynd the leg, from the foot to
the knee. For Guydo says, that the diseases of the legs have nothing
propre by them selves, and deferynge from other diseases of the body, but
byndyng, that the antecedent mattier be not deryued to the sore place.

To the cure of the forsayde wounds, the intention alleged in the former
chaptres, are requisyte. Concerning the first and second intention, ye shall
so proceed, as it has been often said in the former Chaptre.

The third shall be accomplysshed by the application of convenient medicines
upon the sore place. wherefore (observation of conuenyent dyete, and universal
purgatyon presupposed) there is nothing better to defend apostemation, than to
admynistre things that swage pain. For as Galen says, pain in wounds
draws humors to the place as a ve^tose.

wherefore we will declare certain remedies to ease pain, and those only which
we have proved. First, this liniment is good to be laid about the sore
ioynctures, A liniment.
which is of our description.. of the oil of camomyll, of the oil of roses.
ana.. ii. of hens grese.. x. of erthwormes washed with wine.. i. and. ss. of
saffran.. i. of calves suete.. i. Let the foresaid things be boiled together a
little, and than put to of white wax.. i. Let them boil again a little and
strain the^. Ite^ we are wont to put this oil to the wound, which is of
merueylous operation in wou^des of ye ioynctures.. oil of terebe^tin, of oil
of roses o^phacine. an^.. ii. of most clear terebe^tine.. x. of erthwormes..
i. and. ss. of mastike.. vi. of gu^me elimi, armoniake dissolved with wine.. i.
and. ss. of saffra^.. i. of the flowers of s. john's wort m^. i. and. ss. of
ce^taurie the greter. m^. i. of oil of lineseed.. vi. let these things be
boiled together a little, and afterward strain them through a cloth, tha^ set
them a su^nyng in a glass the space of a month, and put into the vessel a
few flowers of saint Ioha^nes wort, and change them every seventh day.

This oil, as it may appear by the simples, is of great excellentie in the
wou^des of the synnowes and ioynctures. For it eases pain, it draws
gentlely, and dries moderately, which intentions are requisite to the cure of
the said wou^des. Likewise you may apply upon the wound plasters that swage
grief, written in the former chapiters.

Item this unguent following is good to be applied in all times upon ye said
wounds, Vnguentum basilicu^ magistrate.
which is of our description, and is called vnguentu^ basilicu^ magistrale. R.
of the oil of camomylle, and roses. an^.. iii. of the oil of linsede.. ii.
and ss. of the oil of sweet almandes.. i. of hens grese, and calves suet.
an^.. ii. of clear terebentyne.. iiii. of mastyke.. x. of wethers suet. i. and
ss. of earth worms washed with wine.. ii. and ss, of saffran.. i. of the
muscilage of holihocke. li. ss. Let them all boil together beside the
terebe^tyne, unto the consu^ption of the muscilage, than strain them, and add
to the straynynge of litarge of gold, and silver. an^.. i. and ss. of miniu^..
x. let them boil again with a soft fire, and stir them about. And then
increase the fire and let the^ boil again til they become black of color,
than add the foresaid terebentine, and of rosyne of ye pine tree.. vi. of
ship pitche.. ss. of white diaquilo^ with gu^mes.. iii. Let them boil again
a little with sufficient white wax, and make a cerote in good form. This
oyntme^t is excellent for ye wounds in which the synnowes ben hurt. Finallye
the remedies yt shall be written in the next chapter may be administered in
this case. Thus. etc.

The.xv. cha. of solution of continuite of synnowes and chordes.
THe wou^des of the synnowes (as the doctors testifye) cause evil accidents,
wounds of sinnowes and chordes.
and dangerous diseases, because of their great sensibitie, or feling, and
because of the great conjunction which they have with the brain. wherefore
they must be diligently cured, and by a discrete chirurgien.

The accidents and diseases that ensue thereby are these, spasmes, the palsy,
vehement pain, cold fieuers, apostemations, perturbatio^ of reason,
watchynges, great alterations, and great loethsomnesse of meat.

And oftentimes the wounds of the synnowes are apostemed by the way of
deriuation of matteir, and do cause of spasme without great pain going
before, as Auicenne teaches. The cause of solution of continuite of sinnowes,
may chance so^dry ways, namely by brusynge things, as by a stone, a staff
etc. or by cuttynge things, as by a sword, a kniffe etc. And likewise by
poi^tedthi^ges, as by a dagger, a nedle, a nail, an arow etc. And some ben
after the breadth with a totale incision of the sinnow. Some with the incision of
half the synnowe.

The wou^des that been made after the length of the membre and sinnowes, are not
so dangerous, as they that been made after the breadth. But wha^ the sinnowes
ben half cut, the wou^d is more dangerous, than when the sinnowes ben holy
cut. For Auice^ne says that the hole part of the synnow, is hurt by the sore
part, and through the vehement pain, there often ensues spasmes, palsies, and
other accide^tes. And therefore it is necessary so^times, for the auoydaunce of
the said accide^tes, holly to cut ye hurted synnow. For Auicenne so teaches
by the authority of Galene.

The hurtyng of sinnowes, of contusio^, or brusinge, is harder to be healed
tha^ the other aforesaid. The reason is, because the maturation, digestion,
and resolution can not be finished in short time, by reason of the quitture
which comes of the contusion.

Ye shall cure solution of continuitie caused by incision or cuttyng, by things
desiccatyue. In that, that is caused by contusion, ye shall proceed with
convenient digestyues, that ye may separate and sondre the quitture from the
hole parts, that is to say, the part of ye hurt sinnow, from that, yt is not
hurt.

Further we say that solution of co^tinuitie of the sinowes caused by pu^ction,
prickynge or foynynge, is more dangerous tha^ the other caused of a cuttynge
thing. But among other, ye punction which breaths not out, that is to say,
in which the wound is closed, that the hurt member can not digest ye humors
derived to the sore place, is most dangerous. which thing Mesue testifies
by the authority of Galene, saying: a spasme follows the punction of the
sinnowes, and chordes, chiefly wha^ it breaths not out. And of the same
punction oftentimes there is produced a venomous aposteme, which by reason of
ye co^tinuitie of the synnowe is conveyed to the brayn, and causes a spasme,
and epilepsia

Somtymes in the place of the pu^ction there is engendered a rotten aposteme.
For the auoydaunce of the said accidents, Galene comaundeth to open the said
aposteme, and to administer a medicine attractiue of subtle substance, and
desiccatyue, whereof we will speak more plainly in this present chapter.

To conclude touching pronostication, we say yt al wou^des about the
ioynctures bring great danger of death. For, because that the synnowie
chordes ben made bare upon the joints, they cause the foresaid accidents. And
they are sone made bare, because they ben in the ouerparte of the ioynctures,
which thing may be proved by Galene, and Auicenne saying, the synnowe is a
single membre, and a right precious instrument, procreated of nature from the
brain and the nuke the brains vicarye, to give felyng, and mouyng to the
other parts of the hole body.

To come to the cure of this solution of continuite of synnowes, The cure.
we say that there are four intentions required thereunto. The first
apperteyneth to diete. The second to euacuation of humors. The third to
prohibition, and remotion of accidents, which empesche the true cure.

The fourth shall be accomplished by ye administration of diverse remedies,
according to the diversity of accidents, which co^munely chance, when the
synnowes been hurt.

Concerning the first intention, we say that the diete must be subtle, and
slender, at the beginning because of the said accidents. For it is the
doctrine of Auicenne, saying: Dieta. etc. Furthermore because of the
accidents the disease may be called Peracuta passio, that is to say a sharp
disease. And if the disease be sharp, the diete must be slender. wherefore it
suffices at the beginning to give the patient bread sodden in water, or
alma^des with a little sugre. His drink may be a simple ptisane, or water
boiled with fine sugre, or with a iuleb of violettes.

And when the danger of apostemation is passed, that is to say, seven days
after the hurt, ye may give the patient more nourishinge meats, as chickynnes
sodde^ with Laictuce, and other conueniente herbs. Also for his drink ye
may give him wine of good odoure, with sufficient quantity of sodden water.
This diete is convenient, to make good incarnation of the hurt sinnowes. And in
process of time by little and little, the patient may come to his accustomed
manner of eating, and drynckynge.

Concerning the second intention, which is convenient purgation, after the
disposition of ye body, we have sufficiently treated in the chap. of the cure
of flegmon, and by the aid of god, we will speak more largely thereof in ye.ix.
book in a cha. appointed for laxatyue medicines. whereunto ye shall resort.

But the said inte^tion is moreover accomplished by flebotomye diuersiue, when
the age and strength consent thereunto, and when the patient is of sanguine
complexion, and also by rubbynges and ventoses. In the mean season it is good
to keep the bellye loose with clisters. we have found it profitable also, to
plu^ge the patientes legs, in a decoction of things anodine, that is to
say, which take away pain, chiefly when the hurt is in the superior parts.

when the said hurt is in the nether part, namely in the leg, it is
convenient to wash the arms with that decoction whereof we have spoken in the
cha. of the quynce. For the said decoction turns away mattier, and resolves
gentlely.

The third intention shall be accomplished as it follows. First ye shall note
yt the accide^tes, which happen by pu^ction, or hurt of the sinnowes been three,
namelye vehement pain, a spasme, and perturbatio^ of reason. And with these
many other ensue, as fieuers. etc To avoid the said accidents, it is
necessary to begin by medicines, that swage pain, and keep of putrefaction,
with gentle attraction, as we will declare in this present cha.

Furthermore if the wound be under the navel, it is good to annoynte the
back bone, the flanckes, and the ioynctures of the legs. If it be above the
navel, you must annoynte the shulders, the neck, and parts about the
wound. Ointment.
And that unction defe^deth spasmes, and it is after this sort. R. of oil of
camomylle, of oil of dylle, of each two parts, of he^nes grese one part.

Item at the beginning, the patient must beware of cold, for cold is very
hurtful to the synnowes, as Hypocrates says. Frigidu^. etc.

The fourth inte^tion shall be accomplyshed, as it follows. First if the wound
be made with a cuttyng thing, and after the length of the membre, so yt the
synnowe is discovered, you must go about to cover the same, and that as soon as
may be with a convenient seame. And afterward ye shall proceed with things
deficcatiue layenge about the seame our poudre co^seruatyue of seames, leauyng
an orifice in the lower part of the wound. Also it is good to apply wtin ye
said orifice, a tent with a digestyue made of terebentyne, the yolke of an egg
and saffran. Likewise ye shall proceed with vnguentum basilicum, and with oil
magistical, whereof we will make mention in this present cha. And it is very
expedient to apply the said oil in the stead of the digestyue, until the
danger of apostemation be passed.

For the other intentions ye must proceed according as it shall be declared in
this present cha.

Item if the wound be made according to the breadth of the membre, and the
synnowe holy cut, then you must sewe the wound only in the flesshie part
with a deep seame. I say with a deep seame, yt the part of the cut sinnowe
may the better be joined with the other part.

Howbeit the later doctors ben of sondrye opinions, concerning this sewing.
Some hold that a sinnowe thorowlye cut, must be sowed, for his
restoration. And many say that it must not be sewed. we affirm that they
which hold that the synnowe must be sewed, understood not the text of
Auice^ne, on which they make their fundation. Dinus Flore^tinus, and Petrus de
Argillata do prove with sufficient reasons that the synnowes being cut, ought
not to be sewed together. Theodoryke says yt Hugo de Luca is of the same
opinion. Nevertheless many efforce them selves to make arguments to be
contrary, grounding them selves upon the authority of Auicenne, which says.
If a synnowe be broken after length, it is necessary to sewe it, and if it be
not sewed, it will not be joined together. They understand, by the said
authority, that the sinnowe, and the flesh must be showed together, and not
the flesh only. where in they are deceived. For you must consider that if the
synnowe be prycked, it may induce a spasme, and the foresaid accidents.
wherefore we conclude that it is a great deal better to few the fleshie, as we
have declared.

After that the seame is made, ye shall put a tente in to the wound, dypped
in the oil that shall be here after declared. And lay upon the seame our poudre
conseruatyue of seames. And upon the wou^d, it is convenient to apply our
vnguentum basilicum, whereof we will speak more largely in this present
Chaptre.

Howbeit, the doctors say: that oil must not be put into the wounds of
synnowes, if there be not great necessity of appaysynge grief. It is true if
ye mean simple oil, but not if ye understand oil compounde, as is our oil
magistral, which oil applied in wounds has two vtilities, namelye it makes
medicynes more extensible, that is to say, to be the better spread abroad with
mitigation of grefe. Secondly, it takes away the bytynge and the sharpness
of the wounds.

Further ye shall note, touching the administration of medycynes of hurt
synnowes, that at the beginning you must not apply glutinous or clammysh
things, and which enge^dre flesh greatly. For as Haliabas says, we must not
incarne wounded synnowes, until the danger of an hot aposteme be passed.
Auicenne affyrmeth the same thing, saying: si qua^do. etc. that is to say:
that in wou^des, in which the sinnowes ben hurt, we must not haste to make
incarnation, but only we must go about to appayse grief, and to defend
apostemation, euaporatynge the mattier with cloutes, and with hoote oils, both
actuallye, and by propre virtue or nature, as is the oil of dyll, of camomyll,
and the oil of roses co^plete mengled with conuenyent fattes, and sometime with
oil of roses omphacine, which has virtue to comfort the sore place.

Item ye shall note, that the admynistration of things much repercussyue is
not commendable, though many apply about the wound things greatly
repercussiue, to defend apostemation: but Auicenne says, that it is better
apply things euaporatiue. And he says moreover, yt the best thing that
may be in the wounds of the sinnowes is vnwasshed wolle, taken from between
the legs of sheep, called in latyne, lana succida, which has a propertye
to keep the mattier from descendynge, and when it is descended it euaporateth
the same.

Secondly, to swage pain, and to defend apostemation: it is expedye^t to
apply a playstre resolutiue with gentle mollifycation. These things are good
chefely when the wounds ben large, and when the retaynynge of soul mattier is
feared. And therefore Auicenne has ordained in this case a playstre made with
things resolutiue, and mundificatiue. And for the punction or pryckyng, he
has ordained a playstre of mayles with lie, and syrup of vynaigre called
sirupus acetosus.

wherefore we must conclude, that for the cure of cut synnowes, it is
conuenyent to proceed with things resolutiue, and mollificatyue. And for the
cure of synnowes hurt by punction, we must use things desiccatyue and
resolutyue, that the humiditie or moisture which produces a spasme, may be
resolved, chefelye at the beginning.

But when the punction is apostemed, and the pain is vehement, tha^ a
desiccatyue medycyne is not conuenyent. For it would retain sanious mattier in
the place, and be an occasyon of the increase of the pain. wherefore in this
case it is better to apply things resolutyue, and mollificatyue, with
famylier attraction.

Here ye shall note,
that the things mollificatyue, and maturatyue are dangerous in this case, as
Auicenne testifyeth by the autoritye of Galene, saying: that it chanced that
a man was hurt with a nail upon the synnowes of the hand, and a certain
indiscreet chirurgien applied at the beginning a playstre incarnatiue, and
afterward a playstre maturatiue, and mollificatiue made of the flower of
wheat, and water, and oil. And by this mean ye patientes hand came to
putrefaction, and the seventh day the patient dyed, by reason of a spasme,
which came of that putrefaction. And if the chirurgien had kept the orifice
open, and applied a resolutyue and desiccatiue medycyne with some attraction of
the subtyle substance, ye patient had not dyed at that time.

To come to the ordinance of conuenyent medycynes in this case, it shall be
expedyent to declare their natures and propreties. Medicines for wounded
synnowes.
First Auice^ne says: the medicine of the wounds of synnowes is that, that
is of subtle parts, of equal heat, of familyare attraction, and with no
stipticitie, and chefely at ye beginning, ye must beware of stiptike things,
though the said doctor has ordained somtymes hot things, and stiptike, as
a plaistre of burned brass, and tutia Likewise he commands to mengle
vynaigre with medicines of the synnowes, that the virtue thereof may perce
the better. He says more over, that you must join with the said medicines
certain things of great heat, as euphorbiu^, and brymstone, that the
medicines may desce^d to the botome of the punction.

And because (as we have said) that great pain, a spasme and apostemes, ben
the accidents, that happen in the hurt of synnowes, we say, that they are
conuenyent medicines, which have the forsayde propreties, that is to say
moderate heat, mitigation of pain, and desicccation to dry up the moisture,
and to defend the spasme, and putrefaction of the synnowes caused by humiditie.

The medicines moreover must be subtiliatiue and liquide, why the medicines
subtiliatiue are to be used.
that the virtue may the sooner come to the sore synnowe. The medicynes also
must be attractiue with familiar attraction, why attractyue.
that the infyxed mattier may be drawn out without pain. wherefore the
medycines having the foresaid virtues are suffycient to defend the foresaid
accidents.

To end our fourth intention, it is time to come to local medicynes. First we
will ordeyne an ointment called vnguentu^ basilicu^ magistrale, Vnguentum
basilica^ magistrale.
having all the foresaid virtues, and is conuenyent in all wounds of the
synnowes, and welnygh in all times which is after this form., of oil of
camomyll, of oil of roses co^plete ana.. ii. of oil of mastike, oil of
terebentine, oil of lyneseede. ana.. i. and ss. of most clear terebentine..
iiii. of calves suete, wethers suete, and gootes suete. ana.. ii. and. ss. of
rosemary betonie, of ye herb called horsetaile, of centaurie the greater. ana.
m^. i. of earth worms washed with wine.. iii. of madder somewhat stamped.. x.
of saynct John's worte, of the leaves and seeds thereof. ana. m^. i. of
mastyke, of gum elimi. ana.. x. of ship pytch, of rosyne of the pyne tree.
ana.. i. ss. of serapyne, of galbane, of armoniake. an^.. iii. This ointment
must be made as it follows: yt is to say, ye must dissolve the serapyne, the
galbane and armoniake, in vinegre, and ye must braye the other things
together, and so leave them together, the space of a day, and afterward let
them boil together, with a ciath of odoriferous wine, unto the consumption of
the wine: than strain them with a thycke cloth, and put to the said strayning,
of litarge of gold and silver. ana.. ii. ss. of minium.. ii. And let them boil
together again with a softefyre at the beginning, which afterward ye shall
augment, until the said ointment be black, or blackysshe in color. which
done, make an oyntme^t with sufficient new wax in a good form, for in these
wou^des it is of marvelous efficacitie

Oleum de perforata or of saint Iohans worte.
we will ordeyne a convenient oil to be applied within the wound, which
swageth the grefe, and is desiccatiue, and of familier attraction, which shall be
called oleum de perforata. The description whereof is this.. of most clear
terebentine.. ii. of oil of terebentine.. vi. of oil of roses co^plete.. ii.
of earth worms washed with wine.. i. ss. of madder.. iiii of the seed of saint
John's worte. m^. i of rosemary, of centaury the greter, of mylfoyle. ana. m^.
ss. let them be sta^ped al together, beside the worms, and sees them with a
little odoriferous wine and a little barlye water, unto the consumption of the
wine and the water, than strain them with a thycke cloth, and press them well,
set them a sonning in a glass, ye space of a month about May, and put in the
said glass a little of the seeds, or flowers of saint John's wort, changing
the seed from weke to weke. This oil is excellent above al other, to swage the
pain of synnowes being hurt.

Likewise when the pain is vehement, you may apply an oil of the yolks of
eggs, or an ointme^t made of the crommes of breed with cowes milk, oil of
roses, camomylle, the yolks of eggs, and a little saffron.

Playstre or Cerote
Item this playstre that follows swageth pain, and is a resolutyue, and
conuenyent in this case.. of the rotes of holyhocke.li. i. of clean barley,
lentyles, and beans. ana. m^. i. seth them in barbours lie, than cut them,
stamp them, and strain them, and set them on the fire, with oil of camomyll,
roses, and dyl, and with suffycient white wax, make such a form as is
between a cerote and a playstre, addyng of most clear terebe^tine.. iii. of
saffran.. ss. This playstre is proved good to swage pain, and resolves ye
humors, and prepares the same matter being digested to issue out by his
subtle attraction. And note that it is marvelous to appease grefe, caused as
well of cuttynge, as of foynyng.

Item, when the wound is come to quytture, ye may conuenyently apply this
oyntmente following, An other.
when the synnowe is prycked or foyned.. of bean flower.li. i. of branne well
ground. m^. ii. of camomyll and melilote. ana. m^. i. braye the^ all well, and
make a styffe playstre at the fire with suffycient sapa, and the forsayde
things being cersed, addi^g of oil of camomyll, dylle, and roses, with the
decoction of earth worms. ana.. i. ss. make a mixture with suffycient white
wax, after the manner of the former playstre. This mixture, and that which is
written before may be conuenientlye admynistred, in all times, and in all
wounds in which the synnowes been hurt, as well by cuttynge, as by foynynge.

Item this playstre rehearsed of Auicenne, is convenient at the begynnynyng of a
foyne.. of the flower of beans, barlye, and orobus. ana.li. ss. make a stiff
plaster, with syrup of vinegre, and a little lie.

And Auicenne says, that the synnowes can not endure so strong a medicine,
as the ligamentes, which grow from the bones, namely brimstone, and
euforbiu^. wherefore we say that it is conuenyent, to apply this liniment
following upon the synnowes being discovered.. of oil of roses omphacine. A
liniment.
. i. and. ss. of oil of terebentine.. iii. of the iuce of plantain. ss. of the
seed of saint John's worte somewhat brayed. m^. ss. of tutia preparate.. iii. of
lyme ten times washed with water of plantayne.. ii. of antimonium.. i. of
gootes suete, of calves suete. an^.. v. of earth worms washed with wine.. i.
ss. let the said things be boiled together, except the tutia, with a glass
of water of ye decoction of barley, until the water and wine be consumed, than
strain the^, and set them on the fire again, addyng as much white wax as
shall suffyce, and in the end the forsayde tutia, and of saffran.. ss. This
lynyment is conuenyent in all wounds, in which the sinnowes ben hurt, and
discovered, for it appayseth grief, and engenders flesh, upon the synnowes
being discovered.

A precious oil.
Here flows a precious oil for great wounds, with mundification and
incarnation of the synnowes.. of gu^me elimi, of mastyke, of new rosyne of ye
pyne tree, of most clear terebentine. ana.. i. of armoniake, of bdelliu^, of
galban, of serapine, of opoponax. ana.. i. ss. of earth worms washed with
wine.. ii. of antimoniu^ brought to poudre.. iiii. rosemarye, of mylfoyle, of
centaurie the greater and the less, of the herb called horsetayle. ana. m^.
ss. of s. John's worte. m^. i. of oil of roses omphacine.. i. ss. Let them be
brayed all together, and put into a lembike of glass well stopped, and set it
on a furnays, and stylle the said things. The first destillations shall be
after the manner of water, the rest in the form of an oil, and ye must mengle
the.ii. liquores together, and sees them on the fire. Than ye must add unto
it, a little of fine grain, and madder, and the seed of saint John's worte, and
of the foresaid herbs a little, until the water be consumed. Than strain
them with a thycke clothe, and keep them as preciously as gold, for this oil
conteyneth, all the secrets and properties, that been required to the cure of
all wounds, in which the synnowes are hurt, for it has virtue to swage pain,
and it draws and dries with abstersyon, which intentions are requisite in
this case.

Moreover ye must note, that all conuenyent remedies must always be applied
actually hot: yea the ba^des wherwt the sore places be^ wrapped, must not be
cold, but hot. For cold is very noisome as we have said before. we will
declare some remedy, for the pryckyng or foynynge of the synnowes, albeit that
we have spoken thereof suffyciently in this chapitre, that the diligent reader
may have a more certain doctrine.

First at the beginning, it is very expedyent to lay a cauterization of oil
of elder being very hot, upon ye foyned place. An other attractiue.
Furthermore ye may co^uenyently apply upon the wound a medycyne attractyue,
as is this description.. of leven.. i. terebentyne.. ii. of hens grese, of
oil of lineseed ana.. x. of oil of elder.. i. ss. of ye flour of fenugreke,
and barley. ana.. vi. of saffran.. ii. the yolke of one egg, me^gle them, and
let them boil a little, and put in the yolke of the egg in ye end.

Item to the same intention, this ointment following is commendable. A cerote.
. of white diaquilon with gu^mes,. x. of clear terebentine, of gu^me elimi.
ana.. iii. of oil of elders.. ii. of oil of euphorbiu^.. ss. of armonyake
dissolved in vynegre.. i. mengle them and let them boil a little at the fire,
and make a cerote.

we have in this present Chaptre written sondrye remedies, as well oils as
playsters which ben conuenyent in this case, and therefore we will now speak
brefely of the accidents of these wounds, though we have spoken thereof
largely hertofore. First we say, that there is no surer remedy to remove a
spasme, than to cauterise the sore synnowe incontynently, with an hot iron,
and consequently to apply thervpo^ of oil of elders being hot. And afterward
ye shall proceed with a lenitiue oyntmente, and digestive, to remove the escare,
and ye heat, for we have often proved this curation, and have gotten worshype
thereby.

Galene and Auicenne have written sundry remedies, which are co^pound of
marvelous things not used of ye practisiens of our time, and for as much as
we have not found great profit in them, we let them pass for this present.
we have proved, that ye playstre aforewritten of meals, lie, and syrup of
Roses, is conuenyente for the cure of apostemes in the sinnowes, and likewise
the playstre de sapa or of sodde^ wine ordained in this present Chaptre.

Fynallye, it chances somtymes that beside apostemation, the sinnowes come to
putrefaction: and than if ye can not separate them by a digestyue: it is
necessary to use an actual or potentiall cauterie, and we have often separated
the putrefaction of ye synnowe, with vnguentum egiptiacum of the description of
Auicenne, and with a trociske of minium of our descryption, and likewise with
our poudre of mercurye, of which we will speak in our antidotary by the grace
of god. etc.

The.xvi. Chaptre. Of the cure of a spasme.
A Spasme after Auicen is a synnowye disease, The cure of spasmes.
by the which the lacertes are brought to the place of their beginning, and are
inobedye^t to the verue motyue, so yt they can not extend them selves, after
the will of the patient, until the disease be removed.

And there be.ii. kinds of a spasme namely a spasme proportioned to the
matter, and not proporcioned. That which is proportionat to the matter is
double, of inanicion and repletion. Howbeit some say that a spasme not
proporcionat, chances sometimes by a cut or foyne, saying: that the virtue
is prycked and hurt by ye pain and solution of continuitie, chefelye when the
pryck is made by an instrument with a small heed, or by styngynge of venomous
beasts, or by cold. Also they ground them selves upon Hipocrates, which
says that cold byteth the skin, and causes pain, rygour, and a spasme.
But in deed this chances seldom, and if if it chance, the spasme
incontinently becomes proportionate to the matter, by repletion.

wherefore in the cuttynge or pryckyng of synowes, a spasme chau^ceth by
replecion, by reason of ye vehement pain. For pain, as Galene says: is as a
ventose drawi^g matter to ye place by the which the synnowes be hurt and
replenysshed, and the said matter is conveyed sometime to the brain, by the
sinnowes. And when the brain feleth that matter, it dryueth it back again,
by which expulsion the synnowes are filled with the foresaid matter, and are
inobedie^t to their accustemed mouynge. And sometime ye spasme is throughout all
the body, sometime the spasme is caused by putrefaction, for when the hurted
synnowes come to putrefaction, a venomous matter asce^deth to the brain, and
when the brain feleth the said venenositie, it forces it self to resist the
same, and when it can not resist it, a spasme is caused, through the venomous
quality, and not by reason of the multitude of it.

And therefore we have often seen, this spasme to be caused, through the
coniunctio^ of the synnowes, as good Mesue testifyeth, by the authority of
Galene, saying: a spasme follows ye pryckyng of the synnowes or cords, and
properly wha^ the foyne or prycking has no respiration, for so^times there is
caused upon ye foine a venomous reume, which through the venomous fume,
ascendynge to the brain causes a spasme or epilepsia. And some time there
chau^ceth a rotten aposteme in the place of the foyne, and tha^ Galene
comaundeth to open the place of the foine, and to cut the sinnow thoroughly a
sondre, for the auoydaunce of the evil accide^tes. wherefore to conclude, we may
understand by the auctoctoritie of Galene, that in a manner al ways, a spasme
is caused through repletion, and therefore the cure of a spasme, is like to
the cure of a palsy: that is to say, with sharp clystres, with bathes of
warm water, and with dry bathes made with things that comfort the brain,
and the nuke, and that which dries up the moisture that causes the spasme.

Item the linimentes written in the Chaptre of the cure of the palsye, are
conuenyent in this case, and also the regiment of diete. Furthermore it is
expedyente to use this bathe following.. of camomylle, melylote, dylle, elders,
rue, sticados, mugwort, nept, organy, rosemarye, sage. ana. m^ iii. herb
saint marye, saint Iohns-wort, sothernwood, sauery, of ye flowers of elders.
ana. m^. i. of the roots of holyhocke, of enula campana. ana. li. ii. of
squinantu^, of honye. ana. li. iii. of castoreum.. i. of earth worms.. ii. of
nutmigges, of cinamome. ana.. i. of cubebes, of clowes somewhat brayed. ana..
ss. Let all these things be boiled together with a quycke fox, in suffycyent
quantity of water and wine, and with sweet oil olive, until two parts of
three be consumed.

Than let the patientes body be suffumigated, and bathed with that decoction,
for it is of a marvelous operation to ease the crampe.

Note that if you make a cerote of the roots of holyhocke, and enula ca^pana
sodden and strayned, and with sufficient white wax, it should be a good
medicine to be applied upon all the back bone. For the same intention you may
use this liniment.. of the oil of a fox, of camomyl, of lyllies, of spike.
an^. li. ss. of agryppa, of dialthea, of oil of juniper, terebentine,
castoreu^, mastike. ana.. i. ss. of rosemarye, sauge, saint John's worte,
sticados, nepte, maioram gentle, mintes muggeworte, wormewoode. ana. m^ i. of
squinantum. m^. ss. of earth worms washed with wine.. iii. Cut the herbs
and stamp them, and let them sees with the oils, and a cyathe of malueseye,
till the wine be consumed: than strain them, and put to the straynynge of
clear terebentine.. ii. of rasyne of the pynetree.. i. and. ss. of wax as
much as shall suffyce. Make a lynyment: and annoynte the synnowye places: and
chefely the back bone.

Item the description of this oil following is of the same virtue, Oil against
the crampe.
and is more resolutiue, and desiccatiue.. of oil of spike, of oil of
Camomyll. Ana.. ij. of fox oil, of oil of Juniper, of Castoreum, of Laurel.
Ana.. j. of oil of terebe^tyne.. x. of sticados of Squinantu^, of thyme, of
maiora^, of rosmarye, sage, nepte, mugwurte, wormoode, sothernwoode, of the
sede of saint Johannes wurte. Ana. M. ss. of agrippa, and dialthea. Ana.. iij.
of rue.. ij. and. ss. of nuttemygges, cubebes, cloves, cynamome. Ana.. ij. of
franke^cense.. iij. of rasine of the pyne tree, of clear terebentyne. Ana.. j.
and ss. of ye roots of enula Ca^pana, of the roots of walwurte somewhat cut
and stamped. Ana.. iij. of earth worms washed with wine.. v. let the things
that been to be stamped, be sta^ped grossly, than seethe them all with a
pound, and an half of odoriferous wine, unto the consumption of the wine, and
than strain them, and occupye them.

This oil applied actually hot upon the Nuke, and backebone, and upon
synnowie places is right profitable, to ease a spasme procedynge thoroughe the
hurt of the synnowes. For it resoluethe, and dryethe and comforts the hurt
parts.

Item after this unction of members it is good to wrappe the patient in a
shepes skin newely fleede, or in a foxes skin newely fleed, keeping it upon
the hurt parts the space of a day.

Item in this case the oil called Oleum Benedictum, which is written in our
antidotarye is very excellent. You must anoynte with the said oil the head,
and the Nuke.

The patientes chamber must be hot, and dry moderatly with aromatyke things
as sage, rosmarye, time, Laurel Juniper. etc.

The diete must enclyne to hotenes, and dryenes at the beginning, Diete.
and must be slender cheyfelye, when the spasme is universal thorough out all
the body. And he must drink Hydromel or meth with the decoction of sage, and
a little of horehou^de and synamome. Also grated bread in the broth of a
woodquyste, with rue and sage cut in small pyeces, and sprynkled on after the
manner of spyces, is of great effycacitie in this case. Eggs also with the
foresaid herbs may be well permytted. You may moreover give the patiente
wine delayed with Hydromell that is sodden with the forerehersed herbs. For it
helpethe to resolve the strange humiditie, that causes the spasme.

Likewise a brothe of cycers sodden with sage, Calaminte, Organie, with the
herb called Serpillum or our ladies bedstrawe, and rue, are commendable.

Item it is profitable to apply upon the head, and the Nuke, Cerotum Eugenij,
which confortethe the synnowes, and the brain, and is written in our
Antidotarye. And ye shall note that it must be applied upon the coronall, and
sagittall co^missure and upon the Nuke.

And forasmuch as in a spasme diverse evil accidents ensue as diminution of
fetching breathe, Accidents of a spasme.
retention of vryne, and costyfnes, we will speak thereof more largely. First
if the patient be costyfe, ye shall loose his bellye with clysters
mollificatiue, and lenitiue, whereof we will speak in our Antidotarie.

If the patiente can not pysse, ye shall provoke vryne with convenient
medicynes, which we will declare in a peculiare chapter and in the book of
symples.

If he can not fetch his breath, he shall hold in his mouth a loch ordained
in our antidotarie in the chapy. of syrupes. It is convenient also, to anoynte
the breast with oil of Camomyll, and of sweet almandes, and with hens gresse.

And because that this disease is of a cold and moist nature when the spasme
is without a fieuer, A fieuer somtymes cures a spasme.
a wise Chirurgien shall induce some small fieuer upon the spasme, for
thoroughe the heat thereof, the spasme is sometimes cured. Wherefore
Hypocrates says, that it is better, that a fyeuer should be in a spasme, than
a spasme in a fyeuer.

Further it is good that the patient hold, in the hour of his paroxysme, or
access, a willowe stycke between his teeth, that his tongue be not hurt. Here
you must note that, the cure of a spasme caused, by inanicion, is contrary to
the cure of a spasme caused by repletio^. For the cause of a spasme by
inanition, is drienes which co^sumeth the radical moisture. And the cause of
a spasme by repletio^ is matter co^ioincte fyllyng ye synnowes. And therefore in
a spasme by repletio^, ye synnowes become more large in bredthe and shorter in
length: but in a spasme by inanytio^ the synnowes be shortened and receive no
manner increase.

The cure of a spasme by inanition.
The cure of a spasme by inanycion, must be accomplished by moist and cold
things, and therefore this bayne following is right profitable in this case. A
bathe.
. of ye leaves of mallows, and violettes. Ana. m^. ij. of the sede of quynces,
and Psilliu^. Ana.. j. of ye sede of malowes, and Holyhock. ana. m^. j. of the
rotes of Holyhocke somewhat stamped.li. j. of clean barley. m^. iij. of
warde^s or great pears in no^bre.xx. let ye forsaid things be boiled in the
brothe of a hen with milk, and with the broth of the head and feate of a
calfe, until ye third part be consumed, tha^ strain the^, and let the
patiente be bathed with this decoction moderatly hot.

Likewise it is profitable to bathe the patient in a bayne made of gootes
milk, cowes milk or shepes milk. After that the patient is bathed, it is
convenient to rub his back bone, and all the joints, with this linime^t
following. of oil of violettes. A linimente.
. iiij. of oil of sweet alma^des, of hens grese of the marye of calves
legs. Ana.. vj. of calves suet, and kiddes suet. Ana.. x. Let the^ boil al
together with a pound of ye foresaid decoction of the bath until the decoction
be consumed. Than strain them and use them.

The regiment concerning diete in this spasme, ought to enclyne to coldness and
moystnes. If the spasme happen often in a wound it is mortal, for the most
part, nether any man escapes lightly. For Hipocrates says, yt a spasme caused
by a wound, is mortal for ye most part, which thing is true, because of the
evil accide^tes which ensue after a spasme, as difficulty of breathynge, which
is necessary to life and hurt of ye brain, through the communion that the
brain has with the synnowes. The spasme of inanition is seldom or never
healed, howbeit the chiruurgien ought not therefore to forsake the cure for
nature somtymes works things that seem impossible to men.

The.xvij. chapy. of the palsy and of the cure thereof.
THe cure of ye palsy has sondrie intentio^s, Of the palsy.
which I will leave to my masters the Phisicions, for most co^munely, ye palsy
chances of a corporal cause, and therefore the curation thereof perteyneth to
the^. Nevertheless forasmuch as it is wont to chance in the wounds of
synnowes, and of the head, we will declare some convenient medicynes for the
remotion of the same, and for the other intentio^s ye may resort to mesne which
has substantially entreated of this mattyer.

But to come to practice, we say that ye remedies declared in ye former cha.
are very convenient for the cure of the palsy. Howbeit this one thing I will
not ouerpasse, that the oil of bawme written in our antidotary, is a souerain
remedy in this case. Mesue also has described in the cha. of a palsy, an
oil of like efficacitie, which is after this form. An oil for ye palsye.
. of chosen myrrh, of aloes Epatyke, of spyke narde, sanguinis draconis, of
fra^kence^se, of Mumia, of Opoponax, of Bdelliu^, of carpobalsamu^, of Saffra^,
of Mastyke, of Gu^me arabyke, of liquide storax, of the other storax, of Mader.
Ana.. ij. ss. of musk.. j. of Terebe^tyne to the weight of the^ al, mengle
the^ together, and put the^ in a lembyke of glass, adding of courslope called
herb Peralisis.. ij. stylle the^, and keep ye licour in a glass well stopped,
and rub the me^bres wherein the palsy is, and the hinder part of the neck
with the said licour.

Decoction.
Ite^ this decoction following is rit expedient.. of lycorice.. vj. wild myntes.
m^. ij. of ye flowers of rosmary. M. j. of sage. m^. ss. of courslope, Yua
muscata, of squinantu^, of every one a little. Let the^ boil in a glass til
half be consumed, with the water of wormood fenell, rosmary, and sage, in
sufficient qua^tytie. Tha^ strain them and add to the straynyng, of honey..
iij. of the syrup de duabus radicibus.. ij. of syrup of sticados.. j. ss. and
let the^ boil again a little. This decoction is right convenient for them that
have the palsy, and for the^ that have the crampe thorough repletion, and they
must drink thereof at night and in the morning. ij. Thus we end. etc.

The.xviij. chap. of drawyng out of arowes, thorns and other like things.
IT chaunseth often, that man's body is hurt by arowes, Drawing out of
arowes. etc.
thorns, and like things, which remain within ye wounds.

For the cure whereof we say that two intentio^s are requisyte. The first is
the manner to draw out the foresaid things. The second to cure ye wou^des
after the instruments ben drawn out. Touching the first intention a discrete
Chirurgien, must consider the place where the arow is fyxed in. For if the
arow stycke in a fleshie membre as in the arm, the thygh, or leg having
barbes, and ye wound be deep, it is not in convenient to make the arowe perce
thorough on that other side, and so to be drawn out. For by reason of the
barbes, the arowe can not be drawn back, without tearyng of much flesh, and
many veins and pannycles, and perchance in the drawing out, the head should
remain behind, which should be a very dangerous thing, but if the head
remain within, and the mouth be so streat, that it can not be drawn out with
an instrumente, made after the fashion of a Cranes beck, than ye must cut
the place, even unto the arowe head, and ye shall proceed after the same manner
if it stycke in the bone.

Note here that the sooner ye make incisyo^, the better it is, for auoyda^s of
apostematio^. The cause is this. Wha^ a blody fresh wound is cut, ye place
is not yet altered with vehement pain, nether apostemed with humors arrived to
the sore place, and therefore if it may be done without the hurt of synnowes
and veins, it is better that incision be made spedelye, tha^ when the place is
peynfull and apostemed.

After ye incision is made the arowe must be drawn, out with the foresaid
instruments, as soon as may be, and afterward, ye must power upon the
place, twice a day hot oil myngled with the yolks of eggs. There be some
doctors which command to mollify the place, where ye arow or thorn
stycketh the space of.iij. or.iiij. days, with oil of roses hot layenge
there on things attractiue, before ye come to the drawyng out, or cuttyng out,
of the said arowes or thorns.

But suerlie they work unwisely, for the place at that time is paynfull, and
full of humors, and is not so at the beginning. And therefore ye place must be
lightened and not altered and payned. The curation of thorns, nails, and
pieces of wood, remaynnynge in the wound is like to the cure aforesaid.
Nevertheless I think this one thing worthy to be remembered, that we have
drawn out a thorn, which had caused putrefaction, puttyng into the wound a
tente, which might touch ye place where the thorn was, and it was first
weted with spittel,
and than enrolled with our powder of mercury, and ye said poudre engendered a
quiture, with which ye thorn issued out.

Thus it is good sometime to procure quitture, for ye thorns and like things
come forth therewith all. Many doctors allow ye application of things
attractiue, An attractiue.
among which this description following is commended of brunus and theodorike..
of ye juice of a reed or cane rotes.. ss. of diaquilo^ gu^med.. j. of
aristologialonga..ij. of leven..x. of terebentyne.. vj. of galbane, of
armonyake. ana..iij. dissolve the armoniake and galbane in vinegre, and mengle
the^ altogether, and make them after the manner of a plaster. And if ye add
thereunto of duckes grese and of hens grese. Ana., ss. it shall the better
swage pain.

And forasmuch as the heads of arowes are often enuenomed, The cure of a
venomed arowe.
which thing is known by the swellyng of ye place, by the blewnes and
blacknes of ye same, and by the infla^matio^ of the heart, ye must therefore
scarifie ye place about ye wound, with a deep scarificatio^ or cauterise ye
place with an hot yro^, until the venemousnes be destroyed. And if the place
begin to canker, as we have often seane, it is necessary to take away the
corruption, with an hot iron, as we have said. For ye remouyng of the eschare
ye shall proceed like as in other burned wounds.

The second ententio^, which co^cernyth the cure of the wound after the
drawyng out of ye arowes or thorns, is accomplished after the doctrine
declared in this present treatise of wou^des. Wherefore if the arowe be in ye
head ye shall resort to the cha. of ye wou^des of the head and likewise in
other parts. Thus we end. etc.

The.xix. cha. of the percyng or openyng of wounds and of the regiment of
wou^des apostemed.
IT chaunsethe often that in every part of the body, therbe wounds, Of the
opening of a wound.
which are so closed up, that quytture being engendered in them, can in no wise
issue out. And it is often times the cause, why the evil is increased and
dangerous accidens induced.

To resist this inconueniens it is necessary to enlarge the wound, otherwise
it may easily grow to an holow and fistulose vlcere, and therefore Auicenne
commands, that as soon as it is possible, the wound be opened and enlarged.
As for the curatio^ thereof, ye shall have recourse to ye chapitres of other
wou^des. Likewise if the wound be caused by co^tusyon or brusyng, ye shall
peruse the Chapitre of the wounds caused by the said co^tusion. And forasmuch
as oftentimes the wou^des are with apostematio^, for the cure thereof ye shall
resort to the chapter of wounds having apostemation. For the wound can not
be healed, except the aposteme be first removed, and it must be removed without
pain, which thing is accomplished, by the administration of medicines that
dry and cool with mollification. And Auicenne says, that ye application of a
plaster made with a pomegranade, sodden in small wine, stamped and strayned,
is good in all wounds which have apostemation, and in all parts of man's
body.

Furthermore ye shall consider the complexion or quality of ye aposteme, that
is to say, whether it be vndimia (which nevertheless chances not often in
this case) or herisipelas, or phlegmon. For Herisipelas is otherwise cured than
Phlegmo^, wherefore if the wound have the aposteme of Herisipelas, it must be
cured with ye cure of Heresipelas. And like manner must be observed in other.
Thus we end. etc.

The.xx. chapi. of the manner of byndynge wounds and ulcers.
Of Ligature or byndynge of wounds or vlceres.
AFter the doctrine of the ancient writers, there be three manners of bindi^ges.
The first is called ligatura incarnatiua, which is good in wounds and broken
bones, wha^ intention is to join the loosed parts together. The second is
called ligatura expulsiua, and is convenient in holowe vlceres, that the matter
may be drawn out toward the mouth of the wound. The third is called
rete^tiue, and it reteynethe the medicyne in the sore place, and is comen to
wounds, vlceres and breakynges of bones.

The byndynge called incarnatiue, Byndyng incarnatiue.
must thus be administered. First ye must have a band, rolled in at both
ends and begin beneith to wrappe ye sore membre bringing the band by little
and little, unto the wounded place and a little forther straynyng it a little. And
note, that one of the parts of the band must go up, and the other down,
rydyng one upon an other, and taking as much of the parts lyeng about, as
shall seem expedient. And ye must strain the band more strongly upon the
wound tha^ in other places. Howbeit ye must not strain it to much, for that
might cause apostematio^, and likewise ye must avoid to much losenes, for
otherwise the byndyng should not be of good operation.

When ye have thus wrought as it is aforesaid ye must sow the heads or ends
of the band. This is Galenes inuencio^ in.vj. therapeutices. To the same
intention, the bynding of the wounds in the face written in the chapitre of
the said wounds in the face, is convenient.

The second kind of bynding called ligatura expulsiua, Expulsive byndynge.
is done with a bond only bound at one head. And ye must begin to bind
from the end of the sore membre, straytlye at the first. And wha^ ye come to
the sore place, you must slack it somewhat yt ye corruption may issew out of
ye place.

The third kind of bynding called ligatura retentiua, Retentiue byndynge.
which is profitable to retain the medicynes upon the places, where ye can
not use the foresaid manners of byndynge: As in the neck, in the belly, and in
the face, and upon paynfull Apostemes. In this kind, I say, the bands must
be large, and long, and of soft lynen cloth. And here in it is necessary, to
have seen the workynge of an expert Chirurgien. It avails also, as Galene
says, to have the knowledge of situation of members. Thus we end this present
chapter. etc.

The.xxj. chapter of medicynes incarnatiue or that engendre Flesh.
of medicynes incarnatiue.
ALbeit that we have sufficiently declared in the chapi. of fleshy wou^des,
medicynes incarnatiue: nevertheless, that ye may have a more serten knowledge
thereof. I thought it good, to make an especyall chapter of the said medicynes
incarnatiue.

First we say, by the authority of Auicenne that, that is an incarnatiue
medicyne which has virtue to congele and make thycke good blood in the
flesh. And that is brought to pass, by medicynes that have power to dry in
the first degree, or in the beginning of the second degree. For if the medicyne
be to much desiccatiue, it will let the blood to comme down to the place. And
so the flesh shall not have mattyer, wherwyth it may be increased.

Likewise if it scour to much, it will make the blood to run to fast, and
so consume the mattier that should engendre flesh. Wherefore a medicyne
incarnatiue, must be of such qualytie, that it may conserve the complexion
of the sore members. For Galene says, that we must keep the course of nature
while it contynueth. And again when it is lost, we must restore it. And the
foresaid medicines, work cheiflye by the nature and virtue of the membre.

And therefore we must consydre, the nature and quality of the member. For
sum ben moist, and some ben dry. The dry, require dry things, and the
moist, moist things. For moist members are not preserved by dryenesse, but
are destroyed therewith al. For, as Galene says, hot bodies, will have hot
remedies, and dry bodies, dry remedies. etc. Which thing must be
understand concerning the natural complexion of the membre, and not
concerning the disease.

For as a disease touching his curation desires his contrary, so a member
desires his like. So it follows, that in wounds of moist members,
we must use moist medicynes, that the nature or complexion of the membre, be
not destroyed. Nevertheless we must note, that a medicyne incarnatiue ought
to be less dry in a temperate body, than in a body intemperate in his
qualitees. And therefore we said in the chap. of flesshie wounds, that dry,
strong, and thick bodies and members, for the incarnacion of their wounds,
require greater exciccation or dryenge, tha^ tender bodies or members. For wha^
wounds happen in tender bodies, ye incarnatiue may not exceade the first
degree of dryness: but in dry and strong bodies, the incarnatiue medicyne
must be in the beginning of the second degree.

Wherefore we conclude that a medicyne incarnatiue must be diverse, according
to the dyuersitie of bodies and members. For the same medicyne, is dry in the
first degree in one body, and moist in another. And therefore it engenders
flesh in one, and corruption in another. And therefore Galene says
expressly, that fanckincense is dry in the first degree, in respect of a
temperate body. For in a temperate body, it engenders flesh. And that only
because it preserves the complexion of the member, and dries the superfluous
moystnes, that hyndreth the generation of flesh. which thing chau^ceth not in
a dry body, for therein it enge^dreth not flesh, but quytture: because it is
moist in respect of ye same. And therefore Galene, numbryng medicines
incarnatiue, declares sundry medicines simple in complexion. As frankincense,
barley flower, bean flower, and flower of orobus, flower delice, tutia,
climia, aristologia and the plant of oppoponax. And he declares some
incarnatiues compounde in complexion as mirre, sarcocolle, sanguis draconis.
Wherefore it follows, that a medicine to engendre flesh, must in dryenesse
excede the natural dryenesse of the membre. But where as we said before, by ye
authority of Galene, that a medicine incarnatiue, must be of such drynes, that
it may preserve the complexion of the membre. It is true, if ye understand it
absolutely, that is to say the membre alone: But it must moreover, have virtue
and power, to heal the disease. For a medicine, must be of such power, yt may
not alonly co^serue the complexion thereof, but also dystroye disease. Also
where as we said, that a member is co^serued by his like, as moist me^bres, by
moist things: we say, yt it is true, if ye understand co^seruatio^ only: but
if ye have respect to ye cure of the disease, ye must not only administer
things like, but ye shall also administer things, yt both conserve the
natural complexion of the membre, and destroy the disease.

Wherefore seeing ye moystnes, is contrary to generation of flesh in wou^des,
ye must administer such dry things, that beside the natural co^seruation of
the membre, it may also dry up the moystnesse of the wound.

Thus to conclude we say that a medicine incarnatiue, eue^ in moist bodies
ought to be of a dry complexion. Further more ye shall note this one thing,
touching ye incarnation of wou^des, yt ye must maynteyne ye natural
complexion of the member, and the nature of the body. Which thing Galene
witnesses saying: yt nature is the worker and the physician or chirurgie is
the minister. For the generation of flesh, without the help of nature is
against ye operation of the same. And therefore it is very necessary, that the
pacient be fed, with meats that engendre good blood. And to this our
purpose, says Auicenne in the chapitre of a fleshie wound, when thou haste
kept the complexion of the membre, take good head that nothing be drawn
thereunto, but blood that is natural. And here in are two things to be noted.
First that the incarnatiue medecines be of that complexion, that the membre is
of, so that they shall not be able to draw unto ye member, any thing but
natural blood, and that as well in quality, as in quantity, for the blood
that is noisome other in quality or quantity, does hinder the growing of
flesh in the wound, as says Galien in the third and fourth books de
ingenio sanitatis, and as Auicenne says: take heed that nothing be drawn to
the member, but only natuturall blood. And this shall ye do if ye defend the
member that no antecedente matter of the body come to it, and cause pain with
apostemation in ye place, and change ye member from his natural complexion.
And thus doing, there shall come only natural blood unto the membre. And thus
it follows yt the medecines incarnatiue, shall have their operation in
regendringe of flesh, and closing up of the wou^des. And this is the mind of
Auice^, to let ye coming of euel blood, and of contrary humors, as it is said
in ye place before alleged: the stoppyng of bloodynes and watrines. etc. It is
also to be noted, yt these incarnatiue and sigillatiue medecines of wou^des,
and vlceres ought not to be administered within, before yt the sores be
mu^difyed, and the wou^des digested, as ye cause shall require. For, as Auice^ne
says, capitulo de nascentia carnis in vlceribus: there may be no incarnatiue
laid to the vlcere, till it be very perfytly mundifyed, and that there be
brought unto it, the nouryshme^t, yt is gentel and natural blood, whereby
nature with the incarnatiue medecin, does enge^der blood, both in vlceres and
wou^des. And afterward he says: when yt the euel flesh and rotten matter
are expelled, the^ may ye lay to the member no bytyng medicine, nor cle^syng
with any strength, in what place so ever ye wou^des be. Therefore it is plain that
an incarnatiue medecin, at ye lest wise, in fresh wou^des, must be void
from al vehement clensing and mordication. But in ulcers, for because as Gale^
says, there be ever.ij. manner of matters in them, the one subtle or thynne,
and the other thycke. It is most convenient, that the medecin incarnatiue,
have in him also some nature of scouring, and thus by the reason yt the
medicine dries, it shall consume ye subtyl or thynne matter, and by the reason
of his abstertio^, it shall be able to purge away the gross matter.

Now yt we have treated of ye incarnatiue medecines, and sigillatiue i^ what
degree of here they ought to be, yt is to say according to ye diversity of
the bodies, and complexion of ye me^bres. I think it very profitable, to set
forth certain receptes of incarnatiues, and have divided them into three
sorts. The first, shall be somewhat weak in operation, the.ij. mean, the last
shall be of great strength and power. The first, is to be occupied in ye wou^des
of a tender person, the.ij. is for wou^des of a strong body of dry
co^plexio^, ye.iij. is in all manner of wou^des and sores, where ye will have ye
flesh to grow upon ye bone. And thus it is plain yt a medecin incarnatiue
is necessary to be not only, dry in the first degree, but also in the.ij.
and.iij. and we have an example of ye flourdelice, which as ye doctors say,
does incarnate ye bones, and for all yt it is dry in ye.iij. degree.

And to be short this is the first co^potion.. of fra^kince^se.. iij. An
incarnatiue of the first lord.
barley meal and bean mele. ana.. ij. sarcocol, mirrhe. ana.. i. sanguinis
draconis.. i. ss. me^gle them, and make thereof a poudre. Another of ye same
operation.. of fra^ke^cense, myrrh. ana.. i. of barley meal.. iiij. sa^guinis
draconis.. ij. of litarge of gold and silver, bole armoniake. ana.. iij. of
clear terebe^tine.. x. of syrup of roses.. ss. of the juice of pla^tayne.. v.
let the terebe^tyne sees with the juice, till half be spent, the^ myxt them al
together, for it is of a wonderful operation. Another.. of oil of mastike.. ss
terebe^tyne.. i. rosyn of ye pyne.. iij. mastik.. ij. oil of rosys omphacine..
x. the juice of co^ferie.. i. the juice of pla^tayne.. ss. let the^ seth
altogether till ye juice be wasted, then strain the^, and put to the streining,
goats tallow and wethers tallow. ana.. v. white wax, as much as shall
suffyce, and make a soft oyntme^t, puttyng thereto of frankencense poudred..
iij. ss.

The.ij. order is thus.. myrrh, Incarnatiue of the second sort.
sarcocoll. ana.. iij. franke^cense, mastike, aloes hepatic. ana.. ij. ss.
mengle them, and make a powder. Another.. terebe^tyn.. ij. syrup of roses,
honey of roses. ana.. ss. juice of pla^tayn.. vi. seth ye terebe^tyne and ye
juice a little, and the^ put together al ye rest with a little saffran. Another..
myrrh, of fra^ke^cense, sarcocol. ana.. i. myldust.. ij. mastik, colophonie,
gu^mi elimi.. ij. of saffra^, aloes hepatic. ana.. i. sang. dra. terre
sigillate. ana.. ss. mixed them and make a powder. Another.. rosyn of ye pyne
tree, colophonie. ana.. vi gu^me, mastike. ana.. ij. terebe^tine.. x. and with
sufficient white wax make an ointment, putting thereto franke^ce^se, mastike,
myrrh. ana.. i. ss.

The third sort.
The.iij. order is this.. paucedinis. ss. yreos.. v. myrrh.. iij. centauries ye
less and the greater. ana.. ij. aristologia round, tutie, opoponacis, meal
of oroby. ana.. ij. make thereof a powder, for it is of wonderful operation, in
strong bodies, and enge^dring flesh upon the bones.

And if yt thou wylt make an ointment of this powder, make after this manner..
terebe^tyne.. i. honey of roses.. ss. let them seth a little, and the^ put
thereto.. vi. of ye powder aforesaid. Another. terebe^tyne.. ij. rosyne of pyne
tree, mastike. ana.. i. ss. new wax.. i. oil of mastik.. x. let them seth a
little, and put of the forsayde powder.. v. the juice of yreos.. ij. for it is
marvelous good for the same purpose. I could here reherce many incarnatiue
medecines but I have only set such as I have proved my self with my great
worship and vtilite to the patientes.

The.xxij. chap. of the manner or quality of tents, lyntes and bolsters.
Of te^tes lyn^^s and bolsters
IT is euidente that to the curation of wou^des, and vlceres, the knowledge of
adnistryng te^tes, and bolsters, is necessary, and therefore we will briefly
speak thereof.

First we say that bolsters must be applied in hollow ulcers, chiefly in
those places yt can not well be bound, as in the dugges, the flanckes, under ye
arm holes, in the neck, and other parts of the body, some been quadrate,
some tria^gulare or threcorned, some be of hurdes of flax, some of cotton, and
some of lynte, which are the best.

And these are applied, sometimes dypped in some liquour, sometimes dry. In
breakynges of bones, they are applied being dypped in the white of eggs
mengled with oil of roses, which thing is convenient for the conservation,
and confortation of the bones restored into their places, and that with out
pain, and apostemation.

Sometimes they are dypped in water of roses and vynegre, to keep the members
from vehemente heat. Item it is profitable sometimes, to dip them in the wine
of a decoction of roses,, of wormemoode, sticados, squina^tum, of the nuttes of
cypress, of ye flowers of pomegranades, of rosemarye, of mirtilles, that they
may comfort the members, and that they may help to bring the quytture
toward ye mouth of the wounds or ulcers.

Some moreover use bolsters made of feathers, or cotton, and apply the^ dry,
and they ben good to preserve the natural heat of the member. Item oftentimes
bolsters be made of a flat spo^ge, and sometimes of a long, or hurdes of
flax, to drink in, and to purge the quytture of wou^des, and sores.

Tents are right necessary, for sondrye causes. First to purge quytture. The
use of tents.


Secondly, to keep the mouth of wou^des and sores open. Thyrdly, to engendre
flesh, in that, that it draws out the quytture which hyndred the said
generation. And they are profytablye applied in wounds caused by contusion, or
brusynge, and in wounds apostemed, and altered thorough the air, brieflye in
exitures or outbreakynges, and in all wounds and sores in which bones must be
taken out.

These tents have sondrye names, according to their sondrye effects. Some
ben called mu^difycatiue, and they are made of old, and soft cloutes well
shraped. Some ben called apertiue, because they keep open the mouth of the
wou^des, and sores, and they are made of hurdes or of cotton.

A canulate tente.
Ite^ some purge the matter yt lies in some deep place, and therefore they be
called purgative, and they are holowe like pypes, and been made some time of
leed, sometime of quylles, and sometime of silver, and sometime of leaves of
colewurte dried in ye shadow, and they are called canulares, and they be of
great efficacitie in holowe wou^des and vlceres, and chiefly in womans
breasts. Also a tente of dytanie may be conveniently administered, but above all
other, tents made of gourdes dried in the sun are excellent. Some use tents
of dytanie, of the pyth of myllones, to keep the mouth of ye wounds open thus
we end this chapter.

The.xxiij. chapter of the manner to sow wounds.
Of sowynge of wounds.
THe chirurgiens use diverse manners of seames to join sondrye places together,
of which one is called the skynners seame, which is good in the wou^des of ye
guts. There is an other kind to join together ye lyppes of ye mouth, and for
other parts in which we fear yt they can not be co^serued by reason of ye
tenderness of the same. The threde must be wound about the nedle, as taylours
and semsters stick there nedles in their cotes. There is moreover an other
kind, which is common to all other and is much used, and it is after this
sort. Ye must take the.ij. sides of the wound, depely or superficially,
after the quality of ye wound, and dysposition of the me^bres, (for in fleshy
members, ye wound being deep, a deep seame must be made, but when the wound
is in synowy places, the seame must not be deep, lest the synowe be prycked.)
And when ye seame is made, ye must tie the thredes, or make a knot and cut the
said threade, within a finger bread of the knotte, leaving also ye space of
a finger bread, between point and point, and so proceed sowyng, till it come to
ye end of the wound, and leave a mouth in the nether part of the seame, yt
the matter may be purged thereby. By the grace of god we will speak of this last
seame, and of the first more plainly, in the chap. of wou^des of simple and
isntrumental members. There be moreover sondrye kinds of seames, which be
not used at this time, and because they be of small profit, we will ouerpasse
them, and make an end of this chap. for which the name of god be praised.

The second treatise of the third book.
The first chap. of brusynge through a fall, and of the brusyng of the muscyls,
and attrition of lacertes.
AFter the doctrine of ancient and later doctors, Of confusion and attrition.
there is difference between falling, and stomblynge and likewise co^tusion
and attritio^. We will speak bryefly of this difference. First a fall, is to be
understand from an hye place, and then attrition of many parts is caused in
ye body. Offe^sion or sto^blyng, is when one hurts him self, by occasion of
some thing lyenge in his way. Now I will declare ye difference of contution,
and attrition which is only in the place. A contusion is when hurt happens
in a fleshie place, and atrition is in the heads of the lacertes. As for the
cure of them, we will speak thereof in the next chap. In this present chap. we
will make mention, of the hurt of inward members, and also will speak
somethynge concerning the cure of co^tusion, and attrition in ye outward part.
If ye perceive that some bone be broke beside the attrition, ye shall resort
to ye chap. which treat peculiarly thereof.

To come to a certain doctrine, we say yt a fall and stomblynge are more
dangerous, then contusion and attrition, because of the privy hurt of the
inward members, as of the guts, of the pannicles, of the belly of the
ligame^tes, of the great veins, and the small, contained in noble members. And
therefore it chau^seth often, yt the patie^tes dye, through falling or
stomblynge.

The signs of death in this case are these, vometynge, bledyng at the nose,
for then it is a sign that some vein is broken in the head. Sometime there
chaunseth vomytynge with blood, and that is a sign that some vein is broken
in the stomach, the liver or the mylte. And when flux of the belly, shortenes
of breath, diminution of ye voice, with grypynge in the belly, and soundynge
chance, the patie^t is nigh death. And therefore Auicenne says, when the
patient has lost his speech and hangs down his head with sweet of his
foreheade, not being able to lift it up, then he dies forthwyth, chiefly,
when the sweet is cold. which thing is general, as well in stomblynge, as in
attrition and contusion.

The same auctour says moreover yt sometimes ye lacert of ye heart is broken,
and therefore ye patie^t dies incontinently.

Furthermore when the vryne is retained, and the excreme^tes of the belly issue
out against the will of the patie^t, it is sign of death. The cure of a fall,
shall be acco^plyshed by.iiij. The cure.
intentions. The first is ordinance of dyete, the.ij. euacuatio^ of matters
antecede^t, and turnyng away of ye same, yt it may not be deryued to the sore
place. The.iij. is administration of local medecines, the.iiij. is correction
of accidents. The first, Dyete.
yt is to say ordinance of diete, must be sle^der at the beginning, for
Auice^ne says yt we must give but little to the patient, at the beginning, or
rather nothing at al ye first day. wherefore until ye time that we be sure and
without fear of apostemation, the patient must absteyne from wyue and flesh,
so yt he be not to weak. And he must eat almande milk with sugger, and with
common seeds or gruell of sodde^ grated bred. And when.vij. days be passed ye
shall permyt to the patient, a grosser dyete, as ye broth of cycers, and rybes,
yt the nutritive me^bres may be stre^gthned, and successively, ye may give hi^
flesh, wine and other meats of good nouryshme^t. The.ij. ententio^, which
co^systeth, in euacuatio^ of ye matter antecedent, shall be acco^plyshed by.ij.
things, namely by phlebotomy dyuersiue, if it be nedful, yt is to say, by
cutting a vein to turn away ye matter, Purgation.
and by lousynge the belly. First, ye may louse ye belly, with cassia, ma^na, and
diacatholicon, or with this potion.. of chosen ma^na, of diacassia, and
diacatholicon. ana.. ss. of water of endive, buglosse, and sorel. ana.. i.
me^gle the^ together, and put to it of syrup of roses.. i. or make it thus. R.
diacatholicon, and ma^na. ana.. vi. of reubarbe,. i. and with the water of
endive, nyghtshade, and sorell, make a small potion. Rasis and Mesue say in ye
chap. of reubarbe, yt it heals inward breakynges, and therefore it is a
sovereign medecyne in this case.

The third intention, which consists in ye administration of local
medecines, shall be acco^plyshed as it follows First if ye perceive, yt there be
any bledyng in ye body, ye must give ye patie^t, things yt have virtue to
stau^che blood and which defend apostemation, To staunche blood.
unto the.vij. day. In which case, we have often used this ordinance.. of bole
armenie, terre sigillate, of mu^mie. ana.. i. of reubarbe, of mader. ana.. ij.
the recepte is.. ss. with water of plantayne, night shade, and a little wine of
pomegranades. Here follows an other ordinance to resolve blood me^gled with
in the body, An electuary to resolve blood.
and it must be administered iij. or.iiij. days after the hurt.. of reubarbe,
of madder, of cost, of centaury of sarcocoll. ana.. i. of auence, he^pe,
stabiose. ana.. ij. of the syrup de duabus radicibus.. ij. of annys, of
coriander, of saffran. ana.. ss. mengle them together, and make the^ in manner
of an electuarye. The receyt of this electuarye, is the quantity of a sponeful
every morning and ye must use thereof the space of ten days. To this
entention the potion of gariofilatum, written in ye chap. of wou^des of the
breast, is commendable. Seeing that we have spoken of medicines convenient for
the inward parts, it is time to come to remedies for the outward parts.
First, at ye beginning of the cure, if ye perceive yt the guts or nutritive
me^bres ben hurt, there is no surer remedy then to rub the patientes body with
oil of roses, and with oil of myrte, hot from the breasts to the thighs,
and after the unction, ye shall inco^tinently apply, upon the anointed parts
the powder of roses and of myrtilles. Also immediatlye after the said unction,
ye must wrappe the sore places of the body, from the canel bone to the
flanks in a shepes skin newly flayne, and let it be as hot as is possible,
for we have often proved this thing to our worship and profit to the
patientes. And for as much as in falling and sto^blyng, there chau^ceth often
brusyng of muscules, and attritio^ of lacertes, we will declare certain remedies
for the same. To heal co^tusion caused in ye lacertes and ye ioi^tes, Plaster.
we have proved this plaster to be of good operation.. of ye rotes and leaves
of holihoc, ana. m^. i. of salomo^s seal, and lyllie rotes. ana.. ij. seth
them al in water, sta^pe them and streyne them, and add thereunto of oil of
camomil, roses, and dil. ana.. ss. of white wax. ij. ss. of saffra^.. i.
me^gle them and make a cerote. It chau^ceth sometime, yt the brusynge can not be
resolved, but comes to maturation and to a ca^creus dysposition, and then for
the cure thereof, ye shall resort to the chap. of ca^crena and phlegmo^.
Furthermore there chances sometimes, hardness, and uneasy mouynge of ye
muscules and lacertes, chiefly, in thextremitie of the joints, and the cause
is, that the subtyle matter is resolved, and the gross remains. For the cure
where of, ye shall resort, to the cure of ye hardness of joints, and thus we
make an end. etc.

The second chap. of wounds caused by brusynge, and altered through the
air, and of the attrition of the lacertes with the cure thereof.
ALbeit that in ye former chap. we have sufficiently treated, The cure of of
bruised wounds.
by what mean bruised wou^des and altered by the air, ought to be cured.
Nevertheless that we may have a more certain doctrine of the same, it seemed
good to make a special chapter thereof.

And to come briefly to our purpose, there ben.iiij. intentions necessarely
required there unto. As touching the first and the second, ye shall proceed
after the doctrine, written in the former chap. and in the chapter of a broken
skulle. The third ente^tion, is acco^plyshed by ye administration of
convenient local medicines, and first, we must with al dilige^s, procure
digestion, for otherwise ye contusion, or attrition may quykly grow to a
cancrenous quality, for every bruised wound, as Galene says, must needs rotte,
and be turned into quytture.

And because this wound can not be healed, by the way of the first
intention, therefore it is nombred among compounde wounds, for therein is pain
and apostemation. wherefore let the bruised wou^d be digested with a digestyue of
terebentine, with the yolks of eggs, Plaster
leying on this plaster.. of the leaves of mallows, violettes. ana. m^. i. of
holyhocke roots. li. ss. sees them all in the broth of fresh flesh, stamp
them, and strain them, and in the decoction thereof with sufficient flower of
barley and wheat, and with the foresaid straynynge, make a thyck plaistre,
adding of butter, and of common oil. ana.. iii. the yolks of.ii. eggs, and
a little saffra^. This plaster swageth grefe meruelously, and resolves
humors, which been about the wound, and sondreth the hole parts from the
corrupted, which might cause putrefaction, and therefore digestion duly
administered, in bruised wounds, causes putrefaction to cease: for Rasis
says, that a wound and a sore come not to perfyte generation of flesh, but
after putrefaction, that is to say: after perfyt digestion. But if the said
wounds can not be brought to perfyte digestion, by the forsaid mean, but grow
to corruption which thing may be known by the dark color thereof, than ye
shall apply vnguentum egiptiacum, written in the chaptre of the cure of
cancrena. Likewise a plaster of meals with sodden wine, ordained in the same
place, is conveniently permitted in this case. For it co^serueth the hole
part, and remoueth the deed and rotten flesh.

And when the said wou^des ben digested, and bring forth good quitture, tha^
ye must leave the digestiues, and use things mu^dificatiue. And for ye
mu^dification of ye same, and wounds altered by ye air, and likewise for
incarnation, and sigillation, ye shall proceed according to the doctrine
written in the Chapter of hurted synnowes.

Item if the wound be with attrition of the lacertes, beside the intentions
aforesaid, it is expedient to apply upon and about the wound things yt apease
grefe, and chefely this plaster which we have often proved to be good.. of the
rotes of holyhocke. li. i of the herb called Salomo^s seal.. A plaster
mitigatiue
ii. Let them sees in sufficient water, tha^ cut them, stamp the^, and
strain them, and make a plaster at the fire with sufficient white wax,
addyng these things following.. of oils of camomyl, dyl, and roses. an^.. ii.
of earth worms washed with wine.. i. ss. tha^ let the^ sees with a little wine
of good odor, until ye wine be consumed than strain the^, and with the forsayde
strayning and wax, make a plaster at the fire, as we said before, adding of
clear terebentine.. ss. of saffran.. i.

The fourth intention which is to correct ye accidents, and to defend the^,
shall be accomplished by ye doctrine folowi^g. First ye accidents, Accidents
yt may happen in a wou^d, with attrition ben. iii, namely pain, aposteme, and
corruption of ye member. And these.iii. things be^ kept of by convenient
diete, by laxatiue medicynes, and by fleb. on ye contrary part, Flebotomie
and by ye aplicatio^ of a defe^siue about ye wound, as yt which is written in
ye cha. of wou^des in fleshy places. And if it chance, yt ye brusing grow to
corruption of ye member, tha^ ye shall resort to ye cha. of ye cure of cancrena,
and of askakyllos in which there been many doctrines declared, expedient in
this case. And for swaging of pain, and removing of an aposteme, ye shall
peruse the chapter of flegmon procedyng of a primitive cause. And if ye
aposteme be colerik ye shall resort to the chaptre of Herisipelas. And
likewise to take away the pain, ye may proceed to that, yt is written in the
fore alleged chap. An thus we end. etc.

The.iii. Chaptre: of wounds made by hacquebutes, wounds made with gonnes
gu^nes, and like instruments.
ALbeit that the ancient and later doctors have written nothing of wounds
caused by gu^nes and other instruments of fire, nevertheless, we have
co^sydred, that it is profitable to declare such remedies, as we have proved to
be good in this case. And before we come to ye principal cure, it is necessary
to declare the nature of such a wound.

And first we say by the authority of Galen, yt he is in deed a phisicio^ or
chirurgie^, which ca^ handle things, yt has not be^ handled before, and can
also rightly use such things as be^ taught of ancient doctors. wherefore we
affirm, yt those wou^des are co^pou^d of iii. kinds. First it is called a
bruised wound, because of ye roundnes of the ston. Secondly it is called a
bre^t wound because of ye fire. Thirdly it is called a venymous wou^d, by
reso^ of the poudre. And forasmoch as these kinds be^ contrary and diverse,
they cause ye wou^d to be of hard curatio^. For brusing and burning need
moisture, and venemnes needs desiccation or drying. To com to ye true cure, we
say by ye authority of Galen, yt when.ii. or mo diseases be^ joined together,
ye intention of ye chirurgie^ must be to hele ye more dangerous, not utterly
forsaking also the other. But seeing the most dangerous thing herin is venym
caused by the poudre, the pryncypall intention shall be, to cure the same.

The cure
The cure of the said wou^des is accomplysshed by.iiii. intentions. The first is
ordinance of diete. The.ii. euacuation: the third, administration of local
medycynes according to the composition of ye wou^d. The fourth, is correction
of accide^tes. First wha^ the chirurgien is called to this cure, he must
co^sydre, whether the wound be made with a great instrumente, or with a small, or
a mean. And forthermore he must consider the place yt is hurt, yt is to say:
whether it be upon synowes or no, and whether the bones be hurt or no, and also
whether the stone remains wtin ye body or other me^bres, for true judgment is
taken of ye hurted place

As touching the first and.ii. intention he shall proceed according to the
doctrine wtin the Cha. of fleshy wou^des And it is to be noted, yt though this
wound have part of venym, nevertheless cutting of a vein is convenient at
the beginning, and chefely diuersiue that is to say which turns away
humors, yt they be not deryued: to ye sore place. For the venenositie
proceeding of poudre is not so dangerous as the venenositie of a carbuncle.

The third intention, which concerns the administration of local medicines,
according to the time of the hurt done, shall be accomplished as it follows.
First there is no better remedy, than to use in the said wound an actual
cauterie, which may touch all the parts of the wound, or to apply vnguen.
egip. after the description of Auicen. Also in the stead thereof, a man may use
a cauterization of oil of elders boylyng hot: for cauterization keeps ye
wou^d from putrefyi^g, which might come through the bruise of the stone. After
the said cauterisation, ye chirur. shall proceed with things mollificatiue leinge
about the wound a defensive written in the Chapter of the cure of flesshye
wounds.

Ite^ if the wound be deep, ye must use deep cauterisatio^. And if it be not
deep, ye must aply therein a digestyue which is vnderwrytten.

Also ye must after cauterization, put in the botom of ye wound melted butter,
hot with a syryng, until the escare be removed, and the deed flesh be so^dred
from the good, and if the said wou^d be in a very synnowy place, after
cauterisation ye shall put into ye same water of barley sodden with erthwormes, and
a little holyhocke and redsugre, with the foresaid butter, and without it.

Likewise in this case, a digestyue of terebentine made with oil of roses, and
ye yolks of eggs. And this plaster mollificatiue folowinge, which swageth
pain may be conveniently applied. Plaster
. of the decoction of vyol. mal. and holyhock. li. iii. and with the flour of
barley and beans, make a styffe plaistre at the fire, adding of oil of
camomyl.. ii. of butter, of oil of roses of he^nes grese. an^.. i. the yolks
of.ii. eggs. This playstre is of excellent operation, for beside yt it swageth
pain it procures good digestio^ of ye wou^d and prepares the matter to issue
out.

when the wou^d is come to good digestion, it is convenient to apply things
mu^dificatiue, a mundificatyue
as is this plaistre following.. of honey of roses.. ii. of clear terebentine..
iiii. let the^ sees all at the fire one boylyng, and afterward add thereunto
the yolke of.i. egg, of saffran.. i. of the flower of wheat well bulted, of
barley flower. ana.. v. me^gle them. This emplaistre is mu^dificatiue, An other
chefely when the wound is in a flesshye place. Here follows an other
convenient mu^dificatiue, when ye sinnowes and ligamentes be^ hurt, and when
the wound is in a place full of muscles.. of clear terebentin.. ii. of honey of
roses.. i. of the iuce of plantayne, of the iuce of smalage. ana.. ss. Let them
sees a little, and add thereunto of the flower of lupines, of ye flower of
barley. an^.. iii. of sarcocol.. i. of safra^.. i. me^gle the^. This plaistre is
of excellent operation to mu^dify ye said wounds in synnowye places. After
mundification, ye must incarne and seal up the place, according to that, we
shall declar in the cha. following.

Furthermore if the stone be within the member, ye must wisely behold the place
and remove it, making incision with a rasour or some other convenient instrument,
taking head, that ye touch not the sinowes, and afterward ye shall heal ye
place according to ye doctrine declared before. we have seen some yt have
carried the stone a great while, which thought them selves to be heled, and also
the chirurgyens had closed up the wound: but many have dyed thereby. For the
membre wherein the stone is, comes to putrefaction, and to an aposteme called
Estiomenos. Likewise we have seen some by the help of chirurgyens to obtain
perfyte curation, after that they had carried the stone a great while.

The fourth intention, which concerns the curatio^ of accide^tes, is
acco^plisshed after the doctrine written in the cha. of the cure of wou^des
caused by brusing. And ye shall note, touchi^g the pronostication that ye must
judge of health or death, according to the hurt place. Also if the wound be
very strayte, ye shall open it with a sharp instrument, that the superfluities
of the said wound, may more easily issue out. And so the wound shall be the
sooner healed. Thus we end. etc.

The.iiii. chaptre: of wou^des made by the bytynge of four foted beasts: as
dogs, cattes, horses, and other like beasts.
THe cure of wounds, The cure
made by the bytynge of beasts, shall be accomplysshed by three intentions. The
first consysteth in the ordinance of diete, the second in purgation, the
third in the admynystration of local medicynes.

The first is acco^plyshed, after the doctrine declared in the cha. of ye cure
of a carbu^cle, and this wound is of the nature of venim, for the teeth and
claws of cattes and dogs, have ever some venenositie in the^. As touching
purgatio^ ye shall proceed as in ye cha. before rehearsed is showed, saving ye
shall note this one thing, yt if ye wou^d happened by a mad beast, cutting of a
vein is not convenient, as Auicen says, in ye ca. of ye byti^g of a mad dog.
Cutting of a vein (says he) in this case, draws blood from al parts of ye
body to the mids of ye same, and therefore flebotomie might draw venim to the
heart. Moreover the nature of all venemes is first to assaute the heart, as ye
king of the other members.

As touching the third intention we say yt in the biting of beasts there is no
better remedy, tha^ at ye beginning to cauterise the place with oil of elders
burning hot, and the said cauterisation may be used to the.iii. day. And
afterward ye must put into the wound this unction following.. an egg, an
unction
and beat it with oil of violets, with butter, and with a little saffra^. This
unction apeaseth grefe, and causes ye dangerous fume of ye wou^d to breath out
and keeps the mouth of the same open. To ye same intention this plaistre
following is also profitable.. of ye leaves of malowes and vio. an^. m^. ii. of
wormwod. m^. i. of roses, of the leaves of holihock. an^.. i. ss. of bran well
ground. m^. iii. sees the^ all together with sufficient water, and tha^ sta^pe
the^, and in ye decoc. with beneflour, and barliflour, make a stif plaistre,
adding of oil mirtine, of camomyl and roses. an^.. iii. ye yolks of.iii
eggs, of saffra^.. i. of cu^mi^.. i. ss: this plaistre is convenient unto
ye.vii. day, and after the.vii. day, ye shall apply this ointment following.. of
the rotes of holyhocke. li. ss. of scabiouse. m^. ss. of diptanie.. ii. See the
these things in water, until they be perfectly sodde^, tha^ sta^pe the^, and
strain them, and afterward take as much wax as shall suffyce, and of oil
of roses and mastike. an^.. iii. and set al on the fire again, addyng of clear
terebentine. iii. of gootes suete.. ss. of saffran.. ii.

For mu^dification ye shall put into the wound a mundificatyue of sarcocol,
after this sort.. of clear terebentine.. iii. of honye of roses.. i. and. ss.
of the iuce of smalage.. vi. let them sees a little, and put to of barlyflour
well sifted.. ss. of sarcocol.. i. and. ss. of saffra^.. ss. This ointment is
mu^dificatiue, and incarnatiue, and of good operation in this case.

After mundification ye must apply vnguentu^ de minio, written in ye cha. of a
broken scul. Ite^ ye shall note that at the beginning some defensive must be
laid about the wound, to avoid deriuatio^ of humors. scarificaton
And if ye perceive, yt the said bytyng grows to cancrenositie, ye must
scarifye the place round about, and after scarification ye shall proceed, The
cure of the bytinge of a mad dog
after the doctrine wrtte^ in the cha. of a ca^crena

Likewise if it be the bytynge of a mad dog, ye must proceed according to that
we have written in this present cha. Howbeit ye shall note this one thing,
namely, that incontine^tly after the byti^g of a mad dog, ye must scarifye the
place, and apply ve^toses and afterward cauterise the biting with an actual
cauterye, and bind the place about straytely, until the cauterization be
ended. And when it is ended, ye shall remove the said bynding.

The.v. Chapter. Of the styngynge of Aspis, and other serpents: and of the
cure of the same.
Of the styngynge of aspes.
GOd our glorious Lord, which created man to his own semblaunce, has given
unto the same, dominion upon all other creatures. Howebeit, there are some,
which naturally desire to hurt him, as serpents, and evil spyrites.
Notwythstandyng he has received wisdom to keep him self from them, and
sondrye remedies to the ease of their malycyous cruelty: wherein, his deuyne
power is declared, and therefore man ought to have recourse unto him in all
things, as to his defender, and protector.

The cure
Now to our purpose: The cure of a serpents styngynge, is accomplysshed by one
only intention, that is to say, by admynistryng things universal and
particular, as soon as it is possible. And first the chirurgien must
incontinently give the patient a medicine that resists venim and it is
preservative, as the triacle of Galene, or the triacle of the description of
Haliabas, in the quantity of.. ss. with wine of good odor. Likewise ye must
immediately scarify the place with a deep scarification: and afterward apply
ventoses to draw out the venomous blood.

Item, it is right expedient to use an actual cauterie: or in the stead thereof
to use hot oil of elders. And after ye cauterisatio^ ye must lay upon ye
place, Playstre
a plaistre of roasted onyons, with a little triacle and buttur, and a little
scabious, diptanie, and gentian stamped together with a little terebe^tine: for
this plaistre has virtue to mortify venym, and is retractiue with some digestion
of the escared place as well by an actual cauterie: as by oil. Howbeit some
later doctors say that it is not good, to apply triacle in the outward
parts: because it dryueth back venim: nevertheless it is not to be
disco^me^ded, as Hugo senensis witnesses saying: that great triacle applied
upon ye heart and upon a biting, is good for.ii. causes. The first is because it
kylleth venim, the second is because ye virtue of the triacle, is drawn in by
ye veins and arteries inse^sibly toward ye heart And he says moreover: yt the
accide^tes proceeding of ye stingynge of aspis and other serpe^tes, ben more
horyble than any other diseases: which thing we saw to have happened in
florence to a caryer of triacle: which would prove ye virtue of s. Paul, and
was stonge of an aspe in the great finger: whereof he dyed wtin the space
of.iiii. hours. And first he lost his sight: and his speech: and the color
of his face became blewe and palyshe, and souning ensued, with tremblyng of the
heart and cold sweet: so that he shortly dyed.

wherefore as soon as it is possible, we must comfort ye heart, and socour the
styngyng as we have said we will describe certain remedies, and so end this
present cha. First this poudre following is very commendable. Poudre.
. of castoreu^, of cassialignia, of aristologia rotu^da. an^.. ss. of anise
seed, of peper. an^.. ii. bray the^. The receyt is.. i. with wine of good odor.

Ite^ to the same intention, and also against the pestilence this potion
folowinge may be conveniently used, Galenes potion.
as I have often proved.. of terebe^ti, of diptany, of cardus bu^dictus. an^..
i. of Galenes triacle.. ss. of saffra^, grains.ii. of cytro^ seeds.. i. of
the stone called smaragd, one grain: of dorenik.. i. of ye syrup of ye iuce
of sorel, of water of buglos. an^.. vi. of the wine of po^granades, of
odoriferous wine of mean strength. an^.. ss. mengle the^ together. Take this
potion fasting and may be received, till ye perceive, that the venym is
quenched, which thing is known by the ceassynge of the accidents, and when
the patient feleth him self to be eased.

A digestive.
After that the venynime is removed, the patient must be purged, and must use
this digestyue.. sirupi rosati of infusion, syrup of ye iuce of endive and of
sorell. ana.. ss. of the water of endive, Purgation
of buglose and baume called melissa. ana.. i. And when the patient has used
this syrup by the space of.iii. days, he must take this purgation.. of
diacatholicon.. ss. of chosen ma^na.. i. dissolve them with water of buglosse,
and endyue, and adding of a syrup of violettes.. i. Furthermore ye shall
know, that at the beginning, it is not good to give a laxatiue medicine,
except it be a clistre linitiue. Also ye must beware, that ye cut no vein
in this case, as Auicenne teaches.

For the end of this chaptre, we say, that a wound caused as well by styngyng
or bytyng, as by the said cauterisation and burning, must be healed with
onyons and triacle. And if the patient be in a place, where he may not have
the said remedies, he shall take garlyke, nuttes, rue, and shall lay upon the
bytynge, galbanu^ and scabiose, and al other attractyue things. Thus we end
our third book, for the which ye name of god be praised.

The fourth book, which treats of ulcers and sores generally, and
perticulerly, from the heed to the foot.
The first Chapter: wherein the co^tentes of this book are declared.
CHirurgerye, after cornelius celsus, is the most aunciente part of phisycke,
which has sundry parts, as we often have said: by the authority of
Ioha^netius. Among the which is the curatio^ of outward ulcers, of which by
the grace of god, we will treat in this present book, and also of the
definition of the same.

And first we say, that the cure of ulcers consists in.ii. things
principally The first is, the knowledge of those things that hyndre the
co^sou^dyng of the same. The second is, remoui^g of the said things.
Touching the first, it is convenient to proceed, after ye way of speculation,
in consydrynge what things they been, that hyndre the very consoundyng, and
how many causes hyndre the same, and in what manner they ben contrary, and how
they may be known. As touching ye second, we will proceed by practice declaryng
the manner of admynystryng so^dry remedies, as well simple as co^pound, according
to the diversity of the time and nature of the ulcers. which.ii. things be
sufficient for the cure of the said ulcers. But before we come to ye curation,
we will make a cha. that shall entreat of the diffinition of ulcers, yt through
ye knowledge of the signs, a man may attain the true curation, for which
every man ought to call upon the grace of God, from whom all knowledge
proceeds.

The.ii. Chaptre. Of the definition of ulcers, and of the cure of the same in
general.
AN vlcere, after the ancient and later doctors, is a solution of
co^tinuitie, Vlcere.
with putrefactio^, and differs from a wou^d, for a wound is bloody, without
putrefaction. And Auicenne says, that an vlcere, is engendered through three
things. The first is, by apostemation, the second by pustles, Causes of
vlceres.
the third by wounds ill cured. In an vlcere, there ben comunely sondrye
dispositions, which engendre such corruption, and putrefaction, as hinder
consoundynge. And therefore, Auicenne says, that corruption is engendered in
sores, of the nouryshment that is sent to the members, which members, when
they be weakened, ca^ not turn the said nouryshment in to good blood, and so
it comes to putrefaction. And because the vlcered membre is weakened, the
superfluities of other me^bres, are drawn to ye weak place, wherefore it is
right profitable, to conforte the vlcered membre. And the best thing that is,
to confort the vlcered place, is to purge the mattier that hinders
consoundyng. Further more we say, that an vlcere is always a compounde disease,
but a wound is simple. Howbeit sometime, it is found to be compounde also, for
pain, quitture, rotte^nes, and apostematio^, evil flesh, and other, are wont
to be joined with an vlcere, and make ye same a compounde disease, wherefore
the kinds of vlceres (as Halyabas witnesses) takes their difference of three
things, chieflye, whereby they are made and compounde, that is to say, of
causes, of members, and of accidents. And forasmuch, as the difference which
is taken of members, is soon known. we will say with Auice^ne, that the
kinds of ulcers, are comprehended in two things, that is to say in causes,
and accide^tes, The kinds taken of causes, are these, venomous corruption,
cancrositie, corosion, putrefaction, fistules. etc.

Kinds also are taken of accidents, Kinds of vlceres.
for sometime there is found a diste^pered vlcere, paynful, apostemous, bruised,
altered by the air, with superfluous flesh, with hardness and corruption of
the bone. etc. Likewise there been ulcers of uneasy consoundynge with a
propriety unknown to us. And there be holowe ulcers, with one or two holes, and
of those holow vlceres some be rotten, and some full of fylth and so^time
fistulous, having a strait mouth with a^ple depenes and hardness round about.
Of vlceres also some be ambulatyue or walking, some corosiue or gnawing, some
malign, and some virule^t. And of those corosiue vlceres, some ben rotten,
with styngynges as it were of antes. Malign and virulente, or venomous
vlceres, differ but little, but according to the quantity in greatness and
smalnes. Likewise rotten vlceres, differ little from filthy. Nevertheless in
this one thing they differ, that sometime the rotten vlcere is ambulatiue or
walking. And therefore this vlcere putrefactiue and ambulatiue, is not without
a fieuer, which goes not from him, till the putrefaction and ambulatio^ be
removed. wherefore, Galene called this kind of corosyue vlceration, formicam
ambulatinam, et igne^ persicum. And therefore, malign and poysonable vlceres be
cured after one manner, and likewise fylthy and rotten vlceres.

The causes of malign and virulent vlceres, are wou^des, metyng the
superfluities of a body full of evil and superfluous humors, or vlceres
following evil pustles, or corrupt diete. Likewise the causes of filthy and
rotten vlceres, are apostemes and exitures to ripe, and caused of gross and
somewhat hot humors, in which also the chirurgien used long time mollityue
medicines.

Holowe vlceres are for the most part engendered, of a wound evil cured, or
of a great aposteme broken of it self, or because the incision was very small.

The causes of corosiue vlceres, are sharp and coleryke humors with adustynge
or brennyng. And therefore Auicenne says, Virus.
speaking of the quality of quytture, that, yt which is thyn and subtyle, is
called Virus, and that which is gross and thycke, is called fylth. The thin
requires exiccatio^, and the thick abstersio^, or skowring. Virus is
engendered of the boylynge of hot humors, with the watrines of the same. Fylth
is engendered of superfluity of cold and gross humors.

Furthermore of vlceres some be with a spasme, some ben painful, and some without
pain, some round, some plain, some deep having many holes, and are called
of Cornelius Celsus, chyronica. Moreover some be soft, and some be hard, some
shelly, some there are in which certain veins are swollen through
putrefaction, and are called, Vlcera varicosa, and of al these kinds, we will
make a particular chapter.

The vlceres which engendre a spasme, because of their evil qualities, as
Auicenne says, are holow vlceres, rotten, corosiue, ca^kerous, painful, and
the vlceres of Argyromater, that is to say, of a philosopher, that only
healed vlceres of most hard curation. Likewise certain vlceres enge^dre
spasme, because of the place, as the vlceres which be nigh the synnowes,
chiefly those which are in the back, by reason of the nighnes of the nuke, and
the vlceres which been in the former part of the knee, because the lacertes
be very synnowie, and therefore the wounds and vlceres of that place, does sone
enduce a spasme, and many other evil accidents, as we have declared in the
chapter of the wounds of the said place.

Further ye shall note that the vlceres of synnowie places, may engender three
kinds of diseases. First if the mattier ascend or mount toward the brain, it
engenders a spasme, or perturbation of reason, and if it goo down to the
nether members, it will cause a flux of blood with quytterouse mattier, which
thing we have seen to have often chanced. And if it come toward the parts of
the mids of the body, it will engender a pleuresye.

As touching signs Auice^ne says, that the generation of hear about the
wound, which hear before did fall away, is a good sign. Also white
quytture, thynne, equal in color and substance, and in little quantity, is a
sign that the vlceres will be easily cured. wherefore in every vlcere, ye may
make pronostication, of easy or uneasy curation, by the consideration of the
quality or quantity of the quitture. It is a laudable quytture, which is
engendered by digestion through natural heat of ye member, and therefore it must
be white, not thycke, and equal. Quytture not laudable, is diverse. Some is
gross and slimye, some blackish, some venomous, some corosiue, and of reddish
color. And therefore Auicenne says there been vlceres whose roots are
sharp, that is to say, the humors of whom such vlceres are engendered, are
sharp, hot and bytynge. wherefore through their sharpnes they are wont to
engendre great ytche, which many times makes the place to be vneaselye cured.
Likewise there be some ulcers (as the same man says) from which there sweateth
out citrine or yelow corruption, so that through his heat it burns and
byteth the parts that lie about the vlcere. And these ulcers been of very
hard curation. Further it chances sometime, that evil color of body, as
white, pale or yelowe, accompanies evil ulcers, which things signifye
corruption of the liver, and corruption of blood sent from the liver to the
vlcered place. Also melancholyke, and hard ulcers of blewe or blackyshe
color, are of hard curation. Ulcers moreover of black color, without
feeling, ben worste of all, because of their great putrefaction. Also ulcers
yt have hard and skalye borders, or lips, can not be healed except these
lips or skales be removed with a sharp medicine.

The signs which are good in ulcers, Good signs in ulcers.
be when after mu^dification, the borders of the lips be white, and the
growing of the flesh is like the graynes of pomegranades. Also wha^ the
quytture is white and not thycke, engendered by good operation of nature. And
when the ulcers be touched by a bytynge medicine, they cause not so great
pain, as when the vlcere is malign. And therefore those chirurgiens are
deceived, which say that it is a good sign, when things abstersive with
mordication or biting, administered in wounds cause pain, thynkyng that it
chau^ceth by the reason of good flesh, where in very deed it comes of ye
malignitie of ye vlcere. For good flesh when it is touched with a biting
medicine, causes little pain. And the reason why evil flesh feleth more the
bytyng of the medicine, then the good flesh, is this, namely the sensibilitie
of a contrary thing, which is found always in a malign vlcere. For paynfulnes
is the feeling of a contrary thing. Seeing then, that evil flesh is ever
paynful, therefore biting medicines by the reason of sensibilitie of the evil
flesh, necessarilye cause greater pain in evil ulcers, than in ulcers
mu^dified from that corrupt flesh. And therefore Auicenne says thus, beware
in all medicines that ye cause not pain, chiefly if there be an aposte. or
evil complexion, and grief, ye, it is needful, that ye remove the causes
which hinder the healynge of ulcers, as though he would say, that bytyng
medicines ought not to be admistred in any paynfull vlcere, for yt should add
pain upon pain, ye, when the vlcere is apostemous, he forbyddeth the
washing with wine or with water of alume. And these dryeng things are much
praised of him, in dryeng of ulcers, to bring on skyn, when the vlcere is
mu^dified, and perfytly incarnated. Furthermore the comune practicyeners do
approve our saying, which do use alume of roche burned to bring on skin, and
yet it causes not great pain, but it would do the crontrarye, if it were
applied upon evil flesh. Nevertheless, if the flesh in the vlcere be rotten,
or cankerous, the^ because it has little felyng, bytynge medicines laid thereon
shall cause little pain.

And note, that evil flesh is more sensible and feeling, then good by
accidens, and that those bodies are more apt to receive curation of ulcers,
which have little superfluity with good complexion, and good blood. But in
moist bodies, as are the bodies of women with child, of them that have the
dropsy, and of children, ulcers are not easily cured, because of their
moystnes. Also ulcers which succeed some disease, are of hard curatio^,
because nature enforseth her self to send the water of the first disease, to
the second, as we se daily in the ulcers caused of the french pockes, of
which we will make a treatise, by the grace of god, that shall be profitable to
the studiouse reader,

Further concerning ulcers in sinnowye places, when the quytture is good, and
the vlcere swells a little about, it is a good sign. And ye said vlcere is
not redye to cause a spasme, nor perturbation of reason, nor other evil
accidents. Howebeit, if the said ulcers swell beyond reason, it is no good
sign. Some ulcers be of evil complexion, which must be reduced and rectifyed
by their contraryes, for the rectification of them, Evil signs in ulcers.
is the cause of their curation. Evil signs of ulcers, are when they become
dry with out quytture, for no reasonable cause and when the ulcers been
swollen a about, and the same swellynge conueyeth it self away, without any
reasonable cause. This is a sign of death, because the mattier is drawn into
the inward part, and by sinnowes mounteth unto the brain, and causes a
spasme, and other evil accidents.

Also Galene says, that when swellyng hydeth it self in ulcers and apostemes,
the man dies. Hipocrates affirms the same, saying: if swelling apeare in
wounds and ulcers, and suddenly vanyshe away without reasonable cause, it is
mortal. when he says without reasonable cause, he means except it be
removed with a resolutiue medicine, than it is to be feared, lest a spasme
shall be caused by that mattier. For Hypocrates says that a spasme in a wound
or vlcere, is mortal. And he says moreover in the same place, when swellynges
apeare in wounds, the patientes suffer not spasme, nether wax mad, but when
they vanysh away, the said accidents chance to some men. Now seeing that we
have declared the kinds of ulcers, according to the diversity of causes, and
accidents, it is convenient, that we declare ye things which hinder the
curation of the same. And first ye shall know, that there be two manner causes,
which hinder the said cure, that is to say, causes conioyncte, and causes
anticedent. The causes conioyncte, be these that follow, paynefulnes, evil
complexion, aposteme, a corrupted bone, the hardness of the lyppes, superfluous
flesh, softnes, distemperatnes of the vlcere, as well in heat as in cold, a
round figure of the vlcere, a superficial and fistulare figure, or some other
figure. The causes antecede^tes, have evil humors in quantity or quality.
Further we say, that things that hyndre consoundyng, are of double
difference, that is to say, other they be of the part of the vlcere, or of the
part of things annexed and joined to the same. If they be of the part of the
vlcere, they proceed of solution of continuite, or of quytture, as it appears
by the diffinition of an vlcere. The hyndrans caused by solution of
continuitie, comes of the figure, as roundnes, holownesse. etc. The hyndrance
caused by quytture, comes of the substance, or of the quality, when it
comes of the substance, it is by reason of the subtilenes, grossenes,
slymynes, or runninge mattier. If the hindrance come of the quality, it is
because of his sharpenes, his corosion, or substance, by it self, or by
accide^t, and the foresaid causes, are nombred with the mattier conioynct.

The hindrance that comes by things annexed to the ulcers, proceeds of a
cause material, or efficiente, the material, is blood sent to the member for
his nouryshment, which cannot be changed in to good nouryshmente, therefore
hurtethe the vlcered place, as well through his evil quality, as through his
quantity. when it hyndreth through his quantity, it is by abundaunce or
insufficient quantity, and when it hurts by quality, it is through evil
complexion, as coldenes, heat, moystnes, dryness, simple or compounde
material or not material. Likewise the efficient cause, which hinders
healynge of ulcers, is evil complexion of the vlcered member, which is
contrary to the natural complexion of the said membre. And it is called
efficient, because of ye active qualities, which are heat, and moystnes, and
the said causes ben simple, or co^pounde, material or not material. Further,
if the hyndrance proceeds by things contrary to the ulcers, which bring
evil disposition unto them, either they be accidents, or maladyes, if they be
accidents, they are paynfulnes. etc. if they be maladies, they be purgynge of
the belly, aposteme, shelly flesh, addition of flesh, corosion, putrefaction,
and such other maladyes, which ben annexed to ulcers. These are they, which
hinder the right curation of ulcers, as well by things annexed to ulcers, as
by causes material and efficient. The signs of the said thnges, shall be known
as it follows. First ye shall know, Signs of abundans of blood.
that the blood is to much abundaunt in quantity, by the nature of the
patient, which is strong, and fleshye, of reddyshe color, and has full and
large, and great veins, and when the quytture of ye ulcers is bloodyshe. Ye
shall know, that the blood is diminished in quantity, by things contrary
to the aforesaid, that is to say, Sigges of diminition of blood.
when the body of the patient is lean and thynne, and when the veins ben
small, and empty, and than the mattier which should engender flesh, is not
derived to the vlcered place, and the quyture is in small quantity.

Further ye shall know, that the blood of humors fail in quality, by the
signs following. First in heat, Quality.
which is known by the yelowe color of the body, of the face, of ye eyes,
and when the body is lean, and choleryke, then the quytture which issues
out of ye ulcers, is for the most part yelowe, and if the heat be to much,
so that it burns ye humors, the quytture is of a duskyshe color, somewhat
black. And if ye humors be cold, ye may know it by that, Cold.
that the patient is flegmatike, pale, and when the vlcered membre is white,
and the quytture is slimy, and gross, white in color. And if they been dry,
Dry.
the member vlcered is of a duskyshe color, and the body of the patient is
dry, and lean, and the quytture is thycke, like ashes and derte, and of
black color.

After that we have declared the signs, which proceed of sondrye matters,
according to the diversity of ye complexion of the body, we must search out
the cause, that hyndreth the curation of an vlcere, after the diversity of the
evil complexio^ of the vlcered perticule. Hot co^plexio^
For an hot evil co^plexio^ of the vlcered place, is known by the rednes,
infla^mation, and outward heat of the place, and of the parts there about,
and by the runnyng out of thyn quytture, having a red, yelowe, or grene
color. A cold complexion is known, Cold.
by the blewnes or palenes of the membre, with whytenes, softnes, coldness, of
the place, and by gross, slymye, and undigested quytture, and with watery
substance, without all bytynge, and burning. The signs of an evil moist
complextion, are these. The membre is sort, and loose, Moist.
and full of superfluous moisture. These things declare a dry complexion,
drynes, Dry.
hardness, roughnes, and thinnes of quytture.

As touching putrefaction, we say, that some putrefaction is done already, and
some is to be done. That which is done, is ambulatyue, or walking, that which
is to be done, continues still in his own kind. The signs of putrefaction,
yt shall ensue, are known by alteration of the members, and by chaunginge the
color of the said ulcers, that is to say, by the black, blewe, or grenyshe
color, of the vlcered membre. The signs of putrefaction already done, Signs
of putrefaction.
is evil color of the vlcered place, and when the said place is deprived
utterly, of al felyng, though the place should be cut, or have bytynge things
applied thereupon. An vlcere ambulatiue, is sone known by enlargynge of the
place.

Further, a round and fistulare figure resists true curinge, because yt the
quytture can not issue out, but is constrained to tarry in the botome of the
ulcers, and because it remains in the botome of the ulcers, more the^ reason
is, it receaueth venemenes which produces holownes in the ulcers, and weakneth
the said parts, and through the weakness of the member, the superfluities of
the hole membre, ben arrived to the vlcered place.

In like manner the subtilenes of the quytture, hyndreth curation, for towchyng
the parts of the ulcers, it makes a deep holownes, through his percyng, and
through his moisture, it makes the flesh soft, and ready to receive
putrefaction. For things yt come to putrefaction, have part of moystnes,
which makes them soft.

Item, the grossenes of the quytture hyndreth curation of ulcers, because yt
through his slymynes, it cleaves to the poores, and because it tarieth to
long in the said ulcers, it receaueth an evil quality, for that, that is
touched of a rotten thing, rotteth.

Item the sharpnes of quytture, and bytynge, and corosion of the same, hyndreth
consolidation, because it consumes the natural moisture of the member, which
should be the cause to join together the sondred parts. The blood that is not
in due quantity, hinders curation, for the abu^dans thereof choketh natural
heat, and the want thereof causes, that the vlcered member has not his
nouryshmente, and nature is deceived of her purpose, because it has not
mattier to engender new flesh. Item, the evil complexio^ of the vlcered
place, lets curation, as well by heat, as by coldness, as well by moisture,
as by drynes, whether it be simple or co^pou^de, material or not material. The
reason is, because that when the complexion of the membre is hurt, it must
needs be, that the other natural virtues of the membre be diminished or
corrupted, for the complexio^ of the membre, is the hand maid of the natural
virtues, and helps to turn the nourishment in to the substance of ye
me^bres, and conueyeth away, the noisome superfluities.

Ite^ there be some accide^tes which hinder curation, among which is
immoderate flux of blood, by which the mattier, whereof the new flesh should
be engendered, and the spirits is taken away or diminished.

Furthermore paynfulnes weakeneth the hole body, and the vlcered members, and
causes, that the humors arryue to the vlcered place in great abundans,
which hinders the cure. Also an aposteme, which is a disease compounde of
three things, namely, of evil complexion, evil compositio^, and solution of
continuitie, hyndreth the cure, for sondrye dyseases, vex and grieve nature,
more then one. In like manner the superfluity of hard and skalye flesh,
gendred in the borders of the vlceres, let the matter to be sent of nature,
for the generation of flesh in the same, for it can not pass by the poores,
nor accomplish his natural operation. The addition also of flesh resysteth
curation.

Moreover soft flesh, corrosion, and putrefaction, hyndreth curation, because
that thorough those things, the matter sent of nature to engender flesh, is
altered, and so can not do his kyndelye operation and thus the substance of
the member is corrupted. These things before alleged, are ye causes which
hyndre the curation of vlceres.

Now we will brieflye speak of things, Remotion of the said causes.
which have virtue to take away the forsayde causes. First, if the figure be
fystulare or holowe, it must be destroyed, as it shall be declared here after,
in the chapter of the cure of fystules, and if it can not be, then ye must
find a mean, to purge the matter before it receive evil quality in the
botome of the vlceres. If the said quytture be subtyle and moist, for
rottynge and mollifyenge the substance of the member, ye must proceed to the
curation, with things desiccatiue, according to the great or small moisture,
of the said vlcere, that putrefaction may be resysted, and the strange
moisture consumed.

If the quytture be gross, and slymye, cleuynge to the botome of the vlceres,
and hyndrynge the nouryshmente of the place, ye must remove it from the
vlcered parts, as well from the botome as from the borders thereof. If the
quytture be sharp and corrosiue, ye must rectifye the same, by things,
which have power to resyste sharpenes and corrosion. And when the blood is in
to great quantity, ye shall diminishe it, by cuttynge a vein, if it be in to
small quantity, ye shall give the patient, meats of great nouryshement, and
that engendre good blood. If the blood be evil in quality, ye must rectifye
it by things contrary to the said quality, as if it be to hot, by cold
things, if it be to moist, by dry things. If there chance flux of blood
in the vlceres, ye shall draw the same to the contrary parts, by the cuttyng
of a vein, by ventou^s, and like things. If there be great paynfulnes, ye
shall take away the cause thereof, and comfort the vlcered place. If the
flesh of the vlceres be to soft, ye must take away the strange or unnatural
moisture. If there be superfluous flesh, ye same must be removed, and if it
be hard and shelly, ye shall apply there unto things resolutiue and
linitiue, and if it resysteth resolution, ye must cut it away. If there be
apostemation, ye must consume the matter by resolution, and if it be vndigest,
ye must prepare it to digestion, if the cause come by corrosion, ye shall turn
away the matter antecedente, and remove the matter conioyncte. If the member
be corrupted and rotten, ye must cut it way, and if the putrefaction begin
only, ye shall resyste the same. If ye vlceres be ambulatiue, ye shall remove ye
evil quality of the same, and resolve ye strange moisture which is the cause
of their ambulation or walkyng. This doctrine suffices, for ye acco^plyshme^t
of this present chap, which we have comprehended as briefly, as we could
possible, and have declared how accide^tes, that let, and hinder curation in
every ulcer may be conuenientlye removed. Wherefore the name of God be honored,
magnifyed, and praised.

The third chapter, of the general curation of vlceres.
WE have seen in the former chapter, sondrye kinds of vlceres, and the causes
thereof, and also the causes that hinder the curation of the same. Now we will
shortly set forth, Cure of vlceres.
the universal curation of vlceres, and to begin, we say with Auicenne,
that all vlceres need desiccation, except in some cases, which we will declare
in this chapter, as ben vlceres caused by brusynge, and by attrition of the
muscules, in which we must proceed, with mollifycatiue and dygestiue
remedies. For these vlceres need no desiccation in their cure. For every
bruised vlcere or wound, as Galene says, must needs rotte, and be turned to
corruption.


And note, that Auice^ne says well, that all vlceres need desiccation: how be
it, it is necessary, to make degrees of that desiccation, for one manner of
desiccation, is conueniente to heal some vlceres, and an other to heal other,
and therefore ye shall observe, touching the universal curation of vlceres,
sondrye rules.

Rules to be observed.
The first is, that the wound be not caused by brusynge. The second, that it
be not altered by the air. The third, that it be not very paynfull. The
fourth, that it be not joined with an aposteme. The fyfth, that it proceeds
not of some hot exiture. The syxte, that it be not evil complexioned by hot
and dry matter. In these forsayde vlceres, as ye may se by the nature of the
said vlceres, we must not proceed with medicines desiccatiue, but rather with
things mollifycatiue and dygestiue, and therefore Rasis says, that every one
of these vlceres, comes not to perfyte generation of flesh, but after
rottynge, and it is the sentence also of Auicenne which says, that we ought
to prepare the vlceres to curation, that is to say, in the beginning by
dygestion, afterward by mundifycation, and incarnation, and fynallye by
sigillation.

To come to the principal matter, we say, that four ententions are required
to the cure of vlceres. The first is dygestion. The second, mundifycation.
The third, incarnation. The fourth, consolidation. After that good and
laudable quytture is engendered in vlceres, ye must proceed no longer with
dygestiue medicynes, as some ygnoraunt chirurgiens do, and cause thereby
putrefaction, and so hinder the mundifycation and incarnation.

The universal cure of vlceres, shall be accomplyshed, by the administration of
sondrye local medicines, according to the dyuersitie of vlceres, and according
to the dyuersitie of the times thereof, an universal purgation also, and
observation of good dyete presupposed. For sometimes the vlceres been rotten,
and filthy, sometime corrosiue, virulente and malign, some ben deep, and
holowe, paynfull, apostemous, some clean, some unclean, beside other vlceres
of most hard curation with proprieties unknown to us

These things done, as concerning digestion, we say with Galene, that in a
manner in all times, convenient medicines for the cure of vlceres, ought to have
desiccatiue virtue, with abstertion or scouryng, because there grow in the
said vlceres, two superfluities, one subtyle, an other gross, wherefore such
remedies must be applied, as have double virtue, that is to say, virtue
desiccatiue to remove the subtylnes, and virtue abstersive to take away the
gross superfluity.

We said in the former chapter, that when the vlceres be joined with some
causes which hinder there consolidation, the said causes must needs be taken
away, before we come to the cure. For it is not possible, that the vlceres
should be well cured, except those things be removed. The profit of the
medicines applied in vlceres, is known by their effect, and therefore Auicenne
says, that some medicine is convenient, and some not convenient. A convenient
medicine hurts not the vlcered place, though it can not sometimes produce
his effect because of the evil dysposition of the vlceres. A medicine not
convenient, is when it is to weak, touching his virtue and actiuitie, wherefore
it is needful sometimes, to strengthen it, adding thereunto things
mundifycatiue and desiccatiue, when ye perceive that it mu^difyeth not
sufficiently, another dries enough.

Furthermore, if ye perceive that the medicine inflameth the member, which
thing may be easily known by the strange heat, and by the rednes of the
place, then ye shall diminishe the strength of the medicine, and quench the
said infla^mation. If ye perceive, that by the application of cold things,
the place becomes black, or dark, or blewe, then ye shall add to the
medicine, things that do heat, and have some mollifycatio^. If ye perceive
that the medicine is to mollifycatiue, then ye must administre things having
stiptyke and desiccatiue virtue And for as much, as ye same medicine is
sometime incarnatiue in one body, and abstersive and corrosiue, in an other, it
is sometimes necessary, to diminysh the corrosiue virtue of the medicine, or
the desiccatiue virtue, according to the nature or disposition of the vlceres,
and according to the complexion of the body. And though we have
sufficientlye declared this doctrine, in ye chapter of medicines incarnatiue,
nevertheless, it is necessary to observe one rule, touching the administration
of incarnatiue medicines, it is to say, yt ye medicines be not to abstersive,
for through their abstertion, they would take away the new flesh, produce
moisture, and therefore in this case the chirurgie^s are often deceived,
thinking that the great moisture of the ulcers comes of their nature, and not
of to great abstertion, and they apply things more abstersive then before,
and cause that the said vlceres become deep, and like to apostemous vlceres,
and therefore the patient, when a strong abstersive medicine is administered,
feleth notable bytynge.

Furthermore, it is necessary in the administration of remedies, as Auicenne
says, that ye proceed with your medicine the space of three days, and if it
work not well, then ye may judge that the medicine was not convenient, and ye
must change it. And if the vlceres be rotten and full of corruption, for the
cure there of, ye shall proceed after the doctrine, before written in the
chapitre of rotten and matterye vlceres, and and if they be corrosiue, malygne,
and venomous, ye shall resort to their proper chapters.

Likewise, if they be those ulcers that be called Formicosa, ye shall resort to
the chapter of formica Corrosiua, and if they be paynfull, ye shall cure them,
according to that that is written in the chapter of apostemed wounds, but if
the pain be very vehement, ye must proceed with mollifycatiue things, and
that swage pain, as Auicenne says, that ye must chiefly be occupied in
swagynge pain, when the vlceres be very paynfull. The pain can not be swaged
by things desiccatiue, but by mollifycatiue, and though they be somewhat
contrary to vlceres, nevertheless when the grefe is not appeased, the place is
not prepared to receive any curation, and therefore the vlcere can not be
healed, except the pain be swaged.

As touching holowe vlceres it is necessary to proceed to the cure thereof,
with medicines of strong abstersyon and desiccation, according as the vlceres
shall be very holowe, or not. For Auicenne says, that when the vlceres been
deep, they need more abstersyon and desiccation, and the reason is, because
that great quantity of humors, is drawn to the place, which must be
consumed with great exiccation. And for as much, as in great holow vlceres,
there needs regeneration of flesh, by reason of lost substance to fill the
holes, it is necessary to observe one rule, that is to say, that ye must in
no wise, apply an incarnatiue medicine, because that when incarnatiue things,
be applied before mundifycation, they produce superfluous flesh, which
hyndreth true incarnation.

Furthermore Auicenne says, that holowe vlceres be sone turned into fystules,
wherefore the chirurgien must be diligent in the cure thereof. And he says
moreover, that vlceres which be nyghe to synnowes, and be in places full of
veins, and arteries, been apt to engendre apostemes, in fleshye parts, nyghe
the said places, as are the eniunctories, and the stones, and most chieflye,
when the body is filled with evil humors. And therefore, it is good to purge
the body, according to the evil matter. And afterward ye must proceed with
things mollifycatiue, and that swage paynefulnes, which is comunely great in
this case, by reason of the nyghnes of synnowes.

When the pain is seized, then ye shall proceed to the cure of the said
vlceres, and among the convenient remedies, vnguentum Basilicon, of our
description is good.

Furthermore, ye must hold this for a general rule, that when the vlceres be
in a very sensyble place, ye must proceed with light medicines, as much as
it is possible. And when they be in members not sensyble, ye shall proceed with
strong medecines, which is the doctrine of Auicenne, which says, that as a
synnowe discovered has need of an easy medicine, because of his great
feeling, so lygamentes that grow from the bones, which are insensyble, may
suffer stronger medicines. Wherefore we may more surely work in members of
small feeling, then in me^bres that been very sensyble. And ye may say, that
preciouse members and most necessary, are sonest hurt, because of their
great sensibilitie. And therefore vlceres and sores in synnowie places, and in
inward me^bres can not endure a strong medicine, as is verdegrese, and soch
like, if they be not corrected, by the admixtion of pleasant, and glutynous
things, as dragagantu^. etc. The lyquores that shall be put in holowe and
fystulous vlceres, must be of mean desiccation, for you must avoid all
vnctuose medicines, if it be not to take away the sharpenes of the medicines
and to swage pain. For as Galene says, vlceres can not be healed by
moisture, but by desiccation. Also ye must beware, that ye cause not
paynefulnes, chiefelye when the vlceres be with apostemation, and with evil
complexion. We have declared in the former chapitre as concerning
speculation, how the said vlceres joined with accidents ought to be healed,
and will speak more in the chapter following.

Furthermore a good chirurgien, must consider what manner of byndyng is
convenient, for in some ulcers, the byndynge called incarnatiue is necessary,
and in some, the byndynge named expulsive, and sometime ye shall need the
byndynge called retentiue, and therefore ye must not strain the byndynge to
much, for it might cause apostemation of the vlceres. The byndynge incarnatiue
is conueniente in the arms, and in the legs, and defe^deth the humors, that
they aryue not to the vlcered place, and as we have said often it is not
possible, to heal an vlcere, till the aposteme be removed, and of the said
lygatures, we have spoken sufficientlye, in the book of wounds, in a chapter
properly of the same.

Furthermore, there be certain vlceres, in which ye must apply lyquide
medicines, that they may more easelye enter unto the botome, of which we will
speak in a peculier chapter of holowe vlceres. Here ye shall observe, that the
ulcers that been old and holowe, are hard to be healed, and for the most
part they be with corruption of the bone. For Hypocrates says, that in old
vlceres the bone must be taken out. etc. This Aphorism is true in holowe
vlceres, and in ulcers caused of cold exitures. One of the principal remedies
in the cure of vlceres, is, to take away the causes which engender the
vlceres, and to comfort the place from whence the humors come, and the vlcered
place. Which thing may be done, by purgation of the evil humors, digestion
of the same, presupposed. For a laxatiue medicine, is not convenient for it,
except the humors been dygested, as Hypocrates says, we must heal
dygested things, and not move raw things. In like manner cuttynge of a vain,
some time avails to the curation of vlceres, chyeflye, when the body is full
of humors. Ye may apply leches, or bloodsuckers, upon the veins called
Hemorroydales, principallye, when the vlceres ben in places nyghe to them.
Finallye, we have proved that the use of vomytynge is good (in those which do
easily vomyte) in the somer time, thus we end this present chapter.

The fourth chapter, of virulent corosyue and malygne vlceres.
VIrulent, corosyue, and malign vlceres, differ not but in the quality
exceeding, for they ben al engendered of hot and burned matter, and therefore
Auicenne says, that the causes of malign vlceres, are superfluities,
procedynge of bodies full of vicious humors, and of evil dyete, and of evil
pustules, and at the beginning, these vlceres utter subtyle and sharp
quytture, called Virulentia, and when their malice is augmented by corosyon of
humors, they are called corosyue vlceres, and when they increase greatly in
short time, they are called ambulatiue, and if the malice be great so that it
confirms the membre, they are called Lupi, or eating vlceres, or rankers, as
we have declared in the chapter of melancolyke apostemes.

The cure of these vlceres shall be accomplyshed, by four intentions, the first
is purgation of the body. The second, ordinance of dyete. The third,
remotion of the virulent and venomous matter, and of the corrosyon. The
fourth, is administration of sondrye remedies, according to the places, and
according to the times of the foresaid vlceres.

The first entention, which consystethe in purgation of humors, shall be
accomplyshed as it follows. First ye must consider, whether the matter be of
burned color, or else gross blood, and of evil complexion. And if it be
coleryke, ye matter must be digested, with syru. of violets, or of roses, or with
ye juice of endive, with ye water of endive, of buglosse, of sorel, of fumitery,
and of borage. And if the matter, be gross blood it must be dygested with
syrup of fumiterrie the less, with syru. of lupulles, or of hoppes, and with
water of endyue, buglosse, and fumiterre. After that the humors be dygested,
ye shall purge the body, as follows. If the matter be coleryke, and burnte,
ye shall use this purgation.. of cassia, of a lenitiue electuarye.. vi. of an
electuarye of persilium, of an electuarye of juice of roses, of every one.. i.
ss. of diacatholicon.. ss. mengle them, and make a small potition, with the
comune decoction. If the matter have part of melancolye, ye shall administre
this purgation.. diacatholicon.. i. ss. of an electuarye of persilium, of the
confection of hamech, of every one.. ij. with the decoction of cordial
flowers, and fruits, of maiden here, of the herbs called Gallitricum, and
Politricum, of the coddes of seny and of Epithime, make a small potion, adding
of syrup of violettes.. i. And when the evil matter, is gross blood, ye
shall use this purgation.. of Cassia, of Diacatholicon, of every one.. vi. of
Diafinicon.. ij. with the decoction of cordial flowers, and fruits, make a
small potion, adding syrup of violettes. i. ss. when ye observe convenient
purgations, ye observe the commandment of Galene, which says, that we
must put away the cause of the disease, before we can remove the disease it
self. Wherefore we must not forgette, to prefer universal rules, before
particular, that the particular operations may be aided, by the universal.

The second entention is accomplyshed, by meats that engender good blood,
and they ought to enclyne to coldness, and moystnes, that the subtyle humors
may be engrossed, and that thorough their moystnes and coldness, they may
correct the sharpnes of humors. Like manner it is profitable, to observe the
things not natural.

The third intention which consists in the dryenge of the venomous matter,
is acco^plyshed as it follows. First, after that the matter is purged by
laxatiue medicynes, or by cuttynge of a vein, which is convenient in this
case, if the evil matter be noughty blood, to remove the malignitie of ulcers,
and also the corrosyon, and venemenes of the same, there is no better remedy,
than to apply within the ulcers our powder of mercury, for it is of the same
operation that vnguentu^ Egyptiacum is of, how be it vnguentum Egyptiacu^
causes great pain and inflammation, about the vlceres, and therefore make the
vlceres sometime, to resist curation, which thing this poudre does not. And
Auicenne says, we must be ware, that we apply not medicynes that cause
great pain, cheyfely, when there is apostemacion, and evil complexion, for as
he says, cure not the vlcere till the pain be swaged, for oftentimes the
rectifyeng of an evil complexion, is the cause of the cure of the vlceres.

The fourth intention, which concerns the administration of local
medicynes, shall be performed as here follows. First, after the malignytie,
corrosyon, and venemenes of the vlcere, is taken away with the forsaid poudre,
ye shall proceed with this ointment under written, which rectifyeth the evil
complexion of the vlceres, and dries them, and mundifyethe with famylier
incarnation.. oil of Roses, Vnguenti Rosati, or instede of that, Galenes
ointment. Ana.. ij. ss. Vnguenti Populeon, oil of Myrtyne. Ana.. j. of swynes
grese, fresshe and molten, of calves suet. Ana.. iij. of the leaves of
plantayne, and of nightshade, of the tender parts of bra^bles, of the leaves
and beries of myrtilles, of woodbynd, of herb called horsetayle, and of the
herb called knot gross, Ana. m^. ss. let thies things be sta^ped together,
and so leave them the space of a day, and afterward sethe them a little, and
strain them, and put to the straynynge of lytarge of gold and silver. Ana..
j. of Minium.. x. of terra sigillata, of ceruse. Ana.. vj. set them on the fire
again, and let them seathe together, till the color become black, Oyntmente.
and afterward with suffycient white wax, make an ointment, adding of clear
Terebentyne.. j. of tutia preparate.. ss. of Camphore gr. iij. Item to the same
intention, this vnguente, following is comendable.. oil of roses.. vj. oil of
violettes. iiij. of calves suet.. iij. Another ointmente.
of the juice of playntayne, and nyghtshade. Ana.. ij. let them sethe all, till
the juice be consumed, then strain them, and put to the straynynge, of white
wax.. ss. of ceruse.. x. of lytarge of gold and silver. Ana.. j. of tucia
preparate.. iij. of ca^phore brayed according to art.. ss. mengle them, and
stir them about, in a mortar of lead, the space of two hours. Also
vnguentum Album Ca^phoratum, and vnguentu^ ceruse, and vnguentum Triapharmacon,
are convenient in this case.

Here note, that if the medicyne be very hot in the vlceres, as in the
second or third degree, it is suspected, because that after his operation, yt
leaves an evil complexion in the vlceres, and therefore our ointment de
Minio, written in the book of wou^des, has a prerogative herein, because it
is not to hot, and is mundifycatiue, and incarnatiue, and of his nature
remoueth the malignitie of vlceres. After that the malignitie is removed, it is
good to wasshe the place with water, sodden with alume, or with this
decoction.. of water of pla^tayn, of water of roses. ana.. iij. of flowers of
pomegranades, of myrtill, of roses, of every one a little, of myrobolanes
cytryne.. ij. of roche alume.. ij. ss. of terra sigillata.. iij. of al ye
saunders, Ana.. j. of water of endive,. ij. of honey of roses.. j. boil thyes
said things till the third part be consumed, and tha^ strain them. This
decoction herin is right convenient, and ye must wash the wound therewith,
three or four times a day.

Auicenne says, that corrosiue vlceres be^ best cured with things that be
cold and stiptyke, as are ye flowers of pomegranades, and roses, and like.
Item it is good to apply small pieces of lead, in corrosiue ulcers, and if
they be made with a little quycsyluer, they shall be of better operation.
Moreover, this plaster is auaylable, in malign and deceyuable vlceres. A
plaster of a dogs tourde.
. of a dogs tourde that eteth bones, well brayed and serced,. iiij. of the
flower of lentylles.. ij. of bean flower.. j. of terra sigillata, of bole
armenie. Ana.. j. ss. of ceruse, and litarge, Ana.. x. put the said things
in the milk of a goat, or a cow, in which ye have quenched burning pieces of
iron, set them on ye fire, and make a solid plaster. This ointment is
marvelous good, to rectify all ulcers, and to take away the corrosyon of the
same.

And that the Chirurgiens may be more certain, touching the administration of
the foresaid things, we will declare the manner of applieng ye same, which is
very profitable in this case. And first ye must apply our poudre of mercurye,
leauyng it a day or more upon the vlcere, till ye perceive that the venemenes
is utterly removed, which thing may be known, by chaungynge of the
quytture, and generation of good flesh, and mytigation of pain and
malignytie. Also when ye touch or wash the vlceres, the pacient fealeth not
so great pain as before, for we have often proved that evil flesh, causes
greater pain than good, as we have declared before.

After that the ulcers be mundifyed, ye shall proceed with vnguentum de Minio,
and with the foresaid poudre, mengled therwyth. After two days, ye shall
proceed with vnguentum de Minio, and with lynte, put into the vlcere, and than
ye shall wash the vlceres with the foresaid waters, twyse a day, putting in
the lynte, and the said ointment, until ye attain to a perfyt cure. The manner
of washing the vlceres is, that incontinent after ye have washed them, ye wype
them with a soft clouth, and forthewyth put in the lynte, and ley the
oyntme^t thereupon. With these forsayde things we have healed many. And this
present chapter, for his excellency, may be called the golden chapter. And
if perchance, the ulcers through their malignitie and corrosyon be ambulatiue,
ye shall resort to the chapter of formica corrosiua, et ambulatiua, if there
be any escare in the said vlceres, ye shall procure the fall thereof, with
vnguentum Egyptiacum, after the description of Auicenne, whose propriety is to
conserve good flesh, and to consume evil. And moreover with fresh butter,
and swynes grese. Other remedies I pass over, for I think no profyt to be in
them. Thus we end this present chapter.

The fyfthe chapter, of rotten and fylthie vlceres, and of the curation
thereof.
Of rotten and fylthie vlcere
AS ancient doctors say, rotten and fylthie vlceres, dyffer not but in
quantytie, and therefore, when gross, and stynkyng corruptions be multiplied in
ulcers, they be called sordida, or fylthie, but if the matter increase in
malice, so that it corrupts and mortifyeth the membre, it is named putridum,
or rotten, and it is known, cheyfelye, when stynckynge fumes, and great,
venemenes, ascend therfrome, and therefore the said rotten vlceres, as
Auicenne says, for the most part are with fevers. And herin rotten and
fylthie vlceres differ, for rotten vlceres, are with fevers, and fylthie are
without fevers. Item if with maliciousnes, they ben ambulatiue, they ben of the
kind of the Aposteme called estiomenos, and must be cured, with ye cure of
estiomenos, or of a canker. The cause of these vlceres are, corrupt, and
venemouse humors, which sone receive inflammation, and venemenes, and therefore
ben of hard curation.

Cure.
The cure of them, consysteth in the observation of three intentions, the first
is ordinance of diete, the second to purge the evil matter, the third to
rote out the vlceres with local medicynes. The first is accomplysshed, by the
administration of meats, which gender good blood, as it is written in the
chapter of cold Apostemes, and bryefly he must use meats, inclynynge to
heat, as mutton, hens, birds of ye wood, rather roasted, than boiled. Also
he may use borage, percely, nepte, sodden with the forsayde things. Item ye
may give the pacient, potage made of strayned white bread, with the brothe of
the forsayde flesh or made with ryce. Also in this case, a potage is
convenient made of borage buglosse, and other good herbs, with the brothe of a
hen, or of mutton. And when the pacient is without feners, ye may give him
wine of good odoure, moderatlye delayed, with sodden water, for it engendrethe
good bleed, which is needful in the cure of vlceres.

The second intention which consysteth in euacuation of the body, is
accomplysshed by digestyon of the humors, and in purging them when they be
digested, with convenient medicyne. Rotten and fylthie vlceres, are caused of
gross and rotten humors, which must be dygested with this dygestiue
following, which puryfiethe and thynneth gross blood.. of syrup of
fumiterre, of the juice of endive, or in the stead thereof of lupulles or
hoppes, Digestive.
of syrup of vynegre simple, Ana.. j. of the waters of fumyterre, hoppes, and
endive, Ana.. j. after that the pacient has used this dygestion by the space
of seven days, he shall be purged with this purgation.. of diacatholicon.. vj.
Purgation.
of caffia.. ss. of diafinicon.. iij. make a little potion, with the comen
decoction, and when the vlcere is ambulatiue, and rotten, ye must give the
patient purgation.. diacatholicon.. vj. of the confection of hameth.. ij.
diafinicon.. iij. with the decoction of cordial flowers and fruits, make a
short potion, addyng of syrup of violettes.. j. ss. Item the patient must
sometimes take pylles of fumiterre, and the pylles called aggregatiue. One
purgation suffices not in this case, because the matter is gross, and
resystethe the medicyne, but ye must renew it often.

The third intention, which consysteth in the administration of local
medicynes, is thus accomplysshed. First when the vlceres ben fylthie, there is
nothing better than to mundifye them from fylthe, and from corrupted flesh
with vnguentum Egyptiacum, mengled with vnguentum Apostolorum, or with the
ointment called cerasyon, or symply with vnguentum Egyptiacum. And if the said
vlcere be hollow, for the mundification thereof, ye shall wash it with lie,
in which is put a little of Vnguentum Egyptiacum melted. And if the patient be
of a tender complexion, or if the vlceres ben in synnowye places, let them be
washed with this collyrie.. of barbours lie.. liij. poudre of mercury.. ij. of
honye of Roses.. ss. mengle them together, and stir them about. Ye shall put
this collyrie in to the holowe vlceres, with a syrynge, for it is of the same
operation as vnguentu^ Egyptiacum is, and that without pain. And if the vlcere
be rotten, ye shall remove the putrefaction with vnguentum Egyptiacum, and if ye
put to the said ointment, lie made with the decoction of lupynes, it shall be
the better in effect, for Auicenne says, that it rotethe out all cancreuse
ulcers.

And if the said putrefaction, can not be taken away with the foresaid
remedies, than resort to the chapter of a cancrena, and of askakyllos, and if
the vlcere be ambulatiue, with great putrefaction, ye shall resort to the
chapter of Estiomenos. After that the place is mundifyed from the fylte, and
evil flesh, which may be known by good quytture, and by the growyng of
good flesh, ye shall proceed a certain space with this mu^dificatiue.. of
oil of roses strayned.. ij. Mundificatiue with incarnation.
of clear terebentyne.. iiij. of ye juice of smallage, plantayne, and worm
wood. Ana.. iij. let them sethe till the iuyces be consumed, than strain the^,
and add to the straynynge, of barley flower well bulted, drammes six, of the
flower of lupynes.. iij. of sarcocolle.. j. ss.

And wha^ the place is perfytly mu^dified, for incarnation of the same, ye shall
put to the mundificatiue a little myrre, frankencense, paucedinis, and
flouredelyce. Item to the same intention, this collyrie is auaylable.. aqua
vite.. ij. of myrrh, of aloes. ana.. ij. ss. frankensens.. j. ss. of Saffran..
j. of paucedinis, and sarcocolle. Ana.. j. ss. mengle them together. This
collyrie must be applied, three or four times a day. In like manner for this
intention, ye may apply the vnguentu^ de Minio, in the chapter of the broken
scui, and when the place is well incarnate, for sigillation, ye must wash the
place with wine of the decoction of roses, with alume, and honey of roses or
with lie, made with the decoction of roses, and of alume, or of honey of roses,
and wha^ ye have washed ye place, ye must put upon it incontine^tly this
powder.. roche alume brent.. iij. of myrobalane cytryne, of flowers of
pomegranades. Ana.. j. terra sigillata.. j. ss. me^gle the^ together. This
doctrine shall suffice, for this present chapter. etc.

The six chapter, of holowe vlceres, and of the cure thereof.
HOlowe vlceres for the most part are engendered of exitures and aposte. which
are permytted to come to over great maturatio^, and chiefly ye said ulcers are
in ye boto^ of the me^bres. They be^ also engendered often times of apostematio^
of wou^des, caused in sinnowie places, and of those vlceres, some proceed of
hot matter, and some of cold, and for the cure thereof, we will assygne but
one intention, (universal purgation, and observation of diete presupposed, as
it is declared in the former chap.) that is to say application of local
medicynes. First for ye cure of these ulcers, there needs great exiccation, and
great mundification, and moreover it is necessary, to give the patient meats
of great nourishment, in good quantity, that good blood may be engendered, and
that the holes may be filled up, and therefore ye must consider, whether the
vlcere be with corruption of the bones, for if the corrupted bones be not
removed, the vlcere can not be healed. Also the member must be situated, that
the mouth of the vlcere be downward, and if the ulcers be so corrupted, that
there is no hope of healyng, than ye must cut the^ wisely, so that no holownes
be left, if it be possible, nor veins arteries or synnowes touched. For if ye
can not proceed, except ye touch ye same, it is better to cast liquours in to
ye holownes of the vlcere, as Arnald de villa noua says, that holowe vlceres
can not be healed but with sharp liquours, cast into them with a syrynge.

And forasmuch, as there are joined with the said ulcers, certain accidents as
pain, Aposteme, and evil complexio^, it is needful to remove the same, before
ye proceed to ye cure. For it is not possible, to come to a perfyt cure, except
the accidents be removed. And therefore Auicenne says, wha^ an Aposteme is
joined with paynfulnes, to an vlcere, than ye shall not wasshe the vlcere with
wine, nor with lie, nor with see water, as though he would say, there is no
curatio^ of ulcers without remouyng of accidents.

Furtheremore, to return to our purpose, holow ulcers are mu^dified with
lotions made of lie, honey of roses, roch alume. And also see water, is
commended of Auicenne in this case, and likewise water of alume, and honye of
roses, is good to dry ye fylthe, and to defend the matter antecedent, that it
aryue not to the sore place. And if these mundificatiues be not sufficient, ye
must wash the place with the collyrie in the former chapitre ordained, for it
is of good operation, and causes no pain. And if ye perceive that by these
means, the vlceres can not be mu^dified, tha^ apply vnguentu^ Egyptiacu^, of
our description, which ye must dissolve in barbours lie, with a little honey of
roses, and cast it in to ye said ulcers, with a syryng. After the place is
mundified, which thing is known by the good quytture, ye must forbear al
bytyng and scouryng things, and wash the place with this decoction.. of barley
water.li. ss. of honey of roses.. iiij. let them seth a little, and use thereof
by the space of.vj. days, washyng the ulcers two or three times a day, and
than proceed with a medicyne incarnatiue, without bytyng, for Auicenne says,
that flesh must not be engendered in vlceres till they be cleansed. We were
wo^te in this case to use this lyquour for incarnation.. of barley water.li. j.
of honey of roses.. iij. of sarcocolle.. ij. of myrrh, of frankencense, Ana..
j. of odoriferous wine.. vj. let the^ boil al together, till the third part
be consumed.

We have often declared the medicines that engender flesh, and will make thereof
a proper cha. whereunto ye shall resort, but for a more certain doctrine, we will
descrybe one recept convenient in this case.. of clear terbentyne.. ii. of
honye of roses.. j. Incarnatiue
of sarcocolle.. iij. of fysheglue, of dragagantu^. Ana.. j. of Antymonium
burned, of burned lead. ana.. j. ss. of the juice of ce^taury,. ij. or of the
poudre thereof.. iij. of barley flower well bulted.. j. ss. of Saffran.. j.
let the terebentyne be sodden a little with honye of roses, than mengle them
all together. This oyntmente shortly incarneth all vlceres.

Note here that it is good, to apply defensyues about the vlceres, written in
the chapter of the wounds of the bone called Adiutorium, for it comforts
the membre, and defends ye matter antecedent, to arrive unto the sore place.
Item ye may conuenientlye add hereunto in all times, Vnguentum de Minio,
written in the end of the chapyter of the cure of the sculle.

For sigillation ye shall proceed, as is written in the former chapyter.
Finally ye ought to know that in this case, that manner of byndyng is
necessary, whereof we have spoken in the book of wounds to which chapter ye
shall resort. etc.

The.vij. Chapter, of vlceres of hard curation, having an evil propriety
to us unknown, with the cures thereof.
Of ulcers of hard curation.
AS Auicenne wytnessethe, there is a kind of vlceres, which have an evil and
hid property, and because we have declared the causes and signs thereof, in
the general chapter of vlceres, we will use the fewer words in this present
chapter. The curation of them (universal purgation, and observation of diete
presupposed) shall be accomplysshed, by the administration of sondrye remedies,
according to the times, and places of the said vlceres. First, because we
have often spoken, of the accidents of all evil vlceres, we will now only
speak of paynfulnes, for in some vlceres there is vehement gryefe, so that it
causethe evil accidents, and sometimes brings the patiente to death,
wherefore if there be vehement gryef, than ye shall apply things about the
vlcere that be stupefactiue, as a plaster made of the leaves of white popie,
and of henbane, wrapped in wete cloutes, and put under hot ymbres, Plaster
stupefactiue.
and afterward stamp them, and strain them, and add oil of Roses
Omphacyne, and vnguentum Populeon, and make a playstere with a little wax.

Item to this intention use the oyntmente following.. the leaves of mallows,
and of henbane, Ana. m^. ij. sethe them in water, and afterward stamp them,
and strain them, and add unto them of oil of Nenuphar, oil of popye, as
much as shall suffyce, set them on the fire again, and make an oyntmente
adding of Philonium Persicum.. vj. Item use this recepte.. oil of Popie, oil
of Camomylle, oil of Violettes. Ana.. j. of white wax.. vj. make a lyniment
at the fyere, adding of woman's milk,. ss. of opium.. j. of Saffran.. j. the
yolke of an Egg, and stir them about in a mortar of lead, the space of an
hour. If the dyfficultie of healynge, seame to proceed thoroughe the evil
complexion of the vlcered part, ye must consider whether the said complexion
be hot, or cold, material, or ymateriall, if it be hot, let it be cured
with local medi^ynes, and that have virtue to cole, as vnguetu^ de cerusa. A
colliry made with water of roses, and pla^tayne, and with white sief without
opium, is of good operation. Further the difficulty of healynge, chances of
the quantity or quality of blood, if it be in quantity, it is other
superfluous, or diminished, if it be in quality, it is in complexion hot, or
cold, moist, or dry. etc. If the blood be superfluous, the cure is
accomplyshed with slender diete, and with cuttyng of a vein, and by
administration of bloodsuckers. If the blood be diminished, ye shall remedy
it with gross diete, of good juice, and by drawyng nouryshment to the vlcered
place, by rubbynges, unctions, and fomentations, and such fomentations, that
swage pain, so continuynge, till the member wax read, and begin to swelle.
If the blood be of an ill quality, as of a hot material complexion, let the
hot mattier be purged, if it be thin, with rubarbe, Myrobalanes, Tamarindes,
pulpe cassie, with water or wine of pomegranades, made after the manner of
iuleb. etc. And if need be, let the mattier be purged, with the juice of roses,
psilio, or sebeste^. etc. If the mattier be gross through adustion, let it be
purged with a lectuary lenitiue of hamech, diasene, cassia, strengthened with seen,
pillulis indis. etc.

Note that hot mattier being subtle, must be digested before purgation, with
sirupe of roses, endyue, vinaygre simple, occisaccaru^, syrup of violets, with
ye waters of endyue, violets, sorell, or other like. If the mattier be gross
through adustion, it must be digested with a sirupe of apples, of buglosse, of
hoppes, with a iulep of violettes, of fumiterre, or other such.

Here ye shall note this one thing, yt in eating and drinkinge, and in other
things not natural, ye keep a proportion, according to ye defaut in these and
other co^plexions, which are found with an vlcere. If there chance a fieuer in
the ulcers, so much more ye shall increase ye forsayde things in ye degree of
coldness, or diminish the same, as ye fieuer shall seem stronger or weaker. If
the blood be of a hot co^plexio^, simple or co^pounde without mattier, the^ the
foresaid digestiues shall only suffice without purgation. If it be of a cold
complexion and material, the^ let the mattier be purged. If it be flegmatike,
with aloes, agarike, polipody, turbith, electuary de dactilis, pillule de
hiera, pillule cochie, or other like, always directyng the mattier with syrup de
bisantiis, with oximel, and sirupe of vinaygre co^pou^de with honey of roses, with
waters of fenell, borage, smallage, maioru^, mint, worwood, or other such.
These things one after another, are good in an euel cold complexion not
material, without purgation. Like curation shall be in cold mattier moist and
material, but if ye complexion be moist without mattier, only digestyues are
convenient, but if the co^plexio^ be dry and material, the mattier must be
purged, and the members yt engendre ye same rectified. If it be not material
ye cure shall be with hot and moist things. Hitherto we have spoken of ye cure
of evil blood. Furthermore we said yt the roundnes of ulcers, hinders
curatio^, wherefore ye chirurgien shall reduce it from a round vlcere, to
alonge vlcere, with an hot iron, or with a caustike medicine, briefly it is a
general rule, in the cure of these ulcers, yt if the difficulty of their
curation, do consist in ill blood, that then, ye minister meat which
engenders good blood, contrary to that, that hyndreth the cure. If the cause
be in slender nouryshmente, the blood shall be multiplied, by dilatynge the
way with good meats. But if the cause be mollifitation through filthy
mattier, than it shall be healed with the cure of a filthy and soft vlcere.
If superfluous dryeng be the cause, so that it be not a fistulous vlcere, it
shall be cured with moist things, and herin it avails much as Auice^ne
says, to perfume the vlcered place, with some thing of gentle moisture, and
by administrynge medicines of little exiccation or drieng, and therefore Auice^ne
says, perchance it is good, to administer cloutes dypped in warm water. If
some cankerouse corruption be ye cause of difficulty, then cure that accidente
as it is said in the cure of a canker. Likewise if a fistula be the cause,
resort to the cure of a fistula. For the remouynge of other causes, that
lets the curation of ulcers resort to ye second chapter of this present
book.

Now I will begin to declare certain remedies, as I promised before.
Ointment.
And to speak generally of oyntmentes which help ulcers that been hard to
cure, these ben they. First. R. of oil myrtyne, oil of roses omphacine. an^..
iii. of goats suet, of calves suet. an^.. ii. of Plantayne leaves, of
woodbynde, of the tender parts of bramles, of the leaves and graynes of
myrtilles, of the leaves of wild olyues, of the herb called Horsetayle ana.
m^. i. of Hypocistidos.. x. two sower pomegranades, of the herb called
alleluya, of sorell, an^. m^. i. ss. of vnguentum populeon, oil of roses
complete. ana. li. ss. stamp all these foresaid things together, and let
them sees with a cyathe of water of plantayne, and as much of water of Roses,
till the waters be consumed, the^ strayn them, and set the liquor upon the fire
again, and put thereunto of ceruse. ii. of Litarge of gold and silver. an^. i.
of minium.. x. of bole armenye, terra sigillata. ana.. i. Let them sees with a
soft fire, and stir them the space of two hours, the^ increase the fire,
and let them sees again, till they become very black in color, adding
in the end as much white wax as shall suffice. This ointment is of great
efficacitie in all Ulcers of hard curation. An other of greater dryenge. R. of
oil omphacyne, and oil Myrtyne. ana.. ii. ss. of shepes talowe, calves
talowe, and goats talowe. an^.. ii. of swynes grese melted.. iii. of the juice
of Plantayne, Nyghtshade, and housleke. ana.. i. ss. of Roche alume, of Lyme
three times quenched in water and washed, ana.. vi. of flowers and ryndes of
pomegranades, of Myrobalanes citryne ana.. vii. Verdegrese.. v. synders of
iron.. x. of Sarcocolle.. ii. stamp these foresaid things, and leave them so
together the space of a day, and then boil them in water of plantayne, and
afterward strain them, and take that, that is strayned and set it on the
fire, and put thereunto a sufficient quantity of white wax, and make a soft
ointment, adding of litarge of gold and silver. ana.. x. of cerusa.. vi. of
burned lead, of synders of iron. ana.. v. ss. of antimoniu^. i. of quycksyluer
quenched.. i. when these things are added thereunto, ye shall put them in a
mortar of marble, and stir them about the space of an hour, adding in the
end of Camphore brayed.. i. This oyntmente is desiccatyue, and of great
efficacitie, in venomous, malign, and corosyue ulcers, which been hard to be
healed, for it dries the straung moisture, which hyndreth consolidation, and
generally these two oyntmentes been good in all kinds of ulcers before written.

After that ye have administered our poudre, which remoueth evil flesh, it is
good also to wash the place somtymes with water of Alume, and with cold and
stiptyke things, as been roses, with the flowers of pomegranades, and
plantayne. we have only declared those remedies, which we have proved. Thus
we end this chapter. etc.

The.viii. chapter of fistules, and of the cure thereof.
A Fistule, after the doctrine of Auicenne, is a holowe vlcere, A fistule.
having a little mouth, and deep in the botome, with hard flesh, compassyng
the sam. And there be four kinds thereof. The first is called fleshy, and
grows in fleshye places, Kinds of fistules.
the second is called a synnowy fistule, and grows in synnowye places, ye
third is that which is engendered in a place full of arteries and veins, the
fourth is called boony, which begins in a boon. Of these some grow in ye
region of the spiritual members, as in the breaste, and some in the head, and
there is joined to them the corruption of the boon, and they be called talpe.

Some are engendered in the jaws, some in the bellye, and some in the corner of
the eye, and some in the fundame^t, and some in the ioynctes, which be^ of most
hard curatio^, as Salicete witnesses, saying the fistula yt goes to some of
the rybbes, or spondilles, or to some ioyncte, is ever suspected of evil
termination. The fistules that grow in fleshye places, though they have many
holes, be not so hard to be healed. Howebeit they be of the worse curatio^,
because they are hid, and deep. Item the fistule which is in noble members,
or nigh to them, and pearceth unto the inward part, as in the breast, in the
belly, or in the bladder, is dangerous, and brings often the patient to death.

The cure of fistules is accomplyshed by four intentions, of which the first
is ordenaunce of diete, the second, universal euacuation, The cure.
the third is confortation of the members, the fourth is administration of
convenient medicines, according to the times, and places, of the fistule. The
first shall be accomplished, by the administration of such meats, as in
substance, or quality, are contrary to the causes which hinder consolidation,
whereof we have spoken in the former chapiters.

The second shall be accomplished, by ye administration of a laxatiue medicine,
according to ye evil humors, (a digestion of the said humors presupposed)
whereof we have spoken, in the chapter of venomous and corosyue ulcers, and in
the book of apostemes. The third entention, which concerns confortynge of
the inner members, shall be accomplyshed, by administration of certain potions
in this case convenient, which we have ordained in the chapter of wounds,
that perce into the breast, and in the chapter of a fall or stomblyng,
whereunto ye shall resort.

The fourth intention which concerns the administration of local medicines,
shall be accomplyshed by things, that have virtue to enlarge the mouth of the
fistula, unto the botom of the same. And after that ye mouth is enlarged, ye
must mortifye the place, and remove ye hardness, which is in the botome, and
in the lyppes. which, when it is removed, ye shall proceed with a mundificatyue
medicine, and after mundification, ye must incarnate, and seal up the vlcere,
and make a good cicatrice.

Touching the enlargynge of the mouth of fistules, there is no better remedy,
then to cauterise the place, or to cut away the corruption unto the botome,
so that it may be done with out hurt of the veins and arteries. Ye may also
enlarge the place, with trociske de minio of our description, or with
vnguentu^ egiptiacu^, with a little arsenycke of our description, or with our
poudre of mercury, or some other sharp lotion, whereof we will speak in our
Antidotarye more at large. Some command to enlarge the mouth of the fistule,
with a tente of gentiane, of ditanye, of bryonye, or of dragons, or with a tent
of a spo^ge, leauyng the^ within the mouth, half a day, and after that the
place is mortifyed and enlarged, ye shall mundify it with this mundificatyue.
mu^dificatiue
R. of terbentine washed with aqua vite.. iii. of honye of roses strayned.. i.
ss. of aristologia rotunda.. ii. of the flower of lupines.. ss. of ye juice of
smalage, of the juice of hounds tongue. an^. vi. sees the terebe^tine and the
iuyces, with the honey of roses, till half be consumed, and afterward put thereto
the other things, and apply them within the fistula.

And note, that if ye add unto this mundificatyue, a little of mirre, of
sarcocol, of paucedinis, and of flouredelice, it shall be very expedient for
incarnation of fistules, putting only some of the said incarnatiue, upon the
tente lykemaner, to incarne fistules with a little desiccation and co^fortyng of
the place, we have found this collirye most auaylable. R. aqua vite.. ii. of
malueseye. Collitie.
. i. of honey of roses.. x. of myrre and paucedi^s braied. an^.. ii. of
sarcocolle, of aloes epatyke. an^.. i. ss. Me^gle them all together, and let
the^ sees a little. Oyntmentes convenient for this intention, and which may be
applied in all times, ben these. Oyntmentes godd for fistules.
Vngm^. basilicu^ magistrale of our description. Vngm^ de minio, noted in the
chapter of a broken skulle, and likewise diaquilon magistrale in our
antidotary mentioned. Item we have found convenient for the dryenge of
fistules, a plaster made of goats donge, with bean flower, sodde^ wine
called sapa, and other wine, and barbers lie. Item lotions convenient in this
case, are these that follow. R. lie made with ashes of vine or fig tree
branches, Lotions for fistules.
or of barbers lie, with a sufficient quantity of honey of roses, and roch
alume, let them sees a little. Item. R. of the said decoction.. ii. of poudre
of mercury of our description.. ss. mengle the^ together. This lotion must be
conveyed in with a sirupe, that it may work in the botome of ye fistule, for it
purges the superfluity, and eats away evil flesh, in short time, and
causes not great pain. And we have often sondred rotten synnowes from the hole
parts, with this lotion applied upon the yard. A lotion for old ulcers.
Item this lotion following, is good to mu^dify old and hard ulcers. R. Vngm^
egiptiacu^.. ss. of mercury sublimate.. ss. of lie.. iiii. of water of roses..
ii. of arsenike.. i. of water of plantayne.. iiii. sees these things together
till ye third part be consumed, and apply it with a syryng, for it mortifieth al
fistules, applied.ii. or.iii. times in the ulcers. Ite^ trosciscus de minio
aforesaid and these that follow are of great efficacity. R. of sublimate well
pounded. A trociske very good for fistules.
. ss. of the mids of bread vnbaken and well leuened.. iiii. of Minium.. x.
mengle the said things together, with a little Rose water, and make trociskes,
according to the fashion and form of tents, and dry them upon a tyle, and
keep them to your use.

For sigillation, ye shall proceed with stiptike and dryenge things, as we have
often said. we could write many other remedies, but our custom is only to
write those, that we have proved to be true. etc.

Here begins the first treatise of the.iiii. book, which treats of ulcers
perticulerly.
The first chapter, of the ulcers of the head.
Ulcers of the head.
THe Ulcers of the head, differ not in cure from other ulcers. For if they be
corosiue, they must be cured after the cure of corosiue ulcers. If they ben
rotten, ye shall resort to ye chapter of rotten ulcers, if they be holow, ye
shall turn to the chapter of holow ulcers. etc. If the bone be corrupt, through
aposteme called topinaria, or talpa, resort to the chapter of those apostemes.
The doctors have many other remedies, wherein we have found little profit, and
therefore we ouerpasse them, for as Celsus says one medicine, suffices not to
diverse and sundry diseases.

The second chapter is of moist ulcers of the head.
Of moist ulcers of the head
SOmtymes, there ben engendered in the head moist ulcers, which are hard to be
cured. The most convenient thing in this case, is to purge the humors of the
head, and than to proceed with the remedies following.

First, ye shall mundify the place with our poudre of mercury, and after that the
place is mundified, ye shall apply an abstersive, made with the juice of
smallage, of the syrup of roses, and of the juice of plantayne, and for
sigillation, water of alume is commendable, or vngm^. de minio of this
description. R. of oil mirtine, of oil of roses omphacine. Vngue^tu^ de minio.
an^.. iii. of goats and calves talow. an^.. i. ss. of ye juice of pla^taine,
and nyghtshade. an^.. i. of the herb called horsetaile, of the leaves of
myrtilles, of the tender parts of brambles, of the leaves of wild olyues.
an^. m^. ss. of the flowers of pomegranades, of galls. an^.. vi. an hole sower
pomegranate, of ye water of pla^tayn. li. ss. braye al those things yt be to
be braied, and let them boil till the juice and water be consumed, then
strain the^, and add to the straynyng, of litarge, of silver.. i. of miniu^..
vi. of bole armeny.. ss. Let them sees again, and stir the^ about till they
be black in color, and with sufficient white wax make a soft cerote, addyng
in the end, of clear terebentyne.. i. ss. of mastike. iii. Ite^ in this case,
water of alume.
water of alume made as it follows, is convenient. R. of water of plantayne,
of lie made with the ashes of vine tree and fig tree, an^. li. ss. of the
beries of mirtilles, and flowers of pomegranades. an^.. i. of a myrobalane
citryne, of Hipoquistidos, of laudanum. an^.. iii. of roche alume.. vi. of honey
of roses.. i. ss. Let them sees all till the third part be consumed, then
strain them and use them. After that the place is washed with this decoction,
ye shall apply this poudre. R. of roche alume brent, of bole armenye. an^..
iii. of a myrobalane citrine, of the flowers of pogranades.. i. ss. Mengle them
and poudre them fynely.

And if ye can not dry nor mundifye, with these said remedies, then ye shall
use Vnguentum egiptiacum, or Vnguentum mixtum. Concerning the rest of the cure,
it shall suffice to apply the foresaid mundificatyues, for the fleshynes of
the head is but small, and therefore the vlceres are not holowe, nether have we
described incarnatyue medicines, for the medicines mundificatiue do partly
incarne also etc.

The third chapter, of ulcers of the head proceeding of dry skalles, and of
exitures called vlcera fauina, et mellina.
Oftentimes, there are ulcers engendered in ye heed, procedyng of hard knobbes,
Of dry skalles of the head.
which ben of hard curation, and also of dry skalles. Here we will only treat
of the vlcere that is called mellinu^, procedynge of hard knobbes, which is,
that the place be mundifyed with a trociske of miniu^, or with our poudre of
mercury, or with vnguentu^ egiptiacu^, from al evil flesh, which thing is
known by the growing of good flesh. Let the head be purged also, with
pills of hiera picra, with agarike, or pills called cochie, or aggregatiue.
etc. for the other intentions, ye shall proceed as it is said in the former
chapter.

The.iiii. chapter, of the skalles of the heed.
AFter the doctrine of ancient writters, there be sundry kinds of skalles of
the head, Of the skalles of the head.
one is called Fabina, for the semblans of beans, an other furfurea, like
bra^ne, another viscose, slimy, and another lupinosa, for semblaunce of a
husked lupine, some dry, some moist, some vlcerous, some without ulcers.
Howbeit the names are not to be regarded, so yt we have the right curation, for
the cure of one differs not from the cure of an other, but in the greater or
smaller mordication, or bytyng, of local medicines. The causes of these
skalles, are gross and corrupt and slymy humors, Causes of skalles.
having beginning sometime of the mothers womb, or of evil diete. This evil
disposition, we have also seen to have chanced, of the negligence of ye
parents. The curation hereof, may be reduced to two kinds, as wilhelmus
Placentinus says, that is to say, to a moist, and a dry skall. That which
is moist, is always vlcered, and that which is dry, is always skaly, and
white, with superfluity like meal.

The cure shall be acco^plyshed with three ententions, the first, ordenaunce of
diete, the second, purgation of the mattier antecede^t, ye third is, to take
away the mattier conioynct, and accidens which ensue, after the application
of bytynge medicines.

For the first and second entention, ye shall resort to the cure of vndimia,
and zephiros. But for a more certain doctrine, we will write some convenient
purgations. First ye shall use pills of fumiterre, pylles cochie, pills de
Hiera cu^ Agarico, pills aggregatyue, for they draw ye humors from the head.
Also ye may use an electuary of Roses, confection of hamech, electuary of
dates, given with a sufficient quantity of Cassia. The third entention is
thus accomplyshed, first if the place be dry, ye shall moysten it, three or
four days with this lotion.

A good lotion.
. of fumiterry, of dockes, of the rotes of holyhocke. ana. m^. ii. of branne,
of camomyll. ana. m^. i. of lyneseed.. i. of beans.. iiii. of lupynes. li. ss.
sees these things in suffycient quantity of lie, made with ashes of vine
branches, and wash he heed with this decoction twyse or thryse a day, as hot
as the patient can endure, and after the lotion ye must annoint the place with
this linnnent.

. of swynes grese. l. i. of fumiterrie, of dockrootes. ana. m^. i. of yuy
leaves, oil of laurel. an^.. ii. of terebentine.. i. ss. of oil mastike.. i.
of ye iuce of black colewortes.. iiii. sta^pe these things together, and so
leave them the space of a day, and afterward sees them till the iuce be
consumed, than strain them, and anoynte the heed, concerning the same, with
the leaves of black colewortes after it is anointed. And when ye have used
these things, the space of.iii. or.iiii. days, ye must scarify the sore
places with a deep scarificatio^, that the matter conioinct and the evil blood
may be purged, and after scarification, ye shall use again the forsayde
lotion, and often shave the heed.

And if ye perceive that the place be mundifyed by the foresaid things which is
known by the clerenesse of the skyn, and remouyng of the brannye and cruste ye
matter, than ye shall wash thrice a weke the heed, with the forsayde decoction,
applying this liniment following, which mundifieth the skin, and heals the
rawnesse and vlceration of the heed.. of oil of the yolks of eggs.. x. of
the oil of lyneseed.. i. ss. of oil of mastike, of oil of laurel. an^.. ss.
of swynes larde melted, of calves tallowe. ana.. iii. of clear terebentine.. i.
ss of the leaves of plantayne, of the leaves of wild olyues, of fumiterie, of
dockes, of sour po^granades, of horsetayle. an^. m^. i. of the leaves of ydye.
m^. ss. stamp that should be stamped, with the forsayde oils and fat, and
seethe them till the iuces be consumed, than strain them, and put to the
straynyng of litarge of gold and silver. ana.. ii. of ceruse.. x. of time ten
times washed of roche alum burned. an^.. vi. of quik silver quenched with
fasting spittel. v. mengle them together, and make a liniment with sufficye^t
white wax. This forsayde liniment is very commendable in all kinds of scalles,
and of great efficacitie.

Note here, that in all kinds of scalles wherein the roots of the heeres ben
corrupt, it is a synguler remedy, after ye have washed the heed with the
forsayde lotion, to make a cap of fustian covered with pytche, to draw out the
roots of the here, that be roten, or in the stead thereof, use small tenacles
or pynsones, and than proceed with the foresaid unction, till the flesh be hole,
and cleansed from all crustye and brannye scurffe.

But if the place can not be mundifyed with the foresaid remedies, the^ ye shall
use stronger mundificatiues with corrosion, as is this ordinance following.
Take of white elebore,. ss of apiu^ risus.. vi. of dockes.. i. ss. of
ca^tarides, taking away the hedes and the wings.. v. of honye, of terebentine.
ana.. i. of orpyment.. iii. of verdigrese.. iii. ss. of larde.. i. ss. of
butter. x. of alume zuccaryne.. v. of leven. iiii. of branne.. vi. ss. poudre
the cantarides, the orpyment, and the verdigrese, and the alume, and mengle
the^ all together, and apply them in the sore places, for through their
blysterynge and corrosion, they purge the watrye and superfluous humors. And
ye must apply them so long, till ye perceive that the place is clean, and
net, which thing is known, by that, that the evil cruste and super fluitie
is removed, and by the growyng of good flesh and good skin.

Afterward ye shall mundifye the place with butter, and the yolks of eggs
and terebentine, making a digestyue of them all: which done, annoint the heed
therewith, and than cover the same with the leaves of black colewortes, for this
medicyne deuideth the evil flesh from the good, and swageth pain, for the
incarnation, and cicatrization, ye shall use the lyniment vnderwrytten, into the
which the oil of yolks of eggs enters.

And for asmoch as after ye application of the said blystryng medicyne, there
remains in the vlcered place great infla^mation, and pain, for the remouyng
thereof, we have ordained this remedy.. of oil of roses omphacine.. iii. of
oil of roses co^plete, of oil mirtine. ana,. ii. of litarge of of gold and
silver. ana.. i. ss. of tutia. i. ss. of ceruse.. x. of the iuce of amidu^. vi.
of the iuce of nyghtshade, plantayne, and lettues. ana.. ss. stamp ye said
things in a mortare of lead, puttyng in now a drop of oil, and now a
drop of the iuces, till they be consumed, and perfectly mengled together, and
use them afeer the manner of a liniment. The cure of a moist scalle


For the accomplysshmente of this cure, we will declare certain remedies
conuenyent for a moist skalle, though the forsayde remedies may conuenyently
be adminystred in this case also. First vnguentu^ egiptiacu^, is good to
mundify ulcers proceeding of moist skalles: and in like manner our poudre of
mercurye, and vnguen. de minio, causes good sigillation in this case. A cappe
of pitche.


And because we made mention before, of the use of a pitched cappe, to pull out
the rotten heeres, we will declare the manner of applyinge the same. First set
pitche on the fire, and take pieces of fustian after the breadth of three or four
fyngers, and let the pytche drop upon the fustian, on ye cottened side,
leaving one part of the fustian without pytche, that when the pieces have
remained, the space of vi. or.vii. days upon the heed, ye may pluck them
suddenly away, with a strong hand and quycke, and thou shalt se, that it
will bring the rotten heeres away with it, and these pieces must be renewed,
till all the heeres corrupt, be roted out. Howbeit, ye must warn the patientes
friends, of the hard and long cure, chefelye when the disease is from the
mothers womb.

The.v. Chapter. Of alopecia.
ALopecia, Of alopecia.
after the au^cyent and later writers, is the baldenesse of the heed, caused
through vlcerous skabbes, and is compared to the mau^gynesse of dogs, and
foxes,, and is engendered of abu^daunce of corrupt humors, engrossed in the
heed. The signs be soon known, for the heeres falls by little and little,
and the place is rough, and sometime vlcered.

The disease is also known by his figure, wyich is commenly round. Some put a
dyfference between alopecia, and albaras, saying: Albaras and alopecia dyffer.
thar alopecia is in the heed, and albaras is in the beerde, and dyffereth from
alopecia, for it has not such roughness, nor such accidents, but the
skin is smothe.

The cure
The cure hereof is accomplysshed by.iiii. intentions, the first is dyete, the
second purgation of matter antecedent, the third, remotion of the cause
conioyncte, the fourth, generation of heeres in the balde places.

As touching the first and second intention, because the matter is
flegmatike, gross, or melancholye, having some sharpness, and adustion, it is
conuenye^t, to use the ordinances and dyetes, and purgations, written in the
Chapter of Vndimia, and of sephiros. The third intention is accomplysshed, as
it follows. First, if the places be roughe, ye shall proceed with lenitiue
things, to make the skin smoth, if it be vlcerous, ye shall dry up the
ulcer, if it be bra^ny, ye shall cleanse away the skurfe.

First in all kinds of alopecia, ye must wasshe the places the space of vii.
days with this lotion.. of beans, A good lotion.
of lupines. ana. m^. i. of raysines, of dry fygges. ana.. ii. of the roots
of docke. li. ss. of fumiterrye, of the leaves of walworte, of maydenheer. an^
m^. i. ss. of sour apples.x. of. branne. m^ ii. of clean barley.. iii. of
liquirise.. i. ss. sees all the forsayde things together in sufficient
quantity of barboures lie, till the third part be consumed, and than put
thereto, of honye. iiii. and sees them again a little, and wash the heed twyse
a day with this decoction, rubbyng the place with a course cloth. And after yt
the places be washed, ye shall annoynte them with this ointment, which is
conuenyent both in a crustye and vlcered alopecia.

. of oil of the yolks of eggs, of lyneseede. ana.. x. of oil of roses
omphacine.. v. of oil mastike.. ss. of of the iuce of plantayne, of the iuce
of fumiterry, and dockes. an^.. vii. of gotes tallowe and cowes tallowe. ana..
ii. ss. Let them be sodden al together until the iuces be consumed, than
strain them, and add to the straynynge, of litarge of gold and silver. ana..
ii. ss. of roche alume burned.. v. of alume zuccatrine.. ii. white wax as much
as shall suffyce, quyksyluer quenched with fasting spyttle.. ix. mengle these
things together, and stir them al about, the space of an hour in a mortare
of lead, except ye quycksyluer, which must be put in, in the end, for the
most part of it (else) would remain in the lead. This lyniment makes the
skin clean, and remoueth the crust and hardness. A liniment. for skurfe.


If the alopecia be full of branne, ye shall remove it with this liniment.. of
larde, of oil of lyneseed. ana.. ii. of oil of the yolks of eggs.. vi. of
the iuce of dockes, of vynegre. ana. i. of honye.. x. of branne.. xv. seethe
these things together, till the vynegre and iuces be consumed, tha^ strayn
them, and if the honey be hardened, ye shall separate it from the other, than set
them upon the fire again, with suffycyent quantity of white wax, addyng of
clear terebentine.. i. of lytarge of gold.. iii. of lyme ten times wasshen..
i. ss. of orpyment.. i. of verdigrese.. ss. make a liniment, and apply it,
after ye have washed ye place with the foresaid decoction. And wha^ the alopecia
is with ulcers full of superfluous and deed flesh, let it be cle^sed with our
poudre of mercurye, or vngue^tu^ egiptiacu^, and for the other intentions ye
shall proceed with the lotion and liniment beforesayde. For cicatrization, it
is conueniet to wash the heed with water of alume, and afterward to apply
vnguentu^ de minio, or of ceruse. Ye may sometime scarifye the places, with a
deep scarifyinge, or apply bloodsuckers to purge the matter conioynct

And when the alopecia is removed: which thing is known by the good color of
the skin, ye shall apply such things as have nature to engendre here, A
good liniment to engendre here.
as is this linimente following.. of the iuce of smalage.. ii. of the iuce of
fenell, and parcelye. an^.. i. of the iuce of enula campana.. vi. the iuce of
apium risus,. ii. of oil of elders, and terebentine. ana.. x. of ship
pytche, greek pytche, and lyquyde pitche. ana.. v. of diaquilo^ gu^med,
mugwort, sothernwoode somewhat stamped, of rosemary, of maydenheere fine
stamped. ana. the.iii. part of an handful, of odoriferous wine, half a
cyathe, of vynegre.. ii. Let them seethe all together, till the wine, iuce, and
vynegre be consumed, than strain them, and add to the straynyng, of new
odoriferous wax as much as shall suffyce, of saffra^.. ss. of yreos.. i. ss.
make it after the manner of a cerote. This linimente is of good operation, to
engendre heeres in the heed, and in the chynne.

Before ye apply this lyniment, ye must rub the place with a course clothe.
Note that when alopecia and albaras ben old, the cure is in a manner
impossible. Thus we end this present Chapter.

The.vi. Chapter. Of the cure of Saphatie.
Of Saphati.
SAphatie, are little pustles which are engendered in the foreheed, in the neck,
and in the face, and chefely about the nose, and are fleshye, with a little
crust upon them, like the skale of a fysh. This passion appears often in a
lepre, and therefore the doctors call it, the beginning of leprye. It
appears also in the French pockes. The causes thereof are gross,
superfluous, and burned, humors.

The cure of the said ulcers conteyneth.ii. regimentes, namelye universal,
and particular: universal regyment, is accomplyshed by the universal
purgation, declared in the chapter of a canker, and also the ordinance of
dyete, is taught in ye same place. Also we have proved, yt the application of
leches, upon ye veins called emorroidall, and upon the ears, is profitable in
this case, and cuttynge of the vein cephalita, and basilica is to be commended.

Item this purgation following (a digestion of humors presupposed) is
expedyeut in this case. Purgation.
. of polipodye.. ss. epithimu^, of the cods of senye. ana.. i. of the
confection of hamech.. i. ss. of diacatholicon.. iii. of anise.. i. of a syrup
of vyolettes.. i. ss mengle them, and give them in the morning. This medicyne
purges fleame, that is gross, and melancholye burned. The regyment particular
is accomplysshed by the administration of local medicynes. Particular regiment.
First after an universal purgation, ye shall annoint the pustle with this
liniment.. oil of Lauryne.. ii. of swynes grese.. i. of litarge of gold.. v.
of auripigmentu^, of roche alume burned, of lyme washed. ana.. i. ss, of
quyckesyluer.. iii. ss. of oil of roses omphacine.. x. as much white wax as
shall suffyce, make a liniment.

Item this decoction following is good for the same intent.. of sublimate.. i.
of salgemme, of sal armoniake, of alume zuccatrine, A good water.
ana.. i. ss. of water of roses, and plantayne. ana.. iiii. of barbours lie..
ii. Sees these foresaid things tygyther, till the third part be consumed,
and put in the end, a little verdigrese, and apply it with cotton moysted in ye
said decoction. An other liniment.. the white of.ii. eggs, of water of
roses.. iii. of sublymate.. ss. mengle them together, and stir them about a
good while. Note here, that the remedies written of skalles, and alopecia, and
of gutta rosacea, may be adminynistred in this case. Likewise ye shall find
many remedies for this purpose, in the treatise of the french pockes. etc.

The second treatise of the fourth book, which speaks of the diseases of the
eyes.
The first Chapter. Of ulcers of the eyes, called macule, and pani.
Of ulcers in the eyes, spotus and webbes
THe ulcers, called macule, or spots, and pani, or webbes of ye eyes are
engendered of causes prymytyues, after the doctrine of Gordon proceeding of an
hot aposteme called flegmon, and also of the disease called ophthalmia. For as
Galene says if the disease ophthalmia be not well cured, it will leave many
evil accidents in the eyes, as vlceration of ye apple of the eye, and of the
pannicle called cornea, The cure of the greues of the eyes.
macule, or spots, and pani, of hard curation. The cure of these ulcers,
spots, and web^es, is accomplysshed by the obseruacyon of double regiment,
universal, and particular. The universal regyment consysteth in the
ordinance of an universal purgation, and a dyete.

Touching universal purgation (if the body be full of humors) ye shall cut
the vein called cephalica on the contrary side. And if ye will so cut the
vein, that it may purge the patient, ye shall cut the said vein in the same
side. Item ye may profytably apply bloodsuckers under the ears, to draw out
the gross blood. Also ye may apply ventoses upon ye shulders, after
scarification, and like wise a bladderynge medycyne upon the neck, to turn
away the matter.

Touching purgation by laxatyue medicines: it must be done according to the
quality of the evil humors.

And if the matter be hot, which thing may be known, by the redness and
inflammation of the place, ye shall give the patient this purgation.. of chosen
manna.. i. of diacatholicon, of an electuary of roses devised by Mesue, of the
iuce of roses, ana.. ii. make a small potion, with the decoction of cordyal
flowers, and fruits, addyng of syrup of violettes. i. An other soluble
medycyne.. of a lectuary lenitiue, or instead thereof diaprunis not solutiue..
x. of an electuary of roses devised by Mesue.. ii. of rubarbe, steped in the
water of endive.. ss. make a small potion with the common decoction, addyng of
syrup of vyolettes.. i. ss. An other.. of pills asageret, pills of fumiterry
the less, pylles of rubarbe. ana.. i. Mengle them together, and make. iii
pylles, with syrup of roses. These pylles must be given.ii. hours before
supper, and the more gross they be, the better they are in operation, because
they tarry longer in the stomach. If the matter be cold and gross, these
medicines following are conuenyente. First.. of diacatholicon.. vi. of
diafinicon, of electuary of roses. ana.. ii. make a small potion, with the
decoction of cordial flowers and fruits. An other.. of pylles of fumiterrie
the greater, of pylles aggregatiue, of hiera with agarike. ana.. i mengle them
together, and make.iii. pylles, with water of fenel. An other. of pylles called
cochie, et sine quibus esse nolo. ana.. ss. make pylles as is aforesade. But
for as much as laxatiue medicines, are not of good operation, exept digestio^
goes before ye must ordeine digestiues according to the matter, whereof ye may
have a special doctrine in the chap. of ophthalmia, and likewise of the diete.

Particular regiment is accomplisshed by the administration of remedies
vnderwrytten. First when the matter is hot, and the eye not very paynfull, ye
shall apply this colerye within the eye.. of rose water, of ye water of the
flowers of mirtill, of the water of horsetayle. ana.. iiii. of sugar candye of
syrup of Roses.. ii. of white sieffe without opium, of syef of lead. ana..
i. of syef of franke^sente.. ss. of aloes epatik.. ss. of myrobalane citrine..
i. ss. the whytes of. iii. eggs, braye the things that are to be brayed, and
shake them together, and distyll them in a glassen vessel, well luted. This
colerye is of our description, and is of good operacyon in all wou^des and
ulcers of the eyes. For it mundifyeth all other vlceracio^s caused of hot
matter. And moreover it has virtue incarnatiue, and sigillatiue.

cold matter
If ye perceive, that the vlceration is caused of cold matter, ye shall apply
this colirie within the eye.. water of roses.. ii. of water of horstayle. i.
ss. of syef of frankensence.. ss. of tutia preparate.. ii. of sugre candye of
syrup of roses.. iii. of aloes epatike. ss. seethe these things together a
little, except the syef, and make a colyrie, according to art, adding of
odoriferous wine.. ss. Item the syef of frankensence, ordained as it follows,
heals the ulcers of the eyes.. of the syef of frankensence.. i. of ye syef of
lead.. i. ss. of myrobalane cytrine.. ii. of tutia, of antimoniu^. ana.. i.
ss. of water of roses, and pla^tayne an^.. i. ss. of myrhe.. ss. of sarcocolle,
of aloes epatik. ana.. i. braye the things that are to be brayed, and let the^
be distylled in a vessel of glass. This colyrye is of a marvelous operation,
for it mu^difyeth ulcers, causes good incarnation, and perfyte curation in
short time. This we end this present Chapter. and.

The.ii. Chapter. Of the spots, or blemysh in the eyes called macule.
THe spotte of the eyes, of spots in the eyes
is engendered of a reumatik matter hot, or cold, and chances often of the
aposteme, called Ophthalmia, when it is not well cured, and when the pacyent
has not obeyed the counsel of the chirurgyen.

Note here, that every spotte, is with vlceration according to his quantity,
for if the spotte be little, the vlceration is little, if it be great, the
vlceracion is also great.

A spotte called macula, macula
is a pustle raised somewhat within the eye, cheefely in the kyrtyll of the
eye, and in the skin called cornea, and at the beginning it is of a whytish
color, and the nerer it is to maturation, the whyter it is. And when it is
come to suppuration it changes his color and waxes read.

The cure of spots is accomplysshed, by the admynistracyon of sundry local
remedies (obseruacion of diet, and general purgation presupposed) First, ye
must apply maturatiue, and lenytyue things, and afterward things
mundyfycatyue and toward the end, things disiccatiue, and cicatrizatyue. For
maturacyon, ye shall proceed with this maturatyue, following, chefelye, in that
spotte that proceeds of ophthalmia.. of the substance of apples roasted under
cooles.. iij. of woman's milk.. ss. the yolks of two eggs, stamp these
foresaid things together, and seth them a little, and afterward apply them
upon the eye, in ye form of a plaster. Another.. of clean barlye. A good
water
m^. ss. of the seed of quinces.. i. of fenugreke washed with water of rooses..
ss. of reisyns.. j. ss. of me lylote. m^. ss. sees these forsayde things in
ye broth of a lean chycke^, with out salt, till the third part be
consumed, then streine them, and put there of into thine eye, warm every half
hour. When the maturacion is fynyshed, which is known by the whitenes of the
pustle, and by the ceasing of the inflamacyon and pain, ye shall apply this
mundyfycatiue within the eye.. of syrup of rooses.. i. of the water of roses..
iij. of sarcocole.. i Ye must still these things in a lembecke of glass, and
after ward ye shall add to the said water dystylled of sugar candye of a
syrup of rooses.. iii. and put thereof into the eye, for it mundyfyeth the
place shortly.

For cicatrysation, ye may use this collyrie.. of the foresaid water.. ij
myrobalane citrine.. j. of the syef of lead.. j. of tucia preparat. ss. make a
collyrie, and put it into the eye

The third chapyter, which treats of the dyseases of the eyes called pani.
THe deseases of ye eyes called pani, Pani and cycatrices in the eyes.
and cicatrises, are always with an aposteme, or vlceracion and spots, and
be^ engendered of corrosiue matter. The cure there of, shall be accomplyshed, by
the admynystration of local medecynes, (the observation of dyete, and
purgacion, as it is declared in the chapyter of the vlceres of the eyes,
presupposed.) First, wha^ the eye is not enflamed, this water folowinge is
conuenyente, which thynneth every pannycle, every spot and cicatrise, and
reducith the eye to a good dysposition.. of water of plantayne, of water of
rooses, ana.. ij. of odoryferous white wine of mean strength.. j. ss. let them
sees to gether a little, and then take them from the fire, and put thereto of
verdegrece well poudred.. i. of tucia.. i. ss. of sugar candye.. i. of myrobalan
cytrine.. j. myngle them together, and pound these foresaid things together,
and so leave them the space of two days, and afterward strain and claryfy
them and put of ye liquoure in the eye, warm till the sore skin be consumed.

Item to this purpose, ye may use of the stylled water, written in the former
chapter.. j. and of the water written in this chapter.. x. myngle them well
together, this myxture, is of sure operation and of little bytynge.

The fourth chapter, of the ytchynge, hardness, and scabbes, of the eye lyddes,
and of the cure thereof.
Of scabbe of the eye lyddes
THe scabbes of the eye lyddes, commen in ye figure of little spots, somewhat
raised up as little pymples, which are sometime with great ytchyng and sometime
yt has the skin skalded of with inflammacyon, and they are engendered of
reumatycke matter, burned, or sharp, and for the most part they happen with
the aposteme ophthalmia. Kinds.
And because there be sondrye kinds of them, sundry remedies are required for
the cure of the same.

For some are whote, and some cold some moist, some dry, some vlcered and
some not vlcered, but crustye.

That that is dry, for the most part comethe of matter hot, and burned, and
likewise the crustye and the moist scabbe, is engendered of flegmatike gross
and sharp matter.

For the cure thereof, ye shall ordain the diet for the euel matter, and
lykwyse purgation. If the scabbe be moist, with ytchynge, or without ytchynge,
ye shall fomente the place with this fomentacyon, turnynge the eye lydde in
ward, softelye, which fomentacyon ye shall use, the space of.viii. days.. of
the roots of dockes, and of fumytery of clean barlye, ana. m^. ss. of
lentylles, of roses ana. m^. j. of lupines.. j. seethe these things with
sufficient quantity of barbours lie, till the third part be consumed, and let
the place be fomented the space of half a quarter of an hour, afterward
incontinentelye ye shall put into the eye, this collyrye following.. of white
syef with out opium.. ij. of water of plantaine, of water of rooses, ana.. j.
ss. of tucia, of antymonium, ana.. j. of burned lead, of ceruse, of litarge of
gold, ana. ij. of lyme x times washed with water of plantayne,. x. roche
alume.. ss. let the waters seth with ye alume one boiling, then put in the
other things one after another, and make a collyrie and apply it upon the
soore. And the said collyrie must remain upon the eye lyddes, the space of a
quarter of an hour, and afterward wash the place with water of plantayne,
water of roses, and with the decoccion of barlye, which thing must be done
twyse a day. After that ye have proceeded with the foresaid things, the space
of a weke, if greater exiccacio^ be requisite, ye shall rub the place with
vnguentum egyptiacum, of the descryption of mesue, (laid upon cotton,) or of
the descryption of Auicenne. But ye must be ware, that it touch not the eye,
but only the sore place, and it must remain there but a pater noster while or
a little more, and afterward ye must wash the place with water of barley, till
the oyntemente be removed, than ye shall apply a little of womans milk warm,
to take away the inflamacio^ and sharpenes of the oyntement, and afterward ye
shall apply the forsaid collyrie, and ye must renew the said remedies, till
the hardenes and skabbes be utterly removed.

And ye must consider one thing that is to say: when this disease is joined
with some evil accidente, as is pain, and evil complexion, or ophtalmia, or
some other, ye must remove the same before ye come to the cure, and if the
scabbes be dry, ye shall moysten them with a moystyng medicine having
resolucyon, and abstercyon, as is this lotion.. of the rotes of holy hockes
and dockes, Cure of dry scabbes
of the leaves of malowes, vyolettes, and plantayne, ana. m^. i. of sower
apples, nombre three of lentylles, of barley and of branne, ana m^. i. ss. of
roses m^. ss. sees these things in sufficyent quantity of reyne water till
two parts of.iij. ben consumed, and than wash the place therewyth, as we
said before, the space of a weke twyse a day, and afterward apply the
collyrie above written.

After a weke ye shall wash ye place with this grene water that follows. of
water of plantayne, of water of rooses, A precious grene water.
ana.. ij. of odiferous white wine.. i. ss. of tucia, of antimonium, ana.. i.
ss. of verdegrece, of roche alume ana.. ss. of lytarge of gold, of lycium,
ana.. iij. sees the waters with alume a little, and powder the rest, and put
the^ to the waters when ye take them from ye fire. After that ye have washed
the place with this water, ye shall apply the abouenamed collyry, in manner above
said. And if need be of greater exiccacion, ye shall repayr to that, that is
written in this present chapter.

And for as much, as in this case there chances great ytchyng, which is
engendered of salt fleme, to remove the same, ye shall use the foresaid grene
water, with an unction made of lard of tucia, and of the water of rooses, for
it takes away itchynge, and heals the sorenes of the eye lyddes. etc. thus
we end this present chapter.

The.v. chapter, of the disease of the eyes called vngula.
VNgula after the doctoures, Of vngula in the eyes.
is a pannycle of coniunctiua somewhat raised up, which appears for the most
part, in the the weeping part of the right side, howebeit, sometime, it
chances in the left side, and at the beginning it is small, and afterward
extends it self unto the commissure of the pannycle called cornea, And
because the matter causynge this pannycle, sometime grows in the over part
of the kyrtylle of the eye, and sometime in ye nether part of the same. when it
is in the over part, it apereth to be somewhat read, because of the veins
which are without, and when it is in the nether part, it is of a whytyshe
color.

The causes of this disease, are gross and flegmatyke, humors engendered of
evil dyete, dyscendynge from the head, by the veins and conduites, to the
kyrtyll of the eye.

The cure of these dyseases is acco^plyshed, by the admynistracion of localle
medycynes having virtue to resolve and dry, and to byte somewhat. First,
(observation of the diet, and purgacyon, as it is declared in the chapter of
ophthalmia presupposed, we will ordain. ii. pryncypall remedies, of which the
first is this.. of the iuce of horhound, of the iuce of sour pomgranades, of
the iuce of lyqueryce, of myrabolanes cytryne, well poudred, Collorye
ana.. i. of liciu^.. ss. of aloes epatike, of tucia preparate, ana.. ii. of
the grene water descrybed in the former chapter. vi. of the sief of memyte, of
whyt sief without opium, ana.. ss. of odoryferous white wine.. x. make a
collyrye according to art.

This collyrie applied in the eye, is very good in all kinds of vngula, of
sebell, and other dyseases of the eyes. Item to this entencyon, this water
following is conuenyentlye used. of ye iuce of saladine.. v. of the iuce of
sour po^granates with the rindes. iij. of ye iuce of liquerice, and carwaies
ana.. ss. of cumin.. ss. of sirup of roses, of honey of roses, ana. iiii. of
water of rooses.. ij. of myrobalanes emblyke, and cytryne ana.. ij. of
antimonium, ceruse ana.. v. of roche alume. j ss. of ox galle, and of capons,
and of partryches, ana.. ij. of cloves, of nutmegges, ana.. ss. of tucia, of
lyme ten times washed with water of plantaine and sorrel, ana.. iii. let the
hard things be pounded before ye myngle the^ with the other, and afterward
put them all to gether in a lembicke of glass, and when the water is
stylled, keep it in a glass well covered, and ye must apply thereof into the
eye, one drop at once, for it is an excellent water, and consumes
superfluytees, and is desiccatiue, and resolutyue, and if ye will that the
foresaid water, shall more strongelye consume superfluous flesh, ye shall
take of the said water.. iij. of odoriferous white wine.. j. of water of
rooses.. x. of tutia, and antimonie, ana.. j. ss. of verdegrece well poudered..
ij. heat the waters a little at the fire, than put to the rest and apply
thereof in the eye as it is said

If the desease be so rooted, that yt cannot be drawn out with these
remedies, ye must come to handye operacyon, though this curacyon be hard and
dangerous, for in pullyng up the vngula, if the chirurgyen be not expert, he
may pluck up the pa^nycle called cornea, and so mar the apple of the eye.
Wherefore, the friends of the pacyente are to be admonyshed, of the danger,
and the matter is to be taken in hand with great fear, and cyrcumspection,
howbeit, my counsel is, to leave such things to the vacabounde toothdrawers

Nevertheless, I will declare my mind herein: first ye must have an
ynstrumente of silver, made after the manner of small tenacles or pynsones
crooked, and take the vngula by the part that is toward the end, and not
toward the root, that is to say toward ye pannicle called cornea, and as ye
hold it with the said instrument, ye must have another sharp cuttynge
instrumente, and cut it by little and little, into the root. And after that
the vngula is removed, ye must dygeste the place with woman's milk, and sugar
candye of a syrup of vyolettes, to swage the pain, and ye must put upon the
eye, a plaster made with roasted apples, written in the chapter of the cure of
ophtalmia.

After that the pain is swaged, if there rest any superfluytie, ye shall
proceed with the foresaid waters and collyryes, which have virtue to consume
superfluous flesh, thus we end this present chapter. etc.

The syxte chapter of Sebel and of the cure thereof.
SEbell, Of Sebell in the eyes.
after Jesus haly, is a replecyon, of the veins of ye pannycle of the eye
called con unctiua, and it is in the over part, engendered of gross, and
reumatike, matter discending from the head.

The definition of Auicenne agreth here wythall. Sebell is a pannicle, lyfted
up upon the pa^nicles, coniunctiua and cornea, through the swellynge of the
veins of the pannicle coniunctiua caused of gross, and flegmatik, matter This
disease causes a smoky mist in ye pa^nicles co^iunctiua and cornea, and it is
with abundance of tears, and ytchynge, and redness, enclynynge to a
duskyshe color, and some time the eye ledes been hard and scabbye, with
vlceration, and troublynge of ye sight.

The cure of Sebell.
The cure of this disease has two entencyons, of which one, concerns the
admynistracion of universal things, the other of particular.

As touching the first, we say yt the remedies written in the chapter of
ophtalmia, are convenient in this case

The second ententyon, shall be accomplyshed as follows. First, ye must show
before hand, that when this disease is confyrmed, it can never, or very
seldom, be healed. And though it be new, yet it is of hard curatyon.
Auyce^ne nombreth this disease, among them that come by enherytaunce, for
often times it passes from one eye to another. Here follows a collyrye of
right excellent operacion. An excellent collerie.
. of the iuce of ashtree leaves of the iuce of celedonie, ana.. iij. of the
shelles of new laid eggs dissolved in vynegre the space of a weke, number.
iiij. of myrobala^s citryne.. j. of tucia preparat, of antimony, ana.. i. ss.
of water of rooses.. vi. of sarcocolle.. ij stamp al these things together,
and afterward seethe them in a little posnet of brass, till the half of the
iuces, and all the waters be consumed, and put thereunto of the said grene
water.. ij. sethe them again until the water be consumed, and afterward add
thereunto, of the syef of sarcocol, of white syef without opium, ana.. ij make
a fine poudre to be put into the eye.

This poudre is desiccatiue, mundyfycatyue, and resolutyue, with a little
bytynge. Item for the same entencyon, this water following is conuenyente.. of
the foresaid grene water.. i. ss. of the syrup of rooses.. ij. of the
foresaid poudre.. iii. of aloes epatike, well poudred.. i. mingle them and
puryfye them, and apply them often in the eye, with a little cotton, for it is a
synguler remedy. And moreover, it is good for ye scabbes of the eye liddes,
and for vngula. etc. thus we end this present chapter.

The.vii. chapter of cataractes and of things whereof catarattes should come
OFten times, Of the cataractes in the eyes
there descend from ye head, certain gross and flegmatyke humors,
coueringe the apple of the eye, and there remaining, are engrossed, and made
thycke, which is named of the doctors cataract. This disease is caused
through the communion of the stomach, replenyshed with evil slymy humors,
whereof certain vapoures ascend to the head, and cause cold and slimy matter,
to drop down, and taryeth long upon the pannycles of the eyes, and seems
to cover the apple of the eye. Item this cataracte, is sometime engendered by
the quality of the eye, that is to say: when the eyes ben very moist, and
filled with blood and when the white of the eye is to aboundaunt. At the
beginning of this disease, the pacyente seems to see before him little flies
flying, and he thinks one thing to be two, the light seems smaller to him
than it was wont, for because the vysyble virtue is diminished, things seem
to be smaler. Therefore the doctors say, that a cataracte hyndreth the virtue
of seeinge, as clouds darckene the light of the sun.

The signs of the confyrmacyon, and perfect maturacion, of a cataract is when
it suffers it self to be removed by manual operacion, and when the sight is
dyminished, and the apple of the eye dilated, and if ye lay your finger upon
the apple of the eye, it dilateth it self, and returns incontinently
afterward into his own color and the color is white or whytish

A black or duskyshe cataracte enclynynge to grenesse, or redenesse, and that
which dylateth not it self when it is touched is incurable, that which is not
co^fyrmed, can not be healed by handy operacyon, wherefore, ye must procure the
confyrmacyon thereof, geuyng the pacie^te meats that engrosse the blood, as are
chessenuttes, beef, and porke, and other gross flesh, and this thing must be
done, wha^ ye fere not that the cataract will come from one eye to another.

Cure.
The cure of a cataract not co^fyrmed is accomplysshed by.iiij. entencyons. The
first, is ordinance of diete, the second, is partly to purge, and partly, to
turn aside the matter antecedent, the third, is confortacyon of the member
from whence the matter is deryued, the fourth, is remotion of the matter
conioynt, by euaporation, and confortacion of the virtue visiue.

As touching the first entencyon, ye must give the pacyente good meats,
that engendre good blood and thynne, and which are of easy dygestion, as are
veale, lamb, kydde, capons, chyckens, partryches, wood birds, and hylle
birds, his wine must be of good odoure, and of mean strength.

Item ye may give with the foresaid flesh, maiorum, mynte, nepte,
penyriall, parcelye, borage, bawme, white betes, fenell, absteynynge from
lettuse, for of their property they hurt the syghte. In like manner, ye may
g^ue the pacient rape rotes and na^^ewes, and percely roots, soden wy^^ the
foresaid flesh. Also, ye must avoyde all things that gender gross
troublous, and vaporous, blood as are radyshe roots garlyke, oynyons,
mustard, colewortes lettuse, beans, etc. And also al manner of pulse except
read cycers. Item ye shall avoyde all falte and hot things, as peper, and
other strong spyces. The bread must be of pure wheat, well leuened, and well
baken, and if the said bread be made with fenell, it shall be the more
conuenyente in this case, as Democritus witnesses, saiynge: Crepynge worms,
being blinded in their holes, in winter, come forth in the spring time, and
seek for fenel, which they eat, and rub their eyes therewith, and so recover
their sight. Wherefore fenel, is right conuenyent in this case, for of his
nature it clarifieth the syghte, and remoueth the vapors, which would ascend
to the brain and do much harm.

The second entencyon, which concerns partly purgacion, partly puttyng a
side of the matter antecedente is accomplyshed as follows. First the matter
must be degested with syrup de duabus radicibus without vynegre, and with
syrup of stycados, and honye of rooses, with waters of buglosse, maiden here,
and fumiterre, or make it thus,. of oximel squillitike, Digestive.
of a syrup of the iuce of endyue, of honye of roses, ana.. ss. of the waters
of fenel betony, and fumitere, an^. j. let the pacyente use this, the space of
a weke, twyse a day, purgacion.
and then let him take this purgacion, two hours before day.. of pylles
cochye.. ss. of pylles agregatiue and yndes, ana.. ss. myngle them, and with
water of fenell, make five pylles.

This purgacyon is commendable in winter, and harvest, but in the spryng time,
this purgacyon following, is more convenient. of the pills of nyco^^^ ^alled
sine quibus esse nolo of pills assagereth with agarike. ana.. ss. make.v.
pills, with water of endive. Item the pills following, may conuenie^tly be used
in this case.. of ye pylles of Hiera with agarike, pylles of mastike, and sine
quibus esse nolo. ana.. i. make them as the aforesaid, and give them.iij.
hours before supper. This later purgation, must be given three times in a
month, a digestive of honey of roses going before, for as mesue says, ye
chirurgie^ must not be co^te^ted with one only purgation, but must renew the
same often. We have proved, ye triacle, in the winter taken in small quantity,
namely.. i. with as much honey of roses, with.ij. ounces of ye water of the
decoction of honey, is right expedient, and it must be received seven hours
before meat. In like manner it is good, yt the pacient eat after repast
quynces, and coriander confyte, that fumes asce^de not unto the brain.

As concerning ye turnynge away of the matter, it may be done by ventoses,
applied upon the neck, or upon the shulder, and by rubbing and byndynge the
extreme parts, and likewise by fomentation, and lotion of the legs with
things attractiue, and resolutiue, as it is written in the chapter of
optalmia. It is also profitable, to bind the heeres backwarde, and to kembe
them backward, for this thing turns matter aside. And we have proved that a
cauterization, actual or potentiall, applied upon ye coronal co^myssure,
purges ye matter of catarattes, and turns it a side.

The third entention which is to comfort the member from which the matter is
derived, is thus acco^plyshed First ye must apply a bag after the form of
a little cappe, full of things yt co^forte^ the brain, and defend the reumes,
as this ordinance.. of milium dried on ye fire, of dry bra^ne beaten to
powder. ana. m^. i. of maioru^, of roses, of wormwood, of betonye. ana. m^. ss
of sticados, of squinant, of each a little, of sweet fenel, calamus aromaticus,
of frankensence, of masticke. ana.. ss. myngle them together and bring the^ to
a fine powder. Item, ye may apply upon the head this cerote following.. the
forsayde powder.. ij. of most clear terebentyne.. i. A cerote for the head.
ss. masticke. x. of oil of mastyke, of oil of roses complete. ana.. ij.
myngle these together, and with sufficient quantity of new white wax, make a
styffe cerote, adding in ye end, of saffra^.. i. It is convenient also, to
wash ye head with this lie following.. of roses, of wormwood of rosemary, of
sage. ana. m^. i. of sticcados, of squina^tu^, of astrabacca, of laurel. ana.
m^. ss. let them be sodden with lie made of ashes of the vine tree.

The fourth entention, which concerns the euaporation of ye matter that is
upon ye pa^nicles or within ye same, shall be accomplyshed with resolutiue and
euaporatiue things, and such as comfort the eyes, as are the ordinances
following. First, this. R. of the water of celedony, fenel, and roses.li. ss. of
odoriferous white wine.. ij. of camomill, mellilote, rosemary flowers. ana. m^.
ss. of white sugger.. i. ss. of the galls of cocks, nombre.iiij. of fresh
fenell, of eufrage, (if it may be found) ana. m^. ss. seth them altogether
with as much reyne water, till the third part be consumed, then strain them,
and put thereunto of saffran.. ss. and seth them and strain them again. And
the patient must receive the smoke of the said decoction, holding his eyes
over it, in the morning.iij. or.iiij. hours before dinner, and after dinner as
much, and if the patient take ye foresaid pills, the day before he receive ye
smoke, it shall be ye better. This manner of suffumigatio^, is praised of Thadeus,
and Aue^soar, and it has virtue to resolve the matter prepared to nouryshe the
cataractes, and it comforts the virtue of seeing.

Item this dystillatio^ following is of great efficacitie, which comforts, and
clarifyeth, A noble water for the eye.
the sight and keeps it from the cataractes.. of a gotes liver hole and
fresh.li. ij. calamus aromaticus, of honye. ana.. ss. of the juice of rue..
iij. of water of celidony, verueyne, and eufrage. ana.. iij. of long peper, of
nutmegges, of cloves. ana.. ij. of saffran.. i. of the flowers of rosemary
somewhat sta^ped, of bosomus. ana. m^. ss. of sarcocol, of aloes epatyke. ana..
iij. of the galle of birds yt live by pray, (if they may be gotten).. i. or in
the stead thereof, he^nes, capo^s, and partriges galls, three times so much,
sta^pe the foresaid things, and cut the herbs, and stamp them a little, and
afterward, put unto the said things, of whyt sugar.. iij. of honye of
roses.. vi. put them al together in a lembyke of glass, and use thereof, for it
has the foresaid virtues.

And if the catarates can not be healed, when they are confyrmed, then we must
turn to ha^dy operation. And though we cou^seyled to leave it to ye toth
drawers, yet we will declare ye manner thereof. First before ye come to ye cure,
it is necessary ye give the patient a lenitiue medicine, of cassia, manna, or
diacatholicon, and. ij. days after, ye must give him pylles of assagereth, et
sine quibus esse nolo, of each,. ss. to purge the humors of the head.

Furthermore, that day yt ye will use the ha^dye operation, ye must give the
patient a linitiue clyster, and wash his legs in the decoction of hot
things, to draw the humors from the head. And it is very good, to apply
upon the forehead this restrictiue following, to keep away the matter from
flowynge to the eye.. of oil of roses omphacine, of mastyke. ana.. ij. make a
soft cerote, with suffyciente white wax, adding of bean flower.. iij. of
frankensence, The manner of cuttynge ye cataracte.
of aloes he patike, of bole armenye, of white sau^ders, ana.. i. mengle them
together and ley them upon stoupes, and bind the^ upon the foreheade, and
comfort the patie^t, and set him upon a straight be^che of a mean height.
Bynd the hole eye, and also his legs and his hands, that he hinder not the
operation of ye chirurgien, (and this thing must be done in a pure air) and
the master must open the eye with his lift hand, and with his right hand he
shall put a sharp nedle to the mids of the pannicle called co^iunctiua, so
long, till he perceive, yt the nedle has perced to ye concauitie or holownes
of the said pa^nicle. And after he must guide and tyrle ye said nedle toward
the pa^nicle called cornea, till he touch ye mids of the apple of the eye,
and a little more. Then he must take the pannicle, and draw it downward, so
that he may touch the cataracte, and there hold it a little space, for it is in
the form of a pannicle, and returns to his place, therefore he must draw
it down again, with the point of the nedle, till it remain beneth.
Nevertheless the master must be ware, that he dylate not the pannicle called
Vuea, ne touch the cristalline humor. And then when it is removed out of
his place, the chirurgien must show the patient some thing, that he may seem
not to have wrought in vein. And incontinentlye afterward, ye must put into
the eye, the white of an egg, beten with water of roses, water of myrtilles
warm, for cold might hurt the prycke caused by the nedle. And upon the eye
in the outsyde, ye shall apply the white of an egg, mengled with the wine of
pomegranades, to defend apostemations, and to comfort the place. And ye must
bind both the eyes with a duble band, and after put the pacie^t in a bed
having the head somewhat hie, and let him continue with this medecin, ye
space of.iii. days and keep a slender dyete, so that the first day he eat
little or nothing.

when these days be passed, remove the medecyne, and proceed with the said
medecyne again, without openyng of the eye, only applieng it upon the eyes
and in the corners, with moist cloutes, and this ye must do unto ye tenthe day
And because that through ye prickyng of the pannicle coniunctiua, perturbation,
or opthalmia, chau^ceth in ye eye, ye shall resort to the chapter of opthalmia.
Note, yt as I have declared, handye operation in the right eye, with the left
hand, so ye shall work in the left eye, with the right hand, thus we end
ehys present chapter. etc.

The.viij. chapter, of the dilatation of the black of the eye.
The delatatio^ of the apple of the eye.
THe dilatatio^ of the apple of ye eye, is double. That is to say: natural, and
accidental. That, that is natural comes of nativity, and is always of an
evil nature, and hyndreth ye sight, and the cure thereof, is impossible:
Nevertheless the colliries which comfort and sharpen ye sight, written in the
former chapter, are expedient in this case. The accidental dilatation, is
double. For one proceeds of a matter antecedent, and the other of a primitive
cause. That, that proceeds of a cause antecede^t, comes always of a
reumatyke matter, descendynge from the head, upon the pannicles of the eyes.
And to remove the cause antecedent, it is convenient to proceed, according to
that that is written in the former chapter. But to avoid many words, we will
only speak of that, that comes of a cause primitive.

First, (observation of universal purgation presupposed,) ye shall put into the
eye water of roses, and water of myrtilles, with the white of an egg shaken
together, until the fourth day after the stroke. For such dilatation of the
apple of the eye, procedyng of a cause primitive, is caused by some stroke
upon, or about, the eye. And therefore it is good, at the beginning, to
proceed as well within, as without, with things refrigeratiue, and that
comfort the sore place. And because that often, through a strype, there is
blood dyspersed through out all the eye, it is necessary, beside the reducyng
of the apple of the eye, to resolve the said blood. Then when ye have used
the forsayde things the space of four days, it is right profitable, A
synguler plaster.
to apply this plaster following. Recipe of beanfloure, and barlye flower,
ana.. iij. of water of roses, of water of myrtilles. ana.. i. make a styffe
plaster, with sufficient sodden wine. This plaster, has virtue to resolve
blood, and to reduce the apple of the eye into his proper place. A spetiall
water.


Item to this entention, the water following, may well be used. R. of sweet
fenell.. i. of doves blood.. i. of tucia, of antimoniu^, ana.. ij. of water of
roses, water of myrtilles. ana.. i. ss. of myrobalane citryne.. ss. me^gle
these foresaid things together, and stylle them in a lembyke of glass, and
apply them within the eye, for this water reduces the apple of ye eye into
his place, and comfort the sight.

Furthermore, A decoction.
it is a synguler remedy, to use the decoction following, layenge it upon the
eye with a thynne sponge.. of roses, of myrtilles, ana. m^. i. of melilote, of
rosemary flowers, of every one. m^. ss. of the nuttes of cypres, in nombre.ij.
of read and thycke wine.li. i. ss. of water of roses, and water of myrtilles.
ana.. iij. braye ye things yt are to be braied, and let them sees until half
the wine and the water be consumed, and then strain them, and use them as is
aforesaid, thus we end this present chapter.

The.ix. chapter, of the weakness of the sight, and of the cure thereof.
Of the weakness of the sight.
THe weakness of the syghte, procedeeth of sondrye causes. For sometimes, it
proceeds of outward things, as by scabbes, pustules and sebell, growing upon
the pannicles coniunctiua, and cornea, sometime it proceeds of an ynner cause,
as are humors, gross, and slymy vapors, ascendynge from the stomach, to the
head, and com^yng to the synnowes called optici, which vapors hinder their
natural operation, and trouble the sight.

Ite^ somtymes it chau^ceth, through thynnes and small quantity of ye spirits,
and sometime, through the great multitude and grossenes of the same. In like
manner it chau^ceth sometime, through defaute of the humor called albugineus,
or the white of ye eye, or because it is to gross in substance, or to thin,
and when it is altered in color. And therefore, follows often ymaginatio^s,
which threate^ yt a cataract will ensue. Also this weakness, may come of the
humor kristallyne, because it is to gross, or to thin, or altered i^
color, or transposed out of his place. Likewise, it may proceed of the glassye
humor, through the evil dysposition of the same. Therefore Galen says, that
when the spirits be thynne and of great quantity, a man sees and dyscerneth
small things afar of, and if they be in small quantity and thin, a man
sees afar of, but can not dyscerne. And therefore the thynne spirits,
require not great clerenes, nor great mouyng of the body, Causes of the sight.
nor great subtiliation of medicines. The spirits yt ben rare in small
quantity, cause evil sight, for in this case, a man sees evil both nigh and a
far of. And when a man sees the sun, or other bryghtnes, it hurts him,
and he rejoices in the air of the morning, and the euentyde. And of this
last dysposition, comes always an evil sight.

Item when the spirits be in great quantity, and gross, the^ a man sees
better afar of, then nigh, and rejoices in bright air, for it thinneth ye
spirits, through exercisyng, and mouynge, and beholdynge, things afar of.
Wherefore ye may co^clud, yt a good sight, proceeds of spirits mean in
quantity, quality, and clerenes, and when the spirits be very clear, and in
great quantity, a man may se in the night, better the^ in the day time, as
owls, and cattes also etc. And if the spirits be gross a man sees not but
in the day time, because the spirits be made thick in ye night, and thynne in
the day time.

The cure of the weakness of sight procedyng of outward things, Cure of
dy^^nes of sight.
shall be acco^plyshed, as it is said in proper chapters thereof, as, if vngula
be in ye cause, let it be healed by ye curation of vngula, and so of other. For
ye causes being removed, ye effect also is removed

When the weakness of sight comes of inward causes, the cure shall be
acco^plyshed by.iij. intentions. The first, is ordinance of dyete, the
second, purgatio^ of the matter antecede^t, the third, remotion of the matter
conioynct, by local medicines, and comfortation of the member from which ye
matter is derived.

Touching the first and second inte^tion, the ordinance declared in ye
chapter of cataractes, shall be sufficient. And as concerning the third, we
say, yt the colliries written in the said chapter, are convenient in this
case, for they clarifye the sight, and comfort the virtue of seeing.
Nevertheless, for a more certain doctrine, we will declare certain signs or
remedies, for the same purpose, and first a water which has the forsayde
virtues, and it is thus made. A wonderful water.
. of the juice of fenel, of ye juice of celidony, rue, and eufrage. ana.. ij.
of honey.. x. of sarcocoll, of antimoniu^, of tutia, of aloes, ana.. ss. of the
galle of capo^s, cocks, and he^nes. ana.. ij. of nutmegges, saffran, and
cloves, ana.. i. of sugar candy of syrup of roses.. vi. of a hole goats
liver.. ij. ss. of rosemarye flowers, of bosomus. ana. m^. ss. braye ye hard
things fynely, and cut the liver in pieces, and the^ put them al in a le^byke
of glass, and still them twyse, and apply them within the eye, for it is of
marvelous operation to clarifye and co^serue sight. Another.
An other water.. of the gal of birds that live of pray, of cranes galle.
ana.. ij. of the galls of pertryches, fesau^tes, and cocks. ana.. iij. of
honye.. i. of the juice of fenel, of eufrage. ana.. i. ss. of wine of both the
kinds of pomegranades. ana.. x. of aloes epatyke, of sarcocolle. ana.. ij.
cubibes, long peper, and round. ana.. i. of sumach. i. ss. of nutmegges, and
cloves. ana.. i. of sugar candy of syrup of roses.. vi. of antimony, of tutia.
ana.. ij. ss. of a goats liver.. iij. of the flowers of rose mary. m^. i. and
then put them in a lem byke of glass to stille, and put them in the eye, for
this water comfort the weak eye, and clarifyeth the sight.

Item to this same intention, (an universal purgation presupposed) it is good
to wash the eye with those things that open, and comfort the sight, which
ben declared in the chapter, of cataractes. Also, it is good to bind the here
backwarde, as it is said in the forsaid chapter. And in like manner purgations,
and digestio^s of humors, and washyng of the extreme parts, may be
administered in this case.

Item to this intention. An electuary
. of the seed of fenel, anys, seed of ameos, of siler mountain, of ginger, of
cloves, of cubebes, of long peper, of nutmeges, of the roots of celedony,
eufrage, of rue, betonye, of cynamo^, of sweet fenel and strong, of
corianders. ana. equal portion, and make a dredge, with sugar. If ye will have
it in the form of an electuarye, stamp them al together, which a past of
quynces, and with a sufficient quantity of sugar, and let the patie^t take
hereof in the break of the day, a sponful, namely yt day when he receives no
other medicine, and as much at night This dredge is, The dredge of Thadeus
florentinus.
of the description of Thaddeus florentine, and has the foresaid properties.
The solutiues convenient in this case, are pillule lucis, pillule sine quibus
esse nolo, pillule assagegereth with agaryke, pillule de hiera cu^ agarico,
hiera galeni, hiera constantini, also it is good in this case, to take
triacle.. i. of constantyns hiera.. ij. ss. vi. hours before meat.

The.x. chapter of heeres that curle inward toward the eyes, in the eye lyddes.
IT chances often, Of heeres curlynge inward in the eye lyddes.
that in the eye liddes, there are engendered certain heeres, which bow inward
toward the eyes, and prycke the eyes, and trouble the syghte, and the other
part of the heeres, go out of the eyes more then reason is, and make the eye
yuel favored. Wherefore it is necessary to remove them, and to defend their
generation. And because the said heeres, are engendered of a sharp flegmatike
humor, sent to the extremity of the eye lyddes, which loses the said eye
lyddes, and keeps them moist, ye must chiefly purge ye humor with pylles of
hiera cu^ agarico, taking sometimes a sponefull of honey of roses in the
morning fasting, and after the said purgation, ye must foment the eye
lyddes, and mollifye them, with a decoction of holihocke, dockes, of fenugreke,
and of fumiterrie.

And after that they ben well fomented, ye must take away ye foresaid heeres with
small pynsons, without wauerynge, A good water
and afterward rub the place often with this decoction.. of the wine of
pomegranades, of water of roses. ana.. i. ss. of roche alume.. i. of stamped
dockes.. x. of licium.. ss. seth them al together till the third part be
consumed, then strain them, and put thereunto of verdegrece.. ss. of tucia, of
of antimonium. ana.. i. ss. me^gle them together. This decoction, dries the
moystnes which is in ye roots of the heeres, and draws together the little
holes, which remained after the remouynge of the heeres, and so they can grow
no more. etc.

The.xi. chapter, of swellynge or loosenes of the eye lyddes.
Of loosenes of the eye lyddes.
THe eye lyddes are oftentimes loosed, through flegmatyk, reumatyk, gross, and
wyndy matters, for curation whereof, ye must purge the humors of the head,
with pylles of hiera cum agarico, and with other things that purge the humors
of the head.

And after purgation, if the place be paynful and enfla^med, ye shall apply
this plaster following.. of roasted apples. iij. of bean flower.. iiij. of
water of roses, of wine of pomgranades, of water of fenel, of every one as much
as shall suffice, this plaster resolves all swellyng and infla^mation, and
reduces the eye lyddes into their place.

Item ye may conuenie^tly apply, the cromes of bread, lythed in ye broth of a
chicken, and mengled with roasted apples and a little saffran. If the matter be
flegmatyk, and wyndye, ye shall apply the plaster following. Another.
. of bean flower, of the flower of lentyles, ana.. i. ss. of the flower of
orobus.. ij. make a styffe plaster, with sufficient sodde^ wine.

This plaster helps the losenes of the eye lyddes, and resolves the
swellyng of ye same, which thing this decoction following does also, when the
said losenes is without infla^matio^, Another resolution.
. of red wine, of barbours lie. ana.li. i. of wine of pomegranades.. ij. of
camomille, mellilote, corianders. ana. a little of ye nuttes of cypres,
no^bre.iij. of roses, of myrtilles, each a little, of roche alume.. i. of honey..
vi. sta^pe the forsaid things, except ye lie and ye wine, and let them seth
till the third part be consumed, and dip in ye straining a spo^ge, and press
ye same, and bynd it upon ye eye. etc.

The.xij. chap. of the wartes, and pustles, that grow in the eye lyddes.
IT chau^ceth, that wartes and other pustles being in the borders of the eye
lyddes, are infla^med and receive evil complexion, so that sometime they grow
to a certain ca^kerdnes, for the cure whereof, ye must proceed with sharp
medicines, to root them up, eue^ as we have declared in the chap. of ye
disease called polipus, for the remedies and signs of both ben like.
Nevertheless for a more certain doctrine, we will declare somewhat convenient
in this case.

First when the pustle or warte is not malign, ne yet inflamed to a ca^ker,
there is no surer remedy, than to rote them up with pynsons, or to cut them with
little cysers, or to tie them with a threde of silk, and to streyne the same more
and more, till they fall, and afterward ye must cauteryse the root with an
actual cauterye, or with a potentiall cauterye of great actiuitie, as is that,
that is made of capitelle. After the cauterisation, ye must digest the place,
and incarne it, with the common cure of ulcers. And if other wartes and pustles
grow again: ye must cure them as it is said. etc.

The.xiii. Chapter. Of the morphewe, and the cure thereof.
Of the morphewe.
THere be.ii. kinds of morphewes, namely white, and black. The white is called
albaras, and the black is called morphea nigra. And ye morphew is a passion
which chau^geth ye natural color of the skyn. And when it grows in heery
places, it causes the heeres to fall, and chefely ye white morphewe. This
passion when it is confyrmed upon the skin, receives no curation. Albaras is
welnygh always without vlceration, though Lanfrank be of a contrary opynion.

Signs of albaras.
Albaras is a chaungyng of the natural color of the skin into whitenes without
vlceratio^, albeit ye doctors ben of sundry opynions, which I for brefenesse
let pass, and have decreed to declare the cure of the white and the black
morphewe, which shall be accomplyshed by.iii. intentions. The first is,
ordinance of dyete, the second, purgation of the matter antecedent, the
third, is remotion of the matter conioynct, and attraction of norishment to
the place, when need is. Concerning the first and second intentions, ye shall
proceed according to the doctrines declared in the chap. of vndimia, and
chefely when it is a white morphew. And in a black morphewe, ye shall proceed
as it is written in the chapter of a canker.

The third intention is performed by the admynistration of local remedies.
And first ye shall know, that the remedies declared in ye cha. of the cure of
alopecia, are conuenyent. Nevertheless, we will declare certain synguler
remedies. First, for the cure of the white morphewe, this epithyme following,
is of great efficacitie.. of the iuce of motherwort, of the iuce of squilla.
ana.. ii. of the iuce of dockes.. iii. mengle them together. The manner of
applyinge this epithime is this. First ye must rub the place with a course
cloth, till it be red, than lay on the epythyme with the foresaid iuces, and if
need require ye more noryshmente be drawn to the place, do this,. If the
white morphewe be in an heerye place, let the place be shaven and rubbed, and
the^ lay upon it the medicine following.. of the iuce of squilla, of the iuce of
apiu^risus. ana.. iii. of cantarides.. ii. of strong vynaygre.. ii. of leven..
ii. stamp these things together, and apply them after the manner of a
plaster, for it draws noryshment, and causes blysteryng.

when the place is blystered, ye shall apply upon it a leaf of coolewortes,
with duckes grese, and butter, the space of.iii. days. And afterward, ye shall
use this remedy following, A medicine to cause here to grow.
which reteyneth natural hete in the place, and produces here.. of ye. juices
of sothernwod, mugworte, of the iuce of squilla. an^.. ii. of man's heerbrent,.
i. ss. of oil of tartare.. ss of clear terebentine, of liquide rasyne of pyne.
ana.. vi. of the flour of lupynes, of fenugreke. and of leven. ana.. iii of
honey.. x. of armoniak dissolved in vynegre.. ii. ss. seethe these foresaid
things a little, and afterward sta^pe them, and apply them after the manner of
a plaster.

Ite^ we have proved this oyntme^t following, in a black morphewe, which is with
vlceration, but before ye apply it, rub the place with lie made with the iuce
of dockes, of fumiterry, and with lupynes. And afterward, ye must scarify the
place, and than to remove the causes conioynct, ye shall lay bloodsuckers al
about, ye oyntme^t is this.. the oil of laurel, oil of tartare. ana.. i. ss.
of terebentyne.. ii. of branne, of orpymente. ana.. iii. of sublimate.. i. of
the iuce of dockes.. ii. ss. of melted larde, and of french soap. ana.. x. of
verdegrese.. v. of soote.. iii. ss. of burned paper.. v. of litarge of gold
and silver. ana.. i. of quycksyluer quenched with spittle.. x mengle it
together, and stamp them, and make it after the form of an ointment, and ye
shall use thereof, till the skin be mu^difyed, and the crust removed.

And if there be any superfluous flesh, ye shall take it away with our poudre of
mercury, and afterward dry the place, and cicatrice it with vnguentu^ de
minio, written in the Chapter of the cure of a skalde heed, which remoueth
sharpness and inflammatio^ that comes of a sharp medicyne: and thus we end
this Chapter.

The.xiiii. Chapter. Of impetigo, serpigo, derbia, and of salt fleame.
SErpigo, impetigo, and salt fleame, Impetigo.
are engendered of gross, corrupt, and sharp fleme. Impetigo, or derbia after
Papias, is a dry and roughe skabbe, of a round figure, and marreth the
beauty of the members, and it is often without vlceration, and grows upon
the neck, upon the forhed, upon the vysage, and upon ye arms. Serpigo, is
also roughe, and dry, at the beginning, but it is not of a round figure, and
it crepeth into so^drye places, and wha^ it is large, it is commonly called
salt fleame. The cure of the said disease shall be acco^plyshed by.iii.
intentions, namely by diet, purgation of the matter antecedent, and remotion of
the matter conioynte. As concerning the first, the patient must avoid all
meats that enge^dre gross flegmatike, and melancholyke blood, and he must use
meats yt enge^dre good blood, as hens, capons, veale, mutto^ of a year
old, partryche and like, sodde^ with borage, lettuse, buglose, betes, spynache,
fenel, and a few mintes, or ye may give him new laid eggs rere. Moreover he
must avoid al salt, egre, and gros meats, and birds of ryuers. The second
intention is thus acco^plysshed. First let ye matter be digested with this
digestion.. of sirupe of fumiterry, of honey of roses, of syrup of ye iuce of
e^diue an^.. ss. of water of endive, of fumi. mayde^heer. an^. i. And when ye
have used this sirupe ye space of a weke, let him be purged with this purgation..
of diacatholico^.. vi. of ye co^fectio^ of hamech.. i. ss, of diafinicon.. ii.
make a small potio^ with the decoction of cordial flowers and fruits, of polipody,
hartestonge, and maydenhere, adding of syrup of violettes.. i or ye may purge
the patient, with pylles of fumyterrye, or with aggregatiue pylles, or with pylles de
hiera cum agarico. Ite^ the remedies written in the chapter of Sephiros, and
Vndimia, are conuenyent in this case.

The third intention shall be accomplyshed thus. First the cure of impetigo, and
derbia, is al together like, and ye must rub the place with fasting spyttle
in the morning, and afterward rub it with a course cloth or scrape it with a
rasour, and the^ let the patient be epythimed with this epithime following.. of
the iuce of dockes. Epi^heme.
. i. of branne.. ss. of vinegre squilityk.. x. of roch alume, of verdegrese.
an^.. i. ss. of sublimate.. ss. of sal gemma.. i. mengle them, and seethe them
together, till the third part of the iuce and of the vynegre be consumed, and
than let the place be epythimed, for it mortifyeth ye ryngworme, in short time.
A liniment.
Item this lyniment following is of good operation in this case.. french soap..
i. ss. of glass well broken.. vi. of bran.. iii. of liquide storax, of laudanu^.
an^.. ii. of litarge of gold and silver. ana.. v. quyksyluer quenched with
fasting spyttle.. ss. of most clear terebentine, of oil of laurel. ana.. iii.
ss. mengle the said things together, and make them after ye manner of a
lyniment. Ite^ an oil of wheat, made upon a styth, or hanfeld with hot burning
iron, is profitable in this case. And likewise an oil made of lupynes, as it
is said before.

Ite^ this liniment following serves for all kinds of tetters and ryngwormes.
An other.
. of swynes grese, of oil of laurel. an^.. ss. of an oyntme^t of roses.. iii.
of auripigme^tu^.. ii. of sublimate of litarge of gold and silver, of ceruse,
and quycksiluer quenched with spyttle. ana.. v. of verdegrese.. i. ss. mengle
them together, and make a lynime^t. Ite^ an other linime^t, which heals salt
fleme vlcered and chapped. of the iuces of dockes, plantayne, and nyghtshade.
an^.. ss. of swynes grese molten, of vnguen. popilio^. an^.. ii. of oil of
roses omphacine, of oil mirtine. an^.. i. of oil of the yolks of eggs.. x.
of litarge of gold and silver an^.. i. ss. of tutia.. ss. of burned led.. v
of ceruse.. x. of quycksyluer.. ix. mengle them together, and make a lynyment
in a mortare of marble.

Note, that in these passions, chefely for salt fleame, a bath of ye decoction
of malowes, of fumiterry, of dockes, of barley, and bran, and of sweet and sower
pomegranades, with the ryndes before the administration of sharp oyntmentes, is
right expedye^t. And if in salt fleme, some mundification of this ulcer be
required, our poudre of mercury may conuenyently be admynistred, so that ye
aply afterward the last liniment before written, till the salt fleme be
perfytly cured.

The.xv. Chapter. Of lyse in the eye lyddes, and in the genitalles. Trablyse

Bitter things have virtue, not only to kyl lyse, but also worms, and
therefore aloes dissolved with water of roses, applied in the place where lyse be,
kylleth the same. Item to remove them without fail, ye shall rub the place with
a cloute, wherewith the goldsmythes gylde silver. Ite^ an epithime of capons
galls, or partriche, is good. Item it serves well to this purpose, to take an
hard egg, and to cut it through the mids, and to take away the yolke, and
to poudre aloes epatike, upon it, for it dryueth away and kylleth the lise. If
these things prevail not, ye may rote them out with pinsonnes. This shall
suffyce for the doctrine of this chapter. etc.

The.xvi. Chapter: of syro^s, which ben little worms crepyng here and there,
upon the flesh.
Of little worms in the flesh
THe remedies declared in ye former chapter, may be co^uenyently admynystred in
this case, for as we said, all bitter things have virtue to kyl worms. And
for because that ye foresaid worms, make in their creping watery blysters:
therefore ye shall open the blysters with a sharp nedle, that the medicines may
touch the place where the worms be, and than ye shall adminystre the
medicines written in the said chapter. Item oil of vitrioll dries, and
kylleth the said syrons.

Moreover it is the synguler remedy in this case, to take quycksyluer and
quench it with spyttle, and mengle it with french soap, and a little orpyment,
and than to apply it on the place, where the syrons be. Vynegre squillitike,
mengled with the bryne of salt fysh, and a little aloes epatik, causes them to
dye in short time. etc.

The.xvii. Chapter: of little pustles of tht face, commonly called rubyes.
THe cure of these pustles, is acco^plysshed by ye administration of local
remedies, Of rubies in the face
having virtue to ripe, and that easily: an universal purgation presupposed,
with Cassia, diacatholicon, or by cuttynge of the vein called cephalica, and
with ventoses applied upon the shulders, with scarification, and with bloodsuckers
laid under the ears, and veins emothoidall, when the matter is hot, and
caused of gross blood. which is known by redness and inflammation of the
place.

But if the pustles be engendered of gross fleme, me^gled with gross blood,
which is known by the whytenesse of the place, then let the body be purged
with cassia, and diasinicon, or with pylles de hiera, or pills aggregatiue The
medycynes local must be lenytyue and maturatyue, as is this plaster
following.. of white lylly roots sodden in water.. ii. of roasted apples.. i.
ss. of reysons.. i. of fresh duckes grese.. i. ss. sta^pe them and make a
playstre.

when the pustles be ripe, ye shall open them with a launcet, and mu^dify them
with this ointment.. of clear terebe^tine.. i. of honey.. x. of the flour of
lupynes.. vi. of sarcocoll.. ii. mengle them together: this oyntme^t purges
the gross matter contained in them. To ye same inte^tio^ serves this cerote
following.. of the muscilage of holyhocke, of fenugreke, and of figs. li. ss.
of the oil of lyneseede.. iii. of clear terebe^tin.. i. ss. of he^nes grese,
of duckes grese, ana.. x. of lytarge of gold.. i. ss. set these things upon
the fire with sufficyent quantity of white wax, and make a cerote, as white
diaquilon, and use it, for it mundifyeth and purges the matter, and makes the
color of the face fair and clear.

The.xviii. Chapter. Of a fistula in the corner of the eye.
Oftentimes there is a Fystle engendered in the corners of the eyes, Of a
fistule in the corner of the eye
of an aposteme grown in the said place. And the said Fystula comes
sometimes to great maligninitie, so that it rotteth the grystles of the nose,
and the bones, and brings the patientes to death.

To come to the cure hereof we say, that, a purgatio^ as it is declared in the
chap. of ophthalmia, presupposed, there is nothing surer than to enlarge the
mouth of the same: First with our poudre of mercury, and afterward with a
trosiske of miniu^, of our description, and last of al with a sponge, or a
tentmade of a dried gourd. And when the place is enlarged, ye shall cauterize
it with a small and sharp cautery, and ye must put it in through a pype of
silver, till the bone be perced in the inner part of the nose. For the said
pype keeps the borders of ye fistula, that they be not hurt of the actual
cautery. And consequently apply again an other cautery more gross after the
large figure of an olive, till all the corruption of the bone be cauterifyed,
and then let the bone be bored through, with a quadrate poynted cauterie.
Howbeit ye must first put in ye silver pype, that ye hole flesh be not hurt
with the cauterye. And this was the practice of master wyllyam Placentin,
wherewith we have healed many people. But ye must beware that the cautery touch
not the corner of the eye, for it would deuyde the corner from the eye lydde,
which would be a very evil favored thing wherefore wife chirurgiens cover the
^ye with a syluerspone, when they apply the said cauteries.

After cauterisation, to remove the eskare, ye shall proceed with things
mollificatiue, as I have written in sondrye places. The brent bone through
cauterisation must be cured, according to that, that is written in the Chapter
of the cure of rotten bones. And after that the corruption of the bone is
removed, ye must proceed certain days, with a mu^dificatiue of syrup of
roses, which is written in many places. And afterward, let it be incarned,
with this incarnatiue following.. of clear terebentine. ss. of myrre, of
sarcocolle. ana.. ss. of frankensence.. i. of bean flower.. i. ss. of honye of
roses.. ii. of aloes epatik.. i. This incarnatyue is suffycient, for the
incarnation of the place. And for sigillation, ye shall proceed with vnguentu^
de minio, and ye shall wash the place with water of alume. For ye cicatrisation
ye shall apply the poudre called cicatrisatiue, written in the forsayde
Chapter, and many other places.

The.xix. Chapter. Of the cure of gutta rosacea.
GVtta rosacea, after ye doctrine of ancient and later writers, Gutta rosacea.
is a strange rednes, which is engendered in the ball of the chekes, and
sometime about the nose, and it has crustye pustules, and the doctors say,
that it is a sign that declares ye beginning of a lepry. This disease, is
engendered of a gross, corrupt, and somewhat burned, blood. And it is of the
nombre of the diseases, that been contagious, and for the most part it appears
in winter, for tha^ the vapors are restrained in, and ascend out of gross
blood.

The cure hereof shall be accomplished by three inte^tions: the first consysteth in
ordinance of dyete, the second in purgation of matter antecedent, ye.iii in
administration of local remedies.

As touching the first and second intention, ye shall proceed according to the
doctrine declared in the chap. of a canker, or of sephiros, chau^sing in the
dugges. For ye acco^plishme^t of ye.iii. intention, ye remedies written in the
Chap. of saphatie, and serpigo, and of a morphew, are convenient in this case.

Nevertheless, for a more ample doctrine, we will descrybe certain approved
medicines, and first an epithimie, after this form.. of dockes roots, of ye
rotes of affodyl. ana.. ii. of venegre squilliticke.. i. of orpimente.. ii. of
brymstone.. x. stamp these forsayde things, and lay them upon the gutta
rosacea, for it dries the pustles, and remoueth the rednes thereof. To ye same
ententio^ it is good to beat the white of an egg with rose water, and the iuce
of plantayne, and of dockes, and addyng a little of sublimate. Item it is very
convenient in this case, to sees vynegre with bran and water of roses, and to
wash the place often therewith. Also oil of grain, and lupynes, laid upon
pustles, helps very much.

And forasmoche as the said remedies be somewhat corrosyue, after that ye have
proceeded with them, til the crust and malignitie be removed, ye shall apply this
lynime^t following. which takes away the evil color, and roughness of the
skin, and causes good cicatrization.. of the iuce of dockes, plantayne, and
of affodyl. an^.. ii. oil of yolks of eggs.. x. clear terebentine.. ss. of
the iuce of licoresse.. iii. of roche alume brent.. i. of quyck silver
quenched.. ss. of oil mirtyne, of oil omphacine. ana.. v. ss. stamp these
foresaid things together, and stir them about in a mortare of lead, except
the quyksyluer, which must be put in, in the end, and let this liniment be
often applied, for it has the foresaid virtues. Item to this intention; the
epithimie following, is profitable.. of white syef without opium.. i. ss. of
the iuce of licoreis.. ss. of the wine of pomegranades somewhat thicked at ye
fire.. i. of verious, of vinegre of roses. ana.. ii. of tutia, ceruse. ana..
ii. ss. of litarge of gold and silver. ana.. iii. mengle these things and
shake them well together, and make them after the form of a colirie, and
apply it often upon the place for it is of good effect.

The.xx. Chapter. Of the cure of the ulcers of the nosethrylles.
THe ulcers of the nosethrylles, are very dangerous, Ulcers of the nostrylles.
because of the humors descendyng from ye brain which hyndre the operacyon
of local medicines, and therefore the said ulcers, grow often to a canker. To
come to the cure thereof, purgation of the matter antecedent, and good diet, as
it is said in ye former cha. presupposed, ye shall proceed with local medicines,
which dyffer nothing from ye common cure of ulcers in general. That is to say,
if the ulcers be venomous, they must be cured after ye cure of venomous ulcers,
if they be corrosyue, like corrosyue ulcers. Nevertheless, I will speak of
some remedies which have be^ proved. First if ye ulcer be venomous and
corrosiue, ye shall mu^dify ye place with our poudre of mercurye, or vngue^.
apploru^ me^gled with vngue^. egip. And when ye place is mu^dified, ye shall put
this licour into the ulcer.. of sweet and sour pomgranades, in no^bre.ii. of
licium.. i. of myrobalan c^^yne.. ii. water of plantayne, water of roses. an^..
i. ss. of the herb called horsetayle, of the tender parts of bra^bles of the
herb called knotgresse, of the leaves of plantayne. ana. m^. i. ss. sta^pe all
these things together, and press them, and afterward let them sees till
they become thycke as honey, tha^ strain them, and put of the lycour into the
ulcers with cotton, or with soft te^tes.

Item to this entention, wine of pomegranades newely pressed out, and sodden
with the juice of plantayne, and with the juice of hounds tongue, and a little
roch alume, is very expedient. It must sees till it be thycke, and must be
applied within the nose, for this decoction dries, incarneth, and consoundeth
ulcers. Ointment for ulcers in the nose.
In like manner, here follows a singular ointment, for all ulcers of the
nosethrilles,. of the liquor described in the first ordinance. i. of oil of
roses omphacine styrred about in a mortar of lead till it be thycke.. i. ss.
of tutia, of burned lead, of antimoniu^. ana.. iii. of ceruse.. ii. ss. of
litarge of gold and silver. an^.. ss. of myrobalane citrine well brayed.. ss.
of the juice of the tender parts of brambles, or of plantaine, dra^mes.ii.
mengle them, and stir them about in a mortar of lead the space of two
hours. Liniment
Item in this intention, the liniment following is convenient.. of vngm^ album
camphoratum, of oil of the yolks of eggs. an^.. vi. of vngm^ rosarum..x. or
instead thereof, as much of vnguentu^ galeni, of litarge of gold and silver,
of tutia. an^..iii. of burned lead, of antimonium. an^..i.ss. of the juice of
the great and less plantaines, of the juice of nyghtshade. an^..i.ss. me^gle
them together and make a liniment in a mortar of lead.

The.xxi. chapter of ulcers of the face, and the cure thereof.
THe ulcers of ye face, are cured as the Ulcers of the nosethrilles. ulcers of
the face.
And because the face beautifieth the body, the chirurgien must make good
cicatrization thereof, namely not to hye, nor to low, nor to broad, if it may
be. For the cure of the said ulcers, vngm^ de minio of our description is
convenient, and produces good cicatrice. And for as much, as they have
nothing proper, ye shall resort to the general chapiters of ulcers, that is
to say, if they be venomous, resort to the chapter of venomous ulcers, if
corosiue, to corosiue. etc.

The.xxii. chapter, of the ulcers of the mouth, of the gu^mes, of the rofe of
the mouth, and of the almons.
THe Vlceres of the mouth, of the gommes, Ulcers of the mouth.
and of the parts thereof, must be cured according to the general cure of
other ulcers, that is to say, if they be rotten, or venomous, they must be
cured after the order of the same. etc. Nevertheless, for a more certain
doctrine, we will describe some medicines, which we have proved.

First, to heal corosiue and cankerous ulcers of the gu^mes, vnguentu^
egiptiacum mengled with the wine of pomegranades, is very good. A peculiar
decoction
Ite^ the decoction following is convenient, in this case.. of the wine of
pomegranades, of the water of plantayne, an^..ii. of the leaves of olyues
somewhat stamped. m^.ss. of vngum^ egiptiacu^ after the description of
Auicenne.x. of liciu^..i. sees them all together till two parts of three ben
consumed, then strain them, and use them, rubbing the place therwyth. Item to
this intention, and for the vlceration of the almons, and of the vuula, this
gargarisme following, is of singular remedy.. of clean barlye, of sumach, of the
flowers of pomegranades, of ye leaves of olyues, of the tender parts of
bramles, of the leaves of pla^taine, and lentiles. an^. m^. ss. of both the
kinds of pomgranades, nombre two, of water of roses, of water of plantayn,
an^. li.ss. of licium, of diameron, of honey of roses. an^..ii. of roche
alume..x. of myrobalane citrine..ss. of ye herb called horsetayle. m^. ss.
stamp them al together, and sees them till the third part be consumed, than
streyne them, and use them as is aforesaid.

The.xxiii. chapter, of the chappes of the lyppes.
THe chappyng of the lips may be healed by-ye application of vngm^ album
camphoratum. Chappes of the lyppes.
Also vngm^ de tutia, and oil of the yolks of eggs, and the wasshyng of
barlye water, with pla^tain, water, is very commendable. Here follows a
singular remedy for chapping of the lyppes.. of oil omphacine, of the oil of
the yolks of eggs. an^.. x. of ceruse..ii. of burned lead..vi. litarge of
gold and silver. an^..x. of a^timonium of tutia. an^..iiii.ss. of calves
talowe, cowes talow. an^..i. of ye juice of pla^tayn, of ye juice of
nyghtshade, an^..x. sees ye iuyces with the oils and talowe, till the juice be
consumed, and afterward, put in the other things being poudered, and set
them on the fire again, and make an ointment with white wax, wherewyth ye
shall often rub the lyppes. This is a singular remedy for chappynge between
the fingers and the toes. Also water of alume, made with ye water of plantayne,
is very good in this case, before ye apply the said ointment.

The.xxiiii. chapter, of the cure of noli me tangere.
THere chau^ceth often in the face, chiefly about the nose, a kind of a
co^sumynge and eating vlcere, Noli me tangere.
called of the later doctoures noli me tangere, and it comes often time of a
warte, having a large foot, and a round figure, which comunelye is hard,
and of blackyshe color, with some pain, and sometime there apeare, certain
little veins full of melancholy blood. And when this disease comes to
vlceration, in short time it increases excedynglye, and the accide^tes of a
canker are multiplied with this vlcere.

The cure of this disease must be accomplished, according to the doctrine,
The cure.
declared in the chapter of a canker. For we have seen that this vlcere has
had his beginning, of melancholy and paynfull pustules, of a round figure,
and with the accidents of a canker, wherefore ye shall resort to the chapter
of a canker. Nevertheless for a more certain doctrine, we will recite some
remedies, allowed in this case. And first a linimente after this sort.. of the
herbs called gallitricu^, and politricu^. ana. m^. i. of the fourth kind of
nightshade called, manicon, Apren^^ce remedy.
m^. ss. of hole sower pomgranades, no^bre two, of nyghtshade. m^. ss. stamp
them all together, press them, and sees them with two ownces and a half of
licium, unto the thycknes of honey.

When ye have applied this linime^t with lint, or coton, ye shall also apply
vngm^ of tucia, written in our antidotary. Item tutia poudred with antimoniu^,
and a little burned lead, has a marueylouse prerogatyue in this case, ye
vlcere being a fore hand mundified with our poudre of mercurye. Moreover the
herb called verucaria, or wartworte, roteth up all cankerous mattier, so it be
not old, and grown in the bone, of which herb we will speak more plainly in
the seventh book. Moreover the juice of manico^, and of houndestong, may
conveniently be used, and likewise vngm^ albu^ camphoratum, with the juice of
pla^tayne, and nightshade, and a little tutia. We have written other remedies,
in the chapter of canker, which may be well applied in this case.

The.xxv. chapter. of the ulcers of the throat and of the neck.
OFten times, there chau^ceth about the throat and about ye neck, Of ulcers
of the throat.
strophulous ulcers, and sometime they ben holowe, and somtymes full, which are
engendered of cold meter. The cure of whereof, shall be thus accomplished. First
(convenient purgation according to the humors, and ordinance of diete,
presupposed) as it is written in the chapter of sephiros. If the said ulcers
ben scrophulose, namely having superfluous, flesh bounchyng out, they shall be
cured with the cure of vlcered scrophules. And if they be holowe, the shall be
cured by the cure of holowe scrophules. But as our custom is, we will declare
certain remedies, which we have proved.

First, the patient must absteyn from all cold and moist meats, as we have
said in the chapter of vndemia, and tha^, it shall be profitable, that the
patient take in ye break of the day, of this electuarye the quantiite of a
sponeful. of sirupe of sticados, of honye of roses an^.. vi. of syrup of
violetes..iiii. of Turbith preparate. A lectuary to purge fleume
. vi. of agaryke made in trosciskes.. x. of gynger..v. of cinamome..ii. of
polipodye..i.ss. of anise..vii. of triacle..iii. of fine sugar.v. bray ye
things yt are to be brayed and make an electuary.

After that ye have given this electuary, ye must study to remove ye mattier
conioyncte, and superfluous and vnctuouse flesh, with the administration of
vngm^ egiptiacum, and if it be necessary, with the trosciske of minium written
in our antidotary. And in delicate persons, we have used our poudre of
mercury, and afterward, for mundification, ye shall wash the place with water
of Alume, and apply lynt with honey of roses.

And because the ulcers of the neck require great drieng, by reason of the
moisture yt co^tinuallye descends from ye brayn, our custom was for the
cicatrisation, to apply lynt with vngm^ ceraseos, and our poudre cicatrisatyue.
Ite^ we have proved this ointment following, to be good in all times unto
perfect curation.. of oil of white lillies, of the oil of lynsede an^..iii.
oil of roses odoriferouse, oil myrtyne, an^..ii. of litarge of gold and
silver, of minium. an^..i. of white diaquilon with gu^mes..iiii. of goats
suet, and wethers suet. an^..ii.ss. of ship pitch and greek pitche,
ana..i.ss. of the iuce of houndestonge..iiii. sees these things together, til
the juice be consumed and that ye ointment receive a black color, and the^
strain them through a cloth, and set them on the fire again, and let them
sees till they be very black, and that done, add in the end thereunto, of
clear terebentine..iii. of opoponax..ii.ss. This oyntme^t, has virtue to
purge the mattier, and to incarne, and mundifye, the said ulcers, and to make
good cicatrisatio^. Item we have proved good, to apply the herb called
houndestong, and to bind it upon the vlcere. Thus we. etc.

Here follows the third treatise of the fourth book, which speaks of
ulcers of the breast, the back, the ribs, and the arms.
The first chapter, of the ulcers of the back.
Ulcers of the back.
THe ulcers of ye back as we have said in the chapter of the wou^des of the
said place, are dangerous for many causes as it is there alleged. The cure of
the same, differs, not from the comune cure of other ulcers. wherefore if they
be rotten, or corosyue, ye shall resort to the chapter of rotten and corosyue
ulcers, and likewise of other kinds. But you shall note one thing, that is to
say, that the medicines which must be applied in the same place, ought not
to be so sharp, as those that be applied in all other places. And the cause
is, for that, that in the back there is a great multitude of synnowes,
procedynge out of the nuke. wherefore in rotten ulcers of the said place, it
suffices to apply vngm^ egiptiacum, with as much of vngm^ apostolo. me^gled
together. And in filthy and mattrye ulcers, it suffices to apply our
ointment with one part of vngm^ egiptiacum, and of two parts of vngm^
apostolorum. In like manner to mundifie them, ye may use an abstersyue made of
honey of roses, of the juice of smallage, of sarcocol, of the juice of
affodille, with terebentyne, and flower of lupyns. Item if the said ulcers ben
holowe, ye shall not use sharp and corosyue lotions. For by towchyng the
synnowes, they may induce a spasme. If ye may use an incision, without
cuttyng of veins and synnowes, it would be more laudable, then to use sharp
medicines, chiefly when the mouth of the vlcere is above, and the holownes
beneth. If ye can not co^uenientlye use incision, because of the dangers, ye
must mundifye the place with this lotion following, which has vetue to
mundifye all holowe ulcers, from mattier and evil flesh, without great
pain. A good lotion
. of lie made of the ashes of the vine tree or the fig tree, of equal
strength, as is barbers lie.. vi. of our poudre of mercurye..ii. of
sarcocolle..i. of honye of roses..i.ss. mengle them together. This lotion must
be applied warm, with a syrynge, and it must remain in the holownes the space
of a day, before ye apply any other medicine, for the foresaid medicine eats
ill flesh, and turns the fylth into good matter. After they ben mu^dified
well, which thing is known by the growing of good flesh, and by laudable
quyture, ye must wash the place, with water of barlie and honye of roses
only, or with an abstersyue made of honye of roses, of terebentyne, of
sarcocolle, ordained in many places. After mundification, for incarnation and
sigillatio^, ye shall proceed according to the doctrine given for the same, in
the universal chapter of ulcers. Likewise if ye would purge the body, and
orden a convenient diete, ye shall resort to the second chapter of ulcers in
general. etc.

The second chapter of ulcers of the breast.
THe cure of Ulcers of the breast, Ulcers of the breast.
differs not from ye comune cure of other ulcers, when they perce not into
the inward parts. wherefore if they be holow and corosiue ye shall resort to
the chapter of holow and corosiue ulcers. etc. If the said ulcers ben with
corruption of the bone, and not percynge, ye must warely remove the corruption
of the bone, with an actual or potenciall cautery, discovering first the
corruption of all the rotten flesh, and afterward remouyng the rotten bones
with raspatories, unto ye hole part. And after that the corruption is removed,
ye must cauteryse the hole part gentlye, and superficially (if it be
possible) and for the rest of the cure, ye must proceed as we have declared in
ye chapter, of ye cure of ulcers wherein ye bones be rotten.

And if the said ulcers be percyng, ye shall proceed with a cure palliatiue
without application of sharp things, for the noble me^bres might be hurted,
through the sharpnes thereof. wherefore the remedies that are declared in the
chapter of percyng wou^des, are convenient in this case, which I council you
to peruse.

The.iii. chapter, of the ulcers of the arm.
Ulcers of the arm.
THe Ulcers of the arm, differ not from the comune cure of ulcers. wherefore
according to their kinds, ye shall resort to their proper chapters. Howbeit
ye shall note this one thing, that as the ulcers of the legs require lienge
in a bed, likewise the ulcers of the arms, would be bound up toward the
breast. etc.

The.iiii. chapter, of the chappynges of the nypples of the dugges of women,
and ulcers of the same.
THe ulcers of women's breasts are comunelye holowe, Ulcers of women's breast
because that the flesh thereof is rare, and spo^gious, and for the most part,
are engendered of hot apostemes proceeding of kurded milk, and sometime of
cold humors, and are hard to be cured. For they yt proceed of kurded milk,
because of the continual deriuation of milk to the dugges, resist resolution,
and they also which proceed of cold humors, cause great holownes, through
their grossenes, and are not easelye cured. Moreover, because that convenient
byndyng can not be used in the breasts, they said ulcers be therefore of harder
curation.

The cure of the said ulcers, Cure
is accomplished, by the application of sondrye local remedies. And first
(ordenaunce of diete and purgation, according to the humors, presupposed) for
mu^dification, we have found our poudre of mercury to be of good operation,
leynge upon the same, vngm^ de minio of our description, and ye may also lay
over the breast, this plaster. R. of bean flower, of the flower of lentilles,
Plaster de^^ccatiue.
and barlye. an^. li. ss. let them sees with sufficient sodden wine till they
be thycke. This plaster dries, and resolves, and swageth pain. And if the
said ulcers be very paynfull, ye shall apply a plaster of the crommes of
bread, the leaves of malowes, in the broth of a hen sodden with a little
buttyre, oil of roses, and the yolke of an egg, and a little saffran. Here ye
shall note, that the tent ought not to be long, but must be holowe, made of the
rote of ditany, or of a dry gourde, after the manner of a latchet, or of the
leaves of black Coleworte, somewhat dried in the shadow. The dugge must be
tied upward, toward the neck, that the humors re^ne not down to the place. we
have described sondrye remedies convenient in this case, in the chapter of
remedies of the dugges.

Also ye dryeng up of milk, helps much to the curation of this vlcere. And
therefore it is good, to give ye woman a pille of rubarbe, To dry up milk.
in the quantity of a pease, with an ounce of water of plantayn, and myntes.
Ulcers caused of cold and gross humors, may be cured with the foresaid
ordinance, and for the other ententions, that is to say, for mundification,
incarnation, and sigillation, ye shall proceed after the chapter of ulcers in
general. And because that often, the teates are full of chappynges, through the
superfluity and the sharpnes of the milk, we will ordeyne a convenient
linime^t, for the cure thereof. R. of an ointment of roses, of oil omphacine.
an^..i. ss. of the juice of plantayne..ss. of calves suet..x. of litarge of
gold and silver an^..vi. of burned lead, of ceruse, of tutia. an^..iii. of
antimonium..ii. of frankynsence..ss. of terra sigillata, of bole armenye.
ana..i.ss. mengle these things together in a mortar of lead, the space of two
hours, and make it a liniment. For sigillation, ye shall apply vngm^ de minio
in a styffe form, or vngm^ de cerusa (a fomentation of water of alume, going
before.)

The.v. chapter, of the ulcers that grow in the inner parts of the ears.
THere are oftentimes engendered within the ears, Ulcers of the ears.
apostemes of reumatyke mattier, whereof ulcers come of hard curation. The
reason is, because ye place is unmeet to have medicines applied upon it, and
because the superfluities of the brain, do easily arrive to the said place.
Likewise because the place ca^ not endure sharp medicines, which are requisite
for the cure of ulcers, wherefore, the gentler the curatio^ of the fore said
ulcers is, the better it is.

The cure of these ulcers is accomplished by ye administration of local
remedies, that been of familier mundification. First (purgatio^ of the humors
of the head, with pills of agaryke, and of assagereth, and ordinance of
diete, presupposed) if the ulcers be new, ye may heal them with honey of
roses, with oil of the yolks of eggs, and a little sarcocolle, stilled into
the vlcere. Item it is a good remedy to distill into the ears upon the ulcers,
the wine of sweet pomegranades, for it heals in mundifienge and purgynge the
mattier.

The manner to make the said wine, is this. The manner to make wine of
pomegranades.
Ye must take a good sweet pomegranade, and sees it in white wine, and
afterward stamp it finely, and then streyn it, and press it stro^glye, and
add thereunto of most fine honey of roses..ii.ss. and sees them again unto
the thycknes of honey, and apply this often upon the ulcers. And if ye will that
it be more abstersive, and attractyue, ye shall add thereunto..i. of
terebentine, with an ounce and a half of the forsayde liquor. And because yt
the said ulcers are comunely paynfull, ye must not apply things very
desiccatiue. wherefore the oil of the yolks of eggs, labored in a mortar of
lead a great while, is a singular remedy in this case (as Auenzoar testifyeth)
for it mundifieth, and swageth pain, prepares the mattier to issue out easily.

Item it is a singular remedy, to apply upon new ulcers, the wine of a sweet
pomegranade, with the juice of the herb called centinodia some called it
weygras, or knotgrasse, or lingua passerina, and the juice of wild tasyll
sodde^ with a little of the root of lyllies, till it be thycke. Likewise a siefe
of memyte, with licium, and a little frankensence, sarcocolle, and honye, is
conueniente in this case, for it mundifyeth and incarneth parfytlye, and dries
a little.

If the said vlceres ben old, rotten, or venomous, then it is convenient to
apply vnguentum egiptiacu^ of our description, which remoueth the
putrefaction, and the quytture, of ye said vlceres. And in like manner this
ointment.. of honye..i. of verdegrece.. iij. of roche alume..ss. of the juice
of smallage, of the juice of knotgrasse, of the wine of sweet and sower
pomegranades, of every one..i.ss. strain first the iuyces, and the^ seth all
the foresaid things at a soft fire, unto the thycknes of honye. This ointment,
mundifyeth the vlceres of the ears that been rotten, and mattry, without great
pain, and if it be to bytynge, ye may put thereunto, as much of vnguentum
apostolorum, or ceraseos, as of this foresaid ointment.

After mundifycation, it is convenient to apply, an ointment made of ye refuse
of iron, washed three times in the wine of pomegranades, and after well poudred,
and labored in a mortar with a little aloes, and sarcocolle, and incense. This
plaster is desyccatiue, and incarnatiue, and heals perfytlye the said
vlceres. If the vlceres be virulent, and venomous, and corrosiue, ye shall use
vnguentum egiptiacum. Item it is a good operation in this case, to use our
powder of mercurye, myngled with vnguentum albu^ camphoratum. And when the
malignitie is removed, ye shall apply vnguentum album camphoratum, with so much
of the forsayde oyntmente made of the refuse of iron. Item if the matter be
hot, lotio^s made with the decoction of roses, lentilles, barlye, knotgrasse,
and sugar, conveyed in with a syrynge, avails very much. And if the matter be
cold and gross, ye may use a lotion, made with the decoction of honye, and of
wine, and of lie, and of sarcocolle.

And for as much, as when stiptyke or bytyng things are applied, great pains
and apostemation ensue, therefore to swage the pain, ye shall use this
suffumigation following.. of the leaves of mallows and violettes of camomill,
mellilote, and dille, of every one. m^. i. of read worms..i. ss. of read
sugar..ss. clean licorice, of reysons, of every one..i. myngle these things
together, and sethe them in sufficient quantity of hens brothe, without
salt, till half be consumed.. the smoke all hot, within the ears, and after
suffumigation, put into the ears, oil of the yolks of eggs, with butter.

The.vi. chapter, of wartes growing in the ears.
THe superfluous flesh, and wartes, that grows in ye ears, let the
healynge. For ye cure whereof, ye shall rote them out, and to that entente, ye
shall proceed after the doctrine written in the chapter, of polipus not
cancrouse, in which the manner is declared, of rotyng up wartes, before they
grow to the producynge of a canker. Wherefore ye shall resort to the said
chapter.

The.vij. chapter, of the sou^de and wyndynes in the ears.
Soundynge in the ears.
This dysposition, is engendered of gross, and slymye matter, whereof wyndynes
proceeds, and causes soundyng For the cure thereof, ye shall purge the matter
antecedent, gyuynge the patient pills of hiera with agaryke, or pylles cochie.
And after purgation, we found good to use, a suffumigation made of maioram,
sodden in water and wine, with camomill, dille, and a little honye: after
suffumigation, ye must apply oil of bitter almans, and oil of dille, and
honey of roses. To the same entention the suffumigation following, is
convenient. A suffumigation to resolve wyndynes in the ears.
. of the leaves of horehou^d, of camomil, and dille, of every one. m^. i. of
maiorum, of organye, of each a little, let them sethe with wine, and see water,
till the third part be consumed, and then put thereunto of honye.iiij. of
castorie..i. let the^ seth again a little.

After this suffumigation, ye shall put into ye ear, oil of elders warm,
with oil of bitter almans, and oil of nardus, with a little oil of rue, or of
radyshe, which Auicenne prayseth syngulerly. Item to this entention, after
suffumigation, we have found it good to put into the ears, this oil
following, which takes away all wyndynes, of the ears.. of oil of dille,
of oil of elders, oil of bitter almans. Ana..i. of the juice of horehounde,
of the juice of radyshe. ana.. ss. of the leaves of rue, of cumyn, maioram, of
cynamon, of every one a little, of castorium, graynes.ij. of vynegre.. ss. seth
these forsayde things a little together, till the vynegre be consumed, and then
strain it through a clothe, and put thereof warm into the ears, for it takes
away wyndynes, maruelouslye, and restores the hearing. Some men say, that
goats galle, or calves galle, sodden with the juice of horehounde, and
radyshe, and oil of dille takes away ye hyssynge of the ears wonderfully.

The.viij. chapter, of the pain of the ears.
THe pain of ye ears, Pain of the ears.
proceed sometime of a cold cause, and sometime of a hot. First for the cure
thereof, (a purgatio^ of the head according to the humors, presupposed) if the
matter be caused of heat, oil of roses omphacyne, boiled in an apple with a
little saffran, swageth pain maruelouslye. Also goats milk, cowes milk, or
woman's milk, serves for the same purpose. Item oil of violettes, and sweet
almans, sodden with wine of sower pomegranades, and a little saffran, with
chestwormes, nombre.xxx. in.ij.. of the forsayde oils until ye wine be
consumed, is a synguler remedy, in this case.

Furthermore a roasted apple, stamped and strayned, and myngled with oil of
roses, and oil of violettes, and a little saffran, and the yolks of two eggs,
sodden together a little, and laid upon the ears like a plaster, eases pain
greatly. Also sodde^ wine, with barlye flower, and bean flower, and oil of
roses, and camomill, and a little sta^ped branne, is a good remedy to swage
the pain of the ears, and it resolves somewhat. If the matter be cold, The
cure in a cold cause.
ancient writers say, yt oil of dille sodde^ with butter, and the juice of
affodilles, till the juice be consumed and the^ poured warm into the ears,
has virtue to swage grief caused of a cold matter.

Furthermore oil of ye yolks eggs, as Auensoer says, is a synguler remedy
to appease any grefe of the ears. Item oil, preparate with oil of sweet
almans, and oil of elders, with a little vynegre, and wine of granates, and
butter, with.xij. earth worms, and snaylles, and as many chest worms, boiled
altogether, with.ij. ounces of oynyo^s roasted in an oven and somewhat cut and
stamped, these things must sethe till the wine and vynegre be consumed, with
a little saffra^, then ye shall strain them, and power of the straynynge into
the ear, for it has the foresaid virtue. Item to this intention, it is
convenient to apply a plaster made of sapa, sodden with butter, oil of
elders, a little saffran, and white wax, brayed branne, and barlye flower. Also
the oil of lynsede, and the oil of bitter almandes, sodde^ with earth worms,
may co^uenie^tly be used

Furthermore, a plaster of sapa, sodden with branne, and with oil of
camomill, and dille, and with a little camomill, and mellilote, and applied
upon the ears, has a great prerogative. Besides this, the suffumigation
following, helps to swage pain caused of hot humors. A suffumigation in a
hot cause
. of malowes, violettes, camomill, mellilote, dille, of every one. m^. i. of
barlye chafe small cut, of clean barlye, of branne. ana. m^. ij. of
licorice, of raysons, of every one..i. sees the foresaid things together,
till half of the water be consumed, then let the smoke be received into the
ear, and afterward use in a hot cause, the forsayde remedies.

Here follows another suffumigation convenient to release the pain,
procedynge of a cold cause.. of the roots of holihocke. A remedy for a cold
cause.
li.ss. of camomill, mellilote, dille, of the leaves of horehounde. ana. m^. i.
of sticados, of squina^tum, of maiorum, of every one a little, sees them with
water, and a little odoriferous wine, till half be consumed and receive ye smoke
into the payned ear, and afterward, let the remedies before written for pains
procedynge of a cold cause, be poured into ye ear according to necessity.

The.ix. chapter, of impedime^tes of hearing, or of defnesse.
NAture is wont to be vexed with sundry dyseases, Impediment of hearing.
about ye virtue of hearing, which is very necessary to every man, as well to
optaine knowledge, as to conducte other affairs of this present life. Wherefore
it is diligently to be conserved, and when any evil chances it must be
wisely removed. The accide^tes, Causes of defnes.
that hinder and sometime destroy the virtue of hearing, are these, griefs,
apostemes, wyndynesse, vlceres, superfluous flesh, deafnes, worms, and such
like, whereof we will make a proper chapter, by the help of god. Wherefore, if
the cause of defnes of the ears, be an aposteme, for the remotio^ thereof, ye
shall resort to the proper chapters of the apostemes of ye ears, and likewise
in all other. We ente^de in this present chap. only to entreat of deafnes in
general. First, before ye come to local medicines, ye must purge the humors
of ye head, with pylles of hiera, agregatiue, or cochie, or of assagereth with
agaryk, according to ye evil humors. Also ye must order a dyete, which ought
not be to moist in this case. And therefore the patie^t may well use time,
maiorum, percelye, myntes, nept, organy, nutmegges, cynamon, in his meats, and
he may drink wine of good odoure, delaied with water sode^ with coria^der. Ite^ it
is good to use water sode^ with honey, coria^der, and a little cynamon, and he
shall receive thereof, half a glass full in the morning, and as much at
night.

As touching local remedies, we say, that the medicines written in the
chapter of the soundynge of the ears, are convenient in this case. Of the
remedies praised of learned men, this is one.. of oil of bitter
almondes..i.ss. of oxegalle..i. of black elebore stamped, graynes.ij. of
castorium, of vynegre, of every one..v. let them sees all together, till the
vine egre be consumed, then strain them, and pour thereof into ye ear warm.
Item this remedy following, is profitable to recover hearing.. of hares
galle..i. of oil of castorium, oil of elders, of oil of nardus, of every
one..vi. of odoriferous wine, of vyneegre, of every one..i. of ye flowers of
rosemarye, of the leaves of rue, of each a little; of fox grese, of the fat
of an ele, of every one..iij. or of black eleborus brayed..i. let them sees
all together, till the wine and the vyneegre be consumed, then strain them,
and use them, as is aforesaid. Also the oil of balsami, and the oil of
castor, has a great prerogative in this case. Likewise the vnderwrytten
suffumigation, restores hearing maruelouslye. Suffumigation.
. of camomille, of mellilote, of dille, of stycados, of squinant, of rosemary,
of every one. m^. ss. of whit oynions, nombre.iij. of the roots of
affodilles..iiij. of black ellebor brayed..i. of horehounde, of maioram, of
serpillum which some call our ladies bedstraw, of organy, of wormwood, of
every one. m^. i. of honye.li.i. of bitter almanse somewhat stamped..iij. of
oxegalle..iij.ss. sees these forsayde things with sufficient quantity of
water, and a little vynegre, and use them after the manner of a suffumigation.
Another remedy for the same purpose. A synguler remedy.
. of juniper seed..ss. of black elebore..i. of oil sysamyne, of oil of
lynseede, of oil of elders, and rue, of every one..ss. of oil of castorium of
oil of a fox, of every one..ii. of vynegre..x. of odoriferous wine..i. Let
them sees all together till the wine and vynegre be consumed, strain them,
and put thereof into ye ear warm. Item an other.. of the beryes of laurel, of
the seed of juniper, of every one..ijij. of oil of bitter almans..x. of oil
of dille, and of lynseede, of every one..ss. of oil of castorium, oil of
elders, of every one..ij.ss. of the juice of purslane, of the juice of
ciclamine, ana..v. of maioram, of rue, of each a little, of vynegre..ij. of the
galle of an hare..vi. sees them all together, till the iuyces and vynegre be
consumed, then strain them and use them, as is aforesaid. Another
suffumigation, good for deafnes.. of the leaves of elders, of the leaves of
walwort, and mugwort, of every one. m^. i. of the beries of iuneper, and
laurel. ana. m^. ss. of the roots of ciclaminie, of the roots of affodilles,
of every one. m^. i. of maiora^, of wormwood, of myrrh, of every one..i.ss.
of honye..iij. of ox pysse.li.i. of vynegre.li.ij. of water, as much as shall
suffyce, adding of nept, calamynte, betonye, rue, ysope, sticados, ce^taurie,
spykenarde, of every one a little, let the^ seth till ye third part be consumed,
and use them after the manner of a suffumigation, for the operation is
marvelous. Item the oil of elders, sodde^ with oil of dille, and roots of
affodilles, is a synguler remedy for deafnes. Item some say, that it is very
profitable to apply this decoction.. of the roots of a white and a black
vine, called vitis alba et nigra, bearing grapes. of every one,.i. of
wormewoode. m^. i. of ox galle, of hares galle, of every one,.i. of the fat
of a fox..vi. of the fat of a wesyll, or of elys..x. of castorium, of black
elebore, of every one, graynes.ij. of vynegre, of odoriferous wine, of every
one.. iij. of oil of nardus..i. of oil of laurel..ss. let them sees
together till the wine and vynegre be consumed, then strain them, and put
thereof into the ears. It is also good, that the patient exercise him self in
grauelye places. Item contynuall purgations of the head, make much to the
purpose. Yea the foresaid remedies are not to be administered, before the
purgation of the body, and of the head. Likewise, in the time of the
administration of the same, they ought not to be another to hot nor to cold.

Furthermore, it is the duetye of a good surgeon, to provide, that the
medicines that enter unto the synowe planted within, hurt not the same. It is
moreover to be remembered, that medicines of the ears, must not be styffe, but
liquide, that they may perce into the inward part. Item the medicynes must
be often changed, namelye every fourth hour, and the pacient must lie on
the contrary side, a certain space after the application of the medicine,
stoppynge his ear, that the air enter not in. The best manner, of
administryng medicines for the dyseases of the ears is, that the ear be
cleansed from all superfluous things, before the application of the said
medicines. etc.

The.x. chap. of water, and stones, and worms, and graynes, or such like
things, entryng into the ear.
Worms, Of worms and other noisome things in the ears.
and other things, enter into the ears, and hinder hearing, and may be known
by the relation of the patientes, which feel a bytynge, and mouynge, in the
ears, and heuye paynfulnesse. The cure thereof, Cure.
is to draw out the said thing. And to come to our purpose, bryefly, some
doctors say, that water which is entered into the ears, may be drawn out
easily with instruments, wherewith great wyndy balls be puffed up, which are
after ye manner of a syrynge. The way to draw out the said matter, is this.
First, ye must bathe ye ear with wine of the decoction of nepte, and of
maiorum, and afterward, ye must put the instrument into the ear, unto ye
botome, which must be stopped with cotto^, that the instrument may draw the
water from the botome unto it self. And this ye shall do, so often, till ye
perceive the water dried up, which is known by ye remotion of ye accede^tes,
yt were there before.

Some allow, that the water be drawn out with the wood of a palmetre, or
dry elder. Ye must put one end of the wood, into the fire, and the other in
the ear, and the wood must be three cubits long, for they say that by
reason of the fire, ye wood draws the water unto it self. Likewise, some use
this mean to draw out the water. After a suffumigation, the patiente must
iompe with the foot, that is on the sore side, and in leapyng, he must strike
his ear of ten with his hand, and afterward they put into ye ear a see
spo^ge, and the^ cause the patie^t to sleep upon the same ear.

Likewise, ye may draw out the water, with such a syrynge as the surgeons use
to draw vryne out of the bladder, putting it into the ear without pain,
and suckinge out the water at the other end with your mouth. Fynallye, the
doctors have descrybed few remedies in this case, for they knew that
instruments were more fytte, to draw out the said water, then local remedies.
How be it, Auicenne says, that the juice of oynyons put into the ears,
eases the heaviness of the head, and draws out the water. Arsilata, and
Platearius, say, that the said juice me^gled with gose grese, and put into
the ears, is of the same effect. Nysynge also, provoked by art, is
convenient in this case.

As touching the drawing out of little worms, and such other things, if it
be possible, they must be drawn out with little pynsons, or some other
convenient instrument, enlargynge the conduyte of the ears. And if ye can not
draw them out on this mean, Medicyne to kylle the worms in the ears.
ye must proceed with localle medicines. First, to kill the little worms, ye
shall pour into the ear oil of bitter almondes, dyssolued with a little aloes
epatyke, and ox galle, and afterward, ye shall make a suffumigation of
things anodyne, that is to say, which swage pain. For within the space of a
few days, the worms shall appear to your eyes, and then ye shall take them
out, with some conueniente instrumente.

Little stones, and graynes, being entered into the ears, must be drawn out
after that, that is written in this present chapter, concerning drawing out
of water, except, that when the greyne is in the ears, ye must not use oil
and suffumigations, but when there is great pain, for they enlarge the greyne.
Wherefore, it is better to draw it out, with some convenient instrumente,
somewhat crooked. And because, that sometime the stone or the greyne, stycketh
so in the ear, that it can not be drawn out, then ye shall break the stone,
or the grain, with small sharp tenacles, made for the purpose. And for
as much, as often times the said things can not be drawn out, but they cause
great pain, and bring the place to an hot apostemation, some have
counsayled to make incision under the ear, that so the said things may be
drawn out, by the cut place. Nevertheless, my council is, that no
incisyon be made in the said place, because it is noble and synnowy, except a
sign of apostemation appear under the ear, but to leave the cure to the
workynge of nature, which is ever mighty in her operation.

If apostemation appear under or above the ear, ye shall further maturation
thereof, with a plaster maturatiue and attractiue, and afterward ye shall open
the place in the form of a new moon, before it come to maturation. For
mundifycation, incarnation, and sigillation, ye shall proceed after the
doctrine, declared in a peculier chapter of the vlceres of the ears. etc.

Here begins the fourth treatise of the fourth book.
The first chapter, of the vlceres of the belie.
vlceris of the belie
THE cure of vlceres of the belie yt perce not, dyffereth nothing from the
common cure of vlceres of other parts of the body. Wherefore, if the vlceres
be virule^t, or venomous they must be cured, after the cure of the said
vlceres, and so of other

But if such vlceres, be penetrante and percynge, or fystulous, than they are
very hard to be cured, howebeit the cure must not be refused, for nature
works sometime secretlye, and heals rhynges that seem impossyble to the
surgeons, and therefore in this case ye, shall proceed, according to the
doctrine declared in the chapyter, of penitraunte wounds in the breast, etc

The second chapter, of the vlceres of the fla^kes, and armeholes.
vlceres of the flanks and armeholes
THe ulcers of these parts by reasone of the thynnes of the flesh become sone
holowe, and like ye apostemes called formice, and crustye, and they have
nothing proper by them selves, from the common cure of other vlceres, howbeit,
we will ordain the cure, according to the qualytie of the place, and of the
ulcers. Cure.


First, (purgacion and good diet presupposed) as we have said in many places,
if the vlceres be holow, my custom was to put into the said vlceres, this
lyquore following.. of the barbours lie..vi. of our poudre of mercurye..iij.
of honye of rooses..i. myngle these things together, and put them into the
ulcers, a lotion for holow ulcers
warm, with a sirynge, kepinge in the same strayghte way with your finger,
or with a tente, that it may fulfill his operation, and let the said lyquour be
retained the space of.xii. hours, then mundifie the place, and wasshe it by
the space of two days, with lie and red sugar, or with water of barley and
honye of roses. And again every second day, wasshe the place as is before
said, until the vlcere be mundyfyed from all evil flesh which thing is
known, by the appearaunce of good flesh, and-good quytture. And if the mouth
of the vlcered place be very streite, ye shall enlarge it by incision or by
application of some caustyke medicine, as is capitell, oil of coperose, or with
a trosciske of minio of our description, or with the foresaid powder, poudered
upon the tente, and afterward ye may proceed with the fore said remedies.

For incarnation, we were wount to use this ointment following, put, tyng it
upon a tent.. of honye of roses.. i. of most clear terrebentyne.. ii. of the
juice of smallage.. ss. of the juice of plantayne and wormwood, ana.. ii. Let
them sees a little, and put thereunto of the flower of barley and beans well
boulted, and of the flower of lentyles, ana.. iii. of sarcocolle, of myrrh,
ana.. ss. of frankynsence..i. with this ointment, I put upon the place a great
piece of the oyntmente or cerote vnderwrytten, and in the time of incarnation,
I did syringe the place every day with the wine of the decoction of honey of
roses, and a little frankynsence, or with the foresaid lie, and honye of roses.
cerote of noble opeation
The form of the cerote is this.. of oil of camomylle, oil of rooses, of
oil of lyllyes. ana..iiij. of calves suet, cowes suet, and wethers suet
melted. ana. lj.ss. of oil of lynsed.iii. of muscilage of psilium, holy
hocke, fenugreke, lynseed.lj.ij. of lytarge of gold and silver, ana..j.ss. of
minium..x. make a cerote of all these at the fire, according to art, adding
as much white wax as shall suffyce for it purges matter, and in resolving
mollyfyeth hardenesse, we sealed up the place with vnguentum de minio, of our
description, washinge the place with water of alume, soden with honye of
rooses, and rooses by them selfs, which oyntmente is written in the chapter
of a broken skulle.

If the vlceres be corrosyue, and malygne, ye shall rectyfie them with our
poudre of mercurye, or with the poudre following, which I optayned of master
Scipion of Mantua, a chirurgien syngulerly learned.. of read coralles,
Scipcious powder
of psidia, of bytanye, of read roses, of fine white sugar, ana..ss. powder all
these things finelye, and use it upon a corrosyue and malygne ulcer, for that
is of excellent operacyon, as the said master Scipion showed unto me.

We have cured many, with vnguentum de tucia, or of minium under written,
Vnguentum de (...).
the ordinance whereof is after this sort.. of oil of rooses omphacine..ii.
of oil of rooses complete,.iii. of oil myrtyne, of vnguentum populeon,
ana..x. of the iuce of plantayn..ii.ss. and as much of night shade, of calves
suet.lj.ss. let them seth all together with a little vynegre, till the iuces and
the vynegre be consumed, then strain them and add to the streynyng, of
lytarge of gold and silver, ana..x. of minium..vi. set the^ to the fire
again, and make a soft cerote, with suffycyente white wax

Black color or like black, it is a sign that it is perfytelye sodden,
this oyntemente is suffycyente for incarnacyon; and mundyficacyon, and likewise
it is good to make good cycatrizacion, when the vlceres are first washed, with
water of plantayne, wherein a little alume has be^ soddene

Fynallye, if the vlceres been hard and have gross and roughe borders, ye
shall remove the said roughness, with our powder of mercurye aforsayde, or
cut a way the lyppes with apayre of sycers, and than cauteryse the place
superfycyallye, or in the stead of a cauterye ye may mynyster vnguentum
egyptiacum.

If the pacyente abhor an actual cauterye and incision, than ye shall use
our capytelle of lie, whereof, we will make mencyon in our antidotarie. When
the lyppes be removed, mundyfye the vlcere with vnguentum egiptiacum, myngled
with vnguentum apostolorum, the rest of the cure shall be accomplished as it is
aforesaid

The third chapter, of the vlceres of the yard, and of the stones.
ALL kinds of vlceres are engendered in the yard, Vlceres of ye yard
as in other parts of all the body. Wherefore, for ye curacion of the same,
ye shall proceed as it is said of other vlceres and so forth. Howbeit, ye
shall observe this one thing, that is to say: that (because the member is
hot,) after that ye have removed the malygnitie of the said vlceres, ye must
apply things that cool, and before ye use dryinge medecynes, ye must purge
the body, for ye might bring the abundaunte matter to the flanckes, and
engender an apposteme called bubo, wherefore, a purgacyon is necessary in this
case.

Cure.
The cure of vlceres of the yard, and of the stones, is accomplished by
mundifycacion of the same, and to mundyfye them, there is nothing better, then
our poudre of mercury, or vnguentu^ apostolorum with a little of vnguentum
egyptiacum, and when great mu^dyfycation is not required, it shall suffyce to
use only vnguentum appostolorum, or a mundyfycatiue, of the iuce of plantayne.

When the place is mundyfyed, ye shall come to incarnation, which shall be
accomplysshed with aloes epathyke, myngled with sarcocolle and burned dylle,
with a little sugar. And when ye place shall be incarned fully, for sigillacyon,
ye shall use vnguentu^ de minio, written in the former chapter or with vnguentum
album camphoratum, or vnguentum de tucia. Item in this case it is conuenyente
to wasshe the place with red wine, and water of plantayne, and decoction of
rooses, of the flowers of pomegranates, of mirtilles with a little alume, for it
causes good cycratrizacion. Like wise, it is good to use the poudre
cycatrisatyue of bole armeny after our descrypcyon As touching the chafyng
and excoryacion, of the yard, we have spoken thereof in a peculyer chapter, in
the book of apostemes. etc.

Here follows the fyfte treatise, of the fourth book.
The first chapter, of a fystule of the fundamente
The fistule of the fundament, Festule of ye fundamente.
is engendered often times, of some rotten aposteme, chefelye, when the matter
is retained within, a long time, for the place is ready to receive corruption,
and corrosion of the quitture. Some times it begins of pustles, or little
apostemes, left unhealed. Likewise, it is often engendered by the pain of the
emoroides, by reason of the aliaunce of those parts, and through the
reteynynge of matter, accustomed to be purged by the veins emorroydalle once
or twyse in a year. And alto sometimes it is engendered, through vlceracyon of
the gutte talled intestinum rectum.

Of these vlceres, some perce in, and some perce not. kinds of fistules
Of those that perce unto the muskle of the gutte called intestinum rectum,
some perce above the said gutte. Item some of them are holowe, which stretche
them selfs into sondrye places, and some go downewarde depelye, that is to
say, towearde the bladder, or toward the back bone or toward the haunches,
and sometime toward the skin, called perytonium, as we have seen in our time.

Ye may have knowledge of the percynge of the said vlceres, partelye by the
little profytynge of medycynes, and partly by the long contynuaunce of the
same, and when through the mouth thereof, there issues out dyrtye matter. Also
ye may know them, by putting into the vlcered place, a provete of silver,
guydyng it with ye lift hand toward the fundemente, and putting in the little
finger of your right hand, anointed with oil of roses. For if it perce unto
the gut, ye shall feale the prouet with your finger.

The cure of a fistula, that percehe within the muscule of the gutte,
(a purgation of the body and conueniente diete presupposed) has one kind of
healynge, besides the common intentions in the proper chapiters of fistules,
where it is declared, that the narowe place must be enlarged, and mortified,
as ye may there see. The manner of the said cure, is this. Ye must anoynte
your formoste finger of your right or left hand as it shall seem good, with
oil of roses, and ye must put the said finger into the fundamente, according
to the situation of the fistula, and therwithal ye must conducte a crooked
sharp instrument called Phalac, or Gamaut, by the mouth of the fistula,
toward the fundamente, till ye feale the point of the seyde instrumente
under your finger, which done, draw out your finger, and make incision from
one mouth to an other, directly drawing the point of the instrumente, by the
fundamente, that the emeroidal veins be not hurt.

And before the said incision, be sure of the true percynge, by puttyng in of
a prouet of silver, or a leden nedle, if need be.

After incision, ye shall dygeste the place, with a dygestyue of terrebentyne,
and of the yolckes of eggs, with a little saffron. And if there remain any
hard flesh, ye shall remove it with vnguentum egiptiacum, or with our
powder of Mercurye.

And after the admynystation of sharp things, it is good to puryfye the place
and to prepare the incarnacyon, with a mundyfycatiue of small ge, written in
our antidotarie in the chapter of abserstyue medecynes.

When the place is mundyfyed, ye shall incarne it with sarcocolle, aloes
epatyke, clear terebentyne, and a little honye of rooses myngled therewyth. Also
vnguentum de minio, may well he admynistred in all times of this fystula.
Likewise, to make a good cycatrize, ye shall wash the place, with water of
plantayne, soden with rooses and myrtilles, and mirabolans cytrynes, and a
little alume, and honye of rooses.

The doctoures have written many other remedies, which cannot be used,
without great pain and danger of apostemacion. One is, by a syngle lace,
which is reproved by dyscrete chirurgiens, the second, is by a threede
anointed with a sharp and strong medecyne, conductynge the same from one
mouth to the other, and some commau^d, to cauterise the place with an hot
iron, from the conduit of the fundamente unto the mouth of the fystule. And
first they put in a threde, with a ledyn nedle, and after the cauterisation,
they draw out the threde from one mouth to another.


Here ye shall note this one thing that if the fistule perce upon the gut
three or four inches unto the muscule, ye must use no incision, for after
incision, the pacyente should have no power to retain his excrymentes, for as
Rases says, in the end of this gutte, there is a muscle bindyng and keeping
in, the excreme^tes, according to the will of the pacyente. Wherefore it shall
suffyce in this case, to receive a palliatiue curation.

I say also, that if the fystule go toward the bladder, or the boones of the
haunches, or the tail of the backebone, ye must not proceed butte with a
pallyatyue cure, for ye shall get nothing thereby but dishonor and hurt.
and.c.

The second chapter, of the cure of holowe, and fystulous vlceres of the
fundamente, that perce not
Vlceres of the fundamente ^ not per^ynge.
THe vlceres of the fundament that perce not are engendered of the same causes,
that percynge vlceres are. The cure whereof (conuenyente purgacyon and
ordinance of diet presupposed) is the self same with the other vlceres,
declared and set forth in the universal chapyter of vlceres.

Howebeit, I will describe the manner that I have used in such ulcers. wherefore
in the curation of holowe vlceres, (for most commonly they be holowe) I was
wount to mundyfye the holowenes, with vnguentum egiptiacum dissolved with lie,
casting it into the vlcere with a siringe, or in the stead thereof, I conveyed
in, our powder with a little lie, after the manner aforesaid. And when the mouth
was very streyte, I did enlarge it, and removed ye hardness thereof with a
trosciske of minium, or with a caustike of capitelle, with a cautele or
provision, described, in the chapter of fleshye knobbes, in the book of
apostemes.

And when I could not root out such a fystula by this mean, I used
incisyon, and afterward mundefied the place with our powder, or with
vnguentum egiptiacum aloone, or myngled as much with vnguentum apostolorum,
till the place was parfytelye mundyfied of all evil flesh and matter.

Fynallye, for incarnacyon and sygillacion, I used the remedies written in the
former chapyter. And for as much, as these places are wont to be enflamed,
through sharp medycines or to be apostemed. It is requisite for the
resolution of the matter, and for apeasynge of the grefe, Epithema
to use fuffumigatyon and epithemes, following.. of camomylle, mellilote,
branne, of the leaves of malowes, holyhocke, and of tapsus barbatus, ana. m^. j.
of lynseed.j. of the rotes of holihocke..iiij. sees them all together with
suffycyent water, till half beconsumed, and let the smoke be receauyd, and the
place epithemed with the same decoction

The third chapyter, of the chappyng and cleftes of the fundamente.
IT chaunseth often, Of ryftes in ye fundamente
that the fundamente is chapped, through salt fleme or burnt melancholy, and
sometime through great costyfenes of the belie, or through the floynge of a
colyrycke humor, which byteth and chafeth away the skin of the place,
wherefore for the curation of the same, a leuytyue purgation of the belie
presupposed, there is nothing better, then to bathe the place, and to receive
the smooke of this decoction following. of camomylle, mellylot, branne of
barlye, malowes, vyolettes lentylles, ana. m^. ii. of sweet apples somewhat
broused, in number.x. of tapsus barbatus. m^. iii. of lynseed..iij. of
sugar..iij of frankensence, of aloes, of myrre, ana..ss. of licium,. x. roche
alume..ii. ss. let them seth al together with suffycyent water, till ye third
part be consumed, and let the smoke be received into the fundament, and than
use this lynimente following.. oil of lynseed, of oil omphacine, ana..ss. of
the wine of sweet granades brayed with the ryndes, and than strongelye
pressed..iiij. of roche alume..j. of gootes suet and calves talowe, ana..iii.
let them sees al together till the iuce and the wine be consumed, then
strain them and use them.

Item oil of linseed, applied upon the chappes, is good against the pains of
the emoroydes, and all dyseases of the fundame^t, as Mesue says, Oil also of
the yolckes of eggs, labored in a mortar of lead, with as much oil of
lynsed, is a present remedy against the chappes of the fundamente.

An other lynemente for the same purpose. of the oil of nuttes, Linimentes
of the fruit called crysomela, of the oil of sweet almons, of peches,
ana..ii. of oil of the yolks of eggs, of oil of lynseed, ana.. ss. of the
iuce of wild tasell, of the iuce of knotgrasse, of the iuce of tapsus
barbatus, an^..vi. of aloes epathike..iii. of the iuce of plantayne..i. seethe
them till the iuces be consumed, than strain them, and use this medecyne
within the fundamente.

Another,. of the oil of yolks of eggs, of the oil of lynseed, ana.. x. of
goats talowe, of most clear terbentyne. ana.. iii. of frankensence, of
Mastike, ana..ss. of Rasyn of the Pynaple tree..i. of Aloes Epatyke..i.ss. of
tapsus barbatus, of the leaves of Plantayne, of the leaves of houndestong, and
of horsetayle, ana. m^. i. stamp them al, and draw out the iuce and let them
all sees together till the iuce be consumed, then streyne them, and put to the
streynynge, of litarge of gold and silver, ana..ss. of ceruse,.iii.ss. of
burned led, of tucia, ana..ii. myngle them, and labor them in a mortar of
lead the space of two hours.

And for as much as, sumtyme the said chappes, perce into the inward part
of the fundamente, and cause great pain, chefelye, Suffumigation.
when they are joined with emoroides, then suffumygacyons and bathynges that
swage the pain, make to the purpose, as a bathe of tapsus barbatus aforenamed
Likewise, ye may clyster the place with the said decoction, and read sugar,
and a little aloes epathike dyssolued, for this clyster swageth pain and makes
good incarnation.

If the said chappes cannot be healed by the foresaid remedies, than it is
necessary to fylle the chappes, with our powder of mercurye, for within two
or three times, it remoueth the malygnitie, as we have proved in my lord
Marcke, cardynal of Romemyshe church, named Cornarius.

After that the malygnytie is removed, the foresaid remedies shall suffyce for
the curacyon of the vlceres. But some time it chauncethe, as we have seen,
that the fundamente is vlcered of a prymytyue cause, for the cure whereof, at
the beginning ye shall proceade with lenytiue medycynes.

Wherefore, it is conuenyente, to bathe the place with the decoctyon of
malowes, of lynseed, of tapsus barbatus, of barlye, and of branne.

And after the common fashyon, ye shall apply a dygestyue of the yolks of
eggs, and oil of rooses omphacyne, and a little saffron.

When the place is dygested, for mundyfycation and incarnacyon, ye shall
proceed with oil of lynseede, with oil of yolks of eggs, and a little aloes
epatike, labored the space of two hours in a mortar of lead, adding
thereunto a little juice of pla^tayne, and a little litarge of gold and silver.
For the rest of the cure, ye shall proceed with the remedies before written. etc.

The fourth chapter of emoroydes or pyles.
THere are about ye end of the fundamente.v. veins, which are calemoroydalle,
Of emoroydes or piles.
and are ordained of nature, to purge the gross and melancholye blood in men,
as women's bodies are purged every month.

And as the ancient writers say, if the said purgation come duly, it
preserves the body from sondrye diseases, as from the leper, from ca^ker, and
other like. And they be called called emoroyde, of Hema, which in greek is
blood, and roys, which is flowynge. kinds of emoroydes.
And there are diverse kinds of them, for some been like greynes of raysons or
like little bladers, some are like wartes, and other been like an opened fig,
read, and full of little greynes, some are like mulberyes, and are called
morales, and some are small as little pieces of flesh, about the fundamente, and
some are payneful and apostemous.

The cause of these, for the most part, The causes of emoroydes
is abundau^ce of gross and melancholyke blood, and sometime of fleume, and
sometime of brent choler sent unto the said place, or else, they come through
the receipt of sharp medicines, or else of the long use of pills of aloes
not washed. Wherefore by the great abundaunce of such blood, it chau^ceth that
the said veins swel, and be extended out of the fundame^t, being very
paynefull, and apostemous. Therefore if the blood be very subtyle and sharp,
and the passion natural, and coming by courses, than the mouths of the veins
are opened, without the melancholye blood is purged, by the benifyte of
nature, and also the said subtle and sharp humor. If they be caused of
flegmatyke blood, watrye, and not gross, the^ they are like little bladers, or
greanes of raysonnes, and white in color, and soft in towchynge, and cause
no great pain. If they be engendered of gross flegmatyke blood, they are
hard like wartes, and been like unripe figs, and are not very payneful,
except they be vlcered, and joined with some hot humor. Their color is,
between blewnes, and rednes. If they be caused of melancholyke, and flegmatyke
blood mixed together, they are like little pieces of flesh, of black color,
called Condilomata, and if they be caused of burnt choleryke blood with
melancholye, they are in color and figure like to a mulberye and very
paynefull.

Item ye shall note, that some be natural, and some accidental, the natural,
are those which in some dodies, every month, or every year four times,
purge gross and melancholyke blood. The accidental, are those, which
proceed of the foresaid causes, through evil diete, and other things not
natural. wherefore, the pacient must avoid all sharp, salt, and tarte
things, and ye engender melancholyke blood, as all pulses, the head, and the
inwardes of beasts, and gross flesh, as of kyne, swyne, goats, hares, and
birds of the river.

Further more the emoroydes are caused inwardly, and outwardelye. Those yt are
engendered inwardly, are natural, and they are wo^t to send forth gross
blood, and those that apere outwardelye, send forth watery blood, somewhat
reddyshe.

The cure of emoroydes, shall be accomplishid, by an universal, and particular
regiment. Cure of emoroydes.
The universal regiment, has two intenciones, namelye, ordinance of diete,
and purgation of the cause antecedent. Particular regiment, is accomplished by
the administration of local medicines. As touching the first intention, we
say, that when they drop inordinatly, they must be restrained (though it be
a general rule, that the flowynge of blood by certain times and courses,
should not be restrained) lest the pacient fall into a dropsye, through the
weakness of the liver, and of the stomach. For the restraining of the same, the
remedies which be administered to stop the flowers, are convenient in this
case, applied as well within as without, and likewise in provoking the same.
If the flux come of a cold cause, let the pacient be purged with
diacatholicon, cassia, and with the decoction of myrobalanes, called kebuli,
equally proportioned, according to the strength and age of the patient. If
they proceed of hot mattier, ye shall purge the body, with diaprunis not
solutiue, reubarbe, and with the decoction of myrobalane citrine. The doctors
say, that the solutiues must purge in pressing together, and leauyng some
stipticitie in the member, that sends and receaueth the humors. After
purgation ii. days, ye shall administer a bathe, of things ye restreyne, as
sumach, roses, myrtilles, pla^tayn, boiled in water wherein hot steel has
be^ quenched. It it is good to take trifera magna, cu^ sa^guine draconis, with
a little mumia, and a little reubarbe with wine of aygre pomegranades. Rasis
prayseth trosciskes of karabe, Playsters for the emoroydes.
with sumach, to restrain the flux of ye emoroydes, and he prayseth the
application, of a plaster of spica, written in ye chapter of the weakness of
the liver. Item a sirupe of myrte, and of roses, is of great excellency in
this cause. Furthermore, it is very good to lay upon the rennyng place in the
somer, a plaster of lentilles, roses, beans, made with water wherein a hot
iron has been quenched, for it stauncheth blood marvelously. Item this
plaster following, serves for the same purpose. R. of roses, of myrtilles, of
the leaves of pla^taine, of the herb called lingua passerina or knotgresse.
ana. m^.i. sethe them all in water wherein hot iron has been quenched, then
stamp them and streyne them, and put thereunto a little wine of pomegranades,
and a little vinaygre of roses, shake them together, and bring them in ye manner
of a plaster, and use the same. If the flux of emoroydes chau^ceth in winter,
ye must take wormwood, with oil of roses omphacine and a little sage, and
mugwort, and sees them in a pot, and afterward stamp them, and apply them
upon the place. Ye shall put also wtin the fundament, this ointment following. R.
of roses, myrtilles, and knotgrasse. an^..ss. of fra^kensence..i. of sa^guis
draconis, of myldust, of ^eane flower. an^..ii. of hares hear cut in small
pieces..ii.ss. of bole armeny, terre sigill. an^..iii.ss. of tutia, of litarge
of gold and silver. an^..i.ss. of the juice of tapsus barbatus, of the juice
of horsetayle, plantayne, and comferye. ana..iii. the whytes of two eggs,
shake them all together, and put them into the fundame^t with cotton, or with
lynte, for it is a present remedy to staunche blood.

Also byndynge of the arms and shulders, and ventoses, is very good to turn
away the mattier. Also it is profitable, to lay a ventose upon the liver.
Item it helppeth much, that the patient eat before his meat some stypstyke
thing, as roasted pears, or quinces, or mines made of the same, medlers,
wyldynges. etc. Also ye must avoid anger, immoderate use of women, and great
exercise. This doctrine shall suffice, for particular purgation of emoroydes.

Universal cure of emoroydes.
Now we will come to the universal cure, which shall be accomplyshed by four
intentions. The first consists in the ordinance of diete, the second in
purgation of the mattier antecedente, the third in remouinge the matter
conioynt, the fourth in correction of the accidents. As towchyng the first,
the patient must use such meats as may engendre good blood and destroy evil,
as chickyns, hens, partryches, fesauntes, motton, veale, sodden with herbs
that enge^der good blood, as borage, buglosse, lettuse, spinache. etc. He must
avoid all fish, except perches, and fyshes that live among stones. Also he
must avoid al sharp things, and that engender melancholyke blood.

For the second intention, which is to purge the mattier antecedente, you
shall use Diacatholicon, or Cassia, or Diacassia, and ye shall forbear
solutyues into which Aloes, and scamonye, enter. wherefore it shall suffice, to
loose the bellye with one of the said lenitiues.

The third intention, shall be accomplyshed with the administration of local
remedies. And first, if the emoroydes be like mulberies, though they be of
little aperaunce, yet they cause great pain, which if you swage not spedelye, an
apostemous or fistulous vlcere, may be engendered in the place. Wherefore,
Lanfranke a learned man, comaundeth at the beginning to cut the vein called
Basilica of the same side, and the next day, the vein saphena, of the same
side. And if the patient were wont to have purgation by the veins emoroydal,
ye shall provoke the same, and if he were not acustomed, he shall forbear. And
herein the chirurgiens err often times, applyenge in the beginning of
emoroydes, blood suckers, and things that provoke blood, whereby they have
brought the place to an aposteme, or to a fistula. wherefore it is better to
study to swage ye pain, and to resolve the emoroydes, whereunto a
suffumigation, and fomentation of the place, by this decoction following, is
profitable in all kinds of emoroydes, which we have proved in Iulye the
second. A pope full of pyles.
R. of the leaves of Malowes, and Violettes, of Parietarye, of the leaves of
Holihocke, of Tapsus barbatus with the rote. an^. m^. ii. of quynce seeds.. vi.
of clean barlye. m^. i.ss. of branne. m^. iii. of lynsede, of Fenugreke.
ana..iiii. of peers wild or sweet somewhat bruised, nombre twelve, of lingua
passerina or knotgrasse, of wyld Tasyll, ana. m^. i. sees them all together
with sufficient water, and add of Camomylle, Mellylote, Dylle. ana. m^. i.ss.
Let them sees till the third part be consumed, and use them after the manner
of suffumigation and fomentation.

A good liniment for the same purpose. R. of cowes buttyre..x. of the oil of
yolks of eggs..ss. of duckes grese..iii. of the juice of plantaine, of tapsus
barbatus. ana..ii. mengle the^ and labor the^ in a mortar of lead half a
day, and make a liniment, which ye shall put into the fundamente with your
finger, or with lynte. Item ye shall administer this plaster following, after
suffumigation. R. of roasted apples.. iiii. of buttyre..iii. ye yolks of two
eggs, and labor them in a mortar of lead the space of three hours, with
oil of Violettes, oil of sweet almons, hens grese, duckes grese. an^..ss.
of woman's milk..xii. of fresh barlye flower well bulted, and of bean flower.
ana..i. of the juice of the root of tapsus barbatus, and of the leaves
thereof.. x. Let them sees all together (beside the oil and the yolks of
eggs) until they be thick, then put to the oils, and the yolks of eggs,
and let them sees again, one boylynge, and put thereunto in the end, of
saffranne..ss. apply this medicine upon the place, after the manner of a
plaster, for it mollifyeth the hardness, and resolves the mattier, and swageth
pain. Another. R. of the Muscilage of holihocke, of malowes, of the sede of
quynces, of psiliu^, of fenugreke prepared. li.ss. of white dragagantum stamped
and laid in the water of roses ye space of a night, of bean flower.. iii. of
oil of camomylle, of oil of lynsede. an^..i.ss. of butter labored in a
mortar till it be black in color..x. of oil of violets, of duckes grese.
ana..ss. of the meat of roasted apples..iii.ss. of the juice of plantayne, of
houndestonge, langdebefe, of tapsus barbatus. an^..v. Let them sees all
together, till they be thycke and styffe, and put in the end, of saffran..i.
with the yolks of eggs, and use them after the manner of a plaster. Item
white dragagantu^, lythed in water of roses, with ye muscillage of psiliu^, and
labored in a mortar of lead the space of an hour, resolves ye swellyng of
emoroydes, and swageth pain. Ite^ byttilles, and chestwormes, sodden in oil
of camomyl, buttyre, oil of linsede and oil of chrisomeles, of every one..
vi. which afterward ye must streyn, and labor ye space of an hour, with the
yolke of an egg, and a little saffran, it is a present remedy, against the
pain of the emoroydes. Likewise, oil of lynsede, and fresh buttyre, in
equal quantity, labored in a mortar of lead the space of an hour, and
conveyed in with a syringe warm, swageth the pain of ye emoroydes with out
failing, which thing the said oil alone does perform. And therefore Mesue
says, that oil of lynsede, is a great medicine in all deseases of the
fundament.

Item the oil of the yolks of eggs, is of the same operation, and likewise
buttyre boiled in a great holow rape, in an oven, or boiled in a great apple,
and sta^ped together, is of like efficacitie. And buttyre boiled in a white
oynyon, has the same virtue, as Rasis says. Item this remedy following, is
commendable. R. of oil of chrisomeles.. vi. of fresh buttyre, of the oil of
lynsede. ana.. ss. of serapyne..ss, of wine of pomegranades, of the juice of
tapsus barbatus. an^.. i. of byttylles, nombre six, let them sees all
together, and streyne them, and use them, without and within.

Here follows a plaster, that resolves the swellyng of the emoroydes, and
swageth pain. R. of camomyll, mellilote. ana. m^. i. of clean barlye, of the
leaves of malowes, and violets, of horehounde. ana. m^. ss. of the rotes of
Holihocke, of the leaves of Coleworte, of the leaves of holihocke. ana. m^. ss.
of sweet apples, nombre. x. of clean barlye, of lentilles. ana..ii. of the
rotes of tapsus barbatus and the leaves thereof. ana. m^. ii. of lynsede.. i.ss.
the head of a wether and the fete thereof somewhat broken. The manner of making
the plaster is this. First ye must sees ye head and the fete together till
the flesh be well sodden, and afterward let the foresaid things sees in
the brothe only, till they be perfitely sodden, then press them, stamp rhem,
and streyne them, and afterward ye must take the stamped things, and as much
of the brothe wherein they ware sodden, and set them on the fire again, and
make a solyde plaster, adding of the flower of beans, barlye, and cycers.
ana..i. of oil of Camomylle, of oil of Roses complete, of oil of Dylle, of
oil of lynsede. ana..i. of hens grese, duckes grese, of oil of Violettes.
an^..x. of saffra^..i. the yolks of three eggs, which must be put in, when
the rest shall be taken from the fire. Item the cerote under written, is
profitable to resolve hard emoroydes, and knottye pieces of flesh, that are
wont to rise about the fundament, through the pain of the emoroydes. R. of oil
of camomyl, dyl, lynsede. an^..iii. of ye oil of chrysomeles, sweet almons,
butter. ana..i.ss. of cowes talowe, of calves talow. an^..ii. of duckes grese,
of hens grese, of gose grese. ana..i. of Muscilage made of the sede of
holihocke and of the rotes thereof, and of the sede of psilium, and lynsede, of
malowes, and violettes. li.i.ss. litarge of gold and silver.. iiii make a soft
cerote, according to art, adding of clear terebentyne..ii.ss. This cerote
is a singular remedy, to resolve, and mollifye, all swellyng of emoroydes,
chiefly, if it be applied after the pain be swaged.

Which things administered, for the accomplishmente of the third intention,
if the mattier co^ioynct ca^ not be resolved, and yt the pyles be gross, as
ben those that been like mulberies, it is conueniente to dry them with sharp
medicines, as with our poudre of mercurye, or with a caustyke, or capitelle,
so that the parts about be not towched therwyth. But if the emoroydes be
warty, or like figs, ye shall cut them of, and cauteryse the roots, with
some sharp medicines. Some doctors command, to bind them, which is
paynfull, and not so good as the foresaid way. But if they be like grapes
stones, and bladrye, in bodies that are wont to have purgation of the
emoroydes at certain times, then ye shall apply blood suckers, to draw out
the melancholye blood, or instead thereof, ye shall cut a vein. And if the
emoroydes be in form of little outgrowynges of flesh, the pain being
somewhat removed, it is a good remedy, to lay blood suckers thereon, and the^
for the full mundification and resolution of them, ye shall administer the
foresaid cerote.

There chances often in this disease, a swellynge, round, and large, after
the figure of a chestenut, which causes great pain, and must be cured with
the forsaid remedies, namelye, by resolution, and mitigation of pain. After
the pain is swaged, I was wont to minister the foresaid cerote for perfect
resolution. Finally, if the emoroydes grow to a hot aposteme, for the cure
thereof ye shall resort to the chapter of flegmon.

The fourth entention, which is to correct accidents, shall be accomplished by
the administration of local remedies. The accidents, of these diseases are
these, vehement pain, great flux of blood, apostemes, ca^kerous putrefaction
of the places. Concerning swagyng of pain, staunchyng blood, and curation of
aposteme, we have spoken in this present chapter. But for as much as the pain
is very vehement, for the remotion thereof, ye may apply some thing wherein
opium shall enter, as this that follows, which is of the description of
Alexander, and we have proved it in this case, and in Tenasmo^. R. of mirre, of
frankynsence of licium, of saffran, ana. one part, Alexanders liniment.
of opium, two parts, braye them and make a linime^t with the muscillage of
psilium, and oil of roses, wherewyth ye shall annoynte lyut, and put it both
within and with out.

Here follows an other sure and excellent remedy, for the same purpose. An
excellent remedy.
R. of the leaves of henbane, and of malowes, and of colewortes. ana. m^. i.
wrappe them all in pieces, wete them, and roast them under coals, then stamp
them and labor them in a mortar of lead with a little oil of roses, the
yolke of an egg, and a little saffran, and the meat of roasted apples.. ii.
apply this medicyne after the manner of a plaster. And if the emoroydes grow
to blacknes, and cankerdnes, ye shall resort for the cure thereof, to the
chapter of a canker. And thus we end. etc.

The fyfth chapter of tenasmon.
Of tenasmon
TEnasmos, is a passion of the gutte called intestinum rectu^, wherein the
patiente has great desire to ye siege, but utters nothing, saving a little
flymy mattier, as is ye gelye of fysh, mengled with drops of blood. And this
passion for the more part, is caused of gross and slymie mattier, cleuing to
the arse gutte, which louseth the said gutte through his slymynes, and byteth
the same through the sharpenes and saltnes, and styrreth up the virtue
expulsyue, and causes desire of a siege, and this kind is ever, with
ponderositie or heuines of the place. Sometime the said passion is engendered
through cold of the fete, or by ye receyuyng of a medicine, made wtoute scamony
or elebore. It chau^ceth also so^time, through gross, choleryke, and burnt
blood, and causes great pain, and the patient vtreth more blood, then
fleume. And moreover, there happens in this case, vlceration in the end of
the muscule, which prycketh the virtue expulsive, and provoke to siege. The
cure of tenasmon, Cure.
shall be accomplyshed as it follows. First, a convenient purgation must be
used, that is to say, if the mattier be hot, that the body be purged with a
linityue lectuarye, or with cassia, and diacatholicon, with manna. If the
matter be cold, the patient shall be purged with cassia, and diafinicon, and
diacatholicon. Howebeit ye shall note this one thing, before the
administration of a medicine by mouth, ye shall use a clister linityue, to
mollifye the dregs of the guts. A linityue clister convenient for tenasmo^,
in a hot and dry cause, may be thus ordained. R. of the brothe of hens, or
of other flesh, A linitiue clister.
three pound. of Violettes, Malowes, camomyll, melilote. ana. m^. ss. of
lyneseed..i. let them seeeh all together alytle, and make a clyster, with oil
of violettes, oil of camomyll, and the yolks of eggs, and a little red sugar.
But if the foresaid passion, be caused of a cold mattier, the clystre following
is to be used, which mollifieth and purges, salt, and slymy matter, and
breaks wind.. of camomil, melilote, and dyll. ana. m^. i. of the leaves of
holyhocke. m^. ss. of bran. m^. ii. of the roots of tapsus barbatus. m^. i of
lyneseed.. ii. of sweet fenelle, of anise. ana..ss. of cumyne a little, of
licoryce..x. the heed of a wether, somewhat broken, sees them all to gither
with sufficient water, till half of it be consumed, than strain them, and
press them strongly, and take of the strayning. li.i. and. ss. of oil of
camomil, and dyll. an^..ii. of oil of rue..ss, of honey of Roses..iii. the
yolks of. ii. eggs, and so use the clystre.

Item it is good to bath the place, with the decoction of the said clyster,
and to receive the smoke thereof. Likewise it is a synguler remedy, to take the
same decoction, and oil of lyneseed in even quantitye, and a little red sugre,
and the yolke of an egg, and to clysteryze the sore place therewith. Item oil
of lyneseed, rubbed with the root of tapsus barbatus, and the leaves thereof,
and with a little mugwort, and camomyll, and than clystered warm, swageth pain
effecteouslye. Item we have found it good to use a suffumigation of
frankensence, terebentine, and a little myrre, it swageth pain. Likewise to sit
upon a warm table of a pynapple, makes to the same purpose. Item a
suffumigation and syttyng upon the said decoction, may conuenyentlye be used.
Colliries also put in to the fundamente, pass other remedies. Yea, and
linimentes brought into the form of lyquide oyntmes, are of great efficacitie
in this disease. And therefore the liniment of Alexander, noted in the former
chapter, is of a marvelous excelle^cye: for it swageth pain in prouokyng
sleep, which is a synguler remedy in this case. etc.

The.vi. Chapter. Of the relaxation or loosynge of the gutte called intestinu^
rectum.
IT chau^ceth often, that the arse gutte is molified, and softened, lowsyng of
ye greit gutte
through sondrye causes, so that it comes out of ye fou^dament of the length
of three fingers, and this passion, happens most in children, though it
chance also in other ages. And the cause thereof, is gross and slymy fleume,
cleuynge to the gutte, and molifienge the same, and pryckynge up the virtue
expulsyue. wherefore, there follows great ytchynge, and mollification of ye
fundamente, whereby the gutte issues out of his acustomed place, and this
passion comes often with tenasmon, and happens to children, by taking cold
in their feet.

The cure of this desease, The cure
shall be accomplished with administration of local medicines. First convenient
purgation and good diet presupposed, ye must foment the place, with rasyn of
pyne apple, terebentyne, frankynsens and mastik, and afterward sprincle upon
the gutte, some of this powder underwritten. R. of roses, of mirtiles, of the
flowers of pomegranades..ii. of bolearmenye, of terra sigillata, poude^
ana..ii. frankensence..i. myngle them together, and make a fine poudre of the^
all. Item the suffumigatio^, and bath vnderwrytten, is conuenye^t in this
case.. of roses myrrylles, of lingua passerina or knotgresse, of tapsus
barbatus, of camomyl. an^. m^. i. of wormwood. of mugwort. ana. m^. ss of
sticados, of squinantum, of the leaves of plantayne, and horsetayle, of every
one a little, of flowers of pomegranades, of the nuttes of cypres, of dyers
galls. ana. nombre. x. of roche alume..ss. of hipoquistudos, of acatia ana..i.
of licium..ii.ss. of frankensence, of myrre, of aloes. ana.. iii. let these
foresaid things be sodden with red wine, and water of plantayne, till the
third part be consumed, and make of this decoction a suffumigation, and
fomentation, and afterward use this poudre upon the gutte.. of myrobalans
cytrines, of the flowers of pomegranades, of galls. ana..ii, of franke^sence,
of myrre, of mastyke, bole armenie, of terra sigillata, of hipoquistidos.
ana..i.ss. mengle them together, and poudre them fynely.

After suffumigation of the bathe, ye shall convey the gutte into his place,
with your finger. Item oil of roses omphacyne, oil myrtyne, in equal
quantity, and sodden with the forsayde poudre, and a little iuce of plantayne,
and mugwort, till the iuce be consumed, is a soueraygne medycyne to annoint the
gutta or the fundament therewith. Furthermore, pylles of bdellium make to the
purpose. Diacatholicon also, with the decoction of myrobalanes, citrines, and
emblykes, may sometime be permytted. Item red wine moderatly delayed, and
ryce sodden in the brothe of hens, or mutten, ben convenient in this case.
And the patient must rather use roasted flesh, than sodden. Et sic deo dante.
etc.

The syxte treatise, of the ulcers of the pryuey members of women, and of the
parts thereof.
The first Chapter. Of the chappes of the said places, called ragadie or
fyssure.
THe remedies written in the chappes of the fundamente are conueniente in this
case, De ragadiis value.
nevertheless, we will descrybe some remedies, which we our selves have
proved. And first a lyniment of good operation.. of oil omphacyne,. ii. of
oil of lyneseede..i. of gootes tallowe, of calves tallow. an^..vi. of the
iuces of pla^tayne, of nyghtshade, and of lingua passerina, or knotgras.
an^..ss. Let them sees al together till the iuces be consumed, then strain
them, and put to the straynynge, as much white wax as shall suffyce, labor
them in a mortare of lead, the space of.ii. hours, and put thereunto of
lytarge of gold..x. of tutia..ii. of bre^t lead..i.ss. make a liniment
hereof. Before ye apply this linime^t, ye shall use suffumigation, and
fomentation, A good bathe.
of the matrice, with the decoction under written.. of roses, of myrtyls, of
the leaves of plantayne, of lingua passerina, or knotgrasse, of tapsus
barbatus, and of horsetayle. ana. m^. ii. of mallows, violettes, clear barley,
and lentyles. ana. m^. i. Let them sees all together with suffycyent quantity
of water, till the third part be consumed, and use them as is aforesaid.

Item the said decoction with syrup of roses, cast into the place with a
syrynge, is a great remedy for the chappes of the matryce. Oil also of the
yolks of eggs, with butter, and a little tutia, and a little brent lead,
labored in a mortare of lead, the space of.iii. hours, heals the said
chappes. Moreover, a collirye made with water of Roses, and water of plantayne,
with a white syef without opium, may conuenyentlye be mynystred. etc.

The.ii. Chapter. Of the ulcers of the matrice, and the secret parts of women.
THe ulcers of these places are commonly virule^t and ill complexioned, and are
caused of hot, corrosyue, rotten, or ca^creous matter. wherefore the remedies
noted in the chappes of the ulcers of the yard, are conuenyent in this case,
and they dyffer not greatly from the common cure of other ulcers. wherefore, if
they be corrosiue, ye shall resort to the propre chapter thereof, and likewise in
other cases. But ye shall note, that the remedies of these ulcers must be more
desiccatiue, than of other fleshy ulcers, by reason of the moystnesse of the
place. And therefore Galene says, that the ulcers of the secret parts, need
not moist ne mollificatiue medicines, but rather things desiccatyue, and
citatrisatiue.

Here follows a remedy convenient, in ulcers of this place, evil
complexioned, and caused of hot matter. of the water of plantayne, of the
water of roses. an^. li.ss. of white sief without opiu^. Collyrie for hot
matter
.iii. of myrobalane cytrine.. i. ss. of camphore, graynes. ii. mengle them
together, and make a collirie. A liniment for the same purpose.. of oil of
roses omphacyne, of vnguen. rosa. or in the stead thereof, of vnguen.
Galeni..ii. of calves tallowe melted..i.ss. of the iuce of plantayne, and
nyghtshade, of the iuce of lingua passerina, or knotgrasse. an^.. vi. sees
them all together till the iuces be consumed, then strain them, and make a
soft ointment, with white wax, according to art, adding in ye end, of litarge
of gold and silver, of ceruse. an^..i. of tutia.. ii.ss. of antimoniu^..ss. of
bre^t led..i. of ca^phorbrayed accoordyng to art..i. me^gle them, and labor
them in a mortare of lead, the space of an hour, and so use the lyniment.

An other liniment.. of oil of roses complete, of oil omphacine, of vnguen.
Galeni..ii. of the iuce of pla^tayne..x. of litarge of gold and silver.
ana..vi. of ceruse..ss. of tutia..ii ss. of camphore, graynes.iii. mengle them
together, and make a lyniment in a mortare of lead. If the ulcers been
malign, and virulent, and corrosiue there is no better remedy, then to apply
our poudre of mercury. Likewise vnguen. egiptiacu^ mengled with asmoche vnguetu^
apploru^, is conuenyently admynystred in the same ulcers, water of plantayne
also, with a little alume, and liciu^, is of ye same efficacitie.

Note here, that when the malignitie and corrosyon is removed, ye oyntmentes
aforesaid, may be conveniently used. If the said ulcers ben ca^creous, ye
shall scarifye the place that they be in, and apply bloodsuckers, and
afterward wash the place with the lie of the decoction of lupynes. Also in
this case, to use vnguentum egiptiacum, is an excellent remedy, for it byteth
away evil flesh, and co^serueth the good. If a stronger medicine be required,
ye shall admynistre an hot iron. Finally, if the matryce or the neck thereof,
grow to a cancreous vlceration, which thing is known by the pryckynge and
infla^mation of the same, and by the stynkynge odor of the matter, and of the
sundry color thereof, and when the woman has had apostemation in her breast,
before the said ulcers, and had no list to eat nor to drink, tha^ must ye
proceed with cure palliatyue.

Hugo senensis says, there was a woman in venyce, which lived.xx. year, by
cure palliatiue, having the matrice vlcered with a cancreous ulcer. For this
cure palliatiue, my custom was, often to wash the place with this decoction.. of
clean barlye, of lentyles, of roses, of nyghtshade, of gallitricu^,
pollitricu^, of the leaves of pla^tayne. ana. m^. i. of water of pla^tayne, of
water wherein iron has been quenched. ana. li. iii. of water of roses. li. ss.
of lingua passerina, or knotgrasse, of wild tasyll. ana. m^. i. stamp them
all grossly together, and let them seth till the third part be consumed, tha^
strain them, and add to the straynynge of syrup of Roses.. iiii. of a white
sief without opium, or with opiu^ (if the pain be great).v. make a collirie,
whereof ye shall convey often, into the place with a siringe. Sometime also, cowes
milk in the stead of this collirie, with a little white sugre, is conuenyently
admynystred.

After that ye have used this collirie, A pessarie.
ye shall apply this liniment, with a pessarye, upon the vlcered place.. of
stamped dragagantum, lythed in rose water, of water of plantayne, and
nyghtshade..vi. Let them all so remain the space of half a day, than labor
them in a mortare of lead. iii hours, with oil of roses omphacyne, and
equal portion of the foresaid things, adding of litarge of gold and
silver, of ceruse. ana..vi. of tutia, of brent lead. ana.. ss. of camphore..
i. of white syef with opium well brayed.. ss. of the juice of plantayne..ii. of
nyghtshade.. iii. of the iuce of henbane.. iii.ss. of saffran..ss. labored in
a mortare of lead, use this remedy with a pessarie, for it is an excellent
thing.

The.iii. Chapter. Of the itchyng of the matrice, and of the secret parts of
women.
GReat ytchyng chances often in the neck of the matrice, Of Itchyng of the
matryce.
which proceeds of burned coler, and salt fleame. To ye cure whereof,
purgation of humors, and conuenyent diet presupposed, shall be accomplyshed, by
the application of vnguentum albu^ camphoratum, with the juice of purslane, and
plantayne, and lytarge of gold and silver, or make a lyniment in this manner..
of oil of roses omphacine, of vnguentum rosarum, vnguentum populeon. ana..ii.
of the iuce of plantayne, ana..vi. of vynegre of roses, of wine of
pomegranades. ana..ii. of litarge of gold and silver. ana..i. of ceruse.ss. of
tutia..iii. mengle them together, and make a lininiment, for it eases the
ytche of the said places.

Item, to the same intention the collirye following is conuenyente, which must
be applied with a pessarye.. of water of plantayne, water of roses. ana. li.ss.
of the wine of pomegranades, of the iuce of limons. ana..ss. of the iuce of
houseleeke..x. of white sief without opium..v. mengle them together, and make a
collirie. etc.

The.vii. treatise, of the ulcers of the ha^ches, hyppes, legs, and the
parts thereof.
The first Chapter. Of the ulcers of the hanches. etc.
The ulcers of the hanches.
THe cure of the ulcers of these places, differ not from the co^mone cure of
other vlceres particular. And they ought to be cured, after the curatio^ of the
ulcers of the arms, and of the boones called adiutories. Howbeit, the curation
of the ulcers of the legs, differ somewhat from the cure of other me^bres,
namely in byndyng and quiet rest of the said places.

The cure
To come to the cure, first ye must purge the body, according to the evil
humors, by losyng of the belly, or by cuttynge of a vein, and afterward ye
must use local medicines. And if the ulcers ben corrosiue, they must be cured,
as it is written in the chapter of corrosiue ulcers, and so-forth in other
kinds. Nevertheless ye shall note.ii. things in this Chapter: the first is,
that in hollow ulcers of the hyppes, liquide medycynes, and lotions conveyed
in with a syryng, are profitable, by reason of the thycknesse of the muscles.
The mouth also must be enlarged and bowed downewarde, that the mattier may
easily be purged: and if there be corruption in the bones, though it be little,
it is hard to be cured, because of the gross muscules. And if the corruption
perce to the marye of the bones, it is impossyble to be healed, without remotion
of the boon, and of the mary, because of the great muscules, synnowes, and
veins. Auicen says that when there is corruption in the bone of the hanche,
or in the spondils of the back, we must forsake ye cure thereof. And Galene
says to ye same purpose, receive not the cure of evil diseases, lest ye
obtain the name of an uyll chirurgyen. But the corruption of bones in the
said places, by reaon of the aliaunce of many muscul^s, and synnowes coming
from the bac^e bone, may be reckened among evil diseases. wherefore those that
will dye, leave them to priests. How be i^, I will declare some particular
remedies, for the curation of ulcers of the hippes and legs, and the parts
hereof. And first, as we said before in the cure of these ulcers, byndyng of the
legs, must begin from the hele to the knee, drawing it by little and little,
till ye come to the forsayde place. Likewise, in the ulcers of the hyppes, the
byndynge must begin from the knee to the flank, yt matter be not sent from
the upper me^bres to the nether part. If the foresaid ulcers be in the
hyppes, with corruption of the bone, then ye must cure them as is written in
the chapter of curation of the rotten boon: that is to say, ye must remove ye
flesh from the bone, by incision, or some familier caustike, or by the
application of a sponge, then ye shall proceed with scrapyng, till ye come to ye
hole part of the bone, then cauteryse the same, with an hot iron. After
cauterisatio^ ye shall apply thereupon honye of roses, and an oyntme^t of
smalage, touching the bone, twyse a weke with oil of vitriole. To remove the
rotten bone, after that ye have cleansed ye bone, ye shall apply upon it the
collirye following, which I have often proved.. the iuce of paucedinis..ss. of
the iuce of flowers de lice..ii. of honey of roses..x. of aqua vite..ii. Let
them sees all together with a soft fire, until the third part be consumed,
then put thereunto of myrhe..iii of frankensence..ss. of aloes epatyke..ii.
mengle them together, strain them, and use them, this collirie must be applied
with a syrynge, these, or four times a day, it incarnthe marueylouslye, and
covers the bare bone. Item ye shall apply upon the vlcered place, this
ointment following, for it mundifyeth, incarneth, and draws evil matter out
of hollow ulcers.. of common oye. li. i of cowes tallow. Ointment.
l.ss. of greek ptch, of ship pytche, of rasyn of the pyneapple tree. ana..
i. of masticke.ss. of swynes grese melted..iiii. of lytirge of gold and
silver. ana..ii. ss. of minium..i. ss. of the iuce of smalag^, veruen, and
woodbynde. ana.. i. of odoriferous wine..iii. Let the oy^es and fat sees
with the iuces and wine, till the iuce be consumed, tha^ strain them, and set
them on the fire again with the other things, yt is to say, the litarge, and
the minium poudred until they receive a black color, and put thereunto in the
end, of terebentine..v.ss. of white diaquilon gummed..iiii.ss. and let them
sees a little, and make a cerote with a little white wax. Item vnguen. aploru^
of our description laid upon the ulcers, with a tent, is of great efficacitie.
And if ye put thereunto a little of vnguen. egip. it shall be of greter
mu^dification, for vnguentu^ egiptiacu^ after our, or Auicennes descryption,
does effecteously mundify hollow ulcers, which thing our trosiske of miniu^
does also.

If the said ulcers be in delycate bodies, as of children, and of women, it is
better to aply our poudre of mercurye, laid upon a tente, with fasting spyttle,
or conveyed in by a syryng in the form of a collirie, or with wine, for it is
an heavenly medicine. Also vnguentu^ Egiptiacu^ dissolved with lie, mundifyeth
hollow ulcers conveyed in by a syrynge.

After the said mundification, ye shall yet proceed the space of a weke, with
a mundificatiue of smallage, or of honye of roses, and afterward, ye shall
incarne the ulcers, adding to the forsayde mu^dificatiue, of myr,.ii. of
Frankensence, of aloes, of sarcocolle. ana..i.ss.

Item the collirie aforewrytten in this present Chapter, is a synguler
remedy, to incarne and to dry up. After incarnation, and sigillation, for
cicatrisation, it is good to apply upon lynte, the grene ointment of alleluia
after our description. Also water of alume may well be used in this
intention. etc.

The.ii. Chapter. Of chafynges and gallynges, or itchynge, chauncyng between
the thyghes, through iourneying.
THe chafynge of the thyghes shall be heled by washing of the galled place, Of
chafynge between the thyghes.
with the decoction of roses, pla^tayne, myrtilles, and with the leaves of malowes.
Oyntme^t for chafynges.
After this washing ye shall annoint the place with this ointment.. of vnguen.
rosarum, of oil of roses omphacine, of oil mirtine. ana..ii. of vnguen.
populeon.. x. of litarge of gold and silver. an^..i of ceruse..vi. of the iuce
of pla^tayne, and of hoseleeke. ana..i. of the iuce of lymous..ii. of vynegre
of roses..i.ss. me^gle the^ together, and make a linyment in a mortare of lead.

It is good also to wash the place, with water of roses, and of pla^tayn,
sodden with a little alume, and vinegre, for it dries, and takes away ye itch,
and heals the galling. And afterward ye shall apply ye foresaid linniment. etc.

The third chapter, of the excoriation of the heel and of the feet, caused
of cold, which the genuayes call malum mule.
EXcoriations are wo^t to cause great pain to the patient, for the remotion
where of ye shall use the plaster following. Of malum mule.
. of the meat of roosted apples, or rapes, an..i. ss. of fresh butter,
labored in a mortar of lead, the space of two hours.. ii. of oil of rooses
omphacyne..i.ss. let these forsayde things be sodden together a little, and
when ye take them from the fire, put thereunto the yolks of two eggs, and
use these medycines, in form of a plaster, for it easethe all excoriacions,
and vlcerations, caused of cold, as well in the hands, as in the feet. Ye
may make it also, after this sort.. of fresh butter, of odoryferous oil of
rooses, of hens grese, ana..i. put the oil, the grese, and the butter, into
a hoole of a great rape, and seethe them parfytelye in an oven, and stamp
them to gether, and labor them in a mortar of lead the space of an hour.
Item a decoction made with capes, camomylle, and with the seed of a cytron
brayed, and with apples, and a few seeds of quynces swageth the pain of
these vlceres. Plaster for kybe
Likewise, this lynemente following is a synguler remedy, for the kybes of
heales.. of butter, of oil of rooses omphacyne, of swynes grese, of oil of
lynseed, of calves talowe melted, ana..ii. of whit wax..i.ss. of
frankynsens..iii. of lytarge of gold and silver, ana..i. ss. of tucya..i
myngle them together, and labor them in a mortar of lead the space of an
hour. Item vnguentum de minio, and vnguentum basilicon, of our descripton,
are of great effycasitie in this desease. etc

The fourth chapter, of ytchyng, and paynefull burning, caused of cold, in
the hands and feet
THese passions, Of tynglyng hands
chance to young men and children in the winter, for the cure thereof, ye
shall make a decoction of rapes, of apples, of pomegranates bruised, with
malowes, vyolettes and a little vynegre, wherwyth ye shall wash the feet, and
the hands, and afterward, ye shall anoynte the place, with the lynement
written in the former chapter. and.c.

The fyfte chapter of the vlceres of the thyghes, and legs, being vyrulent
malygne, corrosyue. etc
THe cure of these vlceres, Of vyrulente vlceres of the thyghes and legs.
is accomplyshed by the administration of local medicynes, First, (a
conuenyent purgation, and good diet, presuposed) ye shall mundyfy the place,
with our powder of mercury, and when the ulcers been mundified, which is
known by the growing of good flesh, and good quitture.

Let the place be puryfyed, with a mundyfycatyue of syrup of Rooses, written
in our antidotatie. If the borders of the vlceres beneskalye, and roughe, and
can not be removed, with the foresaid powder, ye shall mortify the same with a
causticke of capitelle, leying in the wound all about some refrigeratiue
onyntement.

The rest of the cure is parfytelye accomplished, with binding, and with an
oyntemente of minium and linte, laid upon the vlcere, and with washing with
alume water, and with thynne pecis of lead, rubbed with quick silver and so
forth.

The.vi. chapter, of the swellynge veins called varices
VArices are great veins in ye thyghes, which are full of knobbes, and they
are seen often in them which bear great burdens, and which iourneye much
chyefelye in melanckolyke men.

And these swollen veins, may be nombred among apostemes, as hernia, for as
hernia is a disese in the receptacle, or the purse of the stones so there may
be an apostemous disease in the swollen veins, namelye in the receptacle of
the same.

And as Auicenne says, these veins proceed sometime of sharp agues, by the
way of crysis, and sometime they appear in women, after their delyueraunce of
children.

The signs are manifest, in sight and in touching, for some time they are
hard and stretched out, chefelye, when they be full of blood, and the
color of them is blackyshe, and sometime they come to vlceracyon, and cause
great pain, and are hard to be cured, and there ensues often a flux of
blood, which is also of hard curacyon, and though it be cured it comes
again with more malignitie, so that when we would cure the said vlceration,
we have been constrained, to purge the matter by the places that lie about
namelye by an issue. Likewise, beside the said vlceration, the veins so swel,
and are filled suddenly with gross melancholicke and burned blood, that the
said blood congeleth together, and comes by little and little, to
putrefaction, and so there ascend up evil vapoures and fumes to the brain,
and cause evil accydentes in the brain, and in the heart, whereby the pacyent
often times dies.

Wherefore, the cure of these veins with vlceration or without vlceration
(chefely if they be confermed) cannot be accomplysshed, without euydent
danger of the paciente I speak of vlcered veins, because the matter which
was wounte to dyscende to vile places, and there to be purged, through the
curation of the varyces is retained, and conveyed to the nobler members, as the
heart, the stomach, and the brain, and so the dysposition thereof, should be
the worse, wherefore Hipocrates says, yt if ye heal emoroides, leuynge notone
open, danger of ye dropsye, tysyke, and frenesy, shall ensue. Wherefore, in
such dyspositions, that is to say: in emoroydes, and swollen veins, it is
better to leave them open, then to cure them. For they that be cured, dye
quyckelye, but they that be not cured, but palliated, live a long season.

For Arnoldus de villa noua says when there is an unnatural issue in a ma^s
body, by the which some matter is wont to be purged, it cannot be stopped,
without greater incommodyties, except the matter be purged by a place nigh to
the said issue.

And therefore, wise chirurgiens in this case make an issue, with an actual
cauterye, or potencyall, four fyngers under the knee, that the matter be purged
by the same, by which mean we have healed many.

The cure of swollen veins not vlcered, by insicion, is very dangerous for
great flux of blood follows the said incision, which is hard to be
retained, and sometime when nature cannot deryue the blood and matter to the
wounded place, the same blood being kept in, growethe to cankerdnes.

Wherefore I was wont, in the cure of swollen veins filled with melancholyke
blood (a conuenyente purgacion of the body, with the applyinge of leches,
upon the emoroydall veins, presupposed) to euapoure out the blood with this
decoction following.. of the roots of holyehocke. lj. ss. of hoorehounde, of
cammomylle, of mellylote, of dylle, ana. m^. j. of branne, of clean berlye,
ana. m^. ii. of honye. lj. i. ss. seethe al these things at the fire, and make
a bathe thereof, where with ye shall wash the whole leg, and make
euaporation with sponges dypped therein.

Also we were wont, to make a cerote of the decoction of holyhocke, and with
the things vnderwrytten, and with these two things for the most part, we
euapoured out the blood, and resolved it perfytly.. of holihok soden, cut,
and stamped. lj. ss. of oil of comomylle, and dylle, ana..ij. of fresh
butter, and hens grese, ana.. i. ss. of gose grese, and duckes grese,
ana..i.ss. of calves talowe..iii. of the marye of of the legs of a calfe, and
of a cow, ana..vi. make a soft cerote of al, with the foresaye straynynge, and
with suffyciente white wax, adding of saffron..i.

Furthermore, to open a vein about the knee, the member being first bound,
and strayned, that the congeled and corrupt blood may only issue out,
perchance it shall not be unprofitable, for by the euacuacyon of blood,
sometime the foresaid accidents are removed

Afterward, upon the cut place, ye shall leye things that staunche blood,
as the white of an egg, beaten with powder restryctiue.

The curation of the vlceres of swolle^ veins, dyffer not from the curation
of vlceres of the legs, and of ye thyghes declared in the former chapyter.

But for as much, as such vlceres are joined with vehemente pain, and
malygnitie, therefore, for the remouyng of the same, we will descrybe certain
peculyer remedies, and first a fomentation to swage the pain. A synguler
fomentation.
of the leaves of malowes, and violettes of the leaves of plantain, ana. m^. i.
of clean barley. m^. ii. of the seed of quinces somewhat brayed,. ss. of
scabyouse. m^ i.ss. of butter. lj.ss. let them be sodden altogether with
suffycyente water, till the third part be consumed and use this remedy,
after the manner of a fomentacyon.

After ye have washed the place with a sponge, ye shall take the yolcke of a
new laid egg, and of butter..i ss. which ye shall labor in a mortar of
lead, and apply them with cloutes And if ye put to this medecyne, an.. of
vnguentum populeon, yt shall be very good, we have some time removed the pain,
and malignitie, of the said vlceres, by apliynge our powder of mercurye, ones
or twyse, and afterward, leying upon the same, this sparadrappe following, and
thyn plates of lead, using a conuenyente manner of byndynge, from the insteppe
to the knee, and when the place was paynefull, we washed it with the water of
plantayne, and water of alume. Likewise, we found that the iuce of plantayne,
and of houndestonge, boiled with a little sugar till half be consumed, and
applied upon the vlcered place, is of good operacyon.

The leaves also of the said herbs, and the leaves of woodbynd, laid upon the
vlceres, in stead of an oyntemente or sparadrappe, brings great ease to the
pacyente.

The myxture of the said sparadrap is.. of the iuce of plantayne, and night
shade, ana..ii. of the iuce of knotgrasse houndestonge, and wodbynde, ana..i of
oil of rooses omphacyne, of oil of rooses complete, of oil myrtyne, ana..ii.
of calves talow..iiij. of swines grese, of gootes talowe. ana..ii. ss. of cowes
talowe..iii. of vnguentum populeon..i.ss. of lytarge of gold and silver,
ana..i.ss. of minium..x. of bole armenye fynelye poudred, of terra sigillata,
ana..ss. let the fattes, the oils, and the iuces, sees together till the
iuces be consumed, then strain them, and add the rest to the straynynge and
let them seethe at the fire and stir them about, till they be black in
color, than make a sparadrap, or a soft cerote with suffycyente white wax,
adding in the end of the decoction, of camphore brayed according to
art..ii. of tucia..x. use this medecyne in all ulcers, for it is of excellent
operation.

Item vnguentum camphoratum, some time may be well used in these vlceres.

The lynemente also underwritten is conuenyente in this case, wherewyth ye
shall anoynte all the leg, of the iuce of plantayne, of night shade, or the
sede thereof, housekele, ana..vi. of oil of rooses odoriferous, of vnguentum
populeon, ana.. iii. of lytarge of gold and silver, ana..ii. of vyneger of
rooses..ii. of camphore.ss. make a lynemente of all these in a mortar of lead,
for this lynemente dilateth sharpness of humors, and suffers not the
matter antetedente, to pass to the matter conioynte.

Abande also wette in vinegar, and water of rooses, and strayned, is necessary
to defend the matter antecedente, and cole the place. etc.

The.vii. chapter, of a member corrupt, and rotten through incision
AS we have said in the chapter of cancrena, Of a putryfyed member
a member putryfyeth.iii manner of ways. First, by a thing that corrupts ye
natural complexion of the member. as by venyme hot or cold.

Secondelye, a member is corrupted, through the prohibicion of vytal spirits,
which were wont to come to the member.

Thyrdelye, by a thing that causes the two foresaid impedimentes, as by a
venemose pustule, and by a medycyne putrefactiue, vndiscretelye administered, as
arsenyke, and realgar. As we have seen, The cardinals must be gloryously
tytled
in the most reuerente Lord, my Lord, the Lord Facio, of the title of
Saint Sabyne Cardinal, which had the apostemes called herpes, and
Estiomenus, in his right foot, through the defaute of natural heat, and
wekenesse of the member, and also through his long ague, and by reason of the
vehemente winter, that was that year.

Wherefore, we began first, to cure the corrupt member with the cure of
cancrena and askachillos, and that with sondrye scarifycations, and likewise we
washed the place with salt water, and with the decoction of lupynes, soden in
lie, and some time with myxte vinegar and salt. And after the lotion, we
administered upon the rotten boon, twyse a day, vnguentum egyptiatum, after
the descrption of Auycenne, that the parts adioynynge might be kept from
putrefaction.

And because as Celsus says, the remedies profytelytle in this most cruel
disease, and the canker seaseth not to crepe, yet one remedy there is, to
cut the corrupt member away, that the hole part of the body be not
enfected. Wherefore, I, seeing that the forsayde remedies ware not conuenyent
and that they could not defend the putrefactio^, but that it crept over the
knee, daily more and more. I councelled to cut the leg of, above the ancle,
between the hole and the corupte part, and than to cauteryse the same howbeit,
certain great Phisicians of the Romayne court, resisted mine opinion,
without reason and authority, though I had astablished it with other of the
said auctorytyes, and also with the authority of master John Marcerathensis.

So they would not suffer that the member should be cut of, ye, one of them
promised, that he would kylle the disease, with the only applycation of
arsenycke, but the said arsenycke, through the wekenesse of the member and
natural heat, could notte work according to the mind of the Physician,
but rather gnawed and rotted, the membre.

And albeit, that the said physician (that worse is) affyrmed, that he would
maintain the corrupt me^, ber with the hole, the space of ten years, yet
the said cardynall was constreyned to dye, through that enterprise. And
because this chance is rare, I have declared the process thereof, that the
physicians may not in such be deceived. In the year of our lord. M.D.
and.ix. at six a clock of the night the first day of Februarye, there
chanced a vehemente pain, with inward pryckynges, in the lift foot of the
said cardynall, insomoche that he cried, that his foot was burned. And yet in
touching, the membre was as cold as yse, unto the knee, and yet it felt not
naturally nor perfectlye, but after the manner of a false felyng. Moreover,
there apered no chaungyng of the membre in color, no rednes, nor swellynge,
until the.vii. day. In the night time, he was vexed a certain space, with
the foresaid pain, and it swaged some what in the day time. And when he arose
from his bed, he seemed to carye a great weight of lead in his foot, which
pain continued, until the seventh day every night, as we have said. In the
seventh day, the membre was mortified, welnygh from the ancle dounwarde. Of
which mortification, we douted first, and afterward, we ware certified in the
seventh day, that ye membre was plainly mortified. Foundyng our pronostication,
upon Willelmus Placentinus, a man of great auctority in chirurgerye, whose
words be these. The signs (sayethe he) of peynes, which proocede of a cold
cause in the extremyties of members, are these. Loss of heat, and readnes,
benommynge, styfenesse, and heaviness and pryckyng of the place which things
signify, that the palsy shall ensue, or that the member is mortified. In the
same day, the foresaid cardinal was vexed with a vehemente fever, and sounded
often and was utterly out of quiet in all his body, so that all the phisicians
thought, that he would dye the same day, by the reasone of the cruelty of the
accidents

wherefore, there assembled the hole college of phisicions, in the morning to
dispute of the quality of the desese and of the cure thereof, and there was
great discord among them, concerning the same, for some of the^ said it
was the french pockes, some said the gout, some that the membre was benommed,
and some that it was mortified and cankerd.

I and master John Macerathensis, allowed the last opinion, and I declared to
the foresaid Phisycyons, the effect of the matter, by experyence and most
weyghtye arguments.

For though the membre seemed not corrupted, another in swellinge, nor in
color, (saving that it was somewhat blewyshe) yet in the presence of them
all, I scarified upon the place, unto the bone, and caused no pain to the
cardinal, and the blood that issued out, was gross, and thick, and as it
ware congeled, and of a very black color, like ynke, which thing done the
phisicio^s changed their minds and consentyd to our opinion, though they
resisted us concerning the cure of the desease. Hitherto we have declared the
story, now we will return to our purpose

First, (purgacion of the body by a lenitiue clister, or some other lenitiue
medecyne, presupposed) there is no better remedy, than to cut the corrupted
member nygh the hole part, so that some of the corrupted membre remain, and
that for three causes. First, that insicion may be without pain. Secondlye,
that flux of blood may be aduoyded. Thyrdelye, that a cauterisation may be
used without pain.

The manner to cut the corrupt member, is this. First, ye must prove with a
prouet, how the mortificacyon of the membre gooethe, and afterward, ye must
cut the membre syrcle wise, in the fleshye and musculose part, and ye must
dyseuer somwhate the flesh, from the bone, in the over part of the member.
And afterward cut the rotten flesh from the boon by piece mele, and cover
the bourders with warm cloutes, that they be not hurt by the air.

Than ye must compass about the over part with your hands, and reduce the
flesh cyrclewyse, and saw ye bone as hye as ye can, with a saw of sharp
teethe. Which done, ye must cauteryse the cut place, unto the hole part,
and afterward, ye must cauteryse the boon, and than cure the wound as other
burned wounds been cured.

And because, that some command to astoyne the member before incisyon, by
applycation of a medicine wherein opium enters, or by the smelling of a sponge
wherein opium is, that the hole body may be brought a sleep. Ye shall
understand (the reverence saved,) they enterprise a daungerouse busynes, for
this disease somtymes chaunseth of a medycine made with opium, as wrytters
affirm.

Nevertheless, the member may be bound before incision, in ye upper part
because of the course of the blood Furthermore they that praise the
applycacion of a certain sparadrap for ye conservation of the corrupt member
with the hole, are not to be herd, for the application of them, does bring
shame to the chirurgien, and hyndrau^ce to the patient. Finally, when ye escare
is removed, ye shall proceed as is declared in ye chap. of ulcers in general,
thus ends the treatise of vlceres.

The.v. book of master Ihon Vigo of Genuay, of the french Pockes, of the dead
evil, and scabbe, and of the pains of the joints, and of the tethe.
The first chapter, of the cure of the french Pockes, not confyrmed.
IN the year of our Lord. Of the french pockes not confermed.
1494. in ye monethe of December, when Charles ye French king took his journey
into the parts of ytaly, to recover the kingdom of Naples, there appeared a
certain disease through out al ytaly of an unknown nature, which sondrye
nations has called by sundry names. The French men call it the disease of
Naples, because the souldyours brought it from thence, into France. The
Neapolitanes, call it ye French disease, for it appeared first when they came
to Naples, and so other languages call it by other names, whereupon we need not
greatly to pass, but rather what the nature and cure thereof is. This disease
is contagious, chiefly if it chance through copulation of a man with an
unclean woman, for the beginning thereof was in the secret members of men and
women, with little pushes of blewe color, otherwhyles of black, sometime of
whytyshe, with a certain hardness about the same, which pustules could not be
healed by medicine applied with in or without, but that they would enbrace the
hole body, with vlceration of the genitall parts, ever returnyng again after
they were healed, chiefly in the joints, in the arms, under the knees, and in
the foreheade, and welnye spredde through all the body, and yet at this time
they begin eue^ so, but it is not so contagious as it was at the beginning.
Furthermore a month after the said pustules, the patient was vexed with great
pain in the head, the shulders, the arms, the legs, after which pain,
that is to say after a year and more, certain hard things like bones were
engendered in the patient, with exceeding pain in ye night time, which seized in
the day time. For the swagynge whereof, the chirurgiens administered anodyne
medicines that apease grief, and prevailed nothing, but the end of the pain
was ever corruption of the bone, as it chau^ceth in the windines of ye
backbone, and for ye most part the me^bres remained crooked, and drawn
together, through the said pains.

After a year and a half, there appeared in this shameful and abominable
disease, certain knobbes of gross and flegmatyke matter, rooted after ye manner
of a whyt chessenut, like a chorde or a synowe half rotten, which were ryped
of nature without help of medicine. Wherefore after their brekyng or openyng of
them, all kinds of ulcers were seen in the^, according to ye diuersytie of
bodies, for in one body it is not credible. For in sundry bodies, sundry
accidents, are wont to be engendered with this disease. And I dare say, yt all the
dyseases yt come of a cause antecedent whereof the chirurgiens have made
mention, may be nombred in this shameful disease, according to the dyuersitie
of bodies. And first to speak of apostemes, we have seen in this detestable
sycknes, all kind of hoote, cholerike, and sanguine apostemes. And also we
have seen great quantity of cold flegmatike and mela^cholyke apostemes, and
in matters co^pou^de if the blood be joined with fleume, and the blood
having dominion, ye aposteme is called flegmon vndemiades, and so of the
conjunction of other, as we have declared in the book of apostemes in general.

Furthermore, we have seen in the said disease, al kinds of quyttures,
according to ye dyuersities of the.iiij. The packes have part of al dyseases
evil humors. We have seen dead flesh growyng in great aboundau^ce, and
also great multitude of glandules, scrophules, apostemes called talpe,
ectopinarie, with corruption of ye bone in the head. And moreover we have seen
al sorts of ye apostemes called formice, and carbuncles, and cancrenes, to
have been joined with the said disease, and al sorts of vlceres, written by all
the doctors, have been seen in this disease. And if ye ulcers of the said
disease be diligently consydred, they have participation with corrosiue, and
putrefactiue ulcers, with creping ulcers, cancreouse, and cancrenouse,
virulent, malign, paynfull, apostemed, holowe, and fystulous ulcers, with
corruption of ye bone, and shelly, with hard lyppes, briefly, the said ulcers
have an euel propriety unknown to us, thorough the malignitie whereof they are
hard to be healed, and return shortly again. Likewise, in this disease all
kinds of pains may be no^bred, as the gout in the hands and fete, and of
the knees, and sciatica. Item al sorts of evil scabbes, are found in this
disease, that is the dead euel, assaphat, and as it were a leprye, salt
fle^gme, in the hands and in the fete, skalles, ryngwormes, tetters. etc. Ite^
we have healed sondrye dyseases of ye eyes, coming of the pockes, chyeflye
the disease called ophthalmia, but it should be to long a thing, to reken up
all the accidents, that come of this disease. Howebeit, we will add this one
thing that they that are touched therwyth, are subject to a slow fever, and
a consumynge, which has brought the patie^t sometime to death. The cause of
this disease, is always primitive, as by having knowledge of fylthy, unclean,
and pocky women for this disease through his venymnes, and the venymnes of ye
pustules, which chance in the privy parts, is spredde about the hole body
from ye head to the fete, and corrupts ye blod of all tht body, and
produces pustules, scabbes, and croustye skalles.

And ye shall understand, that resolutiue medicines, and that swage pain
profit little or nothing in this disease, yea, the pains are rather increased
more and more. Wherefore there was never no such disease known. How be it,
Cornelius Celsus speaks of a like disease, of the cure of a leprye called
Elephancia, and also Hugo de Senis, in the.lv. counsel, seems to speak of a
like disease, and Suetonius, in the book of the lives of Emperors, says that
Augustus had a like disease, for he says, that the said Augustus had
grievous, sondrye, and peryllous, dyseases all his life time. And he says more
over that he had spots, dyspersed upon the breast, and bellye, in manner,
order, and number, of the sterres of the sign called Vrsa mayor. Wherefore it
was needful for the curation of this disease, to search out new remedies. And
so to say the truth, the medicines lately invented, are better in this disease
then the medicines of old writers, as for an example, of pain. Anodyne
remedies, which do swage pain, and resolve, profit nothing in this disease,
and I affirm the same of anodyne oyntmentes, oils, bathes, fumigations,
cerotes, and plasters. Howbeit, it has chanced sometime, that I have healed
pains, pustules, vlcerations, and scabbes, within a weak, anoyntynge the
arms from the elbowe, and the legs from the knee, with a simple unction
fortifyed with a little quycksyluer.

To come to our pryncipal purpose I say that this disease has two curations,
according to the time, and according to the matter. The first year, we used
one manner of curation, the second year, another. In the first curation. iij.
ententions are required. The first, is ordinance of dyete, that good humors
may be engendered, and evil destroyed. The second, is to digeste the matter
antecede^t, and to purge the same being digested, the third, is to remove the
matter co^ioynct. As touching the first ente^tion, we say, yt the patient may
eat veale, kyddes flesh, chyckes^ hens, pertriches, and like, as well
roasted as sodden. Birds also, ye live in woods, and hills, may be permytted.
Co^trarywyse, porke, hearts flesh, hares flesh, and birds of the river must
be forborne, for they engendre gross and troublous blood. Moreover all kinds
of pulse, and of colewortes, and all roots, are forbidden. It shall therefore
suffyce, that the patient use to eat borage, lettuse, white beetes, spynache,
with a little perslye and myntes, sodden in the brothe of the forsaid meats.
Also a potage made with grated bread, and with the forsayde brothe, is
convenient. Eggs also, with a little veriuyce, may well be permyttted. And
sometime rise, sodden in some brothe.

Fyshe of all kinds, except little ones of read color and in little quantity
broyled upon a gryderne, are to be refused, and also lekes, onyons, garlyke,
all hot, salt, and peperye, things for they burn the blood.

All fruits also, because they be soon corrupted in the stomach, except ripe
plommes, and peaches must be refused. Sometimes also, melons, and sower
cheries, moderatly taken may be suffered. All whytmeate is hurtful. But
pomegranades, and the wine thereof, and resyns, are conuenientlye permytted.

The second entention, which is to digeste the matter antecedent, and to
remove the same, shall be thus acco^plyshed. First the strength and ye age of the
patient considered, if he be sanguyne, it is very good to draw blood out of
the common vein, or out of the vein called Basilica, in the right arm, (a
clyster presupposed) the^ let ye matter be digested the space of a weke by this
syrup.. of syrup of fumiterrie the less.. i. of the juice of endive.. vi. of
water of maydenheere of fumiterrie, of every one.. i. then let the paciynt be
purged with this purgation.. of diacatholicon, of a linitiue electuary, of
every one.. vi. of reubarbe steped in water of endive according to art.. i.
myngle them together, and make a small potio^, with the decoction of cordial
flowers and fruits, adding of syrup of violettes.. i. ss.

Howebeit in this evil dyspositio^, I was wont in the first days to digeste
the matter, with a syrup magistrale vnderwrytten.. of fumiterrie, maydenheere,
buglosse, endive, of every one. m^. i. ss. of gallitricu^, and politricu^, ana
of every one. m^. ss. of reysons, of sebesten, of every one.. i. of damask
prunes, nombre.xxv. of sour apples somewhat broken, nombre six, of ye wine of
pomegranades.li. ss. of the water of endive, fumiterrie, buglosse, of every
one.li. i. ss. let them seth all till ye third part be consumed, then strain
them and put to the straynynge, as much sugar as shall suffyce, make a syrup
with.ij.. of the juice of fumiterrie, and as much of the juice of endyue, with
an ounce of the juice of hoppes, whereof let the patient take in the morning an
ounce and a half, with water of maydenheere, endive, and fumiterrie. The matter
being digested, within.x. or.xij. days after the receyt of the said syrup,
let the patient be purged with this purgation.. of cassia fystula.. ss. of
diacatholicon.. i. of electuarye of roses.. ij. or in the stead of the
electuarye after.vi. months, put thereunto so much of the co^fection of
Hamech, and make a small potion, with the common decoction. I used these two
purgations, the matter being first dygested, the space of a year and more,
renewynge the said purgations and dygestions, every second month. And
sometime between purgation and purgation, I gave the patient the pills
vnderwrytten.. of the pylles of mastyke, of pylles of hiera de octo rebus, of
the pylles of fumiterrie, of every one.. i. make.v. pills thereof, which I was
wont to minister before supper, and sometime after supper, according to the
necessity of the members.

Also I suffered scarifications to be made upon the shulders, and thyghes, and
buttockes with application of ventoses, chyeflye when the body was full of evil
humors, and scabby pustules.

The third entention which is to remove the matter conioynct, is accomplyshed
by the administration of local medecines, according to the diversity of
times, and of vlceres. First, to come to the original of the disease, that is
to say to pustules, which are wont to chance in the yard, because these
pustules chance of a primitive cause, there is no better remedy, then to use
incontine^tlye, a sharp and strong medicine to mortify their malignitie, that
it spread not thoroughe all the body. But we ought to do otherwise, if the
punules came of a cause antecedente, for local medicines are not to be applied,
according to the rules of chirurgerie, before purgation of the body.

Among sharp mundifycatiue medicines, which byte away flesh without pain,
our powder of mercurye is most principal, for beside other his virtues, it
kylleth the malignitie of vlceres and pustules, and brings the vlcered place
to dygestion, and purgation, of the matter with mundifycation.

When the place was mundifyed, we were wont to incarne it with an incarnatiue
of sarcocolle, and myrrh, written in our antidotarye. And the^ I sealed up
the vlceres, with vngue^tum de minio, and with a lotion of water of alume, and
if need so required, I renewed the powder, for sometime these pustules are
healed and break out again, with malignitie of the flesh. Wherefore it is
needful, to renew the medicine. And forasmuch, as after cycatrisation,
scabby and vlcerous pustules, do sprede through out all the body, the former
purgation presupposed, I ordained this bath vnderwrytten.. of fumiterre, of the
roots of dockes, and the leaves thereof, of every one, a little bundel, of
barlye, lentiles, and lupines, of every one m^. ij. of the roots of enula
campana, of the roots of walworte, ana.li. ss. of black elebore brayed.. ij.
of honey.li. i. of brymstone.. iij. sees them al with sufficient water, till
the third part be consumed, then let the patient enter into the bathe and
sweet therein, and afterward let him be washed with the same decoction, for
it dries and cleanses all scabbes. And the said bath must be used twyse a
weke.

After the bathe, anoint the pustulous place with a lyniment following. of the
oil of laurel, and mastycke, of every one.. i. of swynes grese, of butyre, of
every one.. iij. of the foresaid decoction.li. i. let them sees all till the
decoction be consumed, then put thereto of clear terebentyne.. ij. ss. of storax
liquide.. i. of white wax.. v. ss. of lytarge of gold and silver, of every
one. iij. of roche alume burned.. i. ss. of myrrh.. iij. of frankensence.. vi.
of ceruse.. x. of the juice of lymous.. vij. and if greater dryeng be required,
add thereunto of quycksyluer, quenched with spytle.. ij. and anoynte the scabbes
therwyth, twyse a day. And if the said medicines profit not, nether the pain
is cesed, but new ulcers return often, the^ ye shall proceed with other
oyntme^tes, and cerotes, wherein quick silver enters, of which we will speak
hereafter.

The second chapter of the French pockes confyrmed, with vlcerations, pains,
swellynges, and hardness, chau^cyng upon the bones. etc.
Of the french pockes confyrmed.
WE have described in the former chap. ye cure of ye french pockes not
confirmed. Now we will treat of the same disease being confyrmed, with the
accidents thereof. First I say, (a convenient purgation and good dyete
presupposed) the ointment following, is right excellent, and passes all other.
And ye must anoint the hole body, and chiefly the vlcered places, till the
tethe begin to ache, or in the stead of the linimente lay a cerote upon the
arms and legs, ones or twyse a day. But when ye tethe do ache, ye shall cease
from anoyntyng, and let the patient keep him warm, till his go^mes cease to
water. And because yt ofte^tymes, thorough much spytle caused through
anoyntynge, an vlceration is wont to be engendered in the go^mes, and the places
lyeng about, with much stynkynge, therefore ye must have a diligente regard
thereof.

Wherefore at the beginning of such a flux, ye must not use styptike
medicines, for through their stipticitie, the matter which moves might be
called backward again, wherefore from the day that such matter begins to
flow, it is good to proceed with gargarismes, which cool with some abstertion,
the space of a week, whereof we will make mention herafter. And because, that
some peradventure will condemn the foresaid remedies, for that quycksyluer
goes unto them, I will answer by the authority of Galene, which says,
that if a disease have but one way to health, we must assaye ye same, though
it be right hard and dangerous.

Furthermore I know not, why ye phisicions should condemn medicines made
with quycksyluer, seeing ye many remedies made with the said quycksyluer, are
found in the books of ancient and later doctors, in the curation of easy
dyseases, as in the cure of scabbes, salt fleume, tetters, ryngewormes. etc.
And though the operation of the said mercury, seem to be repulsiue, and to
drive the matter from the outward parts into the mydle of the body, which is
the foundament of the foresaid doctors opinion, nevertheless the same
doctors, Defense of quycksyluer.
have not well considered the manner of repercussion which chau^ceth by the
application of remedies made with quycksyluer.

we say therefore, that there be two kinds of repercussion, whereof one is to
deteyne and keep in the matter, as it were in a prison, whereby the member is
corrupted, and great pains ensue. The other, is a repercussio^ whose office is
to send the matter to ye myddell, from the outward parts, with a benefyte of
many purgations, as of vryne, sweet, spytle, and solution of ye belly. wherefore
this last repercussion, is the true curation of the said disease For by ye
purgatio^s that follow, well nygh al dyseases are wo^t to be cured.

Seeing then that this is the true curation of ye said disease, as we have
often proved, that the pain has cessed, and the ulcers have been perfytlye
mundifyed, by the only application of the foresaid vnctio^n and cerote, upon
the arms, and upon the legs. Thereof it follows, that this kind of
repercussion may be conveniently used.

Now, lest we should seem to spend time in vain, we will describe ye fore said
liniment, which may be administered in any time of this disease.. of swynes
grese melted.li. i. of oil of camomil, and dill, ana.. i. of oil of mastik
and laurel. ana.. i. of liquide storax.. x. of ye roots of enula ca^pana
somewhat bruised, of ye roots of walwort. ana.. iiij. of squina^. of stica. ana.
a little, of euphorbium brayed.. ss. of odoriferous wine.li. i. let the^seth al
together till ye wine be consumed, then streine them, and add to the
streynynge, of lytarge of gold.. vij. of frankensence, of masticke. ana.. vi.
of rasyne of the pyne tree.. i. ss. of clear terebentyne.. i. of quicksyluer
quenched with spitle.. iiii. melt the oils, and incorporate them all together
with.. i. ss. of wax and make a liniment and anoint therewith with your hand,
the forsayde places, and bind thereon a hot cloth. For the said ointment
heals the desease, and all his accidents, within the space of a weak. For
it takes away the cause antecedent, and brings out the corrupt humors, by
swetes, and by spitle Item the description of the cerote following, makes for
the same purpose, which I have proved a thousand times, with great worship
and profyt, ye form thereof is this.

. of the oils of camomille, spyke, A cerote of n^ble operation
and lillies, ana.. ii. of oil of saffran. i. of swynes grese.li. i. of calves
suet,.l. i. of euphorbiu^.. v. of frankensence. x. of oil of laurel.. i. ss.
the fat of a viper.. ii. ss. of quick frogs, in number.vj. of washed
worms with wine. iij. ss. of the juice of the rotes of walworte, and enula
campana, ana.. ii. of squinantum, of sticados, mugwort ana. m^. i. of
odoriferous wine.li. ii. let them sethe all together, till the wine be
consumed, then streyne them, and put to the streynyng, of litarge of gold.li.
i. of clear terebentyne.. ii. make a cerote, with sufficient white wax, after
ye manner of a sparadrap, addinge in the end of the decoction, liquide storak..
i. ss. then take the cerote from the fire, and stir it till it be luke warm,
and afterward put thereunto of quicksyluer quenched with spitle.. iiii. and
stir it about well, till the quicksyluer be incorporate. This cerote is of
more noble operation, then linime^tes, and more delectable to ye pacie^tes, but
we ought to note, yt before the administration of the said cerote, and unction,
it is necessary to mu^difie the place from al malignitie, and evil flesh, yt
afterward a good cicatrise may be made, for if ye ministre the said things
before mundification of the ulcers though the said vlceres come to
sicatrisation they sone return again, and new spryng, because the
cicatrisation was not made in quick and good flessh. we affirm the same
thing, of a corrupt bone, for except the corruption be first taken away,
with raspatories, the curation shall be of none effect.

Furthermore, from the day of the application of the said medycynes, the
paciente must hold in his mouth, some of the decoction following, D^co^tion
and wasshe his mouth therewith, tylle the cerote be removed. of clean barley.
m^. i. ss. of the roots of langdebefe. m^. ss. of the sede of quinces.. i. ss.
of the flowers of vyolettes, of reysons, ana. m^. ss. Let them seth all
together in sufficient water, tylle the barlye break, then streyne them, and
use them with a iuleb of vyolettes, as is before said. This gargarisme
coolethe, and defends, breaking out of the mouth.

Item it is good in the same time, to hold in the mouth a pype of gold or a
ring, that the vapoures of the corrupt matter, may issue out.

And because that often times, there chauncethe greatte vlcerations of the
mouth, it is needful, that ye retain the matter which caused the said
vlceration. which thing, we were wo^t to do, by washing the arms and
legs, twyse a day, with the lotion vnderwrytten. of camomyl, worm wood,
mugwurt, sage, rosemary, roses, ana. m^. ii. of sticados, of squinantum, of
maioram, of calamint, of organye, ana. m^. ss. of the nuttes of cypres somewhat
stamped, in nu^bre.x. of honey. l. i. of salt.. ii. of roch alume. x. let them
seth altogether, with sufficient barboures lie, and a little odoriferous wine,
til ye third part be consumed This lotion is good, both to reteyne and turn
away the matter that causes vlceracion of the mouth, and also to comfort ye
me^bres, that thereafter they receive not ye matter antecede^t. which done, ye
shall return to ye cure of the ulcers of the mouth, and that is accomplished
with ye lotio^s under written. wherefore I was wont to wash the mouth with this
gargarisme.. of clean barley, of roses, of sumach. ana. m^. i. of water wherein
an hoote iron has be^ quenched. l. vi. let the^ sees altogyther, til.ii.
parts be consumed, then strein the^, and put thereunto of syrup of roses..
iii. honey of roses.. ii. of roche alume.. x. let them sees again a little, and
so use the gargarisme. Item with the same medicine, let the patie^t gargarise
gootes milk, cowes milk, and shepes milk, with a iulep of violettes, or in the
stead thereof, let him gargarise water of barlye, sodden to the uttermost with
the sameiulep. Also water of pla^tayne, of violets, and nightshade, with white
sugre somewhat boiled, may conveniently be used to this same intention. For
these last lotions cle^se and cool the place, and depresse the sharpness of
the matter, but the first water has virtue to dry, and to keep of the
corruption of the gummes, remouynge the evil flesh.

There is sometime so great putrefaction in the gummes, that the parts lying
about, ar vlcered after such sort, that it is necessary to anoint the said
places with vngue^. egip. which is a principal remedy in this case. A lotion
rica^risatyne
Finally, we were wont to fynish up the cure of the gu^mes, and other ulcers of
the mouth, with this lotion.. of ye water of plantayne. li. i. of the tender
stalks of brambles, of the leaves of wild olyues, of horsetayle. an^. m^. j.
of the water of barley. m^. i. ss. of licium. ii. of honye of roses.. iii. of
roche alume.. vi. let them sees all together till half be consumed, and use
ye same as it is aforesaid. But for asmoche, as this disease is wont to
return, after a certain space of years or months, therefore it is
profitable, to use a laxatiue medicine twyse a year, that is to say: in the
spring of ye year and in harueste, taking this syrup viii. days before he
use the laxatiue.. of mirobalanes called embli. beller. indi.. i. of the
flowers of violets, flowers of buglosse, borage, cicorie an^ m^. i. ss. of the
iuce of fumiterrye.. iii. of of the iuce of borage, of the iuce of endine.
an^.. ii. of the iuce of buglosse, of the iuce of sour apples. an^.. iii. ss.
of reysons, iuiubes, damask prunes, sebesten. an^.. x. of clean licorysse
somewhat stamped.. ii. polipodye.. i. ss. of sweet fenel.. iii. of hertesto^ge,
mayde^ here, gallitricu^, pollitricu^. ana. m^. i. ss of the coddes of seen,
of epithimu^. an^.. ss. of chosen agarik.. xviii. of black elebore.. xiiii. of
water of endyue, maydenheer, fumiterry, buglosse. an^ li. iii. of the wine of
pomegranades, li. ss. braye the things that are to be brayed, and then let
them sees until the third part be consumed, and then strayue them, adding
to the straynynge, of white sugre, as much as shall suffyce, and make a syrup
in a good form, puttyng in of most fine reubarbe lythed in ye water of
endive. vi. ss. as it were in the end of the decoction, and put the rest of ye
reubarbe in a piece of lynen, bound with a threde, that it may sees from the
beginning of the second and the last decoction, to the end thereof, and use it
with waters of maydenheere, buglosse, and fenel, and also without waters. The
receite thereof, is from.. i. to.. xii. and it is of an excellent operation, in
the french pockes confyrmed, chefely in the winter, for it digesteth flegmatik
gross, and mela^cholik matter, and brings it forth by little and little. And
it is a general rule, as Mesue says, not to use a purgation only, ones, or
twyse, but often (a space of time put between) and so te^pred, that nature may
rule the purgation, and not the purgation nature.

After digestion, Purgation
let the patient be purged with this purgation.. diacatholico^.. ss. of
diafinicon.. ii. of the co^fection of hamech, of electuariu^ indi. ana.. i. of
chosen manna.. ss. make a small potion, with the decoction of cordial fruits
and flowers, but in the somer, if need be, the purgation and digestio^ noted in
the former chapter, may conuenyently be mynistred. Ite^ it is very good, to
take the space of a weke a sponefull of the forsayde syrup, fasting without
waters, and also to receive.vii. hours before dinner, as much triacle, as the
quantity of a chesnutte. Likewise the pylles vnderwrytten, are good to be
given before the application of the vnctio^s and other remedies, and ye must
give thereof at ones, but.. ss. at mydnyght, or in the morning. Pi^^es for the
pockes
. of black elebore, of good turbyth. ana.. ii. of Galenes tryacle.. ss. of
tormentylle, of genciane, of dytanye. ana.. ss. of diagridium.. ss. of
reubarbe.. i. ss. of the spyces of hiera with agarik.. ii. mengle them
together, and make pylles, with a syrup of sticados, after ye manner of peason:
the receyte of them is, from.. ii. to.. i. Sometime one is received, sometime,
ii. and sometime.iii. Ite^ let the patient receive pylles ordained against the
french pockes, and the accidents thereof, after our description, wherewith we
have healed many, with this cerote, Special pu^les for the p^^kes.
and forsayde remedies. The form of them is this.. of myrobalanes embli.
belli. indi. an^.. ii. ss. of the spices of mastik pills.. ss of sticados, of
the coddes of seen, of epithymi, of saffran. ana.. ss. of gentiane, of anise.
ana.. i. of polipodie, of black elebore. an.. ii. fine turbith.. i ss. of
diagridiu^.. iiii, of gynger, of serapyne, of cynamu^, of nutmygges, of lignu^
aloes, of tormentil, of dytanye, of carduus benedictus, coloquintida ana.. ii.
of agaricke in trociskes, of fine reubarbe, of washen aloes. ana.. ss. of
Galenes triacle.. vi. make pylles after the manner of peason, with a syrup of
vynegre. The dose is.. i. Sometime.v. pills are received, sometime iii. so^time
one. Note also, yt they have great strength against the pestilence.

Also ye shall observe, that when this disease is confirmed, it is very seldom
healed, but with a cure palliatiue. And as concerning his confirmation, it has
no determined time, but by signs, for in some bodies it is confirmed in.vi.
months, which seldom chances, in some within a year, in some wtin a year
and an half. And we call this desease confirmed, when in process of time
these accidents are found therein, namelye swellynges, hardness, pryckyng,
virulent and corrosyue vlcerations, with corruption of the bones, pain of the
joints, and foreheed. etc. Thus we end. etc.

The.iii. Chapter. Of the deed evil, or mortmale.
THe deed evil (as ye doctoures of this time testify) is a malign, fylthy, and
corrupt scabbe, which begins, for ye most part in ye arms, thyghes and
legs, and chefly in the legs it causes crusty pustles, full of fylthy
matter. This disease comes by the way of co^tagion, as witnesses rosa
anglicana, sometime of a leprous woman, sometime of a scabby, sometime of a woman,
which had lately ye flowers. After that this disease is confyrmed, as some men
say, it is not healed but by a cure palliatiue. And this disease is confirmed
after a year and an half, or there about, and therefore it is like to the
french pockes, in signs, causes, and cure. Concerning the foresaid medicines,
as well local as universal, for the cure of ye french pockes, we took them of
theodorik, in the Chapter of mortmale, and in the chapter of the cure of
scabbes. wherefore before the curation of this disease, we thought it convenient
to write a chapter of the french pockes, for ye remedies of the one agrees
with ye other. The cause antecedente of this disease, for the most part,
consysteth in evil meats and drynkes. which engendre corrupt humors, and
there fore we have seen sometimes, that the forsayde pustles have become
malign, and have been turned into cancrenositie, whereby also the pustles are
somewhat raised above ye flesh, with the color of a mulberye half ripe. And
than I scarifyed the place depely unto the bone, and the patient seemed to feel
nothing. wherefore this disease passes from cancrena, to aschachillos, and
esthiomenos.

This disease is engendered of gross melancholyke, and corrupt blood, a sign
whereof is blaknesse of pustles. Sometime also it chances, yt gros and salt
steme is mengled with melancholy, of which large pustles or scabbes are
engendered, of white color, with some blewnesse, and much itchynge.

The curation of this disease, has two regimentes, namely universal, and
particular. The universal is accomplysshed by losyng of the belly, according
to the evil humor, by cuttynge the vein, and by application of
bloodesuckers upon the veins emorroydall.

If the pustles been black, which is a sign of melancholye, it must be
digested with this syrup following.. of the less syrup of fumiterry, of the
syrup of the iuce of endyue. ana.. v. of oximel simple.. ii. of the water of
fumiterrye, of maydenheere, of endive. ana.. i. when the patient has used this
syrup the space of a weke, let him take the purgation following. of
diacatholicon.. i, of the confection of hamech.. x. ss. make a small potion,
with the decoction of cordyall flowers and fruits, addyng of polypodye, of
hartestonge, of maydenheere, coddes of seen and epithimi. ana. a little, and of
syrup of violettes.. i. ss.


Here ye shall note, that because melancholye is erthye, therefore it is
conuenyent to renew the digestion, and to purge it, being digested, with the
forsayde purgation, which purgation also ye shall use often. But if the matter
be melancolycke, with salt fleame, let it be thus digested.. of syrup of
fumiterrye, of oxisaccaru^, of oximel. ana.. ss. of the water of fumiterrye,
and maydenheere. ana.. i. ss mengle them together, and let the patien use
thereof the space of a weke. when the matter is digested, which is known by
the good color, multitude, and some grosnesse of the vryne, then let the
patient be purged, with the purgation following.. of diacatholicon, and
diafinicon. ana.. iiii. of the confection of hamech.. ss. make a small potion,
with the forsayde decoction, adding of syrup of violettes.. i. Item pylles of
fumiterry, and pills aggregatiue, may be sometime conuenyentlye admynystred instead of the forsayde purgation. Also the incision of the vein basilica, is
very good in this case, for it purges gros blood. Morouer, bloodsuckers laid
upon the veins emoroidall, and ventoses applied in any place of the body,
has brought great ease in this sycknesse.

The particular remedies shall be accomplyshed by the admynistratio^ of local
medicines. I will recite certain remedies, which I have used after purgation,
with worship, and profit. First I ordained the bathe vnderwrytten, wherewt I
washed the scabby places twice a day.. dockes, fumiterry. an^. m^. ii. of
nept. m^. i. bran, barlye, lupynes, ana. m^. i. ss. of violettes, mallows.
an^. m^. i. ss. of black elebore and white. ana.. i. ss. of honey.. ii. let
them sees all together with suffycient water, till the third part be
consumed. After the lotion let ye scabby place be anointed with this ointment
following.. of oil of mastik, of laurel. ana.. ss. of fresshe butter, of
swynes grese melted. an^., ii, ss. of the iuce of fumiterrye, plantayne, and of
the iuce of docke roots. ana.. i. of black elebore.. vi. of mercurye
sublymed.. i. let them sees all together, till the iuces be consumed, tha^
streyn them, and add to the straynynge, of litarge of gold and silver. an^..
ii. ss. of ceruse.. i. of quycksyluer quenched with spittle.. x, the yolk of an
egg, and of the iuce of limo^s,. ii. ss. of brayed salt. i. of clear
terebentine.. i. ss. of liquide storax.. i. me^gle the^ together, and make a
liniment, for it helps this disease and all other scabbes. And if ye forsayde
scab of malmort, chance to be vlcered (as we have seen often) and that ye
forsayde unction profit not, tha^ ye shall use vngue^. de minio, or the
sparadrap written in ye former chap. And if ye ulcers be malign, ye malignitye
thereof shall be rectified with our podre of mercury. The manner of applying ye same
is this: ye shall wete your little fingre with fasting spittle, and touch the
vlcered place with the same, after ye have put it in ye said poudre, for a little
quantity thereof works much, when the malignitie is removed: ye shall
proceed with the foresaid cerote and water of alume. Item in the stead of the said
cerote, we have proved the herb which Dioscorides calls clymino^, to be of
great effect. This herb grows in watery places, and is ii. cubits long,
having a square stalk like a beanestalke, and leaves like to weybred, but
somewhat larger, and longer, and thycker, and somewhat iagged about like a
nettle. This herb is found in our parts, in the places about ye water, which
is between the bridge if saint Cyth, at Bysamis, where it is co^menlye called
alabeneratore. This herb is a great medicine for all ulcers of ye legs. The
leaves also of wodbynd moysted with wine, and laid upon the ulcers of the
legs, is a marvelous help.

Furthermore if it chance, that ca^crena be engengred in this malmort, (as we
have seen often) for the curation thereof, ye shall proceed after the cure of
cancrena. And namelye at the beginning, ye shall loose the belly by purgation.
And ye shall cut a vein, called basilica, as we have said before, in this
present cha. After that ye have cut a vein, ye shall scarify ye black flesh
depely, and all about ye shall apply bloodsuckers, to draw out the corrupt
blood, last of all ye shall wash the scarifyed place with the lie of the
decoction of lupines. And afterward ye shall apply thereunto vngentum
egiptiacu^, of the descryption of Auicenne, or vngue^. egiptiacu^ with addition
of arsenyk, ordained in our antidotarye, layinge thereupon a plaster
resolutiue, and desiccatiue, as hereafter follows.. of bean flour, of the
flower of lentiles, and orobies. an^. l. ss. with sufficient quantity of
syrup of vynegre, and a little lie, and with.. i and. ss. of the iuce of
wormwoode, make a styffe plaster. And above this plaster, toward the body,
lay a defe^siue made with vynegre and water of roses, and bole armeny. The rest
of the curation shall be accomplysshed after the cure of cancrena, and other
malign ulcers.

The.iiii. Chapter. Of a scabbe, and the cure thereof.
BEfore we proceed to the cure of this disease, Of a scabbe and his cause.
we must consydre, whether it proceed of a primitive cause, or an antecedente.
The primitive cause, is by touching, for scabbes, are co^tagious. wherefore at
the beginning, it shall suffyce to wash the scabbye me^bres, and tha^ to
anoint the same with the ointment vnderwrytten. First we will descrybe a bayne,
very profitable in all kinds of scabbes.. of ye leaves of malowes, violettes,
and fumiterry. ana. m^. ii. of clean barley, and bran. ana. m^. i. of nept m^.
ss. of black elebore brayed.. i. ss. of the roots of enula campana. li. ss.
of apples somewhat broken, in nombre x. of lymons cut in small pieces,
nombre.ii. let them sees all together, with suffycyente water, till all be
consumed: wash the scabbye places with this lotion, and dry them with a dry
cloth, than annoint them, and rub them with this oyntmente.. of swynes grese
melted, of calves suete. ana. li. ss. of oil of mastik, oil of laurel. an^..
x. oil of roses odoriferous.. iiii. of clear terebe^tine.. ii. ss. of docke
rotes.. iii. ss. of black elebore.. i. of celedony, of fumite. an^. m^, i. of
ye rotes of affodil.. vi. beat them al together, and so suffer them to rot all the space of a week, then sees the^ a little, and strain them, and put to the
straynyng, of litarge of gold and silver. ana.. v. of ceruse.. iii. ss. of
liquide storacie.. x. of quycksyluer quenched with spytle.. iii. and if ye did
put to of taracameli.. ii. it would be a synguler medicyne against al scabbes.
we have proved this ointment to be excellent against the deed evil, and to
dry the pustles of the french pockes. But if the scabbe come of a cause
antecede^t, namelye through the termination of some syknesse (as it has
chanced often in sharp and venomous fieuers) then for the curatio^ thereof, ye
shall use gentyller medicynes. wherefore the bayne hereafter following, is
convenient in the cure of this scabbe. An other. bayne.
. of mallows, violets, barley, bran, maydenheere, of gallitricu^, and
politricu^, and fumiterry. ana. m^. i. ss. of the rotes of enula ca^pana, of
docke roots. ana m^. i. of sour apples in nombre ten, of the coddes of seen,
and of epithimum ana.. ss. seethe them all together, beside the coddes of seen,
and epithimum, with sufficient quantity of water, till the third part be
consumed, then put to the rest, and let them sees again a little, and wash the
scabbye place in a warm stewe, and afterward dry the places with a lynen
clothe, and annoint them with the linyment following.. of fresh butter, of swynes
grese, of the oil of vyolets, of calves suet, and kyddes suet. ana.. vi of
oil of roses.. ii. of oil of sweet al ma^des, of hens grese. an^.. x. of
the strainyng of ye foresaid decoction. li. i. ss. let them be sodde^ all
together, till the decoction be consumed, tha^ strain the^, and afterward wash
the strayninge thryse with water: first with water of endive, secondly with
water of pla^tayne, thyrdly with water of roses, and put thereunto of litarge
of gold and silver. ana.. iiii. of ceruse.. ii. of camphore.. i. And if ye
will, that it shall be of greter exiccation or drying, put to the foresaid
ointment, of lyme thryse washed with rain water.. i. ss. of liquide storax..
ss. and so use the^.

Forthermore, all meats that engendre gross, burnt, and colerycke blood,
must be avoided, as gross flesh, pepered, and salted meats, garlyke,
mustarde, dry fygges. etc. Sometime (if the age and strength of ye patient
would suffer) it is convenient to draw blood out of ye vein basilica, and most
often in this case, ventoses are to be used upon the shulders, arms,
buttockes, and thyghes, chefely wha^ the scab is spread through out all the
body. And therefore Auicen aloweth well, the application of ventoses upon the
thighs with scarificatio^s. we have proved moreover, yt laying of bloodsuckers,
upon the emorroidal veins is very profitable to draw out gros, melancholy
and burned blood. Pylles also in this case, are greatly praised of Auicenne,
so that one only, be taken at one time. But I was wont to admynistre the
pylles vnderwrytten.. of washed aloes. i. of pylles of mastik.. ii. make
pylles like peason, with the iuce of celydonye. The receyte of them in hole
parso^s, is.. ss. unto.iii.. If ye will have it of a stronger purgation, put
thereunto of pylles of fumiterry..i. etc.

The.v. Chapter. Of the pains of the joints, that is of artetik gout, in the
hands, and feet, and kneees. To the most reverend lord, my lord Sixtus
pressed of the Romayne church, vicechaunceler, of the titule of saint Peter ad
vincula.
A Passion arthetyke, as the aunciente and later wrytters declare, is an
outward pain of the ioynctes caused of abu^daunce of fleume, Of the pain in
the ioynctes.
and sometimes of colerike humors, rennyng to the said ioynctes. And according
to the places whereunto the mattier flows, it receives sondrye names.
wherefore, when it flows to the fete, it is called podagra, and when it
flows to the hands, it is called chiragra, and when it renneth to the knees,
it is called genugra, and when the said humors be arrived into the hyppes, it
causes the gout called sciatica. The pain whereof, is extended from the hippe
to the little too. In the gout called Podagra, the pain begins about the
great too. In chiragra, about the fore finger or tho^be, and they which have
this disease live in rest, and pleasure, a riotous life, without excersice of ye
body which also eat gross and melancholic meats and pulses, as beans,
peason, Cycers. etc. wherefore Ypocrates says, that ye grecians called
Helenes, were troubled with the gout, because they used to eat beans, and
peason, and other pulse. This passion moreover, is found in prelates of the
church, and in those which were poor men, and afterward came to some hye
dignity, wherefore they gave them self to slouthfulnes, and delicate living,
wherwyth ye ioynctes are wont to be troubled, with gross and slymye humors,
through evil digestion. wherefore moderate exercise, is very good to avoid
this disease, and idelnes does ye contrary. For as iron cankreth when it is
not exercised, so man's body through rest, is corrupted with evil humors.
Nevertheless, immoderate exercise, chiefly vehement walking, provoke the
gout in the fete, as Arnolde de noua villa does witness, saying, of much
drinking of wine, of great walking, of often use of women, and by
forbearynge of accustomed purgatio^s, innumerable persons become goutie.

And this passion comes by inheritance, and it is merueylouse peynful,
chiefly if it be engendered of a hot cause, so that it brings the patiente in
despiratio^, to a palsy, to apoplexia, to difficulty of breathyng,
perturbation of the senses, and sodeyne death. But the peynes of a gout caused
of a cold, gross and slymye mattier, be not very great. Howbeit they
contynewe long, and therefore Hipocrates says, that sometime they are not
ended in.xl. days. But when the mattier is hot, they end in.xiiii. days, as
I have seen in Iulio secundo. I have often seen, that this disease has
proceeded of a gross, slymye, and chalkye mattier, so that the members have
ever remained crooked, and knobbye. And this kind of ye gout, receives no cure,
but a palliatyue cure, as Ouide says. Soluere nodosam nescit medicina
podagram, that is, no medicyne can heal the knobbie gout. And marueale not if
the peynes of ioynctes, procedyng of a hot cause ben great, for as Galene
says, that humors which cause pain in the hands, fete, knees, or
haunches, fyl the concauitie or holownes, which is between the ioynctes, and
stretche out the ligame^tes, muscules, and synnowes, and through that
stretchyng, a great peyn is caused, and no crampe, which peynes chance for the
most part, in the spryng of the year, and in the heruest, chiefly in the
ioynctes of the fyngers, and the toes. Cornelius Celsus says to this purpose,
that the peynes of ioynctes, come sooner to the toes, and fyngers, tha^ to other
parts. And ye this disease chances not to gelded men, nether to young me^,
that have not had copulation with women, nether to women that have not their
accustomed purgations retained.

To come to our purpose, we ought to consider, the cause and the accedentes of
the disease. And we must know that one kind of the gout comes of a cold
cause, an other of hot. And of those ye proceed of hot mattier, some are with
great pain, as those which come of pure choler, and some are not of so great
pain, and they come of choler me^gled with fleume. The peynes of ye ioynctes,
procedyng of cold mattier, are small and moderate, but they are hard to heal,
and dure longer, as we have said, and the place where the pain is, is swollen
and white. But if the mattier be hot, the place is red, and in this passion
there chances often a little fieuer, which is wont to end when the mattier
leaves his sinnowie places, and comes to the outward parts. And therefore
Galene says, that in the peynes of the teeth, and of ye ioynctes, it is a good
sign. For when swellyng chances in the outward parts, it is a great token
that ye mattier has left his synnewe, and is come to the fleshye particule.

Further we say, that this disease may be nombred among cold and hot
apostemes, and therefore there be three causes thereof, as antecedent, primityue,
and conioyncte, as we have declared in the treatise of apostemes. The members
from whence the mattier of the said peynes proceed, are diverse, for when the
mattier is flegma tyke, and slymye, it comes from the stomach, or from the
brain. And if the mattier be hot, that is to say, choleryke, or sanguine,
those humors proceed always from the liver. And so says Anicenne, declarynge
that this disease proceeds of the superfluity of the second and third
digestion. And the members, that receive this mattier are ye ioynctes. But
Anice^ne deuideth these causes.iii. manner ways. First into a cause efficient,
which has humors. Secondly, into a cause instrume^tall, and those are the
ways and condittes by which the mattier comes to the ioynctes. The third
cause, is ye parts receyuyng namely ye ioynctes weakened by nature, or by some
other chance. Naturally, when they ben prepared by enheritau^ce to ye ioyncte,
accidentally, because the patient has suffered a strocke in ye ioynctes, or an
aposteme, or has used the evil diete aforesaid.

we have declared sufficientlye the causes and signs, Cure of goutes.
now we will come to the cure. The cure of this disease, has three intentions.
The first, is diete, the second purgation of the mattier antecedent, the
third is local medicines, and removing of the accidents. For the first
intention, it is necessary to use meats that enge^der good blood, as flesh of
birds, chyckyns, veale, birds of the mountains, as pertriches, fesauntes,
etc. His wine must be claret delayed with sodden water, and if he ye has ye
disease would use sodde^ water with honey, it should be very profitable, and might
keep of the gout from coming to him. In the declaration of the disease, the
patient may use wine with the said water, or with the decoction of cinamome.
All herbs, roots, and all kinds of poulse, that engender troublous and
gross blood, are to be forborne whith all diligence in this sickness. And
likewise all kinds of flesh that engender gross blood and mela^cholike, as
bief, porke, birds of the ryuers. etc. But although herbs be forbiden, yet
spynache, betes, lettuse, parcelye, soden with convenient flesh, may be
permitted. And also ye patient may use Rice, almondes, clean barlye, in the
broth of the foresaid kinds of flesh. A notable physician Hugo de Senis,
cou^celeth in this disease procedynge of a cold mattier, to use sage,
rosemarye, spike, with a little cynamome, and nutmeges, for it digesteth gross
mattier and comfort the sinnowes. But al pepered things, and salt, and
hot things, as garlyke, oynyons, radysh, rocket, and all sharp and tarte
things, must be avoided, and likewise all kinds of Colewortes and rapes.

when the matter ye causes the gout is hot, the wine must be more delayed
with water, than when the mattier is cold, and ye diete must be more cold in
herbs and flesh, and a little more subtyle. And the patient must absteyn from
eles, and such fyshes. Howbeit, he may eat sometimes, carpes, roches, and
perches. Furthermore he must absteyne from al see fysh, except those yt have
read flesh and small bodies.

The second entention is acco^plyshed by the administration of purgations, and
digestions, according to the disposition of the humors, for if the mattier be
hot and chieflye coleryke, this digestive following is convenient. R. of a
syrup of roses by infusion. ana.. vi. of water of buglosse, hoppes, endyue,
ana.. i. give it the patient twyse a day. If the mattier be sanguine, and the
gout in the hands, ye shall cut the vein basilica. If the gout be in the
feet, ye shall cut the vein called hepatica, or the comune vein of the
arm on the same side. If it be a sciatica, the comune vein of ye contrary
arm shall be cut.

In the state of the disease, for the euacuation of the mattier conioynct, ye
may open the vein called saphena on the same side. For Celsus says, that the
cuttynge of a vein in the beginning of this disease, keeps the patient that
he be not vexed with the gout for ever, or at the least the space of a year.
When the mattier is sanguine, digest it with this syrup. R. of a syrup of the
juice of endyue, of syrup of roses made by infusion, of ye less syrup of
fumiterre. an^.. ss. of the waters of endyue, hoppes, and fumitery. an^.. i. or
make it thus. Recipe of syrup de besantiis, of syrup of roses by infusion,
and of syrup of endyue, an^.. ss. of waters of endyue, buglosse, and
fumiterry. an^.. i. But if the mattier be mengled with fleume, then the
digestive shall be after this sort. R. of syrup of ye juice of endyue, of
sirupe de duabus radicibus without vinayger, of ye less syrup of fumiterry.
an^.. ss. of ye waters of endyue, fumiterry, and fenell, ana.. i. But if the
mattier be utterly cold and gross, than this digestion following is most
convenient. R. of syrup de duabus radicibus without vinaygre, of honey of ^^ses
streyned, of oximel. ana.. ss. of the waters of fenell, sage, rosemary. ana..
i. and let it be spiced with a little cynamome, and nutmegges in the winter.

After the coleryke mattier is digested, by the space of six days, at the least, then ye shall use this purgation. R. of chosen manna.. i. of an
electuary of the juice of Roses.. ss. make a small potion with the decoction of
cordial flowers, and fruits, or make it thus R. of diaprunis no^ solutiui.. i.
of the electuary of juice of roses, of electuary of roses after ye description
of Mesue, an^.. ii. make a small potion with the foresaid decoction. An other
way. R. of the pylles of harmodactiles the less after Mesue.. ii. of pills
assagereth.. ss. make.v. pylles with the water of endyue, and let the patient
take them an hour before day, and let him fast six hours after, and an
hour after dynner he may sleep a little hour, if he have great list to sleep.

If the mattier be sa^guine, the purgation following is very convenient. R. of
diacatholicon, of cassia, ana.. ss. of an electuarie of roses after Mesue,.
iii. make a small potion with the common decoction, or thus. R. of an electuary
of roses after Mesue.. iiii. make a lozenge with sugre, and let the patitient
take it an hour before day with the foresaid prouiso.

But if the mattier be me^gled, that is to say, if it be hot and cold, for
ye purgation thereof we must use medicynes that have mengled virtues, of which
this may be one. R. of diafinicon, of cassia, ana.. ss. of electuary of
roses.. ii. make a small potion with the foresaid decoction, or ye may make it
thus. R. of diacatholicon, diafinico^, ana.. ss. of an electuarie of roses
after Mesue.. i. ss. make a small potio^ with the water of fenel, buglosse, and
sma^ge, addyng of syrup of violettes.. ^orthus. R. of the pills of hermodac
tiles the greater and the less. ana.. ss. of agaryke made in trosciskes.. i.
make.v. pills with the water of endyue, and fenel which the patient shall
receive an hour before day as is aforesaid.

Furthermore if the mattier be utterly cold and gross, it shall be thus
purged. R. diafinicon.. vi. diacatholicon.. ss. of agaryke in trociskes.. ss.
make a small potion with the decoction of damask prunes, maiden hear,
pollitricu^, gallitricu^, and cordial flowers, addyng syrup of violettes.. i.
or make it thus. R. pills of hermodactiles the greater.. i. make.v. pills with
water of sage, and rosemary, which the patient shall use as is aforesaid.

The third intention which is to remove the mattier conioynct, and to correct
the accidents, shall be accomplished by ye application of medicines upon the
ioynctes, according to necessity and the time thereof.

At the beginning, if the mattier be hot, this ordinance following is
convenient. R. of oil of roses omphacine, of oil of roses complete
odoriferous. an^.. ii. of oil of violettes.. vi. newelayed eggs with their
whites and yolks, of the juice of plantayne. i. of woman's milk.. ii. of
barlye flower fynely bulted.. iii. me^gle them and beat them all together, and
then sees them at the fire a little, and use the medicine upon the paynfull
place, after the manner of a plaster, for it is of good operation against all
hot goutes, from the beginning to the time of augmentation, and it swageth
pain, comfort the part, and resolves gentilly. But if ye would put to the
said medicine of oil of camomil,. iii. of bean flower.. i. ss. of camomyl,
and mellilote, well stamped. ana. m^. ss. it would be a very convenient
medicine both in the state, and in the declination of this disease.

Item to this intention, the ordinance folowinge is to be approved. Take the
myddle of bread and lythe it in cowes milk or goats milk, or in the brothe
of fresh veale, or of an he^ne, and afterward press it and beat it with the
yolks of four eggs, and of oil of Roses odoriferous.. iii. of oil of
violets.. i. of saffran.. ss. sees these things a little at the fire,
styrrynge them about, and use thereof as is aforesaid. Another ordinance.
Take three eggs, of the juice of plantayne, lettuse, nyghtshade, and of the
herb called lingua passerina or knotgrasse. ana.. ss. of oil of roses
omphacine, of oil of roses complete and odoriferous of oil nenufar, or in the
stead of it of oil of violettes. ana.. i. of woman's milk.. x. me^gle al these
things together, and lay the^ warm upon the membre, after the manner of a
liniment. Or thus. R. of the meat of roasted apples.. iiii. of the leaves of
malowes, violettes, and he^bane. an^. m^. ii. wrappe them all in cloutes dypped
in rose water, and in the wine of pomegranades, and roste them all under hot
ymbres, and afterward stamp them all together, and streyne them, adding to
the streynynge of oil of violets.. i. of oil of roses o^phacine, of oil of
roses complete odoriferous ana.. ss. the yolks of two eggs, of woman's milk..
x. of saffran.. ii. ye shall use this plaster as it is aforesaid, for it
helps all the pain of all goutes, resolves the mattier, and comforts the
place. Or make it thus. Take two eggs, and of the juice of pla^tayne.. vi. of
oil of roses omphacine.. ii. of oil myrtyne.. ss. mengle them al together,
and make a linime^t which ye shall use, the first, second, and third day.

Likewise in the same time, and in the same mattier (the ioyncte being first
auoynted with oil of roses omphacine, with the white of an egg and a little
juice of pla^tayne) to lay upon the said paynfull place the leaves of
henbane. First ye must lay the said leaves upon a plate of iron, or upon a
hot tyle, and sprincle them with ye wine of pomegranades, and dry them a
little, before ye use them. Item the leaves of Lettuse, or arrage, or Violettes,
used as is aforesaid been of good effect. Moreover the flower of beans,
lentiles, and barlye, sodden with the wine of pomegranades until they be
thycke, having afterward added to the same sufficient quantity of hens
grese, and oil of roses omphacine, and violettes, and a little saffran, and
laid upon the paynful place, is a singular remedy against all grefes of the
gout.

Item to the same intention, Ce^ote for the gowt
ye may co^uenie^tly use this cerote following. R. of oil of roses omphacine..
ii. of oil myrtyne, of calves suet, ana.. i. of the juice of plantayne, of
wine of pomegranades. ana.. ss. of all the sau^ders. ana.. i. of red roses,
of ye flowers of an almonde tree, if they may begoten. ana. m^. ss. of oil of
violettes.. x. let them sees all together till the juice be consumed, then
streyne them and add to the streynynge, of white wax.. i. ss. make a soft
cerote, this cerote is convenient from the beginning to the end of the
augmentation, in all hot goutes. And if ye would put to the same of oil of
camomylle.. ii. ss. of the flowers of rosemary. m^. ss. of saffran.. i. of
odoriferous wine. li. ss. seething them again till the wine be consumed, ye
may conveniently use it in all times. Item in the state and declination, it is
very profitable to use the suffumigation of the decoction f^lowyng, layenge on
the said decoction, with warm cloutes. R. of roses camomyl, mellilote. an^.
m^. i. of worm wood, of squinantum, of each a little, of the roots of enula
campana somewhat bruised. li. ss. let them sees all together with water
sufficient, and a little odoriferous wine, till the third part be consumed. when
ye have used this suffumigatio^, A liniment
annoint the paynfull place with this linimente. R. of oil of camomille, of
dylle, of roses co^plete odoriferous. ana.. ii. of rosemarye flowers, of the
sede of S. John's worte, of roses, of wormwood, of camomille, of every one a
little, of oil of spike.. i. let them sees all together with four ounces of
odoriferous wine, till the wine be consumed, then streyn them and make a soft
liniment with sufficient white wax, wherewyth ye shall rub the ioynctes, an
hour before dynner and supper. Or make it thus. R. of the muscilage of psilium,
and of quynces, made in the brothe of a chyckyn. li. ss. of the wine of
pomegranades.. vi. of oil of roses omphacine.. ii. the yolke and the white of
an egg, beat them all together and use them as is aforesaid. Another.

R. of the muscilage of psilium and quynces made in the water of roses and wine
of pomegranades. li. ss. of cassia fistula streyned.. i. mengle them together,
and use them with a dram and a half of woman's milk, use this ordinance for
it apeaseth grefe inco^tinentlye. Another. R. of the leaves of malowes, and
violettes. ana. m^. ii. of roses. m^. ss. of clean barlye. m^. i. sees them
all in water, stamp them and streyn them, and put to the streyning of oil of
roses complete, of oil omphacine. an.. ii. of oil of violettes, of oil of
nenufar, if it may be gote^. an^.. i. of white wax.. ij. and ss. set the^ on
ye ^re again, and make a mean between a cerote and a plaster, for it is a
sure medicyne against vehement pain.

Here ye shall note, touching the application of the said medicines, that ye
ought to use no strong repercussyues, or medicines compounde with great
quantity of opium, for the use thereof enge^dreth evil mattier, and reteyneth
the mattier in the ioynctes, and makes ye same unfit to be resolved. And
Auicenne says, that when the peynfull part is weakened, it draws humors to
the members lieng about. Antonius Gaynerius shows, Note the story of a Jew
that a certain Jew was called to a weke and lean man, vexed with the gout,
and the Jew strayghte way (no purgatio^ going before) laid upon the paynful
place cloutes weted in cold water by the application whereof the pain
increased, and afterward the Jew laid upon the place stupefactiue and
repercussyue medicines, whereby the mattier became gross, and malign, and
within the space of ten days, the membre grew to cancrena, and estiomenos,
and thus the poor patiente was healed of the gout for ever.

Now that we have written convenient remedies for the goutes procedyng of hot
mattier. Cure of cold goutes.
we will come to the remedies that heal the gout caused of cold mattier. In
the beginning (a convenient purgation of ye body by solution of the belie or
cuttyng a vein going before) apply this plaster upon the place. R. of the
middle of broune bread lythed in goats milk or cowes milk. li. ii. of oil
of camomille, and dylle. ana.. iii. of oil of roses complete.. i. ss. the
yolks of three eggs, of saffran.. ss. make a solyde plaster of all these
things. Another. R. of the roots of enula ca^pana. li. i. of holihocke. li.
i. ss. sees the^ all in water, stamp them, and streyn the^, and put to the
streynynge of oil of camomylle, lillies, dille, and sweet almondes. ana.. i.
ss. of goats suet, of calves suet. an^.. iii. of oil of roses odoriferous..
ii. ss. of white wax.. ss. make a soft cerote at the fire, addyng of bean
flower well bulted.. ii. hermodactilles.. i. ss. of saffran.. ss. of camomylle,
mellilyte, wormwood, fynely stamped, of every one a little, use this cerote,
for it is a good medicyne against cold mattier of the ioynctes. Another. R. of
oil of spike, wormwood, and of myrte. ana.. ii. of oil of roses co^plete..
i. ss. of camomylle, mellilote, sticados, wormwood. ana. m^. ss. of yua
muscata, of the flowers of rosmarye, of each a little, of goats suet,. iii. of
odoriferous wine. li. ss. Let the^ sees all together till the wine be
consumed, then strain them, and put to ye straynyng, of white wax as much as
shall suffyce, make a lynement and rub therewith the joints, before ye use
the forsaid cerote. An other cerote of right good operation.. of the roots of
enula campana, of walwort, of every one.. iij. of ye rotes of holihock.li. i.
ss. sees them all in water, stamp them and strain them, and make a soft
cerote with sufficient white wax, and with the composition vnderwrytten.. of
oil of roses odoriferous, of oil of camomill, spike, or wormwood, of every
one.. iij. of oil of ypericon.. i. ss. of oil of lyllies.. ij. of ye flowers
of camomil, mellilote, rosemary, sauine, of every one a little, of squinantum,
of wormwood, of yuamuscata, of every one. m^. ss. of the nuttes of cypres
brayed, nombre.iiij. of calves suet, of hens grese, and gose grese. ana.. x.
of the rotes of enula ca^pana and walwort. ana.. ij. ss. of quycke frogs in
no^bre four, let them sethe all together with a soft fire, in.ij.li. of good
odoriferous wine, till the wine be consumed, then strain them vehementlye, and
with the former straynyng make a soft cerote, whose office is to remove all
old pains of goutes, to resolve the matter, and to comfort the weak part.
And though it may be administered in all times, yet it seems to be better in
the state, and declination of the disease. There happen often pains, and
goutes in ye knees of mengled matter, wherwyth July the second was wont to be
vexed in the spring time, and in harvest. Wherefore by the counsel of his
physicians, we used very often the unction following.. of oil of roses
omphacine, of oil of roses complete odoriferous, of every one.. ij. of oil of
camomille.. i. and. ss. of earth worms washed with wine.. ss. of the wine of
pomegranades, of woman's milk, of every one.. ij. of saffran.. i. of the juice
of plantayne, of the juice of the roots of enula campana, of every one.. i. of
calves suete, and of the marye of the legs of the same, of every one.. viij.
let them seethe all together, till the wine and the iuyces been consumed, then
strain them, and lay this unction upon the place, three or four times a day,
byndynge thereupon, a clothe dypped in the forsayde oyntmente, for it is a
present remedy, and after three days ye shall lay upon all the knee this
cerote following.. of the flower of beans, and lentylles, of every one, li.
ss. bra^ne well ground. m^. ij. of camomille, of mellilote, stamped, of every
one. m^. i. of stamped wormwood, of the flowers of rosemarye, of every one.
m^. ss. of roses.. i. make a styffe plaster of al these, with sufficient
sodden wine, and a little wine of pomegranades, adding in the end, of the
decoction of oil of roses complete, of dille, of every one.. i. ss. of oil
myrtyne, oil of camomil. an^.. ij. of gose grese, of calves suet, of every
one.. x. of white wax,. i. ss. This plaster is good after augmentation, unto
the end, and if ye would put thereunto of goats dou^ge brayed.. v. of
odoriferous wine.. iiij it should be of greater effect.

Use this ordinance upon the knee, after the manner of a plaster. Item the
forsayde plaster made of the crommes of bread, and cowes milk, and saffran,
is of good operation in all times.

Now we will come to the cure of the gout (called sciatica) of the
huckelbones. First, Cure of sciatica.
the humors must be digeste, and purged, and the humor that causes this
disease for ye most part is cold, namely flegmatike, wherefore the purgation
must be such as purges flemme. After purgation, the plaster following is
convenient wherwyth we have healed many.. of the flower of barlye, lupynes,
cicers, beans, lentilles. ana.. iiij. cowes donge, and goats donge. ana.li.
ss. of camomille, mellilote. ana. m^. i. of bra^ne well ground. m^. ij. of
sticados, of the flowers of rosemarye, of every one. m^. ss. of mugworte,
wormwood, roses, myrtilles, nepte, of every one. m^. i. of squinantum a little,
of coria^ders, of sweet fenell, of every one.. vi. powder them all that may be
poudred, as small as may be, and sees them with sufficient sodden wine, till
they ben thycke and styffe, the^ put thereunto of oil of roses complete, of
camomil, of dille, of spyke, of every one.. i. ss. oil myrtyne, of oil of
laurel, of percely, of terbe^tine of iuneper, of every one.. vi. of agrippa, of
dialthea, of every one.. i. of white wax.. i. ss. myngle them melte the wax
and the oiles at the fire, and stir them al about, and let them sees again
a little, and use this ordinance with a broad cloth after the manner of a
cerote. An other cerote.. of the roots of enula campana sodde^ in water
stamped and strayned.li. i. of salomo^s seal, of the roots of walworte, of
every one.. iiij. of oil myrtyne, of oil of camomill, of percely, of every
one.. i of oil of terrebe^tyne.. i. ss. of colophonia, of clear terrebe^tyne,
of every one,. ij. of the oil of a fox, spike, of lylies of laurel, of
elders, of every one.. x. of white wax.. i. ss. make a soft cerote at the
fire addyng of beanefloure and flower of cycers, of every one.. iiij. ss. of
liquide storax.. v. of frankensence.. iij. use this cerote as it is aforesaid.
Some chirurgiens allow, that the place be rubbed with aqua vite, before the
application of the cerote which thing assuredly, we have perceived to be of
great effect, for it perceth, and dries strange moisture, which two things
are necessary in this curation.

Likewise other men in the stead of aqua vite, praise fomentacion and bathing
of the place with a spo^ge, dypped in the decoction vnderwrytte^.. of
camomille, wormewoode, rosemarye, sage, nepte, of the herb called our ladies
bedstrawe or serpillum, of organye, of maioram, of every one. m^. i. ss. of
roses, sticados, myrtilles, squinantum, of every one, m^. i. of yua muscata, of
saint Ihons worte, of every one. m^. ij. of the roots of paucedinis, of
dytamye, of aristologia, of ce^taury, of policaria, of every one. m^. ss. of
honey li. i. ss. of the nuttes of cypress brayed, nombre twenty, of cloves, of
nutmegges, of myrrh, of every one.. v. of salt of roche alume, of every one..
i. ss. of branne grownde.. iij sees them all together with a sufficient
quantity of barbours lie, and odoriferous wine, till the third part be
consumed, use this fomentation as it is aforesaid.

I have found moreover, that the oil of ypericon, or saint Ihons wort is of
singular efficacitie, in all pains of the huckelbones, and of the knee. Item
the leaves of yuye bound upon the soore membre, swageth the pain, of all
artetyke passions, chyefly if they be cold.

Now we must speak somewhat of the remotion of ye accidents of the gout,
that is to say, the hardness and knobbes which remain within the joints, for
the cure whereof, ye shall use this mollifycatiue following. of oil of
camomill, dille, roses, whyt lylies, of every one.. ij. of the oil of flower
de luyce.. i. of oil mastyke, of oil of spike, of every one.. vi. of hens
grese, and duckes grese, of the oil of sweet almondes, of every one.. x. of
the marye of the legs of a calfe, and of a cow, of fresh butter. ana.. vi.
of liquide storax.. ix, of calves suet. ij. of the sweat of shepes woll called
isopus humida.. iij. Sometime it chau^ceth that the hardness grows to an
aposteme, for the maturation, digestion, mundifycation, and incarnation thereof
ye shall resort to the chapter of the cure of flegmon. etc.

The syxte chapter, of the tothe ache.
The toth ache.
THe teethe are wont to be vexed, through a reumatyke matter distillinge from
ye brain, and thorough the faut of the stomach, with sondrye passions, but
seeing, that ye teeth serve for comelynes, for chewynge of meat, and for
pronunciation, therefore they must be cured with all diligence. Aliabbas
nombreth.vi. dyseases of the teeth, pain, corosion, congelation, dormitation,
fylthynes, loosenes. They suffer not an aposteme, because of their hardness, but
a thing like to aposteme, nether have they feeling by themselves, but by the
reason of synowes, which come from the third pair of synowes of ye brain, to
their roots, and to the gommes, which thing Galien affyrmeth also, in the
book of utility of the parts, and thus we may conclude, that they are not
apostemed nether feel, but by reason of the gommes, and the synowes before said,
which thing is evident, for when one little piece of the tothe is broken, the
man is not payned, and therefore, he adds moreover saying. The pain of the
teeth, chances of the evil complexion of the synowes, or of an hot or cold
aposteme. wherefore sometime, the pain is swaged, when the root is pulled up,
and the matter, which causes the pain, issues by the holownes of ye place
where the tothe was, and also the synowe is not extended, or strayned out,
where the place is enlarged. Fynallye it is a cause why the medicine may enter
in more easelye, and ease the paynefull place, wherefore Galien says, that if
medicines prevail not for the swagynge of the tothe ache, we must descend to
the last remedy, that is to say, we must draw them out by the roots.
Corrosion.
Corrosion chances in the great teeth, through rote^nes, and sharp and evil
moisture which grows and byteth them, ye may remove the said corrosion with
trepanes, fyles, and other convenient instruments, fyllynge the concauities
afterward, with leaves of gold, to preserve the place from putrefaction.
Congelation
Congelation chances to the teeth, of outward or inward things. Of
outward, when a man eats sour things, of inward, when sower vapors
asce^de from the stomach. Also there is yelow fylthe, styckynge to the teeth,
and the roots thereof, which comes of gross vapors ascendynge from the
stomach, and may be removed by scrapynge and rubbing, with convenient
instruments.

Here follows the description of a powder, which mundifyeth the teeth,
preserves the gommes, makes the teeth whyt, Powder for tethe.
and remedyeth the stynkyng of the mouth.. roche alume brent.. ij. of
sarcocolle, of terra sigillata, of mirabola^ citrine. ana.. i. ss. myngle them
together, and make a powder and rub the teeth therwyth, in the morning
fasting thryse a week.

Sometime there chances a certain dormitatio^ in ye teeth, by holding cold
things in ye mouth, and stupefacti. medicines in the mouth, for the remotion
whereof, ye shall use the medicine under written, co^maundyng it to be holde^ in
the mouth warm.. of odoriferous wine.li. ss. of aqua vite.. i. of rosemarye,
sage, and camomill. ana. m^. ss. of cloves, of nutmegges. ana.. i. of
sandrake.. i. ss. let them sees all together, till the third part be consumed,
then strain them, and use them as is aforesaid. Item aqua vite applied to the
teathe, with cotton, takes away the dormytation and congelation of the same.
Loo^enes.
Laxation or loosenes of the teath, chau^ceth through the loosenes of the
gommes, or through debilitation or weakenynge, of the roots or parts, that
bind the tethe, al which things happen, through rewmes, and humors
descedyng from ye brain and sometime by corrupt vapors mountynge from the
stomach.

For the curatio^ whereof ye shall use the medicine following.. of syrup of
liciu^.. x. of roche alume.. iij. of the water of plantayne.. iij. ss. of ye
wine of pomegranades.. ij. of honye of roses.. vi. of sarcocolle.. i. ss. of
vynegre squillityke.. ss. of the leaves of wild olyues somewhat stamped. m^.
ss. let them be sodden altogether, (except ye liciu^, and the honey of
roses,) the^ strain them, and let them sethe again with honey of roses and
licium, till.ij. parts of.iij. be consumed, rub the gu^mes with this
composition, for it fasteneth the tethe, and remoueth putrefaction, and
comfort the synowes that come to the roots of the tethe. And if a more
desiccatiue medicine be required, ye shall use vngue^tum egiptiacum of the
description of Auice^ne, for it has virtue to remove the evil flesh, and to
conserve the good.

Now that we have declared, the passions of the tethe and the causes there of,
we will teach, with what remedies, the said dyseases may be removed, for as
Galene says, the pain of the tethe, is the greatest of all pains that
kylleth not ye pacient. Beside the six causes aforenamed, the pain of the
teth may come of worms, which are engendered in the holowes of the same, and by
apostemacion of the ligamentes of the gummes, but now we will come to practice.
Ye may know whether the matter be hot or cold, by administration of
medicines upon the tethe, if the matter be hot, the pain seaseth, by the
application of cold things. Contrarywyse, if the pain be cold, the patient
is eased, with the application of hot things. The cure.
To the cure of the said disease there be.iij intentions required. The first is
ordinance of dyete, the second purgation of the matter antecedente, the iij.
application of sondrye local medicines. First the patient must absteyne from
all meats that sone putrifye in the stomach, as fyshe, gross flesh and
salted, from al white meats, chease. etc. And he must use meats of easy
dygestion, that engender good blood. His wine must be of good odoure, and
myngled with sodden water. After refection, he must pycke his teeth and cleanse
them, that no rotenes be engendered therein.

The second entention, which is to purge the matter antecede^t, is thus
accomplished. when the matter is hot, Mesue commands to cut the vain
cephalica, or in the stead thereof to lay ventoses upon the shulder, or upon
the neck. Item sacrifycation of the gommes, and application of bloodsuckers is
a present remedy in this case, to cause the pain to cease inco^tinently. These
medicines following purge the matter, that causes the pain. Namelye, an
electuary of roses after Mesue, an electuarye of psilium, cassia diacatholicon,
pylles of reubarbe, and pylles of assagereth medicines that purge cold and
gross matter are these, diafinicon, hiera with agarike, pylles sine quibus,
and pylles cochye. But pylles of fumiterrye and agaryke, purge myngled matter,
and so does cassia, and diacatholico^

The third inte^tion is acco^plyshed by the administration of sondrye remedies
upon the place. First if the matter be hot, yt may conveniently use the wine
of pomegranades, with the water of plantayne, and a little vynegre sodden with
sumach, roses, flowers of pomegranades, and a little licium. Item to the same
ente^tion, it avails much to wash the mouth with this decoction.. of the
roots of tapsus barbatus, having white leaves. m^. i. of roses, of barlye, of
sumach, ana. m^. ss. of tormentille brayed, of the seed of henbane brayed.
ana.. ij. of all the saunders. ana.. i. of lettuse. m^. ij. of the tender
croppes of brambles, of the leaves of wild olyues, and of myrtilles. an^. m^.
i. let the^ be al sodde^ together with.iiij. pound of rain water, and a little
vynegre, and a little wine of pomegranades, until half be consumed, hold this
decoction in the mouth, for it swageth pain maruelously. An other decoction..
of the leaves of plantayne, of lettuse, of lingua passerina or knotgrasse, of
sorell of nyghtshade. ana. m^. ss. of sumach.. iiij. clean barlye. m^. i. let
them sees all together, till the barlye break, and put thereunto, of vynegre..
ij. of syrup of roses by infusion, of diameron. ana.. i. ss. with the skin
of an addre, let them sees again, till half be consumed, then strain them
and use the decoction as is aforesaid, for it swageth the pain coming of an
hot cause in the teeth. Auicenne says, that to wash the mouth with vynegre
of the decoction of an adders skin, appeaseth ye tothache, through a certain
propriety that is therein, and I have proved.ij. parts of the wine of
pomegranades with the said medicine, and it has succeeded well. Item to wash
the mouth with ye decoction of a frogge sodden in vynegre and water, (as Rasis
afyrmeth) is a good remedy against the tothe ache.

It is profitable sometimes to vapor out the matter, and to provoke it to the
outward parts, that it may leave the synowy parts, and come to ye fleshie And
therefore Galen says, that swellynge of the chekes in the toth ache, is a
sign that the pain will cease, for then the matter leaves the synowe and
comes to the flesh, for the euaporation whereof I ever used this ordinance.
of the leaves of lettuse, and violettes. ana. m^. ss. of clean barley somewhat
broken. m^. i. of raysons, of iuiubes, no^bre xx. of the roots of langdebefe
clean piked.. ij. of lycorice.. vi. of the cro^mes of bread.. i. sethe them
altogether, with sufficient quantity of rain water, till ij. parts of.iij. be
consumed, the^ strain them and put to the straynyng of syrup of violettes..
iiij. Ye shall often wash the mouth therwyth, for it eases pain by
suppuration of the matter, or swellyng of the place. If ye put fygges and dates
to this decoction while it does sethe, it may be well permytted against a
cold matter. Item against the pains of the tethe caused of a hot matter, ye
may conveniently use the seed of henbane brayed with a little sandrake, and a
little coriander, and a little opium, incorporated all together with a little
vynegre. Ye may make this ordinance, after the manner of a trocyske, or a
bag, and in a lyquide form, and lay it upon the sore place.

There be many which say ye vyneegre hurts the teeth, whose opininion is to
be refused, for as Galene says, the medicines of the tethe whether they be
repercussiue or resolutiue must be of strong penetration or percyng, because
of ye hardness of the said tethe, wherefore all the wrytters make their medicines
with strong vynegre And Auicenne says, Vynegre.
that vynegre is a common medicine for all matters, affirmynge that the coldness
of vynegre is sone taken away with other medicynes myngled therwyth, and
nevertheless his cuttynge and deep percynge, remain, which.ij. qualities are
necessary in this case. Therefore Galie^ says by the authority of
Alchigenis, yt vynegre is an excellent medicine to heal the tothe ache, and
commands to myngle vynegre with galls, and to apply the same upon ye painful
place, when the matter is hot. Here follows the ordinance of Rasis, when the
matter is myxt.. of the sede of purslane, of corrianders, of sumach, of
le^tilles husked, of yelowe sandres, of roses of piretru^, of camphore, of all
equal parts, and make trosiskes with ye juice of night shade, and lay a
trosciske upon the tothe dissolved in wine and rose water, good Mesue prayseth
this medicine.

Now that we have declared ye medicines of the tothe ache caused of an hot and
myxt matter, we will speak of medicines that swage the pain of the tethe, Have
vi^e in cold matter.
in a cold mattier. First aquavite myngled with the decoction of rosemary,
piretrum, and organy, and leyd upon the tothe warm, spedely eases pain
caused of a cold matter, and so does aqua vite also with Galiens triacle, Item
armonyake dyssolued with aqua vite, and a little sandrake, and a little myrrh,
applied to the teeth with the finger, after the manner of a lynement appeaseth
pain without fail. Item to this intention, the composition following is right
profitable, laid wtin the rotes of ye teeth.. of peper, of assasetida, of
opiu^, of myrthe, of castorium. ana.. i. incorporate them altogether with honey,
and the wine of pomegranades. Item it is good to wash the mouth with this
decoction following, which we have often proved.. of odoriferous wine.li. ij. of
ye water of the flowers of camomill.li. i. of the water of sage, and rosemary.
ana.li. ss. of myrrh.. ij. of armoniake.. ij. ss. of nutmegges, of
fra^kensence, of mastyke, of cloves. ana.. ss. of sandrake.. i. ss. of yua
muscata, of sauyne, of rosemary, of squina^tu^, of organy, of serpillu^, an^. a
little. of licorice.. vi. of reyso^s. x. of honey.. ij. of vynegre.. i. seth the^
al together till the half be consumed, then strain them and use them. Mesue
says also, Garlyke.
that garlyke stamped and bound to the palm of the hand, heals the tothe
ache. Item Alexander says, ye garlyke sodde^ with wine and with.. i. ss. of
olibanu^ and.. i. of myrrh, till they be as thycke as honye, swageth the pain
of the tethe being robbed therwythall.

Ite^ to the same ente^tion it is good to wash the mouth with this
decoction.. good wine and sethe it with red roses, piretru^, rosemary, sage,
honye, and the skin of an addre, and a little vynegre. Item piretrum lythed in
vyneegre of the decoction of opium, and henbane, and deteyned between ye teth,
swageth pain and kylleth worms. Ite^ the iuce of wormood, and sothernwood,
takes away ye pain caused of worms if ye teth be anoi^ted therwithal, the
same thing does triacle also with vinegre.

Furthermore there chau^ceth pain to the teeth through ye corrosion and
holownes of the same, for thereby venymous fylth is deteyned wtin the^, and is
spread to ye roots of ye said teeth, and so ye synowes and lygame^tes, cleuyng
to the same, are greatly hurted. We have healed this corrosion, cauterisyng
the place with hoote oil, put into the holowenes with cotton, or with a
prouet garnyshed with cotton, and sometime with an whote iron, or with
vnguentum egyptiacum of our dyscryption. And sometimes also, in stead of a
cautery, we have put into the holownes of the toothe one grain of a ruptorye
of capytelle, with a little cotton. Item oil of vitrioll put into the
concauitie with cotton, is a sure and a proved medecin. When these remedies
cannot prevail, we must come to handye operation, to draw out the teethe,
whereunto an expert man is requisite, wherefore the chirurgiens do remytte
this cure to barbours and to vacabounde toothdraweers. Howbeit, it is good to
have seen and to mark the workynge of such, and thus we conclude this present
chapter.

Here begins the.vi. book of master John de Vygo, of breaking of bones,
and of the dislocation of bones, and joints of the hole body
The first chapter, of the general curation of broken boones
THE breakyng of bones, as auncyente and latter writers affirm, may be put in
the nombre of solution of co^tinuitie caused of a brusi^g thing for it is wont
to chance for the most part, of a fall or of a struck. Concerning the
breaking of the boones of the head, and of the cuttynge of the same, we will
speak nothing here, but refer the reder to the book of wounds. Kinds of
fractures.
Of fractures and brekyngges, as says Galene, some been simple, and some
compounde. Of simple some ben after ye breadth orouerthwart the boon, some
alonge, and are called fyxurale. And of those, as Lanfranck says, some are
complete, and some are not complete. These that are complete in which the
boon is broken, cyrcle wise, are of hard curation because the two ends of
the bone can not easlye be joined to gether. Those that be not complete, in
which one only part of the boon is broken, been easy to be cured.

Likewise, the curation of the boones called focilia, been of easy curation,
so that they been not both broken, for if they been both broken cyrclewyse,
than it must needs be hard to restore them.

The breaking that is according to the length of the boon, is of easy
curacion, but if the breaking be after breadth, and the boones be in little
pieces, they are dangerous, because the pieces prycke the senewy muscules and
flesshye places. And we have seen often, that through the pryckynge of the said
pieces, a spasme and other evil accide^tes have chanced, which have brought
the pacyente to death. Furthermore we have seen the said fractures, to have
chanced in one of the bones called focilia, and sometime in both.

A fracture compounde, is yt which is accompanied with a wound, or pain, or
aposteme, or when one bone rydeth upon a another through evil restoration and
according to these dyfferences, we must order our cures

The causes of fractures or brekynges are all things, which may bruise or
break as a fall, a struck. etc.

The signs are easily known, as Aliabbas says, if ye behold his fellow
that is not hurt, for they are not equal. Also ye may know it by towching ye
fracture with your finger, for ye shall perceive the sondrynge of the bones when
the fracture is complete, and the pacient can not sustain him self upon the
broken member. In a fracture longitudinall, or according to length, ye shall
not feel separation of the boones, but ye shall feel a certain unnatural
grossenes upon the broken boon, and furthermore the member is payneful, and
unapt to do any thing.

And note, that every fracture which is nigh, the joints, is of hard curatyon,
because the remedies administered by the chirurgines, can not conuenientlye be
bound and splented.

And more over, because that thoroughe the nyghnes of muscles that bind the
joints, the pacyente abides vehement pain, and consequentlye an aposteme is
engendered in the place. Wherefore it is necessary to anoint the broken members
with such things as have virtue to swage the pain, and to remove
apostemacion, as is the yolke and white of an egg beaten with oil of rooses
omphacyne, oil of cammomylle, and oil myrtyne.

Moreover, the member must not be bound ne splented, but it shall suffyce to
ley the member comelye in a lynyn clothe, whereof we will speak more playnelye
here after. In the said fracture, the member moves vneaselye, for the cure
whereof, we have dyscrybed a good remedy in our antidotarye in the chapter of
cerotes.

The fracture which is acco^panyed with pain, with an aposteme, musclous
flesh bruised, and little pieces of boones, is of evil and hard curation, and
except the said accydentes be first corrected and removed, there can be no
good curation, wherefore ye must dylygentlye endeavor yourselfe to remove the
same, and afterward resort to the proper cure at fractures. I will speak of
the remotion of them, when I shall treat of the four ententions concerning
the cure of accydentes.

Furthermore, the fracture that is with a wound, is cured with great
dyffycultie, because it can not conuenyentelye be splented ne bound, for the
mouth of the wound must needs be kept open, ye, and that worse is, splentes
must not be used at al, in this fracture, tylle ye be sure that there is nor
shall be no apostemation.

Touching the restoration of a broken boon, Bones must be spedely r^stored.
it must be done as soon as may be, for the aduoydaunce of aposteme and pain.
Wherefore, in the day and hour when the fracture chaunseth, the chirurgien
must go about the restoration with the means aforesaid, for when the boon
is hardened, and somewhat bound to gether with the pore called sarcoydes, for
the restoration thereof there needs extencyon or stretchynge of the member,
in which stretchynge, as Auycenne says, aspasme is to be suspected. Ye shall
understand more over, as the foresaid man says, that if the fracture be
changed often, and be often bathed with whote water, and if haste be in
mouynge, and therewyth al, if there be a piece of a bone that cannot be
mayntayned with nature, and if the member be bound to hard, and laid
uncomely, for these causes restoration is hindered.

Ye stall mark also, that the fracture in old bodies and coleryk, and in those
that have been late sick, is slowelye cured, through the defaute of
noryshemente which should bind and join the bone to gether. Signs of
restoration.
A sign of perfyte restoration of a fracture is, when the broken member is
like to his fellow in composicion, and with out pain, and when in the first
days the pain and swellynge is removed. Some boones are restored in.xxxv.
days, as the boones of the head: the boones of the rybbes, in eyghte and
twentye: the canell bone in four and twentye: the boones of the shoulders in
four and twenty days: the boon called adiutorium in forty days: the
arms, in four and thyrtie: the bones of the thyghe in fyftie days: the
boones of rascete of the hands in twenty days: the boones of the legs
in.xl. days. Howbeit, in this case the age or complexion increases or
dymynysheth the time of restauracion of the same.

The universal cure of fractures has.iiii. ententions, as Galiene and
Auycenne say. The first is equacyon of the broken bone. The second
conseruacyon of the boon returned into his natural place. The third, is a
strong and comelye byndynge of the poor called sarcoydes. The fourth is to
correct the accidents. As touching the first entention, the manner to restore
broken members is this. First, ye must prepare a bed and conuenyente
cloutes, and lyghce splyntes of wood, which must be.ii. fyngers broad, and
they must be in dystaunce the one from another the breadth of a finger, and
they must be compassed about with cloutes wette in vyneger and roose water,
and ye must prepare bands.v. fyngers broad and also cords mean between
gross and thyn. Furthermore ye must have at hand, whytes of eggs beten with
oil of rooses and myrtyne, for oil myrtyne, among other remedies, excels
in restorynge of broken boones.

Likewise oil of rooses omphacyne is to be admynystred in the first medycyne,
with a piece of fine flax, dypped in oil, in such quantity as may compass
the member round about, and this medycine must be applied warm in the
somer, and hoote in the winter.

A nedle also and a threde, are necessary to the first curation. The said
splyntes must be light as we said before, made of a wyllowe tree, or of a
scabbarde of asworde, and let them be wrapped with cloutes wette in warm
water.

The length thereof must be according to the length of the broken member, and
five fyngers beyond the fracture, so that the ioynte be not hurted therewyth,
when all these things be prepared, ye must have two expert mynisters, of
which one must take the broken member in the nether part and the other in the
over part, and they must stretche out the pacyente ryghtelie, and strongely,
but yet with as little pain as may be.

Than the master must take ye broken member about the fracture, pressynge it
myghtelye, so that the pieces of the boones may be well set together, and if
the fracture can not be brought to his place again, than (if it be in the
leg) ye must roll it in a towell or bands under the knee, and let one
mynyster draw one end toward the over part, and the other mynyster the
other end toward the nether part, layinge his hands about the bowynge of
the foot, and than let the master compose the boones. Likewise if the
fracture be in the over part of the thyghe, set the band about the fla^ke, and
draw one of the ends toward the right side, and the other toward the left
side cross wise, and let the mynyster that must hold the ends, stand
behind the back of the pacyente, and so draw the same, till the boon be
redused to his place.

And for as much, as the fracture is so hardened and glewed together by the
pore called sarcoydes, that the foresaid means are not sufficient, we must
as Hipocrates says, use an instrumente, which instrumente, as all the
practicioners affirm, is wrythen and is called tortulare. First ye must
bind the pacyentes hands and his feet, and ye must tie him under the arms
to a pyller, and extend the broken member as it is said before with two
mynisters, and in the time of the stretchynge, the master must compose and
set the boones dulye together.

After the restoration is accomplyshed, take a fine lynen cloute dypped in
hot oil of rooses omphacyne and with oil myrtine mingled together which may
compass the member after the length of the splentes, and apply it without
wryncles or playtes And afterward, ye shall ley two stoupes dyped in the white
of an egg beaten with the foresaid oils, and stretche them out upon the
member being actuallye hot, than take a band and roll it upon the fracture,
streynynge it somewhat more stronglye upon the fracture, than in the
extremities or ends. Then leye on the splentes, according to the length of
the member, and than bind them with conuenyente stringes, leuing ye space
of.iii. fingers or there about, between every splent

And note, that the bands and the splentes, ought not to be so loose, that the
boon may go out of his place, nether so strayte, that pain, and apostemes
ben caused thereby. For there is nothing that causes greater pain or that does
more hinder the restauratyon of boones, than to strayte bindynge, and uncomely
setting of the member. Wherefore, it is better to err in to loose byndynge,
than to strayte. After splentynge ye wrappe in both the ends a handefull of
chafe. After that ye have laid to the splentes, the next day, ye must
look to the member, and if it be to straytelye bound you must lose it, and
if it be to slack, you must bind it strayter. And you must often anoint the
restored member, with oil myrtine actually hoote layinge it on with an hens
fether. And to avoid apostemation, it is expedyente to apply the defensive
following, in the over part of the broken member.. of oil of roses, of oil
myrtine, ana.. iii. of white wax.. i. and ss. when the wax, and oils are
melted, take them from the fire, and put thereunto, of bole armenie.. i. of all the sau^ders.. i. of bean flower.. x. of barley flower.. i. and. ss. mengle
them, and make as it were a ceroote.

This defensive suffers not, matter to come to the soore place, and yt
comfort the member with familiare resolution of the matter conioynct.

Item oil of rooses, and cammomylle with the decoction of earth worms, and
melted with a little wax, may be co^uenie^tly administered upon the knee, and
upon the synnowye parts lyinge about the same in all times to aduoyde the
pain of a spasme.

And if the fracture be in the thygh ye shall leye it upon the flancke or
upon the huckle bone, and ye shall proced till the seventh day with such a
medicine, so that no evil accydentes chance, as pain, aposteme. etc.

After the seventh day, good practicioners are wounte to vyset the fracture,
and to thaunge the former apparel for many causes, and chefely to se whether
the bone be gone out of his place and if he be, Kinds of fractures.
the master may co^uey it in again with little extencyon and pain, which
thing he could not do, if he did not vyset the place in many days, for
about the eyghte or ix. day, the pore called sarcoydes begins to be
engendered of nature in the boones, wherefore that pore being engendered, sondrye
evil accydentes may chance through the stretchyng of the boones.

Another reason why they vyset the place is this, namelye that if the boon be
in his due place, a fresshe medicine helps the generation of the poor
sarcoydes, which thing is very necessary.

For the accomplyshemente of the third entention, which is to conserve the
boon being reduced into his place, through due byndynge of the same pore
sarcoydes, ye shall proceed as hereafter follows

First, when ye have removed the first aparell, ye must visit the member
with a cloute dypped in the foresaid oils, and stretche it upon the fracture
as is a foresaid. A^^erward ye shall use stoupes w^^te in water and
odoriferous wine, and leye them upon the member as is a foresaid and than ye
shall use this plaster following,. the whytes of.iiii. eggs of most clear
terbentyne.. ii. of myldust.. x. of the powder of the graynes and leaves of
myrtilles, of bean flower ana.. vi. of red powder.. i. of saffron. ss. of
mumia, of dragagantum brayed ana.. ii. mingle the^, and proceed with this
plaster and the foresaid unctions ten days, if no accydente let you

After which ten days, ye shall vyset the member, and take away the
foresaid medicine and afterward, ye shall use this lotion the space of the
viii. part of an hour.. of rooses, of the leaves and graynes of myrtylles, of
woodbinde, of yarowe, ana. m^. i. rotes and leaves of ash tree. ana. m^. ii.
of the nuttes of cypress somewhat brayd in number. vi. of the rotes of holyhock
somewhat stamped.. iii. of comomyll melilote, wormewoode, ana. m^. ss. of
honey.. iiii. of licium.. ii. of sarcocolle, of myrrh, of frankensence, ana..
ss. let them seethe all to gether with suffycyente water and good red wine,
till the third part be consumed, and let the member be epythymed, as is
aforsayde, and after the epythimation, ye shall use the foresaid medicine of
the whytes of eggs and read powder and the other aforesaid other ten
days, and afterward ye may thu^ do every forth day, for the epithymie
fortyfieth the member, and draws noryshemente, by the which the boon is
bound together and the pore sarcoides is engendered.

And after that the.xx. days are passed, ye must apply the cerote written in
our antidotarie, which is appointed for broken boones.

For the accomplyshemente of the iiij. entention, which is to correct the
accydentes, if pain ensue, ye shall proceed with things that swage the pain,
descrybed in our antidotarye. And semblablye, if aposteme or gangrena
happens, ye shall resort to the proper chapters.

Fynallye, if there be any ytchyng ye shall anoynte the member with the
linimente folowinge. a linimente so itching.
. of oil myrtyne, of oil of rooses omphacine, ana. iii. of the iuce of
plantayne.. vi. of lytarge, of gold, and silver, ana.. i. and ss. of
bolearmenie, of terra sigillata. ana.. i. of tucia.x. ii. the iuce of amylon.
v. of camphore.. i. myngle them, and make a lynimente in a mortar of lead and
leye it upon the broken member, and bind the same with abande weted in
roosewater, and wine of pomegranades.

For ytche hyndereth the workynge of nature, and of medicines that should join
the boones to gether. Wherefore, it must be remedyed with al dylygence.
Albucrasys commands, that if the fracture be in a great member, we use not
splentes unto the.vii. day. Howebeit, (the reverence of so great a man
premised) I affirm that we ought to use splentes from the first day, unto
perfect restoration of the member.

But if the fracture came by a great bruise, or wound, and is very paynefull,
in a body full of evil humors than we ought not to splent the member, but
it shall suffyce to bind it with two, or three bands having certayholes over
the bruise or wound, that the superfluytes of the wound may issue out. We
have proved this cure in fractures accompanied with wou^des, and thus we healed
a noble man Leonarde de Paciis, The cure of Leonarde de Paciis
which as he roode about the town fell into a pytte, and brake the bones of
his lift leg called focilia, so that many pieces of bones issued there
withal, and the wound became cancrenous, and there happened also a cholerik
aposteme. But by the grace of god we removed the cancrenation with vnguentu^
egiptiacum, and we resolved the aposteme with a decoction of malowes,
violettes. rooses, laictuce, barlye, and pla^tayn. And we anointed al ye leg
with a lynemente made of the yolks and whytes of eggs beaten to gether with
oil of rooses omphacyne and with an oyntemente of rooses of mesnes
description. And we did set the leg in a little bed or cradell, made of
lynyn clothe and cotton, according to the length of the leg, that is to
say, from the knee, unto the bowyng of the leg or instep. And in the said
cradel, there was a round staff on both the sides, to keep the leg streyghte
all ways. And this cradell was tied to the leg, with many bonds of lynnen,
and woollen. And thus the said gentelma^ was restored to health with out
splentes, and without any hurt of his leg.

Concerning diet, it ought to be slender, and subtyle at the beginning till
you be without fear of apostemation. But afterward, Galene councelleth the
pacyent to use meats, that engender gross, and clammysh blood as trypes,
neates feet. etc: Likewise he may conuenyentelye use rise, or wheat sodden
with beef. Ye, and in this case chestnuttes, fresh chese, slymye fyshes, and
gross wine are permytted. As touching purgation, it is not requisite, nether
to vomyte, nor to purge down ward, cheifelye when the fracture is in the
nether parts of the body.

For through mouynge, and vexation of the body, pain might be increased,
and consequentely an aposteme engendered, where as it is a thing most
requisite in the cure of fractutures, to aduoyd apostemation

Which thing may be brought to pass, by the applycation of remedies before
written, and also by flebotomie in the contrary part, and by diametre, that
is to say, if the fracture be in the left arm, the common vein or the vein
called basilica of the right arm, must be cut. Fynallye it is expedyente,
that the patiente have a cord hanging over his bed, than when his
medicines, and splentes shall be applied, he may the better lift up his body and
move him self from his bed. Thus. etc.

The second chapter, of remedies to restore fractures and dislocations of
bones.
THe medicines which restore fractures, dislocations, and wrestynge of bones,
are those which have virtue to dry, and to glewe together, with some little
heat, as fra^kensence, myrrh, aloes, and such. Howebeit Galene says, that
a broken member or put out of ioyncte, can not be duelye restored, except
consoundynge medicines be applied at the beginning. Nevertheless, it shall be a
point of a wise chirurgien, not to apply the said medicine unto the seventh
day, or till he be sure that no apostemation will ensue. But in ye same time,
it is not only profitable, but also necessary to cool the member, and to
draw the mattier from place to place. The member is cooled, with the white of
an egg beaten with oil of roses and myrte, and likewise the mattier is turned
away, by flebotomyes, rubbing, and ventoses, applied upon the contrary
parts. Wherefore divine Hipocrates commands, not to lay consoundynge
medicines, upon broken or displaced bones, unto the seventh day, or till the
member be out of danger of apostemation, and it is the practice of all good
chirurgiens, to proceed with coolyng medicines, unto the said time.

Here follows a remedy of good effect in the beginning of a fracture and
dislocation. R the white of.iii. eggs, of oil of roses omphacine, of oil of
roses co^plete. an^.. x. of oil mirtyne,. i. ss. of mildust, of barlye flower.
an^.. vi. of bole armenye fynely poudred, of sa^guis draconis. an^.. iii.
Me^gle the^, and beat them al together, and make a plaster. After the.ix. or
tenth day, except some accide^t hi^der your purpose as pain, an aposteme, or
ytchynge, then ye may conveniently apply upon the broken and displaced member,
this medicine lolowynge. R. the whites of iiii. eggs, of oil myrtyne, of oil
of roses. an^.. ii. of clear terebentine.. i. ss. of fra^kynsence.. iii. of
mastike.. i. ss. of myrrh, of aloes. an^.. ii. of sa^guis draconis, of bole
armenye. an^.. ss. of myldust.. iii. mengle them. Another medicine for the
wresting of the synnowes and ligamentes of the ioynctes.. of salomons seal..
iiii. of the roots of holihocke.. viii. of the leaves of plantayne. m^. ii.
sees them all together, and stamp them, and streyne them, and make a soft
cerote with white wax, addyng of oil of roses, of oil myrtyne. ana.. ii. of
clear terebentine,. i. ss. of Agrippa, and Dialtea, ana.. ss. of bole armenye..
vi. of sa^guis draconis.. iii. of frankynsence.. i. of all the saunders.. ii.

Note here, that this cerote must be applied after the seuenthe day, but
before ye seventh day, it is good to proceed with the foresaid medicines of
whytes of eggs. Item we have described a notable cerote in our antidotarye for
fractures and dislocations, and also many other remedies in the former chapter,
which may be reduced to the use of this chapter. And thus we make an end. etc.

The third chapter, of the fracture of the bone in the nose.
THe bone of the nose, is often broken by a fall, or by a stroke, ye signs are
manifest enough, and need not to be described. But it chau^ceth sometimes, yt
the said bone is broken with a wound, and sometime without a wou^d. when it is
broken with a wound, it is of harder curation.

The cure of this fracture, is thus dispatched. The master must put his fore
finger, or his little finger, in the nose, and therwt al inco^tinently, he must
address ye bone into his place with ye fingers of his other hand. And if the
fingers be not sufficient, to lift up the depressed bone, the^ in the stead
thereof, he must have a smoth willowe stick, and must lift up the bone
therwithal after ye manner aforsayd. when ye bone is reduced into his place, he
must apply in ye outward part, whites of eggs beaten with oil of roses,
oil mirtine, mildust, barlye, sa^guis draconis, and bole armeny. an^. a little.
And he must put into the nose te^tes moisted only in oil mirtine, beaten
with ye white of an egg. And of one side (if need be) he may use a holowe
tente like a pype, made of silver or of lead, and rolled about with cloutes
wette in oil mirtine, yt the man may breath through ye same. After.viii.
days, ye may conveniently apply the medicine written in the former chap. which
co^sou^deth bones, or the cerote written in our antidotary for the fracture of
boones. And if it be with a wou^d, let the wound be left open as much as may
be, ye it may be daily visited with a convenient medecyne. If the wound be
bruised, let it be healed after the curation of a bruised wound, and so forth in
other, as we have declared in the doctrine of wou^des. This restoration
comunelye, is brought to pass within.xx. days. Of diete and purgation, we
have spoken sufficientlye in the universal chapter of fractures. As touching
bynding, though sundry men have taught sondrye things thereof, nevertheless,
because the place is unapt to be bound, it is better as experience has taught
us, only to use the forsaid remedies. For if ye bindyng should be to streit,
ye members might be made evil favored thereby, if it be to loose, it shall
profitte nothing.

The.iiii. chapter, of the breaking of the jaws.
IT happens sometimes, yt the iawe boon is broken through a fall, or through
a stroke, which thing is easily known, by the equality of the teeth, and by
the depressio^ of the one iawe, and standing up of the other. For ye
restoration thereof, the doctors command to put the thombe into ye mouth,
upon the fracture, to lift up the bone, and to lay the other hand under the
chynne, and to lift up ye.ii. extremities of ye bone, and so join them
together.

The restauratio^ of this fracture, is known be the equality of the teeth,
and by the natural figure of his fellow. If ye fear lest the teeth will fall, let
them be bound with a golden threde, or with a seared threde, as ye shall think
best.

After yt the iawe is returned, ye shall emplayster the place the space of.vii.
days, with the white of an egg beaten with the oil of roses, oil myrtine, and
a little myldust, and afterward ye shall bynd it conveniently. If the fracture
be with a wou^d in the outward part, ye must proceed as it is declared in the
former chapter. But if the wound be within, ye must proceed with honey of
roses, and with sirupe of roses, and afterward for the rest of the cure, ye
shall use the remedies described in the former chapter. Concerning diete,
purgation, and flebothomye, ye shall resort to the universal chapter of
fractures, and thus we make an end, etc.

The.v. chapter of the fracture of the canell bone of the breast, called furcula.
IT chances often, that the canell bone of ye breast, is broken or depressed,
and most comunely it is depressed toward ye inner part, which thing may be
easily known by touching of ye fingers. This fracture maybe restored as
follows First if ye bone incline inward, The cure.
ye must lift him up, thrustyng down the other part of the bone yt stands up.
And if it can not be reduced into his place by this mean, ye must use another
remedy. Let the patient sit upon a benche, and let him have two ministers, of
which let one hold ye adiutory of the broken part, and let the other hold the
adiutory bones, and stretch out the same. Tha^ let the master restore the
fracture, thrustyng down with his fingers the part yt stands up, and lyftynge
up the part depressed. And if there need greater extention or stretchynge, it
is profitable to make a round thing like a bowl, and to fill it with cloutes,
and to lay it under the forked bone, and then the pacient must incline his
elbowe to his ribs on the same side. For this workynge makes much to ye
restoryng of a fracture.

Sometimes it chances, yt the canel bone called furcula is only broken wtin,
and is greatly depressed, for ye restoration thereof, ye patient must lay his
belly upward, and ye must lay under his shulder on ye sore side a well stuffed
cusshen, and ye must thrust down ye shulder strongly with your hands, til the
pressed perte of ye canel bone be lifted up, which done, let ye fracture be
made eue^ with your fingers, streining ye bones strongly. And for as much as ye
forke bone, is wont to be broken in small pieces, and causes great pain, when
ye perceive yt it is so, ye must take away ye pieces, and make an incisio^,
which thing must be wisely done, lest the inner pa^nicle of ye breast be
touched. If the canel boon be broken in his end, and toward ye adiutory, the
adiutory being depressed with the canel bone, then ye must lift up ye adiutory
with a round balle, made with cioutes, and with ba^des, tied upon ye head, and under
ye adiutorye. But if any piece of the forke bone be lifted up above the
adiutory, which chau^ceth seldom, then the adiutory must in no wise be reised
up, but ye must only restore it in drawing the shulder, and in pressing your
fyngers upon it. As touching pronosticatio^, ye must know, Pronostication.
that this fracture is of hard restoration, and it requires a man excercised
in this affayre. As touching diete, ye shall resort to ye universal chap. of
fractures. As touching purgatio^, and phlebotomy, let the patient be purged
according to his age and complexion, with cassia, ma^na, and diacatholico^, with
the decoction of cordial flowers and fruits, and the veyn of the head called
cephalica, must be cut on ye contrary pert of ye sore. when ye canel bone is
restored by handy operation, let ye place be emplaistred with stoupes wette in
water and wine, and well wro^gen, and thereupon lay a plaster made with the white
of eggs and myldust, beaten with oil of roses, and oil mirtine, unto ye
seventh day, which remedy must be renewed every second day. For ye rest of ye
cure, and ye generation of ye pore called sarcoides, ye shall proceed with ye
remedies described in ye forsaid chapter. If a slender splent, or in ye stead
thereof a piece of lether, be required in this case, let it be bound on with
convenient ba^des unto ye perfect restauratio^ of ye bone, so it be done without
pain, lest mattier should be drawn to the place. etc.

The.vi. chapter, of the fracture of the shulder.
IT chances seldom, yt the shulder boon is broken, but it chances often,
that the ends and sides thereof be broken. For the curation whereof, ye must
proceed wiselye, in conueyeng the broken part into his place with all
diligence, and it may this be restored. Let the chirurgien thurst his hand
upon the place that stands up, and with the other hand let him draw down
the top of the shulder, according to the length of the fracture. By this
mean the part lyfted up or depressed, may be brought to his proper place.
And if need be, in the time of restoration, ye may lay a great balle of
flax, moysted in wine, under the arm hole, drawing the elbowe downewarde,
toward the rybbes. And if necessity require, let the chirurgien have another
minister helpyng him, if he ca^ not restore the place by him self.

When the boon is restored, let the place be emplastred with stoupes moisted
in wine, and water, and afterward lay upon it, a plaster made of myldust,
written in the universal chapter of fractures, and ye must lay upon the
plaster, light splentes, or in the stead thereof, pieces of lether, which must
be bound conveniently, and ye must leave the balle under ye arm holes. For the
rest of the cure, ye shall peruse the cha. of fractures, nether shall you
change the apparel, or medicine but every sixth day. Some apply at ye
beginning, only the white of an egg beaten with oil of roses, and oil myrtyne.
And when seven days are passed, they apply the foresaid plaster. And this
kind of curing has ever pleased me, and I have obtained thereby honor, and
profitte. Last of al, I sealed up, and fortifyed the place, with embrocations,
and with the cerote written in our antidotary, for fractures. The restoration
of this bone, is dispatched in.xxiiij. days. etc.

The.vii. chapter, of attrition, and breakyng of the boones of the neck.
Paul, as auicenne witnesses, says, that the bone of the neck may receive
a fracture.

How be it Albucasar holds a contrary opinion. And though it be so that a
fracture chances seldom in the bones of the neck, by the reason of their
roundnes. Yet there happens often in them attrition, which fracture and
attrition, be reason of ye nobilltie of ye nuke, and presence of pa^nicles and
sinnowes of the same, there ensue evil accidents, as great pain, and
difficulty of brethyng, stretchyng of the inward synnowes and lacertes,
apostemation, and palsy of the arms, chieflye when the fracture is in the
spo^diles of ye neck. But if ye fracture be in the nether parts and
spondiles, there follows a palsy of the thighs, legs, and fete, and sometime
death. The pronostication of the fracture of the spondyles and attritio^ of the
same, is this, namely that if the patient lie upon the spondiles, and his
excrementes vryne and wyndines come from him, they signifye death.

The cure of the attrition, and fracture of the spondilles of the neck, and of
the back, without a wound, must be fynely and subtylye restored. But if the
foresaid attrition or fracture be with a wound, ye must consider immediately,
whether therbe any piece of a bone in the wound, and if there be, ye shall take
it out discretlye and diligently, and to swage the pain, ye shall put into ye
wound oil of roses, of mastyke, of camomylle, with the decoction of earth
worms, whereunto, if ye put a little of clear terebe^tine, it shall be much the
better. we have found it good also, to comfort the nuke, with this unction,
rubbing it from the head to the end of the back bone. Howebeit, Auicenne
prayseth in all hurtes of the head, hens grese, and oil of dylle, and of
camomylle and dylle, wherwythall ye may conveniently boil earthwormes. If the
fracture be without a wound, and that the boon is restored to his place, ye
shall apply at the beginning a plaster of mildust, whereof we spoke in the
formerchapter, and ye shall also use little splentes, and bind them as it shall
seem good.

Here ye shall note, that the pacient must always have a loose belly, either by
nature, or by a linityue clyster, and at the beginning, cut the vein of the
head called cephalica in the hand, contrary to the hurt place, or in the
stead thereof, ye may use ventoses upon the buttockes, and thus we make an end

The.viii. chapter of the fracture of the bone of the tail or rumpe.
THere is a bone in ye end of the spine, or the back bone, called os caude,
or the rumpe bone, which is many times broken or displaced, through a fall.
And comunely, the practicioners restore it into his place, thrustyng down the
part that stands up, and therwythall putting their thombe in the fundament,
lyftynge up the bone depressed. when the boon is reduced into his place, ye
shall apply upon it a plaster of mylduste, or one of the playsters described
in the universal chapter of a fracture. And ye must bind it conuenientlye,
and lay upon it a splente half a handful long, wrapped in stoupes, for the
rest of the cure, ye shall resort to the universal chapter of fractures. etc.

The.ix. chapter, of the fracture of the bone called adiutorium.
ALbeit that we have sufficientlye declared, the knowledge of all fractures of
boones, in the universal chapter of fractures, nevertheless I thought it
good, to declare the signs that signifye a full fracture of the boon of the
adiutorie. Wherefore as Auicenne says, in the boon adiutorye, one part is
raised up, and an other depressed, and when the chirurgien touches it, he
feleth the bone to move and to crashe.

The restoration may be thus accomplished. First all necessary things must
be prepared, as we have said in the fractures of great bones, and the
chirurgien must have two ministers, of which one must take ye arm of the
patient about the hand, and the other must take the head of the adiutory in
both his hands, and they must stretche the arm together, and the master must
address the fracture into his proper place, as well as he can.

After that the bone is restored into his natural place, the chirurgien must
apply a band moysted in oil myrtine, and in oil of roses omphacine, and
afterward he must lay upon it stoupes with the white of an egg, rolled and
beaten with the forsayde oils, and afterward he must bind on the splentes,
and settle the member according as it is declared in the universal chapter.
And if the chirurgie^ did cut ye veyn called basilica, or ye comune vein in ye
contrary arm, it should be very profitable, a clister going before. Ite^ in ye
first days, ye belly must be loosed with cassia, manna, and diacatholicon,
before the fourth day. Also the syrup under written, may be conveniently used
in the morning, from the first day of the fracture, till the danger of
apostemation be passed, to engrosse the mattier, and to conforte the members.
R. of syrup of roses by infusion, of syrup of violettes. an^.. vi. of the
water of violettes, buglosse, and lupins, an^.. i. for diete and chaung of
remedies, ye shall resort to the universal chapter of fractures. This
restoration is confirmed, in the space of.xl. days.

The.x. chapter, of the fracture of the arm.
Sometime as Auicenne says, the two boones of the arm called focilia are
broken, and sometime but one only. when the little bone is broken, it is easy
to be restored, but if the greater boon be broken, it is hard to be cured.
For the great focille is ye, which susteineth the arm, and comes to the little
finger. The end of the other focille bone, is continued with the thombe. And
wilelmus Placentinus says, yt in young children they ben tender and pliable.

The cure of this fracture and of the bowyng, Cure.
differ not from the cure of ye bones called adiutoria. wherefore when ye shall
come to this cure, consider whether the fracture be in the less or greater
focile or in both, for if the fracture be in the greater or in both the
focilles, then in ye time of equation, great stretchyng is required, but if the
fracture be in the less focille, then small stretchyng shall suffice. wherefore
provide two ministres as we have said before, of which let one draw the
hand, and the other the elbowe, and they must draw both together equallye.
And the^ let the master restore ye bone unto his place, imbracynge the arm
with both his hands, and let him have his aparel prepared as it is said in
the universal chapter. And let splintes be applied, six in no^bre at ye lest,
of which one must be greater then another, and must be laid upon ye fracture,
as we have declared in the universal chapter, and the byndyng must be more
straight upon the fracture, then in the ends of the splyntes. And it is a
very requisite thing to bind them conveniently, for if the bynding be to
streyte, ye member might be astonyed and sometime cause an aposteme or
cancrena, and if it be to loose, it will not hold the bone fast in his place.

When the fracture of the focilles is restored, after the foresaid manner, let
the arm be laid equallye upon the bed. Nevertheless, the hand must be
somewhat raised up, that the humors run not down to the lower part. At the
beginning, except necessity constrayne, ye shall not visit the fracture unto
the.viii. day. Howbeit, ye shall lay upon the bone called adiutoriu^, a clout
dipped in odoriferous oil of roses, beaten with the white of an egg, and a
little juice of plantayne, lest humors resort to the sore place. Furthermore
it is a general rule in this case, and in other like, that the medicine be
changed every tenthe day, washing the members with the decoction described
in the universal chapter of fractures. Ite^ the old and later doctors
command, that the splyntes be not taken away within xl. days, for as
Auicenne says, it is better yt they should remain to long, tha^ to little
while. It is also requisite in this case, yt the pacie^t absteyn from laborious
moui^g. And he must beware yt he lay not the member uncomely.

Of dyete, purgation, and flebothomye, we have spoken suffycient in the
universal chapter of fractures.

The.xi. Chapter. Of the fracture of the bones of the hands.
IT chances seldom that the bones of the hand, and the fingers be broken,
nevertheless when it chau^ceth, the pacyente must hold his hand upon a
plain table wrapped with stoupes, and than he must have a mynystre to
stretche out the tho^be, and the other fingers, and then the master must convey
the bones of the fyngers, and of ye other part of the hand, into their
natural places, applying afterward, a plaster of mildust, written in the
universal Chapter of fractures, and byndyng on.ii. splyntes according to the
length of the finger. He must moreover, bind the said fracture with a band,
beginning from the elbowe to the hand, which thing must be done sleyghtly,
yt it be neither to loose nor to strayte, and the apparel must not be removed
unto the.vii. day. For other intentions, ye shall proceed according to that is
written in the universal Chapter. etc.

The.xii. Chapter. Of the fracture of the rybbes.
WE said in our anatomy, that.xii. rybbes are situated in man's body, of
which, the.v. nether rybbes are called false rybbes, and they are seldom
broken by reason of the gristlye nature. The other rybbes which are called
complete, are often broken (by reason of ye hardness) through a bruise or a
stroke Concerning the restauracion of the^, the doctors varye, nevertheless I
will follow the excellent doctor m. Guilelmus Placentinus.

First (as the same doctor says) if the rybbes be broken in one place or in
two, it may be known by touching, for ye shall feel a holownesse in the place,
Signs.
and by touching ye shall cause great pain to the patient, and he can not
easelye breathe, and sometime there is herd a crashyng of the fracture, and
sometime they are but bowed only. when ye perceive the forsayde signs, then
understand, yt the rybbes be very much bowed, or else broken, which bowyng or
brekyng of the rybbes, there follows sometimes a disese called a pleurisy,
coughing, spittyng of blood, and a great fever, and this fracture is judged of
all doctors to be very dangerous, and it is like in signs, causes, and cure,
unto the fractures of the bones of the breast. And they must be discretely
restored, depressyng the bones that stand up, Manner of restoryng.
and raysyng up the boones that been depressed. The manner of restoring them, is
this. Ye must lay your left hand, upon the part of the broken bone that
stands out, and ye must prepare your right hand, to be holden upon the
said part, being anointed with some glewysshe ointment or cerote, the space
that a man may say the Psalm of Miserere. which done, ye must cause the
patie^t to cough as stronglye as he can, and together, and in one time, ye
must thrust down the part of the bone yt stands out with your left
hand, and raise up the depressed part with your right hand. A glewysh
ointment.
The form of the glewysh oyntme^t is this. ye white of an egg, of mylduste..
ss. of dragagantu^ brayed, of frankensence. ana.. i. of fine bird lime.. vi.
of muscilage made with rose water and glewe of pitche. i. ss. mengle them, and
use them as is aforsayd, or after this manner. Take a threfolde cloth, and
playstre it with the said ointment, and lay it upon the depressed part. And
ye must leave in the mids of the plaster, a piece like a sleue, to draw it
when need shall be, to reyse up the depressed bone, thrustyng down with your
thombe, the part raised up, and cause the patie^t to coughe, in time of
restauracion.

when the bone is restored, ye shall apply this playstre following, unto
the.vii, day, renewyng it every second day.. the whytes of.iii. eggs, of
oil of roses omphacine, of oil mirtine. ana.. ii. of mylduste.. i. ss. of the
muscilage of holyhocke.. ii. ss. of been flower, and barley flour. ana.. vi. of
sa^guis draconis, of terra sigulata, of bole armenye. ana.. ss. of
frankense^ce.. i. After the.vii. day, ye shall apply this cerote following..
of ye rotes of holyhock. li. i. two fete of a calfe, sees them all in water,
and odoriferous wine, and than stamp and strain the roots only, and add to
ye straynynge, of oil myrtyne, and omphacyne. ana.. iii. of oil of mastyke..
i. ss of most clear terebentine.. x. of saffra^ fynely poudred.. ss. of sanguis
draconis, of terra sigillata.. ss. of frankensence.. ii. of bean flower.. i.
ss. mengle them, and make a soft cerote, with suffycient white wax, and lay
it upon the fracture with a broad cloute, for his operation is merueilous good
to swage pain, and to resolve wyndenesse, and to comfort the sore place.

If the body be full of humors, ye may cut the vein called basilica, the
first or second day in the contrary arm. The patientes diete must be
sklendre, till the danger of an aposteme be past, for which intention, ye shall
resort to the universal chapter. Here ye shall note, that after the.iiii.
or.vii. day, ye may conveniently give to the patient a broth of ciceres, to
resolve wyndines. Ye shall also procure that the patient be ever soluble, by a
clystre, or by some other mean.

The.xiii. Chapter. Of the fracture of the thyghe bone.
ALthough there be a great multitude of muscles in the thyghe, and great
thycknesse, yet ye may easily know ye fracture thereof, by reason there is but
one bone which is gross and large, and when it is broken, it appears to be
raised up in one part, and depressed in an other. The restauracion of this
boon differs not from ye bone called adiutory. Howebeit ye shall note this
one thing, that in this case greater stretchynge is required, than in other
bones, and the splentes must be longer, and larger tha^ in other me^bres. And
Auicenne says, that in this fracture the patient seldom eskapeth halting.

Concerning the situacion of the membre, and his cradle made of cloutes, and
other his apparel, we have spoken suffycyently in the universal chapter of
fractures. And for the rest of the cure ye shall proceed according to the
doctrine of the said chapter. This fracture is commonly restored in fyftye
days, somtymes sooner, sometimes longer, according to the age and complexion
of the patient. etc.

The.xiiii. Chapter. Of the breakyng of the leg.
AS we have declared in our Anatomy, there be.ii. bones in the leg, called
socilles also, of which the greater is called crus, or ye shyn, and the little
is called the less focille. when the fracture is in the less focill the
restauracion is easy, but when it is in ye greater or in both, it is hard. And
if the fracture of both the focilles be found with a wound, than it is
hardest of all. The fracture of the greater bone, is known by this, that the
broken part bends outward, and in the fracture of the less focylle, the
bone bends inward. The restoration of the said bones, dyffer not from the
cure of the focilles of ye arm, that is to say, the master must have his
aparel, and.ii. mynisters, of which one must take the leg above ye knee and
the other about the insteppe, and they must draw it equally. Than the master
must address the bone into ye place, pressyng it with both his hands, and
afterward he must apply stoupes moisted in ye white of an egg beaten with
oil of roses, and oil of myrt, and then he must bind it and splente it, as
it is said of the cure of the broken adiutorie.

The.xv. Chapter. Of the fracture of the round bone of the knee.
AS the doctors say, the round bone in the knee receives no fracture, but is
displaced, and put out of ioynte, which thing if it chances the chirurgien
must return it steyghtlye into his place, and afterward he must apply upon
it a plaster of the white of an egg, beaten with oil of roses, and oil of
myrte, byndynge thereupon a piece of lether, according to the rou^dnesse of the
bone, and he must change the apparel every fyfth day.

The.xvi. Chapter. Of the fracture of the bones of the feet, and of the
heels, and toes.
THe fracture of the boones of the raschete of ye fete, and of the toes, and of
the heles, chau^ceth seldom, and when it chances, it is not restored without
great labor. And therefore an exercysed man is required in this case, for
through the multitude of synowes, great pains and apostemations are wont to
chance. And forasmoche as these bones can not be broken without a notable
attrition of the synowes and lacertes, therefore my counsel is, after the
restauratio^ of the bones, to use medicines ye swage pain, unto the.vii. day,
as is this plaster following. A plaster to swage pain
. of oil of myrt, of oil of roses omphacine. ana.. ii. the white of.iii.
eggs, of the less plantayne called rybwort, cut in small pieces and stamped.
m^. ii. of myldust, of barley flower, and bean flower well boulted. ana.. vi.
mengle them all together, and plaster the place with stoupes moysted in water,
and wine of pomegranades, and renew it not but every third day. After vii.
days, ye shall proceed with application of the cerote written in ye chapter of
the fracture of the bones of ye breast. The manner of restoring ye said fracture
is this, ye must lay the foot of the patient upon a fast board, and put under
the foot some cloute or other soft thing, than let the master thrust
together the foot of the patient, and so address the bones into their propre
places, as well as he can. etc.

Here follows a treatise of the dislocation, or displacing of the joints.
The first Chapter. Of universal cure of bones put out of ioynte.
DIslocation (after Haliabbas) is when a bone goes out of his place,
Dislocation
in which there is co^cauities, where the boones are joined together If the
dislocation be little, so that the bone be not out all together, it is called
dislocation not complete, and it is it, which commonly is called torsion, or
wresting. And there is a third kind, which is called of Auicen, the elongation
of the ligamentes out of their natural place. Moreover, the said doctor
teaches, that the bones are joined together.iiii. manner of ways The first is
like a saw, commonly called coniunctio serratilis, as ye may se in the seames
of the heed. The second is after the manner of fixion or styckyng, as in the
teeth. The third is after the manner of correspondens, as ye may se in the
bones of ye breast. The fourth is by byndynge, and in yt there is an holownes
between two bones, as ye may se in the ioynynge together of the arms, and of
the knees.

As touching the causes of dislocacation, some are outward as a fall, a
stroke, Causes
inordynate stretchyng of me^bres, some be inward, as gross slimy humors, and
wyndynesse lyinge about the joints.

And sometime by defaute of nature, which has ordained the joints and the
ligamentes in some men weak, and the holownesse of the joints, not very deep.
And therefore the said Auicenne says: Dislocation chances in some men,
because the holownesse of the joints are not diepe, and also the ligament
which is ordained between them both, is not soft but weak. we said
moreover, dislocation may chance in great joints by reason of gross
wyndynesse, and slymy humors, and that is not our saying, but Auicennes: whose
words be these. wyndynesse (says he) with imflammation, makes the membre
sometime to be broken, that is to say to be displaced. Concerning the kinds of
dislocation, one is simple an other compounde. The compounde is with pain,
aposteme, wound, or fracture of the bone, and sometime with hardness, and by
these kinds ye shall order the cure. Of joints, some are easily displaced, as
the ioynte of the hand, and some are not easily displaced as the joints of
the elbowe.

A dislocation of a membre is known when one part is higher than an other,
and when the membre can not be easelye moved, and is unequal to his fellow.

Every dislocation comes by one of these ways, namelye, either it is
toward the inner part, or the outewarde part, or the former part, or the
hyndre part.

As touching pronostication, ye shall understand, that every dislocation
accompanied with pain and Aposteme, or with a fracture and wound, is
dangerous, and of hard curatio^. And therefore Galene says, that in this
dislocation there ensues difficulty of mouynge the joint, through stretchyng,
so that the membre remains always crooked. And like judgment ye may have of
an old and indurate dislocation. wherefore the sooner the bone put out of joint
is restored, the better it is: and therefore Hipocrates says, that whosoever
is vexed of a sciatica, and after a cure has the same disease again, there is
slimy matter in the joint, and the leg consumes, and the patient halteth,
except he be brent. The manner of this burning is, with a circuler instrument
declared by Albucrasis.

The cure
The universal cure of dislocation (certain rules mencyoned in the universal
chapter of fractures presupposed) shall be accomplyshed by.iiii. intentions. The
first is, to bring the joint into his place again. The second, to conserve
the same being restored. The third is, to defend apostemation and pain. The
fourth is, to correct the accidents.

The first is easy, namely by stretchynge out of the membre displaced, and by
thrustynge down discretelye the part that stands out, into the holowe
place.

The second intention is accomplysshed by the admynystracyon of sondrye local
remedies, according to the dyuersitie of the time, and the dislocation. And
after that the dislocation is restored, ye must anoint the place with Oil of
Roses, and oil of myrt, hot in the winter, and warm in the somer, and
afterward lay on a piece of cloth moysted in the said oils, of such
largeness, as may compass about all the ioynte. And afterward ye must also
lay on stoupes wette in water and wine of pomegranades, well wrong with the
white of an egg, and mylduste, and other things aforesaid like a playstre,
than bind the membre accordynglye, as we have declared in their propre
chapters.

The third intention is accomplisshed by loosing the belly, and by flebothomie
on the contrary side by a diameter, and the patient must keep the diete
declared in the universal chapter of fractures. And for the perfyt
accomplyshment of the third intention we will ordeyn a plaster, which must
be applied aftter that.vii. days be passed, and must be renewed every fourth
day.. of oil myrtyne, of oil of Roses complete. ana.. ii. the whites
of.iiii. eggs, of the iuce of rib worte, of the juice of consolida the less.
ana.. i. of myldust, of barlyflour ana.. x. of read poudre.. i. ss. of terra
sigillata, of bole armeny, of the powder of roses, and myrtylles. ana.. ss. of
clear terebentyne, of honye of roses strayned, ana.. vi. mengle them, and use
them as a plaster, it is a deuyne medicyne to confyrme joints. To the same
intention, the cerote ordained in our antidotarie for broken bones may
conuenyently be used.

The fourth intention (which is to remove the accidents) is thus acco^plyshed.
First, if there be any pain, or any aposteme, ye must take away the same
before ye come to the restoration, lest perchance through stretchyng, a
spasme and other evil accidents be provoked. To swage the pain and to remove
the aposteme, ye shall use embrocations made with anodine, that is to say,
which take away pain, sodden in water and wine, as are roses, camomylle,
dylle, and their oils, with the decoction of earth worms, applied with
vnwasshed wolle. Also a plaster made with crommes of breed, and cowes mylk, and
with the oil of roses and camomylle, and a little saffran, and the yolks
of.iii. eggs mengled together, is a present remedy. After that ye pain and ye
aposteme be removed, ye may safely restor^^^ joints.

when a wound chances with dislocation, ye must restore the dislocation
before ye heal the wound, and than afterward ye shall heal the wound,
sowyng, and byndyng, and keeping it open, as we have declared in the chapter of
the fractures of the bones companyed with a wound.

If the dislocation be with a fracture, ye shall restore the.ii. parts
together discretelye, and after restauracion, ye shall bind it and splent it,
as we have taught in the former Chapter.

The.ii. Chapter. Of the dislocation of the jaws.
IT chances seldom, that ye iawe is put out of joint, and when it chau^ceth,
it is in the former or in the hinder part. when it is in the former part, the
mouth abides open, and the teeth of the nether iaw, go before ye former teeth
of ye upper iawe. when the hyndre part is displaced, the mouth is shut, so that
the patient can not open it, and can not eat but with great difficulty, and
he is al together spechelesse, and ye teeth of the nether iaw enter under ye
teeth of the upper iawe, and seem to touch the roufe of the mouth, and in the
outward part there is an emynence and swellynge. wherefore when ye have ye
knowledge of dislocation, without delay ye must make restauracion, putting
your thombes in the patientes mouth, and pressyng them upon the great teethe
of the nether iawe, layinge therewithal your other f ngers of both hands,
under the chyn, lyftyng up the iawe. we have proved this restauracion, when the
iawe was displaced in the nether part.

And if ye can not restore them by this mean, than in the stead of the.ii.
thombes, ye shall put two wedges of wood upon the great teeth, holding them
fast, and than ye must put a band under the chynne, and ye must have a
mynystre, which must put both his knees upon the shulders of the patient,
and must draw the two ends of the band up, on hye. And the master must
press down the said wedges, and address the boones of the jaws unto their
place, for by this mean we have restored all dislocations of the jaws. when
this restauracion is differred, the patient is in danger. And therefore
Haliabbas says, that if this dislocation be not restored with all speed, evil
accidents will ensue, as a long and strong fieuer, heed ache, flux of the
belly, and colerycke vomytynge. Furthermore, the parts lyinge about, are
vexed with a spasme, and through such accidents, the patient oftentimes
dies.

After the said restauracion, ye shall lay upon the place a plaster of
myldust, written in many chapters of fractures, and ye shall bind it,
removing the medicine every second day, and thus ye shall proceed until the
tenth day. And ye must procure, that the patient receive nothing but
suppynges, as almo^d milk coleyses and soft rere eggs, for through the
mouynge of the jaws, he might fall into his old disease. If the pacyente
has no fever, he may drink delayed wine, and if he has a fever he shall
drink water sodden with honye

The third chapter, of the dislocation of the spondiles of the neck
HAliabas says, that a complete dislocation of the spo^diles of the neck,
Dislocation of the neck.
brings the pacyent with out fail to death by reason of the wrestynge and
breking of the sinowes and hurting the nuke, for as Galiene says, the
accydentes of the nuke, and of the brain, are like

Wherefore in the dyslocation of the spondiles of the neck, the pacyent is
choked incontinently with the quince and his breath is stopped, and so he dies
suddenly. And like wise, through the dislocation of the spondyles of ye breast
by reason of ye lacertes that move it and because the longes, sease from their
natural action. And of the dislocation of the spondiles of the neck, and of
the back boon, there is one which enclyneth toward the inward part, ye
restoration whereof, is impossible, though some men command to apply
ventoses upon the neck, and to provoke neysynge in time of restauratyon,
which thing is reproved of Hypocrates. There is another dislocation, which
enclyneth toward the outward part, and may be restored as it follows. The
pacyent must lie upon a bed, and ye must bind two bands, one under the
chynne, and an another in the insteppes of the feet, and ye must have three
mynisters, which must draw together, and than the master must address the
dysplaced spondile, thrustynge and pressynge hard upon the dislocation,
howebeit, he had need to be a discret and an expert man. But if the
dislocations of ye spo^dile be lower then the neck, it is better to tie the
bands under the arm holes, crossewayes.

There is another dislocation of the back boon called of Haliabas, arcuatio
spine, and that is when some spondile is enclyned toward the right or left
side, and it may be restored by ye foresaid stretchynge, and thrustyng of the
spondile into his natural place

Furthermore it is to be noted, that in all dislocation of spondyles coming
as well by a cause primytiue, as by a cause antecedente, there is danger lest a
bunch happen in the place, cheyfelye in young children, but of the cure thereof,
we will speak in our book of addicions.

The signs of euel pronostication are these, reteynynge of vryne, Eyell signs
and issuynge of excrementes against the pacyentes will, by reason that the
synowes been hurted, and coldenes of the extreme parts, and some time there
chances therewyth all, dyslocation of the rompe, and that is thus known, as
Auycenne sayethe, namelye when the pacyente can not bow his knee, nor lift up
his heel toward his rompe, and when there is great pain, and deformytie of
the place, for the restoration hereof, the pacyent must lie upon the bed,
and his belly downward, and the master must put his thombe or his myddle
finger, anointed with oil of roses in to the foundament, and he must lift up
the boon as strongly as he can and therewythall press down with his the other
hand, the boon that stands out, and so bring it into his natural place.

After restoration, ye must apply upon the place a plaster made of myl
duste, the white of an egg, and oil of roses, and myrtine, unto the fourth
day, and for the rest of the cure, ye may aply a plaster of mylduste made with
the iuce of plantayne, and comferye, written in the universal chapter of
dislocations. And ye must bynd upon the place, a splente of wood or lether.
And thus we make an end.

The.iiij. chapter, of the dislocation of the shulder or of the top of the
boon called adiutorium
DIslocation of the boon called adiutorium, chau^ceth not often, but in the
nether part, by reason of the thyckenes of the muscles which are in the said
places, and because yt the shulder is well covered, and there chances not
often dislocation toward the hinder part, as Auycenne says, because the
shulder defends it Likewise it chances not toward the breaste, for there
is a great lacert which has two heddes, and keeps the bone of the
adiutorie, that it be not dysplaced on that side. Howebeit, Albucrasis says,
that the top of the adiutorie may be dysplaced on every side, which
opynion is approved of very few writers.

when ye have perceived the dyslocation by the holownes upon ye shoulder, and
by swellynge under the arm hooles, and by comparynge the one with the other,
ye must go about the restoration with all speed, and if this dyslocation be
in young children, ye may restore it by puttyng your tho^be under the arm
holes, lyftynge up the boon, and drawyng down the arm with the other hand.
And if this dislocation be in a strong and hard body, than ye must put a
round piece of wood under the arm hooles, and thrust the boon to his place
after the manner as is aforesaid. Howebeit we will declare.iiij. ways to restore
the boon into his place.

The first, is to put a wedge of wood under the arm, viii. fyngers or
inches long, and four fyngers broad having a round end, which end must
be compassed with stoupes and set justly under the arm.

Then the master must lay the pacyente upon a benche, or upon a bed and set
his heel upon the the other end of the wedge of wood, and therewith all, he
must draw down the arm with both his hands, as strongly as he may. This
is the most certain way of restoration that is, and it is of our invention.

There is a another way, with a long bar, having in the myddle a roundenes
somewhat bigger than an egg, made with stoupes and cloutes which bar must
be holden by two strong mynysters, upon their shulders, standing in a high
place, that when the pacyente hangethe on the bar, setting his arm hoole
upon this roundnes, his feet may not touch the ground. Than let one mynyster
pull down the arm of the pacyente, and another his feet to the ground ward,
softely, and let there be a third mynyster, which may thrust the shulder with
his hands beneth, an other manner. The pacyent must be hanged upon the step
of a ladder, wrapped about with cloutes, with some emynence or standing out
after the manner of an egg, and let his arm be drawn down myghtelye, wherein
ye shall mark, that in the time of restoration, the roundnes of the said
step be under the armehole lest parchaunce the boon called adiutorium
should be broken.

We have another way of restoration, which is accomplysshed only by
hands. Ye must have a lynnen band.iii. or.iiii. times doubled, and ye must
tie it to a beam of a celler, and set the pacyentes arm hole upon the band,
fyrsteleying under as it were a great ball of cloutes, and than use the manner
declared in the use of the lader. Furthermore we have often restored the
adiutorye, with a piece of wood bended after the manner of the iron of a
crossebow with his string nailed at both the ends descendynge from the
beam of the soller by a wyndlace hanging the arms over, as it is said before,
and being under a quantity of stoupes in a round figure, for tha^ the
mynisters drew down the arms and the feet gentylly, and I addressed the
dyslocation thrustynge the shulder down. Some comaunde to leye the arm of the
pacyent upon ye shulder of some higher man, and so to pull down the arms of
the pacient, which way I never allowed, for the most part it is deceyuable.

Furthermore, it chances sometime, that this ioynte abides long vnrestored,
and therefore hardenes grows in the place, which hyndereth restoration,
wherefore the place must be molyfied with some decoction, or plaster
mollyficatiue, and so the restoration may be enterprised by one of the
foresaid means.

This restoration is commonly accomplysshed in twenty days, we will speak
nothing of the dyslocation of the shulder and of the forcke boon, for as
Auycenne says they are very seldom displaced, and suffer only separation,
and not dyslocation, and when they be separated, ye may reduce them to their
places only with your hand, and by the applycatyon of constrictiue medycines.
and. c.

The.v. chapter of the dyslocation of the elbowe.
FOr many causes the dyslocation of the elbowe and restauratio^ thereof, is
judged to be of great dyfficultie, both for the strong lygamentes that
contain it, and also for the shortenes of the same, and morouer by reason of
the concauitie of the boon. And though this joint, as some say, may be
dysplaced in all parts, yet it happens not commonly but in the former and
hinder part, and that is the worse, which through in obedyence and scarcenes,
of flesh, bends to the hinder part.

The signs of the dyslocation of ye elbowe, are easy to be known, for one
part boucheth out, and the other syncketh in, and the pacyente can not bow
his arm toward his breast, nether lift it up to his shulder, and there is also
inequality, between him and his fellow. The restoration hereof, must be
taken in hand with all spedynes.

Ye must have two mynysters, of which one must take the adiutorye and the
other the hand of the pacient and they must stretche out the arm and than
the master must conueye ye bone into his place with his hands being
anointed with oil of rooses, pressynge the place that stands out very
strongelye. And if the dyslocation be in the hinder part of the elbowe, the
mynisters must stretche out the arm strongelye as is aforesaid, and the
master must compass the elbowe about with his hand, and so thrust the bone
into his place This done let the ioynte be emplastered with a restrictyue
plaster, and let it be bound conuenyentelye, and let it be holden hanging up
toward the neck, and let the medicine remain till the forth day.

This restoration may be accomplysshed in five and twentye days.

And because that oftentimes there remains certain hardness after
restoration, for the molyfication there of ye shall resort to our
antidotary, to the chapter of molyficatyue medycynes. Item after the.xv. days
be passed, ye may use our cerote ordained in the chapter of cerotes for
fractures of boones.

The.vi. chapter of the dyslocation of the joints of the hand, and of the
fyngers.
THe joints of the hands and of ye fyngers, are sone dysplaced, and sone
restoored, and for the most part they are displaced in the former and hinder
part. The signs dyffer not from other dyslocations. For the restauratyon, ye
must have two ministers, to stretche out the hand, and the master must move
the joints, thrustynge down the bone that stands out, till they be again
comen into there place

After restoration, ye shall apply a palyster of mylduste, made with the
whytes of eggs, and with oil of roses, and oil of myrte, where wythall ye
shall proceed unto the.vii. day, chau^ging it every third day, and the arm
must be set upon a boorde wrapped with hourdes and cloutes. After the vii.
day ye shall use this remedy under written unto perfyte curation. the whytes
of two eggs, of oil myrtine, of oil of rooses. ana.. ss. of oil of
mastycke.. ss. of clear terebyntyne.. x. of read powder.. i. of the iuce of
pla^tayn.. vi. of the flour of barley and beans ana.. v. myngle them and let
the^ be aplied after the manner of a plaster And for as much as great pain
and dyffycultye in mouynge the joints and weakness of the same chances after
restoration, ye may conuenyentelye use the cerote following, which swageth
pain, and molyfyeth and comfort the joints.. of the rotes of holyhocke
soden and strayned, of the roots of salomons seal sodden after the same
manner, ana.li. ss. of oil of roses omphacine, of oil of myrt, ana.. i ss. of
agryppa, and dyalthea. ana.. vi. of clear terebentyn, of oil of cammomyll.. i.
of the flowers of roosemarye, of squinantum. of wormewoode, ana a little, of
worms washed with wine. i. ss. of odoryferous wine. lj. i. sees altogether
except the straynynge, tylle the wine be consumed, then strain them and make
a soft cerote, with suffycyente white wax, and with the foresaid strayninge,
adding of saffron.. ii. This ioynte is confyrmed in xii. days, as some men
thyncke, and thus we make an end. etc

The.vii. chapter, of the dyslocation of the hyppe.
ALl though all doctoures affirm (except Albucrasys) that the hyppe may be
dysplaced on every side, Dislocation of the hippe
yet commonly it chau^ceth in the outward, or hinder part

A sign of dyslocation toward the outward part, is when the foot of that
same side is shorter than his fellow, and when there is in the flancke some
uncustomed holownes, and a certain buntch, or eminence in the contrary part. A
sign of dyslocation in the hinder part, is this, namelye when the paciente
can not bow his knee, and when the foot is shortened, with molyfication in
the flanck, and when the roundnes of the hyppe, bou^cheth outewarde the
buttockes. when dyslocation is in the inner part, though it chance seldom.
These be the signs thereof. The foot of ye same side is longer then the
other, and the knee is greter then the other, and the patient can not lift up
his leg toward his flank and the end of the hippe bone bends toward the
flank, and therefore there appears always in that place some swelling. when
dislocation chances in the former part, it may be known by returning of
vryne and excreme^tes, and by swellynge of the flancke, and by that that the
pacyente can not go but upon his heel, and suffers pain in his knee

Wherefore, when the dislocatyon is known by the foresaid signs, ye must go
about the restoration with all spedines, for the longer ye tarry the worse it
shall be to heal. And therefore, Auice^ne says, that if it be not restored
quy^kely, humors may be deryued to the place, and rotte the member. As
touching the restoration, the doctoures are of sondrye opynyons, but
commonly the later writers teach.ii. ways of restoration. The first is the
way of Albucrasis, which is universal to all dislocations of the hippes chefly
when ye know not in which side the dislocation is, and it is after this sort.
Ye must tie ye pacient to some pyller or other strong thing, with a double
towel bound under his arms and flanckes, and also of the other side, ye must
tie to his knee an other towell, discending downward toward the in step, which
done, at ones the paciente must be so stretched on every side, yt he may seem
to hang from the ground and in the time of the stretching, the master must
enbrace the joint with his hands, moving the hippe hither and thither, til he
perceive yt it is come to his proper place, which thing is known by the
seasinge of pain, and by the equality of ye other leg And though this mean
be common to al dislocatio^s yet it is chefely good, in a dislocation of the
inner and outewarde part.

The second way is this. Ye must set the pacient al along upon a table, longer
then the pacient, and set a bar at both ends. Than ye must bind the
pacient under the flanks with a towel, crossewayes over the belly, and
drawinge it up, ye must tie it to the bar, and with annother towel ye must
bind the leg above the knee, crossewyse wyndyng it often times over ye leg
unto the heel, and ye must tie it to ye the other bar, and ye must stretch
out the pacient with pinnes put between the towel and the bar, turning and
wrestyng the same on every side, till the master may set the joint in his
place with his hands.

Another manner of byndyng. Ye must bind the pacyente under the arms, unto a
bar with a towell, and his hyppe with another towell to a press for this
wise all dislocatyons of the hyppe may be restored, so that they be new.
After the restoration of the said dyslocations, ye shall use the remedies
written in the universal chapyter of fractures. But if this dyslocation come
of a cause antecedente, for the restoration thereof, the old writers praise
an actual cauterye, to dry up the superfluos moisture. After that the joint is
returned into his place, it is right profitable to use a splente of wood
wrapped with hurdes, from the out ward part of the hyppe, unto the insteppe,
byndyng it crossewyse accordyngelye, and this apparel must not be changed
but every syxte day. The restoration, is accomplyshed in.xxx. days.

The.viii. chapter, of the dislocacion of the pan or rowell of the knee
THe joint of the knee, as Haliabbas says, may be dysplaced on every side,
except the former part, for the pan or round boon suffers it not to be
there. The restoration hereof, is finished as we have often declared in other
chapters, that is to say, by stretchynge the leg, and addressynge the boones
into the joints with hands. when the pan of the knee is only out of the
ioynte, let the pacyente set upon a bench, and put his foot upon the
ground, and then let the master set the pan in his place pressynge it
strongelye with his hands, and afterward let the place be plaistred with a
plaster of myldust, and with stoupes, than bind it, and put cloutes under
the hamme, that the knee bow not. For the confyrmamation of the ioynte, ye
shall apply some of the remedies written in the former chapyters. And it is
good to splente the knee from restauratyon, unto the.xii. day. And ye shall
remove the apparel every third day.

The pacyente may not goo upon his leg till it be perfytelye healed, for as
Auycenne says the knee is sone put out of ioynte. etc.

The.ix. chapter, of dyslocation of the heel and of the toes
THe heel is sometime dysplaced with a complete dyslocation, and some times it
is only separate or sondred. The dyslocation of it can not chance but in the
former, or hinder part, and it may be known by the swellynge of that side,
where the heel is dysplaced.

The joints of the toes are soon dysplaced, and soon restored. For the
restoration of the heel boon, when it is thoroughly dysplaced, needs great
stretchynge and thrustynge down, upon the said dislocation. But if it be
only separated, it needs not great stretchynge or compression, but it may
be redressed with the hands only

The restoration shall be accomplyshed as it follows, that is to sape, The
manner of restoring the heel
ye must have two mynisters, of which one must hold the foot, and the other
the knee, and they must stretche out the leg together, and than the master
must return the boon into his place, and after restauratyon, ye shall apply
the remedies written in the former chapter, and it must be bound discretelye,
and not to hard for thereby ye synowes of the foot may be hurted For the
restoration of the toes, ye shall proceed as we have said of the fyngers.

Here ye shall note this one thing that after the bone of the heel is
redressed, the patie^t walk not the space of.xl. days, for after restoration
the foot abides paynefull a long season, by reason of the multitude of the
bones, synowes, and ligamentes.

And therefore to swage the pain, and resolve the matter that causethe it, and
to comfort the place, it is right conueniente to use the ordinance
vnderwrytten, after the manner of a cerote.. of the roots of holihocke sodden,
Cerote to swage pain
and stamped.. ss. of the roots of enula campana, of salomo^s seal in like
manner sodden and sta^ped.. iij. of oil of camomill, roses, and myrte, of every
one.. i. ss. of agrippa, and dialthea, of every one.. vi. of oil mastyke.. ss.
of earth worms washed with wine. i. ss. of camomil, roses, wormwood,
squinantum, of rosemarye flowers, of every one a little, of odoriferous wine one
cyathe, let them sees all together till ye wine be consumed, then streyne them,
and add to the streynynge, of bean flower and barlye flower well bulted, of
read powder. ana.. v. of sa^guis draconis, of mumia, ana.. iij. of saffran..
i. of all the sandres.. i. ss. of most clear terebentyne.. i. Again make a
soft cerote with sufficient white wax, and the forsayde streynynge,
according to art, which is a great medicine in all wrestynges and
attritions of lacertes. And thus ends the book of fractures, and
dyslocations, in the name of God who be blessed forever and ever. AMEN.

Here begins the seventh book of master John de Vigo, of the nature of
simples.
Considering the great utility that comes by the knowledge of simple
medicines, I thought it good to make a particular book of the same, being
comunelye used in making of playsters, oyntmentes, lynimentes, embrocatio^s.
etc. For to wryt of all the symples, it requires a man of greater learning
and eloquence then I am of. Wherefore I will declare only those that are in
use, by ye order of the. A.B.C. whereunto I will add the compositions of
playsters, and oyntmentes, and the use of the same, following Dioscorides,
Serapion, Galien, Paul, and Auicenne, with other ancient doctors. which book
I council all them that are studious in surgerye, to read diligently, that
they may more surely proceed in their workynge, etc. And thus we begin our
book.

ACetum or vynegre is cold in the first degree, and dry in the third, has
compou^d virtues with great percynge. The opinions of philosophers agree in the
drienes of it, but they varye in the heat and the cold, for some say that it
is cold, for that it represseth choler, and other say that it is hot,
because when it is poured upon the ground, it boyleth and breaks stones.
wherefore it is better to say that it is hot, and that afterward it is cold,
and sharp. And therefore when it is made of strong wine, it is of hot
complexion, and when it is made of small wine, it is of a cold and dry
quality.

Aloes epatike is hot, and dry in the second degree, and it is conuenientlye
administered, in the vlceres of the priuye members, and of the matrice, chyeflye
when it is stamped, with burned dille, also it incarneth fresh wounds
effectuallye, clarifyeth the sight, and being myngled with rose water and
waterof myrtylles, and aplyed within the eyes, restrayneth the droppynges of the
eyes

Agaryke is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third, when it is
poudred and myngled with lytarge, honye, terebentyne, and the flower of
lupines, with a little salt, and lies of wine, it heals all kinds of
morphewe, and chyeflye, when the place is a little scarifyed. Also it draws
out, and mundifieth, rotten bones being put in, with a little paucedinis, and
aqua vite. Item it is of good operation, to heal fystules, myngled with the
roots of dragons, and our powder of mercury, and a little salt, and a little
tartare or lies of wine.

Assarum bacar is an herb of hot and dry complexion, in the third degree,
whose goodness seems to consist only in his root, and it is good for lotions
of the head to comfort the same.

All other auctours say that it is moist and not dry
Argentum viuum, or quycksyluer, (as Paul says) is hot and dry, in the
fourth degree. And it is known by his effect, for it cutteth, and perceth in
dyssoluynge, through his heat. How be it some say, that it is cold in the
fourth degree.

Alume is hot, and dry, in the.iiij. degree, and it keeps of flegmatyke
matter, descendynge toward some member, and when it is mengled, and boiled
with water of plantayne, it heals vlceres of hard curation.

Amigdale amare, or bitter almandes are hot, and dry in the second degree,
and their oil is of the same nature Sweet almandes are hot and moist in the
first degree, and their oil and the oil of bitter almandes, ben good against
deafnes. But the oil of sweet almons cures the pain of the ears caused of
myxte matter, moreover bitter almons brayed, and thycked at the fire, after ye
manner of a cerote, having added a little aloes caballine does maruelously kill
worms, being laid upon the nauyl.

Anyse is hoote, and dry in the.iii. degree, and has virtue to break wind

Antimonie is cold, and dry in the third, and if it be myngled, with the
white of an egg with the herb called lingua passerina or knotgrasse, bean
flower, frankensence and the heeres of an hare, cut in small pieces, it is a
singular remedy, to staunche blood of the nose, being put into the same. It
may also conuenyentelye be admynystred, in colliries for as Alma^sor says it
conserueth the eyes. It consumethe morouer superfluous flesh, in vlceres
without mordication, or bytyng, and it mundifieth, and incarneth malign and
corrosiue vlceres.

Arsenick and orpyment, are hot in the third degree, and dry in the second
They have virtue to mortify and putrify a member Howebeit auripigme^tum is of
less strength.

Absinthium or wormewod, is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.
And through his bytternes it is stypticke, and it has contrary virtues in
operation. wormwood being stamped and heated upon a tyle, and sprincled with
odoriferous wine, heals brusynges, and takes away the blewe spots of any
stroke, and when it is sodden with branne, camomill, malowes, mellilote, and
with sapa, in sufficient water, and with oils which take away pain, as oil
of roses, of myrte, camomill, it is marvelous good to take away the pain of
brusednes, and of attritions of lacertes.

Althea or holihocke, after the common opinion of doctors, is hot and moist
temperatly, but some judge that it is hot and dry, and therefore Serapion
affyrmeth that it is stiptyke, and has virtue to bind. Galien says, that it
has virtue to scour, to digeste and to loose, and to swage pain. And
therefore when it is myngled with wheat flower, and sodden in ye brothe of a
hen with butter, and made in the form of a plaster, it rypeth apostemes of
hard maturation, and of raw and gross humors. Item it is conveniently added
to other agreeable medicines for fractures of bones for it gleweth broken bones
by reason of his slymynes.

Acorus, is hot and dry in the second degree, and it is used in medicines for
the mylte, both within and without.

Acetosa or sorell, is cold in the first and dry in the second degree, and
when it is stamped with lettuse and with knotgrasse and the white of an egg,
beaten with oil of roses omphacine, it eases cholerike apostemes which pass
from membre to member.

Agrymonye is hot and dry in the second degree, and the juice thereof enters
into cerotes, made for wounds in the head, and a syrup made therwyth, healeh
the crampe, the epilepsie and the palsye. And it is made, after this sort.. of
agrimonye, of mugworte, of pympernell, of primerose, of the flowers of
rosemary, of every one. m^. i. of sage, nepte, and wyld myntes, of every one.
m^. ss. of the seed and root of pyonye, of every one.. ij. of maioram, of
fenell, of every one. m^. ss. of cinamome, of nutmegges, of quibibbes, of
every one.. i. ss. of agaryke in trociskes.. ij. stamp them al together and
let the^ sees with water of fenel, and sage unto the third part be consumed,
then strain them, and make a syrup with sufficient honey, and sugger, and let
the body be afterward purged, with pylles aggregatiue, and with pylles called
fetida. For the said syrup taken with water of wormwood, and sage resolves,
and swageth all pains of sciatica, and the crampe, and comfort the members.

Allium or garlyke is hot and dry about the fourth degree, and when it is
roasted, with oynions, and stamped with fygges, and swynes grese, it rypeth
cold apostemes of hard maturation. Item being roasted, and stamped with
nuttes, fygges, and triacle, is a great medicine against styngyng of venomous
worms, whether it be mynistred within or without, and therefore it is called ye
husbandma^s triacle

Apium march or smallage, is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.
The juice thereof with terebentyne, wheat flower, honey of roses, and sarcocolle
mingled together upon the fire, makes a perfyte mu^difycatiue of malygne and
carbu^culous ulcers. Moreover apium sodden, with the leaves of colewortes, and
with mellilote having added in the decoction branne, oil of camomil, dille,
and roses resolves the apostemes of woman's breasts, partlye dryenge and
partlye purgynge the milk.

Aristologia is hot and dry in the second degree, and it has virtue to
incarne vlceres with mundifycation.

Antheca is the yelowe in the myddest of a rose, and it is cold and dry in
the first degree with stipticitie.

Alkechyngy or solatrum montanum, or morel of the hill, is cold, and dry of
complexion and it provoke vryne and mundifyeth the reins, being taken in
form of a syrup.. of alkechingi.. i. ss. of resyns, of ye kernelles of
pyneaple cle^sed, of every one. vi. of the.iij. less seeds, of every one,.
iij. of the rotes of percelye, fenel, asperage, bruscus, and smallage, of
every one. m^. ss. of lyquirice.. x. of damask prunes, sebesten, of iuiubes,
of every one, in nombre.xij. of the flowers of violettes, and of the herb
called gyrus solis, of every one. m^. i. of saxifrage. m^. ss. let the^ sees a
little, (being brayed) with water of endive, buglosse, fenel, and a little wine
of pomegranades, till the third part be consumed, then streyne them, and make
syrup with sufficient white wax, and.. i. ss. of good reubarbe, this syrup
mundifyeth ye reins, from the stone, from branne, and from here is, comforts
the stomach strengthens digestion, and breaks wind of the entrailles.

Ameos is a seed hot and dry in the third degree, and it is administered in
medicines to provoke vryne.

Anetum or dille is hot and dry in the second degree, and it is nombred among
symples, that take away pain, and it resolves and breaks wyndynes and
being burned, (as Galien says) it heals the vlceres of the yard. And it
swageth the pain of the ears. Moreover dille is resolutiue, with maturation.
Wherefore when it is myngled, with resolutiues it increases resolution, and
added to maturatiues it furdereth maturation Item the oil thereof, myngled with
oil of bitter almandes, remedyeth the wyndynesse, and sowndyng of the ears.
Also being myngled with oil of the yolks of eggs, butter, and oil, of
violettes, it swageth maruelouslye the pain of the ears, caused of hot
mattyer, chieflye when it is boiled with chestwormes, called porcelliones and a
little saffran, and wine of pomegranades unto the co^sumption of the wine.

Arthemisia or motherworte is of hot and dry complexion, about the
beginning of the third degree. It comfort synowy places, and when it is
sodden with wine, and things anodine that is to say which take away pain,
and applied in ye form of an epitheme with a sponge it comfort synowie
places with some resolution. Also it is of great efficacitie in the disease,
called tenasmos, caused of cold, being ministered after this sort. Take
poudred colophonie, with nuttes of cypress, and frankensence, and put the
powder upon hot coals, and let the pacient receive the smoke, and afterward
ye must have a handful of motherwort heated upon a tyle, and spryncled with
stiptike wine, whereupon the patient must sit, for it is a marvelous medicine
against tenasmon.

Agrestum or veriuyce is cold in the second, and dry in the third degree,
and it represseth the heat of humors.

Acatia comenly taken for sides, is cold and dry beyond the second degree,
and of great stipticitie.

Aqua or water is cold and moist, in the first degree, and it has virtue to
make thick, and to congele and therefore it dryueth back colerike apostemes.

Aqua aluminosa, or water of alume has virtue to dry, and therefore it
mu^dyfieth vlceres, and it keeps back flegmatyke matter, dyscending to an
vlcered place.

Acedula or little sorell, is cold and dry about the second degree, and it
is repercussiue and confortatiue.

Abrotanum or sothrenwod is hot in the first, and dry in the second degree.
It mundyfieth vlceres and comfort the vlcered place. And the iuce thereof
mingled with honey, vyneger and aloes caballyne, and applied upon the nauel,
like a plaster, kylleth worms.

Armoniacke is hot in the third, and dry in the first, yt has virtue to
resolve with molyfication.

Assafetida is hot and dry in the second, and it is abstersive with great
attricion.

Affodillorum radices, the rotes of affodilles are hot and dry in the third,
and they scour with corrosion, and the iuce of them, mingled with honey, and
the oil of tartare or wine lies (as Platearius says) produces here in the
disease, called albaras Item the decoction of affodilles, with lie and lupines,
heals cotton, ambulatyue, and cancrenouse vlceces.

Argilla or clay is cold in the first, and dry in the second, and is
repercussiue.

Aspaltum is hot and dry in the second, and therefore it has virtue to dry,
and glewe together fresh wounds, it is a hardened foam found in ye sea called
mare mortuum

Atramentum minerale, is hot and dry in the third degree, and it is corrosyue
with much stipticitie.

Auricula muris, anagallus, or mousere, is of two kinds, that is to say ye
male and the female, of which one has flowers of the color of a iacyncte, or
reddyshe, the other has a blew flour, after the color of the sky and their
seeds be in the form, and greatness of coria^ders, and ye herb is of
temperate hotenes, as the seeds be and dries (as Gallien says) with great
abstercio^ and attraction, some say it is oculus christi, but they are
deceived.

BOLE armenie is cold and dry in ye second degree. It is restrictiue, and
keeps of hot matter

Beries of laurel are hoote, and dry, and more hot, than the leaves. The leaves
thereof may be sodden in bathes conuenyently, with sage, rosemarye,
wormewoode, and a little salt to comfort the joints of the feet.

Borage is hoote, and moist in the first, and engenders good blood, and it is
conveniently permitted to wounded men, in their dishes, with parcely and mintes
chyefly in the broth of an he^ne

Buglosse is hot and moist, and cordial, and engenders good blood and has
virtue, like unto borage and his rote roasted under the cooles, in weted
cloutes, and afterward stamped with as much of roasted apples, and a little
butter, swageth the pain of a white flawe, and rypeth all froncles, and it is
good to take away the roughnes of the tongue, in a fever, if it be holde^ in
the mouth, after that it is steped in water, and wine of pomegranades, and
deliteth the paciente.

Betonie is hot and dry in the first and it mundifieth, and incarneth wounds
of sinews, and it is a principal herb against the ulcers of the head and
the leaves thereof laid upon the forheed, swage the pains of the eyes in
retaynyng the matter, that would aryue to the sore place.

Berbena or veruene is cold, and dry and has virtue to confound, wounds,
without mordication (as Galen says) therefore the strength thereof is
administered in cerotes, for the wou^des of the head and of the synewes.

Branca vrsina or bears claw is hot and moist, and has virtue to ripe
apostemes of hard maturation, and it is good to mollify the hardness of the
synowes, when it is stamped and sodden with holyehocke, oil of sweet almondes,
hens grese, and a little white wax. And if ye would add thereunto, of white
diaquilon gummed.. ij. of Galenes cerot of isope.. i. ss. and a little flower
deluice, it would be a singular remedy, to resolve al hard apostemes.

Bleta or beetes is cold and moist it has virtue to scour, to cool, and to
moysten, and therefore sodden in a brothe with a little mercurye, and borage,
and a little sugar, lowseth the bellye, but the black beeres does contrary
wise, for they been stipticke.

Berberies been cold and dry, in ye second, but wyld berberies are in the
third degree with much scipticitie.

Basyll is hot in the first, and dry in the second, and it conforteth,
mundifieth, and dyssolueth. If it be eaten, it darkeneth the eyes, but if it be
admynystred in colliries, it amendeth the dymnes of the same.

Brionia is hot, and dry in the second, and it has virtue to scour, with
maturation. And the iuce thereof, mingled with the iuce of smallage, flower of
lentylles, with terebentyne, and honye of roses, heleth vlceres called
fraudulenta or dyceatfull, for an example such an ordinance may be made. of
the iuce brionia, of the iuce of smallage purified ana.. i. of terbe^tin. iii.
of honey of roses.. x. let them seth together a little, and add thereunto of
flower of lentilles.. x. of flower of barlye.. j. mingle them and use them.

Baucia or persnippes, is hot and therefore ripeth apostemes of hot maturation.

Bdellium is hot in the end of the first degree, and a little more, and
therefore mollyfieth, and resolves hard apostemes.

Balsamum bawme, or oil of bawme has virtue to draw, to scowre, and to
comfort, and makes cycatryces of wounds thynne, and therefore it is hot, and
dry in the second degree.

Balaustia or the flowers of pomegranades are cold and dry in the second,
and are somewhat repercussiue and they been much sciptike.

Butter is hot and moist and of temperate heat, it rypeth, mollyfyeth, and
swageth pain, and being labored in a mortar of lead, with oil of the
yolks of eggs, it swageth sharp pain of the ears.

Boras is hoote and dry, with temperate heat, and has virtue to consound,
and glewe together wounds

COlewortes are hot in the first, and dry in the second, and (as Diascorides
says,) they mend the falling of the here and they are conuenyently put into
playsters, for the deseases of the stone.

Cucumer is cold and moist in the second, the iuce thereof myngled with the
iuce of plantayne, and oil of rooses, and violettes, and with the whites of
eggs, heals al sanguine colerick apostemes at the beginning.

Citonium acetosum or a sower quince, is of cold nature and ^herfore at the
beginning, it dryueth back hot apostemes. It has morouer virtue to incarne,
and consound wou^des. That that is sweet, is of a temperate substance, and of
less refrigeracion, and stipticitie. A plaster of roasted qui^ces (as serapion
says) helps hot apostemes in wome^s breasts. And I say, that it is good
for all apostemes of the stoones, of the fundament, and of the emeroydes. The
manner to make this plaster, is written in the Chapter of ophthalmia, and of
the cure of hemoroydes.

Calx viua or lyme unquenched, is hoote and dry in the third, but washed
with wine according to art, it is hot and dry in the first. If ye mengle
it with oil of roses, and the iuce of lettuce, and pla^tayne, and labor them
all in a mortar of lead, it heals skaldynge or burning, and also skabbes,
and itche of the legs, and suffers not humors to desce^de to the place: But
vnslecked lime mengled with wax, oil of terebentine, and verdegrese,
mundifyeth, all rotten ulcers.

Coral white and read, are cold and dry, in the second degree: and they be
confortatiue, and restryctiue: therefore if they be myngled with the iuce of
knotgrasse, with sanguis draconis, and the donge of an ass somewhat dried at
the fire, and with the white of an egg, they stanche bledyng at the nose. Also
being hanged at the neck, so that they touch the stomach, they help
digestio^, and defend them that carry them, from lygghtenyng: and their houses
also. Auicenne says: that coralles consume superfluous flesh of wounds and
ulcers without pain. Ye may make a poudre of coral, after this sort.. of
brent roche alume, of myrobalane citryne of terra sigillata, flowers of
pomegranades. ana.. ii. of our poudre of mercurye, of the poudre or coral.
ana.. i

Coloquintida is hot in the third and dry in the second, and a decoction
thereof, made with vinegre, and honye, and with a little sandrack, takes away
the pain of the teeth, caused of a cold and dry matter, and if ye mengle
one. For worms in children.
. with an ounce of honye, sodden till it be thycke, and.. iii. ss. of aloes
caballine, and as much of the flower of lupynes, and a little vynegre, it shall
be a good medicine to kill worms of children laid upon the nauyll.

Cassia is of like heat, and cold (as Auicenne says) and it is resolutiue
and lenitiue, and being gargarized with the water of morell, it eases the hot
aposteme of the entralles, and of the throat. Moreover, it mollifyeth, and
resolves hard apostemes: and it is a singular remedy for the gout, and
other pains caused of hot matter, and it may conuenyentlye be put into
playsters made against the said pain. Fynallye it mundifyeth blood, and
purges gros fleame.

Cinamome is hot in the second, and dry in the third degree, and it is put
into colliries against the dymnesse of the eyes, and catarres.

Crocus or saffran is hot in the second, and dry in the first degree. It
rypeth, digesteth, and swageth pain, and therefore it enters into digestyues
of wounds and playsters of hot apostemes. It is also conveniently used for
wounds of synnowes. Item it appayseth pain of the ears, mengled with oil of
roses, vyolettes, and with the oil of yolks of eggs.

Calamus aromaticus is dry and hot in the second. Galene says that some
affirm, that the rotes thereof sodden with the roots of lyllyes, draws out
thorns, and pieces of bones. But he him self never proved it. The root
burned, and afterward poudred, and mengled with honye, and vynegre, is a good
remedy to heal the disease, called alopecia, laid on in the form of a
cataplasme, and the water of it stylled, as it follows, clarifyeth the syghte
merueyloflye.. of Calamus aromaticus, of honye. ana.. ss. of the iuce of rue..
iii. of the water of celidoni.. vi. of the water of fenelle, and of veruene.
ana.. iiii. of long pepper, of nuttemygges, of clowes. ana.. ss. of saffra^.
i. of the flowers of Rosemary, some what stamped, of Sarcocolle, of aloes.
ana.. i. ss. of the gall of birds, that live by pray.. vi. (if they may be
gotten) or else of hens, capo^s, or partryches thryse so much, braye them,
and mengle them all together, and stylle them in a le^bycke of glass,
according to art.

Ceruse is cold and dry in the second degree, and therefore is conuenyentlye
used, against hoote and inflamed ulcers. The virtue of it is to scowre
gentyllye, to dry, and to thynne.

Capparis ben hot in the first, and dry in the second, they have virtue to
comfort appetyte, and to heat a cold stomach. The wine of the decoction of
the same is a synguler medycyne, against the hardenesse of the mylte, and the
liver. Item, the iuce thereof made in a form of a syrup, as it follows, is
marvelous good against sciatica, and old arthetycke passions.. of the juice
of capparis, and succorie, ana.. iii. of the iuce of walworte.. i. ss. of the
common seeds.. ii. of hertestonge, of gallitricum, and pollitricum, of the
flowers of rosemarye. ana. m^. i. of yua muscata, of wormwod, of sticados, of
sage. ana. m^. ss. of vyolettes. m^. i. ss. of iuiubes, of prunes, of raisons.
an^.. i. of clean lycorice sta^ped.. x. of maiorum of mugwort. ana. m^. ss. of
water of buglosse, endyue, and fenel. ana. li. ii. of polipodye.. v. let them
sees all together, with a soft lyre, tylle the third part be consumed. Than
strain them, and with suffycyente sugre, and.. ii. of good reubarbe infused
according to art in the foresaid decoction, make a syrup in good form.
This syrup is synguler against the foresaid diseases, and I have proved it
in goutes, and in the French pockes, it dygesteth perfytelye all gross, and
myxte matter, comfort the stomach, remoueth all oppylacyons of the liver,
and the mylte, it mundifyeth the brain, and the reins, and prouokethe vryne.

Chestnuttes been hot and dry in the first degree, they restrain, and are
of great noryshment, and engendre wind. The auctoure of the pandectes sets
them, about the first degree of coldenesse.

Cubebes are temperatelye hot, and dry. They comfort the stomach, and if they
be myngled with water of borage, they been good against soundyng, and against
the epilepsia, and passions of the heart.

Ca^wayes been hoote and dry in the third degree: They provoke vryne, and
mundify the reins, chefely the wine of the decoction of them.

Camphore is cold and dry in the third degree, and therefore it is put
conuenyentlye into cerotes, and oyntmentes of enflamed ulcers.

Cynoglossa, or houndestonge, is cold, and dry, the iuce of it mengled, with
the iuce of plantayn, with wine of pomegranades, and a little lycium, and sodden
unto thycknesse, heals the ulcers of the mouth, nastrilles, gu^mes, and
priuey me^bres. Item mengled with honye of roses, and terebentine, it is a good
medycine for ulcers caused of cold humors. wherefore (as experience has
taught us) it is of synguler efficacitie, against old ulcers of the french
pockes, and it mollifyeth, purges, and cleanses the hard flesh of them,
chefelye if it be made thycke at the fire, with a syrup of Roses, and
oximelle, squilliticum.

Item the leaves of the said herb, through a certain propertye, that they
have, laid upon cold, and scrophulous ulcers, do heal them.

Camomylle is hot and dry in the first, it resolves without attraction, but
with some mollification, and comfortation of the place. And therefore his oil
called benedictum, resolves without attraction. And the decoction thereof,
with the tops of wormewoode, with lyquerice, and with the roots of fenelle,
parselye, and asprage, and with the four cold seeds, with iniubes, and
sebesten, made sweet in the wine of Pomegranades, water of Endyue, and sugre,
and taken fasting, provoke vryne myghtely, and dryueth out the stone, and
cures the pain of the mylte, of the liver, and of the guts, and fynallye it
remedyethe the yelowe iaundyse.

Chamepytis is hoote and dry in the second degree. It perceth, mundifyeth,
and resolves. And therefore the iuce of it, laid upon the breasts of women,
with the flower of fenugreke, of lyneseede, and with holyhocke sodden, and
strayned, and with hens grese, and duckes grese resolves the hardenesse of
the said breasts. Semblably when the juice is sodden with Terebentyne, and
Oil of Ypericon, it heals great wounds.

Capillus veneris, or mayden-heere is moderately cold and dry. It provoke
vryne, and is good against diseases of the mylte, and of the liver, and the
iuce thereof, with the iuce of holyhocke, sothernewood, and with the juice of
cresses, resolves scrophules, and it engenders heeres in alopecia.

Cepe, or oynyons, are hoote in the fourth degree, with superfluous humiditie
or moisture, being sodden with oils, and white lylly roots, with butter, and
wheat flower, they ripe apostemes of hard maturatio^: and a white oynyon
roasted with triacle, and with syrup of the juice of orenges, a little dytanye,
and tormentille, and than pressed strongly, (receyuyng of the said expressyon
the quantity of.iii. ounces with a fasting stomach.vi. For the pestilence.
hours before meat) it helps them that have the pestylence, and if ye put
thereunto of electuarij indi. and electuarii rosati. ana.. i. of Diafinicon..
ii. of manna.. ss. there is nothing better in a pestilent matter, for it
resolves the matter thorough a certain virtue that it has against venyme.
Item water stylled out of the said oynyons, provoke vryne myghtelye, if
that.iii.. be taken of it in the morning, with a little sugre.

Corianders are cold and dry, but some say, that they are hot, because they
resolve wind, and scrophules, and on the other side they seem to be cold,
because they repres vapors after meat, and the decoction of them made in
form of a styffe plaster, with bean flower, oil of roses, and oil of myrte,
resolves hot apostemes of the stones, and swageth pain. Ite^ the iuce of it,
with yt iuce of plantayne, the white of an egg, and oil of roses omphacine.
It is a good remedy against apostemes, of the nature of herisipelas, and
other hot apostemes.

Cuscute or dodder is hoote in the first, and dry about the second degree, and
has virtue of mundifyinge, and purges melancholye, and fleme, and therefore
the electuarye following, is good against hard and cancrous apostemes.. of.
dodder.. i. of maydenheere, of the coddes of seen, of epithimu^. ana.. ii. of
polipodye.. x. of agarycke in trosiskes.. i. ss. of annyse.. vi. mengle them,
and make as it were an electuarye with honye of roses, and a syrup of
vyolettes, the receyte of it is from.vi.. to.. i.

Celedony is hoote and dry in the third degree: the virtue thereof is put in
colliries, to sharpinne ye sight. The iuce of it, put into the teeth, causes
them fall, within a certain space, as some reaporte. The root is of less
exiccation or drying: and it has virtue to draw, and to resolve, and therefore
the said root brayed, and sprynkled with vynegre, and holden in the teeth,
heals the toth ache coming of a cold cause.

Catapucia or spurge is hot in the third, and moist in the second, and it
has virtue to purge fleme, mela^choly, and choler: therefore ye decoction thereof
with mercury, polipody, doder, borage, reisins, damask prunes, sodde^ in the
broth of an hen, and spyced with a little cinamome, purges al raw, slymye,
flegmatyke, and melancholycke humors, chefely if it be taken fasting with
syrup and honye of Roses. Furthermore, the poudre of spurge, taken with a
little cynamome, in a rere egg, or in the broth of an hen, purges gross
fleame myghtely, and without pain. wherefore the use thereof is good for the
conseruacyon of the health of the body.

Canabus or hemp is hot and dry in the second, and the seed is dryer, and
therefore it has virtue to break wind.

Coperose is hoote and dry in the fourth, and therefore it is corosyue.

Consolida or comfery is hot and dry with temperate heat, and slymy
moisture, and therefore being chewed, it takes away the dryness of the mouth,
and both the consolidaes, that is to say comferye, and dasies, have virtue to
consounde wounds. Some say, that comferye brayed between two stones by a
divine miracle, kylleth anthrax. Howbeit they are both of one virtue.

Cantharides are like the greater flies, but that their bodies be longer, of
grene color, and they ben hoote and dry in the third degree, and have virtue
to burn and to blyster.

Castoreum is hoote and dry in the second, it has virtue to comfort
synnowye places, and therefore his oil is good for the crampe.

Capitellum, which is made of lie of French soap, is hot and dry in the
fourth: it burns and cauteriseth, as it were fire. Item capitelle made thycke
at the fire in a brass banne, with a little vitrioll romayne breaks all
Apostemes in cauterysynge.

Cinis or ashes is of hoote and dry complexion, but of more or less excess,
according to the nature of the wood wherewyth it is made: it has virtue to
dry and to scour.

Chese being fresshe, has virtue to consounde, but old chese is contrary.

Crassula is cold in the third, and moist in the second, and therefore it
quenches infla^mations, and is very repercussiue, and the iuce thereof with the
iuce of lettuse, oil of roses, and ye white of an egg beaten all together
eases Herisipelas, and heals the chafynges of the priuye me^bres, and is
good against scaldynge.

Cressoni or water cresses ben hot and dry in the second, they open and
perce: and when they been eaten with oil and vinegre, they provoke urine, and
they are agreeable to some men's taste.

Cumyn is hot in the third, and dry in the second. It has virtue to
resolve, and to break gross wyndynesse, and when it is mengled with wax,
with oil of camomyll, and of myrte, with the iuce of radyshe, and a little
juice of wormewoode, it resolves deed blood, that remains under the skin,
through a bruise, and it heals easelye the blackness, and blewnesse of the
eye lyddes, when they come of a primitive cause.

Carduus benedictus has virtues that cool, and bind. The leaves and flowers
sodden in sweet wine, with sapa, resolve the swellynge of the stones, and the
said carduus benedictus heals all ulcers of the fu^dament. Item the iuce of
it is conuenyentlye put into oyntmentes, against wounds. Galene says, that
carduus benedictus has virtue inflatiue, or puffynge up, and that it is
moderately percynge.

Dytany is hot and dry in the third, and it is good gaynst ye stingyng of
venomous things, how soever it be admynystred, and therefore Virgil says,
that dear being wounded by venomous arowes naturallye seek out dytanye, which
they eat, and rub the wounded place therewith, and so recover health. The
decoction following, taken in drink, has great virtue in all percyng wounds in
the breast, and fystles.. sufficient quantity of the roots of dytany, of
auens, of mugwort, of mouseare, of ielosioures, of red coolewortes, of
threleafed grass, seth the^ with the wine of pomgranades, and let the^ be made
sweet with a syrup de duabus radicibus.

Daucus or french persnepes, or (as some think) yelow carattes, be^ hot and
dry in the third degree: Their virtue is, to draw, to loose, to consume, and
to provoke vryne.

ELeborus albus, or white elebore, is hot and dry in the third, and has
virtue to purge fleme, but the black purges melancholy, and in old time they
were used in purgatio^s, because the bodies were then stronger, and might
sustain stronger purgatio^s. But now instead thereof, we use scamonie,
neither can the other be used without euydent danger. The iuce of elebore
me^gled with swynes grese and oil of mastyke and laurel, with a little
quycksyluer quenched, and a little litarge, which all must be incorporate after
the form of a liniment heals all scabbes of hard curatio^, chefely after a
bathe of the decoction of mallows, vyolettes, barley, bra^ne, fumyterrye, and
apples. Item the said linimente mengled with terebentine, is good against all
morphewes and scalles.

Enula campana is hoote and dry in the second degree, the root thereof
sodden with holyhocke, and Salomons seal and a little wormwod, which all
afterward must be stamped and strayned, and ye must make a styffe plaster with
sapa, bean flower, branne, and melilote, addyng of oil of roses, camomyll,
and myrt. an^.. ii. The root I say, thus ordained, resolves marueylouslye
contusyons, and attritions of muscles and lacertes, and wrestynge of synowes
after the first days ben passed, and it swageth pain. Item it may be
admynistred in goutes of the feet, and of the iointes. Finally the virtue of
it how so ever it be admynystred, eases the passions of the heart, and of the
stomach.

Esula, or round spurge, is hot and dry in the third, his virtue is to
purge melancholy, and fleme, and it draws up the roots of wartes, and
dries them.

Epatica, or liver worte, is cold and and dry in the first. The leaves of it
stamped and sodden in the wine of pomegranades, with barlye flower, with white
saunders, and with oil of roses omphacyne, disperse, drive back, and resolve
a hot aposteme of the liver. And a decoction of the same, made with garden
endyue, and wild endyue, and a little maydenheer, and a little cicorie sodden in
water and sugar, and a little wine of pomegranades, heals the liver when it is
distempered in heat.

Ebulus, or walwurte, is hot and dry, it resolves temperatelye, and therefore
it moderately incarneth, and dries ulcers and wounds, and it is conuenyentlye
admynystred, in oyntmentes, playsters, and linimentes, against the pains of
the joints.

Edera terrestris, or ground yuye, is cold and dry: it has virtue to
mundify, dry, and incarne wou^des. And the blood of a goote, fed therewyth a
long season, helps them that have the stone, and stamped with larde and
elebor, it is very good against all manner scalles of the heed.

Ermodactilus is hot and dry, and it scoureth with some corrosion, and (as
Mesue says) it helps the^ that have the gout.

Es and stos eris, that is to say, bras and the flower thereof, that is,
verdigrese, be hot and dry in the third degree, and are corrosiue, and make
an escare of slow remotion, through their stipticitie.

Epithimum is hot and dry in ye second (as the auctour of the pandectes
says) but Galene says, it is hot and dry in the third, and has virtue to
purge both fleme and also melancholye.

Euforbiu^ is hoote and dry in the fourth, and when it is boiled with oil of
elder, branne, and earth worms, it is good for the pryckynge of synnowes, and
it enters into cerotes, and linimentes, which we have ordained against the
french pockes.

Emblici are a kind of myrabolanes, and the decoction of them with cytrine
myrobalanes, water of plantain, rose water, and a little roch alume, and honey of
roses, heals spedely ulcers of evil curation: but cytrine mirobalanes are
right profitable in colliryes for ophthalmia coming of an hot cause.

Endive is cold and dry in ye first, and the water thereof, with the water of
plantayne and roses, with a white sief without opiu^, is a good collirie
against ulcers of the yard inflamed. Item for goutes of the joints, it is
profitable, to make a plaster of the water of endyue, with the iuce of the
roots of holyhocke, oil of Roses, oil of camomylle, barlye flower, the
yolks of eggs, and a little saffran.

Eupatorium is hot and dry in the second degree, and the iuce thereof, with
the iuce of dockes, is conuenyentlye admynystred against all scabbes, and
skalles, against Alopecia and Albaras. whereof such a liniment may be made.
Take of the juice of eupatorium, of the juice of dockes. an^.. vi. of black
elebore broken, of the juice of fumiterre. an^.. ss. of buttyre, of swynes
grese. an^.. iii. let them sees all together a little, then streyne them, and
add to the streynynge, of litarge of gold.. x. of quycksyluer quenched with
spittell.. vi. of oil of mastyke, of oil of laurel. ana.. v. of the juice of
lymons.. ii. ss. of clear terebentyne.. i. ss. of sublimate dissolved with
water of roses.. ii. ss. of ceruse.. vi. me^gle them, and make a linimente
according to art.

Figs are hot in the first degree, and dry in the beginning of the second,
and therefore they been maturatyue and are conveniently administered in ye
gargarismes, to ripe the quynce. And when they are stamped with snayles, and
swynes grese, they bring the mattier to the top of the aposteme, and make the
skin subtle and thynne.

Fabe or beans are cold and dry, and they resolve and break wyndye, and
hot humors, and are conuenientlye ministered in apostemes of the stones, and
of the dugges. The flowers of them clarify the sight and ben abstersyue.

Fenugreke is hot and dry in the first degree, it consoundeth, ripeth, and
resolves with mollification. And it rypeth cold and mengled apostemes, and
not hot apostemes. For as Guido says it enflameth flegmonyke apostemes, and
makes them malign. A decoction thereof with psilium and the said quynces, and
a little mellylote with water of roses, and endyue, swageth the pain of an hot
ophtalmia, and resolves moderatelye.

Fumitory is hot and dry in the second degree, and the juice thereof thicked
with the juice of dockes, and a little oximell, mundifieth all kinds of
morphew, if ye rub it upon the place. Item the decoction of fumitorye,
malowes, violettes and dockes, with bran, barlye, and nepte mundifieth, and
purges all manner of scabbes.

Fenell is hot and dry in the second degree, and it breaks wynd, and
conforteth the sight.

Fragaria or the herb of strawberies, is cold, and the juice thereof with
wine of pomegranades, and a little rose water helps hot apostemes, in the
beginning and augmentation.

Ferrum or iron is cold and dry in the second, and ye refuse thereof, is
dryer then the iron it self, and therefore it is stiptike, and dries much, and
when it is me^gled with the oil of yolks of eggs, and a little honey of roses,
and sarcocolle labored a good while in a mortar of lead, it heals
vnpeynfull vlceres of the ears, mundifienge and dryenge them marueylouslye.

Fraxinus or the ash tree is cold and dry in ye second, and has virtue to
glue together fleshy wou^des, and therefore his leaves sodden with terebentyne,
and oil of hipericon, mastike, and earth worms with a little odoriferous wine,
and ye juice of yarow and a few dayses, and a little mader, till the wine be
consumed, it consoundeth, or gleweth together cut synnowes. Likewise the juice
of it, with ye juice of march malowes, the juice of comferye, oil of myrte and
the whytes of eggs, and myldust, and sanguis draconis laid upon broken
boones, after the manner of a plaster, consoundeth them maruelously. Item the
leaves of the same weted in rose water, and wine of pomegranades, and laid
upon the foreheed, restreyne and keep back humors flowyng to the eyes, as I
have proved in ophthalmia.

Frumentum or wheat is moderately hot and moist, and the flower of it sodde^
in the broth of a he^ne, with buttire, yolks of eggs, oil of Violettes, and
a little saffran, rypeth hot apostemes, and swageth pain. Item being chewed
with raysons, it is good against a whiteflawe or ordioolum in the eye.

Furfur or branne is hot and dry in the first, and when it is pounded with
camomyl, mellilote, bean flower, and sapa, and sodden unto thycknes, having
added in the end a little saffra^, of oil of camomyll, oil of roses. an^..
ii. it swageth al pains of the ioynctes, and of the belly.

Fex olei ye dregs of oil, or amurca the foam of oil, is hoter then the
oil, and has virtue to resolve with mollification.

Fex cere or the dregs or refuse of wax, is hot, with abstertion, and
mollification.

Farina volatilis or mylduste is of cold and dry complexion, and therefore it
stauncheth blood, and being mengled with terebentyne, honye of roses, and the
yolks of eggs, it mu^difyeth perfytlye, the ulcers of exitures.

Flammula is hot and dry in the fourth, and it has virtue to burn
vehemently.

Fuligo or soote is hot and dry, and therefore it stauncheth and dries blood.

Filix or fern, ye roots and leaves of it are hot in the second degree, with
abstersion, and resolution.

Fermentum or leven is temperatelye hot, and moist, and it is of a boylynge
and nitrouse nature. And therefore through his heat, it draws vehementlye,
and through his moystnes, and nytrouse nature, it causes boylynge upon the
member, and therefore being mengled with maturatiue plasters, it thynneth the
skin, and procures maturation spedelye. Item leven dissolved with
terebentine, galbanum, and oppoponax, and white diaquilo^ administered after the
manner of a cerote, upon the prickyng of synnowes, is a singular remedy.

Filius ante patre^ is an herb that brings forth sondrye little branches,
whereof they that succeed, ar longer then the first, and therefore it is called
filius ante patre^, that is to say the son before the father. And some call it
oculus Christi, and some a gilofer, the flower of it is like garden saffran.
The decoction of this herb (as Auicenne says) laid upon the stingyng of a
viper heals it myghtelye.

Gariofilata or a ielowfer or (as other thyncke) Aneus is of a dry complexion,
and has virtue to conforte, G
dissolve, and consume, and therefore the wine of the decoction of it, with
madder, and other things described of Mesue, in the.xxi. distinction, heals
maruelouslye the wounds and fistules of the breast. Item the juice of it
mengled with verdegrese, cures ulcers of hard curation.

Gentian is hot and dry in the second, it is attractyue co^sumptiue,
resolutyue and of great opening, and the juice of it or powder mengled with a
little triacle, ditany, and torme^tyl, and so received, heals the styngynge of
vennomous worms.

Glandes or acornes are cold and dry in the second, and have virtue to dry,
and glewe together wounds.

Gallitricum is hot and dry with temperate hotenes, and has virtue to purge
the mattrice.

Genestra or brom is hot and dry in the second degree. The juice of it
mengled with oil, and aloes kylleth lyce.

Gramen is cold and dry in the first, and the decoction of it with the seed
of purcelane, and sorell, with ye wine of pomgranades given in drink, kylleth
worms.

Galla tinctoru^ or galls ben cold in the second with virtue to dry and to
bind.

Glutinu^ or glue is hot and dry together, and has virtue to consou^de,

Grana tinctorum or diers grain, wherwyth read clothes are dyed, is hot and
dry with temperate heat, and therefore it dries, and consou^deth wounds,
without mordication, or bytynge. And we have proved oil of grain of our
invention, with honor and profytte. Oil of grain.
whose ordinance was after this sort. R. of oil omphacine, of oil of roses
complete, and odoriferouse, of clear terebentyne. ana. li. ss. of earth
worms, washed with wine,. i. ss. of odoriferous wine one cyathe, of the
flowers of rosemary, of yarow, of saint Ihons worte, of centaury the greater,
and the less, of betony, of ribworte, of mader. ana. m^. ss. of the herb
called horsetayle a little, of clean licoryce somewhat broken.. vi. of mastyke,.
x. mengle them all together, and sees them till the wine be consumed, then
streyn them, and put to the streyning, of the flowers, and seeds of saint John's
worte. ana. m^. i. of fine grain brayed, of mader brayed likewise. an^.. v. of
oil omphacyne.. iii. Mengle them and let them sees a little, then put them
in a glass well stopped, and set them in the sun.xv. days, in the month of
may. For this oil heals great wou^des, and swageth the pain of the
wounds of the synnowes. Item it heals cut synnowes, dryeng them by little and
little, and incarneth them with gentle attraction, which things are required in
wounds of synnowes, as Auicenne says.

Gariophili, or clowes are hot and dry, in the third, and as some say in the
second. They conforte the synnowes, and therefore they are co^uenientlye put
into linimentes, oils, and decoctions for the pains of the synnowes, caused
of cold mattier, and they enter into colliryes ordained for the weakness of the
syghte, and against catarres. Moreover they have virtue to confort, consume,
and dissolve, and ben aromatyke.

Galyngale is hot and dry in the second degree, and it is spycy and
aromatyke, it consumes and dissolueth with great confortation.

Gum arabike is hot and moist, and softeneth, and mollifieth, and
stauncheth blood through his slymynes.

Gynger is hot in the third, and moist in the first degree, and therefore it
heateth vehementlye, as Paul and Galene say.

IVsquiamus or henbane is cold, and dry, in the third degree, and it is
nombred among medicines stupefactyue. Howbeit ye leaves sodden under cooles in
wee^e cloutes, and stamped with buttyre remove all pains caused of hot
mattier. The leaves also are co^uenientlye ministered in playsters, for
apostemations in woman's breasts, and for hot apostemes of the stones. Auice^ne
says that they resolve the hardness of apostemes in the stones per
antiphrasin, that is to say by a contrary. The sede being brayed with a little
sandrake, and myrrh, and piretrum, and holden between ye teeth in a little bag,
eases the toeth ache.

Iuiubes and sebesten are hot and moist with temperate heat. The decoction of
them with raysons, figs and sugar is good for apostemes of ye throat.

Juniper and the graynes of the same are hot and dry in the second they have
virtue to consounde wounds with confortation. The oil thereof conforteth
synnowye places in resoluynge. Item it is of great efficacitie in all goutes
coming of cold mattier.

For the cough.
Isope is hot and dry in the third, a decoction thereof made in the form
following, is good for the cough, and for short breathynge. R. of hysope, of
scabious, of branne. ana. m^. i. of dry figs, of dates. ana. in nombre.vi.
of raysons.. i. of iuiubes in nu^bre.xx. of sebesten in nombre.v. of clean
liquyrice. x. of the roots of enula campana.. iii. of melissa or bawme. m^.
ss. of the rotes of langedebefe.. vi. let them sees all together to the third
part be consumed, then make as it were a long syrup, with honye, sugar and
penydies, for it is of a marvelous operation.

Ireos or flower deluyce is hot and dry in the end of the third, and it
has virtue to dissolve, and to open and therefore it is administered
conuenientlye in small quantity in cerotes, for hardness of the liver, and of
the mylte, and the juice of it mengled with white diaquilon gu^med, and oil of
lynsede, and duckesgrefe, resolves and mollifieth al hard apostemes.

Iva muscata is hot and dry, and is very good against old peynes of
ioynctes. Moreover it is conveniently used in lotions, linime^tes, and pills
ordained for the french pockes. wherefore the decoction thereof with honye, and
flowers of rosemarye, and a little mugwort, and a little sweet fenell taking in
the morning, the quantity of.. vi. heals the said peynes marueilously.

Ipoquistidos is cold and dry in the second, with virtue to dry through
great stipticitie. To staunche blood ye may mengle it with sanguis draconis,
bole armeny, the heeres of a leueret cut in small pieces, and of frankensence.
an^.. ii. it is a very good medicyne.

Ipericon or saint John's worte is hot and dry in the third, and Galene
says moreover, yt it is subtiliatyue. And Dioscorides says that it has
great prerogatyue, to heal wou^des of the synnowes without mordication or
bytynge. Item the juice of it in the form of a cataplasma, is good against
great wou^des, and it mundifieth, and incarneth. Moreover the oil of it made
as it follows, is a great medicyne in ulcers, and wounds of synnowes. R. of
oil omphacine.. vi, of oil of mastike.. i. of oil of terebentine.. vi. of
oil of roses complete, of most clear terebentyne. ana.. ii. of mastyke, of
frankynsence. ana.. ii. of myrrh, of aloes hepatike. ana.. iii. of gu^me
elimi, of colophonia. ana.. iii. of the juice of saint John's wort, pla^tayne,
centaurye, and horsetayle. ana.. i. of yarowe.. ii. of the rotes of tormentil,
of ditany, of carduus benedictus. an^.. i. of mader, of fine grain.. ii. ss.
of saffran.. ss. of earth worms, washed with wine.. ii. of the leaves and
rotes of an ash tree. ana. m^. ss. of odoriferous wine. li. ii. sta^pe the
things, that are to be stamped, then sees them till the wine, and the juice be
consumed, and then streyn them through a thycke clothe, and put them into a
glass, with the seeds and flowers of saint John's worte, and a few flowers of
rosemary, and set them in the sun, in May the space of.xv. days, renewynge
the said flowers twyse, and so ye shall have a most precious oil to heal all
wou^des, except they came of a bruise, and be altered by the air. It is
moreover good against old peynes of the ioynctes, in the french pockes, and
for synnowes that move vneaselye, and finallye for ulcers, and wounds that
induce tremblynges, and crampes.

Iarus or aaron that is the less dragone, has virtue to heat moderatelye,
and when it is sodden, with the rotes of mallows, violettes, tapsus barbatus,
and lynsede, and apples it resolves the swellynges of the emoroydes.

Isopus humida or the sweat and fat of shepes wolle, is moderatelye hot,
and mollifieth al hardness, with mitigation of pain.

LActuca or lettuse is cold and moist it has virtue to quench all evil, and
hot co^plexions, as well within as without, and therefore it is a good remedy
against Herisipelas. Lettuse (as Auice^ne says) engenders good blood, but
if it be often used, it dimmeth the sight.

Lapacium acutu^ or dockes, is hot and dry in the third, and it is good in
bathes, and oyntmentes for the lepry, scabbes, ryngwormes, tetters, the french
pockes, and mormal.

Lupuleis or hoppes is hot and dry in the first, declinynge to coldness, and
it has virtue to swage burning pain, soupplynge, and mundifienge blood and
choler.

Leuisticus or louage is hot and dry in the second, and it provoke vryne
and is of temparate heat, and conforteth the synnowes, by his aromatyke
quality. A baine of his decoction with sage, rosemarye, mugwort, nepte,
camomylle, mellilote, sticados, squinantum sodden in wine, is a good remedy
for the crampe, coming of replecion, and for the palsye.

Lanciola or sperewort is hot and dry in the fourth, and it has virtue to
purge fleume and cholere, and is corrected with the juice of wormwood.

Lac or milk is of temperate heat, and Serapon says, it is compounde of three
substa^ces, that is buttire, chief, and water, and it is resolutyue with
mollificatio^. If ye me^gle sour milk, with the leaves of plantaine wormwood,
rybworte, oil of roses, and of myrte, with barlye, and bean flower, and eggs
it is a singler remedy for wrestynges of the ligame^tes, and ioynctes, and for
attrition of muscules at the beginning. And if ye put thereunto a little oil of
camomille, spike, and mastyke it heals the said diseases, in the end with
confortation of the place. Item milk with a syrup of roses, and a little wine
of pomegranades, heals the quynce. Milk also put into the eyes, swageth the
pain of them.

Licium is compounde of sondrye substaunces, and it is desiccatyue
subtiliatyue, and percynge. Moreover it is of erthye substance cold and
stiptyke.

Lentilles are temperate, inclinyng to dryenes, and been partelye restrictyue,
and stiptyke, and therefore they are good in eating, and deceytful ulcers.

Lignum aloes is hot and dry in the second, and it conforteth the brain
distempered by a cold cause, through his aromatyke quality, and the decoction
thereof with mader, barlye, and sugre, heals all wounds, and ulcers of the
entrayles. The powder of it, with cloves, and ye bone of a stagges heart, and
oil, shall make a cock to crow day and night, if ye rub his comb herwyth.
And therefore the fume thereof received at the nose, conforteth the cold brain.

Limacis caro, or snayles flesh is hot and moist, and is good for the
straytnes of the breast, and shortness of wind, and if ye boil snayles in an
oven, and stamp them, and dry them with their shelles, they have virtue to
scowre. But raw snayles stamped without their shelles, with leven, and the
rotes of a cane or reed draw out pieces of bones, and pieces of wood. Item the
flesh of little snayles that live in trees being roasted in an oven, and brayed
as fine as may be, heals the ulcers, spots, and other diseases of the
eyes. Snayles of the sea are of like operation, but that they are more dry and
abstersyue, because of their saltnes.

Licorice is hot and moist with temperate heat, and when it is sodden with
raysons, horsetayle, barlye, alkechingi, and conveyed in with a syryng, it
remedyeth vlcerations, and chafinges of the bladder.

Lupynes are hot in the first and dry in the second. Galeyne says they are
desiccatyue, and abstersyue without mordication, or bytynge. A decoction of
lupines heals cancrena, and does make the face fair, and is good to heal
the morphewe.

Litarge is cold and dry, and is co^uenientlye ministered in linimentes of hot
ulcers.

Laudanum is hot and moist in the second, and it is good for cold catarres,
and comfort the matryce, when it is applied with a pessarye. And when it is
poudred with mastike, and incorporate with licium, it fasteneth loosed teeth.

Lilly roots are hot and moist in the second, they ripe apostemes, and swage
pain.

Lapis lazuli is cold and moist, good for all kinds of diseases, yt come of
melancholye.

MErcurialis or the herb mercurye is hot and dry in the first, and being
sodde with ye broth of an hen, and sufficient sugar, souppleth, and purges a
stiptyke and bound belly. Likewise in clysters, it is a singular remedy, for
the peines of ye ioynetes, and of the crampe. The clyster may be made after
this sort.. of the leaves of mercuriall, and holihocke. ana. m^. i. of the
leaves of beetes, and coleworte. ana. m^. ss. of the flowers of rosemarye, of
nepte, and camomylle, and polipodye, and of the coddes of seen, and epithimu^.
ana. a little, of the roots of brionia.. x. of ye rotes of flourdeluyce. ss. a
hedde of a wether somewhat chopped, and bruised, let them sees all till half
be consumed, then streyne them, and take of the foresaid decoction. li. ss. of
oil of camomylle, dyl, and lillies. ana.. i. ss. of honye of roses.. ii. of
benedicta simplex.. ss. of the yolks of two eggs a little, and with a little
salt, make a clyster.

Marchasita is hot and dry in the third, it has virtue to consounde
wounds, and to staunche blood.

Melissa is hot and dry in the second, and it has virtue to scour, to
consume, and to glewe ulcers together, and the wine of the decoction of
melissa, of Citron pillis with a little cynomome, conserua roses, and buglosse,
made with the water of buglosse, and wine of pomegranades, and so streyned, and
swetened with sugar, is a singular remedy for the passions of the heart, and
swonyng.

Mellilote is hot and dry, in the first, and is of the nature of camomyll,
and it has virtue to resolve, and swage the peynes of hot apostemes. Moreover
it consoundeth fresh wounds. The juice of it mengled with ye juice of yarowe,
mengled with clear terebentine, and oil of ipericon, and sodden in sufficient
quantity of erthwormes, till the juice be consumed, is of marvelous operation
against great ulcers of synnowes, and muscles. For it swageth pain, and
resolves humors, without attraction and mundifieth pleasauntly.

Malowes been cold in the first, and moist in the second, and when they ben
sodden in the brothe of a hen, or a chyckyn, with barlye flower, and the^
stamped, with yolks of two eggs, with sufficient quantity of oil of
violettes, and a little saffran, they heal cholerike, and hot apostemes, as
well in resoluyng, as in rypyng. etc.

Myntes are hot and dry in the second, and they dissolve and confort
members, through their aromatyke nature. They have also virtue to confort the
stomach, when it has lost appetyte, through cold, moist and gross mattier
ordained after this sort.. of myntes, of serpillu^, of percelye. an^. m^. ss.
of peper, cynamome, galangale, cubebes saffran. an^. a little, of the wine of
pomgranades.. x. of veriuce, of cromes of bread somewhat dried at the fire..
i. ss. comune seeds.. vi. of blanched almondes, of raysons. an^.. v. of white
sugar a little, braye them all in a mortar of marble, and make a sauce. Item a
liniment made of myntes, conforteth the stomach, and styrreth up appetyte, and
it must be laid upon the stomach. R. of fresh myntes, of mugworte,
wormwood, and rue. ana. m^. ss. of cinamome, galingale, nutmiges, clowes.
ana.. i. ss. of calamus aromaticus, of sweet fenel. an^.. i. of the oil of
wormwood, of the oil of mastike, ana.. ii. let the^ sees al together, with a
little odoriferous wine, till the wine be consumed.

Mumia is the flesh of a dead body, that is enbawmed, and it is hot and
dry in the second, and therefore it has virtue to incarne wou^des, and to
staunche blood. Wherefore it is conuenientlye administered to a bruise caused by
a fall, with mader, Reubarbe, terra sigillata, water of roses, and water of
plantayne. Inward ruptures or breakynges are healed with this medicine, and
blood also is staunched therwyth.

Minium is cold and dry, and is made of cerusse by adustion, or burning, and
it is used in cerotes and oyntmentes for malign ulcers.

Merdasengi is cold and dry, it co^soundeth, and is stiptike.

Millefoliu^ or yarow is of a temperate quality, enclinyng to drines, and has
virtue to co^sound wounds, and to keep the places lyenge about, from swelling.
Moreover mengled with a little buttire, and laid to the teeth it heals the
toeth ache. Item the juice of it, dronken with a little vinaygre, provoke
vryne, chiefly being mengled with the wine of ayger pomgranades. Also dronken
with cassia, it is good for the^ that are vexed with the stone.

Maiorum is hoote and dry in the third, it has virtue to conforte by reason
of his aromatyke nature, and it resolves, consumes, and dries with great
heatyng and therefore it is pleasant to them, that have Epilepsia, and the
crampe wha^ they smell it. And the decoction of it received at the nose
conforteth the brain, and purges it from cold humors, if it be made after
the manner following. R. of maioram, of white beetes. ana. m^. i. of rosemarye,
of mugworte. ana. a little, of clean licorice.. vi. of honey.. x. of gynger, of
piretrum. ana.. i. of raysons. v. let them sees all with sufficient water,
till half the water be consumed, tha^ press them, and use them, as is
aforesaid.

Marrubium prassium or horehou^de is hot and dry in the third, and by reason
of his bytternes, it provoke vryne, and is abstersive, and has nature to
comfort, and to dissolve, and the wine of the decoction of it, ordained as it
follows, is good for the strangury, and the cholike. R. of the leaves of
horehounde, of the flowers of rosemarye. ana. m^. i. of sweet fenell, of the
roots of percelye. ana. m^. ss. of clean licorice.. x. of raysons, prunes,
iuiubes. an^.. i. of comune seeds.. v. of syrup de duabus radicibus.. iiii.
Let them sees al together, with water and wine of pomegranades, till the half
be consumed, then streyne them, and put thereunto sufficient sugar and let the
patient take thereof, the quantity of half a cyath.

Mora celsi or mulberyes are hot and moist if they be sweet, if they be
harrishe, they are cold and moist. The juice of them when they be half ripe,
sodde^ with wine of pomegranades, and a little rose water, is a good remedy for
the quynce, and the fall of the vuula, and for ye apostemes of the throat, and
the two amigdales or almons, and I affirm the same thing of wild mulberyes,
called morobaci, and therefore diamoro^ is good for the same intention.

Mandragora is cold and moist as some say in the second, and as some think
in the third. His virtue is to deprive a member of feeling, wherefore when we
will cut of a member without feling of ye patient, we plaster ye said member a
certain space with the decoction thereof, or with the oil of the boylyng of
the same. Howebeit this practice is not without great danger

Mary is hot and moist, and it souppleth, swageth, and rypeth.

Mel or honey is hot and dry in the second and it is abstersive and
mu^dificatiue.

Memythe is cold and dry in the first, and it is an herb like popy, and of ye
juice thereof, there is a laudable syef made, very good for the eyes. Pliny
says that celidonye the less, is memythe, and there is a controversy among
the doctors concerning his quality. For Galene says, that celidonye, is
hot in the fourth. Howebeit, it is very good to clarify the eyes. And
therefore some say that swalowes when their birds been blind, bring this
herb and give them to eat, and so recover their fight.

Mala or apples, when they be unripe are styptyke, and therefore they are cold
and dry, very hurtful to the sinnowes. Ripe apples roasted, swage the pain of
the eyes, and of the fundament, when they ben mengled with milk, and yolks of
eggs, and so applied in the form of a plaster.

Matrisilua is hot and dry, and it cutteth and thynneth, as Galene says,
and is conuenientlye administered in oyntme^tes of the legs, and the leaves of
it, heals the ulcers of the legs.

Margaryte or perles, are temperate, and when they be poudred, and mengled with
honye of Roses, they are good for passions of the heart. Manna, is hot and
moist temperatlye, it has virtue to mundifye choleryke blood, and it
quenches the boylynge heat of cholere.

Millium, is a grain cold in the first, and dry in the second, and it is
conuenientlye put into little bags, and applied in sondrye parts of the
body, to dry. And when it is dried in a brass pan, with branne, and well
stamped, it apeaseth the pain of the ioynctes. If ye rub the head therwyth,
the here being shaven of, it stops reumes, having added a little of
calamus aromaticus, and a little sandrake.

Mastyke is hot and dry in the second, and his virtue is to conforte
synnowye places, with incarnation, and stypticitie, and if mastyke be chewed
with a little of staphisagre, they provoke humors from the brain to the mouth.

Myrrh is hot and dry in the second, it has virtue to comfort, and defend
putrefaction, and it co^soundeth, and therefore it is used in fresh wounds, to
glue them together, and it is also good in rotten ulcers.

Mespiles or meddlers, are cold and dry in the third, and be very
restrictyue, and the unripe are more byndynge then the ripe.

NVttes are hot and dry, of evil nouryshme^t, and of hard digestio^, and they
cause heed ache. when they ben me^gled with honey, figs, salt, and a little
triacle, they heal the biting of men, dogs, serpents, and other venomous
beasts. Auicenne says, that hasyll nuttes increase the brain.

Nutmygges comfort by the aromatike nature, and dissolve. So^time their virtue
is necessary, for the dymnes and weakness of the eyes.

Nuttes of cypress are hoote and dry temperately, they comfort and dry with
notable stipticitie.

Nasturcium, or cresses, are hot and dry in the third, and have virtue to
ripe cold apostemes. The sede of it sodde^ with vinegre and brayed, dissolve
scrophules.

Nigella is hot and dry in the third, and when it is sta^ped with honey, ox
gal, and aloes caballine, and applied upon ye navel, in the form of a
plaster, it kylleth worms in children.

Nenupher is cold and moist in the second, the flour sodde^ with oil of
violettes, oil of roses omphacine, and a little wine of pomegranades, unto ye
co^sumption of the wine, que^cheth the inflammation of herisipelas and phlegmon.

Oil made of ripe Olyues, is hot and moist with temperate heat, and it has
virtue to receive into it self all the virtues of simples. If it be made of
unripe olives, it is cold and dry, and therefore it is stiptike, and is called
oil omphacine. And when it is made according to art with roses, it quenches
al hot mattiers, and conforteth the complexion of the member.

Oua gallinaru^ or he^nes eggs, are te^perat. Their yolks ben moderatly hot
and moist, and the oil thereof (as Auenzoar says) is an excellent remedy to
swage the pain of the ears. The white is cold and moist.

Organy is hot and dry in the third, and it has virtue to dissolve, and to
consume with attraction. when it is mengled with camomyll, mellilote, dylle,
mugwort, and put in a bag, it swageth peyn of ye belly coming of a cold
cause, chieflye if it be first heated upon a tile, and sprincled with wine.
Ite^ when the arsegutte issues out of the fundament, sta^ped organy with
roses, calomus aromaticus, and wormewoode and laid hot thereunto, reduces the
gutte unto his place.

Opoponax is a gu^me of hoote and dry complexion, and it is resolutyue with
mollification.

Opiu^ is cold and dry in the fourth, and therefore it is stupefactyue.

Os sepie, that is ye bone of a fyshe called a cuttle, is cold and dry, and
mundifieth gentlye.

Ordeum or barlye is cold and dry in the second, and dryueth back hot
apostemes, and when it is mengled with things resolutyue, it resolves the
said apostemes. And when it is sodden in the decoction of malowes, the yolks
of eggs, oil of violettes, and a little buttyre, it ripeth cholerike and
sa^guine apostemes being applied after the manner of a plaster, and having
added a little saffran.

Orobus is hot in the first, and dry in the second, and being chewed with
almondes of a fasting stomach, and laid upon tetters, ryngwormes, and
morphewes, it helps the said diseases. And if ye rub your hands and face
therewyth, it clarifieth the skin. It scoureth, and purges, filthy and
rooten vlceres, being mengled with flower of lupines, honye of roses, and
terebentine. And it is of like efficacitie, in wounds of synnowes, after that
the danger of apostemation is paste. Item the flower of orobus put in
playsters, is good for synnowye wounds and apostemes.

Olyues unripe, are cold and dry, and therefore their oil is stiptyke.

And when they be seasoned with salt, Fenell, water, or veriuce, and eaten in
small quantity, they confort the stomach and provoke appetite.

Ripe olyues be temperatelye hot and moist, but they ben of evil digestion and
nouryshment.

Oleum muscelinum is hot, and has virtue to resolve. Guydo says, it is
drawn out of a certain grain as oil is drawn out of behen.

Pears are of sondrye kinds, and their substance is watrye, and earthye,
some of them be sweet, some harryshe, some sower. The sweet are less cold
than the sower, howebeit they have all some stipticitie, but being roasted,
they are of less stipticitie, than when they be raw. Pears and apples roasted,
are conuenientlye used in playsters, for hot apostemes at the beginning. And
some say that the juice of them incarneth, and consoundeth, wounds and
vlceres. But it shall be better and surer, if ye put to a dram of the said
juice, two drammes, of syrup of roses, and.. x. of clear terebentyne.. i. of
frankincense, and.. ss. of bean flower, Let them sees together beside the
flower, and the frankynsence, and tha^ incorporate the rest and use them after
the manner of an ointment.

Porrum or a leke, is hot and dry in the third degree, wherefore the water
thereof dronken with honye and water, or meth, is a present remedy for
venomous styngynges. If ye roast leekes, and make a plaster of them with a
little triacle, terebentyne, and oil of rue, they heal the wound that comes
by bytynge. Item if ye mengle the juice of a roasted leeke, with a little
olibane, oil of roses, and a little woman's milk, and a little oil of the
yolks of eggs, it has virtue to take away the pain and sowndynge of the
ears, coming of a cold cause.

Pix naualis or ship pytche, is hot and dry, it has virtue to consume and
dissolve, liquide pytch, and ship pitch, are conuenientlye put into
oyntmentes for cold ulcers.

Purcelane is cold in the third, and moist in the second. The juice thereof,
has virtue and proprietye to pluck up wartes, being rubbed therwythall. And
moreover it stops the flowynge of hot humors. And when it is put into
playsters for flegmon, and herisipelas, it defends putrefaction, and
finallye, it heals the congelation of the teeth.

Pinguedo anatis, or duckes grese, is hoote and moist, and excedeth all other
in swagynge pain, with mollification.

Peper is hot in the fourth and dry in the second, it draws notablye, in
dissoluynge, and consumes, through his drynes.

Prunes be cold and dry, and the meat of them sodden in a brothe of flesh,
with a quynce or a warden, or buttyre, is good for hot apostemes of the
fundament, and of the yard. And if ye put thereunto barlye flower, with the
yolks of eggs, and a little saffra^, it will be a singular remedy.

Pomegranades are sondrye, some be sweet, some other sower. The sower are cold
and dry in the second. The sweet are cold and moist in the first. The
juice of them both stamped with their ryndes, and sodden with as much honey of
roses, and the leaves of wild olyues somewhat bruised, cures perfytlye the
vlceres of the nosethrylles, and of the mouth. The graynes of them confort the
stomach, used moderatelye. Otherwise they hurt the same. The wine of
pomegranades, taken after repast, keeps meat from corruption. Item when they
be sodden in the ryndes, stamped, and made after the form of a plaster, they
are excellent remedies, at the beginning for all hot apostemes.

Populus or the popler tree, is cold and dry in the third. It is
repercussyue, and stupefactyue, if ye rub the nosethrilles, and temples, with
the juice thereof. And the ointment called populeon, mengled with the white of
an egg, oil of violettes, and oil of popie, abateth the heat of a chafed
yard, and swageth the pain.

Popye is cold and dry in the second, and therefore it astonyeth moderatelye.

Psilium, is cold and moist in the second, and has virtue to repress
choleryke apostemes, and therefore in the beginning and augmentation of the
same, it is a good repercussiue ministered in the form of a muscillage. Item
the muscilage of psilium beaten with oil of Roses omphacyne, with an oyntmente
of roses, and the juice of lettuce made after a plaster, or linimente, heals
herisipelas. The inner part of this sede is hot and dry in the third, and
therefore has virtue to burn and to chafe, the outward part cools and
souppleth.

Papirus is cold and dry with familier repercussion, therefore when it is
weted with water of roses, oil of Roses, and aplyed upon the legs, it
reteyneth deriuation of humors.

Psidia is cold in the second, and dry in the third, it has virtue to dry,
cicatrise, and restrain.

Polium montauum, is hot in the second, dry in the third, it has virtue to
sesolue, consume, and to provoke vryne.

Petroleum, is hot and dry in the third and more, being sodden with
philosophers oil, terebentyne, earth worms, and the juice of walworte, it is
a merueylous medicyne against the peynes of sciatica, and other goutes.

Pinguedo or grese, is hot and moist, more or less, according to the nature
of beasts, and it has virtue to ripe, and mollifye, and swageth pain.

Palma is hot and cold in the second.

Pentaphillon, or cynkefoyle, dries vehemently, howbeit it has no manifest
hotnes.

Pineole, or the kernelles of a pinaple, are hot and moist, and been of
great nouryshmente. The ryndes of them been cold, dry, and stiptike.

Plumbum is cold and moist in the second, and it is good against malign
and cankerouse ulcers, and has a meruelouse prerogatyue, to resolve the
hardness and lyppes of the said ulcers, through a certain unknown virtue.
Plates of lead bound fast upon knobbes, resolve them maruelouslye.

Peaches been cold in the second, and dry in the first. Dioscorides says,
that they conforte the stomach. Serapion says that the leaves of peches are
abstersyue, and resolutyue, and through their bytternes, have strength to
kylle worms. Peches be of hard digestion, and if they be eaten before meat,
they prepare away for other things to pass out, but if they be eaten after
meat, they are easily corrupted, howebe it they are rectifyed with good wine.

Pellis castrati, or the skin of a wether newely flaine, is good for strypes,
and brusing of the entrayles, and of the bellye, procedynge by a fall, and
sometime it restores the patiente in one day, resoluynge, and consuming the
blood, that is out of the veins.

Piretrum is hot and dry in the third, it has virtue to draw and to
heat, and therefore holde^ under the teeth, it heals the toeth ache
procedynge of a cold cause, if it be first mollified with vinaygre.

Pionye is hot and dry in the second, the seed of it carried about the neck
with the root, preserves enfantes from the epilepsia or falling sycknes.
Item when it is poudred with sage, rosemarye, and maierum, and given to drink
with hydromell, or methe, it heals the epilepsia, or at the lest swageth it.

Percelye is hot and dry in the second, it provoke vryne. The root of it
is of hard digestion, howebeit it styrreth up appetite, and the leaves confort
the stomach. And if it be me^gled with fenell, water cresses, bawme, Myrte, Rue,
in little quantity, with flowers of rosemarye, pympernell, borage, lettuse, in
equal portion, making a salet of it, with sweet oil, and vinaygre, it styrreth
up appetyte effectuouslye.

Paritarye is hot and dry in the third, and the seed is cold and dry with
stipticitye, and when it is fried with buttyre, and eaten, it makes the stone
to come out of the raynes and the blader. Item parietarye heated in a pan,
with a little wine and percelye leaves, and water cresses, and applied upon the
bone over the privy members, provoke vryne. And if ye sees it with malowes,
Roses, mugworte, branne, husked beans, and stamped, and sodden again with
sapa, till they be thycke. It should be a good plaster for attrition and
brusynge of the lacertes and muscules.

REsina pini, or rosin of pynaple tree, and almoost all other rosins have
virtue to heat, and been mundyficatiue, and dissolutyue: and mynystred in
oyntmentes, they heat and dry cold ulcers, and produce flesh in wounds of
strong bodies.

Roses ben cold in the first, and dry in the second, and are much used in
oyntmentes, syrupes, and other confections.

Rosemarye is hot and dry, in the third, it resolves and mundifieth with
co^fortation, the flower is called authos, which has virtue to clarifye the
syghte. Item it has virtue to resolve and mundifye, with co^fortation.

Rue is hoote, and dry, in the third, and has virtue to consume wind, and
the iuce of it is put in coliryes, to help the dymnesse of the sight.

Radysh is hot and dry in the second, the rymme of it taken in a little
quantity, aydeth digestion. The iuce of it thycked with oil of dylle, cumyne,
and a little wax, takes away black and blewe color, caused under the eyes
by a stroke.

Rubea tinctorum, or madder, is hot and dry in the second. Aueroys says,
that it helps the difficulty of gross vryne, and it is good for ulcers that
perce into the breast, and them that are fallen from an hye place, for it
purges with confortation.

Rapesben hot in the second, and moist in the first. Auicenne says that when
they be eaten, sodden with flesh, they sharpen the sight, and increase seed:
but they be of hard dygestyon.

Rise (as Galene says) byndeth the belly. Serapion says, it is hot and
dry in the first, but Rasis says that it is temperate. when it is sodden in
an hens broth without salt, it resolves the swellyng of women's breasts, in
mollifying their hardness. Item sodden with the said brothe, horstayle, lignu^
aloes in small quantity, and with read sugre, it heals the intrayles, or
inwardes being vlcered. Item when it is sodden with feet or heed of veale, or
of mutton, and eaten as is aforesaid: it engenders the pore, called Sarcoides
in broken bones.

Realgar is hot, and mortifyeth, and is nombred among medycines that
putrefye, for it brings an escare in the members, like deed flesh.

Rubus or a bramble, is cold and dry with stipticitie, and it consoundeth
wounds and ulcers. The decoction of the croppes, with the leaves of wild
olives, roses, and a little alune, and licium heals ulcers of the gummes, and
of the mouth, and of the parts thereof.

SOlatrum, nyghtshade, or morell, is cold and dry in the second, with
stipticitie. Auicenne says, that it has virtue to resolve inward hot
apostemes. The iuce of it mynystred in a liniment, as it follows, heals
ytchyng, which comes of fracture of bones, and takes away the heat of
ulcers, and also the chafynge of the priuey me^bres.. of the iuce of night
shade, of the iuce of plantayne. ana.. vi. of ye wine of pomgranades.. ss. of
oil omphacyne, of roses complete. ana. ss. ii. of vnguen. populeon, of
vnguentum rosarum. ana.. i. of litarge of gold and silver. au^.. ii. of
tutia.. iii of ceruse, of washed lyme. ana.. vi. mengle them in a mortare of
lead, and make a liniment after this sort. First put the myneralles in a
mortar, and than put in a drop of oil, and a drop of the juice, and so
still till they be well incorporat, stirryng the^ ever about, with a pestel of
lead, then put to the rest, and add in the end, of camphore brayed.. ss.

Spica Nardi, is hot in the first and dry in the second, and his virtue is
to retein heeres, ye fall in the eye lyddes, or in the bearde, confortynge the
rotes of them. The odoure conforteth the brain hurt by cold. Item when it is
mengled with tucia, aloes epatyke, water of eufrage, fenell, and roses, and
with a little clowes, and so sodde^ and strayned, it is a singular remedy, to
conforte the sight and to heal the disease of the eyes.

Sticados arabike, is hoote in the first and dry in the second, and has some
part of stipticitie, and by reason of his bitterness, is subtiliatyue and
resolutyue with some stipticitie. A decoction of it, with water and wine, with
camomyll, mugwort, buglosse, sage, rosemarye, and other confortatiue herbs, as
organy, nept, serpillum, arsmerte, is good to heal apostemes of ye legs,
called vndimyes. Also a suffumigation and fomentation of the legs, made with
the forsayde decoction, comfort the members, being weryed with iourneying.

Squilla marina is hot and dry in the third. It has virtue to thyn, to
mundifye, and to scalde, and chefelye it mundifyeth rotten ulcers from gross
matter with resolution The iuce of it being roasted under the cooles, with the
iuce of dockes, and oximell, squilliticum, and stamped with black Elebore, and
boiled together with a little brymstone, heals all manner tetters, ryngwormes,
morphewes, alopecia, and such like. Also vinegre squillitik with liciu^
strengthens the teeth, and remoueth the putrefaction of the gummes.

Semperviua or housleke, is cold in the third, and dry in the first, the
iuce thereof me^gled with lettuse, oil of roses omphacyne, oil of vyolettes
beaten with the white of an egg, quenches inflammations of choleryke
apostemes.

Satirion is hot and moist in the first, and therefore it provoke lechery
through his inflation or wyndynesse.

Sparagus is hoote and dry, and (as Platearius says) in the third degree.
It scoureth and provoke vryne.

Salix or wyllowes, is cold and dry, and byndeth, and is good for chafynge of
the mouth, and inflamed ulcers.

Sumach is cold in the second, and dry in the third, withstipticitie, and
therefore it is good for hot apostemes of the mouth. A decoction of it, with
barley, wine of pomegranades and licium, and a little diameron, is good for the
said diseases.

Sambucus or elders, is hoote and dry, in the beginning of the third degree.
It resolves, dries, opens, and is of subtyle substance, and therefore ye
oil of elders is good to cauterise in the pryckynge of synowes, by reason of
his vehement percyng, and dryinge. The leaves sta^ped with elebore, oximel,
squilliticke, heal the morphewe, scalles, and other kinds of scabbes. Item
the rynde of the root chopped in small pieces, and steped in wine the space of
a night, makes the wine of such nature, that it provoke vomyte, and purges
ye bellye of evil humors: Finally elders have virtue to discuss.

Sauyne is hot and dry in the third. A decoction of it with lie, dyl,
paritary, camomyll, branne, organy, mugwort, holyhocke, sapa, takes away all
pains and grypynges of ye bellye, and dissolueth all ventoses of the guts,
if they be not caused of a coleryk matter, and it must be admynistred upon the
bellye with a sponge or with raw threde. Item, wine of the decoction of
sauyne, with dyll seed, paritary leaves, and of holyhock laid on the bellye,
about the pryuey members as a plaster, cures ye stra^gury, and dissury,
prouokyng vryne, and swageth the pain of the bladder.

Scrophularia is hoote and dry, and is very resolutyue.

Stercus or donge, is hoote and dry, more or less, according to the nature
of beasts. Gootes donge poudred, and sodden with honye, and sapa, mundifyeth
hollow ulcers, after the mundification of them. Item sodden with bean flower,
branne, camomyll, vynegre, and water, and sapa, having added in the end, oil
of camomyl, and dyll, heals perfytly the pains of the knee, and wyndy
swelllynges of the same, though they be very old, as I have often proved.
Item, a dogs tourde that eats bones, stamped, and sodden with lentyle
flower, and gootes milk, heals malign, corrosyue, and disceytefull ulcers,
if it be applied as a plaster.

Sepum, or tallowe, is temperately hot, according to the nature of beasts,
it is resolutiue and maturatiue, and swageth pain.

Sarcocolle is a gum, hot in the second, and dry in the first, it has
virtue to incarne wounds and ulcers, and is put in colliryes ordained for
ophtalmia.

Sanguis draconis is cold and dry in the third, and by reason of his
stipticitie, coldness, and slymynesse, it easelye stancheth blood. And Galene
says, that it has virtue to cole, and to bind moderately. Item the plant
brayed and broken with the blood, co^soundeth fresh wounds, and so does
terebentine also, myngled with sanguis draconis, frankensence, and a little oil
of ipericon.

Sapo or soap, is hot and dry with adustion or burning. And french soap
mengled with the poudre of black elebore, litarge of silver, verdegrese, a little
quycksyluer, and a little glass brayed, cures the black morphewe, tetters,
and ryngewormes, being made in the form of an ointment.

Spuma maris, or the foam of the sea, is hot in the first, and dry in the
third: it has virtue to scour, and to dry.

Spongia maris, or a sponge, is hot in the first, and dry in the second. It
has virtue to resolve, and to dry, and being somewhat burned, and laid upon
superfluous flesh, it co^sumeth it without pain, and therefore it may be
laid upon dura matter, to consume superfluous flesh, for it mundifyeth with
some corrosion, and without pain.

Staphisagria is hot and dry in the third, and has virtue to draw, and
therefore being chewed, it purges rewmes of the heed, and when it is me^gled
and stamped with oil, it kylleth lyse.

Scabiouse, is hot and dry in the second, and has virtue to scour: the
juice of it mengled with the juice of dockes, and fumyterrye, and oil of
laurel, and mastyke, and tha^ sodden with terebentine, with litarge of gold,
and a little quycksyluer quenched with spettle, with the addition of a little
iuce of sothernewoode, and of the rotes of affodilles, and a little black
elebore brayed, cures scalles, ryngwormes, and tetters, mophew, and alopecia.
And moreover it has a great prerogatyue in diseases of ye breast. For the
cough.
The water of the decoction of it with licoryce, reysons, fygges, iuiubes,
branne, damask primes, sebeste^ penydies, and a little honye, is a synguler
remedy for the cough, and for a short breath: half a cyath must be taken in the
morning, and when the patient goes to bed. And it was committed to me as a
secret, and I have proved it to be very good.

Sisaminum, is a grain hot and moist in the first, and has virtue to
mollify, and to ripe hot apostemes.

Sulphur or brymstone, is hot and dry in the fourth, and when it is sodden
with oil of elders, and erthwormes, with a little vynegre, till the vinegre be
consumed: it is a good medicyne for the pryckynge of ye synowes. Item being
sodden with oil of roses, and of laurel, and a little vynegre, it consumes
and dries all manner scabbes.

Salt is hot and dry, and is used in lotions of filthy ulcers.

Sandalus or saunders, is a tree of cold and dry complexion in ye second and
there ben three kinds of it, namelye, white, yelowe, and red, and they are put
in repercussiues, of hot apostemes and wounds.

Semen lini or lyneseede, is hot and dry in the first, with some moisture,
and it rypeth cold apostemes. And the oil of it is a good medycyne for
diseases of the fundament, and against the crampe of wounds, if ye anoint the
backebone, and the joints with the said oil.

Storax, calamyte, and liquide storax are hot in the first, and dry in the
second, and they have virtue to heat a cold brain. And when they are
incorporate with laudanu^, odoriferous new wax, after ye manner of a poma^der,
they comfort the brain, and when the pomander is borne in the hand, it
comfort cut synowes. Liquide storax is put in linimentes, against scabbes
and scalles of the heed, and against the french pockes: and makes the
oyntmentes of good odor.

Spodium is cold and dry, and when it is mengled with water of plantayne,
antimony, myrobalane citryne, sumache, and a little roche alume, and licium
somewhat sodden, cures perfytely ulcers of the mouth, and being me^gled with
tutia, antimoniu^ and burned lead, it heals cancreous ulcers. Item it
stauncheth bledyng at the nose, being blown with antimonye and frankensence.

TErebentine is hot and dry, with temperate heat, it is good for wounds of
synnowes, and muscles, and it passes other in wou^des of children and women. A
suffumigation thereof heals the disease tenasmos. when it is taken by mouth,
as it shall be declared hereafter, it swageth the pains of the inward parts..
of most clear terebentine thryes washed with water of fenelle.. i. of syrup
de duabus radicibus without vynegre.. x. of asses donge that gives milk from
the month of may, dried in the shadow, and fynely poudred.. i. ss. of
saffran, graynes.ii. of sweet fenelle.. i. me^gle the^, and let the patie^t
receive this ordinance with a fasting stomak.

Tartare or wine lies, is hot and dry in the third: it is conuenyentlye put
in oyntmentes for scabbes. wha^ it is poudred, and taken with a little mastik,
in the broth of an hen, or with sugre of roses, it has virtue to cause.iiii.
or.v. syeges.

Tucia is cold and dry, and is used in ulcers of the yard, and in ca^creous,
malign, and corrosyue ulcers, for it dries, and incarneth them. And when it
is mengled with the iuce of fenell, or water of fenel, and antimony, it
preserves the eyes, and it is conuenyently used in colliryes.

Tamariscus is hot and dry, and provoke vryne. And wine of the decoction of
it, is good for the hardness of the mylt, and of the liver, and for dissurye
and strangurye, by reason of his opening.

Tamarindes are cold and dry in the third, or in the second (as Paul says)
A decoction of them, with barley, and reysyns, heals hot apostemes of the
throat, at the beginning, and in the augmentation, and they quench ye sharpnes
of humors, chefely if ye add a little wine of pomegranades.

Tapsus barbatus or milliu^, is hot and dry, and swageth pain. A decoction
of it with things following, is convenient for all diseases of ye fu^dament..
of Tapsus barbarus. m^. ii. of the leaves of mallows, violets, and holyhokke,
of clean barley, and bra^ne an^. m^. i. of lineseed. li. ss. of apples somewhat
broken, in nombre. x. Let them sees all with sufficient water, till the third
part be consumed, and make a suffumigation.

Tormentille, otherwise called bystorte, is cold and dry in the third, and
has virtue to consounde wounds, it has a divine power against the
pestilence, if it be given to drink in the quantity of.. iii. with a roasted
oynyon and a little triacle, and syrup of the iuce of ore^ges, and a little wine
of pomegranades. Guydo says, that the same herb is hot and dry.

Thus, or frankensence, is hoote in the second, and dry in the first, and it
has virtue to engendre flesh in wounds of tender bodies, and more over it
consoundeth.

Terra sigillata, is hot and dry, with much stipticitie, and therefore it is
put in linimentes, oyntme^tes, and composicions to stanche blood.

VErrucaria, or Scorpiuron, is hot and dry, and is called storpiura, for the
flowers of it been like to the tails of scorpions. The iuce of it dronken with
wine, remedieth the styngyng of scorpions, and pryckynge of synowes, being
laid thereupon. And it is called verucaria, because it heals wartes, and
cancreous ulcers coming of the same wartes, as I have proved in a cancreous
ulcer of the eye lyddes, which came of a warte. This herb is dried up in the
winter, and it has leaves like basylle, but they be somewhat rougher and
blacker. It has a stalk with one root, and.v. or.vi. branches, which stalk
is round, and will not be broken lightly. It is called of Dioscorides,
Heliotropium.

Vmbelicus veneris, or penygrasse, is cold and moist in the third. Howbeit,
Mesue says, that ye moystnesse of it passes not the second degree. And it is
good to delay the infla^mation of Herisipelas, when it is myngled with flour
of barley, water, and oil of roses: and it is to be aplyed in the beginning,
and in the augmentacion.

Worms of the ground are hot and subtiliatiue. The oil of the^ is good for
wounds of synnowes, and the crampe. It swageth pain, and mundifyeth with
incarnation, and it is made after this sort.. of erthwormes washed with wine.
Oil of worms.
. iii, of oil omphacyne.. iiii. of oil of roses complete and odoriferous..
ii. of oil mastik.. i. of oil of terebentine.. ss. of oil of yolks of
eggs.. x of the seed of S. John's worte. m^. ss. of yarowe, of the flowers of
rosemarye, of consolida the greater, and the less. ana. m^. ss. of the iuce of
pla^tayne.. vi. of centaurye the greater, and the less. ana. a little, of
madder, of fine grain, of saffran.. i. of most clear terebentyne.. iii. ss.
stamp them all together (save the worms) and let the^ sees with a cyathe of
odoriferous white wine, till the wine be consumed, then strayn them, and put to
the straynyng a little of the seed of saynct John's worte, with the flowers
thereof, chaungyng them every weke, and set the said ordinance a sunnynge in
the month of May, and Iulye.

Vsiphur, that is cinabrium, is hot and dry in the second, and it is made of
quycksyluer and brymstone: therefore it dries much with stipticitie, and
being sodden with vynegre and brymstone, it heals tetters, and ryngwormes,
and gutta rosacea. Also it is good for scalles, alopecia, and ye morphewe. Item
a suffumigation thereof made upon the coals, with frankensence, from the neck
downewarde, under a canapye of lynte, is a princypal remedy against the french
pockes.

Vryne is hot and dry, with some adustion, chefelye of them that have hot
fevers.

Vernysh is hot and dry in the second, it has virtue to scour, and to
consounde wounds.

Vsnea or moss, chefely of the oak, is hot and dry temperately.

Vitrum or glass, is hot in ye first and dry in the second. when it is
poudred, it enters into oyntmentes for scabbes, and tetters.

wine is hoote and dry, more or less, according to the nature of vynes. New
wine and sweet, is moist, and therefore rypeth.

Vrtica or nettles, is hot and dry in the third, and it is very
subtiliatyue, and therefore when it touches the skin through his
subtiliation, and heat, it byteth the same, and reyseth pymples. when it is
bruised, it netleth not. Galene says, that it has nature to discuss, the
seed of it dronken with sodden new wine, provoke lecherye.

Violettes are cold and moist in the first. They ripe hot apostemes,
que^chyng infla^mation of choler, and they heal herisipelas not vlcered.

Viride es, or verdegrese, is hot and dry, and has a corrosyue nature, with
stipticitie. And therefore it co^sumeth superfluous flesh, being me^gled with
wax and oil. when it is sodde^ with vynegre, roche alume, and honye, unto
thycknesse, it mundifyeth rotten, corrosyue, virulent, holowe, and filthy
ulcers. Moreover, it remedyeth rotten, malign, cancrenous, and corrosyue
ulcers of the gummes, if ye add thereunto a little licium, a little vynegre
squilliticke, a little water of plantaine. Item it is used in colliries for
diseases of the eyes, coming of cold and gross matter.

Vitriole, is hot and dry in the fourth. It stancheth blood, being burned in
an oven.

Virga pastoris or wild tasyll, is cold and dry. There be two kinds of this
herb, that is to say, the male and the female. The leaves of the male (when
they spring first) are like to the leaves of lettuse, but when they are more
thornye, and bring forth a stalk of.ii. cubytes long, fullers use the heedes
of them, to card clothes. The female is called lingua passerina, or
ce^tu^nodia, or knotgras and has virtue to cool, and to dry, in the second,
and a little more, and is good for herisipelas crepyng from membre to membre,
and the iuce of it is put in medycynes, to stanche bledyng at the nose.

Viscus quercinus, or mystletowe, is hot and attractiue, and therefore it
rypeth apostemes, which chance under the root of the ears. And being
mengled with other things prepared for hard apostemes, it aydeth their
strength in mollifyinge and resoluynge.

ZVccarum, or sugre, is temperatelye, hot and moist, and is put in to
abstersyue medycynes in wounds and ulcers.

And thus ends the book of symples.
Here begins the.viii. book, called the Antidotarie, which conteynethe the
description of Oyntmentes, Cerotes, Playsters, Oils, Pills, and other
confections necessary to the art of Chirurgerye.
The first chapter treats of repercussiue medicynes, as well simple as
compounde, of hot Apostemes.
GAlien says in the.v. book of symples, that a repercussiue medecyne is
necessary in the cure of diseases, for it comfort and binds ye place,
stops the ways, and keeps Apostemes from encreasyng. Likewise being
applied in wounds and fractures of bones, in the over part of the membre,
suffers not flowyng of matter to have recourse to the sore place. Symples
repercussyue of hot mattier, Simple repercussiues.
are these that follow. Waybred, housleeke, great tasill and less, roses,
ribwort, lettuse, sto^croppe, gourdes, cucumers, the muscilage of psillium, and
of the seed of quynces, the leaves and ryndes of an ash tree, violettes,
mallows, nenuphar, and all the kinds of morel, purselan, sau^ders, myrt,
sorell, alleluya, sower pomegranades stamped with the rynde, sower apples,
pears and quynces, vynegre either delayed with water, or made of wine of
moderate strength, horsetayle, herb of strawbery, the tops of brambles, and
of vynes, unripe fruits, as mulberyes, black beryes, medlars, crabbes, wild
plommes, ypoquistidos, sloes, leaves of popler, wyllowes, veriuyce, water of
roses, water of plantayne, reyne water, water of nyghtshade, water stylled out
of the foresaid things, bole armenie, terra sigillata, saunders, sanguis
draconis, Psidia, ceruse, tucia, camphore, litarge, antimoniu^, burnte lead
and not brent, quycksyluer, myrabolanes, cimolea, myldust, barley flower, bean
flower, lentyll flower, whytes of eggs, Coral read and white, galls,
Compounde repercussiues.
flower of Pomegranades, Sumach, Penygras. Compounde repercussiues of hot
mattier are these, oil of rooses, of violettes, of Nenuphar, of myrte,
Vnguentum Rosarum, Vnguentum Galeni, Vnguentum Album camphoratum, Vnguentum
Sandalinu^, Vnguentum, de Tucia, Vnguentum of Litarge made in a mortar of
lead. Symples repercussiue of cold matter, be these. Squinantu^, blacta,
bisantia, wormwoode, sticados, maioram, nuttes of Cypress, aloes epatyke,
myrre, frankensence, roche alume, nutmygges, cloves, cynamome, sage, cyperus,
rose marye, laudanum, laurel, serpillum, organy, mynte, calamynt and nepte.
Seeing that we have declared the symples repercussyue, as well of hot as of
cold mattier, we will declare the compoundes, which are to be used in
Apostemes, wounds and vlceres.

The second Chapter, of compounde, repercussyues.
AVicenne says, that there be two kinds of repercussiue medecyne, of which
one dryueth back hot and sharp humors, and must be of cold and dry
complexion, as pla^tayne, roses, nightshade, and other before reherced. The
other kind is of hot and dry complexion, with interposition of things that
cool. And therefore the said Auicenne says, that if the Aposteme be cold,
the repercussiue medecynes being cold and styptyke, must be mengled with
some thing wherein consistethe an hot and dry virtue, with retentio^, as is
squinantum, blacta bisantia, wormewoode, and like, whereof we ever made this
ordenaunce following in a cold mattier.. of oil of Roses complete, of oil
myrtyne, ana.. j. of oil of spyke.. ij. of wormwood, squinantum, of rosemarye
flowers, of the nuttes of Cipresse somewhat brayed, of lignum Aloes, of
mastyke, frankensence, ana.. ss. of the leaves and graynes of myrtilles, of
Roses, Ana. m^. ss. let them sethe all together with odoriferous wine and a
little vynegre, till the wine and vynegre be consumed, than strain them and put
to the straynyng, as much white wax as shall suffice, and make a liniment,
addyng of saffran, and read and white saunders, ana.. j. ss. this liniment is
a great medecyne for vndimia, and to defend flowynge of cold mattier unto
the place. Another.. of roses, myrtilles, wormewoode, squinantum, sticados,
ana. m^. ss. of maiorum, of rosemarye flowers, of each a little, of the nuttes
of Cipresse somewhat brayed, nombre ten, of roche alume, of salt, Ana.. ij. of
Cinamone.. j. of Saffran.. ss. let them sethe all together with sufficient wine
and barbours lie, and a little vynegre, til the third part be consumed, than
strain them, and make a styffe plaster of the straynynge, with flower of
lentilles, beans and barley, addyng of oil of roses complete, of oil of
camomylle and spyke, ana.. ij.

Now we will speak of co^pounde medicynes, repercussyue of hot matter, first
for wounds that are come to the nature of Herisipelas, it is a peculier
repercussiue, to take the whytes of two eggs, with oil of roses odoriferous,
a little juice of pla^tayne, and muscilage of quynce seeds, and of Psillium,
which things ye must lay upon the place, after the manner of a linimente, In
this case, Repercussiue of wounds.
Mesue his ointment of rooses is of like effect.

Here follows an excellent repercussyue for all wounds, which must be
applied four fyngers above the wound.. of oil of Roses omphacyne, of oil of
Roses complete, ana.. vj. of oil of Camomylle.. iiij. of earth worms washed
with wine.. j. ss. of the juice of plantayne and nyghtshade, ana.. j. of
vynegre of Rooses.. x. seethe them all till the juice and vynegre be consumed,
than strain them and make a soft cerote, with white wax, adding in the end
of the decoction, of bean flower well bulted.. j. ss. of barley flower.. vj.
of bole armenye.. x. of all the saunders.. iij. mengle them and use them as is
aforesaid. Repercussyue of Sanguine Apostemes.
This cerote defendethe flowynge of mattier to the place, with famylier
resolution, and comfortation of the synnowes. Item for hot Apostemes, bole
armenye dyssolued with oil of Roses omphacyne, is a good repercussyue. A sower
Pomegranade sodden with his rynde in vynegre, and stamped with oil of roses,
and a little barley flower, and set to the fyere again till it be in a styffe
form, is of like effect. For the same intencion, the liniment following is
convenient.. of oil of roses complete, of myrt, of oil omphacyne, ana.. j. of
all the saunders. Ana.. j. of bole armenye.. iij. make a linimente with
sufficient white wax. Another.. of the leaves of plantayne, roses, nyghtshade,
lettuse, arrage, of every one. m^. j. seethe them all in water and a little
vynegre, stamp them and strain them, and make a styffe plaster in the
decoction, with barley and bean flower, adding of oil of Roses.. vj. This
playstere is a good medecyne for Flegmon and Herisipelas, in the beginning and
augmentation, for with the repercussion it is somewhat resolutyue. Another,.
the yolks of three Eggs, with their whytes, of oil of Rooses complete, of
oil omphacyne, of every one.. ij. of the juice of plantayne.. ss. shake them
all together, and lay them on the place warm, after the manner of a linimente,
for it swageth pain with repercussion, and some refrigeration.

Now I woll descrybe repercussyue medecynes, For Coleryke Apostemes.
for Choleryke Apostemes. First the white of an egg beaten with oil of roses
omphacyne, and oil of violettes, the juice of plantayne, lettuse, and night
shade, is a present remedy in the beginning and augmentation. The white of an
egg beaten with oil of rooses, and the juice of lettuse, or the white of an
Egg, with oil of violettes, and the juice of plantayne, or the white of an
egg with ointment of roses, and the juice of nightshade, ben of like
efficacytie. Item an ointment of Roses mynistred alone, is a good remedy for
Heresipelas at all times, and so is oil of violettes, and oil omphacyne, in
the beginning and augmentation. Furthermore, ye may make a styffe plaster of
the yolks and whytes of Eggs, beaten with oil of roses odoriferous, with an
ointment of roses, and woman's milk, and with barley flower, and barley water,
for it is a synguler remedy in this case. Item ye may make a mixture between a
plaster and a cerote, of the leaves of malowes, and violettes, lettuse,
barley, roses, duckes meat, waybred leaves, sodden in water stamped and
strayned, adding white wax, and oil of Roses, for it is good against
Herisipelas at all time. Another remedy.. of the leaves of mallows, and
violettes, ana. m^. j. of knot grass, lettuse, and waybreed, ana. m^. ss. of
clean barley, ana. m^. ij. of the seeds of quynces.. ij. ten apples, of
lentilles.. ij. seth them al in water, stamp them and strain them, and make a
styffe plaster in the decoction, with barley flower, and the foresaid
straynynge, adding of oil of violettes and roses, of an ointment of roses,
ana.. j. ss. lay this ordinance upon Herisipelas, after the manner of a
plaster, for it quenches the heat of Cholere with some resolution, which is
privily in the malowes, as lanfrank says. But because herisepelas is sometime
vlcered, ye former remedies are not convenient, because of their moistnes, and
therefore the linime^t following is right convenient, for an vlcered herisipelas.
R. of oil of roses omphacyne.. ij. of vnguentu^ rosaru^.. j. ss. of the juice
of pla^taine, knotgresse, horsetaile, or instede thereof of the tops of
bra^bles, ana.. iij. first strain the iuyces, and tha^ sethe the^ al together
till the juice be consumed, and so make a soft liniment with sufficient white
wax, addyng of lytarge of gold and silver, of ceruse, ana.. i. of tucia.. i.
and ss. of camphore graynes. iii. and labor them again in a mortar of lead,
the space of two hours.

Towchynge the administration of repercussyue, resolutyue, and maturatiue
medicynes, it is to be observed, that we have the knoweledge of bodies,
diseases, and medicynes, for that medicine, that helpethe one, helps not an
other. And moreover, the same medecines cool in some bodies, in the second
degree, and in other bodies, cool only in the first, by the reason of the
sundry complexion of men.

For a medicine repercussyue, in the first degree, shall be sufficient in a
choleryke body, but in a flegmatyke body, it has not strength enough, by
reasonne of the complexion of the said body, wherefore that your medicyne may
work conuenientlye, it is mete that it have virtue of repercussion in the
second degree. Furthermore ye shall note, that it is better to fail in too
little repercussion, than in too great, for though, that thoroughe to little
repercussion, the aposteme increases and comes to mattier, yet thoroughe too
much repercussion, a worse thing chances, that is to say vehement pain,
which holdethe in the mattier, as it were in prison, and causes the members
to rot and dye. we judge semblablye, of resolutyue medicynes, for if they be
too weak, they hinder the declynation, of the disease, if they be too strong,
they draw matter oftentimes to the place, resoluynge the subtyle mattier, and
leuyng the gross. The same likewise of maturatyues. etc.

The third chapter, of medicines that resolve, rarify, and dyscusse.
A Resolutyue medicyne (as Auicenne says) is that, Medicines Resolutyue
which has virtue to thine gross mattier, by reason of his heat, and to
separate it, and open the poores, that the matter may vapoure out, and be
utterly euacuate.

Of resolutyues, some ben simple, and some been compounde. The symples are
these, camomille, malowes, parietarye, mellylote, hollyhocke, branne,
colewoortes, dylle, myntes, stycados, calamynt, organy, fumitory, mugworte,
woormwood, netles, enula campana, elders, wallwoorte, valerian, volubilis,
horehounde, squinantum, smalache, etc. The seades ben these that follow, the
seed of fenell, anyse, coriander, fenugreke, linsede, sede of malowes,
holyhocke, colwoorte, percelye, with other seeds, yt provoke vryne, with
te^perate heat. The meals yt resolve, are these, the flower of whete, barley,
beans, orobus lupyns, lentilles, and the crommes of brown bread. Resolutyue
roots, with mollification, are rapes, the rotes of holyhocke, langdebeef,
parsneppes, branca vrsina or beresbreche, lylye roots, etc. Of the foresaid
simples, sundry medicines may be compounde, and some of these symples resolve
by little and little, with refrigeration, and work in colerycke mattier, as the
leaves of malowes, violettes, barlye flower, bean flower. Other resolve hot
sanguyne matter as camomylle, which is principalle, mellylote, dille,
colewoortes, beetes, the leaves of hollyhocke, of volubilis etc. The flower of
wheat, of barley, of beans, crommes of bread sodden in a brothe of flesh.
Other resolve hot matter mengled with cold, as the rotes of holyhoc, lillies,
pasneps, ye flower of whete, fenugreke, lupines bra^ne, cro^mes of brown
bread, etc. Item there be some symples that resolve cold and gross matter, as
Camomylle, melylote, dylle, wormewoode, fenugreke, lynseed, the roots of
Holyhoc, and lilly, wheat flower, branne, with oils and fattes anodyne, that
swage pain. The fattes that resolve, are these. Grese of hens, Capons,
Cranes, and duckes, and such other, the maryes that resolve with
mollifycation, are of an ox, of a calfe, of a wether, of a heart. etce. Item
the tallowe of a goat, of a wether, of a calfe, of a cow, resolve with
mollifycation. Of the kinds of gummes, these resolve temporatlye, terebentyne,
laudanu^, the fat of vnwasshed wolle. These resolve more than the other,
wax, gum Armonyake, Galbane, Serapyne, Opoponax, Myrrh, Frankensence,
Bdellium, Colophonia. etc.

The fourth Chapter, of compounde resolutyues.
Oil of Roses co^plete, is of great effect in resoluynge Coleryke matter,
for it coolethe inflammed members, and heatethe cooled members, as Galien
says. Also oil of Violettes, with a little of the foresaid oil, is very
good. Item Mesues oyntmente of Roses, with oil of Roses and Camomylle,
resoluethe Choleryke matter, and comfortethe the members, and so does the
decoction of malowes, violettes, melylote, Holyhocke, barley, quynce seeds,
and a little Camomylle. Moreover whytes of eggs with yolks beaten with oil of
Roses complete, and a little oil of Camomylle, and a little juice of plantayne
and nyghtshade, resolve Apostemes of the nature of Herisipelas, barley flower,
sodden in the decoction of mallows, Roses, and barley, and a little Camomylle,
so that a plaster be made of all together, with oil of Camomylle, Roses, and
violettes, is of like effect.

These oils resolve hot and sanguine matter, oil of roses complete, of
Camomylle, of Dylle, of Llilies, whereof ye may make a plaster with white wax,
and Saffran. Item for the same intention.. of oil of Roses complete, of oil
of Camomylle, and dille,. j. of duckes grese, of hens grese, of oil of sweet
Alma^des, Ana.. ss. make a lyniment with white wax suffycient, and lay it
upon the member with vnwasshed wolle. The playsters that are good for these
intentions, ben these that follow.. of cromes of bread steped in the brothe of
flesh.li. j. make a solyde plaster with oil of camomylle, of Roses, and a
little Saffran, and lay it upon the Phlegmon. Another,. of the cromes of brown
breed.li. j. ss. and make a styffe playstere with the decoction of Camomylle,
melilote, Parietary, cool wortes, adding of oil of Roses, and of Camomylle.
ana.. ij. of oil of vyolettes, and of sweet Almandes, of hens grese. Ana..
ss. of Saffran.. j. Another of noble operation.. of the roots of Holyhoc.li.
ss. of white Lilly roots.. ij. of clean barley. m^. j. seth them al in
water, stamp them and strain them, and make a soft cerote, with oil of roses,
hens grese, and a little butter and Saffran, with suffycient white wax. An
other.. of the flower of Barley and Beans, Ana.li. ss. of wheat flower, and
branne ground, ana.. iii. camomyll, and stamped melylote, ana. m^. i. sethe
them all in the brothe of flesh, with a little sapa, till they be thycke and
styffe, adding in the end, of oil of Camomyll, roses, and dille, ana.. ij.
this plaster is a divine medicine for phlegmon, with the admixtion of gross
matter. An other with greater mollification.. of the roots of holyhock sodden
and strayned.li. j. of white lilly rotes sodden likewise.li. ss. of oil of
roses.. ij. of oil of Camomylle, lynseed, and dille, ana.. j. of oil of sweet
almondes and violettes, of butter, duckes grese, hens grese, and goes grese,
ana.. vi. of calves suet melted.. ij. ss. make a soft cerote with sufficient
white wax, adding saffran.. j. ss.

Resolutyue of myxte matter.
Here follow co^pounde medicynes, to resolve Apostemes me^gled of hot and cold
humors. And first we will speak of oiles. Oil of elders, and of lilies, with
hens grese, is of great strength, and so is oil of nardus, of dylle, and
camomylle. Item the grese of a he^ne, of a ducke, and a gose, with oils of
Camomylle, dylle, nardus, elders, and lilies, made like a linime^t with
sufficient white wax, and applied upon the member with vnwasshed wolle,
resolves vnmyxt matter. Item a plaster of melylote, with as much sodden and
strayned Holyhoc, made like a plaster with oil of camomyll, dille, lillies,
and sufficient white wax, makethe for the same purpose.

For the same intention ye may use this remedy.. of white diaquilon without
gummes.li. ss. of Holyhocke sodden and strayned.. iiij. of oil of Camomylle,
Dylle, and Lillies, ana.. ij. of oil of lynseed, of butter. ana.. x. of clear
terebentyne.. vj. of litarge of gold.. ss. of muscilage of the seed of
Holyhocke, of mallows, of Violettes, of the seed of Quynces, of Psillium, li.
j. of calves and cowes suet, Ana.. iiij. sethe the^ all beside the straynynge,
with a soft fyere till the muscilage be consumed, than make a soft cerote,
with sufficient white wax, and the foresaid straynynge: Item the plaster
following resoluethe the said matter.. of the roots of Holyhocke, and of
enula campana, ana.li. ss. sees them all in water, stamp them and strain
them, and make a styffe plaster in the decoction, with equal portion of sapa, of
bean flower, and whete flower, of branne, of Camomylle, and of melylote
stamped, adding of oil of Roses, Camomylle, dille, and Lillies, ana.. ij.

Medecynes that resolve gross matter only, ben these. For gross matters.
Oil of elders, of lillies, with Agrippa, Dialthea, and vnwasshed wolle,
resolve cold matter. Diaquilon album sodde^ with gummes, and an ounce of oil
of lillies, and as much of oil of elders, with ten drammes of the juice of
flourdeluyce, and an ounce and an half of duckes grese, made in a soft cerote
with addition of sufficient white wax, is a synguler remedy to resolve cold
matter. In this case, diaquilon magnum is likewise praised of the doctors, and
likewise the remedy under written.. of the roots of Holyhockes.li. ss. of
white Lilly roots of the roots of flower deluyce, Ana.. ij. sethe them in
water, stamp them and strain them, adding of oil of Camomylle, dylle, and
lillies, of every one.. j. ss. of whyt diaquilon gummed.. iij. of galienes
cerote of ysope.. ij. ss. of serapyne, galbanu^, bdelliu^, opoponax. ana.. ss.
of duckes grese.. x. dyssolue the gu^mes with vynegre, and make a soft cerote
of al these things, with the foresaid streinyng, and sufficient new wax.

The.v. chapter, of medicines that break wind, and resolve dead blood under
the skin.
MEdicines yt break wind, and resolve dead blood are these. Dille, rue,
mellilot, camomil fenell, annyse, percely, commyn, carewayes, flowers of
rosemary, sticados, laurel beries. etc.

Compou^des are these, oil of dil, rue, of laurel of carewayes, camomill, of
elders, of lyllies, of spike. For of these symples, many remedies may be made
to break wind as this that follows. Medicine to break wynd.
. of red wine, of barbours lie. ana.li. ss. of camomill, mellilote, dille,
corianders, ana. m^. i. of cummyne, sweet fenell, organy, nept, horehounde.
ana. m^. i. ss. of honye.. iij. of salt.. i. sethe them till the third part be
consumed, and use this ordinance with a sponge, for it breaks wind and is
good against vndimia. Another fome^tacion for the same purpose. of melilote
camomill, dill, branne, ana. m^. ii. of the roots of persely, of enula
campana, of fenell, of bruscus, ana. m^. i. of the seed of sisylios, of
coriander, annys, ameos, cumyn, ana.. ss. of maioram, of organy, of calamynt,
ana. m^. ss. parietarye, m^. i. ss. of honey, of millium, ana.. iij. of laurel
beries, of french soap, ana.. x. sees them all with sufficient barbours lie,
and a little odoriferous wine, till ye third part be consumed. Another to
resolve wind.. of oil of lyllies, and of dille. ana.. ij. of oil of rue, of
laurel. ana.. i. myngle them and make a soft oyntmente with sufficient white
wax.

Here follows a plaster to resolve wyndynes.. of milium somewhat dried.li.
ss. of bean flower.li. i. of grou^den branne.. viij. of camomille, mellilote,
dille, stamped. ana. m^. i. of coriander, of cumyn. ana.. vi. make a styffe
plaster with sufficient sapa, addyng of oil of camomill and dille. ana.. iij.
of oil of laurel and of rue. ana.. vi. myngle them and use them. Another. of
bean flower, of branne. ana.li. ss. of goats donge.. viij. of camomill,
mellilote, dille. ana. m^. ss. a little cumyn make a styffe plaster of them al
with sufficient sapa, and barbours lie, adding of oil of camomill, dille, and
wormwood. ana.. ij. This plaster resolves wyndynes, chiefly in ye kne.
Another to resolve dead blood.. of dille oil.. i. of wormwood, and myrte
oil of the juice of a radyshe an^.. iij. of brayed cumyne.. i. of odoriferous
wine.. i. Let them sethe all together till the wine and the juice be consumed,
so strain them, and make a cerote with sufficient white wax.

The.vi. chapter, of maturatiue medicines.
IT chances often, that apostemes can not be ended by repercussiues and
resolutiues, wherefore it is necessary to come to maturatiues. First ye must
understand, that a medicine maturatiue of hot matter, thorough his moderate
heat and the natural heat of the member, and thorough his slymynesse, and
vnctuositie has virtue to stop the poores, and to retain the gross and
subtyle matter, and to dygest it by little and little, and so bring it to
suppuration. More over, it is found that a medicine maturatiue of cold and
moist complexion, is necessary for the maturation of collerike apostemes, for
Auice^ne says thus. A hot aposteme that wants quytture, must have his
head playstred with psilium, for by quenchynge outward heat of ye aposteme
and retaynynge natural heat in the member, the matter comes to suppuration.
Furthermore in rypynge, it is necessary to pass the second degree of heat,
either because the matter is gross, cold, and slymye, or else because the
member is deprived of natural heat, other because it is weak. For these
causes I say, it is necessary to put to the maturatiue medicine, an oynyon,
the root of cyclamyn, and garlyke, roasted under cooles.

Maturatiue medicines are these that follow, white lyllie roots, the rotes and
leaves of march malowes, branca vrsina, the roots of bryony, passenep roots,
dry fygges, barlye flower, resyns, dates, roasted apples, fenugreke, lynseede,
crommes of bread, wheat flower, bean flower, the rotes of langdebeefe. etc.
whereof.iij. kinds of playsters shall be ordained hereafter The first shall be of
weak operation, and it shall be to ripe hot matter. The second, shall be also of
moderate maturation, and it shall be to ripe myxte matter. The last shall be of
strong maturation. Here follows an example of the first.. of the leaves of
malowes, and violettes. ana. m^. i. of the rotes of langdebeefe.. iiij. sethe
them all in water, stamp them and strain them, and make a styffe plaster in
the decoction, with barlye flower, and the foresaid straynynge, adding of oil
of violettes.. iij. of butter.. i. the yolks of.iij. eggs, myngle them.. of
ye leaves of malowes, and violettes. ana. m^ i. ss. of the leaves of lettuse.
m^. i. of the seed of quynces.. ij. of clean barlye m^. ij. sethe them all
together with the brothe of flesh till the barlye break, then stamp them and
strain them, and put to the straynynge sufficient quantity of barlye flower,
and make a styffe plaster with the foresaid straynynge, and add of oil of
violetes.. iiij. of cumyn oil, of sweet fresh butter. ana.. i. and the yolks
of.ij. eggs. Another.. of the meat of roasted apples, of the leaves of
malowes, and violettes. ana. m^. ij. of barley flower, of cro^mes of white bread
steped in ye broth of a hen, a chycken, or of veale.li. ss. roste the leaves
of malowes and violettes in weted cloutes under hot ymbers, then stamp them
all together with the foresaid things, and make a styffe plaster with butter,
and oil of violettes, addyng the yolks of.iiij. eggs in the end of the
decoction.

Maturatiue medicines of the second order are these.. of the roots of
holihockes, of white lillies. ana.li. ss. of ye leaves of malowes, and
violettes. an^. m^. i. sethe them altogether in flesh brothe, stamp them and
streine them, and make a styffe plaster adding of butter.. ij. of swynes
grese.. iij. ye yolks of two eggs. Another.. of the roots of white lyllies
and holihock, ana.. viij. of dry fat fygges, in no^bre ten, sees them al in
sufficient water, and make a styffe plaster at the fire, with the flower of
wheat, lynseed and fenugreke stamped with the rest of the ingredience,
adding of fresh swynes grese.li. ss. of butter.. ii. the yolks of two eggs,
myngle them and if ye will have it stronger with subtiliation, and attraction,
put to the foresaid plaster, of new leven.. iiij. of snayles stamped with
their shelles. i. ss.

Maturatiue medicines of ye third order, ben these.. of the roots of
holihock, of lillies, of beres breche, ana. one part, of the roots of
cyclamyne, of passeneppes, of rapes, if they may be gotten. ana. part half,
of dry fygges in nombre ten, sees them al in sufficient watter, stamp them
and strain them, and make a sufficient plaster in the decoction, with the
flower of wheat, fenugreke, and lynseede, addyng of swynes grese.li. ss. of
butter.. iij. Another.. of roasted oynio^s, and garlyke, nombre.iiij. stamp and
make a styffe plaster with the flower of fenugreke, and lynseede, and with the
decoction of holihocke, adding of swynes grese.li. ss. If ye will that the
plaster shall be more mollifycatiue, put thereunto of ye roots of holihock..
viij and if ye will that it shall have more attraction, maturation, and
subtiliation, add of dry fygges nombre.viij. of leven.. ij. of snayles
nombre.x. and this is the last maturatiue.

The.vij. Chapter, of embrocations to ripe apostemes.
First for hot apostemes.. of the decoction of malowes, violettes, barlye, of
the seed of quynces, of langdebiefe, li. iij. of barley flower.. i. ss. of oil
of violettes.. iii. of butter.. i. ss. let the^ sees together and make a
juice, like the brothe of an hen, adding in the end, the yolks of.iij.
eggs, and leye the lycour upon the apostemes, with hot cloutes, chaungyng
them often, for this embrocation helps resolution and maturatio^ of hot
apostemes, swagynge pain, and bringing the matter to the skin. Afterward
ye must apply a maturatiue, in ye first order of hot matters Another
embrocation to ripe myxte matter.. of the roots of holihocke, and lillies, of
every one.li. i. of dry fygges in nombre ten, of malowes, of violettes, of
every one. m^. i. of hole fenugreke and lynseed, of every one.. i. seth them
in sufficient water, and make a juice at the fire in the decoction, with a
little wheat flower and butter, and oil of sweet almandes, which ye shall
lay on, as is aforesaid with cloutes, and afterward use a plaster ordained
for this purpose.

The.viij. Chapter, of medicines that mollifye all hardness of synowes, and hard
apostemes, fractures of bones, and joints evil restored.
ALbeit yt we have sufficie^tlye spoken of mollifycatiue medicines, in ye
chapter of hard apostemes, nevertheless for a more ample doctrine, we will
speak some what of them, in this place, for a mollifycatiue medicyne is
necessary for sondrye causes. First to mollifye the hardness which remain
often in apostemes, after the use of resolutiues. Secondlye to mollifye a joint
which has tarried long without restoration. Thyrdlye to mollifye a dyslocation
or fracture evil restored, that afterward it may be brought into his place
more easily by handye operation. Finally, to mollifye the hardenes of synowes
and joints, which is caused by a wound or by bruise. First we will declare a
fomentacion to mollifye al hardness. A bathe.
. the head of a wether somewhat cut and bruised and the feet of the same,
and the roots of holihocke.li. ij. of camomille, mellilote and dille, of every
one. m^. ij. of hole fenugreke, and lynseede, of every one.li. ss. sethe them
altogether with sufficient water till the flesh be separate from the bones,
then remove the bones, and bathe and suffumygate the place grieved, and wash
and rub it therwyth Afterward lay ye plaster following upon the hard
place, the space of a week.. of the flower of fenugreke and lynseede, of
every one.li. ss. of wheat flower.. iiii. make a styffe plaster in ye
foresaid decoction, and with a root of holihock stamped and strained, adding
of butter, of swynes grese melted, of every one.. iiij. of he^nes grese,
duckes grese, and gose grese, of every one.. i. ss. myngle them.

When the joint and broken bones been mollifyed, the master must reduce the
same into their places. Item the cerote following, mollifyeth the hardness of
synowes and joints.. of the roots of holihocke.li. i. of salomons seal and
white lyllie roots, of every one.. iij. of the roots of flower deluyce.. i.
sethe them all in water, stamp them and strain them, and make a cerote with
the things under written.. of the oils of dille, lillies and lynseede, of
every one.. i. ss. of he^nes grese, goose grese, and duckes grese, of every
one.. ij. of oil of a fox.. vi. of the fat of a graye otherwise called a
brocke, of the fat of a beer, of the marye of the legs of a calfe, of
agrippa, and dialthea, of every one.. i. of white diaquilo^ gummed, of a
wethers suet, of every one.. iij. ss. seethe them all together, and stir
them about the space of an hour, and make a soft cerote with the foresaid
straynynge, and new wax, adding in the end of the decoction, of most
clear terebentyne, of Galienes cerote of ysope, of every one.. ij. let them
sees again, this is an excellent cerote to mollify the hardness of synowes,
and joints, and thus me make an end of this chapter.

The.ix. chapter Of medicines that mundifye and scour away fylthe or
corruption.
WE use mundifycatiues or abstersiues, A mundificatyue medicine
in all bruised wounds, and altered of the air, in vlceres and apostemes
lately cut, after their dygestio^, that they may through their heat and
pleasauntnes, separate corruption from the flesh, and purge it, drawing the
same to the outward part of the skin. And therefore we say, that
mundifycatiues must be used after digestion, for as Rasis says, a wound or
an vlcere comes not to convenient generation of flesh, except it be
perfytlye dygested. The simples that mundifye be these, honye of roses, sugger,
honye, syrup of roses, sothernwood, sticcados, the flower of barlye, of
lentylles, of beans, of mylduste, wormwood, the seed of netles the flower of
lupynes, terebentyne, sarcocolle, the roots of flower deluyce, and of
smallage, and the juice of the leaves of it, and of hoorehou^d, many kinds of
gu^mes, whereof sondrye remedies may be made, in a week, a strong and a
stronger form.

First we will begin at those that mu^dify weakly.. of clear terebe^.. ii of
siru. of roses streined.. i. of the juice of pla^tayne.. iij. seth the^
altogether a a little, and when ye take them from the fire, put thereunto the
yolke of an egg, of barlye flower.. vi. of saffran.. i. Another.. of honye of
roses.. ss. of syrup of roses.. i. the yolke of an egg, of beanfloure and
barley flower, of myldust, of every one.. iij. of most clear terebentyne.. iij.
of saffran.. iij. make an ointment. Item a mundifycatiue of the second order
is thus made.. of honye of roses strayned.. ij. of clear terebentyne.. i. of
the juice of smallage. i. sethe them all together a little, adding of wheat
flower and barlye flower, of every one.. vi. of sarcocolle. iij. myngle them
and use them in all vlceres, wou^des, apostemes, pustles, and carbuncles, for
his mundifycatio^ is sufficient. Another.. of honey of roses strayned.. i. ss.
of clear terebentyne.. iij. of ye juice of smalage, and of horehou^de, of every
one.. ss. of the juice of wormwood.. ij. sethe them all together, adding in ye
end, of bean flower and barlye flower, of every one.. vi. of the flower of
lupins and orobus, of every one.. iij. of sarcocolle and myrrh. ana.. i. ss.
myngle them and use them.

Here follows the third order of mundifycatiues.. of clarifyed honye. ij. of
honey of roses strayned.. i. of clear terebentyne.. vi. of ye juice of flower
deluyce.. iij. of the juice of smallage of the tops of brambles, of netles,
of wormwood, of every one.. ij. ss. sethe them all together a little, adding
of myldust, of the flower of lupyns, and orobus, of every one.. vi. of
sarcocolle of myrrh, of every one.. ss. myngle the^ and use this ordinance,
for it scoureth away gross matter myghtely. An other.. of clear terebentyne..
iij. of honye of roses strained.. ij. of the juice of smallage and fumitorye,
if it may be gotten, of every one.. ss. of juice of yrereos.. ij. let the^
seth a little, and make an ointment with sufficient flower of lupynes, myldust,
and sarcocolle. Here follows a decoction to mundifye holowe vlceres.. of
barbours lie.li. i. of honey of roses.. iiij. of sarcocolle.. iij of the leaves
of smallage, and horehou^de m^. ss. sethe them a little, steaine the^ and use
them.

The.x. chapter, of incarnatiue medicines, and conglutinatiue, of wou^des and
vlceres.
ALbeit that we have declared in ye chapter of wou^des, incarnatiue medicines,
and in what degree of heat they should be, yet for a more plain doctrine, we
will descrybe certain peculier remedies. And first ye shall understand that
if ye do add to the mundificatiues of the former chapter, frankynsence,
mirrhe, and aloes, they shall be convenient to incarne vlceres and filthy
wounds, chyefly after dygestion. Here follows an ointment to incarne
wounds.. of clear terebentyne, of oil of mastycke, of roses, omphacine. ana..
ii. of the tallowe of a goat, of a wether, and of a cow, ana.. ss. of
centaury, of co^solida ye greater and the less, of yarowe, of tops, of
rosemary, of pla^tayne, of knotgrasse ana. m^. i. braye them all and wrynge out
ye juices, and put thereunto of mirrhe, sarcocolle, frankynsence, aloes. ana..
ss. of mastyke.. iij. of rosyn of a pyne apple tree.. ij. ss. sethe them all
together, with a soft fire, till the juice be consumed, then strain them, and
make a soft ointment with sufficient white wax. Another.. of clear
terebentyne li. ss. of frankensence.. ss. of mastyke.. i. of goats tallowe..
x. of the juice of betonye, centaurie, and yarowe, of every one.. ss. sethe
them all together till the juice be consumed, addyng of oil of mastyke.. i. of
oil of roses omphacine.. ij. make a soft cerote, and afterward supple the
plaster with the iuyces of the said herbs, and then with cowes milk.

Here follows an oyntement to incarne synowye wounds.. of clear
terebentyne.li. i. of mastycke, of rosyn of the pyne aple tree, of every one..
i. of oil of roses complete.. ij. of goats tallowe.. iij. of centaury,
pympernel, betonye, yarowe, rosemary, of every one. m^. ss. of madder.. vi. of
most fine grain.. ij. cut the herbs and stamp them, and sethe them all
with.ij. ounces of earthwormes washed in wine, and with a cyathe of odoriferous
wine, till the wine be consumed, the^ streyne them, and make a soft ointment
with sufficient white wax. Another oyntement incarnatiue in coleryke bodies,
in malign, corrosyue, and ill complexcioned vlceres, coming of hot matter.
of oil of roses odoriferous.. iij. of calves suet melted.. ij. of oil of
myrt, of oil of roses omphacine.. i. ss. of the juice of plantayne and knot
grass, of every one.. one, seth them al together till the iuyces be consumed,
the^ streyne them and put to the streynynge, of lytarge of gold and silver, of
every one.. i. ss. of minium, of tutia, of every one.. ii. of ceruse.. x.
sethe the^ again in a brass pan, till they be black, adding in the end of
clear terebentyne.. i. ss. make a soft oyntme^t with sufficient white wax.

Pouders and lotions incarnatyue.
Now we will descrybe incarnatiue lotions and pouders of which this is one..
of aloes epatyke, of myrrh, of every one.. i. of sarcocolle. i. ss. of
fra^kensence, of myldust, of every one.. ij. of sanguis draconis, of terra
sigillata, of every one.. ij. ss. of tucia, of targe, of dragagant, of every
one.. i. ss. myngle them and make a powder. If ye put to an ounce of this
powder.vi.. of leuerettes here fine cut, and the white of an egg, it shall be
a synguler remedy to staunche blood. Here follows a lotion to incarne holowe
vlceres.. of white wine odoriferous.. vij. of fine aqua vite.. iij. of myrrh,
and aloes epatyke, of sarcocolle, of every one.. ij. of frankynsence.. iij. of
the seed of saint John's worte of centaurye the greater and the less, of
yarow, of veruene, of knotgrasse, of consilida the greater and the less, of
every a little. First stamp them al a little, and sethe them till the third
part be consumed, then streyne them and use the^ in fresh wounds (strowyng
the powder of aloes upon the wound) with mirrhe, frankynsence, wine. etc.
Another lotion to incarne wounds.. of white odoriferous wine.. viij. of water
of plantayne.. vi. of aqua vite.. ij. of frankynsence, of myrrh. of aloes, of
every one.. i. ss. of sarcocolle.. iij. of honye of roses.. x. of the flower of
lupynes and orobus, of every one.. iij. of the juice of centaurye the greater
and the less, or in stead of it of the herb, of every one, a handful, of
the iuyces.. v. sethe them al together to the consumption of the third part,
and so use them.

The.xi. Chapter. Of medicines cicatrisatiue sygillatyue, or conglutinatiue.
AS al autours testify, a medicine conglutinatiue, and cicatrisatiue, is that,
which through his heat, (as is burnte alume, or cold, as ceruse) with his
stipticitie, has virtue to dry up superfluous humyditie, tylle new skin be
engendered.

The symples that engendre skin in ulcers, are these: Burnte alume, lyme ten
times washed, flowers of pomegranades, litarge, burnt lead, ceruse,
ypoquistidos, myrte, terra sigillata, bole armenye, Roses Plantayne, tutia,
mirobalanes, galls, coralles.

Here follow compoundes. Vngue^tum album camphoratum, vnguentum de cerusa
coctum, vnguentum pomphilicos, vnguentum de minio, waters of alume, of
myrtylles, of pla^tayne, of roses, styptyke wine of the decoction of roses, of
flowers of pomegranades, of myrtiles, and of alume. The poudre following is of
marvelous cicatrisation.. of burnte roche alume, of read coral, ana.. ss. of
terra sigillata, of bole armenye. ana.. ii. of the flowers of Pomegranades, of
myrabolane cytryne, ana.. ii. ss. of tutia.. i. mengle them.

An other.. of washed lyme, of burnte roche alume. ana.. ii. of myrabolane
cytryne, of terra sigillata. ana.. i. mengle them, and make a powder.

The.xii. Chapter. Of medycynes that swage pain.
Pain as the ancient doctoures say, Medicines to swage pain
may be swaged.iij. manner of ways. First with anodyne resolutyues, which
vapor out the matter that causes pain, and do comfort, the natural heat
of the membre, and destroy strange heat, as camomylle, dylle, mellilote,
holyhok, lynseede, duckes grese, he^nes grese, goose grese, oil of camomyl,
dyl, yolks of eggs, of all these or of part of them, with crommes of bread,
yolks of eggs, and saffrane, ye may make playsters resolutyue,
mollificatyue, and that shall swage pain, drawyng the matter fro ye deper
parts to the outewarde parts, all about, and vaporyng it out by the poores.

Secondly, pain may be swaged by alteryng the evil complexion, with his
contrary. Thyrdlye, by mortifieng natural heat of the membre, and taking
away the felyng thereof, which is done by medicines of oppium.

Here ye shall note that pain is the felyng of a thing,
contrary to his nature: and though it may be caused, as Galene says, by
fraction, extention, corrosion, brusynge, solution of contynuitie,
nevertheless by it self, it is caused of contrary quallyties, and by
accidents, it is caused of solution of continuytie. And the most certain
medicine too swage pain, as Gallien says, is that which is like to the
complexion of the membre, exceeding a little in heat, that it may increase the
said heat, and prepare humors to dygestion by the operation of nature. It is
manyfeste then, that as pain is the fealynge of a contrary thing, so swagyng
of pain is the application of some pleasant thing, agreyng to nature.

There ben.xv. kinds of pains (as Auicenne says) namely, an ytchynge pain,
smertyng, pryckynge, compressyue, extensyue, or stretching, strykynge, Causes
of pains.
breaking, loosynge, percynge, actual stupefactyue, beatyng, grievous or
heavy, bytynge, and tyrynge. Now we will brefely declare the causes of al
these. Ytchyng pain comes of a tarte and salt matter. Smartynge, of an eger
humor. Pryckynge, of a sharp humor. Extentiue, of wyndinesse, that
stretches out the synnowes, and muscules beyond nature. Compressyue comes
of a matter or wyndynesse, that constrayneth and makes narowe, the membre or
place. Concussyue or shaking, proceeds of matter that is resolved between the
muscle, and the pannicle, which by stretchynge the pannycle, makes resolution
of continuitie. werying pain is caused of an humor, or wyndynesse enclosed
between the pannicle and the bone, called almocatim, or of cold drawing the
said pannicle together. Loosing pain is caused of a matter stretching the
flesh and the muscles, and not the chordes. Percyng pain is caused of humors,
or gross wyndynesse, retained between the tunecles of an hard and gross
membre, as in the gutte, called colon, which without ceasyng pearceth, and as
it were, boreth thorough with a wymble. Actual pain is caused of humor
retained in a membre when solucyon of continuitie is made. Stupefactyue pain
is caused of strong cold, or by oppilation of the pores reteynynge the
sensible spyrites, as by strong bynding and replecyon of the receptacles.
Beatynge pain comes of an hot aposteme, for a cold aposteme never causes
pain, except it turn to hete: Neither this bytynge pain is in hot
apostemes, but when it proceeds from their inflammation, and sensybylitye of
the membre, and multitude of beatynge veins. Grauatyue, or heavy pain, is
caused of an aposteme in a membre not sensyble, as is the longes, the kydneyes,
and the mylte. Tyrynge pain, comes of laboryous exercise, or by an humor
vehementlye stretchynge the membre. Bytynge pain comes of a sharp and eygre
humor.

Here ye shall note, that the remedies ordained in the chapter of resolutyue
medycynes, may be conveniently redused to the use of this Chapter.

Now we will speak of co^pound remedies to swage pain. First, I say, that
crommes of breed steped in the brothe of an hen not salted, wherein
camomylle, melilote, dylle, branne, lyueseede, barleye, and organye, have been
sodden, if ye stamp them and strain them all together, and make a playstre
with the yolks of eggs, oil of Roses, camomylle, and vyolettes, it shall
swage pain, without fail. Item, crommes of breed steped in cowes milk, and
tha^ pressed, making a playstre with the oil of camomyll, and roses, hens
grese, and duckes grese, and a little Saffran, swageth pain merueylously, and
chefelye the gout.

Item a bathe of anodyne oils, appayseth all grefes, and so does a bath of
oil of the decoction of earth worms. Likewise unwashed woll howsoever it be
admynystred, is of good efficacitie.

Item.. of the leaves of mallows and violettes, of the roots and leaves of
holihock. ana. m^. i. of camomylle, melilote, dylle. ana. m^. i. ss. of the
roots of langedebefe.. iii. of penygrasse, of paryetary. ana. m^. ii. sees
them all perfytelye in water, stamp them, and strain them, and make a styffe
plaster in the decoction, with crommes of breed, and the forsayde straynynge,
addyng of oil of camomylle, roses, and dylle. ana.. ii. of duckes grese,
hens grese, and goose grese. an^.. ii. ss. of saffra^.. i. the yolks
of.iiii. eggs, mengle them, and let them sees again a little.

Item barley flower, with bran, bean flower, and the foresaid decoction,
having added the said oils, fattes, and saffran, swageth pain merueylously.
Item if ye make a styffe playstre with the flower of barley, and branne, and
sufficyent sapa, adding of oils of roses, camomyll, and dyll ana.. ii. of
duckes grese.. ii. ss. of saffran.. ii. the yolks of.iii. eggs, it shall be
excellent to swage al pains caused of matter compounde.

To swage pain caused of myxes matter.
Here follows a lynimente to swage pain caused of myxte matter.. of oils of
camomylle, dylle, lyllyes, and spyke. ana.. ii. of oil of roses, of elders, of
agrippa, and dialtea, of hens grese, gose grese, and duckes grese. ana.. x.
of the flowers of rosemarye, camomylle, of mellilot ana. m^. i. of iua muscata,
of calamint, mugwort, sage, sticados, squinantu^, of every one a little, of
lignum aloes,. iii. of the roots of enula campana, and walworte somewhat
bruised. an^.. i. ss. of the suete of a calfe, and of a cow. ana.. iiii. of
earth woormes washed with wine.. ii. ss. sees the^ all, with a pound of
odoriferous wine, till the wine be consumed, and make a linymente with
suffycyente white wax, adding of liquide storax.. vi. use this lynyment, for
it appayseth all old grefes, of the joints, back, and the gout. Item a
decoction of mallows, vyolettes, psillium, of the seed of quynces,
penygrasse, barley flour, oil of roses, and violettes, swageth pain, and
inflammation, and alters an evil hot complexion, and so does an
embrocation, made with such a decoction. Oil of roses odoriferous beaten with
the white of an egg, and the iuce of pla^tayne is of like efficacitie. But if
the pain be caused of gross wyndynesse. Then dylle, camomylle, cummyn,
coriander, fenelle, carewayes, ameos, ciselos, percelye seed, how so ever
they be mynystred, in playsters, or oils, procure mittigation of pain
merueylouslye.

The.xiii. Chapter. Of corrosiue, and putrefactyue medicynes, and that break
hole flesh.
COrrosyue, Corrosyue medicynes.
putrefactyue, and caustyke medycynes, dyffer not but in more and less
actiuitye, for they have all virtue to byte, and therefore it chances often
times, that one fulfylleth the operation of an other, because of the complexyon
of the members, or quantytye of the medycyne, or long taryaunce upon the
membre. we will descrybe three orders of corrosyue medicines: The first shall
be of weak corrosyues, the second of stronger, the third of strongest. For
weak corrosyues are conuenyent in feeble dyseases, and delycate bodies, strong
in strong diseases: strongest in most vehement diseases. For extreme diseases,
as says Hypocrates) require extreme curations.

Now to go forewarde in our purpose, though all these medycines be hot, and
of erthye nature, yet corrosyues been of less operation, than putrefactyues,
and putrefactyues ar weaker, than caustycke medycynes. And therefore corrosyues
work in the upper part, and in soft flesh, putrefactyues in hard flesh,
and deep, but caustykes have power to break the skin in hard flesh, and
enter depelye.

Now we begin of simple corrosyues, which are these: alume of roche burnt,
and not burnt, sponge of the sea some what burnte, lyme meanelye washed, read
coral, powder of mercurye.

Compounde corrosyue medycynes are these: vnguentum apostolorum, vngue^tum
ceraseos, vnguentum Egiptiacum after Mesue, whose operation is weak enough,
vngue^tum egiptiacum, after Auicenne, which is made of alume and verdegrese,
honye, and vynegre, and it is good against ascachillos, and gangrena. Item
vnguentum egiptiacum of our description, is of great efficacitie, and is thus
made.. of verdegrese, of alume, of honye, of vynegre. ana.. ii. of arsenyke
poudred.. ii. of sublimate.. i. Let them sees all together (the ingredyentes
first made in poudre) till they be thycke, and so use it, for it kylleth all
kinds of cancrena, aschachillos, and fystules. Item vnguentum egiptiacum of
our invention, for malign, corrosyue, rotten, and hollow ulcers, may be
conuenye^tly used, and is thus made.. of water of plantayne, and wine of
pomegranades, of honye, of licium. ana.. ii. of verdegrese, of roche alume.
ana.. x. seethe them all together, till they be thycke. This ointment following
is good for the same purpose, with less mordication.. of oil of roses, of
calves suete. ana. li. ss. of the iuce of pla^tayne, of alleluya, of sorelle,
of the wine of pomegranades. ana.. ii. me^gle them, and sees them, till the
iuces be consumed, then strain them, and make a soft oyntme^t, with sufficyent
white wax, adding of verdegrese fynelye poudred.. x.

An other.. of the water of plantayne, of honey. an^.. iiii. of verdegrese. ii.
of roche alume.. ii. ss. let the^ sees till they be thycke. Item vnguentum
egiptiacum of strong operation, and is good against a carbuncle, Vngue^. egip.
stronger.
anthrax and herpes.. of verdegrese, of alume, of honey, of vynegre. ana.. ii.
of arsnyk poudred.. i. of sublimate.. ii. sees them all together, tylle they
be thycke. Vnguentum apostolorum.
Item vnguentum apostolorum of our description.. of oil of roses.. vi. of
clear terebentine.. iii. of washed lyme, of litarge, of tutia. ana. ii. of
myrrh, frankensence, sarcocoll an^.. ii. ss. of verdegrese.. x. of roche alume
burnt.. i. ss. of the iuce of hoorehounde.. i. let the oil, terebentyne, and
iuce, be sodden till the iuce be consumed, than strain them, and make a soft
oyntement with suffycyente white wax, adding the rest fynely poudred.

Here follows the poudre of our invention, which is of most excellent
operation in remouynge superfluous flesh without pain. First ye must have of
aqua fortis, wherewith gold is separate from silver. li. i. ss. which is made
after this sort.. of vitriolle romayne, of roche alume. ana. li. i. of salis
nitri. l. i. ss. stylle them in a glass. Of this water, take as we have said
li. i. ss. of quyckesiluer. li. i. put the water in a glass well luted, and
set it in the furneys with a cover, and a receyuer, as they use to stylle in
glass, and se they be all well luted, that no air breath out: and use a
soft fire, till yt begin to drop, than fortyfye the fire, till the
receyuer be read, afterward increase the fire, by little and little, till the
water be stylled out. Than break the glass, and take out the quycksyluer
calcyned, which the alcumystes call precipitate, or calcyned, and poudre it
upon a marble stoone, than put it again in the glass, luted, as is
aforesaid, and stylle it, till all the water be stylled out, which done,
break the glass again, and draw out that, that is within, and poudre it
upon a marble stone, and put the powder in a brass pot on a strong fire,
styrrynge it about, the space of an hour and an half.

It is a sign of perfyte decoction, when the poudre is read, and like minium,
and somewhat clearer. This poudre may be called a great secret, wherewyth I
have gotten great gaynes, and worship, for it mundifyeth all virulente,
malign, and corrosyue ulcers, without pain, and prepares them to incarnation,
and cicatrization.

Item a trosiske of minium, of our descryption, mundifyeth all evil, and hard
flesh, and is good for fystules and flesshye ulcers, and is made after this
sort.. of the crommes of raw breed well leauened,. iiii. of most strong
sublymate.. i. of minium.. ss. stamp them all together, with a little
rosewater, than make trosiskes after the form of the kernelles of a
pyneapple, and put them in an hot oven, upon a tyle, till they be dry, and so
use them. If that ye will have them stronger, increase the virtue of sublymate,
and if ye will have them of less corrosyon, dimynysshe the receyte of
sublymate, and increase the quantytye of the crommes.

Item a trosyske of affodylles, Trociske of affodilles.
after our descryption, is good to kylle a fystula, and canker.. of most
strong sublymate.. ss. of arsnyk poudred.. i. ss. of ceruse, of the iuce of
amidum. ana.. iii. ss. of the iuce of affodilles.. x. of vynegre.. v. sees
them all till the juice and vynegre be consumed, than strain them fynelye, and
incorporate them with two ounces of the crommes of raw bread, adding of
auripigmentum calcyned,. iiii. make trosiskes of them all, with a little
rosewater: as we said before of minium.

The manner to calcinate auripigmentum, is this. To calcinate auripigmentum.
. of auripigmentum poudred.. ii. put them in a glass and set the glass upon
hoote cooles, and so leave it, till all the auripigmentum cleave to the glass,
with a reddysshe color, which done, break the glass, and gather the
auripygmentum being calcynate, and than poudre it, and use it, for it is a
merueylous good corrosyue, with little pain. And it is good for disceytfull,
corrosyue, cancreous, and malygue ulcers.

Here follows an other poudre of our descryption against fystules, cancreous,
and putrifyed ulcers.. of ceruse, of the juice of amidum. ana.. x. of white
arsenycke.. vi. the juice of plantayne, celedonye, and of the ryndes of
pomegranades. ana.. ss. of tutia.. ii. of camphore.. i. of the stone called
ematites well poudred.. i. ss. Let them boil all together beside the Camphore,
tylle the iuyces be consumed, then poudre them with the ca^phore brayed,
according to art, and keep them in a glass. Item the troscyskes of Andraron,
are good for the same purpose, and the description of them is this.. of the
ryndes of pomegranades.. x. of galls.. viii. of myrre, of aristologia rotunda.
ana. iii. of dragagantu^, of alume named iamenu^. ana.. ii. of vitriol romayne.
iiii. poudre them, and make trociskes with sweet wine.

Hot trosiskes, of Galenes descryption are good for the same purpose.. of
vnssecte lyme one part, of read auripigmentum, and yelowe, of realgar, and
acatia. ana. half a part, powder them, and make trosiskes with capitelle.

Trociskes restric^yue
Item our trosiskes made to sta^che blood with putrefaction, are not to be
disalowed.. of burnte vitriol.. x. of our poudre of mercurye.. i. ss. of the
iuce of amidum, of gipsum. ana.. ii. of lie moderatelye washed.. v. of myrrh,
aloes epatycke brayed. ana.. ii. ss. of our trociskes of minium.. i. braye them
all together, and incorporate them with two ounces of the crommes of raw
breed, and the iuce of knotgrasse.

Item oil of vitriolle is of famylyer corrosyon. Aqua fortis, wherewith gold
is divided from silver, consumes superfluous flesh, and plucketh up evil
wartes.

Item the water of our description ordained to byte away superfluous flesh
with little pain. Corrosyue water
. of sublymate.. vi. of salis gemme, of salis nitri. of roche alume. ana.. ss.
of verdegrece.. i. of water of roses, and plantayne. ana.. viii. sees them all
together beside the verdegrese, till ye third part be consumed, and put to the
verdegrese, when ye take the rest from the fire. Now it remains, that we
speak of putrefactyue medycynes.

Auicenne says, that putrefactiue medicynes are those yt have strength to
corrupt the complexion of the member, and induce an eschare, like deed flesh,
and cause great pain and fieuers, and they must not be mynistred but in
strong bodies, and to distroy strong deseases, as a carbuncle, harpes,
esthiomenos. And they are these, arsenicke, sublimate, realgar, and other
medicines compound therewith. And when they shall be applied, they must be
prepared with some thing that represseth their sharpness and venemenesse, as
realgar, and arsnyke, must be sodden with the iuce of plantayne, nyghtshade,
and houseleeke, and after the manner of the ordinances following.. of arsnyk
and realgar. ana.. ii. of auripigmente.. i. ss. of barbours lie.. vi. of water
of roses.. iiii. sees them all together, till the water and the lie be
consumed, and braye them fynelye, and add of the stone called ematites.. ii.
ss. use this ordinance upon anthrax, Powder of affodilles
and other such. To the same intention the powder of affodylles descrybed of
wyllyam Placentinus, is commendable, and is made after this sort.. of the iuce
of the roots of affodylles. li. i. of read auripigmentum brayed.. ii. lyme
vnsleckt and poudred.. iii. seethe the iuce till it be half consumed, and than
put to the auripigmentu^, and the lyme well poudred, and incorporate them all
well together, and dry them at the Sun, and than divide that myxture in to
small pieces, and lay them upon a boerde in the sun till they wax hard. And
if ye will put to the said receyte, an ounce of Realgar well poudred, it shall
be of stronger operation, but than it must not be used, but in very strong
bodies.

Now we will speak of caustyke medicynes, which are called ruptories, and
albeit that their operation is most strong, and inclyneth to the nature of
fire. Nevertheless it is lightlye taken away when they are to strong, which
thing chances not in putrefactiue medicynes, for when they begin their
operation, their action may be swaged with wine or water, A raptory of capitel.
and therefore they be more safelye used, then putrefactyues. First a ruptorye
of excellent operation, is made after this sort. R. of lie wherwyth soap is
made, which is called capitel or magistra. And if it be gathered of the first
drops, the ruptorie shall be the better (it is a sign that the lie is good,
when an egg does swymme upon it) li. ss. of vitrioll romayn.. i. ss. of
opiu^.. i. Let them sees all together except the opium till they be thycke,
then put to the opium, when ye take the rest from the fire, and put it in a
g^asse well stopped, and use it when ye will break apostemes and hole skin.
Another. R of the juice of ciclamen.. i. ss. of the forsayde lie.. iiii. of
vitrioll romayne.. iii. of aqua fortis.. i. salis nitri.. ii. ss. of opium.. i.
sees them al as it is aforesaid. Item the ruptorye which Guido speaks of,
made of lie, of bean branches. etc. is of good effect. Howebeit I have ever
allowed more the first receyt.

Here ye shall note, that in the administration of caustike medicynes, ye must
defend the places lyeng about, with some cold ointment as with an oyntmente
of ceruse, and like, that the caustike medicines work not but where need is.
For which purpose, ye must make a hole in the mids of ye plaster, and by
that hole ye must apply the caustike medicine in the place, where ye see
need. Moreover it is requisite, that ye apply all about, some cold lycoure
with stoupes weted in water and vinegre, to keep of deriuacion of humors, and
our custom was to use this ordinance following. R. of oil of roses odorife.
complete, of oil omphacine. A defensive.
an^.. i. ss. ye whytes of three eggs, of the juice of lettuse, pla^tayne.
ana.. ss. shake them all together, and use them as is aforesaid. Note, that the
said medicyne has wrought sufficiently, when the place is black by the
effect of the medicyne, and comunelye it comes to pass by ye space of half
an hour. Howbeit let it lie upon the member, more and less, according as
necessity shall require.

After the said operation, ye shall procure the fall of the eschare, with buttyre
and swynes grese, and with the leaves of colewortes, or a plaster of malowes,
and violettes, or other, according to that shall be expedient.

The.xiiii. chapter, of midicines that blyster.
SImples that blyster are these, apium risus, cantharydes, ciclamyne, oynyons,
strong garlyke, mel anacardinu^, A vesicatorye
the stones or graynes of vitis alba. Of these simples, many compoundes may be
made, whereof this is one. R. of cantharides.. iii. of cromes of raw bread. ii.
of vinaygre squillitike.. iiii. Take away the heads, the wings, and ye fete
of cantharides, and stamp them all together, and make a paste, which ye shall
apply upon the member that ye will blyster, the space of half a day or more.
when the place is blistred, ye shall prick the blysters in sondrye places, and
anoint them with buttyre, and lay on black coleworte leaves, till ye bladders
be perfitly purged. Another of greater strength. R. of the roots of apium
risus, of the roots of cyclame^ ana.. i. of the sede of vitis alba, of
cantarydes. ana.. ii. of brayed pepper.. i. of mel anacardinu^.. v. of raw
breed. x. take away the heads and wings of cantarydes, stamp them al
together, and use them as is aforsayde.

The.xv. chapter, of cauteryes.
A Cauterie is a necessary thing in ye art of chirurgerye, and there ben two
kinds of it. Actual, and potentiall. An actual cauterye, is of better and
surer operation then a pote^tial, by reason of the simplicity of ye fire, for
his operation hurts not after application, as a pote^tiall cauterye does,
which is made by medicines corrosyue, putrefactiue, and caustyke, which
inflame the parts about, and induce evil accidents, as feiuers, crampes, and
great pains. And therefore Auicenne says, that an actual cauterye
moderatelye used, is a noble remedy, to stop corruption of members, and it
rectifyeth the complexion of the members, and it resolves and takes away
corrupt mattier, and stauncheth blood. Howbe it ye must beware that ye touch
not the sinowes, chordes, or ligamentes, lest the member, be weakened, or that
the crampe ensues.

And here ye shall note touching co^fortation and rectification of the member,
that through an actual cauterye a member evil complexioned by cold, moist,
rotted, and venomouse mattier, may safelye be rectifyed and conforted, and
therefore the doctors allow opening of cold apostemes, with an actual
cauterye. Likewise, when the mattier is venomous or corrupt, as in a
carbu^cle, herpes. and esthiome nos, the doctors hyghlye praise the use of the
said cauterye. But if the member be evil co^plexioned through hot, and dry
mattier, then ye must use nether actual nor potentiall cautery, for so ye
should add dryenes to dryenes, heat to heat. And therforin hot and dry and
flegmonike apostemes, and of the nature of herisipelas, ye must use a lancet,
that is to say a cold iron, and not a hot. Wherefore the chirurgiens do evil,
that use indifferently actual cauteryes in all apostemes. Furthermore it is a
general rule, that universal purgacion of the body, must go before particular
purgation. The vtilities and profittes of cauteries, be these that follow. First
it conforteth a cooled member, secondlye, it takes away the evil complexion
of the same, thyrdly, it suffers not corruption to sprede abroad, fourthlye,
it resolves and dries the corrupt mattier, it takes also away venemnese.
It seperateth the corrupt part from the hole, it keeps open the place of
apostemes, that good cicatrisation may be made, it stauncheth blood, and
makes a deep eschate, it emptieth and turns away cauterous mattier
discendyng to the eyes, being applied upon the coronall comissure, it enlarges
holowe vlceres, and fistles, that the mattier may issue the better out. It
reducith a round form of vlceres, to a long, whereby they are more easesy
healed, it roteth up supfluous things, as glandules, scrophules, etc. It
turns a side matteir, or deriueth to the nigh parts of the vlcered place,
which must be done when a mattier must be led from one place to another. As
we did sometime, to purge ye mattier that was wont to arryue in an vlcere about
the insteppe, we made an issue under the knee. And therefore Arnoldus says
well, that a flowing which can not be turned to a natural issue, may
conuenientlye be drawn out with cauteries.

There be many other profittes of an actual cauterye, which sondrye doctors
have largelye spoken of, and we will yet speak somewhat. First ye shall
understand, that an actual cauterye applied upon the coronall comissure,
aydeth to vapoure out the cauterouse and reumatike mattier of the brain, and
turns it a side from the parts lyeng about. Moreover it cures the
epilepsia, and remoueth old pain of of the head, and it keeps of
cataractes. Some comaunde that the cauterisation be made unto the boon, and
some comaunde that the bone be towched and skaled, which Albucrasis reproves,
by reason of the nobility of the pannicle tied to the said comissure.

The place of ye said coronall comissure is thus known. Put your hand upon the
nose between the two eyes, and stretche it out toward the coronal comissure of
the head, for where the great finger ends, there is the comissure, and
there ye shall make an issue. And the cauterye wherewyth ye must make the
issue, must be after the figure of an olyue, and sometimes we have done it with
the caustyke of capitell above written. Item cauterisation made under the
temples, is good to staunche droppynges of the eyes, and to keep of cataractes.
Item an issue made upon the huckle bone, is good for the sciatica. There be
many other profyttes of cauteryes, written by ancient doctors, which our men
neglecte now adays, and therefore we have declared them that been most in use.

The.xvi. chapter, of oyntmentes and cerotes.
ALbeit that in ye former chapters, we have spoken sufficientely of oyntme^tes
and cerotes, yet that they may be the more easily found, we will treat of
them in this book also. And First we will describe a cerote for the wounds of
the head, of noble operation. R. of betanie, woodbynd, saint John's wort,
yarow, mouseare, rosemarye, sage, sentuarye the greater and the less, of
pinpernell, of herb saint mary. ana. m^. ss. of consolida the less. m^. i. of
clear terebentyne. li. iii. of oil of roses odoriferous made of ripe olyues.
li. i. ss. of mastyke.. iii. of rosyn, of the pynaple tree, of gu^me elemi.
an^.. iiii. First cut the herbs and stamp them, and with the rest melted at
the fire, incorporate them al together adding of odoriferous wine. li. ii.
let them sees a little at the fire, and set the^ in some vessel a sunnyng,
the space of a weke, styrrynge them about every day, which done, set them
on the fire again, and let them sees til the wine be consumed, and streyn
them through a thyck cloth, and make a cerote at ye fire with sufficient white
wax, than soften the cerote and chafe it with goats milk, and cowes milk,
and the juice of the said herbs first, and last of all with aqua vite.

Note that if ye add immediatlye to the cerote,
some of the said herbs fynely cut, and stamped, it should be of much better
operation. Another cerote for the head, called Ceroum de minio capitale.
Cerotu^ capitale de minio.
R. of oil of Roses odoriferous. li. i. of oil of mastyke.. ii. the suet of a
wether, and of a calfe, li. i. ss. of litarge of gold and silver, ana.. iiii.
of Minium.. iii. of odoriferous wine. li. i. sees them with a soft fire at
the beginning, and stir them about, and in the end increase the fire, till
the cerote be black, or blackyshe, than add of clear Terebentyne. li. ss. of
Mastyke.. ii. of gum elimi.. i. ss. of white wax as much as shall suffice.
Another cerote of our description. Recipe of gum elimi.. iii. of Mastyke..
ii. of new rosyn of the pyne tree.. i. of clean Colophonia, ten drammes, of
clear Terebentyne.. iiii. of oil of Roses odoriferous.. v. of the juice of
Betonye, and woodbynde, of every one li. ss. Sees them all together, and put
to the streynynge, of white wax as much as shall be sufficient, and make a
cerote, which afterward must be malaxed or softened, with odoriferous white
wine.

Another cerote which heals all wounds of the head without corruption, so
that the wound at the beginning be dressed with the white of an egg, without
a tente, and we have healed many of the said wounds, applienge only a piece
of this cerote. R. of oil of Roses omphacyne, of oil of Roses complete and
odoriferous, of every one.. ii. of oil of Mastyke, of oil of Myrte, of
every one.. i. of the juice of Yarowe.. iii. of the juice of Betonye.. i. of
goats suet.. i. ss. Sees them al together til the juice be consumed, then
streyne them and put to the streyning, of mastyke, ten drammes, of gum elimi,
six drammes, of clear Terebentyne,. ii. ss. of white wax as much as shall
suffice, let them sees again a little and make a cerote which must be
malaxed with milk, and after with aqua vite.

A cerot of Peter de ebano.
Here after follows the ordinance of Peter de Ebano, wherewyth he healed all
fractures of the sculle (as men say) Howebeit in deed it is not a sure cure,
for many practicioners in our time have been deceived therwyth. Wherefore it
is better to discover and to lift up the boon, before ye apply any cerote.
The description of Peter's cerote is thus. R. of gum elimi.. iii. of rosin of
the pine, of pure wax, Armoniake, of every one.. ii. of Terebentyne.. iii.
ss. with oil of Roses.. ii. ss. Sees them all together, save the Armoniake,
with a cyathe and a half, of maluesye, till the wine be consumed, than put
to the Armoniake dissolved with vynaygre, and let it be malaxed with wine or
aqua vite.

Vnguentum basilicon, which is good in all wounds and vlceres, is made after
this sort R. of swynes grese, of calves suet, Vng basilicon.
of wethers suet, of every one. li. ss. of goats talowe, of worms washed
with wine, of ship pytche, of rosyn of the Pyne tree, of every one.. ii. of
oil of Roses odoriferous.. viii. of the juice of Plantayne.. iiii. of the
juice of Yarowe, and woodbynde, of every one. iii. of the sede of saint John's
wort, and of the leaves thereof, of every one m^. i. Let them sees all
together till they juice be consumed, then streyne them and put to the
streynynge, of Minium, of terra sigillata, fynelye brayed, of every one.. i.
ss. of litarge of gold and silver, of every one.. iii. ss. Sees them and
stir them about, till they be black, and then put to of most clear
Terebentyne.. vi. of Mastyke.. x. of white wax as much as shall suffice, let
them sees again, and make a cerote.

This oyntmente is of good operation, in digestynge, rypynge, and swagynge of
pain, with subtyle and gentle attraction. A cerote or sparadrappe for malign,
virulent, and corrosyue vlceres of the legs, and of the arms, is made of
this sort. R. of the oil of Myrte, of oil of Roses omphacyne, of every
one.. ii. of Vnguentum populeon.. ii. ss. of calves and cowes suet, of every
one. li. ss. of swynes grese melted.. v. of the leaves of Plantayne,
nyghtshade, and woodbynde, of every one. m^. ii. of the wine of pomegranades..
viii. beat them, and stamp them all together, and so leave them the space of
a day, and afterward sees them till the wine be consumed, then streyn them,
and put to the streynynge, of litarge of gold and silver, of every one..
iii. of miniu^.. x. of bole armenye, and terra sigillata well brayed, of every
one. vi. sees them again, and stir them about, and make a black sparadrap
with sufficient white wax, addyng in the end, of Camphore, brayed according
to art.. ii. of clear terebenbentyne.. iii. ss.

Vng. de cerusa decoctum.
Vnguentum de cerusa decoctum after our description, is good for the same
intention. R. of swynes grese melted,. iii. of the wine of pomegranades.. viii.
of cerusse brayed.. xiiii. sees the^ all together with a soft fire, till the
wine be consumed, then increase the fire and let it sees again the space of
an hour, and stir them ever about, and afterward make a stiff ointment,
with sufficient white wax, addyng in the end of clear terebentyne.. ii. ss.

Vnguentum de tucia or diapomphilicos, Vng. de tutia.
after our description, which is good against corosyue, cancreous, and
deceytfull ulcers, is thus ordained. R. of oil of Roses odoriferous, of oil
omphacyne, of every one. li. ss. of oil Myrtyne, of Galienes oyntmentes, of
Vnguentum populeon, of every one.. ii. of the leaves of Plantayne, and
nyghtshade, of every one, m^. ii. cut the herbs and stamp them, and mengle
them all together, and so leave them the space of a weke, the^ sees them a
little, and streyne them, and put to the strenynge, sufficient white wax and
make a soft oyntmente, and take it from the fire, and stir it about till it
be warm, and last of all put thereunto of litarge of gold and silver well
brayed, of every one,. iii. of tucia.. i. ss. of cerusse.. x. of bre^te
lead.. vi. of Camphore brayed according to art.. i. Mengle them all
together, and labor them in a mortar of lead the space of an hour.

Here follows the description of Vnguentum album camphoratum. R. of oil of
roses odoriferous. Vng. album ca^phoratum.
li. ss. of calves suet melted.. iii. make a soft oyntmente at the fire with
sufficient white wax, which done, take it from the fire and stir it about
till it be warm, than add the whytes of two eggs well beaten with an ounce
of water of Roses, and a dram of Camphore, stir them about again the space
of two hours, for it is a marueylouse oyntmente to cool, and quench hot
mattier with mitigation of pain.

Vnguentum de minio, for virulent corrosyue, and malign vlceres, and fresh
wounds. R. of oil of roses odoriferous. li. ss. of calves and cowes suet.
an.. viii. of oil myrtyne.. iiii. of swynes grese melted.. ii. of the leaves
of plantayne, woodbynde, yarowe, weybreyd, buglosse, sowthystel, of consolida
the less. ana. m^. i. stamp them all together, and mengle them, and let
them lie three days, then sees them a little and strain them, and put to the
streynynge, of litarge of gold and silver. ana.. ii. of minium, of cerusse, of
terra sigillata, of bole armenye well brayed. ana.. i. of clerest terebentyne..
v. of mastike.. i. let them sees again till they be black in color, and
make an oyntmente with sufficient white wax.

Vnguentum rosaru^ after Mesue, is of good operation against heresipelas, and
al inflamatio^, and is much used in the court of Rome. R. of fresh swynes
grese melted.. iiii. let it be washed ten times, first with whote water, and
then with cold, afterward, take asmoche of red rose leaves, cut in small
pieces, and leave them together the space of.vii. days, then sethe them a
little and streyne them, and again put thereto as many more red roses, and so
leave them, other seven days, and afterward set them on the fiere with a
pound of the juice of roses: and. iii. of the oil of sweet almondes, and let
them seth again with a soft fire, till the juice be consumed: Then strain
them, adding again. ii.. of the juice of roses, and let them seth again,
till the iuces be consumed, and make an oyntmente, if ye wasshe it thries with
rose water it shall be the better.

Here follows an other oyntmente of roses of our description, Vigoes ointment
of roses.
which is good to quench al hot complexions of herisipelas, and ignis
percicus. R. of oil of violets, of oil of nenuphar, or in the stead thereof
oil of roses odoriferous. ana.. iiii. of the oil of sweet almo^des.. ii. of
calves suet. l. i. of kyddes suet. li. ss. of swynes grese melted, namelye of a
bore of two year old. li. iii. First melte them and streyne them all, and wash
them ten times with hot water of the decoction of barlye, of roses, of violet
flowers, and of lettuse. The^ wash them as often with cold water of barlye,
and afterward take as much of sta^ped roses as the weight of al is, and so leave
the^ the space of a weke, and then seth them a little with a soft fire, and put
unto them, of the juice of white roses. li. ss. of red roses somewhat sta^ped.
li. i. ss. mengle them al together and leave them.x. days. Afterward sees
them again with a soft fire, till the iuce be consumed, and streyne them again,
and put to the streynyng, of white wax,. iii. sees the^ again one walme,
last of al let the^ be washed with water of violets, and as much water of roses,
this is an excellent oyntmente to cool all infla^mations, and is a
repercussiue of ulcers, without hurt of the vlcered place.

Item the oyntmente of Galene, which is put instead of an ointment of roses,
and is made after this sort. R. of oil of roses omphacyne. Vng. Galene.
li. ss. of white wax.. ii. melte them all at the fire, and wash them often
with hot water, and then with cold water, of violettes and roses, and
afterward with vynaygre of roses. This oyntmente quenches all inflammations
of herisipelas, and it is also repercussyue.

Vnguentu^ triapharmacon is thus made R. of old oil. li. i. of litarge of
gold and silver fynelye brayed, Vng. triapha^macon.
of white vynaygre. ana.. iiii. Let the oils sees together, and stir them
about with a stick till they be thick, this ointment incarneth wounds and
ulcers.

Here follows an oyntmente or cerote to conforte the stomach, and strengthen
digestio^. R. of oil of roses odoriferous.. ii. of oil of Mastyke.. i. ss. of
the iuce of wormwood six dra^mes, of the juice of quinces.. ss. of myntes,
Nepte, Rosemarye flowers, Mugworte, squinantum, Roses, of every one. m^. ss.
of Spica inda, two dra^mes, of odoriferous wine. li. i. of saffran.. ss. Let
them seethe together till the wine be consumed and the iuyces, than strain
them, and make a soft oyntme^t with sufficient white waxe-addynge of the three
saunders.. j. use it.

Diaquilon magnum.
Diaquilon made after our description, resolves all hardness, and opens and
mollifieth safelye.. of muscilage made as it follows.li. j. ss. that is to
say.. of the rotes of holyhoc.li. ss. of lynseed, of fenugreke, ana.. j. of
the seed of violettes, malowes, holyhocke, and quynces, ana.. ss. of psillium..
ij. of the roots of Yreos.. ij. of oil of Camomylle, dylle, lillies, of the
oil of lynseed, and flower delyce, ana.. iij. of hens grese, duckes grese,
and gose grese, ana.. iij. of oil of Almondes, of ysopus humide, of the juice
of lycoryce, ana.. x. of most clear terebentyne.. j. ss. of calves talowe
melted.li. ss. of litarge of gold fynelye brayed.. x. let them sethe all
together, and stir them about till the muscilage be consumed, and make a
soft cerote with sufficient white wax, addyng of armoniake dissolved in
vynegre.. v. of serapyne, Opoponax, Bdellium, Galbanum, ana.. iij. dyssolue
them all in the said vynegre, and mengle them.

Diaquilon minus.
Here follows the less diaquilon of our description, which resoluethe hot
apostemes in the end with mollificatio^.. of oil of roses odoriferous, of
litarge of gold well brayed, Ana.. viij. of Camomyl.. iiij. of oil of
violettes and of sweet Almandes.. j. of calves suet, hens grese, and duckes
grese, ana.. ij. of clear terebentyne.. x. of the muscilage of the rotes of
holyhocke, of the roots of langdebeef, Ana.. iij. of reysynes.. iij. ss. of
the seed of holyhocke, of the seed of malowes, ana.. vi. of the seed of
quynces, and violettes, ana.. iij. of psillium.. ij. make a muscilage of them
all with sufficient water according to art, and put it to the oils and
fattes, and sethe them till the said muscilage be consumed, and strain them,
putting to the straynynge, of white or yelowe wax as much as shall suffyce.

Here follows the ordinance of galienes cerote of ysope, Cerotu^ ysop^ Galeni.
which is good against hardness, and knobbes of members, and against hardness
of the liver, and the mylt, and peynes of the matrice, and hardness of the
joints and synnowes, with mollificatio^ of the bones.. of yelowe wax.. iij.
of oil of Camomylle, and oil of flower deluyce, ana.. vi. of mastyke.. j. of
spyke.. ij. of saffran.. i. ss. of terebentyne.. j. of ysopus humida.. viij. of
rosyn, of the pynaple tree.. ss. make a soft cerote of all, with sufficient
white wax. Item a cerote of ysope of our description, which is good in all
hardness of the body, and chieflye against knobbes coming of the french
pockes, is made after this sort.. of oils of Camomylle, dylle, roses, and
white lillies, ana.. ij. of oil of flower deluyce, of oil of Yreos.. j. of
oil of mastyke, of oil of spyke, ana.. vi. of hens grese, of duckes grese,
of oil of sweet almandes, ana.. x. of the mary of the legs of a calfe and a
cow, of fresh butter, ana.. vi. of liquide storax.. ix. of calves talow. ij.
ss. ysopus humida.. iij. sethe them all together (beside the ysope and the
storax) with the muscillage vndrewrytten, till the muscillage be consumed, than
strain them and put to the straynynge,. iij. ss. of clear terebentyne, of
Saffran.. ij. of yelowe wax as much as shall sussyce. This is the description
of the muscilage.. of the roots of holyhock, of the rotes of enula campana,
ana.. ij. of ye rotes of yreos.. vi. of reysons.. x. of spike.. j. ss. of
armonyak, of bdellium, of serapyne, ana.. iij. boil the^ all together with a
sufficient quantity of water, and a little vynegre, till half be consumed,
then strain them and let them sethe together again, a little, as is
aforesaid.

Cerote of melilote.
A cerote of mellylote having the effects of the former cerote is thus
ordained.. of mellylote fynelye stamped.li. j. of Camomylle, wormewoode, dille,
likewise stamped. ana.. iij. of branne brayed and dried in an oven.. viij. of
the roots of holyhock sodden and strayned.li. j. of the roots of Yreos,
likewise sodden and strayned.. ij. of reysyns sodden and strayned.. iiij.
seethe them all together in sufficient sapa, till they be thycke and styffe,
and than put to of oil of Camomylle, dylle, lillies, and Roses complete, ana..
iiij. of hens grese, and gose grese, of butter, ana.. x. of clear
terebentyne.. ij. ss of storax liquida.. vj. of ysopus humida.. j. ss. of
saffran.. j. calves talowe.. v. of new wax as much as shall suffyce, melt the
wax with the oils, and make a cerote thereof, which beside ye forsayde
virtues, takethe away the pain of synnowes of the side, and of the belie.

Eugenius cerote.
Here follows the cerote of eugenius, against cold catarres.. of maioram,
penyriall, sticados, squina^tum, ana. m^. j. of herb sent marye, of nept,
ana.. j. ss. of sandrake, of frankensence, ana.. iiij. of mastyke.. ss. of
nutmygges, cinamome, anyse. ana.. j. of lignum aloes, of calamus aromaticus,
Ana.. ij. ss. first dry the things that are to be dried, and braye them that
must be brayed, and make a styffe cerote, with sufficient quantity of oil of
mastyke, and with new wax, and spreede it upon a piece of lether, and lay it
upon the coronall commissure, (the place being first shaven) for it
comfortethe the brain, and stops cold reumes of the head.

Here follows a cerote of noble operation, to restore broken bones, A cerote
for broken bones
and to fortify the pore called sarcoydes, in the application whereof, ye need
not to fear attraction of matter, nor ytchyng of the place, wherewith ye bones
are wont to be vexed with that deuelishe cerote oxicroceum. Wherefore to avoid
such inconvenience, ye shall use this cerote which is of a gentler effect,
and of our invention.. of oil myrtyne, of oil of roses omphacyne, ana.li.
ss. of the juice of the roots of Holyhocke.li. ij. of the roots and leaves of
the ash tree, of the roots and leaves of consolida the less, of myrtilles
and the leaves thereof, of the leaves of wyllowes, ana. m^. j. stamp them
first, and sees them with red wine, and as much water, till half be
consumed, with half an ounce of myrrh, and as much frankencense, than strain
them, and put to the straynynge, of goats tallowe.li. ss. of most clear
terebentyne.. ij. of mastyke.. j. let them sethe again with the forsayde
oils to the consumption of the said decoction, than strain the^, and add of
litarge of gold and silver ana.. iij. of bole armenie fynelye braied, of terra
sigillata. ana.. ij. of minium.. x. set them to the fyere again, stirynge
them ever about, and make a cerote with suffyciente new wax, after the manner
of a sparadrap. Here ye shall note,
that only oil of myrtyne, has virtue (as Auicenne says) to restore all
fractures of bones.

Vnguentum of Lyme of our descryption, Vnguentum of Lyme.
which is good against burnynges of fyere, ytchynges, hot vlceres,
blysterynges, and chafynges, is made in this form.. of lyme nine times
washed and fynely poudred.. ij. of litarge of gold and silver, of every one..
iij. of ceruse.. ij. ss. of Tucia.. ij. of oil of Rooses omphacyne.. vj. of
oil of roses co^plete odoriferous.li. j. ss. of calves talowe melted.. viij.
of the juice of pla^tayne, nyghtshade, and lettuse, of every one.. iiij. first
let the talowe sethe at a soft fyere, with the oils and iuyces, tylle the
iuyces be consumed, than streyne them, and put to the streynynge, as much as
is sufficient of white wax, of Vnguentum Rosarum.. ij. ss let them sethe
again a little, and than take them from the fire, and stir them about with
the said myneralles well brayed, make an ointment.

Oyntme^t for ytchynge.
Here follows an ointment or linimente for ytchynge and for all the forsayde
intencions,. of oil of roses odoriferous.li. iij. of Vnguentum Populeon,
vnguentum Rosarum, vnguentum Galeni, of every one.. ij. of the juice of
plantayne, and housleeke, ana.. j. of the wine of pomegranades. ss. of vynegre
of roses.. ij. of litarge of gold and silver, of every one.. iij. of Tucia..
ij. ss. of ceruse.. x. make a linime^t in a mortar of lead of al these,
according to art. The manner to make this oyntmente is this. Ye must put the
myneralles in a mortar of lead, and than put in now a drop of oil, now
a drop of oyntmentes, and now a drop of the juice, and stir them about,
till they be well incorporate, for it is a synguler remedy for inflammed
vlceres of the legs.

Vnguentu^ de Calcantho.
Vnguentum de Calcantho, which cures old vlceres, and mundifyeth evil
flesh, and incarnethe, is thus made.. of swynes grese, of calves and cowes
suet, of every one.li. ss. of celedonye, of alleluya, of plantayne, of
woodbynde, of houndestonge, ana. m^. i. of lyme thryse quenched with water.li.
ss. of Calcantum poudred.. j. of verdegrese.. x. stamp these foresaid
things, and so leave them together the space of seven days, tha^ put thereunto
of water of plantayne, of the wine of pomegranates, ana.. iiij. tha^ let them
sethe with a soft fire, till the water and wine be consumed, and so strain
them with a thycke clothe, and put to the straynynge, of litarge of gold and
silver. ana.. iiij. of bole armeny, terra sigillata, and minium, ana.. j. of
clear terebentyne.. iij. let them sethe again and make a black cerote with
sufficient white wax.

The ointment following, heals salt fleume, and scabbes.. of vnguentu^
Populeon, of oil of mastyke, ana.. ss of oil of the yolks of eggs.. iij. of
oil of lynseed.. vj. of calves suet.. iiij of black elebore.. vij. of docke
rotes.. ij. of the leaves of plantaine. m^. j. sta^pe the^ al fynelye, and
incorporate the^ together, and so leave the^. iiij. days, than sees the^ with
a ciath of water of fumytorie, till the water be consumed, tha^ strain the^,
and add to ye scrayning, of litarge of gold and silver.. v. of ceruse, of
terra cameli. ana.. x. of white wax, as much as shall suffice, make a soft
oyntme^t. Note that the forsayde oyntme^t is good for ytchyng, and chiefly wha^
the salt fleume is with infla^mation, and pain of the place. And if ye will put
to this receyt, two ounces of quycksyluer quenched with spytle, it shall be of
more efficacytie, to dry all manner scabbes.

The ointment following is good for tetters, and ryngwormes. Oyntmentes for
tetters.
. of french soap, of the oil of bitter Almandes, of the oil of laurel, and
mastyke, of every one.. j. of clear terebentyne.. ij. of terra cameli, of
branne grounden, of quycksyluer quenched with spyttle, ana.. ij. ss of glass
poudered, of litarge of gold and silver, Ana.. j. ss. of vynegre squillityke..
ii. of black elebore, brayed fynelye,. ss. of cowes tallowe.. vi. myngle them
all together, and make an ointmente.

Vnguentum Corasces.
Vnguentum cerascos, which mundifyeth old wounds and ulcers, and rectyfyeth
them, is thus made.

. of armoniak.. j. of bdellium, olibanum, aristologia, sarcocolle. ana.. v. of
myrrh, of galbanum, ana.. iii. of lytarge.. xv. of aloes, of opoponax, ana..
ii. and ss. of verdegrese.. x. of rosen of the pyne tree.. xiiij. dissolve the
bdellium, opoponax galbanum, and armoniak in vynegre and set them on the fiere
and stryene them, and powder the other things fynely, and sort them, which
done seethe, the lytarge with oil a little, styrryng it about with a stycke,
and when it begi^neth to incorporate, than put to the wax, and the rasene. And
it is known to be soden enough, when a drop being laid upon an iron or upon
a stone, congeleth together inco^tinently: than take it from the fyere, and
incorporate al to gether, and last of all put in the verdegrece, and stir it
about till it be warm, and keep it as a tresure.

Vnguentum Aureum.
Here folowethe the ordinance of vnguentum aureum, which incarneth and
consoundeth fresshe wounds. R. of yelowe wax,. vi. of oil of roses
odoriferous.li. i. of clear terrebentyne,. iii. of rasin, of coliphonia, an^..
i. of mastyke,.. vi. of frankynsence of sarcocoll, and myrrh, ana.. ij. and
ss. of wethers tallowe, and calves tallowe, ana.li. ss. of yarowe, m^ ii. the
flowers of rosemarye, or the tops thereof, of centaurye the less, ana. m^.
ss. stamp them all to gyther, beside the wax, and the rosen, with the
herbs, than incorporate them, and so leave them, the space of three days,
and afterward, sethe them with a ciathe, of odoryferous wine, tylle the wine
be consumed, than strain them and make an ointment at the fyere, with wax
and rosen, which ye shall wash three or four times with milk, for milk
delayeth the heat of it, and causes it to swage pain the better. We could
have declared here many other oyntementes and cerotes, but our custom is to
setforth them, which we have found to be good.

The.xvij. Chapter. Here follows a table of medicines compounde, and simple,
wherwyth Chirurgiens ought to be furnysshed that dwell in villages and towns,
where no potycaries be, and also such as go to the sea.
First we will begin with symples which be these. Camomylle, melilote, dylle,
wormwoode, corianders, anyse, branne, milium, fenugreke, lynseed, and the
flower thereof, the flower of beans, of barley, of orobus, of wheat, honye,
sugar, bole armenye, terra sigillata, aloes Epatyke, myrrh, frankensence,
gypsum, sarcocolle, saffran, Saunders read and yelowe, camphore, tucia,
litarge of gold and silver, ceruse, burnt lead, plates of lead, vitrioll
brent and not brent. To staunche bledynge ye must have our powder restrictyue,
the hears of a leueret, quenched lyme, roche alume, verdegrese, our powder of
mercury. Also terebe^tyne, mastyke, go^me, elimi, rasin, of pyne, colophonia,
ship pitche, he^nes grese, duckes grese, gose grese, swynes grese, butter,
sanguis draconis, mumia, myrt, licorice, little rotes, clean barley, the rotes of
march malowes, the seed of malowes, common seeds, psillium, quynce seeds,
reysons, fygges, dates, iuiubes, sebesten, prunes, sumach, flowers of
pomegranades, nuttes of cypress, squinantum, sticabos, arsenyke, orpyment,
sublimate, minium, dragagantu^, braied white wax and read. These be the
symples wherwyth a good Chirurgen may make many remedies to the use of
Chirurgerie. It shall be sufficient that he have a little quantity of these with
him, and he must not forgete to have with him leches, or bloodsuckers.

Now we will come to co^poundes. Electuarye of the juice of roses, honey of
roses, diafinicon, the confection of hamech, diaprunis simple and solutyue,
diacassia, triacle, benedicta, diacatholicon, hiera simple of Galien.

Pills.
Pills of Hiera with agarike, Pills of Hermodactiles greater and less.
Pills sine quibus esse nolo. Pills of mastyke, Pills called Bechechie,
Pills agregatiue, Pills of Reubarbe.
Syrupes.
Syrup of Roses, Of the juice of Endive, Syrup Acetosus symplex. Syrup the
duabus radicibus, with vineg^^ and without, honye of roses, honye of violettes,
oximell symplex, Syrup of violettes, Syrupus de acetositate citri, Syrup of
fumytery the greater and the less, Syrup of Epithimum.
Oyntmentes, and cerotes.
VNguentum albu^ camphoratu^, vnguentum basilicum magistrale, of our
description, vnguentu^ de minio, of our description, cerotum capitale, of our
description, diaquilon magistrale, of our description, cerotum isopi, of our
description, cerote for broken bones, of our description, vnguentum
egiptiacum, of our description, a ruptorye of capitell, a trociske of minium,
agrippa, dialthea, white sief, sief of frankynsence. These suffyce for the
necessity of chyrurgyens.

Waters
WAter of roses, of fenell, of fumytorye, of plantayne, of mayeden hear, of
endyue, of buglosse, of nyghtshade, of vyolettes, of melissa or bawme, aqua
vitae.

Oils.
Oil of roses omphacine, and complete, oil of mastike, oil of camomyl, of
vyolettes, of lyllyes, of ipericon, of euphorbium, of elders. And that the same
remedies, may be the better administered, of chyrurgyens, I will describe the
properties of them. First we will begin of syrup of vynegre.

Sirupus acetosus simplex, is common for the digestion of all humors, and
therefore it is conveniently given to them, that have tertian fevers, for by
reasone of the vinegre, it thinneth gross humors, and cuttethe slymye
humors, it opens oppilations, and amendeth rottnes of humors: wherefore it
is good for pestilentiall fevers, and by reason of his gentle coldness, it
thicketh somewhat subtyle parts, it cools choler, and swageth thirst.

Sirupus acetosus cum radicibus, has temperat virtue, and digestethe through
his property gross color, and resists rotten putrefaction, correctyng
evil qualyties of humors, and it opens opilatio^s, and cutteth fleume, and
provoke vryne and sweat. The physicians use it often in the beginning of a
tertian, coming of cholere myngled with gross fleume, and it must be used
with honye of roses, waters of endyue, fumitorie, buglosse sorel, fenell, etc.

Oximel simplex, has virtue to digest, to thin and to cut evil humors
chieflye fleume, and those that are in the stomach, in yt joints, and the
liver. And therefore it is good for the^ yt have had long fevers, caused of gros
fleume being me^gled with water of fenell.

Oximell composytum is very digestyue and peculier to digest thynne, and cut
gross, slymye, flegmatyke, and melancholyke humors, in long fyeuers, and
pourgeth them, by swettes, and vrynes. And therefore it is given to them,
that have a quartayne, in declination. For the same entention, the sirupe de
quinque radicibus, is convenient, and is of greater temperaunce.

Sirupus de bisantiis, is good for compounde and long fevers, of hard
curation, coming of cholere mengled, with gross fleume, for it dygestethe,
the same, and opens opilations, and therefore it remedyeth, the yelowe
iaundees, or Ycteritia. Moreover it is good in choleryke fevers, being
prolonged after the.x. day with water of wormwood, maydenheare and endyue.

Sirupus de endiuio simplex, has virtue to digeste, subtyle and sharp
cholere. And it cools the boylynge heat thereof, and represseth, the sharnes
of it. Moreover it opens the opilacion of the liver. Likewise sirupus de
endiuia compositus, has the same virtues.

Sirupus violatus, dygesteth subsubtyle choler, and que^cheth and cools the
heat thereof. Also it que^cheth thyrst, and soupleth the breast, and is good
for a dry cough, and shortness of wind.

Sirupus de iuiubes, clarifyeth the horsnes of the voice, swageth thyrst, and
thycketh thynne spytle. And more over it eases the cough in pleuresye, and is
used in burning fevers.

Sirupus de liquiricia is temperat in heat, and his virtue is to take away the
coughe, and to cleanse the longes from gross flemme.

Sirupus de hissopo, is somewhat hye in heat, and it opens and cures a
long and a hard cough, and digesteth gross fle^me, which stop the ways of
the breathe. Moreover it prepares reumatyke matter to issue out, and therefore
it helps short breathynge, pains of ye head, and of the sides, coming of
a cold cause with wyndynes.

Sirupus de prassio or of horehou^d is good for the longes, and for the breast,
and it dygesteth flegmatyke, gross, and slymye humors, and purges reumatyke
matter being in the breast and in the longes. And therefore it is used for the
remedy of an old coughe.

Sirupus de granatis or of pomegranades, dygesteth cholere, and represseth the
sharpenes of the same, it mundifyeth blood and swageth thyrst, and therefore is
given in coleryke fevers.

Sirupe of the juice of orenges or cytrous, is a good remedy for sharp,
vehement, and pestilentiall fevers, it represseth the sharpenes of cholere, and
of venomous matter, and quenches thyrst, and resysteth putrefaction of
humors, and therefore it is chyefly used in the somer for the pestilence.

Sirupe of popye provoke sleep, stops reumatyke fluxes, thyckyng, the
subtyle matter thereof, it is good for a dry cough, chieflye in them that
begin to have a pthisik.

Sirupe of ye juice of sorell, is good for a pestile^tiall fever, it swageth
heat and thyrst, and preserves humors from putrefaction, it delaieth heat of
cholere and mu^difyeth blood, cutteth gross humors, and comfort the heart.

Sirupe of myrte, byndeth myghtely, and therefore it is good for the flux of
the belie, and of the flowers, and it stops sharp reumes.

Miua citoniorum or of quynces, thorough his stypticitie is very good for the
flux of the belie. Moreover it styrreth up appetyte, and comfort the
stomach, and strengthens the entrayles, and causes vomyte to cease.

Sirupe of myntes is of temperat heat, and it comfort natural heat, and
dygestion of the stomach, and repayreth the weakness of the same.

Sirupe of wormwood comforts the stomach, and the liver, restores apetite
lost, and eases pains of the stomach, of the liver. etc.

Sirupe of fumiterrye, dygesteth al gross, salt, corrupt, and burnt humors,
and therefore it is good for scabbes, tetters, ryngwormes, salt flemmes,
lepryes, malmort, ca^kers, and the french pockes.

Sirupe of epithimum, is good for the french pockes, leprye, ca^kers, malmort,
salt flemme, old scabbes, it heals also pushes coming of salt, sharp and
burnt humors, it provoke vryne, and suppleth the bellye.

Sirupe de sticados, is good for cold dyseases of the synowes, for the
palseye, the crampe, the epileptia, it is good also for reumatyke old men.

The common decoction.
The common decoction to cool, is thus ordained.. of the.iiij. common seeds. of
the.iij. less seeds, of every one a little, of clean barlye, of raysons. an^..
i. of licoryce.. ss. of annes.. ii. of iuiubes, of damask prunes. ana. number
ten, of sebesten, number.vi. sees them all together, with water of endyue,
buglosse, and rain water, in equal portion, till the third part be
consumed, it is used in medicines against sharp and choleryke fieuers, and it
is good for the breast.

A peculier decoction for the breast, and against the coughe, and short
brethe. R. of branne, of scabiouse, of maydenheere, of ysope, of horehound,
ana. m^. i. of flowers of violettes, of borage and buglosse. ana. m^. ss. of
the roots of langdebefe.. ii. of damask prunes, of iuiubes. ana.. i. ss. of
sebesten, of barlye, of dates, of dry figs. an^.. i. of licoryce.. x. of
pennydies.. ii. ss. of fenell,.. iiii. of good honye.li. ss. seethe them all
with sufficient water, till half be consumed, than strain the decoction, and
use it for it is of merueylous operation.

A loche to ease the coughe, and the streytnes of the breaste, R. of sugger
candye of a sirupe of vyolettes.. ten, of penidies.. i. and. ss. of syrup of
violettes., ii. of diadragantum.. iii. of juice of liquyryce.. vi. of the
comune seeds pycked, of kernelles of Pynaple. ana.. i. mengle them and make a
loche, with a little water of Scabious.

Diameron and Dianucum, are good for the squynce from the beginning to the
augmentation. Item it remedyeth inward swellynges of ye throat, and losing of
the vuula, and stops catarres, clensynge gross fleume, if it be gargarised
with water of pomegranades, and water of plantayne.

Of electuaryes lenityue and solutyue.
First diama^na purgeth-subtyle cholere, and soupieth the bellye, and heals
the diseases thereof

Diacatholicon purges indyfferentlye all humors, and louseth without trouble,
and is pleasant in taste, and it is given to them that have a sharp fever,
and to them which have dyseases in the liver, and in the mylte.

Diaprunis non solutinus, louseth the bellye without violence, it is of
pleasant taste, it swageth thyrst, and quenches the heat of fevers, and
therefore is conuenientlye used in hot and brennynge fevers. Item it soupleth
the guts, and comfort them, and if ye put unto it a little of diagridium,
it shall be very solutiue, and shall purge all kinds of cholere.

Diacassia is lenitiue, and good against coleryke, sharp, and burning fevers.
It mundifyeth blood, and louseth the belly without violence. Some add to this
co^fection. ij.. of diagridiu^ and then it is of stronger solution.

Electuarium de psilio is of right good operation, for it helps coleryk
fevers myghtely. Item it remedyeth yelowe iaundes, and stoppynges of ye liver.
It cools brennynge heates, and is conveniently given to them yt have malygne,
corrosyue, and virule^t vlceres.

Electuary of the juice of roses is solutiue, and purges al kinds of cholere,
and remedyeth al tercians, and pains of joints, coming of a hot cause, it
emptyeth all hot and furious humors, and therefore it is conuenientlye given
to them that have a furiouse herisipelas, carbuncle. etc. with diacatholicon,
to purge the residence of humors in the^ that begin to recover of any
syckenesse, and is as the quyckenynge of other medicines.

Diafinicon is a medicine without danger of easy solution, purges gross
cholere, and flemme, and it is conveniently given, in the end of coleryke
fevers myngled with gross flemme, it eases the pains of the bellye, and of
the guts, caused of gross flemme, and therefore it is good for the colyke.

Electuarium indum, is a great medicine to purge gross and flegmatyke humors
in the stomach, and in ye joints. And therefore it is given to them that have
cold joints. Moreover, it takes away all pain coming of wyndy matter,
and therefore it is used in the french pockes.

Co^fectio hamech, purges al choleryke, salt, and burnt humors, and therefore
it is given to them that have virulent, and malign vlceres, by reason of the
french pockes. Item it is good for skabbes, salt fle^me, ye ca^ker, leprye,
malmort, tetters, ryngwormes. etc.

Benedicta received by the mouth or mynistred in clysters, is a good medicine
against all pains of the joints mynistred of cold matter, and also against
the dyseases of the reins, and of the blader, coming of like cause. Item
used in clysteres, it eases ye pains of the french pockes.

The confection of turbyth, purges gross and flegmatyke humors, and therefore
is good for scrophules, wennes, and knobbes, and it is conveniently given to
old men, women, children, flegmatyk, idle, and delicate, persons. The
ordinance of it, is after this sort. Confection of turbyth.
. of turbyth preparate, of agaryke in trociskes, of black elebore, an^.. i.
ss. of ginger, polipody, of myrte. ana.. iij. of diagridium.. i. of cinamome,
of cloves, of every one.. ij. of galangale, long peper, of nutmygges, maces,
quybebes, ana.. ss. of white suggre.li. ij. of spyke. i. myngle them and make a
styffe myxture with syrup of roses. The receyt of it is the quantity of a
chestnutte.

A solutiue of the dropsy, which is good to purge the matter of ye disease
called hernia aquosa.. of the juice of comferye.. i. of the juice of flower
deluyce.. x. of the juice of radyshe.. vi. of syrup de quinque radicibus.li.
i. sethe them together with sufficient quantity of water of endive, and
fenell, and make a long syrup, the receyt of it is from two.. to. iij.. it
brings out the yelowe water, and heals the dropsy

Tartare or wine lies, with washed terebentyne, loose the belly vehemently,
but it is corrected with honye of roses, and a little mastyck, the receyt of it,
is of tartare.. ij. of rerebentyne. vi.

Common oil dronke^ with the juice of sothernwood, and of lymous, kylleth the
worms, and loses the belly, the receyt is of every one.. ij.

Hierapicra Galeni, is good for all dyseases of the head caused of cold
matter, and a sponefull of it must be taken two hours after supper, if it be
used in clysters it is of like effect.

Hiera constantini makes for the same purpose, and is more pleasant in taste,
and heals the dymnesse of ye sight

Micleta is good against all fluxes of the bellye, and of the emorroydes. It
comfort the stomach, and ye virtue of dygestion, and rectifyeth ye evil
complexion of the liver. Ite^ an electuary of myrte has the said efficacities

Sugger of roses comfort the stomach, and entrayles. It cools the body
being received with water in the somer, it is a good remedy to them that have
the ptisik, and spete blood.

Sugger of violettes represseth the heat of cholere, and of fevers, swageth
thyrste, suppleth the breast, and the bellye, helps the coughe, and is
conveniently given (at the beginning) to them that have a pleuresye.

Sugar of buglosse, is good for the dyseases of the heart, and of the liver,
and remedyeth swounynge and trembling of the heart, and quenches all strange
heat, and is good for melancholyke persons, suggre of borage, has like
virtues.

A marmalade of quinces, called diacitonium, stops flux of the bellye, and
vomytynge, and strengthens weak members, and the virtue of dygestion. For to
stop the belly, it is taken before, and to stop vomytyng it is taken after
meat.

The confection called manus christi, is made after this sort.. of whit sugger
one pound, of rose water as much as shall suffyce, make a confection at the
fire in morselles. But if ye put thereunto of margarites.. ss. it shall be very
cordial.

Diarodon abbatis comfort the stomach and restores appetite. And therefore
it is given in ye end of sharp fevers with a little odoriferous wine it
restores them that be in consumption, and heals the yelowe iandes.

The confection of three saunders is good for the diseases of the liver, it
comforts the stomach, styrreth apetyte, and quenches heat of fevers, and
remoueth oppilacions or stoppynges.

Aromaticum rosatum, is a confection very pleasant in taste, and good for
many passions of the body, for it comfort a weak stomach and liver,
restores lost appetite, and helps digestion. Moreover it comforts all the
natural strengthes, and clarifyeth the spirits, and is conveniently given to
them that wax hole of some disease, and use often to swounde, with a little
odoriferous wine.

Diaciminum heateth a cold stomach, and breaks wind, helps dygestion,
and remoueth a cold cough.

Dianthos, or electuarye of the flowers of rosemarye, has virtue to comfort,
and is good in all passions of the heart. Item taken with a little wine, it is
good for them that been pensyfe, and melancholy, and begin to recover of a
disease.

A confection against worms.. of coralline, of the seed of percelye of
Macedonia, or in stead thereof of alisaunders, of the seed of purselan, of
every one.. ij. of the seed of lauender cotton.. ij. ss. of ditany, of a
hertes horn burnt, of every one.. i. of reubarbe.. iij. of cloves.. i. of
saffran.. ss. of sugger.li. i. make a confection with the wine of pomegranades,
and give it in the quantity of a chestnutte.

Here follows the ordinance of a confection of eufrage, to sharpen the
syghte, and to clarifye the spirits. of eufrage.. iij. of cynamome, of
cubebes, of macys, of long peper, of cloves, of every one.. ss. of fenell..
iij. of clarifyed honye.li. i. ss. of the juice of fenell purifyed.. i. of the
juice of rue, of of the juice of veruene, ana.. ij. of the juice of salendyne..
ss. sees the iuyces with the honye till they been consumed, then strain them,
and put the rest to the straynynge, and make a confection. The receyt of it is
the quantitye of a chessenutte, at night when the pacient goes to bed. The
confection following is of like effect.. of fenell, of siler montanum, of
every one.. i. of euphrage, of germander, of the roots of celedonye, of
smallage seed, of every one,. ss. of the seed of dille, of percelye, of penny
riall, of Isope, of the flowers of borage, of the graynes of iunipere, of
saxifrage, of every one.. i. myngle them altogether with honye of roses. The
receyt is.. i. ss. dyssolued with water of rue, or of fenell.

Here follows an electuarye for them that sail on the sea, which opens
oppilacions, and remedyeth the yelowe iau^dies, the swellyng and pallenes of
the face, long fevers, and the dropsye.

Rece. of cloves, of pepper, of annys, cumyn, fenugreke, cardomomum, roses, of
the seed of mylons, cucumers, citrulles, and gourdes, of every one,. ij. of
cynamome, of the seed of smallage, of every one.. ss. of the two sau^ders,
read and yelowe, of gynger, of every one.. i. of seen, of epithimum, of
squinantu^, of galyngale, of macys, of every one.. ij. of spyke, of saffran, of
every one.. i. make an electuary with honye of roses.

The.xviij. Chapter. Of Opiate medicines.
OPiate medicines swage pain, howbeit it is only after the manner of
palliation, and they must not be ministered but in great necessity, and with
great consyderation, that is to say, a convenient purgation premysed. For
their operation brings the member to corruption, and destroys the natural
heat and feeling of the member, and mortifyeth the vital and animal
spirits, and though the pain be appaysed for a season, yet it will return
again with great vehemencye.

Moreover ye must observe, that ye apply not medicines made with Opium, nor
any other of strong repercussion, when the pacient is weak, for the nature
and heat of a weak member, is soon destroyed by Opiate and also repercussyue
medicines. As we saw by the applicacion of bole armenie, and vynegre, upon
the knee of ye Cardinal of saint Sabyne, which had been dyseased a great
while, and the^ had such chance, that his knee came to cancrenositie. Wherefore
the said medicines must be corrected with saffran, and castorium, and other
things, before they be applied, that the malicious nature of opium may be
amended. An opiate medicine to swage pain in the outward parts, may be made
after this sort. Opiate medicine.
. of the cromes of bread steped in the brothe of flesh.li. i. of oil of
camomill, and dille, of every one.. ij. the yolks of two eggs, of saffran..
ij. of opium.. i. Item the ordinance of Alexander rehearsed in the chapter of
emoroides, is good against all pains of the fundament. As concerning inward
pain, trifera opiata is very convenient, and so is trifera romana, and
persica, which induce sleep.

Trifera persica was invented to retain flowers, and the flux of emorroydes,
and vomitynge and spyttyng of blood, chieflye when it is given with the juice
of plantayne, and when it is put in the womb, it stauncheth flux of the
flowers, and in clysters it cures the flux of blood, and excoriacion of the
guts, and it closes the mouths of the veins.

Of clysters, supposytories, and pessaryes.
A Clyster is a noble remedy to drive out superfluitees of the guts, and of
all the body. And it was found, by a bird called a storke, which to ease the
pain of her bellye, was seen to put salt water with her beck into her hinder
hole. The operation of a clyster is to purge the guts the reins, and the
bladder, without hurt of the principal members. Wherefore there be many kinds
of clysters, some supple, some break wind, some restrain, some comfort
synowye me^bres through their heat. And those be good for a crampe that
comes by a replection. A clyster against the said crampe may thus be
ordained.. of camomill, Clyster for the crampe.
yua muscata, mellilote, dille, of every one. m^. ij. of the roots of enula
campana. m^. ij. of the roots of walwort.. ij. of maioram gentle, of
hoorehounde, of sage, of nept, of mugwort, of rue, of every one. m^. ss. of
annys, of common, of every one.. ij. of castorium, of triacle, of every one..
ij. of honye.li. i. of the fat of a fox.. x. of oil of camomill, dille, and
lillies, of every one.. iiij. of the oil of a fox, of laurel, of
terebentyne, castorium, of every one.. vi. the head of a wether somewhat
bruised, let them sethe all together with sufficient water till half be
consumed, then streyne them and put to the straynyng, of odoriferous wine,
about the third part of the decoction, and let them sethe again, and mynistre
it for a clyster. Let the quantity of this decoction be to ordeine a
clyster.li. j. ss. with an ounce and a half of oil of camomill, and as much
of the other foresaid things, and. i. ss. of the syrup of sticcados.

An other lynitiue clyster. Linitiue clyster.
. of the brothe of a chycken sodden with barlye.li. ij. of oil of vyolettes..
iij. the yolks of two eggs, of read sugger. ij. myngle them and make a
clyster. A clyster restrictiue is made after this sort.. of a decoction of
barlye made with smythes water.li. ij. of oil of roses omphacyne, of oil of
myrte, of every one.. i. ss. of myua of quinces. ij. ss. the yolke of an egg,
of read sugger.. i. this clyster is good against the flux of the emorroides,
and of the guts.

Here follows a clyster to break wyndines.. of a decoction of camomille,
dille, mellilote, anyse, colewortes, fenell, corianders, cumyne, of every
one.. i. of oil of rue, and dille, of every one.. i. of diafinicon.. x. of
honey of roses.. ij. a little salt, myngle them and make a clyster. If ye will
have it of less heat, make it with a decoction of camomille, mellilote,
dille, and with the foresaid oils, leaving out cumyn, and other hot symples.

Of suppositories.
OF suppositoryes some been gentle, some mean, and some strong. Gentell
suppositories be made with swynes larde, or with the stalk of the leaves of
colewortes, wrapped in wome^s here, and anointed with larde or butter.
Meanelye strong suppositories, are made with honye sodden unto thycknes,
whereunto if ye put a little sall ge^me, they shall be of stronger operation. A
suppositorie made with french read soap, is of like effect, and so is a
suppositorie made of the fresh roots of flower deluyce. Item a suppositorie
made in the form of pills, called suppositorium succarinu^, which is much
used at Genuaye, is of good operation. The ordinance whereof, is after this
sort.. of agaryk.. i. ss. of black elebore.. ss. salis gemme.. x. of ireos..
i. sethe them all together with four pound of reyne water, till half be
consumed, then make pylles, at the fire with sufficient sugger, with the
foresaid decoction strayned, and corianders, whereof ye shall put five into the
fundament. A suppositarye of greater strength, is thus made.. of honey sodden
till it be thycke.. iij. of benedicta.. vi. salis gemme, of ox galle, of every
one.. ij. myngle them and make a suppositarye.

Of Pessaries.
PEssaries are made to provoke the flowers. of mugworte, sauyne, sothernwood,
marigoldes, ana. m^. ss. of safron. ss. of honey.. ii. let the^ boil all
together in sufficient water, till the third part be consumed, than streyne
them and with the streynyng, make a pessary of cloutes. The pessari following is
to be used in like case.. of honye sodden till it be thycke and styffe.. iiii.
of nigella brayed, of mugwort poudred of every one.. ss. of safro^. i. myngle
them and make a pessarye

The xix chapter. of oils.
First we will speak of magistrall oiles. Oleu^ benedictu^, is good for the
cure of many deseases of the body, as for the crampe caused by repletion, or
the palsye, for pains of the iointes coming of mingled matter (convenient
purgacion presupposed) It is also good for the brain distempered thorough
cold. Furthermore it is of good operacion against ye falling sycknes, if ye
anoint the coronal commissure there with. It dries also fystules. (A
mundifycation with a strong medicyne premysed) it cures great fresh wou^des,
and cold catarres, it conforteth the spirits, opens veins stopped through
cold humors, and if one drop of it be put into the ear with cotton, it
ame^deth hearing, chieflye when the impediment is caused of a cold cause. Item
a rose cake moystened in the said oil, and laid to the temples, eases the
mygryme, and takes away the swimming of the head. And if half an ounce of
the said oil be dronken, with alytle odoriferous wine, in the morning.iii.
days together, it conforteth and renews the heart, and longes. Item if it be
taken with a little odoriferous wine, it is good in quarteyne fieuers. The
receyt of it must be almost a sponeful, and that order must be be kept four
days, taking every day the forsaid oil an hour before day, upon such
days as no paroxisme is looked for. Item taken the space of.xxx. days with a
little wine and a little pionye, it heals the falling sycknes, and the peynes
of the french pockes. Item it is a great medicyne for the styngynges of
venomous beasts, and for weakness of the synnowes and this oil may be
compared to the balsamum. The ordinance of it is after this sort.

R. of oil omphacyne, two pound, of storax calamita, O^^um benedictum.
of laudanum, of olibanum, of saffranne, of gum arabyk, of mader, of gum of
the yuye tree, of aloes succatryne, of mastyke, of cloves, of galingale, of
cynamome, of nutmigges, of cubebes, of every one two ounces, of gum elimi.
li. i. of myrrh, of bdelium, of every one,. i. ss. of galbanu^, six ounces,
of spike, of lignum aloes, of every one.. i. rasyn of the pyne, of armonyke,
of opoponax, of every one ten dra^mes, poudre the things that been took
poudered, and mengle them with the said oil, and then put them in a lembike,
with his head and receyuoure, and stille them according to art, and let all
the vessels be stopped with luto sapiencie.

First put the lembike upon a soft fire ye space of. xii. hours, encreasinge
the same from.vi. to.vi. hours, till all be stilled, which done, powder the
residue of the spices again, and with the foresaid oil being stilled as is
aforsayd, let them be stilled again, and so at the last ye shall have an oil
like unto bawme.

Here follows an artificial oil of bawme, Bawme artificial.
which is a great and a noble secret to conserve health. R. of cynamome,
cloves, nutmigges, ginger, zedoar, long and black peper, of the graynes of
iuneper, of ye ryndes of limons, and orenges, of laurel beryes, of ye leaves of
sage, basille, rosemarye, round mintes, of penyrial, ge^cian, calamint, of the
flowers of elders, of ye flowers of rosemary, of spike narde, of lignum aloes,
of wild cubebes, of cardomomu^, of calamus aromaticus, of stichados, of saint
John's wort, of germa^der, of mirre, of mastike, of olibanu^, of aloes epatike,
of the seeds and leaves of dylle, of the seed of motherworte. ana.. i. of
fat dry figs, of raysons, of the meat of dates, of sweet almons, of
kernelles of a pyneaple, of every one ten drammes, of white honey.. vi. white
sugar as much, stamp them all and stille them, and renew them thries at the
lest, with the spices remaining in the botom.

Another oil of bawme of our invention, which is of the same effect that
the other is, and heals great and fresh wounds. R. of most clear
terebentyne. li. ii. of oil omphacyne, li. ss. of gu^me elimi.. vi. of new
rasyn of the pyne, of colophonia, of every one.. iii. of myrrh, aloes
epatike, fra^kynsence, of sarcocolle, mastyke, armonyake dissolved with
vinagre, of every one.. i. ss. of cloves, nutmigges, cubebes, cynamome, of
every one three dra^mes, of the seed of saint John's worte, of mader, of fine
grain wherwyth scarlet is died, of every one ten drammes, of earth worms
washed with wine.. viii. poudre the things that be to be poudred, and mengle
the^ all together, adding of maluesye. li. i. ss. stille them in a glass as
it is aforesaid.
Note, that the water which shall come out of this composicion, is very good
for the wounds of the head, though the sculle be broken, without
discovering of the boon, and administered with cerotes and the poudre written
in the chapter for the breaking of the sculle. This oil may well be compared
with bawme, and has all the virtues requisite to heal wounds perfytlye, and
chieflye those which are in synnowy places. For as Auicenne says, a medicyne
apt to heal wounds of synnowes, must be hot and dry of fine parts, and
temperate heat without mordication.

Oil of yolks of eggs
Oil of yolks of eggs, is good to smoth the roughnes of the skin, and also
to remove tetters, and ryngwormes, and chappes. Item it swageth pain of cold
vlceres in synnowye places, and of ulcers of the ears, and it is made as it
follows. Take the yolks of twenty eggs with the shelles sodde^ with water,
then sta^pe the^ in a mortar, and set the yolks only on the fire in a little
brass pan, and stir them about till they begin to heave up from the
botome of ye pan with foam, then put them in a weted thycke clothe, and
press them stro^glye in a press, and use this oil for it is a present
remedy, in all the forsaid passions.

Here follows the ordinance of an oil magistrale of our description which
we have proved to be very good, Oil magistrale.
against all cold passions of the sinnowes and ioynctes, for it heateth
moderatelye and dries, and resolves straung humidities of the synnowes, of
ioynctes, and therefore it cures the palsye, and crampe, coming of a moist
cause. Item it remedyeth swymmynge in the head, epilepsia, and apoplexia, if
ye annoynte the coronall comissure therwyth. And it is thus made. R. of oil of
nardus, of costus, of oil of a fox, mastyke, flouredeluyce, lillies, of every
one two ounces, of oil of roses odoriferous, li. iii. of new brycke. li. iii.
Then burn the brycke, and put it hot into the said oils, and afterward
stamp them, and braye them, and stylle them with the oils in a lembicke, and
keep the distillation for the said infirmities. The oil of yperycon, or
saint John's worte, is written in the book of simples, whereunto ye shall
resort.

An artificial oil of bawme, Oil of (...).
which is singular for wounds of the synnowes, and for diseases coming by
cold humors, and to remedy the crampe, the palseye, the epilepsye, being
laid upon the coronall seame, is thus ordained. R. of terebentyne, a pound, of
white frankynsence, of laudanum, of every one four ounces, of mastike, of
galingale, of cloves, of cinamome, of zedoar, of nutmigges, cubebes, of lingnum
aloes, of every one two ounces, of gum elimi, six drammes, of oil of roses
omphacyne. li. ss. of oil of mastyke.. ii. ss. of earth worms washed with
wine, three ounces, mengle them all together, and stille them in a glass as is
aforesaid.

Oil of sweet almons smotheth the breast, and the longes, and suppleth the
hardness and dryenes of the joints, and swageth thyrst, and therefore it is good
for them that have the ptisike, and peynes of the ears caused of mixed matter.
The oil of bitter almons eases the pain of the ears, caused of cold
matter, for it drives away the wyndynes, and hissynge of the same, and
amendeth defenes. Moreover it remoueth spots of the face, and softeneth
hardness of ye synowes, and kylleth worms through his bitterness. Oil of peches
is of like effect.

Oil of lynseed has great virtue against all passions of the fundament and
it is conuenientlye administered in medecynes ordained for the crampe. Item it
is a good medecyne for the roughnes of the synnowes, and pains of the
joints. Oil of laurel by reason of his aromatic nature, is good for ye colik
caused of cold matter, it comfort cooled and weakened synnowes and also the
crampe, and fynallye all cold synnowy diseases. Oil of roses complete, that
is to say made of roses and olyues perfitlye ripe, comfort the natural
heat of the member, and cools the accidental heat of the same. And
therefore Galiene says, that it coleth heated members and heateth coled
members. More over it dryueth back evil humors descendynge to a place, and
causynge apostemation, and it is ministered in hot apostemes at the beginning.

Oil of roses omphacyne, is of greater stipticitie and confortation, wherefore
the doctous comaunde to apply it in the beginning of a broken skulle, upon
the pannicle of ye brain, and it is a right good medicyne in the beginning
of hot apostemes.

Oil of violettes, makes smoth, the roughnes of the breast, and is a great
medecyne against herisipelas and against the crampe coming of iuanycion.

Oil of camomille is called oleum benedictum, it resolves without attraction,
with some confortacion of the members, and it is a good medecyne against all
the passions of the synnowes, it stops flowyng humors, and swageth pain,
and breaks wind moderatelye.

Oil of dylle is of like excellency, saving that it is myghtyer in breaking
of wind.

Oil of popye quenches inflammation of cholere in hot apostemes. Wherefore
being beaten with the white of an egg, and a little juice of lettuse, it is a
present remedy against herisipelas in the beginning, and in the augmentation,
and against inflammation of the yard.

Oil of nenuphar is of like virtue, and being beaten with the said things,
is good against the forsaid passions.

Oil of white lillies, and oil of flouredeluyce, have equal virtue, saving
that greater resoluttion is found in oil of flower deluyce, then in oil of
lillies, they resolve, supple, and mollifye cold apostemes. Item they be good
against the pain of the back caused of cold mattier, chiefllye oil of
lillies.

Oil of myrte is convenient against wrestynge of the synnowes, and brusynge of
the lacertes. And Auicenne says, that it restores broken bones, and
resolves blood lyenge under the skyn, and conforteth the synnowes, through
his aromatyke nature.

Oil of rue, has virtue to heat, to resolve, and to break wind.

Oil of mastyke conforteth synnowye places, and also a weak stomach,
strengthenynge the virtue of digestion.

Oil of nardus has like virtue. And therefore it conforeteth synnowye places,
and strengthens weak joints, and ye stomach, and it is a good medicyne
against the crampe coming of replecion.

Oil of cost is very good against all coldness, it heals and sesolueth evil
humors, it opens opilations, helps weak synnowes, muscules, and also the
stomach.

Oil of euphorbium heals vehementlye, and it is a singular medicine for
prcikyng of synnowes, for a moist crampe and palsye.

Oil of fox is a right good medicyne for cold passions of ye synnowes, and
ioynctes, and for the cra^pe of repletion, and for the pains of the back.

Oil of scorpions is good for cold passions of the bladder, and therefore
being anointed upon the thygh, and upon the skin called peritoneum,
provoke vryne and causes ye stone to issue out. And being cast into the
yard with a sirynge, it brings out also vryne and the stone.

Oil of Ienuper is good for all cold passions of the ioynctes and synnowes.
Item for cold ulcers of the legs, for ryngwormes, and tetters.

Oil of terebentyne has virtue against cold diseases of ye sinnowes, and
against all passions of the ioynctes, and it heals also fresh wounds.

Oil of ipericon is hot and dry, it consoundeth wounds of cut synnowes,
and it is thus compounde.. of the flowers and seeds of saint John's wort..iii.
stepe the^ three days in sufficient wine, and then sees the^ in a brasyn
vessel till the wine be consumed, Oil of ipericon.
then streyne them, and put to the streynynge, as much of fresh saint
John's worte stamped, and stepe it again three days, and afterward add
thereunto of terebentyne.. iii. of old oil.. viii. of saffran.. i. of
mastyke.. vi. of myrrh, of frankyncence, ana.. ii. ss. afterward put in the
streynynge, the space of a month, of ye flowers and seed of saint John's wort
m^. ss. of madder brayed, of fine greyne wherewyth scarlet is died. ana.. iii.
of the juice of yarow.. ii. sees the^ to the consumption of ye juice, with
earth worms washed with wine.. ii. and a little wine odoriferous.

The.xx. chapter, of pills.
Pills aggregatiue purge indiffere^tlye all gross, flegmatike, melancholic,
and choleryke, humors, and therefore they are used in the diseases caused of
the said humors, and in long fieuers, for they clarify blood, the spirit
and the sense.

Pills elephangine be of weak solution, and slow operation. Howebeit they
resolve moderatelye flegmatyke, and gross humors enclinynge to putrefaction.
And they mundyfye the stomach without violence, they conforte the head and
instumentes of the senses, and help digestion, and therefore they be good to
preserve health.

Pills of heira cu^ octo rebus, have virtue to purge the stomach without
violence. Item they purge the head, the liver, the reins, the matrice, the
ioynctes, resoluynge flegmatyke humors and diseases coming of the same,
cuttyng and scouryng gross humors, opening, heatynge, and dryenge. Finallye,
they make the spirits clear and sharpen the senses.

Pills of hiera compounde, are of quycker operation, they purge the animal
spirits, and bring out gross and flegmatyke mattier.

Comune pills are marvelous good against the pestilence. They purge corrupt
humors, and preserve good humors from putrefaction. Item they conserve long
health, and though they loose sloulye, yet they bring forth evil humors,
and are thus made. R. of aloes washed.. vi. of myrrh.. iiii. of saffra^, of
mastyke. an^.. ii. of tormentylle, of bole armenye thryes washed with vinaygre.
ana.. i. ss. make pills about the quantity of peason. The receyt of them is..
i.

Pills of turbyth brings fleume out of the head, preserves from flegmatyke
diseases, and therefore are conuenientlye given to them that have scrophules,
and hard swellynges, and are thus made. R. of turbyth.. i. of agaryke in
trociskes.. x. of polipodye.. vi. of gynger, of roses. ana.. ii. of annyse..
iii. of aloes epatike.. ii. mengle them, and make pills with water of
wormwood, the receipt of them is.. i.

pills of reubarbe open oppilacions of the liver, and purge, evil, mixed, or
vnmixte humors, chieflye slymye, and corrupt, with confortacion of the
stomach. And therefore they are conveniently given to them that have a canker,
and are thus made. R. of the spices of hiera de octo rebus.. i. of trociskes
diarodo^ abbatis.. iii. of reubarbe.. ii. ss. of mirobalane citryne.. i. ss. of
mastyke.. i. of saffran.. i. of agaryke in trociskes, of aloes epatyke washed
ana.. x. of the juice of wormwood, and lycorice. ana.. i. of fenell.. ss. make
pills with water of wormwood, for they ben very good in long fieuers.

Pills cochie purge cold and flegmatyke mattier from the head, and mundifye
the original of synnowes, and therefore they may be ministered in all diseases
of the head, coming of cold mattier, and against a catarrat. and they are
thus made. R. of the spyces of hiera simplex.. vi. of turbith, of sticados.
ana.. iii. of trociskes of coloquintida.. ii. ss. of diagridium, ana.. ii. of
agaryke in trociskes.. v. make pills with the juice of wormwood, in the
quantity of peason. The receyt of them is.. i.

Pills which old men, reumatyke, and of dymme syghte use. They purge all
evil humors, sharpen the syghte, repare hearing, strength the other senses,
mundifye the brain, are thus made. R. of washed aloes.. i. ss. of diagradium..
ss. of all the mirabolanes, of reubarbe, of mastyke, of seen, of wormwood, of
dodyr, of every one.. i. ss. of agaryke in trociskes, of the spyces of hiera
simplex, of diarrodon abbatis. ana.. iii. make pills with the juice of fenell,
in the quantity of peason, the receyt of them is.. i.

Pillule auree purge cholerike humors in the stomach, and in the brayn, and
cure choleryke diseases, ben good against wyndynes.

Pillule lucis are very good for cold diseases of the eyes, and they bring
forth evil and duskysh humors. Moreover they resolve vapoures in the brain
darknyng the sight, they strengthen the spirits, and virtue of seeing. R. of
eufrage.. vi. of agaryke, of seen. ana.. v. of all the mirobalanes ana.. ss. of
roses, violettes, trociskes of coloquintida, of turbyth, of cubebes, of calamus
aromaticus, of nutmigges, of spike, of epithimu^, of xilobalsamum, of
carpobalsamu^, of siler montanum, Rue, squinantu^, assaru^, cloves, cynamome,
annyse, fenel, smalache, cassia lignea, saffran, mastyke, an^.. ii. of aloes..
ii. make a past with water of fenell, the receyt is.. i. ss. Pills of fumitory
are very good aagaynst all scabbes, morte mall, canker, leper, french pockes,
cancrena. Item they purge all coleryke, burnte, and bytynge humors, and salt
fleume.

Pills against the french pockes, which must be ministered in strong
bodies, in ye somer, when the disease is confirmed for they purge salt fleume,
burnte cholere, Pills for the pockes.
and wyndy humors from the ioynctes, and from far places, are made after
this sort. R. of all the mirobalanes. an^.. iii. of trociskes of coloquintida,
of mastyke, of diagredium. ana.. ii. ss. of nigella, of organy, of cumyne.
ana.. iii. of black elebore,. ii. of spyke, of euphorbium, of a hearts horn
burnt, of sall gemme. ana.. ss. of maydenheare, of the coddes of seen, of
politticum, and gallitricum, of the flowers of rosemarye, of hearts tongue, of
epithimum. ana.. i. ss. of corianders, of annyse, of polipodium. an^.. v. of
good triacle.. vi. of agaryke, in trociskes, of washed aloes. ana.. x. of the
spices of hiera de octo rebus, of the spyces of diarrodon abbatis. ana.. viii.
make a paste of pills, with the iuce of fumitory, and honye of roses, the
receyt is.. i. Pillule inde have like virtue.

Pillule fetide have virtue to purge corrupt, gross, raw, slymye, and
choleryke humors, from far places, and from the ioynctes. Therefore they be
given to them that have goutes, and be scabbie. Pills of euphorbiu^ have like
virtue.

Pills of harmodactiles the less, are used in hot goutes, the greater in
cold goutes, for they purge gross humors of the ioynctes.

Pills of liquiryce, or bechichie, take away the roughnes of ye throat, and
help them that have a strong hot coughe, smothinge the breast, and causynge
spitle to issue out easelye.

The.xxi. chapter, of waters, and first of magistral waters.
WAter called the mother of bawme, Mother of bawme.
is thus compounde.. of terebentyne. li. ii. of fra^kince^ce,. ii. of lignum
aloes.. i. of mastyke, of cloves, of galingale, cynamome, nutmigges, cubebes.
ana.. i. ss. of gu^me elimi.. vi. as much good aqua vite as the quantity of
all the foresaid is, stamp the things together, and put them in a
stillatorye after one day, and stille them with a soft fire, and the water
that shall come forth is called the mother of bawme. which being mengled with
as much of aqua celestis herafter written, and stilled again, shall have
marueilouse virtues against cold passions, and also hot, and it is called
the lady of all medicines.

A singular water, which is called the water of bawme, A singular water.
or oil of bawme, is made as follows. R. of terebentyne. li. iiii. of
frankincence, of mastyke. ana.. ii. of aloes epatyke, of laudanum, of
castoreum, of date stones, of the roots of ditanye, and of consolida the
less. ana.. i. stille them al in a lembike of glass with a soft fire. The
first water shall be clear as the water of a spring. The second shall be yelow,
and swymmeth above the other in the vessel. The third shall be reddesh as good
saffran, and when it begins to be red and thycke as honye, than begins
the third water. The first water is called water of baume, the second oil
of baume, the third artificyall baume. And some call it the ouercomer of
baume, for it is stronger than baume. The first burns like a candle, the
second curdeth milk. If ye put the third into a glass of clear water, with
the point of a knyfe, one drop at ones, it will go down to the botome wtoute
sondrynge of it self, and when it has been there an hour, yt will mount up
to the top as true baume does. The first is good, the second is better, the
third is best, and has the virtues following. First if ye wash your face
twyse or thryes a day with it, and chefely the nosethrylles, it cures a reume
descendynge from the brain, and clarifyeth the sight. And if ye rub the
hyndre part of the heed therewith, it comfort the remembrance, and
sharpeneth the spirits of man. Item if ye put it in a violle well stopped with
odoriferous herbs, and so leave it six days, it will draw the virtue of the
said herbs unto it, and so ye may make sublymed wine, puttyng into a glass
full of wine, two or three drops of this water, and so the wine shall have the
color, savor, and odoure, of the herbs and spyces, wherewith it was
mengled. Item flesh and fysh, put in this water, rotte not, and if it be
rotten, it byteth away the tottennesse, and preserves the hole part. It
induseth appetite, comfort the stomach, and consumes fleme in the botome of
the stomach. Taken with a little wine, it cures a stynkynge breath. If ye put a
serpent or a toode in a cloute wette therewith, they shall dye incontinentlye.
And it has like virtue against all venymes, even as true baume has. And it
is like in operation to fine triacle, and consumes all apostemes, ulcers,
fystules, swellynge pustles, wounds, emoroides, brusynges. etc. And it is
repercussyne of cold humors, deficcatiue, and co^sumptyue. Item, if ye wash
the teeth with it twyse, or thryes, it shall heal mundifye, and strengthen
them. It heals also the palsye, and fortifyeth all the members, and is hoote
above all thing, that may be found, and of so great percynge, that if one
drop be put into the hand, it will pearce through the same without hurt. Item
in swellynge of the feet, or of the legs, and pains of the joints, if ye
wash the said places therewith, and plaster them with a lynnen cloute, it
shall cure all diseases, coming of cold matter, and rotten blood. Finally,
it is a synguler remedy for synnowes drawn together, if ye bathe them three or
four times therewithal.

The third water which has the color of blood, is of such virtue, that if a
leprous man use thereof. xv. days, half a sponefull every morning, he shall be
healed. Item it preserves youth, if it be received in the morning with a
grain of wheat, with a sponeful of flowers of borage.

Aqua celestis is of two kinds, Aqua celestis.
as we will declare in this present chapter. If ye mengle with it asmoch of the
water called mother of baume, and stylle it again, ye have ye treasure of al
medicynes. And if ye will, ye may sondre the four elements one from an other.
First we will speak of the virtues of these two waters. The first water is of
such virtue, that if it be put into a fresh wound, it heals it in.xxiiii.
hours, so it be not mortal. And it heals malign ulcers, cankers, noli me
tangere, old wounds within the space of.xv. days, if ye wash them with the
said water, every third day. And if ye put a drop of it upon a
carbuncle, it mortifyeth the malignitie of ye same shortly. Item if ye put of
the said water into the eye that has lost his sight, so that it be not
utterly lost, it shall be recovered within three days, or.viii. at the
vttermoost. And if a man drink a drop of it with a little good wine it
breaks the stone in the space of.ii. hours, whether it be in the reins or
in the blader. It mollifyeth hardened synnowes, if ye wash the^ therewith, and
many other virtues it has, which for brevity we ouerpasse.

The second water has color of blood, and is most precious, it preserves
the body from diseases, and comfort the weak members, chefely of old men.
It restores remembrance, sharpeneth the spyrites, comfort the heart,
purifyeth blood, consoundeth the longes, heals all dyseases of the mylt, and
keeps the joints from goutes, causes good digestion, purges cold and
rotten humors, heals all agues, and brefely it conserueth and comfort all the parts and members of man's body.

This water must be used, from the monethe of November, till the month of
Apryll, and ye must take but half a sponefull at ones, nor oftener tha^ ones a
weke. The manner to make it is this. First ye must have a vessel of glass a
cubyte hye, or there about, and fylle it with aqua vite, made of good wine, and
se that it be well stopped, than cover it in horsedonge, or in grape shales, or
in doves donge, so that it be not to moist, nor to hot, lest the glass
break, and ye must leave the neck of the glass without in the air. The
glass through the heat of the donge, will boil myghtelye, so that the water
will ascend to ye neck of the same, and descend again to the botome through
the coldenesse of the air, and so it will come to perfection within the space
of thirty days, than draw out the glass, and put the things following
into the water, and stop the mouth, that it breath not out, and so leave it
eight days. Last of all, put the glass in balneo marie with sand, setting
on a heed with a receyuer well stopped, and make a soft fire, and gather the
first water, while it seems to drop down clear. But when ye se the water turn
into a red color, immedyatelye change the receyuer, for this is the second
water, which ye shall keep in a glass well stopped. The spyces that enter into
this water, be these.. of good cynamome, of cloves, of nutmygges, of gynger,
galingale, zedoarye, long pepper, and round of the ryndes of a citron, of
spyke narde, lignum aloes, cubebes, cardomomum, calamus aromaticus, germander,
saint John's wort, maces, white frankensence, round tormentyl, hermodactiles,
of the pythe of white walworte, of juniper, and laurel beryes, of the seed of
mugwort, of smalage, of fenell, of aneys, of flowers of basyle, of rosemarye,
of sage leaves, of maiorum, mynte, penyryal, sticados, flowers of elders, of
red roses, and white, of rue, of scabiouse, of lunarie the less, of agrimonye,
of tentaurye, of fumiterrye, of pinpernel, daundelion, of eufrage, of
maydeheere, of the herb called caput monachi, or e^diue, of the seed of
sorelle, of yelowe saunders, of aloes epatik. ana.. ii. of ambrosyne, of fine
reubarbe. ana.. ii. of dry fygges, of reysons, of dates without stoones, of
sweet almondes, of graynes of the pyne. ana.. i. of aqua vite made with good
wine, to the quantytie of them all, and four times as much sugre, as they ben
all, that is to say, for one pound of ingredience, four pound of sugre, of
white honye, two pound, than put to the vnderwrytten, of the roots of
genciane, of the flowers of rosemarye, of nigella, that grows in the corn,
of bryonia, of the root of the herb called panis porcinus, of the seed of
wormewoode. ana.. ss.

This water is called, aqua celestis, but before ye still the water, ye must
quench in it an hoote plate of gold, oftentimes, and put to it oriental
peerles, and so stylle the water, and take heed that the peerles remain not
aloone without water, for if they be set on the fire without water, they
will loose their color.

Of the virtues of sondrye waters.
THe water of buglose, or baume called melissa, and the flowers of Borage,
rejoice the heart of man.

water of the flowers of elders, is good for the hardness of the milt, and it
opens the ways of vryne, and scoureth the face.

water of rosemarye is good for all cold passions of the synnowes.

water of plantayne is good for bledynge, with refrigeratyon, and stipticitie.

water of synkefoyle provoke vryne, and grauellye water.

water of scabiouse, is good for the passions of the breast, as a cough, a
canker. and.c.

water of the roots of bruscus, asparage, fenell, percelye, smallage, is good
for the stoone. For these herbs open the veins, and provoke vryne.

The water of the herb called gramen, kylleth worms, opens opilations, and
provoke vryne.

water of nyghtshade or morell, is good for an hot liver, and is very
refrigeratyue.

water of madder, opens the veins of the matrice.

water of the flowers of camomylle swageth inward pains.

water of myntes comfort a cold stomach.

water of betonye, opens the veins of the matrice.

water of saxifrage, breaks the stone in the reins, and in the bladder, and
dryueth out grauellye water.

Here ends the eight book of John Vigo. And begins the.ix. book of
additions.
The.ix. book of additions.
The first Chapter. Of the regiment of health.
FOrasmoche as moderate eating and drynkyng, and temperat exercise, help much
to preserve health, and to avoid diseases. Therefore my son Aluisius, I have
thought good to write somewhat of yt matter. First thou shall abstain from
superfluous replecyon, and imoderat exercise of labor, which may corrupt
the meat, and hinder digestio^. For, when a man eats or drynketh to much,
he stretches out his stomach, which thing weakeneth it, and sometime causes
solution of continuitie, and so the virtues of the stomach are destroyed, and
digestyon corrupted. The corrupt digestion of the stomach is divided.iii.
Corrupt digestion.
manner of ways, that is to say, after the diversity of the meat, after the
diversity of the complexions and times, and after the preparation of the
me^bres, to receive diseases.

As touching the first, some meats are of light, some of mean, and some of
hard digestion. And therefore sondrye meats at one repast, are reproved of
wise phisiciens. For when one meat is dygested, an other begins to be
digested, and so undigested meat is laid upon digested, which is very
noisome to the health of man's body. And therefore Hugo de senis commands,
yt we receive not the second meat, while the first is felt in the stomach.
wherefore he that will preserve his health, let him receive his meat in
temperate hours of the day, in such quantity and nature, that his stomach
is delyted in, without ouerchargynge of the same. And let his meats be of
light digestion, and good noryshmente, for Pontane seems to have spoken
wisely, which being asked why he was contented with one kind of meat,
answered, that I need not a physicyon, wherefore it is plain, that if the
meats be evil, and corruptlye digested: first, in the stomach, there can be
no good digestyon in the liver, and all the other members.

The governors of coursers, and iustynge horses, teach us how we may guide
our selves in mayntaynynge our health, for they give their horses at certain
hours a certain measure, that is to say, such quantity of meat, as they
may conuenyentlye bear and digeste. For it is plain, that if they should be
fed immoderatelye, and inordynatelye, they would soon be tired, which
thing some men do not observe in ordrynge of them selves.

As touching exercise, we must behave our selves wyselye in it, for moderate
exercise is a great conseruacyon of health, for it keeps natural heat in
the body, which consumes and dries up superfluouse humors.

Contrary wise, immoderate labor corrupts digestion, and dries up the
radical moisture of the body, and prepares the humors to corruption, and
causes sundry diseases.

Furthermore corrupt digestion is divided after the complexion of bodies, and
of times of the year, for colerycke bodies use an other quantity and quality
of meat then sanguyne bodies, and sanguyne then flegmatyke. etc.

Likewise, we must use one portion or quality of meats in the somer, and an
other in the winter, for in the somer ye must use meats of light digestion in
small quantytie, for than natural heat is spredde abroad, and driven to the
outward members, whereby the digestive virtue of the stomach, and of the
liver, is weakened. But in the winter natural heat is strengthened, because
the pores be drawn together, and natural heat is gathered into the inward
parts. And therefore than we may use stronger meats, and in greater quantity.

The third distinction is, according to the dyuersitye of members ready to
receive diseases, for when the stomach or the liver is discrased, it is
impossyble that there should be good digestion. wherefore my son Aluisius, to
come to good digestyon, it is most profitable to preserve the health of the
said members, and to remove their diseases by the benefit of medycynes.
Excercyse also as we have said, is a good mean to preserve health, if it be
used moderately, after the first and second digestion, and after the expulsyon
of the superfluyties of the body, namely, ordure, and vryne. Item it must be
used in a time neither to hoote nor to cold. Now we will brefelye declare the
meats and drynkes, which are co^uenyent to preserve health.

First, let the wine be white, of good odoure, delayed with good water of the
well, or of a river, neither may you eat before ye have appetyte, nor drink
before ye be a thirst. For there is nothing more hurtful to the joints, than
wine dronken out of time, for it perceth the joints and weakeneth them. Thy
meat must be of good digestion, as veale, mutton of one year, capo^s,
chyckyns, pertryches, birds of wooddes, and mountains. Let thy breed be of
pure wheat well leuened, and well baked, of two or three days old. And ye
must beware, yt ye eat it not hoote, for through his heat it marreth the
stomach and corrupts digestion.

Herbs that be wholesome and in commune usage, are these: borage, lettuse,
spynnache, white beetes, perrelye, sorelle, myntes, buglosse, which must be
sodden in the brothe of the said flesshes, for they loose the bellye, and
engendre good blood. Ye must abstain from all poulse, except cicers, and
lentilles.

Of roots, these been wholesome, nauywes, rapes, sodden in the brothe of good
flesh, with a little saffran, and fenelle, and a lycle pepper in the winter.
Item parsnepe rotes though they been of hard digegion, yet if ye roste them in
ymbres, or sethe them, and eat them with vynegre, sweet oil, and a little
salt, and pepper, they are conuenyent instead of a sallet in winter. Item the
leaves and roots of cicorie drassed as is aforesaid, may be well suffered.
Cappares also well dressed, are good in the beginning of dynner and supper.

Sometime to stir up appetite, ye may eat a little of this sallet following.
A sallet to provoke appetite
. of the leaves of tender lettuse, of endyue, of pympernelle, of baume, of
prymrose, of hareworte, of tender cicorie, of every one an handeful and an
half, of the flowers of borage if they may be gotten, of rosemarye, or of the
croppes thereof, of cynkfoyle, of Romayne myntes, of percelye, of rue. ana a
little, wash them all together, and make a sallet with vynegre, sweet oil, and
a little salt.

wild pasneppes sodden in water, and after rolled in flower, and a little
sugre, and than fried with oil may well be permytted, in the stead of fysshe.

Item gourdes dried and sodden with a little saffran, and pepper, ben
delectable, and hurts not the stomach. New gourdes sodden in the broth of
flesh with fenelle and ver^uyce, is likewise permitted in the somer: for the
fenelle takes away his wyndynesse. Ye must avoid all kinds of colewortes,
for they engendre melancholyke humors, and hurt the sight. wherefore if ye
eat them, let it be seldom, and in small quantity, and let them be sodde^
with myntes, and percelye. Fenell, though it be of hard digestion, yet sodden
in the brothe of flesh, it may be used with oil, and pepper, for it
sharpeneth the sight. Pastyes or pyes, are seldom to be used.

Item muschrymes of all kinds are to be avoided. If ye chance to use them, ye
must seth them in water with leekes, and afterward frye the^ with organye, and
pepper.

All kinds of fyshe, except see fysh and skalye fysshe, and all fruits that
lightly be corrupted in the stomach, must be eaten in small quantity. The
best among them are these, grapes, fygges, prunes, ripe peches, peers, and
apples of good sent. These things my son Aluisius, shall suffyce for
preservation of thy health, if thou remember to keep a moderation in sleep,
that is to say, that thou sleep not past.vii. or eight hours, and yt in the
night, and not in the day. etc.

The.ii. Chapter. Of Flebothomye, and ventoses.
FLebothomye (as the doctors testify) is a good euacuation of humors, and
surer, than a purgation received by the mouth, for it lies in the chirurgyens
will, to emptye evil blood, and keep in the good, by closing of the vein. And
it is a synguler remedy to heal diseases procedynge of abundance of blood
of evil quality, as Arnoldus de villa noua, declares, gyuynge a good
definition of the same, Flebotomie
and saying: Flebothomye is the cuttynge of a vein, purgynge blood and
humors rennynge therewithal.

Here ye shall observe a general rule, which is, that ye purge the bellye
with a lenitiue clyster, before ye use flebothomye, lest the emptye veins be
filled with evil vapors, ascendynge from dregs, and noughtye humors. The
lettynge of blood must neither be to aboundaunte, nor to small, for if it be
to aboundaunt, the strength of the pacyent shall be weaked, if it be to
small, the disease shall not be cured. Howbeit, it is better to fall in to
little, then in to much. wherefore Auicenne says, that we must avoid, that we
bring not the patient to one of these two infirmyties, that is to say, to the
boylynge out of colerycke humors, or to the rawnesse of cold humors. Rasis
says, that flebothomye used in due time, mayntayneth health, and defe^deth
diseases. It seems convenient, to cut a vein, the second or third day of
the sycknesse, but it is better to renew flebothomye, than to let out much
blood at ones, for life consistteth in blood: Flebotomye preseruatyue, may not
be used in winter, another in somer, but in the spryng of the year, and in
harvest.

Antonius Gaynerius says, that when young men ben infected with the
pestilence, they must be let blood aboundantlye, for so the venemouse matter
may be soon purged and the pacient healed. But ye shall note, that as
flebothomye duly used is the cause of many commodities, so if it be used out of
season, and inordinately, beside that it weakeneth nature, it brings many
diseases, as the dropsye. etc. Wherefore we must proceed discretelye. If
flebothomye be used for the remouynge of some disease, a lenytyue clyster must
go before, and the next day ye must cut a vein, and afterward ye must give
an other medicine of gentle solution.

The doctoures assign many vtilities of flebothomy. The first is to emtye all
humors, the second to turn matter from place to place, the third to draw,
the fourth to alter, the fifte to preserve the body that it fall not in to some
disease, the syxt to lyghten the patient, whereof Galene speaks saying. If the
patientes age and strength will suffer, it is very good to cut a vein, not
only in continual feauers, but in all diseases coming of rotten humors.
Howebeit, flebothomy must not only be used because of multitude of humors,
but also because of the foresaid vtilities, and for the intemperance of
diseases. The in temperaunce of a disease, as Galene says, is according
to.iii. things, that is to say, according to the principality of the grieved
part, according to the actiuitie of the disease, and according to the evil
qualytie and disposition of the same.

Seeing that we have showed the vtylyties of flebotomye, we will now declare
what veins are wont to be cut, A declaration of the order of phlebotomye
and when persons may endure the cuttynge of them. Those which may endure
flebothomy, are men of strong, and sanguyne complexion, having ample and
large veins. Contrary wise, weak and pale persons, can not sustain
flebothomye, neither children, before they be twelve, nor old men after.lxx.
year old, except great necessity require it: Howebeit, Auenzoar did let
his son blood at three year old. The veins which are wont commonly to be
opened, are these: first the veins of the forhead, against the disease
ophtalmia and the mygryme, and to heal greatte peynes in the head, and the
frenesye, and a leprye not confyrmed. The.ii. veins which are found in the
neck, are sometime cut to avoid humors and rewmes.

The vein about the nosthrilles, is commonly cut to recover lost hearing,
and to purge the humors of the head. Item the.ii. veins which are within the
mouth, are cut against skalles and pustules in the head, and against
peynes of the teth and of the jaws. Also it amendethe heaviness of the head, and
dyseases of the mouth, and of the throat.

The vein of the lyppes being cut eases apostemes of the throat and of the
gummes. The vein that is in the top of the nose, is cut against heaviness
of the head, and droppyng of the eyes. The two veins under the tongue, are
cut for the passions of the throat, and chyefly for the quynce, to purge the
matter conioncte. The vein between the little finger, and the ryng finger, is
opened for the diseses of the mylt, and quartayne fevers. The vein called
cephalica, is cut in the hand, against the passions of the head and the
eyes, at the beginning in the contrary part, and in the state on the same
side, that ye matter conioyncte may be purged. The vein called Cardiaca or
mediana, is cut against passions of the heart. The vein called Basilica or
epatica, is ordained for the passions of the liver, and in them that have
quarteyne fevers. The vein called Saphena, which is in the insteppe, is wont
to be cut against the pain in the hyppes, and against inflammation and a
postemes of the stones, and the matrice, and to provoke the flowers. The vein
called sciatica, which is in ye outward part of ye foot, is opened against ye
disease, called also sciatica. The veins behynd ye ears, are opened against
apostemes of the eyes, and to amend remembrance, and mundifye pustles and
spots of the face. The veins of the temples, are opened to swage great
pain of the eyes, and to heal the disease called Ophtalmia. And when they ben
opened, the head must be bound diligently. The veins emoroidall, are
opened, or have leches applied unto them, to purge melancholyke humors, and to
preserve the body from leprye, canker, scabbes, mortmale, vertigo and
melancholia. And therefore. Hipocrates says, that coming of the emoroides,
oftentimes heals melancholye. Beside these veins there be many other in the
body that physicians use to phlebotomye, which, because we will not be
tedious, we will not speak of at this time. But for as much as ventoses
supply the rowme of phlebotomye, we will now speak somewhat of their
vtilities.

Ventoses applied upon the raynes, are good against the apostemes of the
thyghes, scabbes, goutes, wyndynes, and pleuresie, and also they provoke the
flowers. Applied upon the shoulder, they ease the pain of ye eyes and of the
head. Upon the buttockes, they swage the pain of the rybbes, and the
backbone. Upon the liver, they are good against bledynge. Item applied under
the chynne, they help the quynce, and draw the matter which might choke the
pacient, to the outward parts, and they are of like effect laid upon the
neck. The chirurgiens nombre.x. veins in the arms, two called mediane, two
cephalice, two basilice, two assellares, and two cubitales. In the head there
are.xiij. veins, two behind the ears, two in the temples, two in the corners
of the eyes, two called organice or isntrumental, one in the crown of ye
head, the vein of the forheed, and ye vein of the nose, and two under the
tongue. In the legs and fete, there are found viij. veins, two in the knees,
two called saphene, two sciatice, and two upon the comb of the foot. And thus
we make an end of this chapter to the honor of God. etc.

The.iij. chapter, of curing.
FOr as much as chirurgiens sometime need laxatiue medicines, we will speak of
them in this chapter, and we will declare the rules which must be observed in
the administration of the said medicines, for great consyderations must be
had herin. For even as abundance of humors is cause of dyseases, so
euacuation is cause of health. Galie^ declares sundry manners of purgations,
that is to say, by laxatiue medicine, by sweat, by bleedinge at the nose by
spytle, by ye vomyte, by phlebotomye, by provocation of vryne, and of the
flowers, by emeroides, by bathes, rubbynges, clysters and exercises. Of
phlebotomie, we have spoken at large, in the chapter going before. And of
clysters we have written sufficientlye in our Antidotarie, there making an
especial chapter of ye same, where unto ye shall resort, as need shall
require. Wherefore we will only declare in this chapter, The order of purgation
by mouth.
purgations with things taken by mouth. First let the chirurgien beware, lest
he fall into an error touching purgation. For as Mesue says, no suffragyes
or helps profit him that perishes, wherefore we must consider the nature of
the humors which we will purge, and the complexion of the body. For cold
humors must be purged with strong medicine, hot humors with temperate
medicine. Likewise strong and fleshye bodies, and accustomed to labor and
receive purgations, may endure strong medicines, but lean and weak bodies,
as old men, children, and women with child, unaccustomed to receive purgacion,
must have more easyer and gentler medicines. wherefore se that ye consider the
exercise, complexion, and custom of the body, the age, the time of the year,
the nature of the region or country For as Hypocrates says, regard must be
had of custom, contreye, time, and age. Item ye must ask the pacient,
whether his bellye be of hard or soft nature, and whether medicines were wont
to work in him spedely. Moreover ye must consider, whether the disease
proceeds of propriety, accompanyenge, or suffrynge with other. Also the times
of the disease, are not to be neglected, namelye the beginning, increase, or
augmentation.

Likewise ye shall dyete the pacient according to the co^syderation of the
forsayde things, for sometime a slender dyete is requisyte, and sometime it is
not requisyte, for when the disease is sharp, the dyete must be subtyle, but
when it is continual and endures long, the dyete must be more gross.
Howbeit, it is better to fail in great quantity, then in to little, for if
natural strength be to much dyminished, the medicine shall profit nothing
thereafter. Therefore Hipocrates says well, that patientes do err in slender
dietes, for every fault is worse in slender dyetes, then in gross. The
phisicions sometime use purgacion, though there be no great repleacion, or
abundance of humors, by reason of the veheme^cy of the disease, and this
they do by authority of Galien, which says. In sharp dyseases we cut a
vein. In diseases caused of quality, and not of matter, the doctors use
things that alter, and not that purge. How be it when blood is much altered
in heat, ye may use phlebothomie to dyminishe the heat, but when the fault
is only in the quantity of the blood, the doctors proceed incontinently with
euacuation, and not with alteration. To come to our purpose, we will declare
the canons or rules, which are comonlye used in the ministratio^ of laxatiue
medicines.

The first is concerning dygestion, for before we purge any matter, we must
dygeste ye same, ingrossynge the subtyle, and subtylynge the gross, and
likewise we must bring the raw humors to heat by things fyt for ye
purpose. Howbeit, sometimes necessity co^strayneth us, to use purgatio^ with out
dygestion going before, chyeflye when the matter is aboundaunt, as in
apoplexy, palsye, or like dyseases, in which chokynge of nature is to be
feared within four days, or in venomous and pestilentiall dyseases, and when
the matter is nigh the princypall members. Item when the disease is very
paynfull, and proceeds of subtyle matter mouynge from one place to another,
and when of nature it is ready to corrupt the complexion of the member, as in
esthiomenos, and cancrena.

The second canon is, that universal purgacion go before particular, that the
particular may the better work upon the matter conioyncte. We call it an
universal purgacyon, Universal purgation.
which purges the matter of a member, receyuynge the said matter thoroughe
community of the hole multiplication of humors, or thorough co^munitie of
sondrye members, or that purges the matter of the comun ways, as of the
stomach, the great veins, Particular purgation.
or the guts. Particular purgacion is, that which has respect to one
only member, as to the brain, the heart, the liver, the mylte, and other
such.

The third canon is, that some time particular purgation go before universal,
namelye when the matter is not aboundaunt, either because it shall be sufficient
that it be drawn out by the emunctories of the member, or because the member
from which the matter is deryued, is not strong in gyuyng, or because the
body or the member, are not set under the dominion of the matter which causes
the disease in the member.

The fourth canon is, that purgacion be made in that part whereunto the matter
inclyneth. Wherefore if the matter be in the stomach, ye shall purge it by
vomyte, if in the guts, by ^lysters.

The fyfth canon is, that ye must diligently consider the evil humor, that
such things as be needful may be purged, for by it self, rest follows
after such euacuation, by accident, harm may ensue. As when a raw humor is
purged, good humor is purged, good humor may be emptyed therwythall, and
many spirits are resolved. And moreover when the humor is hard to be purged
or is far from the condyttes of purgacion, or when the body is evil
dysposed, as hot, and dry bodies, and ready to receive infla^macion, which
do sone pass to a cotidian fever.

The syxth canon is, that ye must not give a strong laxatiue medicine, before
flebothomye, for it might cause evil accidents. Wherefore, if the disease
chance thorough rawnes of humors, let the humors be digested diligently,
with things convenient to digeste gross and raw matter. But if the disease
come of ebullition or boylynge out of cholere, or of hot humors, ye must
proceed with dygestiues convenient for that purpose, where of we have spoken in
our antidotarye. But if both flebothomye and purgacion be necessary in any
disease, then this order is co^monlye kept. First a light purgation goes
before phlebotomye, and after phlebothomye follows a strong potion. If the
humors been myngled with blood, or not much varyenge from the nature of
blood, then in this case flebotomye goes before purgation.

The.vij. canon is, that in somer, it is more convenient to use vomyte, and in
winter, clysters and purgacions by the bellye. But if the matter be furiose,
and myngled with blood, let it be purged incontinentlye by flebothomye, as well
in somer as in winter. But if the matter be without the veins, then it is
necessary to purge the body with a competent laxe, no dygestion going before.

The.viij. canon consysteth in preservative purgation of the body, that it
fall in no disease. And here ye shall consider, that there be two
preseruacions, that is to say, a proper, and a comune. That is called comune,
which preserves the body from dyseases procedynge of repletion, and for this
purgacion, all the practicioners use the remedies whereof Hypocrates speaks
saying. In who so ever it is convenient to let blood, it must be done in the
spring time, for in the spring time there is more thynnes in the humors,
whereof replecion is wont to ensue. Item Mesue commands, that for the
conservation of health, no medicines be received, but in the spring time, and
in the harueste. The proper preseruacion of the body, is that which
preserves from some determinate disease, as from the goutes and other dyseases
to come, and for this cause, purgacion may be used in other times then spring
and harvest, as if a man be complexioned to have a gout in the harvest, in
this case let him use purgacion in the somer.

The.ix. canon consysteth about the cure of the disease, and because that at
all times dyseases chance, ye may give medicines at all times to heal them.
If a disease chance in the coldness of the winter, or heat of the summer, ye
must chose convenient places, that is to say hot in the winter, and cold in
the somer. And good practicioners give medicines in the somer before day, in
the winter in the day time.

The tenthe canon consysteth also in choosing of the time of a disease, when
the medicine shall be given to the pacient. Wherefore a convenient time to receive
medicine, is the beginning of a disease, the matter being first dygested,
and likewise in declination. The augmentation and the state, are not
convenient, for then the accidents be strong. How be it, if necessity
require, we may ministre some gentle and linytiue medicine in those times.
Likewise sometime we use in the beginning lenitiue medicines, before dygestion
of the matter, when we entende to dyminyshe the matter, and here in also,
clysters some times do supplye the rowme of minoratyue medicines.

The eleventh canon, that they which have apostemes in the guts or in membrs
nigh to the heart, ought not to be purged with a strong medicine. For medicines
wherein scamonye is put, can not be so corrected, but that they hurt the
princypall members. And therefore Gentilis an exellent physician says, that in
this case we must proceed with gentle lenitiues, chyeflye when costyfenes is
joined with an aposteme, or when the matter is undigested, likewise when the
matter is very furious and aboundaunte, for it is hard to be purged, though
some say, that in such case we may use strong medicines, whose oppinion
Auicenne confuteth.

The.xii. Canon is, that before purgacion we make the places slyppery, by which
ye medicine must pass by lenitiue clysters or moist meats. Wherefore if we will
pourge cold humors, let the pacient be fed with fat meat, sodden with
percelye, fenell. etc. For the purgation of hot humors, let the pacie^t eat
beats, mercuriall, lettuce, arrage soden also with fat flesh to mollifye
the bellye. But if the pacientes bellye be loose, ye shall not make the way
slypperye, but rather give him some medicine to provoke vomyte.

The.xiij. canon, that if the pacient abhor the medicine, in the steed
thereof ye must give him light pylles, with some convenient decoction
according to the humor. If ye entende to purge cholere, let the decoction
be fumyterrye, endyue, hoppes, sorell, and such other. If ye will purge
flemme, let the decoction be according to that humor, and so forth of other.

The.xiiij. canon is, that the pacient receive the medicine fasting, and that
he abstain from much salt in his meat. If the pacient be of hot
complexion, or if he have a weak stomach, then it is good before the
exhibicion of the medicine, that he take somewhat, as water of barlye, or wine
of pomegranades, or some other subtyle thing. If his stomach and feet be
cold, let them be heated with hot cloutes. If ye medicine be weak, he must
sleep but a little upon it, but if it be strong he may sleep the space of an
hour.

The.xv. canon is, that they which have cold stomachs, may use after the
medicine, some confortatiue thing, but not in such quantity that it hinder
the action of the medicine. And after that the abhorrynge of the medicine is
taken away, the paciente must move him self, and not rest.

The.xvi. canon is, that he that receives a medicine, must dyffer to eat,
till the medicine has wroughte perfytlye upon him, and he must avoid meats
of evil noryshment. Yea, it is a general rule, that the pacient feed upon one
meat.

The.xvii. canon is, that the pacient sleep not while the medicine works,
except he will restrain the operation of it. For sleep lets strong
euacuations.

The.xviij. canon is, that if the stomach has much cholere, and has
suffered long honger, so that ye think he can not suffer a complete
euacuation, then ye must give him a little bread dypped in wine, after that he
has taken the medicine. For it shall help the operation thereof. And if the
pacient be feeble, even during the operation of the medicine, he may give him
meat or some comfortable thing, as a little wine, or the brothe of a capon.
The practicioners, are wont after the exhibition of some lenitiue medicine,
as.. i. ss. of cassia, to give the pacient some good meat sufficiently, for it
forthereth the operation of the medicine.

The.xix. canon is, that in one day, purgation upon purgacion be not
multiplied, chyeflye if the purgacion be eradicatiue. Howbeit, the practiciens
somtymes aid the operation of the medicine with clysters. And if the pacient
be strong, and the medicine work not, ye may give him.. i. of manna with the
broth of a capon, but upon the first medicine, ye may not give another
strong medicine, for nature can not rule them. How be it the phisicions are
constrained some time, to use.ij. eradicatiue medicines, when they fear the
maliciousnes of the disease, as in the pestilence, but if the medecyne purge
beyond measure, and cause a flyxe, than ye may give the pacient some styptyke
medecyne, as reubarbe dried at the fire, syrup of myrte, the meat of quynces.

The.xx. Canon is, that if in the hour of the ministracion of the medecyne, ye
fear perbrakynge, ye must leye to the nose of the pacient, a hot toste dypped
in vynegre. And ye must cause him to chewe some eger or tart thing, byndyng his
extreme parts, and layeng a ventose upon his nauel. Item an oynyon with
vynegre, leyd to his nose and smelled unto, shall resyste perbrakynge.

The.xxi. Canon is, that after the operacion of a solutyue medecyne, ye give
the pacient the broth of a chekyn with sugar, that if any thing of the
medecyne remain in the stomach, it may be skowred away. And ye next day ye
must give him a lenytyne clyster, to purge that that remains in the guts.

The.xxij. Canon is, that when ye give a purgacion, ye mark the reuolucion of
the moon and the time of the year, and course of the disease. For we must use
other remedies in the somer, than in the winter. Item it is not good, to give a
purgation when the moon is new, or about the chau^g, for evil accidents may
happen thereby.

The.xxiij. Canon is, that digestio^ and purgation must be done with things
convenient, that may direct the strength of the medecyne, to the members
which we would purge. And the medecynes must be corrected chosen, and
prepared, and they must not purge exquisytlye, except great necessity
require. For by great purgacion, good things issue out with the badde, and so
the body is made ready to receive cotydian fevers, and the members are defrauded
of their natural heat.

For the last Canon, we will declare medecines to purge every humor. First,
we will speak of medecynes that purge cholere, among which, scamonye is
pryncipall in strong bodies, the weight thereof is from.v. graynes unto.vij.
howebeit, it is not wont to be given alone, but to be corrected and compound.
Likewise reubarbe is of the same virtue, and the weight thereof is.. ij. or
theraboute. The receyt of myrobalane citryne, is from.iij.. unto.. j. but if ye
add to the said receyt of reubarbe, of ma^na.. vi. it shall be more convenient,
than reubarbe alone.

Medicynes compounde to purge Cholere, are these that follow.. of cassia
newelye drawn out.. j. of electuary of roses after Mesue.. iij. mengle them,
and make a small potion with the decoction of cordial flowers and fruits,
addyng of syrup of violettes.. j. Item.. of chosen manna.. j. of electuary de
Psillio, of electuarye of rooses after Mesue, ana.. ij. mengle them and make a
potion with the said decoction, or make it thus.. of an electuary lenytyue, or
in siede thereof Diaprunis non solutiui, or diama^na, or diacassia.. j. of
chosen reubarbe steped according to art with water of endive, and a little
spyke, of an electuarye of roses after Mesue, or instead of that of diaprunis
solutiue.. ij. make a small potion with the said decoction.

Digestiues of cholerike matter are ordained as it follows. Digestiues of
cholere.
. of syrup of violettes, of syrup of vynegre called acetosus symplex, ana..
vi. of the waters of violettes, sorell, and hoppes, ana.. i. or make it thus..
of the syrup acetosus symplex, of the syrup of the juice of endive, ana.. vi.
make a syrup with the other things aforsayde, or thus.. of the syrup of
nenufar, of syrup of roses by infusion, of syrup of the juice of sorell,
ana.. ss. of water of endive, hoppes, and sorel, ana.. j. All these syrupes are
good in the beginning and augmentation of terciane fevers, coming of subtyle
Cholere.

But if cholere be mengled with gross fleume, as it chances in a tercian not
pure, the digestiues following may conveniently be admynistred.. of syrup of
the juice of endive, of honye of roses strayned, of syrup of vynegre called
acetosus symplex, ana.. ss. of the waters of endyue, hoppes, and fumyterry,
ana.. j. or thus.. of syrup de bisantijs, of syrup de duabus radicibus with
vynegre, of syrup of the juice of endyue, ana.. ij. ss. of the waters of
fumyterry, fenel, and wormewoode, ana.. i. These two digestiues are good in the
state and declination of tercian fevers, in which gross matter aboundethe.
The ordinances following purge myxt matter, that is to say, choleryke and
flegmatyke, in tercian fevers.. of cassia, of diacatholicon, ana.. iij. of
diafinicon.. ij. of electuarye of roses after Mesue.. i. ss. make a small
potio^, with the decoction of cordial flowers and fruits, addyng of syrup of
violettes.. i. or thus.. of diafinicon.. ij. of cassia.. vi. of reubarbe steped
according to art, of electuary of roses after Mesne, or instead thereof of
Diaprunis solutyue, ana.. j. make a small potion with the foresaid decoction
and syrup.

Symples having virtue to purge fleume are these: turbyth, agaryke, garden
saffran, coloquintida, mirabolanes kebuli. Compoundes are these: pillule
cochie, Benedicta, Hierapicra Galeni, Diacartamus, pylles of agaryke after the
description of Mesue. Item the magistrall electuary written in the Chapter of
scrophules, is good for the same.

Simple medicines that purge me la^cholye are these: Time, Epithimu^, coddes of
seen, dodder, mirobalanes called indi, polipodye, volubilis, hoppes, Lapis
lazuli. Compoundes are these: Diaseny, Hiera ruffini, catarticum imperiale,
hierologodion, and other things written in the chapter of a canker.

Medecynes that purge watery humors, are these: flower de luyce or Yreos, the
juice of wild cucumer called cnomis asininus, sardonella, tartar, panis
lacticiniorum, whereof platearius makes mention in his book Circa instans.
Some for this intention, give the shauynge of the said panis, with wine in the
quantity of half an ounce, and it works meruelouslye. Furthermore medecynes
that purge all matter indifferently, are such as follow.. of Diafinicon, of
Diacatholicon, ana.. iij. of cassia.. iij. ss. of an electuarye of Psillium..
j. make a small potion, with the decoction of Gallitricum, Politricum,
mayden-heare, Polipodie, hertestonge, of the coddes of seny, and Epithymye,
adding of syrup of Violettes.. j. or make it thus.. of Diamanna,
Diacatholicon, ana.. vi. Diafinicon.. ij. of electuarye called Elect. indum, of
electuarie of rooses after Mesue, ana.. j. make a small potion with the said
decoction, and addition of the strength of myrobalanes kebul. adding of syrup
of violettes.. i. but concerning purgacions and digestions, we have spoken
more plainlye in our Antidotary, whereunto ye shall resort.

A treatise of the fevers of them that sail upon the sea, or of maryners.
THe seuers of maryners, and those that continue long upon the sea, are of the
kind of pestilential fevers, or that vex me^ without order, called inordinate
vagantes, or of the kind of tercians, which thing we may know by their
kind of life, and exercise, for they eat nothing but gross and salted
flesh, as bacon, beef, etc. Likewise they eat salt fish evil dressyd, and
all kinds of poulses sodden with the foresaid flesh. Their breed is
wormeate^, and foysty ostentymes, their wine eger, and mengled manytymes with
roten water, and they labor day, and night, in rain, and in wind, which
things prepare their bodies to the generation of evil humors and evil
diseases. Signs of fevers pestilentiall.
The signs of a pestilentiall fever, are when the pacient felyth no great
heat in the outward parts of his body at the beginning, but within, and
chieflye about the heart, the pacient thinks that he burns The vryne also
in the first, second, and third day, is little changed from his natural
disposition, but some times it appears watery, pale, and mela^cholyke. In the
end of the third or fourth day, the vryne begins to wax read, or yelowe,
and afterward it becomes troublous, as the vryne of an ass, and it
signifies madness, and that death is nigh at hand. Moreover when the vryne
seems to be of good disposition, ye must not trust thereunto, for sometimes it
is an evil sign, as Auicenne witnesses, saying: many times the pacient is
not much altered thorough the heat of fevers, neither in poulse, nor in
urine, and yet dies quycklye. The reason is, that venomous matter assayleth
first the heart, as the prince of the body, and cleueth thereunto, than when
nature sees yt the heart is grened with venomous matter, she dares not
assault ye same, but gooth about to mainteyne other members, and therefore
sometime the pulse and vryne be good, and yet the pacient is nigh death.
Furthermore the pulse in this ague, is busyer in the night, than in the day,
for tha^ the fever is greater, and the paciente is short wynded, and breaths
peyn fully, and is very thirstye, for the pipe of the longes and the mouth ben
dry. The pacientes tongue is white or yelowyshe in the over part, and is black
in the top thereof, and somewhat swollen, and he can not speak directlye as
he was wont, and all natural strengthes are weakened, and also the taste. Item
there happens in this ague, vehement perbrakynge, sowndynge, and cold sweat,
crampe, and perturbacion of reason, with other evil accidents. And sometimes
the belly of the pacient is swollen as in the dropsye, and sometimes is loose.
And for the most part, botches and carbuncles appear in the emunctories,
which when they happen by the way of terminacion ad crisim, are mortal, as
we have declared in the chapter of the pestilence, for as Galene says, every
crisis is a token of health, rather than of death, saving in a fever
pestilentiall.

Now when ye have knowledge of the fever, Cure.
pronostication of the danger premysed, ye shall proceed to the cure, which
consysteth in three intentions. The first, is administracion of the six things
natural. The second, is the purgacion of the evil matter. The third,
comfortacion of ye heart and mayntenaunce of the strength.

As concerning the first intention, we will first speak of the air, which
must inclyne to coldness, and therefore it must be rectified with water of
roses and vynegre, and in the winter with vynegre and odoriferous wine. Also ye
must strowe the chamber with the leaves of willowes, of vines, of myrt, and
like. Item ye may rectify the air in ye winter and harvest, by burning of
ienuper, and other sweat wood, for as reyne and vapoures corrupt the air,
and make it apt for pestilencis, so fire of his nature resolves and purifieth
evil vapoures, and therefore it is not good to have a house or chamber with
wyndowes toward the southe, for the southwynde is pestiferous, but the
northwynde amendethe the Pestilence.

As towching sleep and watchyng, at the beginning they must be very moderate,
let the pacient sleep about the break of the day, but the must avoid long
slepyng at the beginning, for long sleep draws the venomous matter to the
heart. Furtheremore, ye shall procure to comfort the paciente with pleasant
words, promisynge him health.

As concerning etyng and drynkyng, the paciente must eat often, for the fever
vexes contynuallye. Howebeit it must be in small quantity, and he must
enforce him self to eat, for as Auicenne says, they that eat manly, are
delivered from the disease. Ye shall give the paciente to eat, according to
his strength. When he is strong, ye shall give him cromes of bread washed
ones or twyse in cold water, and after sodden in the brothe of a chickyn, with
lettuse, barley, endy^e, purslan, and a little veriuyce, or the juice of lymons,
or wine of pome granates. Item ye may give him a gourde sodden in the same
brothe, with veriuyce, and a little saffran, or grated bread sodden in the
brothe of flesh, with sharp things, or alman milk with the comune seeds.
If the pacient be weak, and have evil accidents, ye shall give him the
coleys of a young capon, or a rostyd pertriche, with a little juice of lymones.
For his drink, ye shall give him white wine of good odor, well delayed with
sodden water, and also ye may give him the wine of pomegranates. Item he may
eat lettuse, white endive, the roots of succorie sodden with veriuyce, and
vynegre, and also borage buglosse, white beetes, sodden with capons, chickyns
or other good flesh.

The second intention which is to purge the matter, is accomplisshed by
cuttynge the vein called basilica, or the comune vein, and by administration
of a laxatiue medecyne. Wherefore if ye pacientes strength be able to endure
flebothomy, ye may use it hardly in small quantity, for it is better to
multiplye the no^bre, tha^ the quantity. And it is requisite before
flebothomy, to purge the pacient with a lynityue clyster. Item it is good to
scarifie the shulders, and the buttockes, in them that can not abide
flebotomy. Howebeit some hold opinion, that if they have a vein cut, they
shall be delivered of the disease, some command to purge the matter, before
digestion, and some without digestion. Aueroys commands, to purge all the
humors indifferently in this case. Wherefore wha^ ye shall perceive, that this
fever comes thorough the dominion of hot matter, ye shall purge the pacient
without digestion, with the medecyne following.. diacatholicon.. vj. of an
electuary of rooses after Mesue, of electuary of Psillium, ana.. j. ss. of
diafinicon.. j. make a small potion with the decoction of cordial flowers and
fruits, adding of dytany well stamped, of tormentyll, of Cardus benedictus, of
ye rotes of Tunici, ana.. j. of Galenes triacle.. ss. of syrup of the juice of
sorel, or in the stead of it de acetositate citri.. j. If the foresaid fever
came of gross mattier, let it be purged with this purgation following.. of
diafinicon.. iij. of diacatholicon.. ss. of an electuary of rooses after
Mesue.. ij. make a potion with the comune decoction, and the foresaid things
ordained against venyme.

Digestive.
If that ye perceive the fever will give any respyt to digest the matter, ye
shall use this digestyue.. of syrup de acetositate citri, of syrup of the
juice of sorell, syrup of rooses by infusyon, of water of buglosse, sorell,
and baume called Melissa, ana.. j. myngle them, or make it thus.. of syrup de
Ribes, of syrup de Acetositate citri, of every one.. ss. of Syrup of the
juice of endyue.. vi. of waters of endyue, buglosse, and sorell, ana.. j. when
the matter is digested, let the body be purged with one of the forsayde
purgacions.

For the third intention, ye shall note, that ye ought to be diligent about
the comfortacio^ of the heart, both within and without, with epithymes, and
co^fortatiue syrupes, whereof this ordinance following may be for an example..
of the waters of sorel, buglosse, and Mellissa, or bawme, ana.li. ss. of wine
of pomegranades.. iiij. water of roses.. iij. of syrup of roses by infusyon..
v. of syrup of the juice of sorell, or of ribes, or of the sower juice of a
citron, orange or of lymous.. ij. of white saunders.. ij. ss. of camphore
graynes.ij. make a long syrup with sufficient white sugger, whereof let the
pacient take two sponefulles, for it quenches heat, and comforts the heart.
Item a conserua of roses, borage, and buglosse, with cordial powder and
sau^ders, and a little syrup of the juice of sorell, or of roses, is very
convenient in this case. For the confortation of the heart, ye may apply in
that place, a cerote written in the chapter of carbuncle, and bubo, whereunto ye
shall resort.

The fourth chapter, treating the cure of a pure tercian fever.
THe signs of a tercian fever, caused by a coleryke humor, are these great
pain of ye head, contynuall watchyng, aboundaunte sweat, yelowe or fyrye
vryne, great thirst and dryenes of the tongue, dimynution of apetite,
unquietness, hard excrementes, swyfte pulses. Fynallye the paciente is vexed
every third day.

Here follows the cure of the same.
First obseruacion of diete presupposed, as we have declared in the cure of
herisipelas, ye shall demand of the pacient, whether he be costyfe, and if he
be, ye shall administre this clystre following.. marcurie, malowes, violettes,
betes, clean barley, ana. m^. j. make a decoction, whereof ye shall take.li. j.
ss. the yolks of two Eggs, a little salt, of read sugre, honey of violettes,
ana.. v. of oil of violettes.. v. mengle the^ and make a clyster. After the
clyster, ye shall ministre this digestyue.. of syrup of vynegre called
acetosus symplex.. i. of syrup of endyue.. ss. of waters of buglosse and
endyue, of every one,. j. ss. or make it thus.. of syrup de duabus radicibus
without vynegre, of occizaccarum, of every one.. vj. of waters of endyue,
hoppes, and nenuphar, of every one.. j. myngle them and make a syrup, or
thus.. syrup of nenuphar, or in the steed of it, of syrup of violettes, of
syrup of endyue, of syrup acetosus symplex, of every one.. ss. of waters of
violettes, endyue, and buglosse, of every one.. i. myngle the^ When ye have
used these syrupes, or digestiues, the space of four days, ye shall mynistre
these medecines following.. of good Reubarbe.. j. of spyke, graynes three, make
an infusion with water of endive. vi. hours, tha^ strain them strongly, and
put thereunto of electuary lenityue, or manna.. vi. of electuarye of the juice
of roses.. ij. dissolve them all with the decoction of cordial flowers and
fruits, and make a potion as it is said in the former receyt, adding of syrup
of violettes.. j.

But in strong bodies, ye shall use this medecyne.. of cassia newelye drawn
out, of diacatholicon, of every one.. ss. of diaprunis solutiue, of electuarye
of the juice of rooses, of every one.. ij. dissolve them all with the decoction
of cordial flowers and fruits, and make a potion, adding of syrup of
Violettes.. j. As concerning comune digestiues, we have spoken sufficiently
about the end of the chapter of purgacion, whereunto ye shall resort.

Of the pain of the head.
FOrasmuch as pain of the head, is wont to acompany this fever, I will
describe some remedies for the cure of the same, whereof the first is this.. of
oil of roses.. iij. of vynegre of roses.. iij. of saffran.. j. mengle them, or
thus.. the whytes of two eggs, of oil of rooses, of water of rooses, of
every one.. j. ss. of the wine of Pomegranates, of vynegre of roses, of every
one.. iij. make a confection, or thus. R. oil of roses.. ij. of read
saunders.. j. of vynegre of rooses.. vi. of saffran.. ss. mengle the^ and make
an oxirundinu^. But if the pain can not beswaged with the foresaid
remedies, than ye shall apply ventoses upon the shulders, with scarifications
or without. Also rubbing and byndynge of the extreme parts, an hour before
dinner and supper, helps very much, and to wash the extreme parts with
things anodyne, is of like effect. Fynallye, leches or bloodsouckers, set upon
the veins emorroidal, swage pain of the head maruelouslye.

Of the pain of the reins.
When the paciente is vexed with pain and heat in the reins, ye shall
proceed with the remedies following.. of galenes ointment called infrigida^tis, or
colyng.. vi. of ointment of roses.. j. ss. myngle them, and anoint the reins
therwyth, or thus.. of Vnguentum populeon.. j. of Galienes ointment.. vi.
mengle them and anoint the reins, or thus.. the white of two eggs, the juice
of plantayne.. j. oil of violettes, nenuphar, of ointment of roses, ana.. ss.
myngle the^, or thus.. water of endyue, violettes, sorell, and nyghtshade, of
every one.. viij. of all the saunders, of every one. j. of roses, violettes,
nenuphar, of every one. m^. ss. let them boil all together a little, and foment
the paynfull place therewith, with sindalle, or lynnen clothe.

Of thyrst.
THe patient in this fever is often vexed with great thyrste, for the
mitigation whereof, we will declare certain remedies. First if the body be
strong, and have no impediment in the stomach, nor in the ly^er, ye may give
him cold well water in great quantity, and not in small, for so it might be
turned into fumes, and in to choler, and this must be done in ye somer, and to
young persons: but if colyke or other evil accidents let you to use water, ye
shall use this potion following.. the waters of vyolettes, sorell, endive,
nenuphar, ana, li. ss. of wine of pomegranades.. iiii. of fine sugre.. viii. of
syrup of roses by infusion, of syrup of vyolettes. ana,. ii. mengle them, and
make a long iulep, according to art, whereof let the patient drink often. Or
let him hold in his mouth, a piece of a cucumer, a prune stone, or barlye
sodden, or the root of langdebefe somewhat sodden in water of barlye, or the
muscilage of psilliu^, or the seed of quynces, or thus.. of the water of
violettes. li. i. of endive. li. i. ss. of sorel, of buglosse, ana,. vi. of
fine sugre.. viii. of wine of pomegranades.. vi. make a long iulep, whereof
let the patient take with water of barlye, or well water, or thus. Take of
Tamarindes.. i. ss. of fine sugre.. ss. of iulep of vyolettes.. i. of roses by
infusyon, of syrup called acetosus simplex. ana.. ii. mengle them, and make an
electuarye, which the patient must hold in his mouth.

Of slept.
IF the patient can not sleep, ye shall annoynte his temples with this
ointment. R. of vngue^tum populeon.. i. ss. of oil of popie, of oil of
nenuphar, an^. ss. mengle the^, or make it thus. R. of the leaves of wyllowes,
of lettuse, of the ryndes of white poppye, of the flowers of nenuphar,
camomylle, vyolettes, ana, m^. ss. make a decoction with the water of
vyolettes, nyghtshade, and sorelle, and embroke the temples with sponges.

A Chapter of the signs of a tertian not pure.
THe signs of a tertian not pure, been these. The pulse is not so swyfte, nor
so thycke, as in a pure tertian, the vryne is not colored, the excrementes are
not so hard nor so brent. The patient is payned with heavy grefe of the heed,
his appetyte is not utterly lost, sleep, dryness of the tongue, and sweat, are
moderate. Howebeit, sweat may be more plentiful, by reason of the multitude
of matter, and the patient is wont to be very cold in the beginning of
peroxismes.

The cure of a tertian not pure.
THe cure of a tertian not pure, consysteth in three intentions. In dyete, in
digestion of the evil mattier, and purgation of the same: and finally in
correction of the accidents.

As touching the first intention, the dyete at the beginning must be
sklendre, but not so sklendre as a pure tertian. wherefore let the patient eat
grated breed, almande milk, and the brothe of a capon sodden with good herbs,
and commune seeds sodden with a little brothe of a chyckyn, are good in the
declination. Let his wine be well delayed, and not very sharp. Item he may
eat lettuse, and cicorye roots, with vinegre, and a little oil.

The second intention is thus accomplyshed. First for digestio^, let the
patient take this digestive.. of syrup of the iuce of endive.. i. of sirupe
called acetosus simplex.. ss. of waters of endive, borage, and sorell. ana.. i.
mengle them. An other.. of syrup acetosus simplex, of honey of roses, of the
syrup of endive. ana.. ss. of waters of endive, hoppes, borage. an^.. i. when
the matter is digested, let the patient be purged, as it is declared in the
Chapter of purgation universally: or thus.. of cassia, diacatholicon. ana.. v.
of electuarye of the iuce of roses.. ii. make a small potion with the common
decoction, adding of syrup of vyolettes.. i. or thus.. of cassia, diafinicon.
ana.. iii. of diaprunis solutyue, of electuarye of the iuce of roses. ana.. i.
mengle the^, and make a potion with the common decoction, addyng of syrup of
vyolettes.. i. ss. But because a tertian fever not pure, is not wont to obey
the foresaid digestions and purgations, therefore for the eradication of the
same, we must use stronger medicynes, and first let the matter be digested
after this sort.. of syrup of vynegre, of syrup de duabus radicibus, de
bisantiis, of syrup of the iuce of endive. an^. ss. of the waters of buglosse,
endive, and wormwood. ana.. i. mengle the^

After digestion, let them be purged with this purgation.. of diacatholicon,.
iiii. of diafinicon.. ii. of electurium indum maius, of diaprunis solutiue, or
in stead thereof, of the electuarye of psillium. ana.. i. Make a sma^ll potion
with the commune decoction, adding of syrup of vyolettes.. i. or make it
thus.. of cassia.. ss. of diafinicon.. ii. of electuarye of roses after Mesue,
of good reubarbe steped and strayned, according to art. ana.. i. make a
small potion, with the decoction of cordial flowers and fruits, adding of
syrup of violettes, one ounce. This is for rich men.

The third intention, which is to correct the accidents, is thus
accomplyshed. Sometimes great pain of the stomach accompanyeth this fieuer,
for the remotion whereof, ye shall use this unction.. of oil of wormwoode, of
oil of roses omphacyne, of oil of quynces, ana.. i. of oil of mastyke.. ss.
of cynamome, nutmygges, cloves, saffran. ana.. i. of worm wood, Romayne
myntes, of each a little, of the spyces of the three saunders, of the spyces of
diarodon abbatis, of all the coralles. ana.. i. ss. let the^ sees all together
with a cyath of odoriferous wine, till the wine be consumed, then strain the^
and anoint the stomach therewithal.

And because these fevers ar wont to be prolonged unto the fourth month and
more, therefore we must renew digestion and purgation. This may be the
ordinance of digestion. R. of sirupe of the iuce of endive, of honye of roses
strayned, of syrup de duabus radicibus with vynegre, ana,. ss. of water of
maydenheere, and wormewoode. ana.. i. ss. or of thus.

R. of honye of Roses, of syrup de. v. radicibus, of syrup of cicory. an^..
i. ss of water of endyue, wormewoode, and maydenheere. ana.. i. me^gle the^.

These digestiues are connenyent in quartayne, and inordynate fieuers.

Equiualente purgations, after the said digestion, are in form of pylles, as
it follows.. of pylles aggregatiue, of pills of hiera with agarik an^.. ss. of
pills of reubarbe.. i. make v. pylles with water of wormwood, and let them
be taken in the morning, or thus.. of pylles aggregatiue, pylles of mastycke,
of clean reubarbe. ana.. i. make five pylles with honye of roses.

The Phisicions of the court of Rome use only pylles aggregatiue in these
fieuers, the receite whereof is.. i. Item, pills of mastycke received ones a
weke, are good, and also simple pylles of reubarbe, for they comfort the
stomach, and purge it by little and little.

Of the weakness of the stomach.
THe stomach is often weakened in this fieuer, for the amendment whereof, ye
shall use this confection fasting, with a little odoriferous wine.. of the
spyces of three saunders, of the spyces of Aromaticum rosatum. ana.. i. of the
spices of diarodon abbatis, of the spyces of diamuscu^. ana.. ss. make round
trociskes with suffycyent white sugre, and water of melissa.

Item aromaticum rosatum, and diagalanga, are good in this case. Fynallye,
clysters and rubbynges, must also be used. And thus we end this present. etc.

Of a sanguyne fever.
THe signs of a sanguyne fever are these: red ^^loure about the face and
eyes, and other parts of the body, fullness of veins: The patient has great
pain in the heed, and can not sleep, his excrementes are not so hard nor so
black as in coleryke fevers, the poulse is great and full, and sometimes swyft
and diverse, the vryne is sanguine, and gross. They that have this fever, are
men which use excess in meats and drinks, and therefore there happens
often to the^ perbrakynge, pain in the back, and in the reins, deep sleep,
sweat, and difficulty of speaking.

The cure of a sanguyne fever.
THe cure of this fever, co^systeth in three intentio^s The first is ordinance
of dyete. The second, digestion, and purgation of the evil matter. The third,
correction of the accidents.

For the first ye shall proceed, as it is declared in the former Chapter. The
second is thus accomplysshed. First, when the vryne is gross and read, ye
shall use flebothomye (if no accident let you) in the vein called mediana or
basilica, a clystre ever goinge before. Then let the water be digested as it
follows.. of syrup of the juice of endive, of syrup of violetttes, and
hoppes, ana.. ss. of waters of endive, hoppes, and buglosse an^. i. me^gle
the^, or thus.. of the syrup called acetosus simplex, of sirupe of ye iuce of
endive. an^.. vi. of the waters of buglosse, endive, and sorelle, of every one
an ounce. After digestion, let the patient be purged as it follows.. of
cassia newly drawn out, of diacatholicon. ana.. ss. of electuary of roses
after Mesue, of electuarye, of the iuses after Mesue, of electuarye, of the
iuce (...) roses. ana.. i. ss. mengle them, and make a small potion, with the
commune decoction, adding of syrup of vyolettes.. i. or this.. of chosen
manna.. vi. of cassa, half an ounce, of good reubarbe steped according to
art, of electuary, of psillium. ana.. i. mengle them, and make a potion with
the decoction of cordial flowers and fruits, adding of syrup of vyolettes..
i.

The third intention, which is to remove the accidents, is accomplysshed by
the remedies noted in the former Chapter. Howebeit, it is to be observed, that
the rubbynges before dynner, are very good to swage the pains of the heed.

Item ventoses applied upon the shulders, with scarification, or with out
scarification, are good for the same purpose, and supplye all the rowme of
flebothomye in delycate bodies, and so by bloodsuckers applied upon the
emoroydall veins. Nevertheless in strong bodies, it is commendable, to keep
the bellye loose with clysters.

Of a flegmatycke fieuer.
THe signs of a flegmatyke fever ar these. First, it begins with little
cold, and increases by little and little, till the body become as cold as yse,
and therefore his perorisme is wont to dure eyghtene hours, and the patient
has heavy pain in the heed, deep sleep, and somtymes sowneth, because of
the corrupt vapors, which assault the heart. The pulse at the beginning is
small and secret, and busye in the end. The vryne in the first days is
thynne and white, by reason of the oppilacyon of the veins, and therefore the
patiente feleth pain in his sides, and consequentlye the color of his face
and all his body becomes white and pale.

The cure of a flegmatyke fieuer.
THe cure thereof, has three intentions. The first is ordinance of dyete,
the second digestyon, and purgation of the matter antecedent, the third is
correction of the accidents.

The first intention is accomplysshed, as is declared in the Chapter of a
soft aposteme. The second shall be performed by admynistration of this
digestive.. of syrup de duabus radicibus with vynegre, of honey of roses
strayned, of syrup of vyolettes. ana.. ss. of waters of endyue, buglosse, and
sorell. ana.. i. mengle the^. This syrup is good at the beginning. An other..
of syrup de bisa^tiis, syrup de duabus radicibus with vynegre, of honye of
roses streyned, ana.. ss. of waters of buglosse, wormwoode, and endyue. ana..
i. mengle them. This syrup is good in ye state of the fieuer.

An other in the declinacion of the fever.. of sirupe de tribus radicibus of
oximell simplex, de bisanciis. ana.. ss. of waters of maydenheere, wormwood,
and fenell. ana.. i. mengle the^.

when the matter is digested, let it be purged as it follows.. of
diacatholicon, of cassia. ana.. ss. of diafinicon.. iii. ss. make a small
potion with the common decoction, adding of syrup de duabus radicibus,
without vynegre, or instead thereof honye of Roses. i. dra^me and an half,
or thus.. of Diacatholicon.. vi. of diafinicon, of electuarii indi. maioris.
ana.. ii. make a potion as is aforesaid.

These purgations are good in the first days. After certain days (digestion
of the matter presupposed by receyuyng of the first or second dygestyue) give
the patient this purgation.. of diasinicon, electuarii indi. maioris, ana.. i.
ss. of diacatholicon.. ss. of agaryke in trosiskes.. ii. make a small potion
with the decoction of cordial flowers and fruits, of maydenheere, of
gallitricum, politricum, polipodye, with water of Endyue, maidenheere, buglose,
and scabious, adding of honye of roses strayned.. i. or in the stead of this
medycyne, ye may use the pylles following.. of pylles aggregatiue.. ii. of
pylles of reubarbe.. i. make five pylles with water of wormwoode, or thus. of
pylles de hiera cum agarico, of pylles aggregatiue. ana.. ss. make five pylles,
with honye of Roses, strayned, which the patiente must take in the morning.
Phisicyons that practyse in Rome, give after certain days in this fieuer, of
pylles aggregatiue.. i. and afterward, of pylles of mastyke, of pylles of
reubarbe. ana.. ss.

It is very profitable to purge the patiente from gross, and slymye humors,
with clysters, whereof this may be one.. of the leaves of beetes, mercurye,
holyhocke, camomyll, of branne. ana. m^. i. of the seeds of sweet fenelle, and
coriander. ana.. vi of polipodye.. x. the heed of a wether somewhat bruised,
sees them all together with suffycyent water, until two parts of three be
consumed, than strain them, and put to suffycyent quantity of the
straynyng, of honye of roses.. ii. of syrup de duabus radicibus without
vynegre.. i. of oil of camomylle.. ii. of butter.. i. ss. the yolks of two
eggs, and a little salt, make a clyster, or thus.. of the foresaid decoction.
li. i. ss. of honye of roses.. iii. of oil of dylle, camomylle, of every
one.. i. ss. of benedicta simplex, of Hiera picra Galeni. ana.. ss. the yolks
of two eggs, and with a little salt, make a clystre.

The third intention, which is to correct the accidents, chefely the
weakness of the stomach, is thus accomplysshed. First, this confection
following may be received for the weakness of the stomach.

. of ye spyces of diarhodon abbatis, of the spyces of Diagalanga, of the spyces
of sugre of roses. ana.. two: make trociskes with suffycye^t white sugre, water
of wormewoode, and of myntes.

In the outward part there may be applied the unction ordained in the Chapter
of a tertian. This curation is most conuenyent in a quartayne fieuer, and in
inordynate fieuers.

A Chapter of vomytynge.
VOmyti^g is good both to preserve the body from dyseases, and to cure them
of diseases. Auicenne says, it is good for them that have the gout, the
sciatica, passions of the reins, and of the bladder, leprye, quartayne, and
all long dyseases, and Galene says that it preserves health.

The office of vomytynge is to purge fleme and humors of the stomach, and to
turn them from other parts. It may be provoked in sondrye manners. The
practicioners commenlye, give warm water with a syrup of vinegar, and
incontinently afterward, they command the patient to put his fyngers into his
mouth, and so provoke vomit. There be some (as Galene testifyeth) which
receyuyng sondrye meats at a dynner, ones in a month, provoke vomit after the
manner aforesaid, to preserve health. Some use a strong vomit, and vomitiuu^
nicolai, which ought not to be done but in great necessity, for it weakeneth
the stomach, and ye sight of the eyes. wherefore when a vyolent vomytynge
chances to any man, through the weakness of virtue retentiue, ye may give
him a myna of quynces, or quynces otherwise dressed, a syrup of myrte, sugre
of roses, syrup of roses. etc.

Of drawyng of a deed child out of the matryce.
THe signs, when a child is deed in the matrice, been these. The child moves
not as it did before. The bellye of the woman is cold. Her face and her lyppes
been pale. Her eyes been hollow. Item, it may be known by the evil odoure
of her mouth, and by long travail, and difficulty of delyueraunce. wha^ ye
perceive, that the child is deed, by the foresaid signs, ye shall come to
handye operation. But first ye shall make a suffumigation of castorium, and
euforbium, and ye shall provoke perbrakyng, with putting of feathers anointed
with oil and vynegre into the woman's mouth, or else provoke nesynge. And if
the child can not come out by this means, than using first a
suffumigation, with a decoction of mollificatiue things, as of mallows,
vyolets, fenugreke, camomylle, march mallows. etc. Ye must annoynte your
right hand with oil of roses, and put it into the matryce, and set the heed
of the infa^t streyghte, to come out, and draw it out as gentlye as may be.
And if the heed be to gross, ye must take away the bones and the brain,
that it may the more easelye come out. Some admynystre in this case many
kinds of iron instruments, as pynsons, speculum. Howebeit, they ought not to
be used, but in great necessititie, lest the matrice be torn therwyth. etc.

To preserve heeres from falling.
A Decoction of maiden here, with myrobalanes, called Emblici, made with gentle
lie strengthens the rotes of the heeres, and multiplyeth them. Ysaac says,
that a decoction of sisamus, prolongeth the heeres, and mundifyeth scurffe, if
ye wasshe the here theerwith.

Item, lie made with ashes of gootes donge, and of the roots of vine tree,
multiplyeth here, and suffers them not to fall, if ye wash the heed
therewyth.

Also a grene lisarde sodden with oil of sweet almondes, and a little laudanum,
and a little oil of myrt, and with water of myrtylles, tylle the water be
consumed, strengthens the heeres, and makes them fair, when the heed is
anointed therewythall.

This ordinance following, is good for the forkynge of the here. R. of the
leaves of myrte, and of willowes, ana.. ii. of the oil of mirt.. iiii. of
laudanum poudred.. vi. of mirobalanes embli. poudred.. ii. of wine.. ii. sees
them all together with a soft fire, til the third part of the wine be
consumed, then anoynte the ends and the roots of the here therwyth. Item
red wine of the decoction of myrtilles, sumach, roses, spike narde, of the
coddes of seny, strengthens the heeres from falling, if ye wash them
therwythal, a lotion of lie premised.

Of the cure of one that is skourged.
THe cure of skourgyng, differs not from the cure showed in ye chapter of a
fall. Wherefore in the pacientes strength and age will suffer, cut a vein at
the beginning, and use scarifications, and ventoses. Likewise ye shall give
the patient of reubarbe,. i. of madder, of gynger. ana.. i. mengle the^ and
make a potion with hot water of scabious. Item it is very expedient, that the
patient take in the morning certain days, a dram of the poudre under
written, with water of hoppes. R. of terra sigillata.. iii. of reubarbe.. i. of
mumia, of rubea tinctorum. ana.. ii. of gynger.. ss. Furthermore let the diete
be slender at the beginning, as it is declared in the allegid chapter.
Afterward ye shall come to local medicynes. And ye shall wrappe the patient in
a hot wethers skin newlye stayne, sprinklyng upon it the powder of
myrtilles, namelye of the graynes and leaves thereof. The next day, ye shall
wash all the body with wine of decoction of roses, worm wood, mirtilles,
camomill, mellilote, dille, and afterward, ye shall apply upon the skourged
place this cerote. R. oil of roses odoriferous, of oil of myrte. an^. li. ss.
of oil of wormwood, camomylle. an^.. ii. make a soft cerote with sufficient
white wax, adding of bean flower well bolted.. ii. ss. of roses.. i. of the
poudre of the graynes and leaves of myrtilles. ana.. x. mengle them and use
them. Many other remedies are described, in the chapter of brusyng and
attricion of lacertes whereunto ye shall resort.

A chapter of lyce.
THe cure of lyce, consists in three intentions. In purgation, diete, and
application of local medicines. Concerning the first intention, the body
must be purged with pills of agarike, or diacatholicon, or diafinicon, picra
Galeni, or such as purge rotten mattier. For lyce are engendered of rotten
mattier. Concerning diete, the patient must absteyne from meats that
engender corrupt or rotten mattier, as figs, chestnuttes, colewortes. etc.
To come to local medicines, some affirm that the iuce of brom, with the iuce
of wormwood, and oil of mirt sodden, kylleth lyce if ye annoint the head
therwythall. Oil dissolved with aloes, likewise used, is of like effect. Item a
decoction of the gum of an yuye tree, white beetes, and black, of the coddes
of senye, made with wormwood yarowe, and lie, kylleth lyce, if ye wasshe the
head wythall twyse a weke. Note that what sooner kills lyce, kylleth nyttes
also. To kylle crab lyce, in the privy members and under the arm holes, ye
shall rub ye place with a clout wherwyth ye goldsmyth gyldeth silver. But if
the lyce be found in the eye liddes, ye shall use a surer medicine. Take of a
he^nes galle.. ss. water of roses, of wormwood. an^.. ii. of aloes epatyke..
i. mengle the^ and lay it upon the eyeliddes. Or thus.. of buttyre thryse
washed with rose water.. iii. of aloes epatyke.. i. mengle them together, and
make a linimente, and anoynte the eye liddes therwyth, when the patient goes
to bed. etc

Of the stynkynge of the nose and of the mouth.
THe evil odor of the nose, and of the mouth, may come of sondrye causes (as
Galene says) Sometime it comes by corrupt vapors ascendyng from rotten
humors in the stomach, and this chances to those persons that live
riotously, vsyng excess in meat and drink. Sometimes it chances through
the rottenes of the go^mes, and of the teeth. The stynke of the nose comes
sometime of a rotten vlceration, and sometime of corrupt and catarrouse
mattier, desce^ding from the brain, and sometime through the stoppyng of the
streynour of the nose, and this kind is of hard curation, or rather incurable
as some affirm.

The cure of this evil disposition, consists in three intentions. The first
is ordinance of diete, the second purgation of corrupt mattier. The third is
administration of local medicines. For the first, the pacicient must absteyne
from all meats that engender gross and corrupt humors, as are gross
flesh, fyshe, colewortes, oynyons, garlike, pasties, and pies, and he must
eat meats of good digestion as capons, chyckyns, veale, lamb, and like,
spyced with cynamome. His bread must be unleavened. Pomegranades are commended
in this case, for they suffer not meats to corrupt in the stomach. Item
stiptyke fruits, as medlers, quynces, are permitted after meat, but al other
fruits are to be abhorred. Furthermore his wine must not be sweet, nor gross,
nor troublous, nor strong. Of herbs he may use borage, lettuse, maioru^,
percely, mintes sauerye, time, sage, sorell, rosemarye. Also it is good to use
after meat corianders, sweet fenell, cynamome.

For the second intention, let the mattier be purged with diacatholico^,
cassia, and tamarindes, or with pills of mastyke, or pills de octo rebus, or
pills of washed aloes, these must be received twyse a weke, three hours
before supper, or.ii. hours after supper. We have found it good to take in
the morning fasting, an ounce of honye of roses, aromatised with a little
cynamome, and nutmigges. Also the root of gynger, with honey and sugar,
received fasting, comfort digestion, and causes good odor of the mouth,
and so does the rynde of a citron, or of an orange, confecte as is aforesaid.
Item confection of the three saunders, and aromaticum rosatum, received fasting
with a little wine, is profitable in this case. The third intention is thus
accomplished. First if the cause of the stynke, be in the rotten teeth, let
them be removed. But if it be in the go^mes, let them be rubbed with this
mixture following. R. of the water, of sorel, of ye wine of pomegranades. an^..
i. of roch alume.. ii. ss. of licium.. vi. let them sees all together till the
water and wine be consumed, and if need be of stronger remedies, put to the
mixture, of vnguentu^ egiptiacu^.. vi. If the stink of the nose proceed of
rotten vlceration, ye must mundifye the place with the forsayde remedy, or
with vnguentu^ apploru^, mengled with vnguentu^ egiptiacum. It is good also to
draw into the nose thrilles, this decoction following. R. of water of roses,
and plantayne, ana.. iii. of wine of pomegranades,. ii. of licium, of honey of
roses. ana.. i. ss. of sarcocolle.. i. of alume.. i. ss. of myrrh.. ss. sees
them all together a little. Item it is good to make a lotion with water of
roses, wine of pomegranades, and a little odoriferous wine, wherein roses,
myrte, calamus aromaticus, ciperus, and a little alume, and a little honye of
roses, are sodden. Ite^ it is good to hold in the mouth, cynamome, nutmigges,
or sweet fenell, and to eat medlers after repaste or sower apples.

A chapter of horcenes.
TO clarifye the voice (a purgation with pills of hieracum agari^o, or with
cassia and diacatholicon, premised) it is very profitable to take this
decoction following, hot, when the patient goes to bed. R. of water of
scabiouse, fenell and buglosse. ana. li. i. of iuiubes, fattefigges, raysons,
dates. ana.. i. of clean liquiryce.. x. of sirupe de duabus radicibus without
vinaygre.. iii. of honey.. ii. of penydies, of sugar candy, of sirupe of
violettes. an^.. i. ss. sees the^ all together in a glass, till the third
part be consumed. Dioscorides says that assa fetida taken with water of
honey, rectifieth a horce voice. Item it is very good to take after supper.. i.
of these pills. R. of the juice of liquiryce, of aloes epatike, of dragagantum
braied, of assa, of aloes, ana.. i. of cububes, of myrrh. ana.. ii. of liquyde
storax, of clear terebentyne an^.. i. ss. of coriandes, sweet fenel. an^.. ii.
of garden saffran.. ss. me^gle them all together, and make pills with honey.
Also pills bechichie, sieve de liquiritia, holden under the tongue, synke down
to the longes, and clarifye the voice. Item a leke, boiled with oil, and eaten
with honey, ame^deth horcenes, and if ye put thereto a little cubebes, it shall be
the better. Ancient writers in this case, praise a decoction, made with honye,
water, and mustarde. Finallye a decoction made with the seed of quynces,
liquiryce, and the roots of langdedefe, and syrup of violets, soupleth the
roughnes of the pype, and clarifieth ye voice. And thus we make an end. etc.

A chapter of an aposteme which is wont to chance through flebothomye.
IT chances sometimes that through negligence in cuttyng a vein, a synowe is
prycked, or that yuell blood is retained thoroughe streate phlebotomye, of
which.ii. causes, the membre is apostemed with a coleryke or a sanguyne
aposteme. For the curation whereof, ye shall resort to the book of apostemes.
Howebeit ye shall observe this one thing, that if ye fear the coming of an
aposteme, ye shall apply this cerote following, in large cloutes.. of oil of
roses odoryferous, oil of vyolettes, ana.. i. ss. of calfes tallowe.. ii. of
white wax.. i. ss. of the muscilage of the seed of holihoke, of the seed of
quynces, of mallows, vyolettes, clean barlye, one ciathe. Let them seethe all
together, except the wax, till the muscilage be consumed, last of all, put to
the wax, and make a soft cerote. Or make it thus. of the roots of hollyhocke
sodden and streyned.. iii. of oil of roses, and camomille, ana.. j. of hens
grese, of oil of vyolettes, ana.. vi. of calves suet.. ii. ss. sees them all
together a little, and put thereunto of white wax.. x. of barlye flower.. i.
of sasfron.. i. and thus ends this. etc.

A chapter of smelling dymynysshed.
THe virtue of smelling is corrupted thorough sundry causes. Sometime through
opylation, of the passages of the.ij. little pyeces of flesh, in the head,
which ben the instruments of smellyng. Sometime by corruption and
putrefaction of the said pieces of flesh. The cure hereof shall be acomplisshed
with.iii. intencions, The first is ordinance of diet, the second, purgacion of
the matter, the third, administracion of local medicines. For the first and
the second, ye shall proceed as it is said, in the chapter of the stynkyng of
the nose. Likewise the remedies there discribed in the form of decoctions, may
be co^uenyently used, in this curation. Howbeit some ancient writers affirm
that a decoction of nigella, rue, serapine, maiorom, rosemary, with wine and
honye, amendeth the diminution of smelling. Rue, also smelled to, with myntes
and maiorum, is of good effect. Haliabbas says, that the vryne of a heart
stilled in to the nose, recouereth smelling. Item the galle of a hawke, poured
into the nosethrilles, remoueth oppilation of yt little pieces of flesh. The
galle of a cock or of an hen, is of like effect.

A chapter of bonchines.
BOnchines is caused sometime of moistines, dilati^g and slackyng the ligame^tes
and synnowes whereunto the spondiles are tied, and when the spondiles are out of
their proper place, they cause an eminence or bonchynes. Sometimes coughing and
shortness of wynd, causes the said bouchynes, and sometimes it is caused
through apostemation in the muscles of the back, and then the pacient feleth
pain and little heat, and the peyn remains always in one place, which thing
does not happen so, when it proceeds of wyndines.

As concerning bonchines procedynge of a primityue cause, we have spoken in
the chapter of dislocation of the spondiles. In this present chapter, we will
only treat, of bonchines that proceed of gross wyndynes, and moisture,
dilatynge and slackinge the ligamentes and synowes of the spondiles.

The cure of this bonchines consists in three intentions, namelye in diete, in
purgatio^ of matter antecedent, in administration of local medicines. For the
first ye shall resort to the cure of bocium. The second is accomplyshed as it
follows. First if the mattier be gross and slymie, it shall be thus digested.
R. of sirupe de duabus radicibus without vinaygre, of syrup of stichados,
ana.. vi. of waters of sage, rosemary, and fenel. ana.. i. when he has
received this syrup the space of a weke, let him be purged as it follows.
R. of pills de hiera with agaryke.. ii. of pills of hermodactiles, the
greater.. i. me^gle them and make v. pills, with water of fenell. And if the
patient be strong, pills cochye, and pills hermodactiles ye greater, may be
permitted in the winter. But in delicate persons of tender age, pills of
hiera, and assagereth with agaryke, are to be used ones a weke. Further it is
convenient, after purgation, to use this decoction diuretike, the space of
certain days. R. of maydenheere, of the flowers of rosemarye, ana. m^. i. of
comune seeds.. i. of liquyryce.. x. of damask prunes, iuiubes, of each in
number ten, of syrup de duabus radicibus without vinaygre.. vi. of honye.. i.
ss. of white sugar.. iii. of cynamome, and sweet fenell, of every one two
dra^mes. Sees them al together with sweet water, in a vessel of glass, till
the third part be consumed, and use this decoction, two hours before supper,
in the morning and euenyng, after the manner of a syrup.

The third intention shall be accomplyshed, by the administration of the
unction and cerote following. R. of oil of camomylle, lillies, of agrippa, and
dialthea, of every one.. i. and ss. of oil of spyke, juniper, terebentyne,
and of a fox. ana.. ss. of liquide storax ten drammes, of rosemarye, sticados,
squinantum, of maiorum, yua muscata, sauyne, serpillu^, mugwort, wormwood, of
every one. m^. ss. of earth worms washed with wine, of the nuttes of cipresse
brayed, number six, of cynamome, of nutmigges, of every one.. i. of calamus
aromaticus.. iii. of odoriferous wine. li. ii. sees them all together till the
wine be consumed, then strain them, and annoynte the place therewyth, twyse a
day. After this unction ye shall put upon ye place this cerote following. R.
of the oil magistrale before ordained. li. ss. of clear terebentyne, ten
drammes, of the roots of enula campana, sodde^ with water and wine stamped and
streyned.. iii. of white wax as much as shall suffice, make a soft cerote,
adding of saffran.. ss. Item it is very good to euapour the place, with a
sponge dypped in the decoction following. R. of camomylle, mellilote, dylle, of
maiorum, sticados, squinantum, wormwood, of every one. m^. ss. of nuttes of
cipresse brayed, nombre ten, of corianders, cumine, calamus aromaticus, of
every one two drammes, of honye.. i. ss. Let them sees all together, with
water and odoriferous wine sufficientlye, till half be consumed, and let the
place be epethimed with a sponge, and thus we end. etc.

Of too much fatnes and grosnes of the body.
GAlene says, that through the virtue assimulatiue and attractiue, the body
is so engrossed, that a man can not walk nor breathe, but with great
difficulty, whereby if he contynewe without exercise he must needs fall into
some evil disease, as apoplexia, palsye, chokynge, evil fieuer, wherefore it
is necessary to reherce the things that have virtue to extenuate the body, and
to make it thin, which thing consists in two inte^tions, that is to say,
in diminution of blood, and resolution of mattier conioyncte.

The first is accomplyshed by the administration of a slender diete, and by
things that provoke vryne and sweat, as fenell, percelye, rue, asparage,
polium. etc. Also solutyue medicines that purge fleume, ar profitable with
exercise and much fasting, and drinking of vinaygre.

The second intencion is accomplyshed, by administration of meats of little
nourishment, and also by convenient purgation. The meats must be of such
nature, that they may pass easelye from the stomach to the guts, that the
operation of the veins called miseraice, be not fulfilled. Item a bathe made
with the leaves of myrte, willowes, sumach, roses, and a little vinegre and
salt, is praised of the doctors. Some have thought it good to anoynte the
body with oil of wild cucumer. Finallye the patient must watch much, and
must use electuaries, of trifera the less, or electuarye of lachar. etc.

A chapter of a member, or body extenuate or thynned.
THoroughe the defaute of the virtue attractiue and assimilatiue, and by
slender meats, and ceasing from exercise, and great thought, the body is
extenuated, and made lean. The cure of this disease consists in two
intentions. The first is, to engender good blood, that the virtue attractiue
may draw it to the member being extenuated, and that it may nouryshe the
same. The second is, to strengthen the retentyue virtue of the member, yt
blood being drawn and sent thereunto, may be retained in the same.

The first intention, which is to engender good blood is accomplished by the
administration of good diete, for as Galene says. If ye will restore a lean
body, ye shall give him gross and red wine, and meats of great
nouryshmente. Wherefore, the diete of them which are in consumpsion, is
convenient in this case.

The second intention is accomplished, by rubbynges, bathes, and cerotes. The
rubbing of the extenuate members, must be used nether to soft nor to roughe.
And after rubbing, the patiente may conveniently go into a warm bathe. Oils
also, and cerotes attractiue, laid upon the member, are good to draw
nouryshement thereunto. But for as much, as the liver and veins are wont to be
stopped, by the foresaid things, therefore ye shall administer things that
open, as capares, succurrie, asparage, lupines. etc. Likewise in this case, the
wine must not be gross and sweet, till the oppilation be removed but rather
thynne and subtle. Oximell, and waters that provoke vryne, are permitted in
this case. Convenient cerotes to draw nouryshmente, are such as be made of
pytche, hot oils, and gummes, as this that follows. R. of fox oil, of oil
of lillies, of ye grese of a ducke, hen, and gose. ana.. i. ss. of ship
pytche.. iii. of greek pytche, of rasyn of the pyne, terebentyne. ana.. ii. of
oil of euphorbium.. ss. of oil of elders.. i. of sage, of rosemarye. an^. m^.
i. Let them boil all together and streyne them all, and make a styffe cerote
with sufficient new wax, which ye shall spread upon a lether, and lay it upon
the extenuated member.

Note yt rubbyng with cloutes, must be used, before the cerote and the bath.

After that the nourishment, is drawn to ye member, it is good to epithime the
said members with things co^fortatiue, yt the mattier may be retained in ye
members, whereof this was wont to be our ordinance. R. of roses, wormwood,
sticados, nept, squina^tu^ maioru^. an^. m^. ss. of rosemarye, sage. an^. a
little camomille. m^. i. sees them al together with sufficient red wine, till
the third part be consumed.

Auice^ne says yt it is good to draw ye nourishment to ye lean member, by
excercising ye same, and carieng some heavy thing therwt, and by bynding ye hole
member straytlye, yt the nouryshment may not come thereunto, but be constrained
to pass to the extenuat member.

A Chapter, to remove scarres and roughnes of the skin.
SOme ancient doctors say, that Vnguentum citrinu^ Nicolai, remoueth scarres
of the face caused thorough a wound. Item oil of the yolks of Eggs labored
in a mortar of lead, remoueth the roughnes of the face, and of the hands, and
scarres of wounds. Vnguentu^ de tucia, of our description, and vnguentum de
cerusa sodden, and bawme, and a sparadrap of our description made with
camphore and Tucia, amendeth scarres, and roughnes of the skin.

Furtheremore oil of elders, melted with new wax, and a little oil of
wormewoode, and a little juice of a radyshe root, and cumyn and bean flower,
incorporated after the manner of a cerote and sodden, resolves dead blood, and
blacknes of the face and of the eye lyddes, in brusyng and stripes. Item for
the roughnes of the hands and of the face, ye shall rub the^ with almans,
chewed with a little lupynes and barley flower. Likewise the seed of Sisamus,
chewed with nuttes, reysons and rubbed upon the place remoueth blackenes and
dead blood under the skin. Oil of Sisamum is of like effect.
Furtheremore, the root of a wild Cucumer stamped with honye thynneth a
cicatrice, and remoueth black spots. Fynallye to remove the roughnes of the
skin, ye shall use this liniment following.. of oil of sweet Almans, of oil
of Rooses, of every one.. vi. of the marye of a calves leg.. ss. of calves
talowe, and kyddes talowe, of every one.. j. melte them all together and put
them in a holowe rape, or in holowe apples, and set them in an oven to boil,
and afterward stamp the^ all together, and rub the place with the said
rapes or apples, for it is a present remedy, and also for the chappes of the
feet and hands caused of cold.

A Chapter of superfluous sweat.
TO remove superfluous and stynkynge sweat weakenyng the body, the doctors
think convenient, to use things that open and provoke vryne as is this
decoction following.. of annyse.. ss. of the rotes of asparage, bruscus, and
fenell, of every one. m^. j. of clean liquyrice. m^. ss. of ye comune seeds
somewhat brayed.. ij. of reysons.. j. ss. of damask prumes, number ten, of
maidenheare, of Cicorie, of every one. m^. j. ss. of the iij. less seeds, of
every one.. ij. of smallage seed.. ss. let them seethe together with
sufficient water, tylle the third part be consumed, then streyne them and
put to the streynynge, of syrup de duabus radicibus without vynegre.. viij.
of oximell symplex.. iij. of white sugger.li. j. clarify them at the fire
again, and make a long syrup, whereof the paciente shall use in the morning,
the space of a week and more, which done, ye shall come to retentiues, for
which purpose, odoriferous wine of small strength, must be given to the pacie^t
delaied with water of the flowers and croppes of mirtilles stilled in a le^bick.
Item it is very profitable, to wash the body of the patient two hours before
dinner and supper, with the decoction of mirtilles, sumach, quynces, rosewater,
sodden with equal quantity of water and wine, and afterward, ye shall anoint
the body with this liniment.. of oil of roses omphacyne.. iiij. of oil of
myrte, of oil of quynces, ana.. iij. of oil of mastyke.. j. of white
saunders.. vi. of water of rooses, and plantayne, of every one.. iij. of
myrobalanes citrynes.. ij. sethe them all together till the water be consumed,
than streyne them, and put to the streynynge, of white wax as much as shall
suffyce, make a lynyment and rub the body therwyth, in the morning, and at
night.

A Chapter of the stynke of the arm holes.
FOr the stink of the arm holes, fete, etc. some doctors praise a lotion
with wine of the decoction of myrtilles, rooses, wormewoode, rosemary,
squinantu^, sticados, sweet fenell, coriander, and alume. For the same
intencio^ ye may use the decoction following.. of sage, wormewoode and
rosemarye, ana. m^. ss. of maioru^, nepte, mugworte, roses, mirtilles, an^. m^.
ss. of squinantum, sticados, of each a little, of the nuttes of cipresse braied,
in nombre ten, of corianders, of sweet fenel, of every one.. j. of galla
muscata, of calamus aromaticus, of every one.. x. of honye.li. ss. of roche
alume.. iij. of salt.. ij. let them sees all together with sufficient water,
odoriferous wine and a little vynegre, till the third part be consumed, than
streyne them, and use the decoction. After a bathe, ye shall anoynte the
foresaid places with this liniment.. of oil of rooses omphacyne, of oil
mirtyne, of every one.. ij. of oil of mastyke.. ss. of liquide storax,. ij. of
litarge of gold and silver, of every one.. x. of sarcocolle.. iij of roche
alume brent.. vj. of white saunders.. ss. of calamus aromaticus.. j. ss. myngle
them and make a linimente with suffycient white wax.

A Chapter of vryne retained.
Sometimes, vryne is so retained in me^ and women, that if it be not remedyed
by things that open, it will induce evil accidents, as a spasme, Aposteme,
and sometimes death. The stoppynge of the ways of the vryne, is sometimes
caused thoroughe great coldness of the feet, and genitalle parts, and
sometimes, thorough gross and slymye wyndynes, or thoroughe flegmatyke
humors, which stop the neck of the blader. Likewise the vryne, is
restrained by some vlceration of the neck of the bladder, or by a wart, or
congeled blood. And wha^ it is retained by these last reherced things,
baynes, and oils, that provoke vryne are sometime of good effect, and
sometimes not. The reason is, that when the neck of the bladder is vlcered,
the two parts of the conduyt of the vryne cleave, and are incarned together.
And than, when the incarnation is new, or when the warte is new and small,
the said remedies may have good effect. But when the consolidation is
strong, or the warte great and old, the remedies are of none effect, and
than ye must proceed with handye operation, whereof we will speak in ye next
chapter. Howebeit Gentilis and other expositors, hold a contrary opinion, and
expound, that the said vlceration is in the substance of the bladder, and
not in the neck of it. Which thing nevertheless is not true, for putting an
instrument into the yard called argalia (which serves to cause vryne to
issue out) unto the vlcered place, that is to say into the neck, we found, at
the entering of the instrument into the bladder, notable separation of the
incarned parts of the said vlceration. And after that, by the said
instrument, there issued out a little vryne, there came forth also a great
quantity of blood which proceeded thorough the percynge of the instrument and
separation of the incarned parts. Sometimes retencion of vryne, comes of the
stone, lienge in the neck of the bladder, and sometime by multitude of
gravel, stoppynge the comune conduytes.

The cure of this retencion, shall be accomplysshed, by embrocations, bathes,
unctions, playsters lenitiue, and opening, applied upon the yard upon the bone
called pecten, and upon the skin called peritoneum. Moreover it shall be
accomplysshed by the ministration of things diuretyke, received by the mouth,
as is this ordenaunce following.. of the water of fenell, asparage, bruscus,
smallage, sorell, ana.. iiij. of the wine of sower pomegranates.. ij. of syrup
de duabus radicibus.. vi. of liquyrice stamped.. ss. of the comune seeds
stamped.. ij. of white suggre.. ij. ss. sethe them all together in a glass,
till the third part be consumed, tha^ strain them, and let the patiente
take thereof, one ciathe in the morning and evening. Item for the same
intention, the decoction following is commendable.. of the water of Eringium..
vi. of the water of endive, sorell, and smallage, of every one.. viij. of water
of asparage, and bruscus, of every one.. ij. water of maydenheare,. iij. of
the comune seeds, of the.iij. less seeds, of every one.. vi. of the roots
of liquirice cleansed.. x. of the seed of Alcakengi.. j. of raysons.. j. ss. of
damask prunes, of iniubes, of every one.. ij. of sweet fenell.. v. of sweet
sugger, of syrup de duabus radicibus without vynegre, ana.. vij. sethe them
all together till the third part be consumed, tha^ strain them and use the
straynynge. Galene and some othere doctors, praise to put cantarides with
things diuretyke, howebeit it can not be done without danger of deriuation of
much matter from the reins to the bladder. Ye may have like judgment, of the
stone called Lapis Iudaicus.

As towchynge simple local medecynes, the doctors praise to lay a conyes
skin upon the bone called pecten, and to anoint the skin peritoneum, with
the fat of a conye. Like wise peritarie, with the leaves of radishe, and
blackcoolewortes, and cressones, fried in a pan with butter, oil of elders,
and a little cumyne, has great virtue to provoke vryne. Item a lowce put in
to the yard provoke vryne, and styrreth up the virtue expulsyue. Also oil
of scorpions, and the oil called Petroleum, cast into the yard, or if ye
anoint the foresaid places therwyth, provoke vryne. Like wise the leaves of
leekes, dried, and sodde^ with a little white wine, parietary, and honey, applied
upon ye bone pecte^, after the manner of cataplasma, be^ of like effect. And ye
plaster vnderwritte^ has great virtue also to provoke vryne, applied upon
the foresaid place.. of the roots of holyhockes.. iiij. of radyshe roots.li.
ss. of the leaves of colewortes, and parietarie, of wild fenell, southistles,
of cressones, ana. m^. j. ss. sethe them al in water than stamp them, and make
a styffe plaster, in the decoction, with flower of cycers and fenugreke,
addyng of the fat of a conye, of oil of Camomille, and dille, ana.. ij. of
butter.. iij. mengle them and use them as is aforesaid. We have proved also
this bath following to be of good efficacitie in prouokyng vryne,. of the roots
of holyhocke, and radyshe, ana.li. j. of the roots of bruscus, percelye, and
asparage, ana. m^. ss. of cumyn, sweet fenell, ameos, ana.. j. of honye li. j.
ss. of leeke seed, and fenugreke seed, ana.. iij. of camomyl, mellilote,
dylle, horehou^de, ana. m^. j. ss. of parietarie of black coolewortes. an^. m^.
j. ss. sethe the^ al together in sufficient water, with a sufficient quantity
of wine, till the third part be consumed, and bathe with this decoction, the
bone called pecten. Fynallye a clyster, made with the decoction, oils, and
butter aforesaid, with a little salt, the yolks of two eggs, two ounces of
honye of Rooses, is convenient in this case. A suppositorie also, wherein sall
gemma entrethe, provoke vryne.

A Chapter, how a man may draw out vryne with instruments.
AVicenne, Rasis, and Cornelius Celsus, teach that deteyned vryne may be
drawn out, with instruments of brass or silver, made holowe like pipes.
Howebeit the said instruments, must be sondrye according to the diversity of
bodies, and ages. Of those instruments, which are convenient for men, the
longeste must be of. xv. inches, the mean of twelve inches, the leest of. ix.
inches, For women the longest instrumente shall be of. ix. inches, and the leest
of. vj. And the instruments made for men, must be more crooked, than the other
for women, because the conduyte of women is shorter than in men.

Ye must lay the patient upon a bed up right, and let the ministre take
in to his right hand, (anointed with oil of rooses) a crooked syrynge made of
Silver, and let him guide it by the hole of the yard, till he towche the
end of the neck of the bladder, and when he is come to the said place, let
him cause the patient to bow toward his knee, and than let him thrust the
syrynge into the concauitie of the bladder, and tha^ he shall se the vryne come
rennyng out at the end of the syrynge, which done, we were wont to wasshe the
bladder, and to cleanse it from gross humors, by an other syrynge, put into
the end of the said syryng with a decoction following.. of clean barley. m^.
j. of reysons.. j. of liquyrice, of the seed of alcakengi, of the comune
seeds, of the three less seeds somewhat broken, of every one,. iij. of
fygges.. xiiij. of syrup de duabus radicibus.. iij. sugar.. j. ss. let them
seth all together, with sufficient quantity of rain water, tylle they ben
brought to half a pound, tha^ streyne them all, and wash the bladder with
the streynynge being warm, and thus ye must proceed tylle the vryne come to
his natural course, by this mean we healed two noble men. Ancelyne, and
Moruell. etc.

A chapter of brusynge of the nails, and to draw out blood under the said
nails.
Sometimes thorough brusyng of the nails, there remaynethe some blood under
the^, which causes the said nails to fall and greatly payneth the patient,
chieflye when the said blood comethe to putrefaction. The cure is, that
incontinentlye ye anoint the place, with oil of roses, and the juice of
plantayne, beaten with the white of an egg leyng it over all the hole finger.
The next day, if ye blood under the nail be of great quantity, that
putrefaction, is to be feared, ye shall open the nail with a rasor, or bore it
thorough with some convenient instrument, so that ye touch not the quycke
flesh. Afterward, ye shall anoint the place, with oil omphacyne hot, and
lay this medecyne thereupon.. of oil of roses omphacyne, of oil myrtyne,
ana.. j. of new wax.. x. of odoriferous wine.. ij. of clear terebentyne..
iij. of the leaves of wormwood bruised.. ss. of cumyn bruised.. i. let them
sethe beside the wax, till the wine be consumed, than streyne them and putt to
the straynyng the wax, and let them sees again, and add to it bean flower
a little, and make a plaster.

Sometime, the pacient will not suffer the nail to be opened, and therefore
the matter comes to putrefactio^, and then ye shall proceed, with things that
may cause the nail to fall, as are digestiues and mollificatyue playsters,
and after the remotion of the nail, ye shall seal up the place with vnguentu^
de Minio, washyng it with wine sodden with rooses, myrtilles, and a little alume.

A chapter of the swellynge of the neck, and of the throat called Bocium.
BOcium is a great swellynge, in the throat, The cure of a w^nne.
or in the neck, caused of humors, and turned to hard matter, unfit to be
resolved, whereof there ben two kinds, namelye natural, and accidental. The
natural, receaueth not curation in aged bodies by local medicynes, but the
accidental may be cured unto. xxiiij. year, by purging the matter,
clysterynge, and resolutyue medicynes. Arnold. says, that this passion is
hereditarye, and regional, for in some regious it chau^ceth more than in other,
and he says that this passion proceeds of the nature of the air, or evil
quality of the water. And he shows moreover that there is a contree called
garfignana, wherein lyghtlye all men and women have this disease. And therefore
he councelethe to change the air, the water, and the regyon, at the
beginning before it be increased.

Towchynge the cure of this disease, when it is old, and knytte to the veins
and Arteries, ye shall not remove it by handy operation, nor by cautery, for
great and dangerous accidents might ensue, but ye shall rather forsake the
cure.

The cure of that, yt may be healed, has three intentions, diete, purgatio^ of
the matter antecedent, and remotion of the matter conioynt.

As towchynge the first intention, the paciente must absteyne from all
meats, that engender gross troublous and wyndy blood, as beef, porke,
hearts flesh, leuerettes, kiddes and birds of ryuers. etc. Also he must
avoid al kinds of pulses as beans, peason, etc. and fyshe, except souls,
gurnardes, perches. etc. Item he must absteyne from all baken meats, and
oynyons, leekes, garlyke, turnepes, rapes, etc. And above all thing, let him
absteyne from the company of women, and let him eat meats that engender
good blood, as capo^s, veale and rear eggs with percelye, nept, cinamome, and
a little sugger. These herbs are convenient to be sodden in the brothe of good
flesh, borage, lettuse, parcelie, white beetes, nept, myntes, langdebeef. etc.
His wine must be claret, of good odor, delaied with sweet water.

For the second intention, let the pacient use this syrup following the space
of seven days.. of syrup de duabus radicibus with vynegre, of oximell
symplex. ana..iij. of syrup of Epithimum.. vi. of water of fenell, buglos, and
scabious, ana..i. myngle them. After this syrup let the pacie^t be purged as
follows.. of diacatholicon.. ss. diafinicon.. iij. electuarij indi..ij. make a
small potion with the comune decoction. In this disease ye must use sondrye
purgations, and therefore the confection of turbyth, is very convenient,
which we have described in our Antidotarye, in the chapters of electuaries,
and confections. It is good sometimes, to take fasting, two sponefulles of
honye of rooses, aromatized with a little nutmygges, cloves, and Cinamome, and
aqua vite, and it must be used, upon that day, that the patient takes not a
laxatiue medicyne, twyse or thryse a week. Arnolde prayseth this powder
following.. of a sponge of ye see, of palea marina, of the bone of ye fish
called Sepie or a cuttle bone, of long, and black peper, of gynger, cynamome,
salgemine, Piretrum, galls, of the pryckes of rooses, ana..ij. powder them
all, except the sponge and palea marina, which must be burned and their ashes
must be myngled with the foresaid things and tersed, and he commands to
hold this poudre in the mouth, day and night. He thinks it good also, to
take this poudre after digestion before day, and to use it in his meats.
Furtheremore it is good sometimes, to take a dram of pylles cochie. This is
the cure of Arnolde, which must be begone, the next thursdaye to the
reuolutio^ of the moon, and so ye must proceed, to the end of the moon
following. And than ye must cut the veins under the tongue, to dymynyshe the
mattier conioynt.

As towchynge the third intention, sondrye doctors have written sondrye
resolutiues, howebeit, they are of small effect. Nevertheless ye may apply
this that follows.. of ye rotes of dockes, and radyshe, of a wild gourde, of
saxifrage, of the roots of holyhock, ana..iiij, seth them al with wine and
lie, and apply them after the manner of a plaster. We have written many
resolutyues, which are conuenyent in this case. And forasmuch, as this
swellyng comes sometime to maturation, for that intention, ye shall proceed
with the maturatiues, written in the chapter of cold Apostemes. And ye may
make incisyo^, according to ye length of ye neck, taking head yt ye cut not
the veins and synnowes. For the rest of the cure, that is to say for
mundifycation, and incarnation, and sigillation, ye shall proceed as is declared
in the fore alleged place. etc.

A chapter to remove a superfluous synger in the hand, and the cure of a hand
cut of, for some evil fact.
IT chau^ceth sometime, that through abou^dau^t matter in generation, a child
is borne with a superfluous finger, for the remotion whereof, ye shall proceed
as it follows. First ye shall cut it as nyghe the hand as is possible, with
a rasour. And afterward, ye must cauteryse the place with oil of elders, or
oil of roses, brennynge hot. This cauterisation is good for two causes. First
to restrain flux of blood, and to remove a spasme, and pain. After
cauterisation, ye must plaster the place with the white and yolke of an egg,
beaten with oil of roses omphacyne, and butter, and so the pain may be
swaged, and it dygesteth the escare If there chance great bleedyng, which yet
happens but seldom, ye shall cauteryse the place, and afterward leye upon it
our read powder restrictiue with the white of an egg, and afterward ye shall
procure the fall of the escare, with a dygestiue of yolks of eggs, and
terrebentyne, and ye shall mundifye the place, with a mundificatiue of a syrup
of roses, of smallage, or of sarcocoll. For the rest of the cure, ye shall
proceed with vnguentu^ de minio, or Basilicu^, and other remedies, which are
written in the general chapter of wou^des. How be it ye shall note this one
thing, that is to say, yt after the time of incisyon, ye must leye upon ye
arm a defensive ordained in the chapter of hurted synowes, unto the.vij. day.
And ye must anoint the hand with oil of roses and camomill, wherein a little
saint John's worte, and saffran, and an ounce of earth worms washed with wine,
has been sodden.

A hand or foot being cut, must likewise be used, and in no wise ye must
cauteryse the place with fire, as some ignorant men do, for evil accidents
may ensue. etc.

A chapter of the preseruacion of a dead body, that it rotte not.
A Dead body may thus be preserved from rottynge, as Rasis says. First ye
must purge ye carkas, with sharp clysters, as are clysters made with wine
vynegre, and salt water, where in myrre, coloquintida, salt, and alume, has been sodden. The^ ye must ha^ge up the body, and press the bellye with your
hands, that the decoction and excrementes may issue out. And ye shall renew
the clyster till ye perceive that the guts are well cle^sed. which done, ye
shall put into the bellye, a good quantity of this description following,
which is of the description of Rasis.. of aloes, myrre, accatia, galla
muscata, nuttes of cypress, saunders, lignu^ aloes, cumyne, alume of roche,
myngle them all together (after they be poudred) with vynegre and rose water,
and put them into the belly, and stop the condyte with bolsters, and bind it
with bands, yt the lycour run not out, and afterward, ye shall cast into
the ears, mouth, and nosethrilles, spyced wine And then ye shall anoint all
the body with black pytche, and wrappe it, in this sparadrap following.. of
black pytche, rosen of the pyne, colophonia, frankynsence, mastycke, storax,
gu^me arabyke, dragagantum, melte them al together at the fire, and make a
sparadrap with the said powder, and wrappe the legs, arms, and al ye body
therewith, and bind them fast. This is ye mean to preserve a lean body.

The mean to preserve a fleshlye and gross body, is this. Ye must open the
body, from the pytte of the breast, to the bone called pecten, about the
priuye me^bres, and ye must take out all the intrayles, and then ye must wash
the place with vynegre, and with the salt called Baurach, and afterward with
aqua vite, and then ye must rub the parts of ye body, with this powder..
of brayed salt, of alume, of each three parts, of cloves, nutmegges cynamome,
all the sau^ders, frankincense, myrre, terra sigillata, of every of the^, one
part, of nepte, serpillum, rosemary, coriander, wormwood, roses, myrtylles,
of every one. m^. ss. stamp them all together, as is aforesaid, and rub the
body within and without. And afterward ye must fill the bellye, with the
flocks or shauinges of cloth dyed with grain, or some other cloth with
as much of the foresaid powder. Then ye must sow up the belly, and wrappe all
the body in a sparadrap as is aforesaid, and lay it in a chest of odoriferous
wood, if it may be gotten, remembrynge that ye stop the seames well, with
hourdes and pytche. And ye shall put into the chest, the leaves of rosemary,
laurel, nept, wormwood and myrte. Thus may bodies be preserved and carried
from one region to another.

A chapter of burning by fire, boylynge water, or oil.
Sometime, the burning of fire is light and in the ouermoste part of the
skin, and produces only little blysters. Sometime it is deep, and hurts the
muscules. The cure of this scaldynge, whether it be with water, or oil,
dyffereth not but in the smaller or greater burning. If the scaldynge be small
it suffyceth to mynistre incontinently the white of an egg, beaten with oil
of roses omphacine, and a little juice of pla^taine, nightshade, house leke, and
cymolea. These things must be laid on often, for they swage pain, and stop
the blysters, that might arise afterward. wine of pomegranades with a little
rose water, and plantayne water, is of like effect. After that the pain is
swaged, ye must cut ye tops of the bladders with cysers, and anoint the
blystred place, with this liniment following.. of oil of roses co^plete, oil
of roses omphacyne, ana..ij. of vnguentu^ populeon..i. ss. of the juice of
plantayne, houseleke, and night shade. ana.. ss. of lytarge of gold and
silver. ana..i. of ceruse..vi. of tucia alexandrina, of brent lead. ana..ij.
ss. of lyme.vi. times washed..x. myngle the^ and make a liniment in a mortar of
lead, for it is a good medicine in light scaldynges, or make it thus.. of white
tordes of hens..i. ss. of lyme washed as is aforesaid..ij. ss. of the barks
of elder branches.. i. of roche alume..i. of oil of roses co^plete.li. ss. of
vnguentu^ populeon.. ij. of the juice of plantayne..iiij. sees them all
together till the juice be consumed, then strain the^, and put to ye straynyng,
of whyt wax.. x. and sees them again a little, and labor them two hours in
a mortar of lead, and make as it were a liniment. If the skaldynge perce in to
the member and produce an escare, then ye shall pass.ii. or.iii. days with
the ii. first foresaid remedies, and then ye shall proceed with things, that
digest and remove the escare, and therefore butter soden with a decoction of
mallows, and labored in a mortar of lead, and laid upon the member after
the manner of a lynyment, with colewoorte leaves somewhat dried, has a
maruaylous virtue, for it swageth pain, and procures the escare to fall. A
digestive made with oil of roses, and violettes, and with yolks of eggs, is
of like efficacytie. A dygestyue of terrebentyne, with the yolks of eggs, is
not to be disalowed, though it byte some what. Playsters of meal and malowes,
ordained in the chapter of phlegmon to swage pain, are very conuenyent in this
case. After the escare is removed ye shall proceed with the first lynyment
written in this present chapter. The reaste of the cure shall be accomplysshed
with vnguentum de minio, or de tucia, or with our sparadrap and lynte, and if
there be need of mundification, ye shall apply our mundificatyue of a sirupe
of rooses, of the juice of plantayne and terrebentyne, made with bean flower.
Likewise water of plantayne myngled with a little alume, makes good
cicatrisatyon, and is mynistred with the oyntement aforesaid.

A chapter of the wyndynes of the back bone.
IT chances sometime, that through the defaute of virtue, assimilatiue, and
thoorugh corrupt, venomous and wyndy matter, there is engendered great pain
between the back bone and the bone almocatim, which often times corrupts
the bone. And it begins even as the pain, of the joints, though the pain
of the windines of the back bone, be within the bones, and the pain of the
joints, in the flesh. And albeit, that this evil passion may chance in all
parts of the body, nevertheless for the most part, it happens, in the bones
of the legs and of the arms, and we have seen often in the french pockes,
with corruption and vlceration of the bone evil to be cured. The cure of this
windynes is accomplysshed as follows. First ye must purge the matter with
convenient purgations, as is this.. of diacatholicon..vi. of electuary of roses
after Mesne, of diaphinicon ana..i. myngle them, and make a potion with the
common decoction, and let the patient take it in ye morning, this digestion
presupposed.. of sirupe de duabus radicibus, with vynegre, of sirupe of
fumytory the less, ana.. vi. of waters of fumytory, endyue, and hoppes, ana..
i. after purgation, ye shall come to local remedies, which must be
resolutyues, with familyer repercussion, as this that folowyth, of clean
barlye, of lentyles, roses, benes, ana. m^. ss. of pomegranates with the
ryndes. n^. ii. sees them all together with sweet water, tylle the barlye
break, than stamp them, and add there unto oil of myrte, roses omphacyne
dyll, and camomyl, ana..ii. of white wax..ii. ss. let them seth again a little
and when ye take them from the fire stir them about tylle they be warm and
add of safron..i. and make as it were a plaster, if the place seem to require
maturation, ye shall use this plaster following.. of the rotes of hollyhocke,
and white lillies. ana..viii. sees them al together in the broth of a wethers
head, cut them, stamp them, and strain them, and make a styffe plaster with
wheat flower, and sufficient quantity of the foresaid water, and with the
streynyng, adding of common oil, and oil of vyolettes, ana.. ii. the yolks
of.ii. eggs. when the place is come to ripenes, which is not co^munlye
euydent, but is with small swellyng, and without change of color in the skyn, ye
must make incision, according to the length of the member, and afterward ye
shall proceed certain days, with digestiues and mundificatiues, but if the
boon be rotten, ye shall remove it as is said in the chapyter of a rotten
bone. we have sometimes seen in this case so great peyn thorough this wyndynes,
and multitude of matter, that we have been constrained to make incision in the
place, and to take away great part of the bones, of the arms and the legs
called focilia, with raspatoryes, and with actual cauteries, for otherwise we
could not heal the pacientes. Thus by the grace of god the doctrine of this
book is accomplysshed, for the which his name be honored and praised, for
ever. Amen.

Here follows the abrydgementes of the works of master John de Vigo,
conteynyng brieflye, the principal doctrynes declared more largelye in the
former book, and many other things newely devised and invented, by the said
doctor, and is divided into.v. books. The first treats of wounds. The
second of apostemes. The third, of vlceres. The fourth, of proper remedies for
every membre, from the head to the feet. The fyfte, is in manner of an
antydotary, declaryng certain remedies for sundry dyseases.

ALbeit, that we have sufficiently treated of a broken scull in a proper
chapter, neauerthelesse for a more ample doctrine and for the profit of the
reader, I have determined, to write certain notable things, to be observed in
the fracture of the scul, and a new manner of percynge the bone, of the head,
for considering the great danger, of percyng the bones of the head, by
instruments, invented as well by ancient as later doctors, as are trapanes,
molinelles. etc. made without warenes, for hurtyng the pannicles of the
brain, and moreover considering the commotion of the humors, and the pain
which is caused, by rubbing of raspatores, I have found out new instruments
by divine inspiration, as I suppose, wherewith, ye boones of the skulle may be
perced, without pain, or hurtyng of the pannicles of the brain.

First before ye come to the percing ye must know how the boon was broken,
and with what instrumente, and than ye shall shave the head, and make a cross
or.iii. cornerd incision. And if the body be strong, ye shall use flebothomye
diuersyue, and then ye shall perce the bone in the lower part with an
instrument called instrumentum masculum or nespula, whose office is, only to
make a cyrcle percynge into the spoungyouse part of the skulle.

Afterward, ye shall admynyster the instrumente called nespula femina, whose
office is, to make a hole or way, unto the second table. Consequently, ye
shall work with ye instrument called instrumentum securitatis, and ye shall
pearce the second table therwyth, unto the inner part, and then ye shall
cleanse and make smothe the hole, from all roughnes and pryckes, with our
instrument called lenticulare.

After that the bones ben removed, if the body be strong and accustomed to
labor, as ye bodies of mariners, warriors, husbondmen, and like, immediately
ye shall purge the pannicle of the brain and all the wound, with white wine
hot. And after the said mundification, ye shall fill the wound with good aqua
vite, layeng on this powder following.. of aloes, myrre, fra^kynsence,
sanguinis draconis. ana.. i. myngle them. Or make it thus, and it shall ye
better comfort the brain.. of myrre.. i. of aloes epatyke.. ij. of sarcocol,
fra^kynsence, sanguinis draconis, of madder, of fine grain. ana.. ij. mingle
the^ and make a powder, and apply it with sendall or sylke, laynge on also the
said cerote, Cerote of the head.
in a larger piece, whose description is this.. of oil of roses odoriferous.li.
ss. of oil of roses omphacyne.. ij. of calves suet, and wethers suet, ana..
ij. ss. of rasyne of the pynetre, of gu^me elimi. ana.. ij. of mastyk.. i. ss.
of whyt wine of good odoure.li. ij. of betonye, woodbynde, and rosemary
flowers. ana. m^. i. of fine grain.. ss. of armoniake. vi. of madder.. x. melt
the armoniak in vynegre, and braye the things yt are to be brayed, and sethe
them all together with the foresaid wine, till the wine be consumed, then press
them strongly and put to the pressynge, of clear terebentyne.. iiij. of white
wax as much as shall suffice. Make a styffe cerote, and malaxe it with milk
at the beginning, and afterward with wine, and last of all with aqua vite.

This plaster is of synguler operacion, and draws matter, from the botome
unto the outward parts, and has al intencions which been required in this
case. But if the fracture be small in a coleryke or sanguine body of delicate
complexion, the^, after that ye bone is perced, as we have said, ye must apply
oil of roses omphacyne actually hot, unto the fourth day, layenge a sendall
upon the pannicle dura matter, that the oil touch it not. And upon the
borders of the wound, ye shall apply a dygestiue of ye yolks of eggs with
the foresaid oil. After ye fourth day, ye must proceed with ye foresaid
cerote, and abstersive lycours, and other cerotes declared in the chapter of a
broken sculle, for we have found this cure to be co^me^dable. Howbeit Auice^ne
says, that it is better to apply things desiccatiue and dygestiue, after
the pearcynge of the sculle, which thing is true in flegmatyke and strong
bodies. But in sanguine, coleryke, young, and tender bodies, we have proved the
later doctrine of better effect. For as Cornelius Celsus says, one medicine
suffyceth not for all dyseases and complexions.

Now that we have declared ye percynge of the sculle with new instruments,
we will set forth.xv. notable things, which are to be considered, in the
wounds of the head with the breche of the scull, whereof the first is
touthyng a fever, which comunly happens in this case.

First ye must consider, whether it chanced within the.iiij. or.vij. day, or
after the.vij. day. If it chanced with in the fourth day without any forther
evil accidents, I say, that it came thorough dygestion of ye lyppes of the
wound. Likewise if it chances after the.vij. day, though it be with more
suspicion, yet it proceeded of the forsaid cause. But if the fieuer chanced
about the.x. or.xiiij. day with coldness, rygours before heat, it proceeded of
an he risipelas made, or to be made, growe^ already, or that will ensue
afterward, or else through some putrefaction caused upon dura matter. when it
proceeds of herisipelas, it is not mortal, but when it proceeds of
putrefaction, for the most part it is mortal. And therefore we said in a
proper chapter of the former book, that the chirurgien should not
pronosticate, by the pulse, or by vryne, for so they might be deceived.

The second thing to be noted, is of a fieuer caused through blood streyned
upon dura matter, and it chau^seth comunly in somer, about the.vii. day and in
winter, about the.x. day, for in this time, the said blood comes to
putrefaction. And therefore ye must perce the sculle, in summer before the vij.
day, and in winter before ye tenth, as Auicenne says. How be it, we have
perced it after the tenthe day, unto the.xiiij. day, and it has succeeded
well, chieflye when after the percynge of the bone, we ministered this medicine
following.ij. or.iij. days. of good aqua vite.. ij. of honey of roses. ij.
myngle them, and put in one drop after another, on the dura matter, or cast
in the lycour with a syrynge if need be. If the putrefaction, or blacknes of
the pa^nicle, can not be removed this way, ye must proceed with strong
remedies. In this desperate case, we were wont to administre this remedy
following.. of aqua vite.. iij. of honye of roses.. i. of our powder of
mercury.. ij. myngle them, and let them sees a little. Or thus.. of aqua vite..
i. ss. of syrup of roses, honye of roses, of every one.. ij. of vnguentum
egiptiacum.. ij. ss. of sarcocol myrrh, aloes, of every one.. i. of
odoriferous white wine.. i. sees them altogether a little, then strain them,
and use them as is aforesaid. And if the vnguentum Egiptiacum be made with
water of plantayne, or wine of pomegranades it shall be better then with vynegre.
Perchance some will marvel, that we command to apply these two remedies,
wherein our powder of mercurye and vnguentum egiptiacum enter, because they use
only to leye upon the pannicle honye of roses, which undoubtedly is to weak
and therefore we have followed Hypocrates, which says, yt in extreme diseases
extreme remedies are to be taken.

The third obseruaunce, is also touching cold which happens in the wounds
of the head, after the seventh day, by reason of heresipelas, or of a tercian
fever, or by reason of some putrefaction upon the ryme of the brain. When
this rygorous cold, comes thorough herisipelas, the parts lyenge about the
wound swollen, and of read or yelowe color. Yea, and the eye lyddes also,
if the wound be of the former part, do swell and grow to an aposteme, and
the fever leueth not the pacient, till the aposteme be ended by the way of
resolution, or suppuration. when it proceeds of cholere inclinynge to
putrefaction, it is a tercian, and begins with great cold, and increases
in heat, and is with great sweat. But if it begin with cold, and trembling
and perturbation of reason, or with a palsye, or with evil accidents, it
proceadeth of putrefaction, of the brain.

The fourth obseruaunce, is touching flesh growing upon the bone, in
the.viii. or.ix. day. If it grow in the form of the graynes of a pome
granade, and afterward dymynysshe or be utterly destroyed, thorough corruption
deteyned under the skull, or aposteme of the pannicle, it is a very evil sign.
But if this destruction came by a medicine much deficcatyue, or he risipelas
following upon the skulle, it is not so evil a sign. And when the said flesh
receives good increase, and grows circlewyse about the bone, and is joined
with the flesh growing upon dura matter, it is a true sign of health.

The.v. observation, is concerning an aposteme, which sometime chances upon
dura matter, after the percing of the bone. And then as Auice^ne says the ryme
dura matter, swells and ryseth up, above the skulle, and comunely evil
accidents accompany this aposteme, as perturbation of reason, rigours
trembling, palsy, and apoplexye. For remotio^ of this aposteme, ye must make a
new and larger perforation or borynge, as soon as may be, in ye place of the
first percyng, with our greater instrument called nespula. And afterward, ye
must proceed as it is aforesaid, layeng on a piece of ye cerote first
ordained. And afterward, using as much of this plaster following as may
cover the hole place. R. of camomille, mellilote, roses. an^. m^. ii. of
fenugreke.. iii. of ye rotes of holihocke somewhat stamped.. iiii. of sweet
fenell.. ss. of corianders.. iii. ye head of a wether somewhat bruised, let
them sees with sufficient water, till the head be perfitly sodden, then
streine them, and in the forsaid decoction, sees of husked beans. li. i. ss.
till they ben also perfitly sodden, then sta^pe the beans and streine them, and
put to the streynyng, of barlye flower.. viii. of bran poudred, of mellilote
sta^ped fynely. an^.. ii. let the^ sees again a little, make plaster with a
little of the said decoction and sufficient sapa, addinge in the end, of oil
of roses odoriferous, dyl, white wax. an^.. ii. of saffra^.. i. ye yolks
of.iii. eggs, which must come in when ye take the rest from the fire.

Item it is right expedient, to lay upon dura matter a sponge dipped in this
decoction, with the forsaid cerote and plaster, for it resolves the swellyng.

The.vi. obseruaunce, is touching ye black color of dura matter, wherein ye
shall consider, whether, ye color come by the application of medicines, or by
the alteration of the air, or by some bruise, or by blood co^geled and
retained, between ye said pa^nicle, and the skulle. If it seem to come, through
the streining of medicines, there is no better medicine, then to apply honye of
roses. But if it proceed, through the alteration of the air or cold, then ye
shall remove it with this medicine. R. of clear terebe^tine. iii. of honye of
roses streyned.. i. ss. sees the^ a little, and take the^ from the fire, and
immediatlye, add unto the^, ye yolke of an egg, of barlye flower.. iii. of
saffran.. i. of sarcocolle.. ii. This medicine mu^difyeth, with some digestion.

To take away ye black color of dura matter caused by a bruise, ye may use ii.
or.iii. days, a digestive of terebe^tine made with yolks of eggs, or with oil
of roses omphacine. Ite^ ye oil of yolks of eggs, is a singular remedy in
this case. If the said color be caused through blood, retained between ye
skulle and the pa^nicle, it is good to proceed with this remedy.iii. or.iiii.
times.. good aqua vite.. ii. ss. of fine greyne brayed,. ii. of saffra^.. i.
honey of roses streined. i. ss. of sarcocol.. iii. sees the^ al together, till
ye third perte be consumed, streynthe^, and stille ye licour upon the dura
matter, drop by drop, for it dries, and mu^difieth, and co^serueth ye hole
pertes from putrefactio^. Or make it thus. R. of aqua vite.. ii. of rasin of ye
fur tree.. ii. ss. honey of roses.. i. ss. of ye iuce of smallage.. ss. of the
ye iuce of betony.. vi. sarcocolle,. ii. sees the^ al together till half be
consumed, the^ streyne the^, and use it as aforsayd. But if ye rottenes and
blacknes cannot be removed her with, but yt the patient waxes worse and worse,
the^ ye shall show aforehande ye danger, and proceed with stronger medicines, yt
is to say with remedies written in the second obseruaunce.

The.vii. obseruaunce, is touching the percing of ye bone of the head, which
must be done with our instrument called nespula in ye somer, before the.iiii.
day, and in the winter before ye.vii. And ye said percynge must be in a long
figure, in ye lowest part, yt the quitture may issue out more easelye. And if
the stroke be upon some seame, both ye parts of the bone must be perced, in
the right and left sides of the commissure, so that the commissure be left
untouched. The cause why ye must make.ii. holes, one of the one side and
another of the other is: because in the time of the stroke, the blood is
dispersed on both ye sides, and if ye should make but one hole on the one side,
the blood yt is in the other side, could not come to ye other hole, because yt
ye ryme dura matter is knytte to ye co^missure, which the mattier can not perce.
This operation we have often proved in the court of Rome, and chifly in our
marcelles. But when it chances yt the skulle is broken by a bruise, then ye
must diligently remove ye pieces of ye broken bone, with trepanes, healing the
hurt of the rhyme dura matter, if there be any, as we did in a man of place^tia
which was stricke^ in the foreheade with the heel of a mule.

We being called to the cure, opened the place three cornered wise, and removed
all the bones taking some of the hole part away also, and we washed the hurted
pa^nicle, with aqua vite, and inco^tinently, I cured the broken bone, with
bolsters dipped in warm wine, and somewhat streyned. And likewise I closed ye
borders, with other bolsters, moysted in the white of an egg. And moreover I
washed the pannicle dura matter with aqua vite, and laid on, Auicennes capital
powder, and successively, I administered the cerote above ordained. And so the
man was healed, within the space of.xl. days. Likewise a certain man called
bruscho, was wounded upon the head, so greuouslye, that a little of the brain
came out at the wound in the quantity of a pese, which man was healed with the
former cure, for he was a man of a marvelous strong nature, and therefore
perchance nothing is i^possible to nature.

The.viii. obseruau^ce, is concerning the days, wherein the patient dies,
through the defaute of the chirurgien, as when he discovered the bone without
need, or when he perced it in an vnco^uenient time, or when he enjoined the
patient too slender a diete, so that the flesh procedyng from the bone, can not
join it self with that, that grows upon dura matter, for lack of
nouryshme^t. wherefore after.xiiii. days, so that a fieuer let you not, ye must
give the patient a stronger diete then before. When death chau^ceth through the
defaute of the chirurgien, it happens about the.xiiii. day or the.xxi. or
xxvii. day. Sometime, the patient dies through his own defaut, as when he
goes into the air, or drynketh excessyuely, or accompanyeth with women.

The.ix. observation, concerns the dryeng or co^traction of the borders of
the wound, wherein ye must consider, whether it proceed of mattier retained
under ye bone, and of a fieuer caused by the same matter, or by strong and
desiccatyue medicines, or by alteration of the air. when it proceeds, of
matter retained between the skulle, and the pa^nicle, and by a fieuer, the
borders of ye wound are deed, and black, and it is a very evil sign, but if
the co^traction, and dryeng, proceed by the application of evil medicines, the
fieuer is small, and ye borders are not greatly changed from their natural
color, nether is it any dangerous sign.

The tenth obseruau^ce is, touching the time of the remouyng of the bone
altered by the air. If the expulsyue virtue of the member be strong, and if
the patient have no fieuer, the said alteration shall be removed in.xxx. or.xl.
days, and if it remayn longer, ye shall remove it by rubbing or by
cauterisation as we will declare herafter.

The.xi. obseruau^ce is touching corruption of the bone by brusyng, which
chau^ceth often in tender age, wherein ye must diligently consider the danger,
for sometime ye blood retained between ye tables, engenders such corruption, yt
it perceth the tables, and sends putrefactio^ unto the brain. To avoid this
inconvenience, it is necessary to take a way ye first table with raspatories, yt
ye blood may issue out. And afterward let the place be mu^dified with honey of
roses, leyeng upon ye wou^d, ye cerote ordained in ye beginning of ye cure of
ye skulle. And when ye bruise of the bone comes to putrefactio^, ye shall remove
it with rubbing instruments, and after ye rubbing, ye shall apply some light
cautery, for hurtyng ye pa^nicles of ye brain, or in ye stead of the cautery,
ye may apply vnguentu^ egiptiacum.

The.xii. obseruau^ce, is touching provocation of sleep, for it chances
often, yt the patient ca^ not sleep at the beginning, by reason of vapors,
mounting from the stomach to ye brain, or because of some cholerike matter,
dispersed wtin the outward perte of the head, when want of sleep comes by the
said vapors, ye shall give ye pacient, after repast, a miua of quynces.. i.
ss. And it is good to use lettuse with his meat, and a iuleb of violettes. And
it is good to put into the ears thrice a day, with the top of the finger, or
to rub the temples, and the nosethrilles with vnguentum populeon. Item it is
a good remedy to wash the arms, legs and hands, in this decoction, after
dynner and supper two hours. R. of roses, lettuce, and violettes. ana. m^. ii.
of the heads of popye. m^. i. of nenuphar, and wormwood. ana. m^. ss. of
corianders, ten drammes, sees them all together in sufficient water and a
little wine, till the third part be consumed. If the want of sleep be by
choleryke matter dispersed upon the skul, beside the forsayde remedies, ye shall
annoynte the hole head with oil of violettes, and with an oyntmente of roses
warm, twyse a day. Item it is good, to give the patiente a clyster to draw
down the matter, and also it is convenient, to bind and to rub the extreme
parts and to apply ventoses without scarification.

The.xiii. observation is touching herisipelas, which chances often in this
case. First when ye fear herisipelas, ye shall apply this remedy following
which dryueth back and resolves the mattier. R. of oil of violettes, of
oil of roses odoriferous, of an ointment of roses, or instead thereof, of
Galienes oyntmente. ana.. ii. of the juice of lettuse and violettes. ana.. x.
of the juice of knotgrasse.. ss. sees them all together, till the juice be
consumed, then streyne them, and anoint the head therwyth being warm. Or
make it thus, and it shall be of greater efficacitie. R. of oil of violettes, of
oil omphacyne. ana.. ii. ss. of an ointment of roses, or instead thereof, of
Galiens ointment.. x. of the juice of lettuce.. i. ss. of the juice of
knottegrasse and sorrel. ana.. vi. of water of barley, one cyath. Let them boil
al together till the iuyces and waters be consumed, then streyne them, and put
to the streynynge of white wax.. ii. sees them again a little, and dip into
this ointment a piece of lynen clothe, as much as may cover all the head, and
afterward put it in water of barlye, and apply it warm upon ye head being
shaven. If the second aposteme come to maturation, ye shall proceed with the
remedies declared in ye chapter of herisipelas, where also ye shall find
remedies, for the other intentions.

The.xiiii. observation is concerning the dryuynge back of herisipelas, for by
reason of the nobility of ye member, ye must not use strong repercussiues,
which by reteynyng of matter, might cause many evil accide^tes. Therefore
repercussiues, must have some refrigeratiue moistenes, to take away ye drines
and heat of ye cholerike mattier. And herin chirurgiens do ignorauntly, which
apply bole armeny, oil of roses, and vinaygre with ye iuce of stiptyke herbs,
for they keep in, ye mattier, which often comes to putrefactio^, which thing
ye ii. forsaide things do not, for with repercussio^ they have also virtue to
resolve.

The.xv. obseruaunce, is co^cerninge purgation. First ye must consider, whether
a purgatio^ be convenient before ye coming of an aposteme or after, likewise,
whether ye body must be purged with a solutiue, lenitiue, or minoratiue medicine.
First it seems good, before and after an aposteme, to loose ye belly, and also
to use flebotomy in ye beginning, howebeit ye opinions of doctors at so^drye
in this matter, for some say, yt the patient must be purged with electuaries made
with scamony, which do greatly move nature. Other say yt the body must be
purged, with such medicines, as purge ones only, as are these, cassia, manna,
tamarinde, and like. wherefore the best practiciens, before the coming of an
aposteme, keep this order. First before they loose ye bellye, by medicines
received by the mouth, they comaunde (a clister premised) to cut the vein
cephalica in the contrary side, and afterward to give the patient a digestive,
made of syrup of violets, roses, and waters of borage, and hoppes, unto ye
fyft day, and co^sequentlye to administer this medicine following. R. of
cassia, diacatholico^. an^.. vi. make morcelles with sugar. Or for rich men ye
may use this medicine. R. of chose^ ma^na, of diaprunis not solutiue, or
diacassia. an^.. vi. of good reubarbe infused according to art.. ii. make a
small potion with ye water of endyue, and hoppes, addinge of syrup of violettes..
i. The reason why phlebotomy is more convenient at the beginning, then a
solutiue medicine, is this. The humors which are ready to ru^ne to the wounded
member, and bring it to an aposteme, are blood and cholere. wherefore the
cuttynge of the vein cephalica on the contrary part, is necessary to turn
away and to purge the said humors. As touching this purgation, ye shall note,
that ye must not give the patient a medicine, where into scamonye enters, for
as Auerroes says, Scamonye troubles, and inflameth the humors, and can not
be so corrected, but it will hurt the principal members. And Galene says,
that the aposteme upon the ryme, Dura matter, is a sharp disease, and in sharp
diseases strong medicines must not be given, but such as purge easily without
violence.

How, we will describe the instruments, whereof we made mention before. The
first instrument called instrumentu^ masculum, must be made of fine stele,
about the length of.viii. fyngers, in the end whereof, there must be an handel,
like the handel of a wymble or percer, and in the other end, it must have
small teeth like a saw, and must be holow, the length of five inches, having
a quadrate and sharp prick in the mids thereof, standing out a little farther
then ye saw, which shall serve only to make a cercle upon the skulle. The
second instrument, shall be made as the first, without any prick in the
myddest. Nevertheless, a nespula is set in the top of the saw, dented or
tothed to cut two manner of ways, for one part of the nespula must cut the
bone, toward the right side, when the instrument is turned to the same side,
and the other part of the nespula, must cut toward the lift side, when the
instrumente is turned to the same side. The effect of this instrumente, is to
perce the skulle, unto the second table, and is called nespula femina.

The third instrument, which is called instrumentum securitatis, shall be
holowe and dented, and shall have a handle also, and shall be holowe, and dented
without a nespula, and without a prick in the mids, but it shall have
entering in the end of the saw, a piece of iron or of silver.iii. inches long
after the facion of a wrethed vine, and in the manner of a vice, which when it
is turned above, by little and little, shall perce the second table, without
danger of hurtyng the ryme dura matter.

The fourth instrument is called lenticula, and it must be made with the said
wrethed vine or vice, as it is said in ye third instrument, and it must have no
saw, and in the end it shall have a lenticula, and an ynche above, it must have
a lineal round instrument, to reteyne or hold the said instrument. For the
le^ticula, shall help to remove ye roughnes or pricks of the boon. Also a
file shall take away the said pieces of bones, and thus the skulle may be
perced without danger.

A chapter of the cure of wounds, of mariners, and soulders.
Forasmuch as ye bodies of mariners and soldiers ar customed to labor, ye
cure of their wounds, must differ from them, that are of delicate complexion,
and live idelly. First if they be hurt in the head, ye shall proceed with the
remedies declared in the chapter, of the cure of wou^des, that is to say with a
capital cerote, aqua vite, and Auicennes powder. And if they be hurt upon the
ioynctes, with a great wound, ye shall cauterise the same wound, with a light
cauterie, of terebe^tyne and oil of roses, and afterward, ye shall sewe up the
same, leauyng in the lowest part, a hole, that the water may issue out, and ye
shall put a tent in ye hole, moysted with oil of the yolks of eggs, or with
oil of iperico^, with as much terebentyne. And upon the wound, ye shall lay
vnguentum basilicon magistrale of our description, and when quytture is
ingendered in the wound, instead of oil of iperico^, ye shall apply a
mu^dificatiue, of sirupe of roses. Item a plaster of beans, which we
ordained for the gout, is conueniente in this case. And if the wound be in a
fleshye place, ye shall make a seame, and wash the place with aqua vite, and
with a powder made of aloes, and myrrh. And ye must lay thereupon, vng.
basilicum of our description. If the wound be with loss of substance by an
instrument called a scopette, then after cauterisatio^ of the place, ye shall
finishe the cure, as we have declared in a proper chapter thereof. when the
wound perceth into the stomach, or into the belly, ye shall likewise proceed
with aqua vite, aloes, myrrh, and with a cerote of minium, written in a
chapter of additions. Finallye, ye may also use conveniently, this plaster
following.. of bean flower. li. ii. of branne fynely poudred, li. i. sees
them with sufficient sapa, white wine, and a little water till they be thycke,
adding of oil of roses, camomylle, and dylle. ana.. i. ss. As touching
diete, and convenient potions, ye shall resort to the chapter of wou^des that
perce into the breast. etc.

The manner of cuttynge veins from the head to the fete.
ALbeit, yt in a proper cha. of flebotomy, in ye nynth book, we have spoken
largelye of ye commodities and inco^modities thereof, yet yt the doctrine of the
said chapter may be more plain, we will here declare, how ye may use
phlebotomy as well diuersiue, as euacuatiue in apostemes wounds, and
breakynges of bones. First it is a general rule, that phlebotomye be made in
the contrary part, by one diameter complete (except the mattier be venomouse)
and this must be done in the beginning to augmentation, but in the state, ye
must cut a vein in the same side, for then there is no intention to turn
away ye mattier which flows no longer. Yea it is right convenient, to
purge the body by phlebotomye euacuatiue, for then the mattier anticedente is
found under the form of the mattier conioyncte. The order of phlebothomy
As concerning the order of phlebotomye, all the ancient and later doctors,
keep this that follows, that is to say, if the mattier be in the right (the
body and the head not being full of humors) then a clister premised, it is
most convenient to open the vein called cephalica, which is between ye
forefinger, and the thombe of the contrary hand, but in the state, the
practicioners open the same veyn, upon the same part, to purge the mattier
conioyncte. But if the body be full of humors, it is convenient to cut the
vein saphena, on the same side, for so the body shall be emptied, and the
mattier that flows to the eye, shall be drawn down. Consequently, if the
body be stylle full of humors, and if mattier flow to the sore eye, then ye
may conveniently cut the comune veyn on the contrary side, namely if the
mattier be in the over parts, or else the liver vein called epatica, if it be
in the mids of the body. Furthermore if an hot ophtalmia chance in both the
eyes, the body being not very full of humors, then ye shall consider, which
of the veins called saphena must be cut. If opthalmia be more in ye right eye
then in the lift, then if seems better, to cut the saphena of the right
foot, then of the left, so that the inte^tion be rather to turn away the
mattier, then to emptye the body, of superfluous humors. The next day, if
the age and strength of the paciente will suffer, ye shall cut the vein
called basilica of the contrary side of the said right eye. This I say, if
the fulness of humors be in the mids of the body. Or else ye shall cut the
comune vein, if the replecion of the body be universal. But if the abundau^ce
of humors be in the head, then ye must make a diuersiue phlebotomye, of the
cephalica of the contrary hand. Likewise in the state, ye may make an
euacuatiue phlebotomy of ye vein called cephalica, of ye same side. when ye
shall perceive, that the mattier is flowen to the eyes, which is known by the
coming of the state of the disease, then ye shall cut the vein cephalica, in
the part of ye eye yt is less vexed, to purge the mattier co^ioyncte, of the
parts lieng about the eye. And consequently, ye shall open the vein cephalica,
of the other arm.


Here ye shall note a good distinction concerning phlebotomye, which is, that
when we make a phlebotomy diuersiue, or euacuatiue, by occasion of some
aposteme, we must consider, whether the body be full of humors, or not,
whether the aposteme be great or small, whether the matter antecedent begin
to flow, or is derived alredye partlye, or all together.

For if the body be full of humors, whether the aposteme be great or small.
Ye shall use a diuersiue flebotomye in the contrary part by one diameter
only, except the matter be venomous. And euacuatiue flebotomye must ever be
made on the same side that the aposteme is of. But if the body be full of
humors, and the aposteme great, tha^ the farther ye flebotomy shall be from the
sore part, whether it be distaunte by.ii. diameters co^plete, or otherwise, it
shall be ye better, for it shall both euacuate and purge the body, and also turn
the matter aside. And consequently a diuersiue is renewed in a nygher part, by
one diameter, with more safety. For the first flebotomye is used to purge the
superfluous humors of the body: the second to turn the matter aside from the
sore place. But if it chance that the matter antecedent, be partlye deryued to
the aposteme, or ready to run to the said place, than a diuersiue flebothomye
must be used by one diameter. And if ye aposteme be with repletio^ of the
body, the said replecion continuynge at the beginning, because the matter is
not yet deryued to the place, tha^ ye must use flebotomye, in the part that
is farther of. But in the state of the aposteme, because the matter is
conioint, a mynoratiue and diuersiue by one complete diameter presupposed, ye
shall use an euacuatiue, on the same part that the aposteme is of.

Concerning the cuttyng of the vein cephalica, some doubt whether it must be
done, between the thombe and the forefynger, or in the bowyng of the arm. For
the place of ye vein cephalica, is found about the bowing of the arm, above
the common vein, as Galene and Auicenne say, which make no mention of the
vein cephalica, between the thombe and the fore finger. wherefore it seems
that the vein cephalica should be cut in the bowynge of the arm, and not in
the forsayde place. Howbeit, Rasis, Aue^soer, and almooste all the later
practicioners, keep this order following. That is to say, if they entend to turn
the matter to the contrary side of the sore eye, they open the cephalica upon
the thombe. But if they intend to purge the mattier conioyncte, than they
cut the vein cephalica, in the bowyng of the arm. Nevertheless, in the
state of the disease for flebotomye euacuatiue, ye may cut the vein cephalica
upon the thombe, in the same side that the disease is in. For this flebotomy in
the arm seems to help more to purge the matter conioynt, because it is nerer
to the heed.

The other flebotomye between the thombe, and the forefynger, seems better to
turn aside the matter, because it is farther from the heed. And though as we
said before some doctors say, that the vein cephalica is not found in the
said place, yet because the vein that comes to the thombe, is a branch of
the common vein, or of the vein cephalica, how soever it be, we have proved,
that the cuttynge of the said vein has been very profitable, when we would
turn aside the matter from ye right part of the heed, to the left. And like
wise we have proved it good, to cut the vein cephalica, in the hand of the
same side that the sore eye is of, when we would emptye the matter conioynt.
And thus ye must proceed, concerning flebothomye in diseases of the neck,
throat, and of the heed. And as touching apostemes under the arm holes, Mesue
and Auicenne say, that if the aposteme be under ye right arm hole: ye shall
open the common vein of the right arm, so that the matter be not venomous,
chefely if the body be not full of superfluous humors, and if the matter be not
deryued, or ready to be deryued. when the aposteme is in the state, ye shall
open the common vein, in the same side that the aposteme is in, to purge the
parts that lie about the apostemed place.

If the aposteme be great in the right arm hole, and the body full of
humors, ye shall open the vein saphena of the right foot. And co^seque^tly,
the commune vein, or basilica in the contrary part.

Item in the state of the aposteme, if need be, to purge the matter conioynt,
ye shall cut the vein basilica, on the same side. But if the aposteme be in
the rybbes of the right side, the body being full of humors, ye shall cut the
vein saphena of the left foot, and consequently, after, if matter ren to the
place stylle, the patient being strong, the vein basilica on the contrary
side, must be opened. And if need be to purge the matter co^ioynt, ye must
open the vein basilica on ye same side. In diseases that are from the flanks
downewarde, whether they be apostemes, fractures, dislocations. etc. If the
matter run, and if the body be full of humors, ye shall cut the vein
basilica, on ye same side as Auicenne says, to turn away the matter which
renneth, or is redye to run to the sore place. Conseque^tlye, to purge the
matter conioynte, ye shall open the vein saphena on the same side. Here ye
shall consydre, that if the body be very full of humors, than the vein
basilica on the contrary side, must be cut, and successively ye shall cut
the said vein of the same side, if the matter be partly deryued, and yet
run still. For this flebothomye, turns aside the mattere and purges the
parts lying about the apostemed place. And thus the vein saphena of the same
side, may more safely be cut in ye state to purge the matter conioynte. And
this was our purpose in the Chapter of hot apostemes of the stoones, though we
seemed to speak darkely through the negligence of the Prynter, for we
commanded (that the body being full of humors) ii. flebotomyes should be
used. The first was of basilica in the contrary side, to diminyshe the
superfluous humors of the body, the second, of basilica in the same side, to
turn away the matter, with some euacuation of the partis lying about. For if
the vein saphena should be opened in ye same side, danger might ensue, lest
matter should be drawn from ye upper parts, to the payneful place. Furthermore
we ought to consydre, why the doctors praise flebothomy of the vein Basilica,
on the same side, in bodies not full of humors rather than on the contrary
side. The first reason is, that a true diuersyon or turnynge aside of matter is
acco^plysshed by one diameter complete, but from the right flank, unto the
vein basilica of the left arm, there is more than one diameter complete.
Secondlye, because that in this case dyuersion is made from the nether parts
to the upper, which is harder tha^ that is made from ye upper place, to the
nether. For humors descend more easily, then they mount up. And therefore
Auicenne and Gentilis command to cut ye vein basilica in the same side,
when there is an aposteme in the flank, or in the thyghe, though the body be
full of humors. And Dinus proves the same by many reasons and arguments.
Howbeit Auerrois is of an other opynion concerning dyuersiue flebothomy, when
there is an apostem under the ears, for he says, yt when an aposteme is under
the right ear, flebothomy diuersiue must be made in the right arm, chefely
when the body is not full of humors. And ye may perceive by the same
auctour, that if an apostem be in the right ear, he will not, that the left
vein cephalica be touched. He affirms also that every diuersiue flebothomye
emptyeth superfluous humors of the body. But if the aposteme be in the right
ear, of a body full of humors, the said doctor counsayleth to cut the
cephalica of the left hand. For as we have said it does both emptye the
superfluity of the body, and turns aside the matter, and so ye may
perceive, that every euacuatiue flebothomye, does also partly turn the matter
aside.

Of wounds in general, a peculier treatise.
The first Chapter. Of wou^des simple, and co^pound, of their accidents, and
of the cure of hurt synowes.
Simple wounds, need only good byndynge, and washing with odoriferous
wine, of decoction of roses yarow, centaurie the greter, and with the
administration of the ointment, called gratia dei, chefelye, when they be not
very deep. And in this case, ye must not order a very sklendre dyete, as some
ignoraunte chirurgiens do, but ye must rather give the patient good wine to
drink, and let him eat meat of good noryshment. In compounde wounds in
the stead of wine, ye shall give this potion following.. of clean reysons, of
damask prunes washed with water. ana.. iii. of the wine of pomegranades.. ii. ss.
of fine sugre. li. ss. let them sees with viii. pound of rain water, tylle
the third part be consumed. If ye said wounds been very deep, with the
said intention, ye must sow together the sondred parts, as it is said in
the chapter of the wounds of the face, and use a poudre incarnatiue, and wash
the place with aqua vite. Powder
The discriptio^ of the poudre, is after this sort.. of frankensence, and
myrrh, aloes. ana.. ii. of sarcocolle, sanguis draconis, ana.. i. If the
wounds be in synnowye places, and upon the iointes, then a seem of the sondred
parts, so that the synnowes be not touched, and flebothomye diuersiue at ye
beginning, and purgation according to the evil humor, and slender diete,
are necessary for the curatio^ Ite^ it is good to keep the belly loose, using
daily a suppositorye, or some gentle clyster. Item ye must turn away the
matter by rubbyng, and byndynge the extreme parts, and by applying ve^toses in
the contrary parts.

Semblably, it is very good to rub the parts about with oil of camomyll,
dylle, sweet almondes, and hens grese, taking equal portion of every one
of them, wherein.. i. ss. of earth worms have been sodden, with odoriferous
wine, and a little saffran till the wine be consumed. This unction swageth
pain, and defends spasme, and is a synguler remedy to annoint the back bone
therewyth. After this embrocation, lay a broad sparadrap upon all the hole
membre, after this description.. of oil of roses odoriferous, camomil, ana.
li. i. ss. of oil of roses omphacyne.. ii. of he^nes grese, of oil of sweet
almo^des, of goose grese, ana.. ss. of odoriferous wine, one cyathe, of earth
worms washed with wine.. iii. ss. of the seed of. s. John's worte.. ix. of all the saunders, of fine grain brayed. ana.. v. of unwashed wolle.. ii. of the
leaves of plantaine stamped. m^. i. sees them all together, tylle the wine be
consumed, then streyne the^ through a thick clothe, and put to the straynynge
of white wax.. x. and let them sees again a little, which done, ye must
dip pieces of lynnen of the forsayde largeness, into the decoction. And
afterward ye must put them in to water of the decoction of roses, camomyl
mellilote, or into water of barlye, or into wine delayed with water, and apply
the spa^radrap as is aforsayd.

Afterward ye shall lay in the upper part of the sore membre.v. or six inches
from the wound, this defensive following.. of oil of roses odoriferous..
viii. of oil of myrt.. ii of white wax.. iii. melte the wax with oils, and
take them from the fire, and stir them about till they be luke warm: and
tha^ put unto the^ of bole armenye, of terra sigillata. an^. vi, of bean
flower well bolted.. ii. of all the saunders, of sanguis draconis well brayed.
ana.. iii. the white of iii. new laid eggs, labor them al in a mortare of
marble, the space of an hour. These two later remedies are good for two
causes, that is to say, to defend a spasme, or to defend strange matter,
that it descend not to the sore place. Further from the beginning, unto the
seventh day, ye may conuenyently use this linime^t.. of oil of ipericon, and
terebentine an^.. vii. of earth worms washed with wine.. ii. seethe them all
together with a little wine, and after, put of saffran.. i. of fine grain, of
madder. ana.. ii. when they have sodden tylle the wine be consumed, strain
them. Apply this liniment with tents, or lynte. Semblably, ye may
conuenyently lay upon the wound, vnguentum basilicum maius, or the ointment,
called gracia dei, of our descriptyon.

Here ye shall note, that if ye wound be in a body of strong complexion, and
in a synnowy place, then ye must use aqua vite, with the foresaid remedies, and
likewise with the said poudre, incarnatiue, for we have healed many herewyth,
and namely Simon de Iohanna, a panormitane, which had a great and wide wound in
his neck, with a swoorde. when there chances in the said wounds unctuous
flesh, ye shall apply thereupon our poudre of mercurye. And if need be of
mundification, ye shall use this mundificatiue.. of honye of roses.. iii. of
the juice of plantaine.. i. of clear terebentine.. v. sees them together a
little, and put thereunto flower of barley.. x. of sarococolle, of myrrh. ana..
ii. of the flower of beans, and lupynes, ana.. iii. of saffran. i. After the
application of this mundificatiue, ye shall use this ointment called vnguentum
basilicum maius. Vnguentu^ basilicu maius.
Take of oil of roses odoriferous. li. i. ss. of oil of camomyl, and
lyneseed, of hens grese. ana.. iii. of cowes talowe, and wethers tallowe.
ana.. iiii of yarowe, of veruayne, flowers of rosemary, woodbynde, centaurie
the greater, plantayne. ana. m^. i. of earth woormes.. ii. of grain, of
madder, ana.. i. ss. of ship pytche, of rasyne of the pyne tree. ana.. v. of
colophonye, of mastike. ana.. ii. ss. beat them all together, and sees them
with a cyathe of odoriferous wine, than strain them, and put to the
straynynge of minium, of litarge of silver ana.. iii. sees the^ again, and
stir them about, till they be of black color, which done, put unto them,
of clear terebentyne.. viii. of white wax as much as shall suffyce, make a
styffe cerote. The operation of this oyntemente is merueylous, in drawing,
pleasauntly, and comfortynge the synowye places. To cicatrise the wou^d ye
shall wasshe it with wine of the decoction of roses, and roche alume.

Also ye poudre of myrobalanes, laid upon the wound, is good for the same
purpose. Ite^ a sponge or stoop dypped in the decoction following, and laid
hoote upon the wound, and well bound thereunto, causes cicatrisation
spedely. This is the decoction.. of red wine, one quart, of barbours lie, as
much, of Roses, flowers of pomegranades, mirtilles, wormewoode. ana. m^. ss.
of the nuttes of cypress, nombre ten, of roche alume.. ii. of honye.. i. ss.
sees them al brayinge first the things that are to be brayed, tylle the
third part be sumed, and use it.

A Chapter of the pryckynge of synnowes, and cure thereof.
FOr the Cure of the pryckynge of the synnowes, beside the intentions, declared
in the former Chapter, touching flebothomye, purgation, and dyete. etc.

It is conuenyent, to enlarge the prycke at the beginning, with a cold iron,
and afterward to cauteryse the place with hoote oil of Elders, or with the
common oil, where in earth worms, with water of the decoction of camomylle,
and brymstone have been sodden tylle the decoction of the said camomil, The
french book has bra^ne for brimstone
and brimstone be consumed, and this must be done unto the third day. But if
the pryckynge of the synnowes be caused through an instrument of a small heed,
it is necessary to open the place with an hoote iron, for mitigation of pain,
which might enduce a spasme. And ye shall lay upon the said place, this
oyntmente following.. of the roots of holyhockes sodden in water, and barbours
lie, and stamped and strayned.. iiii. of clear terebentyne.. ii. of fresh
hens grese. vi. of white diaquilon gummed.. ii ss. of the foresaid oil with
the decoction of worms, one ounce and an half, sees them all together a
little, and when ye take them fro the fire, labor them about, till they be luke
warm, and use this ordinance, after the manner of a cerote, putting a tente
into the wound, until the seventh day, and ye shall lay upon the hole
membre, the same time this plaster vnderwrytten, which is conuenyent for the
wounds of synowes.. of husked beans, sodden in the brothe of a wethers heed
with barbours lie, four pound, of branne well brayed. m^. ii. of barlye
flower. l. ss. let them sees with suffyciente sapa, and a little of the
forfayde decoction, till they been thycke, tha^ add of oil of camomyl, roses,
and dyll, of white wax. ana.. ss. sees them again a little, and add moreover
of saffran.. i. ss. Item it is good for mittigation of pain, to embroke the
hole membre, with the oil vnderwrytten actually hot, which also defends a
spasme.. of oil of camomylle, of oil of roses odoriferous. ana. li. ss. of
wormwood, squinantum, camomyl. an^. m^. i. of earth worms. The french book
has bra^ne for brimstone
. ii. of brymstoone brayed,. i. ss. of odoriferous wine, two cyathes, sees
them all together, till half the wine be consumed, than strain them, and let
them sees again, till the wine be consumed.

Here ye shall note, that this oil laid hot upon a prycke being closed,
may be in the stead of a new incision. when there is any spasme, it is a
synguler remedy, to cut the synnowe with an actual cauterie, as Auicenne
teaches. Fynallye, it is co^uenyent to rub the bone with oil of camomylle,
dylle, with oil of costus and with oil of a fox. To defend a spasme, and to
swage the pain of a spasme, when it happens, and for the cure of a spasme,
ye shall resort to the former book.

A Chapter of wrestynges that chance in the insteppes, and ioyntures of the
hands, and in the knee.
THe wrestyng of ligamentes caused thorough a fall or a stroke shall be cured by
obseruacion of.ii. intentio^s that is to say, by dycte and general purgation.
For if the wrestyng be in the kne, or in the right foot of the same part, than
ye shall cut the vein basilica on the same side, if the age and strength of
the patient can suffer. Ye shall also purge the patient with cassia, manna,
reuberbe diacatholicon, and such like both before digestion and after. A
digestive in this case may thus be ordained.. of syrup of roses, of syrup of
the iuce of endive. ana.. vi. the waters of endive, buglosse, and wormewoode.
ana.. i. The signs of this disease, if perchance ye shall doubt thereof, are
vehement pain, and swellyng of the place.

Some ignoraunte Chirurgiens think that it is a dislocation, and enforce
themselves to reduce it, putting the membre into hot water, and after into
cold water, which thing ought not to be done, for hoote water draws matter
to the place, and cold induces a spasme. And when they se the place black
about the seventh or tenth day, they scarifye it, thinking that it is, the
beginning of cancrena, which thing causes sondrye accidents.

Now, that we have warned you of their error, we will return to our
purpose. wherefore, as touching local medicines, the first, three or four
days, ye shall emplayster the membre with stoupes moystned in water, and wine
of pomegranades, or vynegre of Roses, and anointed with this myxture
following.. six eggs, with whytes and yolks, of oil of roses omphacyne, or
oil of roses complete.. iiii. of oil of myrte.. ii. of woman's milk. i.
rybworte cut in small pieces, m^. ii. of barlye, and bean flower. ana.. i.
ss. shake them all together, adding of the poudre of the leaves, and graynes
of myrtylles. ana.. x. apply this plaster upon the place twyce a day
actuallye hot, and after the.iiii. day put to the said plaster, of wormwod
cut and stamped. m^. i. ss. of oil of camomylle.. i. ss. ye shall proceed with
this remedy, unto the.vii. day. And if the pain be vehement, in the stead of
the foresaid remedy, ye shall use this plaster following. of mallows, roses,
wormwood, ribworte, ana. m^ i. ss. of branne, of husked beans, ana m^. ii. of
camomylle, mellylot stamped ana. m^. ss. sethe them all together in sufficient
water, till the beans be perfectlye sodden, stamp them all and strain them,
and set them to the fire again, and make a plaster with.li. i. ss. of sapa,
and as much bean flour and with the foresaid streynyng, addyng in the end of
oil of roses odoriferous.. iii. of oil of camomylle, and myrte, ana.. ii. of
saffron.. i. let them sees again a little.

Item to comfort the joints, in the end, it is good to apply this plaster.
of the roots of holyhocke.li. i. of salamo^s seal.li. ss. cut them, and
sees them in the broth of a wethers head, then stamp them and strain them,
and put to the streynyng, of good odoriferous wine.. viii. of bean flower li.
ss. of ox dounge brayed.. ii. of iva stamped, of wormwood, of roses, ana m^.
ss. of oil of roses odoriferous, of oil myrtyne, ana.. i. of oil of
camomylle, spyke, agrippa, and dialthea, ana.. ss. myngle them, and let them
sees again till they be thycke, and use this ordinance after the manner of a
cerote or plaster. And if ye add of clear terrebentyne.. iii. it shall be more
subtyle, and shall the better comfort the synowes, and the muscules. An other
for the same intention.. of holy hock, of salomons seal, sodden and strayned.
ana.. iiij. of clear terebentyne.. ij. of odoriferous oil of roses, of oil
myrtyne, spyke, and mastyke. ana.. ij. of whyt wax.. x. of honey.. i. of
agrippa and dialtea. ana.. v. of good whyt wine half a ciathe, sees them al
together, with an ounce and half of earth worms (washed with wine) till the
wine be consumed, then strain them, and put to the straynynge, of read
powder.. vi. of ye powder of myrtilles, wormwood and roses. ana.. ss. of all the sau^ders, ana.. iij. of mumia.. ij. ss. of saffron.. i. of bean flower..
xiiij. myngle them.

Here follows a co^fortatiue decoction, which dries and resolves, and
serves, in the end, and ye must foment the place twyse a day with sponges.
of wormwood roses, myrtilles, rosema. flowers, and yua, an^. m^. i. of sage
squina^tu^, sticcados, maiorum. an^. m^. ss. ye nuts of cypress brayed, of ye
flowers of pomegranades, ana.. ij. of honye of roses.. iij. of roche alume of
salt, ana.. i. ss. of frankynsence, mastycke, storax calamite, ana.. ij. of
laudanum.. v. of liquide storax.. i. ss. of corianders, and anyse, ana.. ij.
ss. stamp them al together, and sees them with red wine and barbours lie,
till the third part be consumed, the^ strain them and use them

Here follows ye remedies, which are convenient in all fractures and
dislocations, and ben of five kinds, whereof the first is this, wherwyth ye
shall proceed unto the seventh day.. the whytes of four eggs, oil of roses.
oil myrtine, ana.. ij. of mylduste.. ij. ss. of sanguis draconis,. x. of terra
sigillata.. vi. myngle the^, and use this medicine, leynge first upon the
fracture, a piece of lynen cloth, wette in oil of roses and oil of myrte. The
second kind, wherwyth ye must proceed unto the.xx. day, is this,. of clear
terebenti.. iij. of honey.. i. ss. oil of myrte, oil of roses odoriferous,
ana.. ij. of mirrhe well brayed, fra^kinsence. aloes, sanguis draconis, ana..
ss. of bole armeny, of terra sigillata. ana.. vi. of mumia.. v. of myldust, of
the flower of lynseed, of fenugreke. ana.. i. the whytes of.iiij. eggs, of
dragagantu^ brayed.. x. These things must be put in, with. vij. pound of the
muscilage of calves feet, sodde^ with the leaves of holihocke, ash, and
wyllowes, and they must be well myngled together, after the manner a plaster,
and changed ones or twyse a week.

The third is a sparadrap, which is convenient in the fractures of great
bones, as of the thyghes, and of ye shulders, and is written in our antidotary,
called a cerote for the fractures of bones.

The fourth kind, is an embrocacion, which must be used, every third day,
after the application of the sparadrap, unto perfyte curation, and is thus
made.. of roses, wormwood, of the leaves of both plantaines, of yarowe, knotte
grass, of the roots of the ash tree, and wyllowe tree, of the leaves and
graynes of mirte. ana. m^. ij. of the roots of holihock, somewhat stamped.li.
i. of horsetayle, woodbynd, of the roots and leaves of consolida the greater
and the less. ana. m^. ss. of honey.. iij. of roche alume, and salt. ana.. ij.
of frankyncence, myrre, sarcocoll. ana.. i. of aloes eparyke.. ss. of
laudanu^.. x. seethe all these together with two parts of water, and one of
good red wine, till the fourth part be consumed, then strain them, and use
this decoction actually hot.

The.v. is a liniment, which takes away ytchynge caused through dryenge
medicines. And it is in this form.. of oil of roses, of vnguentu^ populeon.
ana.. ij. of the juice of pla^taine. i. of oil of myrte.. x. of ceruse.. i. of
lytarge of gold and silver. ana.. i. myngell them, and make a linimente in a
mortar of lead, and anoint the ytchyng place therwyth.

A chapter of the cure of a bruise without a wound, wherein the bones of ye
head are depressed, chiefly in children.
REsolutiue medicines, and that remove blood caused by co^tusion in childre^s
heads, are of.iij. sorts, whereof ye first is this.. the whytes and yolks
of.iij. eggs, of oil of roses and myrte. ana.. ij. of the flower of beans
and barlye. ana.. i. ss. Incorporat them altogether. This remedy must be
applied upon the bruise, the.iij. first days, and ye must change it ones a
day. And ye shall lay it on, with stoupes, moysted in the wine of
pomegranades, or in vinegre and water, and afterward press them and dip
them in ye said myxture. The second, which must be applied from the.iiij.
day unto the tenthe, is in this form. The french says br^^^.
. of beanfloure.. iiij. of barley flower.. ij. of brymstone brayed.li. ss. of
camomil and mellilote stamped, or the graynes* and leaves of myrte, of roses
and wormwood. ana. m^. i. of corianders, cumyne sweet fenell. ana.. vi. of
calamus aromaticus.. iij. braye the things that are to be brayed, and sees
them al together with sufficient sapa, till they be thycke and styffe, adding
of oil of myrte, roses and camomill. ana.. i. ss. of white wax.. ij. myngle
them together, and stir them about when ye take them fro the fire, till they
be luke warm, and proceed herewith unto the third day.

The third is the application of a sponge, dypped in the decoction following..
of camomill, mellilote, roses, wormwood, mirtilles, of ye graynes and leaves
thereof, of every one. m^. i. calamynt, nepte, of every one. m^. ss. of
coryanders, cumyne, fenell, ana.. vi. nuttes of cipres brayed. n^. x. of honye.
iii. of salt, of roche alume, ana.. x. sees them all together with a quarte
of red wine, and as much lie, tylle the third part be consumed, then
streyne them all, and use this decoction, with a sponge well bound and pressed,
under which sponge ye shall lay thin plates of lead, bored thorough in
sundry places, by this mean, I have healed many at rome, when the bones were
depressed, without opening the place.

A chapter of compound wounds.
A Wound compound, is that wherein there is loss of substance, and therefore the
good practicioners say, that in the cure thereof, two ententions, are required,
whereof one consists in the restoration of the lost substance, the others
office is, to cicatrise the substance being restored. Wherefore in this case
ye must proceed with dygestiues, and not with incarnatiues as ignorant
chyrurgiens do, for Rasys says, a deep wound or vlcere, comes not to
regeneration of flesh, but after rotennes, that is to say, after digestion.
An other reason is, why dygestion is conueniente in this case at the beginning,
because in these wounds, there is always alteration of the air. Howebeit all
digestiues are not convenient, but such as are small, for the long digestiues,
are dangerous, except the wound be upon a great joint with great loss of
substance. A convenient digestive in this case, must be made after this
form.. of clear terrebentyne.. ii. the yolke of an egg, of saffron.. i. fill
the wound with lynt weted in this digestive. And afterward lay upon the
wound, a leaffe of black colewoortes. And about the parts of the wound, ye
shall lay the remedies, written in the chapyter of flesshye wounds, too defend
them from apostemation and peyn. When good quitture shall appear, ye shall apply
no more digestiues, as ignorante chirurgiens do, putryfyeng ye member, with
long digestions. But ye shall apply this mundificatyue following. of clear
terbentyne.. iii. honey of roses sirupe of roses, ana.. vi. sees them al
together, and when ye take them from the fire, add there unto the yolke of an
egg, of saffron,. i. of barley flower.. x. After mundification, which is
known by good flesh, for incarnation, ye shall put to this mundificatiue of
sarcocolle, myrre, aloes, ana.. i. ss. myngle them. The second intention is
accomplysshed by things cicatrisatiue, wherefore ye shall wash the place with
water of alum, and ye shall apply the powder of mirobalane citrine, and
vnguentum de minio.

Altered wounds, are like unto them, which are with loss of substance, and
therefore their cure differs not, except the altered wounds, be with great
contusion, for then ye shall proceed with vnguentum egiptiatu^, to remove the
putrefaction. For the other intentions, ye shall proceed no otherwise then is
aforesaid.

A chapter of great contusion and attrition of lacertes without a wound.
THe universal rules noted in the chapter of hurted synowes presupposed, ye
shall use at the beginning yt whites and yolks of three eggs, beaten with
oil of myrre, and oil of roses to stop the course of the mattyer to the
sore place. After the fourth day, ye shall apply a plaster, of beans
husked, and sodden in water, with malowes, roses, wormwood, bran, cro^mes of
broun bred, wherwt afterward ye shall make a stiff plaster, with as much oil
of roses, camomyll, myrte, and barlye flower, as shall suffyce, and for this
purpose, the plaster foloweyng is of singular efficacitie.. mallows,
wormwood, branne, husked beans, ana. m^. ij. of mugwort, weybread, roses,
ana. m^. i. sethe them all together, with the broth of a wethers head, tylle
the barlye be perfectly sodden, than stamp them well, and put to that that is
stamped, of barlye flower.li. i. ss. of fenugreke flower.. ij. of camomyl,
mellilot, and dyll stamped, a na. m^. i. of the grains of myrt well brayed..
iij. of beaten cumyn.. ii. ss. of honey.. iiij. sees them all together, with
sufficient, sapa, and a little odoriferous wine, till they be thick, and stiff,
and than put thereunto, of oil of camomille, roses, dille myrte, and of white
wax, ana.. ij. of saffron.. iij. This plaster is of great efficacitie, in all
brufynges of lacertes, and falls upon the dely, for it resolves the blod
which is without the veins, swageth pain, and comfort the members.

A chapter of the accidents of wounds and synowes.
THe accidents of wounds, as are a spasme, peyn, and aposteme hinder the cure
of wou^des And therefore they must be diligently removed and when they be
distempered in heat and dryenesse, they engender heri^^pelas. Matter hot and
moist, causes phlegmon, matter cold and moist, engenders vnd^^ia. The
remedies that swage pain in a hot and dry cause, are of.iii. kinds, whereof
the first is in this form.. the whytes and yolks of.iij. eggs, of the iuce
of lettuce and plantayne, ana.. ss. of oil of roses odoriferous.. iii. beat
them all together, and use them with cloutes, upon the member infected with
heriu^pelas. The form of the second is this.. of oil of roses omphacine,
oil of violettes, oil of roses odoriferous, ana. ii. myngle them, and labor
them in a mortar of lead the space of.ii. hours, and anoynte the place with
feathers moysted in this oil. The third form is after this sort. of malowes,
violettes, barlye, and lettuse, ana. m^. i. ss. of branne, m^. ii. of husked
beans, ana m^. ii. ss. seth them al with sufficient brothe of unsalted
flesh, till the barley break, and then epitheme the place with hot cloutes.

The remedies which swage pain, caused of hot and moist matter, are after.
iiii. sorts, whereof, the first is in ye form of a linime^t.. of oil of roses
odoriferous, oil of camomyll, ana.. ii. of the juice of plantane.. ss. the
yolks and whytes of.iij. eggs, of saffron,. i. mingle them, and labor them
in a mortar of lead, the space of an hour and an half. The second form is
this.. of the cromes of bread steped in the broth of flesh.li. j. ss. of oil
of roses odoriferous, oil of camomylle ana.. ii. the yolks of. ii. eggs, of
saffran.. i. make a stiff plaster. The third form is thus ordained. of ye
leaves of mallows, of husked benes, ana. m^. ii. of the leaves of violettes, of
clean barley, ana. m^. i. of the cro^mes of broune bred.li. i. of camomil,
melilote ana. m^. ss. sees them al with broth, or sufficient rain water til ye
barley break, then stamp them and streyn them, and put to the streining of
oil of roses and camomyl, of barlye flower, ana.. ii. seth them all again
till they be thick.

The fourth form is a fomentation, in a hot and dry cause. Whereunto there
is added, of camomyl, and mellylote, ana. m^. i. Furthermore remedies ordained
to swage pain caused of coolde mattier are in five fourmes, whereof the first
is a plaster of sapa, thus ordained.. of bean flower.li. i. of camomylle,
mellylote, stamped, ana. m^. i. of brayde branne. m^. ii. seethe them all
together with suffycient sapa, a little barboures lie, and a little odoriferouse
wine, tylle they been thycke, addyng of oil of camomylle, roses, and myrte,
ana.. i. The second is this.. of husked beans, of the cromes of broune bread,
ana.li. ii. sees them with the broth of a wethers head, tylle the beans be
sodden, then make a styffe plaster with oil of roses, camomylle, and dille.

The.iii. form is cromes of bread steeped in milk, and after made in a
plaster with oil of roses, camomyl, yolks of eggs, and a little saffron.

The fourth is a fomentation, administered with a sponge, or with vnwasshen
wolle, after this description.. of cammomyl, mellilote, wormwod, roses,
sticados, ana. m^. i. of the sede of fenugreke, of lynsede ana.. i. ss. of
honey.. iii. of rosemary flowers. m^. i. of sapa.li. ii. sees them all with
sufficient water and a little odoriferous wine, till the third part be
consumed.

The fifte is an oil magistral, which is excellent to swage pain caused in
wounds thorough the coldness of the air, and is thus ordained.. of oil of
ipericon, camomyll, dylle, and spike, ana.. ss. of agrippa, and dialthea, ana..
i. of fox oil.. x. of anthos, iuamuscata, mugworte, maioram, sticados, ana.
m^. ss. of earth worms washed with wine.. ii. of the rotes of enula campana,
of the roots of wallwoorte. ana.. i. seth them all together with a pint of
odoryferouse wine, and one ciath of water of camomil and sage, till half the
wine and the water be consumed, and then strain them and press them strongly
and let them seth again, till the wine and waters be utterly consumed, and
then add of most clear terebentyne.. i. ss. and let them sethe again, a
little, and use this decoction actually hot with hot cloutes bound upon the
member. when ye shall perceive that the aposteme comes to maturation, ye shall
resort to the former book to the peculier chapters.

A chapter of venomous wou^des, of the styngynge of venomous beasts, and of a
wound by a gonne, and remotion of the.vi. finger.
IN our former book we have declared, that the claws and teeth of beasts are
venomous, and that a wound caused by a go^ne, has part of venymenes, by
reason of the powder. The cure of ye said wounds, dyffer not from other
wounds, but in as much as they be more or less venymous.

To come to the cure, if the wound be caused by an horse, an ape, a mad
dog. etc. ye shall bind ye member streytlye in the over part, and cauterise
it with an hot iron, and afterward with hot oil of elders, whereunto, a little of
Galienes triacle is added. And then ye shall lay upon the place after ye manner
of a plaster with the lefe of a black colewort, scabiouse sta^ped with butter,
yolks of eggs, and onyons boiled in an oue^, anointynge the parts lyeng
about with triacle, vynegre, terra sigillata, and thus ye must do unto the.vij.
day. And after the vij. day let the place be dygested with this dygestiue..
of clear terebentyne.. ij. of the juice of scabious.. i. seth them al together
till the juice be consumed, and then put thereunto the yolke of an egg. After
dygestion, let the place be mundifyed, with this mu^difycatiue.. of
terebentyne.. iij. of ye juice of smallage, scabiouse, and wormwood. ana.. ss.
sees them all together till half be consumed, and then put thereunto of the
flower of lupynes and lentilles well bulted. ana.. vi. of sarcocolle.. v. of
saffran.. i. When the place is mundifyed, for incarnation ye shall add to the
said mundificatiue, of myrrh, and aloes. ana.. v. Finally for cicatrisation ye
shall proceed with an ointment of minium, water of alume and our powder
cicatrisatiue, written in the additions. But if the wound be venemose and
large, caused of an horse, or dog, or some like thing, it shall be
sufficient, to cauterise the place, with the foresaid oil and triacle. But if
the wound be caused of a gonne, then ye shall only cauterise it with oil of
elders, or oil of lynseed. And successiuelye, ye shall fyl the wound.iij.
days, with vnguentu^ egiptiacu^ made with out arsenike, leynge upon the hole
member to avoid cancrenositie, this plaster following, and that many days.
of the flowers of beans, barlye and lupynes. ana.li. ij. of the juice of
wormwood, smallage, and scabious. ana.. ij sees them all together with
sufficient sapa, and barbours lie, till they be thyck, and use this ordinance
unto ye.xiiij. day or more and use the said vnguentum egiptiacum unto the
fourth day. And afterward let the place be mundified, incarned, and
cicatrised as it is aforesaid. Item it is very good to use the potion written
in the additions against the styngynge of aspys, and bytynge of a mad dog.

Concerning the remouyng of the vi. finger, and cure of a hand cut of,
incontinentlye after incision, ye shall cauteryse the place with comune oil
wherein earth worms have been sode^, with a little terebentyne, and afterward,
ye shall dygeste the place with this oil, myngled with the yolks of eggs and
terebentyne. And ye shall anoint the parts adioynynge, with oil magistral,
and bind upon it, the sparadrap written in the chapter of hurted synowes.
After the remotio^ of the escare, and when good quytture is engendered, let the
place be mundifyed with this mundifycatiue.. of clear terebentyne.. vi. of the
juice of plantayne.. ij. of water of barley one cyath, of syrup of roses.. i.
ss. sees them al together, till the water and the juice be consumed, then
streyne them and put to the streynynge, of barlye flower.. ij ss. the yolke of
an egg, of sarcocolle.. ij. For the other intencions, ye shall proceed as is
aforesaid. As touching diet and preservatives, we have sufficientlye spoken in
our former book.

A chapter of the cure of wounds caused by arowes, darts. etc.
WHen a man is wounded with an arowe, or darte or like thing, ye shall enlarge
ye place with sharp iron as soon as may be, except there be danger of cuttynge
synowes, veins, and arteries, and then ye shall draw out the darte or arowe,
with tenacles, or some other convenient instrument. Howbeit some command to
mollifye the place with dygestiues, which thing is very dangerous. If the
arrowe be not venemose, it shall suffice to cauterise ye place with hot oil of
elders, and afterward, ye shall proceed with remedies ordained in ye former book
in ye chap. of a fleshye wound. If ye arowe or dart be enuenimed, which is
known by swellyng and blackenes of the place, than ye shall burn away the
venemouse flesh, with an hot Iron, and scarifie the place about, and lay on
bloodsuckers, and upon the wound, ye shall apply the plaster of meals,
written in the chapter of cancrena. If the arowe be barbed, it is better to
cause it pass thorough, tha^ to draw it back. It chau^ceth sometimes, that
the arowe head remains in the bellye long time, and afterward is sent of
nature to the flanks, and likewise, sometimes the pellettes of hagbuttes,
remain five or six days in some member, and comme out in the end of the
membre.

The remedies convenient to draw out yro^, thorn, or other like are these.
The juice of the roots of a cane or reed, incorporated with new leaue^,
terebentyne, armonyake, and the heads of lysardes cut, brent, and stamped,
and made after the manner of a plaster. Item this plaster following, is good
for the same purpose.. of great diaquilon of our description.. iij. of
armonyake, serapyne, Bdellium, galbane, ana.. vi. of the juice of the rotes of
a cane or reed.. x. of terebentyne, ship pitche, oil of lynseed, ana.. j.
melte them all at the fire, and add of wheat flower.. v. of new leaven.. x.
of oil of elders.. vij. myngle them and use them after the manner of a cerote.
Thus ends the first book, of wounds and begins the second book, of
Apostemes.

The second book of Apostemes.
The first Chapter, of the cure of hot and cold Apostemes.
THe remedies which are convenient in the beginning of apostemes, unto
augmentatio^, must be repercussiue, and when they come to augmentacion, ye
must proceed with the remedies given in their proper Chapter. After
maturation, incision, and digestio^, ye shall apply this incarnatiue.. of
clear terebentyne.. iij. syrup of rooses, honye of rooses, ana.. vj. of the
juice of plantayne.. ss. seth the^ all together a little, and when ye take them
from the fire, add thereunto of frankensence, myrre, sarcocolle, aloes, ana..
ss. of the flower of barley, lentilles, and beans, ana.. iij. use this
incarnatiue, in a sanguine, and flegmatyke, aposteme. In choleryke Apostemes,
ye must not apply incarnatiue medecynes, but rather such as may alter the
Coleryke matter, for which purpose, ye shall use vnguentum de Minio, with the
juice of plantayne, and nyghtshade, or vnguentum de tucia, of our description.
For cicatrisation, ye shall use vnguentum Basilicu^, the greater and the less,
a lotion of water of alume, and our powder cicatrisatyue.

A Chapter of malygne pustules, as Carbuncles, ignis persicus and Froncles.
IN venemouse pustules, it is necessary at the beginning to mortify their
venemousnes, with an hot Iron, or some other caustyke medicyne and ye must cut a
vein of the same side, to draw evil blood toward the Carbuncle, that it be
not derived to the principal members. Afterward, as Antonius Gaynerius says,
ye must give the pacient some purgation that has virtue to resyste venyme, as
we have declared in the chapter of the pestilence, and of a carbuncle. Item for
the comfortation of the heart, ye shall use cordyall Epithimies, and ye shall
maynteyne the strength of the paciente with good meats, and ye shall not lay
upon the place things repercussyue, nor to much attractiue, as some do, that
apply serapyne, and galbanum. etc.

After cauterisation, to cause the escare to fall, ye shall administre things
mollificatiue and maturatiue, as are butter, swynes grese, and a digestive of
terebentyne. When the escare is removed, for mundification, ye shall proceed, as
it is said in the former book. The comune remedies convenient in this case,
are these yt follow. Vnguentum Egyptiacum of our description with arsenyke,
water of arsenyke, and sublymate, to mortify the Carbuncle, which is written
in our additions, a trocysque of Minium, ruptorie of capitelle, cauterisation
with hot Iron, all these mortify the carbuncle. After mortification, ye shall
apply the yolke of an egg, beaten with salt, and scabiouse, a mundificatiue of
smallage, incarnatiue of sarcocolle, terebentyne, honye of rooses, juice of
herbs ordained in the additions, vnguentu^ de Minio, water of alume, powder
cicatrisatiue, black colewortes stamped with salt.

This plaster following is a synguler remedy against ignem persicum.. of
roses, weybred, mallows, lentilles, clean barley, ana. m^. ij. of the cromes
of broune bread.li. ss. of the flowers of pomegranates, myrtilles, ana. m^.
ss. sethe them al together with sufficient water, tylle the beans and barley
be sodden, than stamp them and streyne them, and sethe the straynynge again a
little, which done, add thereunto, of oil of rooses, and myrte, ana.. ij. of
white wax.. j. ss. myngle them. The plaster of two pomegranades, and the
liniment made in a mortar of lead, described in the Chapter of ignis Persicus,
in our former book, are convenient in this case.

A Chapter of the cure of Froncles.
FOr ye cure of Froncles ye shall sethe whete in water, with the rotes of white
lillies and malowe leaves, and stamped with swynes grese for it has great
strength to ripe. For the same intention ye may use the plaster following..
of the roots of Holyhocke and lillies, ana.. iij. of wheat. m^. j. of the
leaves of mallows. m^. ij. sethe the^ all together with the brothe of flesh,
than stamp them and streyne them, and make a styffe plaster with wheat
flower and the foresaid straynynge, addyng of butter, swynes grese, comune
oil, ana.. j. ss. the yolks of two eggs, of saffra^.. j. let them sethe
again a little. It is also a present remedy, for mitigation of pain, and
maturation, to bath the place with a decoction of the foresaid things. After
maturation, for purgation and mundificatio^ of the gross matter, ye shall use
an abstersive of smallage, and diaquilon magistrale. Fynallye, vnguentum de
Minio, to heal and cicatrise froncles, is a good medecyne.

A Chapter of cold Pustules and Scrophules.
PVstules coming of cold and moist humors, are riped with the maturatiues
described in the additions. After maturatio^ ye shall open the aposteme,
fynely, and exquisitelye, and afterward, ye shall digest the place with a
digestyue of terebentyne, and if the place be deep, it must be mundified, with
vnguentum Mixtum, or with our powder of mercury, or with an absterfyue of honey
of rooses. After mundification ye shall incarne it with myrrh, and sarcocolle.
For the rest, ye shall apply vnguentu^ Basilicu^ magistrale, and water of alume.

As towchyng scrophules, the cure of them is double, one is by incision, which
is the shortest way, when it may be used without hurt of veins and arteries,
but when the Scrophules are roted among veins and synnowes, as it chances in
the necks of chylderne, tha^ it is better to proceed with resolutiues, and
maturatiues, for which purpose, we will destribe.v. remedies, whereof ye first is
diaquilo^ magistrale with go^mes, described in ye addicions.

The second is thus made.. of armonyake, Bdelliu^, serapyne, oppoponax,
galbane, ana.. ij. of ye juice of the roots of flower deluyce.. j. of
diaquilon magistrall.. ij. myngle them.

The third form is this.. of ye seed of water cresses.. iiij. of lynseed..
ij. sethe the^ all with sufficient vynegre, till the vynegre be consumed, tha^
stamp them, and put to that that is sta^ped of the rotes of holyhocke sodden
and strayned.. ij. of the rotes of flower deluyce. x. of oil of lillies, and
flower deluyce, of gose grese, ana.. vi. of armonyake dissolved with vynegre..
j. of white wax.. ij. ss. myngle them and make a soft cerote, for it
resoluethe Scrophules effectuouslye.

For the fourth form ye shall use pills of euphorbiu^, of agarik in
trociskes, of gynger, turbith, of the juice of the roots of flower deluyce, of
aloes epatyke, mastyke, ana.. i. mengle the^, and with the foresaid juice of
honey of roses make four pills, which the patient shall use every night
going to bed, except the night wha^ the moon changes.

The.v. remedy is a confection of turbyth, whereof the pacient shall use,
before day, in the steed of the forsaid pills, the quantity of a sponefull.
If the scrophules enclyne to maturatio^, ye shall ripe the^ with this
maturatiue.. of the roots of holyhockes, and white lillies, ana.li. ss. of
lynseed.. iij. of the leaves and roots of dockes, an^. m^. j. of lilly
roots, and oynyo^s roasted under the cooles, ana.. ij. ss. sethe the roots and
the lynseed with water, tha^ stamp them, and strain them, and make a styffe
plaster in the decoction, with the flower of lynseed, and the other aforesaid
things, adding of swynes grese, butter, gose grese, ana.. iij. ss. of wheat
flower.. j. ss. me^gle the^ al together, and fethe them a little. After
maturacio^, ye shall open the place with a ruptorie of capitelle, and afterward,
(ye escare being removed with things digestive) ye shall take away ye roots of
the scrophules, with a trociske of Miniu^ or with arsenyke, or sublimate in
this facion. Ye must boore through the root of the scrophule in the mids,
with a lancet. And in the hole ye shall put a grain of arsenyke, or else
sublymate, and this order of arsenyke must be kept, tylle ye perceive that the
rote of the scrophule is utterly removed. Provided always, that ye procure the
fall of ye escare, before ye renew the arsenyke or sublymate. For other
intentions, ye shall proceed with the remedies aforsayde.

Concerning ye cure of knobbes, ye must consider, whether they be fleshie or
not, or whether they be in way of suppuration, as are the knobbes called
Mellini, or like honye. And if the knobbes be Mellini, ye shall assaye to break
them, and their blader, pressyng upon it with your thombe. And if ye can not so
break them, ye must come to incision, as is aforsayd. If the knobbe be fleshie,
it is better to leave it, and proceed with things palliatiue, as is honye of
rooses labored a good while in a mortar of lead, byndynge plates of lead upon
the place, or this resolutiue following.. of oil of rooses odoriferous.. iij.
of hens grese, duckes grese, gose grese, ana.. j. of the juice of plantayne,
and nyghtshade, ana.. ij. of the mary of the legs of a cow, and a calfe,
ana.. iij. sethe them all together till the juice be consumed, than streyne
them and labor them in a mortar of lead the space of a day, which done, let
the^ seth again a little, and make a lost cerote, with sufficient white wax,
and.. j. ss. of the roots of of holihock sodden and streyned, addyng of tucia
preparate, of burnt lead, ana.. v. of camphore brayed, graynes. iij. This
cerote is good in all Cancreouse matter, when need is of palliation.

A Chapter of cancrena ascachillos, and estiomenos.
CAncrena and Ascachillos, are cured by two intentions, that is to say,
universal and particular. Universal is accomplyshed by diete, Phlebotomye,
purgation, and application of bloodsuckers, upon the veins emoroydall, and
about the Cancrena. Flebothomy must be made in the contrary part, at the
beginning. The mynoratiue purgation may be after this sort, the matter being
first digested with a syrup of sumytorye.. of cassia, diacatholicon, ana.. vj.
or.. j. if the patient be of a strong nature, make a potion with the comune
decoction, adding of syrup of violettes.. j. Note that pills of fumytory,
with pylles of reubarbe, are convenient in this case.

Particular regiment, is accomplisshed by application of local medicynes,
which are five, whereof the first, is scarification upon the place, the second,
a lotion of lie, made with the decoction of lupynes, the third vnguentum
Egyptiacum, with or without arsenyke, the fourth is a plaster of the flower
of beans orobus and barley, made with lie, the juice of wormwood, and syrup
of vinegre, the fyfth is a defensive, made with vynegre, terra sigillata, and
bole armenye. These remedies must be administered after the beginning unto the
destruction of Cancrena in the order following.

First when ye se that the place inclyneth to cancrenositie, ye shall scarifie
it, and wash it with the foresaid decoction, or with vynegre, lie, or water of
baurach, which done, ye shall anoynte the places adioynynge with a defensive
of bole armeny, and ye shall lay vngue^tu^ egyptiacu^ upon ye rotten place, till
ye malignitie be removed. And than ye shall mundifie the place, with a
mundificatiue of smallage, and incarne it with sarcocolle, and perform up the
rest with vnguentum de Minio, and water of alume. If the membre be grown to
further putrefaction, the foresaid remedies are not sufficient, but ye must
cut the membre between the hole, and corrupt part, with a saw. And
afterward cauterise the place, and procure the escare to fall with things
mollificatiue. And when there chances superfluous flesh, ye shall remove it,
with vnguentum myxtum, or with our powder of mercurye. Here ends the second
book, of Apostemes, and begins the third book, of vlceres.

The third book, of vlceres in general.
The first Chapter, of malign virulent, formicose, and corrosiue, vlceres.
THere is no great differens in the foresaid ulcers, as Auicenne testifies,
saying: the cure of malygne, corrosiue, and virulent vlceres, is accomplysshed,
by the administration of things that dry, bind, and cool. Wherefore we will
comprehend their cure in one Chapter. First, when ye have removed their
malignitie, by the administracion of our powder, or vngue^tum Egyptiacum, or
mixtum made with wine of pomegranates, ye shall mundifie the place with a
mundificatiue of syrup of roses, leyng upon the place vnguentum de Minio, or
vnguentum de cerusa, or our sparadrap, whereof we spoke in the additions. Item
it is good in this case to wasshe the ulcers with water of plantaine, sodden
with a little alume, leynge upon the place, plates of lead, or the oyntme^t of
dogs turdes, which uses to eat bones. And because it is necessary to
rectify the membre, from whence the matter is deryued, and to purge the matter
antecedent, we will declare two purgations, convenient to purge choleryke and
sharp humors. First let the matter be digested with this syrup.. of syrup
of the juice of endive, and of the juice of sorell, of syrup of roses, ana..
ss. of waters of endive, hoppes, and fumytorye, of every one.. j. myngle them.

The purgation is thus made.. of diacatholico^, manna, ana.. vj. of electuarie
de psillio.. ij. of good reubarb.. ij. myngle them and make a potion, with
cordial flowers and fruits, adding of syrup of violettes.. j. This purgation
is for delicate persons and rich men. Here follows another, for poor.. of
diacatholicon, of cassia, ana.. ss. of electuary of Psillio and roses after
Mesue, ana.. j. ss. make a potion with the comune decoction, adding of syrup
of rooses.. j. Note, that if the vlceres be in the arms or legs, they must
be bound from the insteppe to the knee, and from the hand to the elbowe, and
likewise the said members must be kept in rest and quiet.

A Chapter of rotten and fylthie vlceres.
THe cure of rotten ulcers is acco^plyshed, by regiment universal and
particular. Regiment universal is diete and purgatio^ ordained in a proper
chapter of the former book. Particular regiment is accomplyshed, by application
of local medicynes. And first to take away the putrefaction, there is no better
remedy, than vnguentu^ Egiptiacum, and the application of bloodsuckers, and of
things deficcatiue and resolutiue. And therefore, the lotions, playsters, and
regimentes, declared in the former chapter, are convenient in this case. If the
putrefaction be great, so that the synnowes and bones are corrupt, ye shall
cut the membre with a saw between the hole and the corrupt part, and
afterward ye shall cauterize it unto the hole part procedyng for the rest,
as in other brent wounds. And when the ulcers ben holowe, ye shall proceed
according to that, that shall be spoken in the next Chapter.

Fylthie vlceres differ not much from rotten, and therefore their remedies agree
together, howebeit, the remedy of fylthie ulcers, must not be so bytynge, as
the other. Wherefore in the stead of vnguentum Egyptiacum, ye shall apply
Vnguentum Mixtum, or our poudere of Mercurye, or Vnguentum Apostolorum. Here
ye shall note, that as rotten vlceres require greater mordication, so fylthie
vlceres require greater abstersion. Wherefore when the corruption is removed, ye
shall apply things of greater abstersio^, as an abstersive, of smallage. And
if the vlceres ben very holowe, it is expedient to remove the holownes, by
vnguentu^ Egyptiacum.

To kill worms in ulcers
And for as much as worms be engendered in these vlceres, we will destribe two
remedies to kylle them. The first is this.. of vnguentum Apostolorum,
vnguentu^ Egiptiacu^, of the juice of wormewoode, ana.. ij. of the flower of
lupynes.. j. ss. myngle them. The second is thus ordained.. of vnguentu^
apostoloru^, of vngue^tum ceraseos, ana.. ss. of vnguentu^ Egyptiacu^.. ij. of
aloes Hepatyke, of alume zuccatrine, ana.. ij. ss. of ye flower of lupines..
iij. of aqua vite.. j. of terebentyne.. vi. of quycksyluer quenched with
spyttle.. iij of the juice of salendyne.. j. ss. myngle them.

A Chapter of holowe vlceres.
THe cure of deep and holowe ulcers, must be accomplished with things
desiccatiue and with strong lotio^s, cast in with a syrynge for Arnoldus de villa
noua says, that vlceres and fistules are not cured, but with sharp licours,
and exquisite cuttynge. Lotions that cure holowe vlceres, without incision, are
of three kinds, of which the first is sharp and is thus made.. of barbours
lie.li. ss. of vnguentu^ Egyptiacum.. j. ss. of honey of rooses.. j. The second
is to purify the place, after ye operation of the other, washing the said
place twyse a day.. of clean barley, and lentilles, ana. m^. j. of licorice..
j. of read sugger.. x. of honey of rooses.. j. ss. of barbours lie and reyne
water, ana.li. ij. let the^ seth al together till half be consumed, tha^
strain the^. The third kind is to incarne ye place being purified.. of
plantayne.li. ij. of odoriferous wine.li. j. ss. of frankencense, of myrrh,
ana.. j. ss. of sarcocolle. j. of suggre, of honey of roses, ana.. j. of
verueyne, agrymonye, of consolida the greater and the less, of centaurye, of
yarowe, ana. m^. ss. seth the^ al together, to the third part be consumed,
than strain them. This lotio^ must be cast into the hollow place with a
siryng, after the application of the.ii. other remedies. And incontine^tly, ye
must use the manners of byndynge, called incarnatiue, and expulsive. And if ye
can not attain to the cure by this mean ye shall come to incisio^ of the
corrupt flesh. And afterward ye shall come to digestiues, mundificatiues,
incarnatiues, and cicatrisatiues, whereof we have spoken in the book of
additions.

A Chapter of a fistula.
A Fistula, and an hollow ulcer dyffer not, but in two things, that is to
say, in hardenesse of the borders of the fistula, and in space of time, for
there must needs be many days before a fistula be confyrmed, but an hollow
ulcer may soon chance, through a wound evil handeled. The remedies which
are conuenye^t for the one, are good for the other, and therefore the lotions
aforewrytte^ are mete for fistules. The remedies which take away the
hardenesse of the borders of a fistule, are. iii. The first is a trociske of
miniu^, the second is vnguentu^egiptiacum, made with arsenicke, and sublimate,
the third is after this sort.. of our poudre of mercurye.. iii. of arsenycke
and sublymate. ana.. i. of ceruse, antimony, an^.. i. of the iuce of celidonye,
pla^tayne, and agrimonie, ana.. vi. of water of roses, and lie, ana.. iii.
sees them all together, till the lie, water, and iuyces, be consumed, than
poudre them fynelye, and use them with a tente, first moystened with spyttle.

when the Fistula is mortifyed, which thing is known by remotion of the
hardenesse, and appearaunce of good flesh, and quyture, than ye shall proceed
with this lotion abstersive.. of barley, lentilles, lupines, beans ana. m^. ss.
of honye.. ii. of read sugre.. i. of barbours lie, two pound, sees them all
together, till half be consumed, than strain them, or make it thus.. of wine
one cyathe, of lie. ii. pound, of water of fumyterrye, and endive, ana. l. ss.
of honye of roses, three ounces, of sarcocolle half an ounce, sees them all
till half be consumed, and so strain them. when incarnation shall be required,
ye shall use this lotion.. of honye of roses.. iii. of aqua vite, of
odoriferous wine, ana.. ii. paucedinis, sarcocolle, ana.. ii. of myrre, aloes.
ana.. i. ss. sees them all together, till half the wine and water be
consumed. These remedies are excellent, after the mortificatio^ of the fistula
or hollow ulcers. For cicatrisation, ye shall use vnguentum de minio, with a
lotion of water of alume.

A Chapter of paynefull ulcers.
IN paynefull Ulcers, ye must be diligent in swagynge the pain. First ye
must consydre whether the pain proceed of an evil complexion, hot or cold,
of sharp and corrosiue matter, or of some aposteme. If it proceed of an evil
hot complexion, than ye shall use only things that altere, as are water of
Roses, of plantayne, of nyghtshade, me^gled with a white sief without opiu^. If
the pain proceed of hot matter, ye shall use a decoction of vyolettes,
mallows, barley, quynce seeds, lettuse, in the form of a fomentation, or
playsters ordained against the pain of herisipelas, and phlegmon. when the
pain is caused of matter retained in the botome of the ulcer. It is good to
mynistre a playstre of barlye flower, made in the decoction of malowes, and
vyolettes, with butter, and oil of roses, for it prepares the matter to issue
out, and swageth pain. A plaster of the crommes of breed with milk, is of
like effect. when the pain proceeds, through the sharpness of the matter,
and thoroughe malignitie, and corrosion of the same, there is no better
remedy, than our poudre of mercurye, or to wasshe the place with the
decoction of roses, water of barlye, flowers of pomegranades, lentilles,
Snmache, plantayne, knotgrasse, sorelle, or with vnguentum album camphoratum.
If the pain proceed of some apostemation colleryke or sanguine, ye shall
resort to the propre Chapiters of the former book.

A Chapter of ulcers, with the bone corrupt.
AS touching ulcers which are with corruption of the bone, they may be cured
by two means, that is to say by strong medicines, and actual cauteries. The
curation by sharp medicines, is conuenyent, when the bone is corrupt in the
over part, but when the corruption is deep and caused of cold matter, good
practiciens open the vlcered place with an hot iron, or with a sponge, so long
until the bone and corrupt part be utterly consumed, for a little
cautterisation should be of none effect in this case. wherefore it is better,
that the cauterye be to great, than to small. After this ye must procure the
fall of the escare, as we have often said. If the corruption of the bone be
small, ye may remove it with oil of vitrioll, or with vnguentum Egiptiacum,
or with brent vitriolle, myngled with aqua vite, or with water wherewyth silver
is divided from gold. And for asmoche as sometimes, little pieces of bones, are
found through a prmitiue cause, ye shall proceed with medicynes attractiue, for
nature casts the^ out easily by the help of things attractiue.

And thus at Rome I cured Pomponius, whose leg was broken by the stroke of a
ferce horse, out of the which leg I took more than.xii. little pieces of
bones, with our poudre, and a cerote of minium, and so healed the patient.

If the corruption be in some spongious done, than ye shall deuyde the whole
part from the corrupt, with some conuenyent instrument, and afterward, ye
shall digeste, mundifye, and incarne, as is said in other ulcers. And thus
ends this third book of ulcers: and begins the fourth book of remedies,
appropriate to every membre.

The fourth book of remedies appropriated to every membre.
The first Chapter. Of remedies, for the diseases of the heed.
THere are engendered in the heed, sondrye dieases, as scalles, baldness,
talpa, and topinaria. First we will declare the remedies to cure the scalles,
and they be.ix. The first is a lotion in this form. The cure of scalles.
. of the leaves of mallows, vyolettes, fumiterrie, dockes, of branne, husked
beans, and lupynes, ana, m^. i. sees them in the brothe of a wethers heed,
till the third part be consumed. The second is butter and larde, ana equal
parts, beaten and sodden, with a cyath of the foresaid lotion. The third is,
to take lynnen cloutes, and dip them in ship pytche, and a little
terebentin. The fourth is vnguentum egiptiacum without arsenycke. The fyfth is
vnguentum mixtum. The syxte our poudre of mercury. The.vii. an ointment of
litarge, and of the iuce of herbs made in a mortare of lead. The eight
vnguentum de minio. The.ix. water of alume.

The manner to apply these remedies is this. First ye must shave away the
here, and wasshe the heed with the forsayde decoction, three or four days,
twyse a day, and than ye must anoynte the sore places with butter and larde,
layinge on a leaf of black colewortes, and afterward, to pluck up the roots
of the corrupt heeres, ye must apply pieces of fustian, in the form of the
herb, called houndestonge, covered with pytche, and terebentine. And to remove
the corrupt flesh, ye shall apply vngue^tum Egiptiacum. And if the body be
delicate, it shall suffice to use our powder of mercurye, or vnguentum mixtum.
And forasmoch, as through the application of sharp medicines, great
inflammation ensues, to ease the same, ye shall apply the foresaid ointment
of litarge.

After that the corrupt flesh is removed, to feel up the place, ye must wash
the heed with water of alume, layinge an oyntmente of minium in the form of a
sparadrap.

As touching diete, and purgation, ye shall proceed, as we have declared in
the Chapter of sephiros. Pylles of fumiterrye, and reubarbe, with agarike in
trociskes, are convenient in this case.

The remedies of alopecia, and albaras.
THe remedies, Alopetia.
conuenyente to heal Alopecia, are five. whereof the first is a lotion in this
form. Take of fumyterrye, of the leaves of black colewortes, of docke
roots, of celidonye, ana. m^. ii. of husked beans, and lupynes, ana. one
handeful: sees them all together with suffycyente barbours lie, and the heed
of a wether, till half be consumed.

The second form, is an ointment made after this sort. Take of syrup of
vynegre, of clear terebentyne, of every one two ounces, of the iuce of
fumiterry.. i. of the roots of sta^ped dockes.. i. ss. the wine of
pomgranades.. ii. sees them al together till the wine and iuces be consumed,
tha^ strain them, and put to the strainynge, of oil of roses and myrt, ana..
i. ss. of verdegrese, an ounce, of roche alume.. x. of water of plantayne,. ii.
ss. sees them all together, till they be thycke as honye.

The third form is a lyniment, thus ordained.. of oil of roses.. ii ss. of
calves tallowe,. i. ss. the juice of plantayne, finnyterrye, and alleluya,
ana.. i. ss. with roots of dockes sta^ped.. iiii, of white vynegre.. ii. sees
them all together, till the iuces and vynegre be consumed, then strain them,
and put to the straynyng, of litarge of gold and silver. ana.. x. of terra
sigillata, of roche alume brent, and well brayed, of washed lyme. an^. vi. of
verdegrese.. vii. mengle them, and labor them in a mortar of lead the space
of two hours.

The fourth is also a linimente made after this sort.. of the oil of yolks
of eggs.. ss. of roses odoriferous, and of myrte, of every one,.ii. ounces, of
the iuce of plantayne,. iii. of ceruse, of litarge of gold and silver, six
drammes, terra sigillata.. xv. of white wax, seven drammes, myngle them, and
make a liniment in a mortare of lead.

The fyfth form, which is good against Albaras, and morphewe, and produces
here, is thus ordained.. of maydenheere, sothernewoode, mugwoorte, of the
flowers of rosemarye, of every one half an ha^dfull, of the coddes of seen, of
epithimu^ ana.. ii. of the roots of flower de luyce, enula campana, and
walwoorte, ana.. ii. of the flowers and ryndes of elders.. x. of gootes
tallowe.. iii. of oil of lyneseede, an ounce and an half, of oil of
lyllyes.. ii. of hens grese, of oil of bitter almondes. ana. i. of
terebentyne, and rasyne of ye pyne tree, of every one an ounce and an half,
of ship pytche.. vi. stamp all these things together, and so leave them the
space of three days, than sees them with a cyath of odoriferous wine, till the
wine be consumed, which done, strain them, and make a styffe cerote, with
white new wax. And before ye apply the cerote, ye must rub the place,
with a dry course cloth, till it be red, when ye perceive in Alopecia, that
the roots of the heeres be rotten, ye shall pluck them up with little pynsons,
or pytche.

The manner to use the foresaid remedies is this, ye must shave of the here,
and wasshe the heed the space of a week, ones a day in the first decoction.

And afterward, ye must apply the ointment of the said receyte, till the
skin be mundifyed, and so ye must proceed certain days, with the liniment
of the third receyte. And afterward, for sigilatio^ ye must use the liniment
of the fourth receyte, washing the place every day with water of alume.

The remedies to heal the diseases called topinaria and talpa, which chance
in the head, with corruption of the bone, as well of the french pockes, as of
other causes, are of.ix. sorts, A cerote of grain.
of which the first is a cerote of grain, thus ordained.. of yarowe, betonye,
woodbynde, madder, of the flowers of rosemarye, of every one two handefull, of
grain wherewyth scarlet is dyed.. i. seed of saint John's worte.. i. ss. of
wormewoode. half an handful, of clear terebentine a pound, of oil of roses
odoriferous two pound, of wethers tallowe. li. ss of mastyke.. iii, of gum
elimi, of rasyne of the pyne. ana.. iiii, bray the things that are to be
brayed, and myngle them together with a cyath of good wine, and so leave them
the space of a day, than afterward sees them, till the wine be consumed, and
strain them through a thycke cloth, and put to ye straynyng, of litarge of
gold and silver, of every one, three ounces, of minium, two ounces, set
them to the fire again, and stir them about again, until there appear a
very black color.

Last of all, add suffycyent white wax, and make a soft cerote, and malaxe it
with aqua vite.

The setonde is a capital abstersive thus descrybed.. of clear terebentine..
vi. of honye of roses.. ii. of the iuce of plantayne, half an ounce, of the
iuce of wormewoode and smalage. ana.. v. sees them all together till the iuces
be consumed, tha^ strain them and put to the straynynge, of the flowers of
lentylles, and barlye, ana.. ss. of sarcocolle,. ii.

The third is our oyntmente, made of two parts, of vnguentum apostolorum,
and one part of vnguentum Egiptiacum, whereunto the wine of pomegranades
enters, instead of vynegre.

The fourth is, our poudre of mercurye.

The fyfth is this lycoure following.. of honye of roses, syrup of roses, of
every one two ounces, of the iuce of yarowe and betonye, ana,. vi. of grain,
of madder, of every one half an ounce, of myrrh, aloes, sarcocolle, ana..
ii. ss. of armoniake.. i. of saffran.. i. of mastyke, gum elimi. ana.. v.
sees them all together, with a cyathe of odoriferous wine, tylle the wine be
consumed, than strain them, and put to the straynynge, of good aqua vite,
two ounces, and an half, and let them sees again a little, and keep this
lycoure in a glass well stopped.

The syxthe, is an oyntmente of minium, thus ordained.. of oil of roses
odoriferous, three ounces, of oil of mastycke, myrte, clear terebentyne, of
every one an ounce, of wethers tallowe, two ounces, of minium, of lytarge of
silver, fyftene dra^mes: Seethe them all together, and stir them about,
tylle the color thereof be very black, which done, make a suffycyent cerote
with white wax.

The seventh is water of alume, thus made. Take, of odoriferous wine, of lie
made of the ashes of vine branches, of every one a cyath of read sugre two
ounces, of myrobalane cytryn, of the flowers of pome granades, of every one a
dram and an half, of roche alume.. ii. sees the^ all together, tylle the
third part be consumed, than strain them.

The eight is a poudre cicatrisatiue, whose ordinance is this.. of terre
sigillata, the flours of pomgranades, of mirabolane citryne, of lytarge of
silver. ana.. iii, of alume of roche burnt.. i.

The nynth is a sponge dypped in this decoction.. a pynte of red wine, and a
quarte of lie made with ashes, of vine branches, of wormwood, roses,
myrtyles, woodbynde, of the roots of madder. ana. m^. ss. of the nuttes of
cypress brayed, nombreten, of roche alume.. i. of honye.. x. of fine grain..
iiii. sees them all together tylle the half be consumed, and then strain
them. For diete and purgation, ye shall resort to the chapter of Vndimia,
taking this way that the patie^t be purged, with hiera cumagarico, and that
he use in the morning fasting, honye of roses, and after meat corianders, or
of the confection of quinces.

A Chapter of crusty scalles in chyldernes heedes, or of apostemes in the
necks of the same.
FOr the cure of these scalles, if the child be yet suckynge, it is good to
purge the norice with cassia, or ma^na, and to wasshe the chyldes heed, with a
decoction of malowes, violettes, fumiterrye, branne, rubbyng before it the
scalde heed with the yolke of an egg, and if need be, ye shall remove the
heeres. which done, ye shall annoynte the heed with butter washed with the
foresaid decoction, and labored in a mortare of lead, leyinge upon the heed,
the leaves of black cool wortes, beetes, or lettuse. And when the crustes
shall be mundifyed, ye shall only lay fair lynnen cloutes thereupon, and
annoint the heed with the foresaid butter, and fynallye, for perfyte curation,
and desiccation, ye shall admynister this linyment following.. of buttyre
washed, as is aforesaid, of vnguentum album camphoratum, an ounce and an
half, mengle them, and labor them in a mortar of led the space of two
hours.

If the child be not suckynge, it may be purged with cassia, or manna. As
touching apostemes in the necks of children, procedynge of the said crustes,
they are for the most part, of the nature of phlegmon, and end by
suppuration.

And therefore ye must proceed with maturatiues, as is this that follows. R.
the leaves of mallows sodden in the broth of flesh, or in sweet water, two
handefull, of crommes of breed, half a pound, stamp the^, and incorporate
them together, and make a styffe plaster in the decoction of the said
mallows, with wheat flower, adding, of buttyre, of common oil, of every
one two ounces, the yolks of an egg.

Item, it is good to embroke the place with hoote cloutes dypped in this
decoction. And for as much, as communelye these apostemes break by their own
accord, ye may proceed with the said maturatiue unto perfyte maturation.

when it is broken, ye shall use digestiues, the space of three days,
mu^difyinge it afterward, with syrup of Roses, or with vnguentum basilicum,
or diaquilon without gu^mes, of our description. For cicatrisation, ye shall
apply vnguentum de minio, and if any superfluous flesh grow there, ye may
easily remove it with our powder of mercury.

Remedies which are convenient for the diseases of ye ears, are these. And
first to swage ye pain of them oil of yolks of eggs and buttire, labored
in a mortar of lead, with oil of sweet almondes, is a singular remedy.
Likewise woman's milk or cowes milk is good in this case. And so is this
suffumigation following. R. of barley, branne, malowes, violettes. ana. m^. ii.
of camomylle, mellilote. ana. m^. ss. of the sede of quynces.. iii. of spelta.
m^. i. the head of a wether somewhat broken, sees these things till half be
consumed. For the same intention, we use the oil of chestwormes, which is
thus made.. of oil of roses odoriferous, oil of violettes, an^.. i. of
vinaygre of roses.. i. ss. of saffranne, graynes.ii. of water of roses. ii. of
woman's milk, of chestwormes which are found under wood in moist places, The
oil of chest worms
and draw them selves arounde together, an^.. x. of earthwormes, of snayles.
ana.. ii. of fresh buttyre.. vi. sees them al together till the vinaygre and
water be consumed, then streyne them and use this oil hot. And if ye would
labor it in a mortar of lead, the space of an hour, it should the better
swage pain and infla^mation. These forsaid remedies ar good when the mattier
is hot, but if the matter be cold, it is good to use oil of bitter almondes,
mengled with oil of the yolks of eggs, or buttyre boiled with an apple, or
in an oynyon, putting the buttyre into the ear actuallie hot, and layenge
the apple rape, or oynyon, upon the ear in the form of a plaster.

This fumigation is also convenient for the same purpose.. of fenugreke, of
lynsede. ana. m^. i. of camomil, mellilote, dylle. ana. m^. i. ss. of sweet
fenell, of licorice. ana.. vi. sees them all together with sufficient broth of
a wethers head, till half be consumed. And if ye would sees herwythall, of
cumyne.. vi. of corianders.. iiii. of maiorum.. ii. of honye.. ii. it should be
a singular remedy against wyndynes and soundyng of the ears.

The remedies conueniente to ripe hot apostemes of the ears, been of three
sorts, of which the first is this. R. of oil of violettes, oil of sweet
almons, of ye marye of a calves leg, ana.. iii. of fresh buttyre or hens
grese. ana.. ss. of the decoction of malowes, violettes, quynces, psilium,
fenugreke one cyathe, sees them all together till the decoction be consumed,
and put thereof into the ear actually hot.

The second is this. R. of the meat of roasted apples.. iiii. or instead
thereof of cromes of bread, of the leaves of malowes sodden in water and
sta^ped.. iii. of woman's milk.. i. of buttyre.. ii of barlye flower.. x. of
oil of violettes.. vi. mengle them and sees them alytle, styrryng them about,
and add in the end, the yolks of two eggs.

The third is after this sort. R. of the leaves of malowes, violettes, and
lettuce. ana. m^. i. of barlye, and branne ana. m^. i. ss. of camomyll,
mellilote. an^. m^. ss. of the rotes of holihocke.. ii. sees them al together
with sufficient rayn water, till half be consumed, and streyn them, and
minister this decoction upon the ear with hot cloutes.

Remedies to heal the ulcers of the ears, are of three sorts also, whereof
the first is made of one part of honye of roses, and half a part of the oil
of yolks of eggs, and the third part of terebentyne, and the fourth of
sarcocolle. And it is a singular remedy for new ulcers of the ears.

The second is good for old ulcers of ears, and is in this form. R.
vnguentum apostolorum.. iii. of vngue^tum egiptiacum made with wine of
pomegranades and with water of plantayne.. ii. mengle them.

The third is after this sort.. of oil of roses omphacyne, oil myrtyne.
ana.. ii. of oil of sweet almons. ii. of goats and wethers talowe. ana.. iii.
of antimonium, of litarge of gold and silver. an^.. ii. of cerusse.. i. ss.
sees them all together, and stir them about, till the color be very black,
and make a cerote with sufficient white wax, adding when ye shall take it
from the fire, of tutia preparate, of brent lead. ana.. ii. synders of iron..
i. me^gle them, and labor them in a mortar of lead the space of two hours.
This oyntme^t dries the ulcers of ye ears after the mu^dification of them.

Here follow remedies convenient to heal the diseases of the eyes, and first,
for ophtalmia coming of hot causes, after this sort. R. the whytes of two
roasted eggs, of water of roses, with the muscilage of psilium, and quynces..
ii. of tutia preparate.. i. of woman's milk.. vi. me^gle them, and when they
have stand the space of two hours streyne them.

The second is goats milk, cowes milk or woman's milk, with a little sugar.

The third, is a white sief without opium, dissolved with the first receipt.

The fourth is a decoction of fenugreke as it follows. R. of fenugreke washed
with reyne water.. iii. of quince seeds.. i. of the seed of psilium.. ss. of
water of roses.. iiii. sees them all together beside the psilium, till ye
third part be consumed, and then, when ye take the rest from the fire, put
in the psilium, and let it so remayn the space of three hours, and afterward
streyn them all.

The fyfth form is the plaster following. R. of the meat of roasted apples..
iii. of barlye flower, of woman's milk, of water of violettes, and roses, ana..
ss. sees them with a soft fire, styrrynge them about till they be thycke, and
add the yolke of an egg.

The sixte form is this. R. of mellilote, camomille, roses. an^. m^. i. of
fenugreke.. i. of wormwood, of flowers of rosemarye. ana. a little. Sees
altogether with reyne water and sweet wine, till the third part be consumed.

The seventh form is the water following. R. of water of roses.. iii. of
odoriferous white wine.. i. of cloves in number four, of aloes epatike. ii. of
sarcocoll dissolved with woman's milk, graynes three, of sugar candy of syrup of
roses.. i. of mirobalane citrine.. ss. me^gle them and sees the^ together a
little, and then streyne them.

The eight is a repercussiue made after this sort. R. of oil of roses
omphacine.. ss. of the juice of plantayne, of the wine of pomegranades. ana..
i. of vinaygre of roses.. ii. sees them al together till the wine, vinaygre,
and juice, be consumed, then streyne them, and put to the streynyng of white
wax,. x. of all the saunders. ana.. ss. of terra sigillata, of bole armenye.
ana.. i. of bean flour.. vi. mengle them and make a sofee cerote.

The nynth is a vesicatorie thus ordained. R. of ca^tarides.. iii. of leue^..
i. of vinaygre of roses.. ii. mengle them and make a vesicatorie, sta^pynge
the^ in a mortar, the wings and heads of the cantarides first being taken
away.

The tenth is a bathe as follows. R. of roses, of myrtilles, of camomyll,
rosemarye, sage, wormwood, sticados. an^. m^. i. of corianders.. ii. of
squinantum, a little, of honye. li. ss. of alume and salt. ana.. i. of maioru^
and nepte, ana. m^. ss. sees them all together with sufficient lie, and a
little odoriferous wine, till the fourth part be consumed.

Universal remedies, are these that follow. The first is diete, which must be
slender from the beginning, to the state. The second is phlebotomie diuersiue,
of the vein cephalyke on the contrary side, which is convenient from the
beginning to the augmentation. The third is by phlebotomye euacuatiue in the
vein cephalica on the same side, when opthalmia is in the state. The fourth is
digestion and purgation of the evil matter, which must be used at the
beginning with cassia, manna, or with a lectuarye of roses, pills of
assagereth, or of hiera with agarike. The fyfth is applicatition of
bloodsuckers upon the emoroydal veins, and about the ears, from the
beginning to the augmentation. The sixte is the application of ventoses, upon
the shulders. The seventh is a clyster mollificatiue after this sort. R.
sufficient quantity of the brothe of a wethers head, of honye of roses or
violettes.. i. ss. the yolks of two eggs, a little salt, of oil of violettes,
or of comune oil.. iii. of cassia.. vi. or of benedicta simplex.. v.

These remedies must be thus ordained. First ye must use diuersiue phlebotomye
in the contrary part, and the day before, ye must give the patient the
foresaid clyster, applieng the particular remedies, as they be before written,
and layeng the repercussiue upon the foreheade, and washing the arms and
legs, in the last decoction. As concerning digestion, and purgation, ye
shall resort to the chapter of ophtalmia. And when the disease is in
declination, it is good to apply the water of cloves, called aqua gariofilata,
to consume the matter. Item it is very profitable to lay upon the eye with a
sponge the decoction of mellilote.

Remedies for ytchynge, and burning of the eyes.
THe remedies for these diseases, are three, of which the first is this. R. of
water of roses and plantayne. ana.. ii. of the iuce of housleke.. iii. the
white of a roasted egg, of tutia.. i. let them so remain together the space of
a day, then streine them. The second form is pereles, and is thus described.
R. of water of roses.. ii. of white wine.. i. of mirobalane citrine.. ss. let
them boil al together a little, and add thereunto of verdegrese.. i. and when
they have stand together the space of two days, streyne them and put the
licour in a glass. Vug. de tutia
The third is vnguentum de tutia thus ordained. R. of fresh butter.. ii. of
larde, of tutia preparate an^.. i. mengle them, and labor them in a mortar of
lead the space of an hour.

Remedies that clear the sight be six in number, whereof the first is this. R.
of a goats liver. l. ss. of the juice of fenell, and basille. an^.. i. of the
flowers of rosemary. m^. ss. of aloes epatike.. ii. of cloves, of nutmigges.
ana.. i. of honey.. i. ss. of the water of celidony, rue, verueyne, roses,
eufrage. ana.. i. of the galls of hens, capons, and cocks, ana.. ii. mengle
these things together, and leave them the space of.xxiiii. hours, then stylle
them in a lembike of glass, and keep this water in a glass well stopped. The
second is Constantines hiera, taken two hours before supper. The third are
pills sine quibus esse nolo, and pillule lucis. The fourth is water of roses,
rue, celidony, eufrage, verueyne, sodden with a little sugar, aloes epatike, and
a little saffran. The fyfth is a large lace of lynen or of lether, bound about
the eye. The sixte is an issue made upon the coronall bone, with a ruptorie or
actual cauterye. As concerning purgation, we have spoken sufficientlye in a
proper chapter, of the former book.

A chapter of matter retained in the skynnes of the eyes, through the disease
ophtalmia.
THere be four remedies for the cure of this disease. The first is this
decoction.. of clean barley. m^. i. of the sede of quynces.. i. of hole
fenugreke.. i. of the roots of buglosse.. ss. sees them all together till
they come to ye form of a muscilage. The second is a plaster of apples thus
ordained. R. of the meat of roasted apples.. iiii. the yolke of an egg of
woman's milk, of the foresaid muscilage. ana.. ss. sees them with a soft fire
till they be thycke. The third form is woman's milk with a little sugar
candye. The fourth is a colirie in this sort. R. of white sief with out
opium.. i. of sief of frankynsence. i. water of roses.. i, ss. mengle them and
make a colliry. These remedies consume and vapor out humors retained between
the skynnes cornea and coniunctiua. And first ye must drop some of the
muscilage in to the eye, and lay upon the eye a great plaster of apples. And
after that the matter is drawn out, ye must apply an absterfiue of sugar. And
then to cure the vlceratio^ the foresaid collirie is a singular remedy.

A chapter of a fistula in the corners of the eyes.
IT chances often, that in the weping corners of the eyes, there grows a
fistula through reumatike matter, and subtylle and watrye quytture there
retained, whereby often times, an aposteme called flegmo^ is often engendered.
For the cure whereof a maturatiue medicine with mitigation of pain and
inflammation, as is this plaster following, is convenient. R. of the meat of
roasted apples.. iii. of ye leaves of mallows sodden in the broth of flesh,
and streyned m^. ii. of barlie flour.. ii. the yolke of an egg, of woman's
milk.. ss. me^gle the^ and make a styffe plaster at the fire. An embrocation
of cloutes dipped in this decoction, is good for the same purpose.

After maturation, ye shall use the four remedies following, of which the
first is our powder of mercurye, the second, vnguentum de minio, the third,
water of alume, the fourth a collirie as follows. R. of water of roses, of
water of the flowers of myrtilles, if they may be gotten. ana.. i. of aloes
epatyke.. i. of cloves brayed graynes.ii. of white wine.. ss. of tutia, of
white sief without opium, mirabolane citrine. ana.. ss. braye these things
that are to be brayed, and mengle them together, and so leave them the space of
two hours, then sees them till the third part be consumed, then streyne
them, and keep the licour in a glass, for it is an excellent remedy to dry
the moystnes of the corners of the eyes. The two other aforesaid remedies, may
be applied instead of the powder of mercurye, putting a tente into the
concauitie, with honey of roses or a mundificatiue of sirupe of roses. For
cicatrisation ye shall wash the place with water of alume and lay upon the
place vnguentum de minio. And when the fistule is with corruption of the bone,
ye shall proceed as it is said in a proper chapter of the former book.

A chapter of virulent and corrosiue ulcers, in the inner and outward part of
the nose.
HEre follow remedies for corrosiue ulcers of the nose, caused as well of the
pockes, as of other diseases both in ye inner and outward parts. As touching
the ulcers, proceeding of the french pockes there is no thing better, then to
mundifye them with our powder of mercury, and after mu^dification, to proceed
with the remidies ordained in the chap. of the french pockes confirmed. And
when they proceed not of the french pockes, the remedies folowenge are of
great efficacitie, whereof the first is vnguentu^ mixtum, the second, our
powder of mercury, the third, the licoure following. R. ii. hole sweet
pomegranades and half a sower, of ye leaves of pla^tayn night shade, wyld
olyues, woodbynd, knotgrasse, of the croppes of brambles. an^. m^. i. of
synders of iron.. i. beat these things together, and so leave them the space
of three hours, and then sees the^ with three ounces of water of plantayne, and
as much water of roses, till the third part be consumed and so streyne them and
sees the^ again, till they become thick as honye. This ointment is good to
heal a cankerous polipus and all virulent ulcers, after the mu^dificatio^. The
fourth is a linimente made as it follows. R. of oil of roses omphacine, of
oil myrtine, of vngm^ populeon, or of roses, or in the stead thereof, of
Galiens oyntmente, ana.. i. of the juice of plantayne and nightshade. ana.. ii.
of the juice of sorel and alleluia. ana.. ss. of roche alume.. ss. of
mirobalane citrine.. i. sees them al till the juice be consumed, and streyne
them, then put to the streynynge of white wax.. v. of tutia preparate.. ii. of
cerusse.. vi. of titarge of gold and silver. an^.. iii. of burnt lead.. ss.
of camphore graynes.ii. mengle them and labor them in a mortar of lead the
space of six hours. This linime^t makes a good cicatrise.

A chapter of remedies for passions for the throat.
THe remedies of squina^tia, are these. For squinantia.
First is a gargarisiue made of water of barlye, wine of pomegranades, and a
little diameron. The second is goats, shepes, or cowes milk gargarised. The
third is a lotion of the extreme parts, with a lotion ordained in ye cure of
ophtalmia. The fourth is a decoction of dates, after this sort.. of dates,
iuiubes, dry figs. an^.. i. of raysons, damask prunes.. i. ss. of clear
liquirice.. x. of bran and clear barlye. ana. m^. ii. of read sugar. li. i.
sees them all together in water sufficient, till the barlye break, the^
streyne them and let the decoction be gargarised hot. The fyfth form is a
plaster of apples, after this sort. R. holihocke sodden in the decoction of a
swallows neste, li. i. of the meat of apples roasted.. iiii. of the oil of
sweet almons, and hens grese. an^.. i. buttyre.. iiii. stamp these things
together, and sees them a little with a soft fire, and when ye take the juice
from the fire, take the yolks of three eggs and mengle them together. The
sixte is phlebotomye of the vein called cephalica at the beginning, and in
the state, of the veins under the tongue to purge the matter conioyncte. These
remedies must be administered as it follows. First from the beginning to
augmentation, ye shall use the first, the second, and the third. But the
fourth and the fyfth are convenient in the state and declination, whether the
mattier be in way of resolution or maturatio^.

The remedies for vlceration of the mouth, porcedynge of the french pockes,
are four. The first is vnguentu^ egiptiacum made with wine of pomgranades.
The second is litium mengled equally with vnguentum egiptiacum. The third is
the licour of pomgranades, ordained in the chapter of the ulcers of the nose.
The fourth is the gargarisme following. R. of lentilles, barlye, of the leaves
of pla^tayn and sorel, of croppes of brambles. an^. m^. ii. of water wherein
iron has been quenched. li. viii. of sumach. m^. i. of granades number two, of
which one must be sweet another sower, of roche alume.. i. of honey of roses..
iiii. beat these things together and sees the^ till half be consumed, then
streyne them, and let the decoction be often gargarised. For it stops
deriuation of matter, dries vlcerations after they be mundified, as well in
the tongue, as in ye throat, gummes, and roffe of the mouth.

And because that the teeth become black in this disease, ye shall rub them
with this powder following. R. of roche alume brent.. ss. of tartare, ofredde
coralles. ana.. ii. of the stone called pomesse.. ii. ss. of coals made of the
branches of rosemary and cipresse, of all the saunders, of sarcocoll. an^.. i.
mengle and powder them all. This powder makes the teeth white, and gives good
odor to the mouth, and lyfteth up the vuula being loosed through flegmatyke
matter, for which purpose in the disease of vuula, this powder is of good
operation. R. of pepper, of flowers of pomegranades. ana.. i. of frankynsence..
ss. mengle them. And when the vuula is loosed, through hoote matter, ye may
reduce it with this powder following.. of the flowers of pomgranades, sau^ders,
mirobalane citrine. an^.. i. of ca^phore, graynes three, or of roses.. ss. Ye
may redress the said vuula with stoupes laid upon the head, suffumigate with
ensence somewhat burnt, for it represseth the catarre, which causes relaxtion
and loosyng of the vuula.

A chapter of apostemes of the gummes, of the palate, and other parts of the
mouth.
OFten times, through catarrous matter, or ye french pockes, there are
engendered apostemes in ye said places which come to maturatio^, and therefore
ye shall set the^ forward with these two remedies following. First with this
decoction, which must be holden in the mouth, actually hot, or with cotton
dipped therein. R. of raysons, dates, dry figs. an^.. i. of clean barlye, of
branne, ana. m^. i. of iuiubes, damask prunes, an^. in number.x. of quinces..
i. of read sugar.. iii. sees them till half be consumed, and streyne them.
The second is this plaster. R. of the meat of roasted apples, of the roots
of holihocke sodden and streyned. an^.. iii. of calves suet, of oil of
violettes. an^.. i. of oil of sweet almons, of he^nes grese, of fresh butter..
iii. when the aposteme is ripe, through these remedies, ye shall open it, and
mu^dify it with honye of Roses. And when there is any superfluouse flesh, ye
shall remove it with vnguentum egiptiacum, or with our powder of mercury. For
incarnation, the patient must hold in his mouth this incarnatiue.. of honey of
roses.. j. of sarcocolle.. j. of aqua vite.. ss. sethe them all together, till
half the water be consumed, than strain the^. For cicatrisation, ye may
wash the mouth with water of alume, made as it follows,. of water of
plantayne, of white wine, of every one,. ij. of roche alume,. i. honye of
roses.. vi. sethe them alytle.

Here follow the remedies of the diseases of the back. And first for
bunchynes, this cerote is good,. of oil of spyke and lillies, ana.. ij. of
oil of rooses omphacyne, Camomyl, and dylle, ana.. j. of the flowers of
rosemarye, of mugwort, wormewoode, sauery, maiorum, sticados, squinantum, ana a
little, of calamus aromaticus, laudanum, anyse, ana.. j. of earth worms,. j. of
clear terebentyne,. iij. sethe the^ all together with a ciath of good wine,
and make a stiff cerote with sufficient new wax. Item for the pain of the
back, and for a spasme, this Epithime is convenient,. of oil of lillies,
Camomylle, dylle, spike Agrippa, and Dialthea, ana.. j. ss. of the roots of
Enula campana,. ij. ss. of Camomylle, and squinantum, of every one a little,
sethe them all together, with six ounces of good white wine, and streyne them,
and epithime the back therwyth.

A chapter of the remedies of the rybbes, breast, and belly.
This lyniment is profitable, for them that have straytnes of the breast,. of
oil of sweet almons, he^nes grese, fresh butter, an^.. j. of the marye of a
calves leg,. vi. of white wax,. v. myngle them, and anoint all the breast
with this liniment. When the patient has great cough, let him take a glass of
the decoction following, in the morning and in the evening,. of clean barley,
scabious, of branne, of every one, m^. j. of damask prunes, of sebesten, of
every one nombre eight, of raisons, iuiubes, fygges, dates, of every one.. j.
of liquyrice.. x. of penidies, of white suggre, of every one.. iij. of sugger
candie of a syrup of violettes, of honey of violettes, of every one.. j. ss.
seth them all together with four pound of water till the fourth part be
consumed. Item oil of fresshe sweet almo^s, is good for this purpose, whereof
the pacient must take in the morning, the quantity of three sponefulles.

The remedies convenient for peynes of the rybbes caused thoroughe wyndynes,
are these that follow. The first is a bag made after this sort.. of Camomylle,
wormwood, mellilote, dylle, branne, millium dried at the fire, ana. m^. j. ss.
of nept, of wild myntes, ana. m^. j. of corianders anyse, cumyne, ana.. ss.
braye them all together, and make a bag. The mean to apply this bag is
this. Ye must heat a broad tyle, and sprynckle it with good wine, and lay the
bag upon the tyle till it be hot, or ye must put it in hot water, sodden
with wine, and afterward pressyng it, and apply it hot. The second is a
cerote, made with oil of Camomylle, and new wax. The third is a sponge or
raw threde dypped in a decoction that breaks wind, written against the
colyke.

The remedies of a true pleuresye, (A purgatio^ with manna, cassia, and
diacatholicon, and phlebotomye, presupposed) ben four. First ye must beat
four eggs, with the oils and grese following,. oil of violettes, rooses, and
Camomylle, ana.. vj. of hens grese, of oil of sweet almons ana.. iij. apply
this ordinance with stoupes, laid hot upon the paynful place, for it swageth
pain and ripeth the Aposteme. Secondlye, ye shall use leaves of colewortes,
fried in a pa^ne with a little butter. The third is parietarye, dressed in like
manner. The fourth is this cerote following.. the roots of Holyhocke sodden in
the broth of flesh and stamped, li. ss. of the meat of roasted apples,. iiij.
of oil of Camomyll,. ij. ss. of oil of violettes, and dylle, ana.. ss. of
hens grese, and butter, ana.. j. of oil of sweet almons,. v. of calves and
wethers suet of every one,. x. make a cerote with suffycient wax, adding of
Saffran. ss.

Of the diseases of the bellye and the stomach.
First for the colyke ye shall use this decoction with a sponge, For the Colyke.
or with raw threede,. of Camomylle, dylle, mellilote, mugwort, of every one,
m^. j. ss. of fenugreke.. ij. of coryander, anyse, cumyne, of every one,. ss.
of honey,. iij. of miliu^, branne, husked beans, of every one, m^. j. of
flowers of rosemarye, of sauerye, maiorum, wormewoode, nept, wild myntes, of
every one, m^. ss. of ashes, li. ss. sethe them all in sufficient quantity of
water, wherein a wethers head has been sodden, until the third part be
consumed, and apply it as is said. Item it is good to make a clyster of the
said decoction, with oil of Camomylle, dylle, and diafinicon. An ox bladder
also, filled with the said decoction, and laid hot upon the bellye, is of
good operation, and so is this plaster following,. of bean flower, li. ij. of
branne, and milium, brayed, of every one. m^. j. of Camomylle, Mellilote,
Dylle, ana. m^. ss. make a styffe plaster with sufficient sapa, and a little of
the foresaid decoction, adding of oil of camomylle, and dylle, ana.. ij. of
white wax,. j. ss. Also a clyster of pure wine is good in this case.

Remedies which remove yoxyng caused of replecion be, hiera constantyni, hiera
symplex Galeni, with a little reubarbe, which purge fleume, chyeflye after the
exhibicion of this vomytiue,. of the waters of fenell and sorell, ana.. ss. of
the juice of a r^dyshe root,. ss. of dylle, coryander, sweet fenel, of every
one,, ss. of syrup of vynegre, of oximell symplex, ana.. j. sethe them all
together, tylle the.iiij. part be consumed.

A Chapter for the pain of the backebone.
First oil of spyke, mastyk, and lillies, and the oil following, are
convenient in this case,. of oil of lillies, dylle, Camomylle, of every one,.
ij. of oil of a fox, of agrippa, and dialthea, ana.. vi. of oil of
ypericon,. j. of the juice of wormewoode,. ss. of squinantum,. ss. of
erthwormes,. j. ss. of good wine, one ciathe, sethe them to the consumption of
the wine, than sethe them, and strain them and make a lynimente with white
wax. Item this cerote following is good for dislocacion of the reins, caused
by liftyng of an heavy burden,. of oil of rooses omphacyne, oil myrtyne, of
every one,. ij. of oil mastyke,. j. of roses, wormwoode, myrtylle graynes and
leaves ana. m^. ss. of rosemary flowers a little, of odoriferous wine, li. i.
let them all sethe beside the oils, till the third part of the wine be
consumed, than strain them, and put to the straynynge, the said oils, and
let them sethe again a little till the wine be consumed, adding of powder of
myrtylle leaves and graynes, ana.. vi. of all the saunders, ana.. ij. And if ye
put thereunto, of terebentyne,. j. ss. of mastyke,. ss. it shall be of greater
confortacion and cleuynge.

Of the remedies of the flanks.
TO ripe hot Apostemes in the flanks, ye shall use this plaster,. of mallows
sodden in the brothe of flesh, m^. ij. of wheat and barley flower, ana..
iiij. make a styffe plaster with the foresaid mallows, adding of butter, of
comune oil,. ij. ss. ye yolke of two eggs, wha^ the aposteme is cold, let it
be ryped with this plaster,. of ye rotes of white lillies, of holyhockes,
ana.. iiij. sethe the^ in water, and stamp them and afterward make a styffe
plaster with the flower of lynseed and wheat, addyng of butter and swynes
grese, ana.. ij. and when ye shall take the juice from the fire, put theru^to
the yolke of an egg, and if resolution be required in a hot matter, ye shall
apply a plaster of cromes of bread dypped in the broth of flesh, with oil
of Camomylle and rooses, and a little Saffran. And if the Aposteme be cold,
resolutiue shall be of this sort,. of the cromes of bread, li. j. ss. of the
decoction of the second receyt, as much as shall suffyce, of oil of
Camomylle, and roses, of every one.. ij. of butter.. j. of Camomyll, mellylote,
branne brayed m^. ss. make a styffe plaster of them. We will speak nothing of
repercussiue medicynes, for they ought not to be applied in the emunctoryes.
For other intentions, ye shall resort to the first book. If the Aposteme come
to formication or stynkynge, ye may remove the borders with a ruptorye of
capitell, putting in to the Aposteme vnguentum de Cerusa, that the ruptorie
towche not the vlcered parts. After the remotion of the borders, ye shall
proceed with a digestive of terebentyne and butter. For the rest of the cure,
ye shall resort to the general chapter of Apostemes.

A Chapter of the diseases of the yard.
First for the chafynge and swellynge of the yard, ye shall use the whytes
and yolks of eggs beaten with oil of rooses, the juice of plantayne and
lettuce, or vnguentum Populeon, labored in a mortar of lead. And to take
away the swellynge spedely, it is good to make a plaster of beans sodden
with mallows and lettuce, in the brothe of flesh, with oil of Rooses, and
the yolks of Eggs. And to take away the malign pustules of the yard, our
powder of mercurye, or vnguentum Myxtum, is a present remedy. Vnguentum
Egyptiacum, made with wine of pomegranates, remoueth the cancrene of the yard.
The grene water vnderwrytten, dries up the vlceration that is wont to chance
between the skin and the head of the yard.. of water of pla^tayne.li. ss.
of water of roses, of white wine, ana.. ij. of roche alume.. ss. of syrup of
rooses.. j. of verdegrese.. ij. sethe them all together a little beside the
verdegrese, and than put in the berdegrese, when ye take the rest from the
fire. Item vnguentum Egyptiacum, dissolved with water of plantayne, and
conveyed in with a syryng is a convenient medicyne. If a venomous pustule
rises between the yard and the skin, than ye shall use an actual cauterye,
or vnguentum Egyptiacum, or a trociske of Minium. If ye yard be chafed or
excoriated, through hot mattier and Choleryke, a whytesief of water of roses
and plantayne, or vnguentum de Tucia is a good remedy. Water of plantayne also
with a little alume, dries the vlceracion of the yard. But for an vlceration
and excoriacion in the conduyte of the vryne, ye shall use the forsayde waters
and lotions, but if they be old and confyrmed, ye shall cast in with a
syrynge, our powder of mercury dissolved with water of barley, and a little
honey of rooses, procedyng afterward with gentler lotions before reherced. If the
yard come to maturacion, ye shall ripe it, with the remedies declared in the
Apostemes of the flanks.

A letter of master John Vigo, sent to the lord Thomas, chyef attorney, of
the court of Rome, in causes of benefices.
COnsyderyng your manyfolde benefytes toward me, I thought it convenient to
write unto you a peculier chapter, of remedies to preserve man's body from the
stone And to come inmediatlye to that purpose, there ben three things, that
engender the stone in the said place, that is to say, great heat of the
reins, the streitnes of the conduyte of vryne, and the abounda^s of flegmatyke
matter, the remedies whereof we will briefly destribe. First to purge the
reins, ye shall use in the winter, and in the caniculer days, an ounce and a
half of cassia with sugger, and at other times ye shall eat cassia out of
the cane, to keep the body moist, Ite^ it is good in the morning to take a
glass of this decoction,. of the broth of a chycken.li. ij. of the seed of
mellons somewhat broken.. j. of the roots of parcely.. vj. of damask prunes
sebesten, of every one in nombre six, of resons,. j. of clean licorice,. x.
water of borage, endive, and hoppes, ana.. iij. seth them al with sufficient
white sugar, till the third part be co^stumed, than strain them, and when ye
have dronken this brothe, ye may sleep a little after it. A brothe of read
cycers with a little sugar, opens the ways of the urine. Likewise, a
decoction of field mallows, sodden with honye, buter, and water, causes the
stone to issue out, souplynge the ways thereof. And some add to this
decoction, a little seed of Holyhocke and alkekengi. This sirupe following is of
like effect.. of water of endyue, hoppes, borage, ana.li. j. of water of
mayden-heare.. iij of the three less seeds, of the comune seeds, of every
one,. ss. of lycorice.. x. of damask prunes, of sebesten, ana nombre eight, of
the seed of alchekengi.. v. of the seed of Holyhocke.. ij. of reysons.. j. of
syrup de duabus radicibus without vynegre.. ij. ss. make a long iulep with
suffycient white sugger. The receyt is one ciathe in the morning.

Here folowethe an electuarye, for the same intention.. of water of endyue,
borage, buglosse, of every one,. iiij. of water of fenell, asparage, maiden
hear, ana.. ij. of the comune greater seeds, of the three less seeds, ana..
j. of the seed of alchekengi of clean liquyrice, ana.. x. of damask prunes,
of sebesten, ana nombre. xx. of reysons.. ij. of anys.. vi. sethe the^ all
together, tylle the third part of the waters be consumed, than strain them,
stampynge and straynynge the rest, which done, make an electuary with
sufficient sugger, and with the forsayde decoction and straynyng, adding of
good reubarbe.. ij. of cassia.. ij. this electuarye mundifiethe the reins, and
provoke vryne. And the receyt of it is a sponefull in the morning or three
hours before supper. For vlceratio^ of the yard.


And forasmuch as the yard is often vlcered within, thorough the burning of
the vryne, for the ease thereof, ye may use good lotions, as this collyrie
following.. of water of plantayne.. iiij. of water of rooses.. ij. of water of
barley.. iij. of myrobalane citryne.. i. of syrup of roses,. j. sethe them all
together tylle the third part be consumed, than strain them and put to the
straynynge of white sief without opium,. iij. make a collyrie. The decoction
following serves for the same purpose,. of the leaves of plantayne of clean
barley, of every one, m^. j. of licoryce.. v. of sugger.. ij. sethe them all
together till the third part be consumed, than strain them, and conueye in
the lycour, with a syrynge. It is good also to cast in goats milk wherein
pieces of iron have been quenched. And because that liquide medicynes can nottary
long upon the vlcered place, we have considered that it is good, to apply
this liniment following.. of oil of rooses omphacyne.. ij. of the juice of
plantayne.. ss. of vnguentu^ Album Camphoratum.. j. ss. of litarge of gold and
silver, of every one,. vj. of Tucia preparate.. iij. myngle them, and labor
them in a mortar of lead the space of two hours. The manner to apply it is
this. Ye must have a pype of silver eight inches long, and ye must put in to
the pype a syrynge, and conducte the linimente to the chafed place, and ye
must put a syrynge in to the pype, and guide it to the chafed place. And thus
it may tarry the longer.

As towchynge diete, ye must avoid all sweet and gross wynes, all pulse, all
gross flesh, all fruits except prunes. Of herbs, ye may use borage,
percelye, lettuce, langedebeef and in the brothe of flesh. All salt,
peppered, hot, and sharp things, must be avoided. But rere eggs are very
convenient, and meats that engender good flesh. Whereof we have spoken in
many places.

A Chapter of the remedies of the stones.
First to heal herniaventosa, Hernia ventosa.
ye shall use this plaster,. of ye flower of beans and cycers, of every one,
li. ss. of Camomylle, mellylote, dylle, branne, ana. m^. ss. of cumyne.. ss. of
oil of Camomyl, dylle, ana.. ij. seth the^ with sapa and barbours lie till
they be thycke. For hernia humoralis proceeding of a hot cause, from the
beginning to augme^tation, this plaster is of good effect.. of the leaves of
henbane. m^. j. of clean barley. m^. j. seth them with water, or the brothe of
flesh, till the barley break, tha^ stamp them and strain them, and make a
styffe plaster with bean flower, and the foresaid straynynge, addyng of oil
of roses odoriferous.. ij. of oil myrtine.. j. the yolke of an egg. Let
them sethe again a little.

In the state and declination, ye may use this resolutiue.. of black cool
wortes. m^. j. of Camomylle, mellilote, ana. m^. ss. of fenugreke.. iij. seth
them all together with sufficient brothe, tylle half be consumed, and make a
styffe playstere with bean flower, and ye foresaid decoction, and a little
flower of cycers, addyng of oil of roses and Camomylle, ana.. ss. of saffran
graynes.ij.

Here ye shall note, that the remedies which cure the Apostemes of the stones,
cure the same of the dugges. And likewise the maturatiues of the yard serve
for the stones, dugges, and stankes. And because the Apostemes of the stones,
come often to hardness, ye shall use things mollificatiue, and resolutiue as
our diaquilon magistrale. Item for the same intention, this playstere is
good.. of rice.li. ss. of brayed branne. m^. j. sethe them with a soft fire in
the brothe of a wethers head, and a little sapa, till they be thycke, adding
of hens grese, and duckes grese, ana.. vij. of oil of Camomylle.. j. ss. let
them seth a little.

A Chapter of the diseases of the fundament.
FIrst to swage ye pain of the emoroides, For the Emoroydes.
this is a synguler suffumigatio^,. of the leaves of mallows, and violettes,
of barley, tapsus barbatus, mellilote, dylle, ana. m^. j. of lynseed,
fenugreke, ana.. iij. of branne. m^. iiij. the head of a wether somewhat
cut, sethe them all together, till the flesh be sodden. After
suffumigation, apply this plaster.. of the foresaid decoction.li. ss. of
dragagantum brayed.. j. of the meat of roasted apples.. iiij. myngle the^ and
labor them in a mortar of lead the space of an hour, or make it thus,. of
water of violettes.. iiij. of water of rooses.. ij. of the seed of quynces, and
psillium, ana.. j. seth them a little, and after stondynge three hours, strain
them and put to the straynynge, of brayed dragagantum,. vi. Item butter
labored in a mortar of lead, with a little oil of sweet almons, and oil of
Chrisomelos, is a very good remedy. Oil of lynseed as Mesue says, is a
great medicyne for all diseases of the fundament. Diaquilon magistrale,
resolves the hardness of the emoroydes maruelouslye.

Remedies for chappes, are in five sorts, of which the first is a fomentacion
declared before, the second is an ointment of lead thus ordained,. of oil of
rooses, of myrte, of every one.. ij. of calves talowe.. j. ss. of the juice of
plantayne, and nyghtshade, of every one,. j. sethe them all together tylle the
iuyces be consumed, than strain them and put to the streynynge, of litarge
of gold and silver, of ceruse, of every one.. vj. of brent lead, of
antimony, of every one. iij. terra sigillata.. v. of Tucia.. ij. myngle them
and labor them in a mortare of lead, the space of two hours. And because
these chappes become malign, and cause inflammacion, ye shall remove the same
with our powder of mercury or vnguentum mixtum. And after the remotio^ of the
malignitie, ye shall apply this liniment. of oil of linseed.. i. of oil of
roses. ss. of calves suet.. iij. of roche alume. ij. of white wine half a
cyathe, seth them all till half be consumed, then strain them, and put to the
streining, of white wax.. iij. ss. of ceruse, of lytarge of gold and silver,
of every one. v. of burnt lead, of tucia of every one. i. ss. myngle them, and
labor them in a mortar of lead, the space of a quarter of an hour.

Wartes and such like which have small roots, may be removed with a saw,
with incision, or a ruptorye of capitelle, leynge upon the parts about some
pleasant oyntme^t, that the ruptorie hurt not the said place. Now we will
speak bryeflye of remedies for a fystula of ye fundeme^t. Fystula in the
fundame^t
First to heal them that are not holowe, there is nothing better then to
cut the place from one orifice to an other, and afterward to proceed with
things mundificatiue and abstersive remouynge the superfluity with our
powder of mercury. But if the fystule perce unto the muscule of the ars gutte,
ye must beware how ye cut it. And ye must proceed rather according to the
proper chap. of the former book. To remedy this disease ye may apply this
plaster following upon the fundament, which is maturatiue and swageth pain.
of the leaves of malowes, and violettes. ana. m^. i. of the brothe of fresh
flesh, one quarte, sees them all together till the malowes and violettes be
well sodden, the^ make a styffe plaster with wheat flower and the forsayde
brothe, addinge of butter.. ij. ss. the yolks of two eggs, let them seethe
again a little.

Here follows an ointment to be aplyed upon the fistula, during the
mu^dificacion, puttyng in to the fystule vnguentum egiptiacum myngled with
vnguentum apostolorum.. of oil of camomill and lynseed. ana.. ij. oil of
roses, of calves suet. ana.. iij. of clear terebentyne.. ij. ss. of lytarge of
gold and silver. ana.. vi. of ceruse.. x. seth them all together, and stir
them about, till the color be black, make a styffe cerote with sufficient
whyt wax.

A chapter of the remedies of the arms and legs.
THere chances often in ye arms and legs a soft aposteme called vndimia,
Vndimia.
for the cure whereof we will ordeyne two remedies, of which ye first is a bathe
of things desiccatiue ordained in the additions. The second is a lyniment
following,. of oil of roses, of myrte, ana.. ij. of oil of camomill.. i. ss.
of lytarge of gold and silver ana.. x. of terra sigillata.. xiiij. make a soft
cerote with sufficient white wax, and apply it with lynen cloutes about the
vndimia, but if the vndimia be with scabbes, then ye must wash the place,
with a decoction of fumiterrie, nepte, malowes, branne, dockes, or to anoint
the place with an ointment of lytarge. To heal the ulcers of the legs, there
are five special remedies. The first is our powder of mercurye. The second
vnguentum mixtum. The third water of alume. The fourth a sparadrap, or vng.
basi. or vng. de minio. The fyfth is convenient byndynge from the inslepe to
the knee, which is chyefly requisite, for it does not suffer the matter to
descend to the place.

Item to resolve swellynges of the legs proceeding of a primitive cause, we
will describe three remedies, whereof the first is this.. of eggs, in number
three, of oil of roses, and myrte, ana.. i. ss. beat them all together, and
apply them with stoupes moisted in water and wine, and use this ordinance
three days. The second remedy is this,. of husked beans. m^. ij. of brayed
branne.li. ss. of the leaves of malowes, and violets, ana. m^. ss. of
wormwood, m^. i. ss. of roses half an ha^dful, of broune bread,. iiij. sees
the^ all together with sufficient water, the^ sta^pe them and strain them, and
put to the strainynge of sapa,. viij. of flower of beans and barley, ana..
iiij. of oil of roses, myrte, camomill, ana.. ij. sees them again till they
be thick. If the bruise can not be resolved by this mean, but that it will be
ryped, ye shall proceed after the doctrine of phlegmon.

And because that in the vlceres of the legs, there chances inflammacion,
and excoriacion. To remove the same, it is good to apply an oyntme^t of
lytarge, with the juice of plantaine and the wine of pomegranades. And for this
purpose ye may use pieces of brown paper dypped in the wine of pomegranades,
water of roses, and water of plantayne, after the forsayde liniment. Item to
resolve blood being out of the veins, it is good to apply upon the place,
thynne plates of lead with small bolsters, and it must be administered last of
all. Item to remove the wyndy swellynge of ye knee, procedynge of the gout, or
of the pockes, we will ordeyne three remedies. The first is gotes donge
dyssolued with wine and water, with barlye flower and sapa.

The second is this plaster following, which breaks wind and resolves..
of bean flower.li. i. of brayed branne. m^. ii. of ox donge and gotes dounge,
ana.. iiii. of camomylle, mellylote, wormwood, ana. m^. ss. of oil of
camomylle, roses, dyll, ana.. i. ss. let them sees with sapa and a little lie,
till it be thycke, apply it actually hot, round about the knee. The third is
a sponge dypped in the decoction, ordained in the additions, to resolve
vndimia, being applied hot, and well bound upon the knee. As touching
goutes caused of whote humors in the knees, the foresaid remedies are not
conueniente, but to swage peine, and to resolve humors we will speak in the
next chapter.

A chapter for the goutes of the hands, and the fete called chiragra, and
podagra.
THe first remedy is this. For the gout
. three eggs, the juice of lettuse, and woman's milk, ana. ss. beat them
altogyther, and apply this ordyna^ce warm, three or four days, for it is
good when the matter is choleryke or sanguyne. The second form is this. of the
crommes of white bread.li. j. ss. of cowes milk or gotes milk.li. i. of oil
of roses odoriferous.. iii. the yolks of three eggs, of saffron.. i. Make a
styffe plaster. The third form is this.. of husked beans, li. iii. sethe
them in the brothe of a wethers head, tylle the beans be well sodden, than
stamp them and streyne them, and put to the streynyng of barlye flower.. iiii.
of oil of roses.. iii. of saffron graynes. iii. sees them again at the
fyere, and stir them about tylle they be thycke, and add the yolks of.iij.
eggs.

This plaster swagethe all peynes of the gout. If greater resolution be
required, ye shall add the virtue of camomylle, and mellylote.

The fourth is the oil following, wherewith ye must annoint the peinfull
place, and it is convenient in the declynation.. oil of roses, and camomylle,
ana.. ii. of oil of sweet almandes.. iii. hens grese.. ss. of calves suet..
vi. of the flowers of rosemarye, of iua, ana.. i. of the juice of the leaves
and roots of walworte, ana.. iij. ss. of the juice of the roots of enula
campana.. ii. ss. of squinantum, brayed.. i. of odoriferous wine.. i. ss. bray
them all together and put them in a cane well stopped with paest, then put it in
an oven, in a vessel of earth, and when ye shall perceive that the wine and
the iuce is consumed, then ye shall take out the cane, and streyne out that,
that remains, strongly, and use the same.

The fyfte is a sparadrap, made with oil following.. of oil of roses.. iiii. of
oil of camomylle.. ii. three quycke frogs, of rosemary flowers, camomylle,
mellylote, ana. a little, of odoriferous wine, one ciathe. Sees them all
together, tylle the wine be consumed, then streyne them and put to the
streynyng, of white wax.. ii. and make a sparadrap.

Item for the same intention, it is good to wasshe the joints daily, in this
decoction.. of roses, myrtylles camomylle, wormwood, mugwort, nepte,
watermyntes, ana. m^. i. of the flowers of rosemary, time, squinantu^,
sticados, ana. m^. ss. of honey. m^. i. of salt. ii. sees them all together in
water sufficient and white wine, tylle the third part be consumed.

Here ye shall note,
that the fourth and the fyfte remedy, must be used, in the declynation of
the disease, wha^ it is caused of hootte matter, and they may be conveniently
administered after the.iiii. day, when the mattier is cold. Fynallye a
plaster made with crommes of bread or of beans, is conueniente in the state
and declination, when the matter is cold. Thus ends the fourth book, of
partyculer remedies

Here begins the fyfte book, of additions which conteyneth sundry remedies
for sundry diseases.
First for the toth ache caused of cold matter, Tooth ache.
or by impregnation, or of the french pockes ye shall lay this decoctjon hot
upon the teth with cotton.. of aqua vite.. ii. of white vynegre.. ss. of the
flowers of rosemarye, of wormwod, ana a little, of honye.. vi. of sandarake, of
armoniake and Gallens triacle, ana.. i. of saffron graynes. iii. seethe them
all together a little, and streyn them. This remedy following is good for the
disease of children called arcula puerorum. Arcula puerorum.
. ij. sweet pomegranats with the ryndes, of the croppes of brambles, of the
leaves of plantayne, of the croppes of myrte, the leaves of wild olyues, of
horsetayle, and knottegras, ana. m^. ss. stamp thyem al together, with an
ounce of rose water, and as much of plantayn water and then sees them till
half of the water be consumed, streyne them and put to the streinyng honye of
roses, fine sugar, ana.. i. ss. of licium.. x. of sarcocolle.. ii. let them
sees again till the honey of roses be thick. And if greater desiccation need,
add of roche alume.. ii. A remedy against the peynes of the sides, and the
iliaca passio.. of mercury precipitat well brayed. gr. ii. of diaciminum.. i.
myngle them and make iii. pills, with sirupe de duabus radicibus, then gylde
them, and take the said three pills, two hours after yt ye have eaten.ii.
rere eggs, with a little wine, and a morsel of bread. The said powder myngled
with half an ounce of philonium persicum, and received as is aforesaid, is of
like effect. Note, that this powder is of the color of minium, and is that
whereof we have spoken in our antidotary, in the chapter of a corosiue
medicine. The said powder is given after meat that one may vomit it up with the
meat and avoid therwt all slymy and fylthy humors, and the said powder may
pass the stomach that it hurt not the guts, and it is of such operation,
ye it swageth the pain, and causes the matter to issue upward and dounward,
Item this powder following, is a good remedy against the pestilence not
confyrmed, that is to say within.xxiiii. hours. Against the pestilence.
. of the foresaid precipitate powder.iii. or.iiii. graynes, of Galens triacle..
ss. sirupe of the juice of sorel,. ss. of sugar of buglosse.. ii. mingle them
and give it the pacient fasting.

Here follow convenient remedies for the pockes, and first a singular unction,
wherewith ye must anoint the legs twyse a day, from the knees down, and the
arms from the elbowes and that by the space of.iiii. or.vi. days, and it is
in this form. R. of swines grese melted.. vi. of quick silver.. iiii. of
lyquyde storax, of Galiens triacle, ana.. ss. myngle them and make a liniment.
Here ye shall note yt the most convenient time to use this cure, whether it be
by unctions, cerots or suffumigations, is the spryng of the year. In other
times it is suspect, as well by reason of the great heat, as of the cold, for
cold makes the humors unapt to be purged, and heat resolves the spirits
and wekeneth the parts.

Here follows a good fumigation, for the french pockes confirmed,. of
cinabre.. ii. of fra^kensence, of liquide storax, an^.. i. ss. mingle them. The
manner to minister this suffumigation is this. Ye must set the patient naked
under a streit canapy, and ye must lay upon the coals, the.v. part, of the
foresaid receyte. And the patiente must enforce him self to receive the smoke,
keeping the fire between his legs, till he begin to sweat, and then he must
lay him in a bed, and cause him to sweat, so doing the space of.iiii. days,
till the teeth begin to ache. For the rest of the cure, ye shall proceed after
the general doctrine, in the former book of the pockes. This cure must be
used in a desperate case and when the remedies made with mercurye produce not
good effect. Here follows the last remedy for strong bodies.. of hole
cinabre,. v. of Galiens triacle.. ii. of the ryndes of lymons and apples, ana..
i. which ye must use as is aforesaid, ye shall know the good operation of this
remedy, when toward the eleventh day, the ulcers begin to dry, and ye
must renew the foresaid remedies, tylle ye perceive, that the body is
cleansed from the disease. Pain and vlceration, of the mouth, or a little
fyeuer, appear about the seventh day.

Here ye shall note, that ye must not proceed with the foresaid remedies, but
after purgation of the body. In this disease confyrmed, we were wont to use
the last remedy in the month of apryle. And when the vlceres were cured and
the pain ceased, we renewed the vnctio^, cerote, and suffumigacion aforsaid,
and sometimes I have assayed the cure again, the third month, and it succeeded
well. For as Mesue says, in hard dyseases, we ought not to be content with
one purgation. For delicate persons, the suffumigacion following, is good in
the french pockes confyrmed,. of hole cynabre,. ss. of beniymyn.. i. ss. or of
laudanum as much, of galienes triacle.. ss. of dorouike stamped, of tormentyl,
dytany, ireos, ana.. i. of the ryndes of cytrons or orenges.. ij. of four
apples, no^bre iij. sta^pe these things together, except the cinaber, the
apples, and the ryndes, and ye must put the cynaber a part in a little
vessel, and ye myxture in another vessel, and the apples and ryndes of
ore^ges in another vessel, and proceed as is aforsayd in the other two
suffumigacions.

Here follow remedies for an vlcered canker. First a powder,. of tucia
alexandrina.. ij. of powder of creuises burnt in an oven, of lytarge of gold,
of every one,. ij. of antimonium, of burnt lead, ana.. i. ss. of ye juice of
pla^tayne, gallitricum, politricum, night shade, knotgrasse, alleluya, of
every one.. vi. of roche alume.. i. ss.

First streyne the iuyces, and sees the^ al together till the iuyces be
consumed, then powder them, and labor them in a mortar of lead, till the
color of the^ be black, then lay this powder upon the canker, applyeng
thereupon vngue^tum pomphilicos, of our description. Another powder for the same
purpose. of tucia.. ij. of mirabolane cytrine, of lytarge, of burnt lyme, of
every one,. i. of lyme ten times washed with water of barlye.. iij. of ceruse..
vi. of terra sigillata.. ij. ss. of vynegre.. iiij. of the juice of plantayne
and nyghteshade, of every one.. iij. ss. sees these things together till the
vynegre and iuyces be consumed, then powder them, and labor them in a mortar
of lead, the space of two hours. The ruptory of capitelle is described in our
antidotarye among caustyke medicines

Here follows the ordinance of the ointment called gratia dei of our
description, Gra^^a dei.
which is mundificatiue and incarnatiue, and good in wounds and vlceres,. of
the greater and less centaurye, of woodbynde, alleluya, plantayne, rybwort, of
every one, m^. ij. of consolida the greater and less, of mouseare, of
galitricum, of yarowe, of every one, m^. i. of the flowers of rosemary of
wormwood, mugwort, of every one. m^. ss. of the roots of madder,. iiij of
greyne poudered,. ij. of the flowers and leaves of saint John's worte,
agrimonye, knotgrasse, verueyne, horse tail, of every one, m^. i. ss. cut them
all and stamp them, adding thereunto of fresh swynes grese melted, li. j. ss.
of oil of roses odoriferous.li. ij. of clear terebentyne, of cowes talowe.li.
ss. stamp these things again with three pound of good wine, and so leave
them the space of.ix. days, setting the^ to sun every day and the^ sees
them with a soft fire, till the wine be consumed, then streyne them and set
them on the fire again, adding of most clear terebentyne,. viij. of mastyke,
rosyn of the pyne, of every one,. iij. of gum elimi.. ij. of white wax as
much as shall suffyce, make a styffe ointment, and malaxe it, first in good
wine, the^ in goats or cowes milk, and last of all in aqua vite. This
ointment heals al wounds.

Here follows a cerote of our inuencion, that heals all wounds and
vlceres,. of swynes grese.li. ij. of calves suet, li. j. ss. of oil of roses
odoriferous, li. iij. ss. of lyme thryse washed with water of barley.. xv. water
of pla^taine.li. iij. sees the^ al together, till the water be consumed, the^
strain them strongly, and put to the straynyng, of brayed ceruse.li. ij. ss.
and sees them with a soft fire three hours, and put thereunto, of most clear
terebentyne.. vi. of white wax as much as shall suffyce, let them sees again
a little.

Tessilus ointment.
Here follows a grene oyntmente, which Tessilus used at Rome, which mundifieth
rotten, corrosiue, and virulent vlceres.. of celedonye, alleluya, or sorel,
centru^ galli, louage, scabious, ana. m^. i. of the juice of plantayne and
knotgrasse, of every one,. x. of ye juice of wormwood, smallage, fumiterrie,
horsetayle, of the croppes of brambles of every one,. vi. of fresh swines
grese. iij. of calves suet, and cowes suete, of every one, li. ss. of clear
terebe^tyne,. iiij. of mastyke.. i. of lyme quenched with rain water,. iij.
ss. of roche alume.. i. ss. of the wine of pomegranades,. v. sees them all
together to the wine and juice be consumed, then strain them and put to the
straynynge, of white wax and oil of roses, of every one,. v. ss. sees them
again a little, addyng of verdegrese brayed.. xiiij. of aloes, franke^sence,
myrrh, sarcocolle, lytarge of silver well brayed, of every one,. iij myngle
them and stir them about. This is vnguentu^ apostoloru^ maius Item to remove
superfluous flesh of vlceres, it is good to myngle one part of vnguentu^
egiptia. Vnguentum Egiptiacum.
and. ij. parts of the said oyntme^t. Vnguentu^ egipti. after our description
is thus made.. of verdegrese, of roche alume. ana.. ij. of honey of roses.. i.
of water of plantayne, wine of granates, an^.. ij. ss. sees the^ and stir
the^ about till they be thycke as honey. Here follows a powder to cause a good
cycatrise,. of mirabolanes citrines.. i. of roche alume burut,. ij. of terra
sigillata, of flowers of pomgranates, ana.. i. ss. of lyme ten times
washed.. iii. of ceruse, of lytarge of silver, ana.. ii. ss. myngle them and
make a fine powder. This lotion is of like effect.. of water of plantaine, of
odoriferous wine, ana.li. ss. of roche alume brent.. vi. of honey of roses.. ii.
sethe them a little.

A dygestyue of sanguyne apostemes, is thus made.. of clear terebentyne.. ii.
the yolke of an egg, of saffron.. ss. myngle them.

This is a digestive of a choleryke aposteme. R. the yolke of an egg, oil of
roses omphacyne.. ss. mingle them and labor them in a mortar of lead the
space of an hour, puttyng in the oil drop by drop.

A mundificatiue of a sanguyne aposteme is thus made. R. of clear terebentyne..
ij. of honye of roses.. ss. of sirupe of roses.. vi. sees them a little, and
put thereunto the yolke of an egg, of barley flower.. i. of saffran. ss.

A mundificatyue of a choleryke aposteme. R. of clear terebentyne.. ii. sirupe
of roses.. i. ss. the juice of plantayne.. ss. sees them a little and add
thereunto the yolke of an egg, of barlye flower.. x. and if ye add of
frankynsence, myrrh, sarcocoll, aloes, of every one.. i. ss. it shall be a
good incarnatyue.

A digestive of a flegmatyue aposteme. R. of clear terrebentyne.. ii. of honye
of roses.. ii. of the juice of smallage, horehounde, scabiouse, cole woortes,
wormwood, of every one. ss. sees them all till half the juice, be consumed,
addyng of the flower of wheat.. x. of bean flower and lentilles, ana.. v. of
sarcocoll.. vi. myngle them.

Here follows a cerote to remove the hardenes of the mylte and liver, and the
stomach.. of diaquilo^ magistrale three ounces, of Galenes cerote of isope.. i.
ss. of armoniake dissolved with vinegre, an ounce and a half, of the juice of
ireos, three drammes, of ye juice of smallage and rue, of every one three
drammes, of the roots of cappares, and asparage, of every one six drammes, of
camomylle, mellilote, wormwood, of every one. m^. ss. of odoriferous wine,
and white vinaygre. ana. cyathe half, sees them till the wine and vinaygre be
consumed, then streyne them, and put thereunto of the roots of Holihocke
soden and strayned four, ounces and a half of new wax as much as shall
suffice, sethe them again and make a styffe cerote, addyng in ye end, of
safron.. ii.

Here follows a good fomentacion to resolve the aposteme of the arms and
legs called vndimia. R. of Camomille, Mellilote of the leaves of myrte, of
every one. m^. ii. of wormwood squinantum, sticados, roses, mugworte, of
every one. m^. i. of coriander, sweet fenell, of every one an ounce, of honey
half a pound, of salt, of roch alume, of every one.. ii. ss. sees them all
with barbours lie, tylle the third part be consumed. A corrosiue water, to
mortify a carbuncle, and to remove wartes, and superfluouse flesh in the
pockes, is thus made.. of sal gemme, vitrial romayne, ana.. ii. of sublimat,
arsenike. an^.. i. of verdegrece.. ss. Sees them to gyther be sydethe
verdegrese, with a cyathe of barbours lie, and half a ciath of water of roses,
tylle half be consumed, and when ye take this ordinance, from the fire, put
in the verdegrese. This is a great secret.

A mundificatiue of a carbuncle of our invention. R. of honye of roses.. iii.
of sapa.. j. of terrebentyne.li. ss. of the juice of woormewood, smallage, and
scabious, of every one.. vi. of the flower of barlye and wheat, of every one..
ii. sees them tylle they be thycke, adding of saffron.. i. of sarcocolle..
iii.

An oyntemente to mortyfye a carbuncle, and to mundifie cancrena and
ascachillos. of honye.. ii. of roche alume.. ii. ss. of sal gemmae.. ii. of
sublimate.. i. ss. of the juice of scabiouse. vi. of verdegrese.. xiiii. of
vynegre of roses.. iii. ss. sees them tylle they be thycke.

An ointment to incarne wounds, of our invention.. of clear terebentyne.. iii.
of oil of mastyke and roses, ana.. i. of calves tallowe.. ii. of rasine of the
pyne, of mastyke, of every one.. x. of frankensence, of mirrhe, of every
one.. iii. of new wax. j. ss. of anthos, yarowe, centaurye the greatter, of
every one. m^. i. of odoriferous white wine, one ciathe. stamp the herbs a
little, and seethe them together, tylle the wine be consumed, then strain them,
and malaxe the straynyng with milk.

Here follows a sparadrap, to cure corrosiue, malign, and virulente ulcers..
of vnguentum populeon.li. ss. of an oyntmente of roses, or of Galiens
ointment.. iii. of oil of roses.li. j. ss. of calves suet.. viii. of swynes
grese.. ii ss. of the juice of plantayne, and nyghtshade, of every one.. iii.
Sees them all tylle the juice be consumed, than strain them, and put to the
strayning, of ceruse.. vj. of lytarge of gold and silver, ana.. ii. of terra
ligillata, of minium ana.. x. sees all together till they be black in color,
addyng sufficient white wax, and of camphore brayed.. i.

Of suppositories and clysteres of honye.
TAke honye.. iiii. sees it till it be thycke and styffe, and make
suppositories like a candel, and labor them between your hands, anointed with
oil, and if ye will have them to be of stronger operation, add of salgemme.
ii. of bn^dicta simplex.. ss. of ireos sta^ped and incorporated in the end.. v.

Here follows another form of our description.. of the rotes of flour
deluyce sta^ped. li. i. of ye leaves of camomyl, mellilote, dille. ana. m^. i.
of white soap cut in small pieces.. i. of the rotes of holihocke. li. ss. of
garden saffran, polipodie, sweet fenel. ana.. x. of cumyne. iii. sal gemme.. v.
of comune salt.. vi. sees these things with five pound of reyne water, till
half be consumed, then streyn them and make little round pieces, about the
bygnes of great pills, with sugar, coriander, and the said streynynge, and put
three, or five into the patientes fundament.

A washing clyster is thus ordained.. of ye broth of a chyckyn or he^ne or
unsalted flesh, or water of barlye, l. i. ss. of read sugar.. iii. of oil of
roses or violettes.. ii. the yolks of two eggs. The comune clyster is thus
made. R. of decoction of malowes, betes, violettes, branne parietarye,
mercurye. li. i. ss. of comune oil.. iii. the yolks of two eggs, a little
salt, of honye of roses.. ii. ss. and if ye add of cassia.. vi. it shall be the
better.

Here follows a magistral clyster against grypynge of the belly and the
colyke.. the head of a wether somewhat broken, of camomylle, mellilote, dyl.
an^. m^. i. of sweet fenel, of coria^der, ana.. ss. of cumyne.. ss. of
parietarye, of fyld mallows. an^. m^. ii. sees them all together with
sufficient quantity of water, till the flesh be well sodden, and take of the
decoction. li. i. ss. and add thereunto, of oil of camomylle, dylle, and rue,
of every one an ounce, of honye of roses, three ounces, of benedicta simplex,
three drammes, the yolks of two eggs.

Here follow repercussiues, and first of sanguine apostemes. R. the whytes and
yolks of three eggs, of oil of roses odoriferouse, two ounces, of the iuce of
plantayne, of bean flower, of every one an ounce, mengle them. Or make it
thus. R. of oil of roses, three ounces, of white wax.. i. of bean flower six
drammes, of all the saunders. ana.. ii. of bole armenye, three drammes, melt the
wax and the oils, and put to the rest. Or make it thus. R. of oil of roses,
three ounces, of the juice of plantayn and nyghtshade. an^.. ss. sees them all
together till the iuce be consumed, then streyne them and put thereunto of
white wax, ten dra^mes. This last repercussiue must be applied with cloutes,
dypped in the licoure, and it is convenient at the beginning.

A repercussiue of a choleryke aposteme, is thus made.. of the juice of
plantayne and lettuce, of every one half an ounce, of woman's milk, three
dra^mes, of oil of roses and violettes an^.. ii. ss. whytes of four eggs,
beat them all together, and apply them with wete cloutes. Item for this
intention it is good to apply the decoction following with weted cloutes
actuallye hot, somewhat pressed. R. of lettuce, mallows, violettes,
plantayne, knotgrasse, and roses, of every one. m^. i. ss. of the seed of
quynces somewhat broken, six dra^mes, sees them all in sufficient water, till
half be consumed.

A repercussiue of a flegmatike aposteme is thus ordened. R. of oil of roses
odoriferouse, camomylle, mirte, spyke, of every one two ounces, of squinantum,
wormwood. m^. ss. of odoriferous wine, one cyathe, of anthos a little. Sees
them all till the wine be consumed, then streyne them, addinge of white wax,
two ounces and a half, make a liniment.

To resolve herisipelas, this sparadrap is of noble operation. R. of oil of
roses odoriferouse, of calves talow of every one, two ounces, of white wax..
i. of wine of pomegranades, of odoriferous white wine, of every one two
ounces. Sees them all together till the wine be consumed, then streine them
and make a sparadrappe with pieces.

The remedies which ripe hot apostemes, are four, of which this is the
first.. of mallows, violettes, of every one. m^. i. of clean barlye. m^.
iii. of lettuce. m^. ii. sees them in sufficient quantity of water till the
barlie break, then stamp them and streyne them, and sees them again a
little, and put thereunto the yolks of two eggs, of oil of violettes two
ounces, and take them from the fire incontinentlye.

The second is this.. of mallows, and violets, of every one. m^. ii. seth
them in the broth of a chickyn, or fresh veale, then stamp them, and make a
styffe plaster with flower of barlye, and the decoction, addyng the yolke of
an egg, of oil of violettes, and fresh buttyre, of every one an ounce, and a
half of the meat of roasted apples, two oun and an half, mengle them well, and
sees them together a little.

The third is this epithemye.. of the leaves of mallows and violettes, of
every one. m^. ii. of clean barlye and lettuce, of every. m^. i. the sede of
quynces somewhat broken, two ounces. Sees them with sufficient quantity of
the broth of unsalted veale, or with reyne water, till the barlye break, and
take them from the fire, and add of psilium, three drammes, and so leave them
together, the space of three hours, then streyne them and press them, adding
of barlye flower two drammes, of oil of violettes, and buttyre, of every one
three ounces, sees them again a little, and when ye take them from the fire,
put thereunto the yolks of two eggs, and apply this ordinance with linen
cloutes dypped in the decoction.

Remedies which ripe sanguine apostemes, are of four kinds, the first is
this.. of the leaves of malowes and violettes, of every one. m^. ii. sees
them in the brothe of a shepes head or in rain water, stamp them and make a
styffe plaster with the decoction, and wheat flower, adding in ye end of
buttyre, and comune oil, ana.. ii. ss. the yolke of an egg, of saffran.. i.

The second form is this.. of the leaves of mallows and holihocke, of
every one. m^. i. of white lyllye roots, three ounces. Sees them and stamp
them, and make a styffe plaster, adding of fresh buttyre, of swynes grese
melted, of comune oil, of every one.. i. the yolke of an egg, of saffranne,
a dram.

The third is good to ripe flegma tyke apostemes of hard maturation. R. of
the leaves of holihocke, and malowes, of every one. m^. i. of the roots of
white lillies, and holihocke cut according to length, of every one, six
drammes, sees them and sta^pe them as is aforesaid, and put thereunto of the
flower of wheat, lynsede, and fenugreke, of every one three drammes, make a
plaster with the decoction, addyng of buttyre, comune oil, swynes grese.
ana.. ii. ye yolke of an egg, me^gle them, and sees them together, again a
little.

The fourth is a fomentation. R. of the roots of holihocke. li. ss. of
lynsede, and fenugreke. ana.. ss. of leaves of mallows and holihocke. ana. m^.
i. of branne, with a little wheat flower m^. iii. sees them with the brothe of
a shepes head, till half be consumed, then strain them and put to the
streynynge, of comune oil and fresh buttyre. ana.. iii. the yolks of three
eggs, of wheat flower.. i. ss. mengle the^ together and sees them again a
little.

Remedies that ripe cold apostemes, ben in three sorts. The first is this. R.
of the roots of holihocke, and white lillies. ana. li. ss. sees them in reyne
water, stamp them, and put thereunto of the flower of fenugreke and lynsede.
ana.. iiii. of wheat flour.. ii. incorporate them with the decoction of the
herbs, and set them on the fire, styrryng them about, and make a styffe
plaster, addyng of butter, of swines grese an^.. iii. ye yolke of an egg,
sees them again a little. The second is this. R. ii. white oynyons, and two
white garlyke heads roasted in an oven, of ye rotes of holihocke, and white
lilly rotes sodde^ in water. ana.. iiii. stamp them, and make a plaster with
lynsede, fenugreke sede, and the decoction, addinge of the flower of new
leven.. iii. of swynes grese.. iiii. of butter.. i. ss. ye yolke of an egg,
incorporate the^, and set them on the fire again, and put unto them, of
snayles broken, in number. xviii. of figs sodden and stamped, in number.vi.

The third, is this fome^tation. R. of ye roots of holihocke.. iiii. of
fenugreke, lynsede. an^.. ii. of dry figs in number.iiii. of branne. m^. ii.
of mellilote. m^. i. sees these things in sufficient quantity of ye broth of
a shepes head, and foment the place with cloutes, and after the fome^tation,
apply one of the two foresaid playsters. Here follows a convenient purgation
for maryners. First if they have tercian fieners, the matter must thus be
digested. R. of sirupe of vynaygre called acetosus simplex, of syrup of
violets, of the iuce of endyue. ana.. ss. of waters of endyue, violets, and
buglosse.. i. mengle them. when the fieuer is choleryke, mengled with gross
fleume, this is more convenient.. of ye said syrup of vinegre, or deduabus
radicibus with vinegre, of syrup of the juice of endyue, of honye of roses
streyned. ana.. ss. of ye waters of endyne, buglosse, and hoppes. ana.. i.

A digestyue of a sa^guine fieuer. R. of syrup of ye iuce of sorel, of ye iuce
of endive, of violets. ana.. ss. of ye waters of borrage, endive, and buglosse.
ana.. i.

A digestive against a malign kind of fevers, called, la fieuer mata, among ye
mariners.. of the sirupe of iuce of sorell, of the sower iuce of a citron, or
orange of ye iuce of endive. an^.. ss. of ye water of buglosse, sorell, and
endyue an^.. i.

Here follows a minoratiue purgation of colerike fieuers, which is convenient
at ye beginning. R. of good cassia.. ss, diaprunis no^ solutiui.. vi. make
morcels with sugar, or with water of endive, make a small potion, adding of
syrup of violettes.. i.

A purgation for delicate persons. R. of chose^ ma^na, of cassia. an^.. ss.
mengle the^, and make a small potion, with water of endyue, violettes, and
buglosse.

For pore men this is convenient. R. of cassia, diacatholi. an^.. ss. of
electuarye of roses after Mesue.. ii. ss. make a small potion with ye comune
decoction.

Another solutiue for rich me^. R. of cassia, of chosen ma^na. an^.. ss. of
good reubarbe steped according to art.. ss. mengle them and make a small potion
with the comune decoction, addyng of syrup of violettes.. i. When fleume is
mixte with choler this solutiue must be used. R. of cassia, diacatholicon. an^..
i. of diafinico^.. ii. ss. of an electuary of roses after Mesue.. i. me^gle
the^ and make a small potio^ with the comune decoction. For the same inte^tion,
these pills are convenient. R. of pills aggregatiue, of pills of reubarbe.
an^.. ss. make. v. pills, with syrup of roses. Give the^ in the morning, or.ii.
hours after supper. A minoratiue purgation of sa^guine fieuers, is thus
ordained. R. of chosen manna, of cassia. ana.. ss. of diacatholico^, of
tamarindes. an^.. ii. ss. make a small potion with water of buglosse, melissa,
and sorell. Another. R. of cassia, diacatholicon. ana.. ss. of trifera persica,
of tamaryndes. ana.. ii. make a potion, with the decoction of cordial flowers,
and fruits. After seven days, ye shall purge the patient with a purgation that
emptieth al humors indifferentlye, which may be after this sort.. of
diacatholicon.. vi. of electuarye of diacassia.. ss. of electuarie of roses..
i. of trifera persica, of diafinicon. an^.. ii. make a small potion, with the
decoction of cordial flowers and fruits.

For the same intention, ye may minister this clyster following four times a
weke. R. of the brothe of unsalted flesh, or of the decoction of malowes,
branne, and violettes. li. i. ss. of honye of violettes.. i. ss. the yolks of
two eggs, of oil of violettes.. ii. ss. or of comune oil as much, and a little
salt. And in the stead of a clyster, ye may use the suppositories before
written.

To conforte the heart, ye may apply this epithemye. R. of water of roses,
melissa and buglosse. ana.. vi. of wine of pomegranades, and odoriferous wine.
ana.. ii. of all the sau^ders ana.. ii. of saffranne.. i. of camphore graynes,
ii. sees them all together a little. Item to swage pain of the head after
universal purgation, ye shall lay upon the forheade, this epithemye
following. R. of water of roses, oil of roses, wine of pomgranades. ana.. i.
the white of an egg, applied hot with a lynen cloute.

Here follows a long syrup, which they must use that have the said fieuer,
to quench strange heat, and to swage thyrst. R. of the water of barley li.
iii. water of buglosse, endyue, sorell, an^. li. i. of the wine of
pomegranades,. x. make a iuleb with white sugar.

To recover appetite ye patient may use a syrup of cicorie, of this
co^fectio^. R. of diarodo^ abbatis, of ye. iii. sau^ders an^.. i. of sirupe of
cicorie, and roses. an^.. i. ss. mengle the^. Or thus. R. of aromaticu^
rosatu^.. ii. ss. of diamuscu^, sirupe of cicorie. an^.. i. mengle them and
make trociskes with sugar. An unction for the weakness of the stomach.. of oil of
wormwood, roses, and mastike. an^.. i. of wormwood maioru^, mintes, rosemary,
squina^tu^. an^. a little, of saffran, graynes.ii. nutmigges, cloves, cynamome
an^.. i. of odoriferous wine one cyath, of white wax.. vi. sees the^ al
beside the wax, till ye wine be consumed, and make a soft cerote, with the
wax, mastike, and a little terebentyne.

Here follows a potio^ for the french pockes. R. of ye rotes of enula ca^pana,
and yuy.. iiii. of ye iuce of anthos, maide^ here, wyld mint, penyrial,
gallitricu^, politricu^, mugwort. an^. m^. i. of the rotes of cicorie.. iii. of
ye rotes of fenell, and smallage. an^., ii. of ye coddes of seen.. ss. of
polipodie.. x. of saffranne, graynes. iii. of agarike in trociskes.. i. ss.
sees the^ al in ten pound of rain water and a pound of honey, and a pound and
half of sugar, till.ii. pertes of.iii. be consumed, whereof the pacient must
take in the morning one cyath, and must sweat in his bed afterward.

This cerote folowinge is good for ye french pockes confirmed. R. of swynes
grese, oil of roses. an^.. xi. of wethers suet.. iiii. of cerusse, litarge of
gold. an^. iii. of clear terebentine.. i. ss. sees the^ with a soft fire ye
space of.ii. hours, and make a soft cerote with white wax, the^ take the^ from
ye fire and stir the^ about til they be luke warm, and the^ put thereunto of
quickesiluer quenched.. vi. of liquide storax.. vi. incorporate the^ and stir
them well together.

Here follows a purgation which is good after ye patient has used the last
potion.xii. days. R. of diacatholico^, of cassia. ana.. ss. of electuarii
indimaioris.. ii. of trifera persica.. i. ss. make a small potion with the
comune decoction, addyng of syrup of violettes.. i.

Here ye shall note, that the said diseases is not contagious, but at the
beginning, when it is the form of scabbes. Item it is verey good at the
beginning, yt the patient take, so^time ye purgation following. (Digestion with
ye less syrup of fumiterrie, and the juice of endyue, with waters of endyue,
fumiterry, and hoppes, presupposed) R. of diacatholicon, cassia, an^.. ss. of
an electuary of roses after Mesue.. ii. of the confection of hamech.. i. of
good reubarbe.. ss. make a small potion with the comune decoction, adding of
syrup of violettes.. i. or make it thus. R. of diacatholicon.. vi. of
electuary of psilium, of trifera persica, diafinicon. ana.. ii. of the
co^fection of hamech.. ss. make a small potion, adding of syrup of violettes..
i. A plaster for apostemous wounds of the synnowes. R. of husked beans. li.
ii. sees them in the broth of a shepes head, or in barbours lie, till they be
well sodde^. Then stamp them, and put unto the^ of oil of roses odoriferous
and camomylle, ana.. ii. sees them again till they been thycke, adding the
yolks of two eggs, of saffran.. i.

Here follows the ordinance of pills of master Nicholas de Furnariis, which
ben good against the migryme, ophtalmia and swimmyng of the head. R. of
myrrh.. iii. of aloes epatyke.. vi. ss. of saffran.. ii. of all the
mirobalanes. ana.. ss. of agaryke in trociskes.. iii. ss. mengle them and make
pills with water of fenell, ye receipt is. i. and.. i. ss. If ye add to these
things, of trifera perfica.. v. electuarii indi. electuarii rosarum Mesue.
ana.. iii. of triacle.. i. of carduus bn^dictus, torme^tylle Doronike. ana..
ii. they shall be good in the french pockes, and against the pestilence.

A potion against the styngynge of serpents, bytynge of wood dogs, the
pestilence. R. of tormentylle, ditany cardus benedictus, ana.. i. of Galenes
triacle.. ss. of saffran, graynes. i. of Citron seed.. i. of a smaragde one
grayn, of doronike.. i. of syrup of the iuce of sorell, water of buglosse.
ana.. vi. of the wine of pomegranades, of doriferous wine. an^.. ss. mengle
the^.

Here follows the ordinance of vnguentum basilicum the greater. Vug.
basilicum.
R. of oil of roses odoriferous. li. ii. of cowes tallowe, and calves talowe.
ana. li. ss. of swynes grese.. iii. of oil of camomylle, lynseede, sweet
almons, of hens grese and goose grese. ana.. ii. of anthos, yarrow, centaury
the greater, woodbynde, saint John's worte, ana. m^. i. of roots of madder..
iii. of fine grain.. i. ss. of the leaves of pla^tayn and ribworte. an^. m^.
i. of comune oil. li. i. ss. stamp these things and leave the^ together ye
space of a week, then sees them with a cyath of good wine, and three ounces of
earth worms, till the wine be consumed, so streyne them and put to the
streynyng of rosyn of the pyne tree.. iii. of colophony, of mastyke. an^.. i. of
ship pytch. x. of litarge of gold and silver. ana.. iii. of minium as much,
sees them till they be very black, ever styrryng the^ about addyng in ye
end, of terebe^tyne.. xiiii. and a sufficient quantity of white wax, sees
them again a little, and make a soft cerote.

This is the ordinance of vngue^tum basilicum the less, which swageth pain
more then the other, and is convenient in wounds of the synnowes. R. of oil
of roses.. iiii. of comun oil. li. i. of fresh buttyre. li. ss. of swynes
grese, calves suet, and cowes suet. an^.. v. of yarrowe, pla^tayne, wood bind,
verueyne. ana. m^. i. of the rotes of madder, of earth worms. ana.. ii. of
ship pytche, of rasyn of the pyne an^.. ii. ss. stamp the herbs, and
incorporate them with the oils and fattes, and so leave the^ the space of a
weke, then sees them with a cyathe of odoriferous wine, till the wine be
consumed, so streyne them, and put to ye straynyng, of miniu^.. iiii. of
litarge of silver.. iii. sees them again till they be black, and put to them
of clear terebentyne.. vi. suffycie^t white wax, and make a soft ointment.

Here follows a liniment good to remove corrupt flesh of formica, procedyng
of the french pockes, and to dry up read buddes in the foreheed, or in the
neck, coming in the said disease, and to remove wartes. of the iuce of
lettuse, and pla^tayne of every one two ounces, of Galenes ointment.. i. The
whytes of.ii. eggs, of sublimate well brayed.. one, beat them together, and
labor the^ a good while in a mortare of lead. This water is good for the same
purpose.. of roche alume.iii. dra^mes of sublimate.. i, of sall armoniacke..
ii. of barbours lie, a pound, of water of roses.. iiii, sethe them all tylle
the third part be consumed. And if ye will have it of greater desiccation,
add a little verdegrese, when y take it from the fire. The iuce of the herb
verucaria, whereof we spoke in the book of symples, is good for the same
purpose.

Auicenne says, that the third part of a dram of Squinantum, with a little
pepper, comfort the synowes and muscles. And if ye put thereunto of water of
camomylle.. v and make a potion, it shall be more co^fortatiue, it shall take
away youxynge, coming of replecyon, and werynesse of the members, and
wyndynesse of the guts. And therefore, the decoction following is good for the
same intention. And moreover it swageth pains of the pockes, and breaks
wyndynesse of the matrice

. of squinantum.. i. of anthos.. ii. of sweet fenelle, of anyse, ana.. ss. of
lyqueryce.. v. of mugworte, nepte, ana, half an handful, of cinamome,
nuttemigges, cloves, cubebes. ana.. i. of good honye,. iiii. of syrup de
duabus radicibus without vynegre, of sugre taberzet, of every one five ounces,
of water of camomylle, wormewoode, of every one two pound, of water of endive
and fenelle. ana. l. ss. sees them together, tylle the fourth part be
consumed, then strain them and give half a cyathe of the straynynge actuallye
hoote. The root of squinantum comfort a weak stomach, and the little leaves
that grow about the rote, are good against venomous bytynges.

An unction for a weak stomach.. of Squinantum.. i. of maiorum, mynte,
wormwood, mugwort, nept of every one a little, of oil of mastik, spyke, and
quynces. ana.. i. ss. of odoriferous wine, cyathe one, sees them til the wine
be consumed, then strain them, and put to the straynyng, of the spyces of
aromaticum rosatu^, of the spyces of diaradon abbatis., iiii. of white wax, as
mochas shall suffice, make a liniment.

A potion for sharp fevers, and for the breaking of the skulle, it may be
given without tamirindes. Take of reysons two ounces, of damask prunes, of
clean barley of every one.. ss. of tamarindes.. ii. of the wine of
pomegranades.. iiii. sees them all, with six pound of rain water, and six
ounces of fine sugre, til the third part be consumed, than strayn them. A
potion for all fystules. For fistula.
. of agrimonye. m^. iii. of plantayne m^. two, of the leaves of a wild olyue,
an handful, of ielefloures,. ss. of honye.. iii. seethe them in wine of good
odoure with a little scabiouse, till the fourth part be consumed, and give it
in the break of the day, in the quantity of half a cyathe. An artificial
iuce, to mortifye a fistule.. of the iuce of agrimonye.. iii. of the iuce of
affodylles, two ounces, of the iuce of celidonye.. i. of common salt, of sal
armoniacke. ana.. iii. of sublymate.. ii. of verdegrese, of roche alume. ana..
i. ss. of aqua vite.. x. sees them till half the water and iuce be consumed,
and cast the licoure into the fistule, with a syrynge.

After mundification of a fistule, this lycoure is conuenyent.. of the iuces of
agrimonie, and plantayne, ana.. ii. of the roots of paucedinis stamped.. ss.
of alowes, myrrh, ana,. ii. of salt, of roche alume, ana.. ss. of honye of
roses,. ii. of aqua vite,. i. ss. sees them together, tylle half the water
and iuce be consumed, and apply this lyquour as is aforesaid. For a trociske
of minium against fistules, resort to the eight book, of corrosyues. The
manner to make the poudre of mercurye is declared in the eight book.

A linimente, conuenyente for a spasme, procedyng through the hurt of the
synnowes, is thus made.. of the seed of Saint John's worte. m^. ii. of anthos.
m^. i. of fresshe buttur. li. ss. of oil of roses, dylle, camomyll, violettes,
ypericon, of every one, two ounces, of calves suete,. iii. of the mary of
cowes legs.. ii. of the oil of sweet almondes.. i. ss. of goose grese,
duckes grese, hens grese. ana.. ii. ss. of earth worms washed with wine
three ounces and an half, of good wine cyathe one and an half, seethe them,
till the wine be consumed, tha^ strayn them, and make a liniment with suffycient
white wax, and dip cloutes therein, in the form of a sparadrap, and bind
them upon the sore place.

A good oil for prycked synowes. of the oil of ypericon, elders, euphorbium,
ana.. i. of brayed brymstone.. x. of armoniacke, bdelliu^, serapyne, an^.. i.
of white vynegre half aciath of erthwormes washed with wine. i. ss. sees them
together tylle the vynegre be consumed, than strain the^, and apply the oil
actuallye hot. The ointment following is good for the same purpose, and draws
out the matter that causes a spasme.. of the forsayde oil,. i. of
terebentine half an ounce, of gootes, and calves tallowe, of every one three
ounces, of white diaquilon gummed.. x. of armoniake, of bdellium dissolved with
vynegre, ana.. ii. of rasyne of the pine tree, of colophonye, shyppytche, ana..
v. make a cerote with suffycie^t new wax.

Here follows an oil of our description, which is good for all goutes caused
of cold and myxt humors, and also swageth pain coming of the crampe.. of
common oil, l. i. ss. of oil of roses odoriferous, oil of camomyll, ana.
li. i. of oil of a fox, spyke, ypericon, ana.. ii. of oil of dylle.. i. ss.
of the iuce of camomyll, wormewoode, anthos, mugwoorte, calamynt. ana. m^. i.
of squinantum. m^. ss. of the seed of ipericon, an handful and an half, of
goose grese, duckes grese, ana.. iii. of the marye of a calves and a cowes
legs. an^.. x. of the roots of enula campana, and walwoorte somewhat broken.
ana.. iiii. eight quycke frogs, of earth worms washed with wine.. iiii.
me^gle these things together, with a quart of good wine, and so leave them the
space of a day, than sees them with a soft fire, till the wine be consumed,
than strain them, adding of clear terebe^tine,. ii. ss. of saffra^.. ii.
sees the^ a little, and reserve this oil as a treasure. And if ye will make it
in the form of a cerote, ye must add two ounces of new wax.

A playstre against the gout. of husked beans sodden in the broth of
flesh.. iiii. stamp them, and strain them, adding of oil of Roses, and
camomylle, of buttyre, and swynes grese, ana,. ii. myngle them, and make a
soft playstre, with the yolks of.ii. eggs, and of saffran.. i.

Here follows the ordinance of vnguentum de minio, which is good to heal
ulcers of hard curation.. of oil of roses odoriferous. li. i. ss. of oil
myrtyne, of vnguentum populeon, ana,. iiii. of hens grese.. iii. of cowes,
and wethers talowe, ana. li. ss. of swynes grese, seven ounces, of litarge of
gold and silver, an^. ii. ss. of ceruse.. iiii, of minium, three ounces, sees
them till they be black, and stir them about, increasing the fire afterward
half an hour, and put to of clear terebe^tine. x. with sufficient quantity of
white wax, make a soft cerote, and let it seethe again a little.

An oyntmente to cool: good for chafynge of the yard and other members, and
kylleth ytchyng.. of oil of roses odoriferous.. iiii. of Galenes ointment, of
vnguentu^ albu^ ca^phoratu^, vnguentu^ populeon, ana.. i ss. of the iuce of
plantayne, and night shade, ana,. vi. of litarge of gold and silver, ana,. ii,
mengle them, and make a liniment in a mortare of lead. The manner to make the
liniment is this. when ye have put the myneralles in a mortare, ye must put in
the oils and the iuces, by little and little, one after an other, styrrynge them
ever about, till they be well incorporated, and so put to the oyntmentes.

Vnguentu^ de tucia, which is good for cankers and hoote ulcers, is thus
ordained. of oil of roses o^phacine, of oil of roses complet odoriferous ana,
li. ss. of calves and gootes tallow of vnguentu^ rosarum Galeni, of vnguentu^
populeo^. ana,. ii. ss of iuces of plantayne, nyghtshade, and sorelle, ana,. i.
ss. of the wine of pomegranades.. ii. ss. sees the^ all with a soft fire, till
the iuce and the wine be consumed, than strain them, and put to the
straynynge, of ceruse, of litarge of gold and silver an^,. ii. ss. of burnt
lead, of antimoniu^, ana,. x. of tucia, alexandrina,. i. ss. of brayed
ca^phore:. i. make a soft cerote, adding suffyficient white wax. Ye must melt
the wax with the straynyng, and afterward incorporate the mineralles,
straynynge them about the space of.ii hours in a mortar of lead.

Vnguentu^ albu^ camphoratum of our description, is made thus.. of oil of
roses odoriferous.. viii. of the tallowe of a calfe, and of a kydde, ana,.
iiii. ss. of Galenes ointment.. ii. of wine of pomegranades, water of roses,
and plantayn, an^.. iii. sees the^ all till the water and wine be consumed,
than strain them, and put to ye straynynge, of white wax.. ii. of ceruse..
iiii. of brayed camphore,. i, ss, the white of two eggs: when the wax is
melted with the straynynge, take it from the fire, and labor it til it be luke
warm, than put in the whites of eggs, and afterward the ca^phore, and
ceruse, and afterward incorporate them well together. It is a good ointment in
all hot matter:

An oyntmente of a dogs tourde, which is good for malign, corrosiue and
gnawyng ulcers:: the tourde of a dog that eats bones, sta^ped, an dried in
an oven, and poudred,. vi. of ceruse, litarge of gold and silver, ana,. ii. of
myrobalane citrine, of flowers of pomegranades brayed. an^. vi. of brent lead,
of tutia preparate ana,. ss. of gootes milk, li. ii. of the flower of
lentilles,. iiii. ss. the manner to make this ointment, is this. Ye must quench
pieces of brenning iron in the milk, and incorporate flower and the dogs
turde with the said milk, and sees them till they be thycke, adding, of oil
of roses omphacyne,. ii. of oil myrtine,. i. ss. of white wax. i. sees them
again a little, styrring them ever about, and than put in the mineralles, and
take them from the fire, and incorporat them in ye form of an ointment.

Here follows a fomentation, and a cerote, very good to heal the hardness,
of the synowes and joints.. of camomyll, mellilote, ana, m^. i. of ye roots
of holyhocke, li. i, of the seed of fenugreke and lyneseede, ana,. iiii. sees
them in sufficyent quantity of broth, wherein a shepes heed has been sodden,
till half be consumed, and foment the place therewith, and after apply this
cerote.. of the oil of a fox, lyllyes, sweet almondes, ana,. ss. of agrippa
and dialtea, ana,. vi. of the marye of the legs of a calfe and a cow, ana,.
ii. of duckes grese, and hens grese, ana,. v. of the fat of a beer, and of
a badger, of gose grese, of every one an ounce, of armoniake dissolved in
vynegre,. iii. ss. of terebentyne,. i. ss. seethe them with a little of the
said decoction, till the decoction be consumed, and than put thereunto as
much white wax, as shall suffyse.

To heal the tongue skorched through catarrhouse, sharp, or salt matter,
descendyng from the brain, ye shall use this ordinance.. of vnguentu^
egiptiacum, an ounce, of syrup of roses, syrup of myrte, ana,. ii. rub the
tongue three days with this remedy often times a day.

The water following is for the same purpose.. water of pla^tayn,. viii. of
syrup of roses, honey of roses, wine of pomgranades, of every one an ounce, of
roch alume,. i ss. sees the^ a little. In this case it is good to chaw the
leaves of lettuse.

A singular decoction for wounds that perce into the breast.. of fygges nombre
six, of reysons, an ounce, of licorice.. x. of clean barley, m^. ii, of
le^tilles, m^. i. of melissa half an handful of read sugre half a pound,
seethe them all together in eight pounds of water, tylle two parts of three be
consumed, than strain them, and if ye will have it more abstersyue, add of
honye of roses, three ounces.

A Chapter of necessary medicines, for chirurgiens that use the sea.
WE declared in the foremer book, with what medicines, as well simple as
compounde chirurgiens must be furnysshed which use the sea. Now we will
brefelye speak of those, that chirurgie^s must carye with them in barks, and
little ships.

First, they must have bolearmenye, myrrh, frankensence, aloes, sanguis
draconis, for broken boones, wounds, and flux of blood. And to make vnguentum
egiptiacum, and water of alume, they must have roch alume, verdegrese, and
honye. Moreover, terebentyne, and honey of roses, to make mundificatiues of
wou^des, and ulcers. And they must carry with them minium, litarge of gold and
silver, ceruse, white wax, common oil, to make an ointment of minium. Of
cerotes and oyntmentes, it shall suffice, to bear with them a cerote of
betonye, or of gu^me elimi, of our description, and vnguentum album, of Rasis
descryption, our sparadrap, with diaquilon, and vnguentu^ apostolorum.

Of syrupes, these ben conuenyent. A syrup of vynegre, called acetosus
simplex, a syrup of the iuce of endive or de duabus radicibus without vynegre,
honey of roses in small quantity. Of waters, these shall suffyce, water of
endyue, of hoppes, borage, wormwood, fumiterrye. Of electuaries, they shall
have with them cassia, diafinicon, electuarium of Roses after Mesue, and
diacatholicon. Of pills, they must have pylles of hiera cumagarico, pylles of
fumiterry, the greter and the less.

Against the disease ophtalmia, they must have water of roses, and a syef
without opium. Of oils, these ben necessary, oil of roses, of myrte,
camomyll, and oil omphacyne, and it is conuenyent that they have with them the
flower of beans, orobus, lyneseede, fenugreke, and aqua vite, to heat the
wou^des of the maryners and other.

Thus (by the grace of God) we have ended this present book, whose name be
praised for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.
The interpretation of strange words, used in the traslation of Vigon.
ABietis. Vigo in one or.ii. receytes, commands to take of abietis.. ii. and
ss where he means the rasyn of the fyrre, or sapyne tree. I have red also,
that the apotecaries call palmam Elate^, whereof, the oil called oleu^ elatinu^
is made, palma^ abiete^. Palma is a date tree, and abies a fyr tree. Aborcement
Aborcement, is when a child is borne out of season. Abstersive Abstersive is
that, which has power to scour. Acacia. Acacia is a thornie tree growyng in
Egypt, which has a white seed cloosed in coddes, whereout a medicenal iuce
is pressed. And there issues also a gu^me out of this tree, commonly called
gu^me arabike: howebeit in the stead of true acacia, they commenlye use the
iuce of sloes. And therefore we have so translated it sometimes. Accidents. An
accident is that, that may be in a thing, and away from the said thing the
self same thing remaynyng still vndistroyed. As vehement pain may be an
aposteme, or from it, without remouyng of the aposteme. It sounds word for
word, chaunsyng to. Acetositas citri. I did translate it ones or twyse, the
four iuce of an orange: howebeit the apothecaries make this syrup with the iuce
of a citron (as they have showed me) Natheles Fuchsius techeth that they ben
both of like virtue and effect. And Io. Agricola says ye citro^ signifies an
orange, and also a limo^. And because this name is doutfull, I leave it to thy
judgment, good reader, whether thou wylt (when thou fyndest the ryndes of a
cytron, or ye iuce) understand an ore^ge or a pome citro^. Acorus. Bru^felsius
calls acoru^ wild flour delyse. Mainarde says, that he was wont to use
calamus aromaticus in the stead of acorus. Some take it for galingale.
Adiutorie. They call the two bones which extend from the shulders unto the
elbowes, ossa adiutoria. Aematites. Haematites is a precious stone, and has
his name of bloody color. For Haema in Greek signifies blood. It has
strength to heat, to thynne, and to scour, and it is vsyd in medicines for
the eyes. Agarike. Some say, that Agaricu^ is a rote, and some affirm, that it
growtth to trees like to destooles. It is found in wild places of Sarmatia,
and also in Galatia, and Cilitia, and it dryueth out fleame and cholere, but
not spedely. Agrippa. Agrippa is an ointment descrybed in Galenes antidotari.
Albugineus. Albugineus is that, that pertayheth to the white of the eye.
Alchohol. The barbarous auctours use alchohol, or (as I find it sometimes
written) alcofoll, for most fine poudre. Alchachinga. Alchachinga is taken for
the second kind of nyghtshade. Plinnie calls it halicacabum. Alleluya. They
use this word, Alleluya, for a kind of three leaued grass, which is sour in
taste. Almocatim. The barbarous writers call the nether bones of the heed
Almocatim. Aloes. Aloe is the liquour of an herb, brought unto us out of
India. Some affirm, that the manner of making it is this. They sta^pe the herb,
and draw out the slymye juice, and lay it to the fire, till it boil, and than
they set i^ a sunnynge, till it be dry. And that, that is purest, they call
succotrine, or succocitrine, that which is in the middell, being less pure,
hepaticke, and finally that which synketh to the botome, and is as it were the
dregs, they call Cabaline. Aloe is bitter in taste, and of an hot and dry
complexion. It purges choler, and comfort the stomach, and is moreover of
great effect in wounds. Althea. Dioscorides wrytteth, that Althea is a kind
of wild mallows, having round leaves, and flowers like roses, it is
commenlye taken for holyhocke, and so I have ever translated it. Howbeit the
chirurgyens beyond the sea, use march mallows for Althea. Alumen zuccarinu^.
There been many kinds of Alumes: But three been most known, which they
co^munely call, Iamenu^, zuccharinum, or rotundum, and roch alume. Alume has
virtue to bind, and therefore it is called Stipteria in Greek, and it is
moreover abstersyue, or scouring. Ambrosine. Ambrosia is communelye taken for
wild sage. Ameos. Ameos. Ammi, in the genetiue case, Ammeos is a white seed,
hot, and dry in the third degree. It grows by the city of Egypt called
Alexandria. Instead of this herb, some use the seed of cheruel. Amygdalae. At
the root of the tongue, there been (as it were) two flesshye kernelles, like
sponges, called in Greek paris^^mia, in latyne tonsillae, and of the (...)
doctors amygdalae, that is almondes. Amydum. They corruptly use this word
Amydu^, for that, that is called in greek Amylon, and it is the juice or milk
of wheat steeped in water certain days, and afterward pressed. Anthera.
Though Vigon thinks Antheram to be the yollowe in the myddest of a rose, yet
Cornelius Celsus, says that it is a composition for the diseases of the
mouth, wherein roses enter. Anotamie. Anotamie is a Greek word, and
sygnifyeth the cuttynge up of a man's body, or of some other thing. Anacardinum
mel. They call the juice of anacardus honye anacardine. And when they say,
that anacardus is the fruit of a tree called Pediculus Eliphantis, which
grows in Sicilia, and Apulia. The honye or juice of this fruit, burns
blood, and rooteth up wartes. Animal spirits. Resort to vital spirits.
Anodine. Things which are without grefe, are caled in Greek, anodina.
Howbeit, Vigon uses the word for things that remove pain. Antecedent.
Antecedent. Going before. Antidota. Antidota are medicines to be received
within the body. whereof there been three dyfferences. For some are given
against poison, some against the styngyng of venomous beasts, or serpents:
and some heal diseases gathered of corrupt meats, and drinks. They call a
book wherein such medicynes are descrybed an antidotarie. Anthos. Anthos in
Greek, sygnifyeth a flower, howbeit, it is co^munely used, for the flowers of
rosemarye. Antimonium Antimoniu^ is a vein of the earth like lead, howbeit,
it has this difference from a metal. A metal melts, Antimonium is brayed,
and will be burnt rather than molten, it is cold, and dry in the third
degree. And it is put in colliries for the eyes. etc. Anthrax. Anthrax is
engendered when gross and boylyng blood, leanyng to some part of the body,
burns the skin. For Anthrax in Greek, sygnifyeth a cool: and for the same
cause it is called carbunculus in latyne, which is a diminitiue of carbo, a
cool. Apium risus. Apium risus is taken for Batrochion, which is thought to
be crowfote, and it is called Betrachio^, or ranu^culus, because frogs delight
therein. And therefore the later auctours call it apiu^ raninu^. And they say that
it is called apium risus, because the man that eats thereof, dies laughing.
For risus signifies laughing. which auctours assign to that, that grows in
Sardinia. Aphorism. Aphorismus signifies a distinction. Aposteme. Aposteme is
a passion wherein the things are sondred, which before were joined together.
wherefore there remains an emptye space, which receives a wyndye or moist
substance, or both. And the said substance fretteth the parts about,
making room for him self. In latyne it is called abscessus. Aqua
gariofilata. Aqua gariofilata is the water of cloves: as it appears in the
fourth book of abridgementes. Howbeit, because gariofilata is commenly taken
for ieloflours, for that, that they have the odor of cloves called gariophili
I think I did translate it ones, the water of iellyflours. Here ye shall note
that though gariofillata be commenlye taken for iellofloures, yet other well
learned men think it to be Aue^s, and so perchance I have translated it
sometimes. Armoniake. Dioscorides, calls that, that Vigon calls armoniake,
ammoniacum, of ammos, which sygnifyeth sand. For it is the lyquour of a shrub
in Aphrica, called agafyllis, which falls upon sand, and so is found in
clottes. Ammoniacum also is a kind of salt found under sand. Arcula
puerorum. Arcula pueroru^. The later writers of chirurgeri, using an arabike
term call the blysterynges, which through corrupt milk, happen in the roof
of chylderens mouths, Alcola^. If this be not the disease which Vigon calls
arcula^. I can learn of noma^ what it should be. Aristologia. Aristolochia
has his name of yt, yt it helps greatly women in labor, for the expulsyon
of the secondes. There been two kinds hereof, the male, and the female. The
male is called long, the female, round. The root of the Female is round,
like a rape, but the male is an ynche thycke, and a span long. Wyllyam Turner
a man (besides his other lerning, of excellent knowledge in herbs) showed me
that he found this herb in Italye with a fruit fassyoned like a pere: And he
gave me seeds to set, howbeit, they prospered not. Aromatike. Aromata be
spyces of good odor. Aromatike is that, that has the nature and quality of
good spyces. Arsenyke. Arsenicon is a greek word, and is called in latyne
auripigme^tu^, because it has the color of gold. And it is dug out of
mines, and has virtue to gnawe, to bind, to repress. It rayseth bladders
like fire, and finally it roteth up heeres, and causes baldness. Vigon uses
arsenike, and auripigmentu^ for.ii. things: which difference I find not in
learned ancient auctours. Aromaticum rosatu^. Aro. to. is a confection made of
red roses, saunders, cinamome. etc. to comfort the heart and the stomach.
Arthetica. Arthritis is when there is weakness in all the joints of the
body, a noughty humor flowing to ye same. It is caled podagra, when the humor
is in the feet, and chiragra when it is in the hands, Ischia dica (or as they
call it) sciatica, when it is about ye huclebone, which is called ischion in
Greek. Artery. An artery is the way, passage, or conduyct of the natural
spirits, as a vein is the way of blood. Asa. Asa fetida is a stynkynge
gum, which heateth vehementlye. Asparage. Asparagus is an herb full of
branches and long leaves like fenell, his root is great, long, having a
bu^che. There been two kinds hereof. The garden asparage is a good meat for
the stomach, and loses the bellye. Assignatio. Assignatio^: appoyntynge.
Assarum bacchar. Some call assaru^ wild spikenarde. Some Asaru^ bacchar. It is
an herb of good odor, having leaves like yuye, saving that they ben less,
and rounder. The flower of this herb is of purple color, wherein there are
seeds like the stones of grapes. This herb heals and provoke vryne.
Hermolaus Barbarus teaches that there is a difference between Asarum and
Bacchar, though their virtues are like. Ruellius says that Bacchar is called
in the country, our ladies gloves. Aspis. Aspis is a venomous serpente, whose
styngyng brings heaviness of the heed, and slepynesse. Attractiue. That is
called attractiue that has strength to draw to a place. Attrition. Attrition:
wearynge asondre. Augmentation. Augmentatio. Increase. Atramentum minerale.
Atramentu^ minerale, or metallicu^ grows together in mines of brass and
seems to be of ye nature of brass It has the same strength to burn, that
vitriolle Romayne has. Baurach. BAurach, is the foam of the salt, called
nitrum. And therefore, it is called in Greek, Aphronitrum. Baucia. The later
writers call pastinacu^, (that is, persnepes) Bauciam. Bedeguar. Serapion
teaches, that bedeguar is that, that Dioscorides calls spinam albam which
grows in mountains, and wooddye places, with rough, and pryckynge leaves,
purple leaves, and an hollow stalk, and whytysh in the top, whereof it has
a pryckye heed. Bechichie. Bechichie. I think they would say Bechie, that is
against ye cough. For Bechion sygnifyeth the cough in Greek. Ben. Ben.
Dioscorides calls ben balanon myrepsicam, and the latynes gla^de^
vnguentariam. And the said autour teaches, that it is the fruit of a tree
growing in Ethiopia, Egypt, and Aphrica, about the bigness of an hasel nutte,
which fruit being pressed sends out a liquour, which they use in precious
oyntmentes. Biarbor. Look in vitis alba: for the Italia^s call vitis alba,
biarbor. Bdelium. Bdelium is a lyquoure of a tree of Arabie. Bisantia. The
pandectarie, says that bizantia is the iuce of herbs yt provoke vryne. Blacce
bisantie. Blatte bisa^tie ben shel fyshes found in India in waters, by which
spikenarde grows, and they eat the spykenarde, and therefore have a pleasant
and aromaticke odoure. The smoke hereof draws down the secondes of women,
and the same rayseth the^ up, that have the falling sycknesse. The latynes
call them vngues odoratos. Bolearmenie. Bolearmenie is a vein of red earth
found in armenie. Boras. Boras, other write it borax, and Pliny says, that
it is a lyquoure in pyttes, runnyng by a vein of gold, and by the cold of
winter, it is hardened. It is called in greek chrysocolla, as if you would say,
ye glue of gold Bozomus. This word Bozomus is found in no good auctour, that
ever I chanced to see. Bromus in greek signifies the corn which we call
Otes, let the reader judge, whether Vigon use bozomus, for bromus. Bruscus.
Some think, that Bruscus is a wild myrt. It has leaves prycking in the end,
and a fruit like cheryes. The latynes call it ruscum. In some places they make
besommes of it, to swepe pauementes. I found it Englysshed in an old written
book, litholme. Some call it gueholme. Bubon. Bubon is a swellynge in the
kernelles. In the pestilence it is wont to appear in the neck, in the
flanks and under the armehooles. CAncrena. Gangrena is when some part of the
body through great infla^mation dies, but is not yet perfitly deed when it is
perfytelye deed, and without feeling: it is called sphacelos in Greek, which
they have turned to ascachillos, sideratio in latyne. Some say, that gangrena,
is when a membre is apt to putrefye. Ascachillos, when it is putrifyed, but
has not al parts of putrefaction. Esthiomenos, when a membre has all
degrees of putrefaction. Camphore Camphora (or as some write it) caphura, is a
gum of red color, spottie. And it is cold, and dry in the third degree. It
stops blood with vynegre, and defends hot apostemes. etc. Cantharides.
Cantharides are certain (as it were) flies of sundry color, of long bodies,
having yolowe, and crooked strakes on their wings. They have strength to draw
heat to the ouermost part of the body, and to blystre. Capsula cordis.
Capsula cordis, called pericardion in Greek, is the skin that covers the
heart, the skaberde or sheth of the heart. Caput monachi. Caput monachi
sounds a monks heed, and it is thought to be the herb which the Grecians
call buphthalmon, that is ox eye, and which we call mayweede. Carduus
benedictus. Carduus benedictus: Hieromye Tragus says, that they are
disceyued, which think that car. been. is groundeswel, or housleke, and he
judges it to be carduus, which is a thistell bearing flowers somewhat redder,
than purple: Some call it wolfethystell. Cassia. Cassia fistularis, or nigra, is
a fruit long, round, hollow, containing in it a liquour rongeled, which is
divided by certain spaces, as it were with thyn pieces of wood, it purges
boylyng colere. There grows an other cassia in Arabie, of color like coral,
of a pleasant odor, and it is called commonly cassialignia. It heals,
dries, and byndeth. etc. Castoreum. Casto. is the stone of castor, which is a
be that lives partly in the water, and partly in the earth, called of some
a beuer. Castoreu^ has virtue against serpents, it provoke neesynge, the
flowers. etc. Cataplasma. Many put no dyfference between cataplasma and
emplastru^. Howbeit proprelye Cataplasma is made of grene herbs stamped, and
sodden in water, till they be soft: and differs from a plaster, for they
put oil to a plaster, after the decoction of herbs. Catarrhus Catarrhus
comes of catarrheo, which signifies to flow down, to run down. For
when an humor descends from the brain, they call it a catarrhe, or reume.
Cataracte. They call it a cataract, when a slymy humor, grown together like
yse, between the skynnes of the eyes, cornea and coniu^ctiua, comes about
the apple of the eye. In latyne, it is called suffusio, in greek hypochyma.
Cauterie. Cauterion is an hot iron, and it comes of caio, causo, which
sygnifyeth to burn. They call an actual cauterie, a burnte iron: a
potentiall, that, that is without fire and iron, but has partly like
strength, as vnguentum egiptiacum. etc. Celidonie. Salendine is called
chelidonia, because that the swallows restore syghte to their young birds
therewith. For chelido^ in greek signifies a swallowe. Centorie the greater.
Leonardus fuchsius thinks that, to be ce^taurie the greter, which the
Apothecaries call rhaponticum. Centaurie the less, is called fell terre, that
is the gall of the earth, by reason of his great bytternesse. Cerote. Ceratum
has his name of cera, yt is wax, for it is compounde of oiles, terebentyne
and wax. Cerusse, Cerussa is made with strong vinaygre and lead. It has
virtue to mu^difie, and to scour. Charabe. Karabe is used for succinu^, which
is the gum of a black poppler tree. Chalcantum. Chalcantum is a congeled
lyquore found in the mines of brass. The Romans because of the black
color, called it atramentu^, and because that skynners used it in their
shoppes called sutrine, they added sutoriu^. Chalcos in greek sounds brass.
Chamepiteos. Chamepitys is co^munelye and falslye taken for an herb that
grows in corn, of no odoure having greyishe or blewishe flowers. Harma^ of
Nuenar councelleth to use saint John's worte, instead thereof. The word
sou^deth, as you would say a low pyne tree, and it is an herb having the
leaves, and sent of a pyne tree, which Roberte Record a man for his singular
learning, and great travail in searching of herbs right worthy to be
remembered, showed unto me, and (as he said) he found it in an hylle in kent. It
is about half an handful high, and (as is aforsayd) it has the semblau^ce
of a pyne tree leaf, and the savor of ye same. So that by the description it
appears to be true chamepitys. Cheiri. Some take cheiri for yelow uiolets.
Chilis. Chile in greek signifies nouryshment. Chrysomela. Chrysomela sou^deth
word for word golden apples. The best of this fruit are brought out of
strinenia. They ben good for an hot stomach. Otho says that quinces are
called chrysomela. Centrum galli. The auctour of the pandectes says that
centrum galli is gallitricu^ which is claire, a kind of maiden here but is
falselye thought to be. And he says also that it is hierabotanum, that is
veruenne. Simon genuensis says that it is a great herb having purple
flowers bendinge to whytnes, and that it is called in ferraria S. John's herb.
In an old book I found it englyshed schawort. Some think it to be oculus
christi. Cicatrice. A cicatrice is the scarre of a wound. Cicers. A cicer is a
kind of pulse like pesen. Cimolia. Chimolia is a kind of earth brought out of
Sardinia, Creta, and also Spain, It is good against the burning of fire, and
it has virtue to bind, and to dry. Clymanu^. Clymeno^ is an herb which has
a square stalk like a bean stalk, and leaves like plantayn. A juice is
strayned out of ye root of it, which is good for them that spitte blood.
Clyster. Clyster comes of clyzeia, which signifies to wash. It is called
also enema of eniemi to cast in. Collyrie. Collyria are medicines to be applied
to the eyes. And there been two kinds thereof. One is liquide, and clear and
that now is comunely called collyrion. The other is dry, and that they call
barbarously a Sief. In greek the first is hydrocollourion, ye second,
perocollourion. Colofonia. Colofonia is called pix greca, yt is greek pytch,
because that there is great abundaunce thereof in greek land. It is hot in the
second, and dry in the first degree. Coloquintida. Colocynthis is a wild,
and bitter gourde. It has virtue to purge. The apothecaries call it
colliquintida, for colocynthida, in the accusatyue case. Conioyncte. Conioyncte
is joined together Coniunctiua. The seuenthe skin of the eye called in latin
coniunctiua, is called in greek epipephycoes, because it grows to the other
tunicles, that make up the eye, in the outward part. Co^missure. Commissura
is when two things are set joined, or souldred together, a seame. Comune
seeds. The hot comune seeds are these, anise seed, perseley seed, fenell
seed, smallage seed the seed of asparage, and bruscus. The comune cold
seeds called the greater are these, cocomber, gourde, melon, and citron seeds.
The comune cold seeds called the less, are the seeds of endive, purselane,
lactuce, scariole or white endyue. Conglutinatiue. Conglutinatiue, is that,
that has strength to glue together. Consolidation. Consolidation is ioynynge
or souldrynge together. Contraction. Contractio^ is when a thing is drawn
together. Constrictiue. Constrictiue is that, that has virtue to strain, or
bind together. Consolida the greater. Co^solida ye greater is co^ferie after
ye opinion of all chirurgiens. Co^solida ye less (as Dioscorides says)
grows in stones, and has branches like organye, and tops like thyme. It
is a plant all woddye, of sweet taste provoking spettell. Consolida media is
comunelye taken for dayses. Howebeit the chirurgiens in Flaunders take it for
dog fenell, which is a weed growing among corn like camomylle. Consolida
regalis is called in dutche Ritter sporen, that is knights spur, because it
has a pleasant blewe flower, fashioned like a spur. All these ben called
consolidae, because they have virtue to consounde, and to glue wounds
together. Coraliine. Corolina is thought to be bryon which is moss growing
to stones in the sea, and kylleth the worms of children. Cordial. They call
that cordial, that conforteth the heart. Corrosiue. Corrosiue is that, which
has power to gnawe, and eat away. Crisis. Crisis signifies judgment. Look
in terminatio ad crisim. Crassula. They make three kinds of crassula, the
greater, the less, and yt mean. The greater has thycke leaves like
houseleke. The less is vermicularis, the mean carduus benedictus after the
comune opinion. Some call crassula mayor orpin, and crassula minor stone
croppe. Cubebes. Cubebe are the seeds of a tree growing in India. Whereof some
been hot like pepper. Some bitter. etc. they provoke urine, and break the
stone. Cuscuta. Cuscuta dodder. It wrappeth it self about flax, and therefore
it is called podagra lini that is flaxes gout. Cyperus. Cyperus is a rushe of
sweet odor growing in Syria, and in the Isles called Cyclades, the roots
whereof are used in medicines to heat, and to provoke urine. There is another
kind of cyperus in India and the root of it is like gynger. It remoueth here
being anointed upon one place. etc. Cyathe. Cyathus is a measure containing
in weight of wine one ounce, three dra^mes, and four siliquas. Siliqua is the
third part of obolus. Obolus is half a scruple. Cyclaminus. Cyclaminus is an
herb, having leaves like iuye, purple, chau^geable, with whytysh spots
above, and beneth. The flower of it is like a rose, of color enclinyng to
purple. The iuce of the stalk of this herb is poured into the nose with honye
to purge the head. Dianucum. DIanucum is made of the juice of the ryndes of
walnuttes, and honye. They use this medicine, when humors descend from the
head to the breast and we saunde. Digestive. In chirurgerie a digestive is
taken for that, that prepares the matter to mundification or clensynge.
Howbeit properly digestion is, when good iuce is distributed into all the parts
of the body, by the veins. Desiccatiue. Desiccatiue is that, yt has virtue
to dry. Dialthea. Dial. is a confection made of holihockes. Daigredium.
Diacrydiu^ is the juice of scamonie howebeit it is counterfaite. Diacyminu^. A
confection of cumine. Diaphinicon Diaphoenico^ is a co^fectio^ made of dates.
Phoenix in greek signifies a date tree. Diophoretica vis. Vis diaphoret. is
strength to discuss. Dianthos. Dianthos is a co^fectio^ made with flowers
which is given to pensive, and troubled persons to cause mirth. Diamoro^. A
confection made of mulberies. Diapo^filicos. Diapompholix is the oyntmente made
of tutia. Resort to tutia. Diarodo^. A confection made of roses. Diacartamus.
Diacartamus is a confection made of garden saffra^. Diametre. Diametros is a
right line equallye cuttynge a figure, where it is longest. Didimi. Didimi ben
ye two stones. Howbeit Mu^dyne, and vigo^ use this word for ye two skins,
which cover ye stones. Dictamnus. The true dictamnus grows only in Candie.
Howbeit practisians have found profit in our ditany and therefore it is to be
used. Dilatation. Dilatation is enlargynge. Diuretike. Diuretike provoking
urine, or yt has virtue to provoke urine Doronici. Doronici are little roots
of sweet rellise, like unto calamus aromaticus and they are brought from the
east parts. Dragagantu^. Tragaca^tha is a broad, and a woddie rote appearing
above ye earth, wherout many low branches spring, spreading themselves al
about. There cleaves to this rote, a gu^mie liquour of a bright color, and
so^what sweet in taste, which they call comunely dragagantu^. Dregge. Leonardus
Fuchsius thinks ye tragea comes of tragemata, which signifies ionkets, or
dilicate meats used in the end of dinner, or supper. Dysuria. Dysuria is
difficulty of pyssinge. Embroke. EMbroche comes of embrocho, which
signifies to rain. And it is an embrocatio^ when we drop down liquor from
an higher place, upon some part of the body, as upon the head. Elaterium.
Elateriu^ is ye iuce of a wild coco^ber. Elebore. There ben two kinds of
elleborus, namely white, and black. The white has leaves like pla^tayn, but
shorter, and blacker. The black has leaves like ye leaves of ye plane tree
so^what less iagged about. The rotes thereof ben small thyn, and black, which
are used in medicines to purge melancholye. Electuariu^ de daclilis is an
electuarie of dates. Eliuation. Eleuare signifies to lift up, elevation when a
thing is raised up. Eminences. Emine^tia is when a thing stands out.
Emu^ctories. Emu^ctoria ben the clensyng places, as the flanckes, the
armeholes, etc. Emborisma. Emborisma is a swelling, which comes of a wound
of an artery, when ye flesh leaning upon ye artery, comes to a cicatrice,
but ye ulcer of ye artery is nether growe^ together, nether has received a
cicatrice, nor is stopped with flesh. Epiglottis, Epiglottis is a little piece
of flesh, which comes from ye rote of ye tongue, and covers ye top of ye
pipe, or wesaunde. Epilepsia. Epilepsia is the disease comunelye called the
falling sycknes. Epithema. Epithema comes of epitheo, which signifies to lay
on. And it is made of stilled liquours, and other simples laid upon a place
with wete cloutes. Epithymum. Some say yt epithymu^ grows without a rote, and
has as it were thin heeres wonde together like a botome. The flowers thereof
been very small white, and like ye flowers of thyme. Mufa says yt, epithymum
is as it were read heeres growyng about cetayne herbs. Eradicatiue. That is
eradicatiue that has power to rote out. Erectum is raised up. Eryngium. They
comunelye take erynglum for Scholme, which is an herb having pryckes like a
thystel, and roots swetyshe in taste, and grows by the sea side. Eschare.
Eschara is the hardness, or cruste yt remains after the burning of a wound,
or ulcer. Essare. Essere, or essare ben called of Paulus Aegineta epenyctides,
because these little read pushes break out in the night season. Estiomenos.
Estiomenos is an eating sore. For esthiomai in greek signifies to eat Vigon
is deceived in serching the original of this word. Exmoline. Ermolinus is an
herb, whereof I have found nothing written. Howbe it ye apothecaries affirm
that they have it. Expulsive. Expulsive is having virtue to dry out. Eufrage.
Eufragia has a little leaf iagged about, and a yelow flower, and because it is
a singular remedy for the eyes, it is called in greek ophthalmica. Euforbiu^.
Euphorbium is a liquoure of a tree growing in Aphrica of veheme^ heat.
Excoriation. Excoriation is when the skin is chafed away. Excresences,
outgrowynges. Exiturae, outbreakynges, outgoynges. Exciccation, dryenge.
Extirpation. Extirpation is when a thing is plucked up by the root.
Eupatorium. Leonicenus thinks eupatoriu^ to be agrimonie. It has one only
stalk woodye blackyshe, straight, thynne, roughe. The leaves been like
sinckefoile, or hemp leaves, and it has his name of king Eupator. Fanus.
FAuus signifies an honye comb, and some times it is used for a swellynge,
which has holes in ye skyn, wherout there is strayned a gross humor like
honye. In greek it is called cerion. Filius ante patrem. Filius ante patrem is
an herb having tustes, or heads from which other branches spring,
bearing tuftes also. And therefore it is called filius ante patrem, that is,
the son before the father, or impia that is wicked. This herb is good for ye
quynce. Fistula. Fistula is an hollow sore, and it is so called because it
has an holownes like a pype. For the same cause the grecians have named it
Syrynges flebotomye. Phlebotomie signifies the cutting of a vein, or phleps
is a vein, and thomos signifies cutting, or a cut of temno to cut. Flammula.
Flammula is spereworte. Focilia. Focilia, the two bones from the elbowe to the
hand, and also the two bones of the legs are called focilia. Fomentation.
Fomentum comes a foueo to cheryshe because it cherysheth with his heat the
parts of the body, whereunto it is applied. For it is called a fomentation,
when liquor is laid upon a membre with a sponge, or cloutes. Formica. Formica
is a little excrescence, or out growing in the skin, somewhat broad about
the botome, which when it is scratched causes as it were the styngynge of an
aunt, or pismare, and therefore it is also called in greek myrmecia. Fragmentes.
Fragmentes are little pieces. Fractures. Fractures are breakynges. Froncles.
Fornuculus is a swellyng enge^dered of gross humors, and for the most part
it appears in fleshye places. When it is gathered in the skin only, it is
gentle, but when it comes from a deep place, it is malign. Fumes. Fumes, is
smokes, or vapors. Furcula. Furcula is called of better latin me^iugulus, or
clauicula, and it is ye higher part of thorax. I call thorax that space which
is compassed on both the sides with rybbes. And the nether part of thorax is
called septum transuersu^. In english iugulus is called the canel bone.
Galbane. GAlbanum is the liquoure of a tree in Syria, which they call Metopium.
It is counterfayted with rasine, and ammoniake. Gallitricum. Herma^ earl of
Nuenar writes thus of Callitrichon. Dioscorides (says he) under ye name of
Adiantho^, describes an herb, which is called of some capillus Veneris of
some callitricho^ (in english we call it maydenheere) There is another kind,
which is called polytrichon, and they grow both in weete stones, and in
pyttes. Some call polytrichon Saxifrage, and it has round leaves, and brother
then callitrichon. wherefore the later writers err shamefully, thynkyng
callitricho^ or (as they corruptly pronounce it) gallitrichu^ to be an herb of
ye garden with great leaves called clarie, but true callitricho^ is capillus
veneris, or maidenheere. Callitrichon signifies in greek fayreheered,
polytrichon much heered. Gallia muscata. Gallia muscata is a co^fection made
of unripe dates, or the ryndes of pomgranades and musk. It comforts the
stomach, and the liver, and restrayneth vomitynge, when it comes of a moist
cause, Nicolas says that it is made of mastike, ca^phore, cynomome, cloves,
nutmigges, rose water, and musk. Gargarisme. A gargarisme is when we cause
water to bubble in our throtes, not sufferynge it to go down. Gariofilata.
Some take gariofilata for Auens, some for gyllofers. Glandules. Glandulae ben
kernels. Gentiane. Gentiana has his name of Ge^tis the king of Illyrie,
which found this herb first, as some think. Ihon Agrigola says, that a
certain old phisitio^, affirmed unto him, yt if a man did eat fasting every
day a little of ye rote of this herb, it would preserve health, and keep the
senses unhurt. Gramen. Gramen called in greek agrostis is an herb having
branches full of knottes, or ioynctes, which crepe by ye ground, and rote
themselves. The leaves of it ben sharp, hard, and broad. Gum elemi. Gummi
elemi is the gum or liquore of the olyue tree of Aethiopia for Elea in Arabik
signifies an olive tree. Gypsu^. Gypsu^ is of the nature of chaulke and there
ben many kinds of it, as Pliny says, which it would be to long to recit.
Gyrus solis. Gyrus solis signifies ye co^passyng of ye su^ne, and they so call
ye herb heliotropion, because his leaves turn with ye declination of ye su^ne.
Read ye next word. Heliotropion. HEliotropion is so called because it turns
about with ye su^ne. And though there ben many herbs that turn about with the
su^ne, yet Dioscorides makes two kinds thereof. The first he calls ye
greater, and it has leaves like basille, but yt they been whyter and greater,
and a white flour, so^what bendynge to purple and bowed in, like the tail of a
scorpio^, and it grows in roughe places. The second, or less grows in
maryshe places, and has rounder leaves then the other. Herb saint marie.
Vigon uses Herb saint marie for persicaria, which is thought to be arssmerte.
Herisipelas Herisipelas is a swellyng of hot boylynge, and thynne blood. Or
it is a flux mengled with blood, and yelowe cholere, being hoter than they
should be. It is called in latin ignis persicus, though Vigon make a
difference of them. Herpes. Herpes comes of herpein which signifies to
crepe, and it is apassion engendered of pure yelowe cholere, without ye admixtion
of any other humor. If the substance be gross, and aygre, it vlcereth the
skin unto the flesh, and is called herpes esthiomenos, that is eating or
gnawynge herpes. But if it be thynne, and less aygre, it rayseth up little
pustles like the grain called milium, and therefore it is called miliaris
herpes. Hermodactyle. Hermodactylus is called of some a wild lilly. It has a
white flour fashioned like the flower of saffran, and a round rote, like an
oynyon. And the said root purges fleume, and therefore is good forgoutes.
Humectatiue. Humectatiue, moystynge. Humiditie. Humiditie, moisture. Hydromel.
Hydromel is methe made of water, and honye. Hyemal. Hyemal is that, that
pertayneth to winter, hymen is a thin skin, in maidens, and a token of
their virnitie. For it is broken in a woman defloured. Hypericon. Hypericon,
saint John's worte. Impetigo. IMpetigo is a deformity of the skin, which may
lightly grow to a leprie. There is another deformity of the skin called
vitiligo, whereof there ben two kinds. One is called leuce, that is white, and
it is nothing else, but the chaungyng of the skin to whytenes being engendered
of slymie fleame. This disease somtymes perceth, and rooteth it self so deep
in ye body that hoar hears grow out of it. Some call it Albaras. The other
is engendered as the former, but it perceth not occupiyng only the over part
of the skin, like skales white and black. Aui. calls this euel the
morpheu. Iamenum. Resort to Alume. Impregnatio. Impregnatio is when a woman is
gotten with child. Ignis persicus. Ignis persicus resort to Herisip^las.
Inanition. Inanition, emptiyng. Incision. Incision, cuttyng. Induration.
Induration, hardenyng. Iera. Hiera picra Galeni is a very good medicine to
purge gross, and shinyng mattier. It is made of cynamome, mastyke, aloes,
casia. etc. hiera in greek signifies hollye, and picra bitter. Incarne. They
use incarna^^, for to bring on flesh. Inflatus. Puffed up, swellyng. Infusion.
Infusion, liquoure wherein some thing a certain time is steped, with out
seethynge, is called of the Apothecaries, infusio, other call it dilutum.
Insensible. Insensible, that feels not, or that is not felt. Inspiration.
Inspiration is when a man breaths in, or draws in his wind. Respiration,
when he sends it out. Isopus humida. Isopus humida should be thus written,
oesypus, and it is fat gathered out of unwashed woulle. Here I admonyshe the,
good reader, that where as thou shall find in a receipt these words (of the
fat of Galenes cerote called Isope) it ought to be thus read, of Galenes
cerote of fat called Isope, or of Galenes cerote of Isope. Ireos. The
Apothecaries use the genitive case for the nominative. Iris is the root of the
flouredeluyce, when it is put in receites. Iua. Iua muscata is thought to be a
kind of chamaepitys. Look for chamepitys. The Germans call Iua or Ibiga
vergessemeinit, yt is forgette me not. Iuleb. Iuleb is made of ^u^ed waters, or
of iuyces and sug^^. Iuiubae. Iuiubae are fruits, which the latins call
zizipha. Howbeit Bras^^olus says that they (...) rather tha^ fruits. The
phisicions use them in decoctions for the breast. Lacea. LAcha is a gum or
liquor of a tree in Arabie, having a pleasant odor some call it cancamum.
Lacertes. Braunie synnowes. Lanciola. Vigo says that Lanciola is hot and
dry in the fourth degree, and therefore I think he means spear worte
La^ciolata signifies the less plantaine. Lapis lazuli. Is a stone of blewe
color, which as Dioscorides says, is dug out of brass mines in Cypres.
The french men call it pierre dazur, that is the stone of azure. Laudanum.
Resort to Hypoquystidos. Lethargus. Lethargus is a disease which brings a
merueilouse necessitye of sleeping and forgetfulness of al things, Lethe in
Greek signifies forgetfulness, argia, ydlenes, slouthfulnes. Leuitiue. That,
that soupleth is called lenitiue Ligamentes. Ligamenta come of ligando, which
signifies to bind. Lingua passerina. Lingua passerina is the female of wild
tasell. Peruse Vigon in virga pastoris. Lignum aloes. Lignum aloes otherwise
called agal lochon is a wood brought out of India, and Arabia, spottie, of
strong sauoure, and somewhat bitter in taste. Liniment. Liniment is an
oyntme^t, linire signifies to smere, to annoynte. Litarge. Litargyrion, spuma
argenti, that is to say the foam of silver, is made partlye of burnte silver,
and partly of burnt lead. That which is of yelow color is called litargyrion
auri, litarge of gold. Local. They call that local, that perteyneth to a place,
that must be applied upon some outward part of the body. Loch. Loch is used
for an electuarie in a liquide form with some slymines, that it may tariesome
while, before it synke in to the stomach. Lotions. Lotions, washynges. Lunaria.
The dutch men call lunaria moone-kraute, that is moon worte, because the leaf
thereof resembles the half moon. Some think it to be a kind of nyghtshade,
as we have showed in Manicon. Lupines. Lupinus is a kind of pulse, so^what
bitter except it be steeped in water. The flower of lupines has virtue to
discuss, to dry, to open. etc. Lutum sapientiae. Lutu^ sapientiae is made of
wheat flower, and moist paper small toosed, and with the whytes of eggs
beaten. Licium. Licium is a tree full of pryckes, and it bears fruit, like
pepper, of black color, and bitter in taste. A juice is gathered out of the
roots stamped with ye other parts of the tree, which is much used in
confections. Maculae. MMaculae ben, when through a strype blood is gathered
between the skynnes of the eye, little spots appearing in the outward part.
Malaxe. Malasso in greek signifies to soften, to mollify. Malabathru^. There
been two kinds of malabathrum. One is the leaf of a tree, in Siria, whereout
an oil is strayned. The other swymmethe upon marysshes in India, without a
root. The apothecaries call malabathrum, folium Indie. Malum mule. I think
that malum mule, is the kybe, called in greek cheimallon, because it comes in
the winter. Manicon. There been four kinds of nyghtshade. The first grows
in gardens, and is called morrell. The second is that, that is called
Alkakengi. The third is called lunaria. The fourth manicon, because it
brings maddenes. For mania in greek, is madness. Malignitie. Though malignus
be properlye illiberall, yet they take it comunelye for wicked, mischeuous,
etc. Manna. Manna is a dew thicked, and falling in certain places upon
trees, and so gathered, and used for purgations. It is brought from the mount
libane. Some call it mel aerium that is honye of the air. Maturatiue. That,
that has strength to ripe is called in latin maturatiuum. Maturation.
Maturation, rypynge. Mesenterion. That part, which is set in the myddeste of
the entrayles, and is tied to the back, is called Mesenterion, or Mesaraeon.
To which mesareon, there descend veins from the gate of the liver, which
veins the liver uses as hands to bring him juice from the stomach.
Mediastine. From the skin that gyrdeth, and enuironeth ye ribs, there grow
out two thin skins, one from the right, and the other from the lift side,
which as it were make an hedge and divide the middle of the body. And this is
it, that they call Mediastinum. Marchasita. Marchasita is a stone wherwyth
brass is tried out. It is like brass, and when it is strycken, sparks of
fire fly out, and therefore it is called, pyrites in greek. For pyr signifies
fire. This stone has virtue to scour away such things, as darken the sight.
Merdasengi. Merdasengi is used for litarge, or burnte lead, resort to
lithargyrion. Minerals are things dug out of mines. Memithe. Some thinks
yt memithe is the juice of ye great salendine, or celidony. But Leo. Fuchsius,
and other learned me^ affirm, yt they are deceived, and say that it is rather
glauciu^. which (as Dioscorides) says is the juice of an herb growing about
the city hierapolis in Syria, having leaves like unto poppie, and a juice of
yelowe color, which cools, and is ministered in me, dicines for the eyes.
Melissa. Melissa in greek signifies a be. It is taken for an herb, wherein
the bees delight. Some call it baume. Mercury. Mercury is used sometime for an
herb of that name, and sometimes for quyckesyluer. Miliu^ solis. Lithospermon
(for it is judged to be milium solis) has leaves like olive leaves, but they
been longer and brother. The branches ben straight, small, and woody. The seeds
are small, and stony, and being dronken with white wine, they break the stone.
Milium. Milium is a kind of corn. It has virtue to cool, and to dry, and to
make thynne, as some think. Minium. Dioscorides says that minium is made in
Spain of a certain stone mengled with syluersande. The paynters call
vermillon, which is made of brimstone, and quyckesyluer minium, which is in
deed cenabriu^, or cinober. Vigon says that it is made of cerusse through
burning. Antonius Musa says that in the veins of quycksyluer there is
dygged out a clotte of red color, which has read dust about it, and yt
duste is minium, after the said auctours opinion. Minoratiue. That ye
diminishes or makes less they call minoratiuu^. Mirtilles. The seeds of
myrte are comunelye called myrtilli. Howebeit John Vigo^ often times byddeth to
take the leaves, and graynes of myrtilles, vsyng myrtilles, for myrte. Mirach.
Under the upper skin of the belly there is another skin, which the
Arabians call Myrach, the latin abdomen, and sumen, the grecians epigastrion.
After the muscles of Myrach which are eight in number, there appears a
thynne skin, much like the webbes of spyders, and it is called in Arabike
Siphac, in greek peritoneon. And when Siphac is removed, the caul appears
comunelye called zirbus in latin omentum, in Greek epiploon. Mitigation.
Mitigation, swagynge. Miuam. The Apothecaries say that Miua is a confection
made with the juice of pears, quynces, etc. to conforte the stomach.
Mollificatiue. Having virtue to soften. Mordication. Bytynge. Muscilage. They
call Muscilagine^ the flymie sap of the roots of Holyhock of the seeds of
quynces. etc. Mundificatiue. Having virtue to cleanse. Mumia. Johan Vigo in his
symples recyteth the comune opinion of Mumia. Howebeit other learned men think
it to be Pisasphalton. Which name sygnifiethe a thing compounde of pytche,
and the Iues lyme. Dioscorides says, that by the violence of streams it is
brought from the mountains Cerauntes, and is cast out about Apolonia, in
Epeiro (which is a country over against Italy) being congeled together like
clottes, having the odor of pytche, me^gled with bitumen, which is a kind
of lyme found about those places, where Gomorra, and Sodom stood.
Myrobalanes. Myrobalani, are excellent fruits which are brought unto us, out
of Egypt and Syria. There ben five kinds of them. One is called Citrinum or
yelowe, because of his yelow color, which has a thycke skin and a little
kernel. Another is called Indum because of his black color, and it is like an
olyue without kernelles. The third kind is called Cepulum, and it is greater,
and heuier than the other, of a duskysche read color. The fourth is
Embeliticum, or Emblicum like a little stone of the color of asches. The
fyfthe is Beletzicum, or Belliricum, which is round like a pere. The yelowe
purges yelowe cholere, the black Melancholy, Cepulu^ purges fleame. etc.
Nenufar. NEnufar otherewyse called Nymphaea grows in pondes, and lies upon
the water with broad and thycke leaves, and a white or yelowe flower of a
pleasau^te odor. The flowers are used in medicynes chyefelye, and they have
great virtue to koole. The Germayne call this herb seehbloume, that is the
flower of the lake. Nigella. Nigella grows in hedges, and meadows, having
leaves like ground swell, saving that they ben thynner. In the top it has
an head like Poppie, wherein there is a black seed enclosed, which they
did put in bread in old time. The Grecians call it Mecona agrion, that is
wild poppie. Nitrum. Salt petre. Nodus mellinus. Resort to fauus. Nuke.
Sometimes they call the marye of the back bone Nucham, and some times they
use it for the nape of the neck. Nutritive. Having power to nourysche.
ODoriferous. That, that has a pleasant sent is called in latin
Odoriferu^. Olibanum. A kind of frankencense. Omphacine. Omphax in Greek is an
unripe grape, Vigo calls oil omphacyne, that oil that is made of unripe
olyues. Oppilation. Stoppynge. Opoponax. Opoponax is a bitter juice of an herb
called Panaces, and it comes out of Syria, and Arcadia. Optyke. The two
synnowes which bring the virtue of seeing to the eyes ben called Optici, of
Optomay which sygnifieth to see. Orobus. Orobus has a little stalk, and
narrow leaves, and little seeds, which are enclosed in coddes, and of those
seeds, there is made a medicinal flower, or meal. Ospectinis. Resort to
pecten. Obthalmia. Ophthalmia is an inflammatio^ of the skin of the eye
called coniunctiua. Ophthalmos in greek, sygnifyeth an eye. The barborouse
writters leave out the aspiration or lettres h h, and turn P, into B. Opium.
Opium is the juice or lyquor of black poppie. Oppositum. Set ouergaynst.
Ordeolum. Ordeolum is a little Aposteme about the bryncle of the eye lyddes,
and it is so called, because it is like a barley corn. Osseum. The purse of
the stones is called Oscheon in Greek, whereof the barbarous wrytters have made
Osseum, leaving out the aspiration that is to say H. and turnynge the lettre
C, in to S. Ossa Sisamina. Look in Sisamina. Os laudae. They call the bone of
the hyndre part of the head, which resembles this greek lettre L Os laud,
or barbarously, laud, for so the lettre is called in greek. Look in
Pericranium. Oximell. Oxymel is made of vinaygre, and honye. Oxirundinum. I
think that they would say oxirodion, or Oxyrodinon, which is made of
vynaygre, and rooses. Oxicroceum. Oxicroceum is made of vynaygre, and Saffran.
Oxisacharum. Oxisachar is made of suggre, and vynaygre. Palea marina. PAlea
marina sygnifieth the chafe of the sea, whereof I have found nothing in any
auctour. Musa says that some Apothecaries in steed of a sponge use a thing
that is woullie within, which they think to be spuma maris, that is ye foam
of the say. The Apothecaries have also certain things, which they call
balls of ye sea, and are made of the foam of the sea beaten against the
rocks, and banckes, and are very small as it were strawes. One of these two
Vigo means by chafe of the sea, as I suppose. Palliatiue. A cure palliatiue
is, when a disease is cloked for a ceason, not perfytlye healed. Panaritium.
Panaritium is an aposteme about the roots of the nails, and it is ^alled in
Greek Paronichia, in latin reduuia. Pani. Vigo uses these two words Pani, and
cicatrices for one thing. Cicatrices in the eyes are of two kinds, that which
is in the ouermoste part of the eye is called in Latyne Tenuis albugo, in
Greek Nephelion a little cloud. That which rooteth more depely is called,
crassa albugo. This evil is called (as I suppose) in englysh a web. Panum.
Panum (as Celsus says) is the swellynge of a kernel, not high, but broad,
where in there is a thing like a pushe, having the semblaunce of bread,
whereof it has this name. Pannicle. Pannicle, a skin, or ryme. Panis
porcinus. Panis porcinus sou^deth word for word swynes bread, and it is so
called because swyne delight in this herb Look in Ciclaminus. Papirus. Papirus
is a kind of a rushe growing in maryshe places of Egipte. Parietaria.
Parietaria, has his name of that, that it grows about walls. For paries
sygnifyeth a wall. The dutche me^ call it saint Peter's crute, yt is saint Peter's
worte, and dach and ^acht that is day, and night. Paroxismus. Paroxismos is
the access, invasion, and first coming of a fieuer. It is deryued of
paroxyno which in Greek sygnifieth to sharpen, to stir up. etc. Parorides.
Parotides, ben apostemes about the ears. Para in Greek sygnifyeth nygh, and
ous, otos an ear. Penidie. Penidie are made of the Apothecaries with suggre
wrethen like ropes. Paucedinis. I think that they have corrupt ye word and
should say Peucedanum, which has a stalk like fenell, a yelowe flower, and a
black root full of liquor. Some call it feniculum porcinum that is swynes
fenell. There is a juice gathered out of the tender roots thereof, being
cut with a knyfe, which is good for pains of ye head, and for the falling
sycknesse. etc. The Apothecaries are wont to show a whytyshe root called of
them Meon, or men, for that, that Vigon calls pauce. Pecten. Pecten is used
of Vigon, for ye bone over the privy members. Pectorall. Pectorall, Pertaynyng
to the breast. Pericranium. Because that Vigon speaks obscurelye about the
Anatomy of the head we thought good here to add somewhat. The skin that
lies under the first skin of the head, and compasses about the sculle,
is called pericranium. For peri in greek sygnifyeth about, and cranion a
scull. There ben three seames, or co^myssures in the head. Whereof two ben
overthwart, of which one is in the foreparte of the head called Stephanea, or
coronalis, the other is in the hinder part of the head, and is called
lambdoides, because it is like this lettre, L called lambda in greek. The
third is stretched from ye myddel of the hinder, unto the myddell of the
former, and is called in greek Obeliaea, in latyne sagittallis. The figure of
these seames represents this letter. The bones, which ben set at the ears
on both sides, been called Petrosa, in Greek lithoeide, because they been like
stoones. About the temples there are two seames called in greek lepidoeides, yt
is like scales. When the brain pan is removed, there appear two rymes, or
thynne skynnes, called in greek meninges. The more outward of these two is
grosser, and defends the brayn that it be not hurt against the sculle. and
it is called dura matter. This rhyme is bored thorough about the bones, called
in greek Ethmoeide, for that, that they ben perced like a strayner, or syffe,
and spongreide, because they ben full of bones like a sponge, Vigo calls them
Basilaria. The inner ryme joined even unto the brain is thynner, and weaker
than the other, and it is like the skin wherewith a child is wrapped, in the
moothers woumbe, and therefore the grecians call it Choroeide, In latin it is
called tenuis membrana, and pia matter. The brain it self is divided into.ii.
parts, the former and the hinder. The former is greater, and softer than the
hinder, and is divided of dura matter. The hinder brain lies to the other, and
therefore the egiptians call it Paregcephalida, the latynes, because it is less
than the other, have named it cerebellum. The two ventricles of the former
brain labor out, and finishe the animalle spirit, and send it in to the
hindre brain to cause remembrance. Wherefore it was need full that a passage
should be from the^ unto the hinder brain, some call this passage, the common
sense, some the third ventricle. There leneth one this passage of the brain, a
little particle or piece after the manner of a vaulte, bounchy without, and
hollow with in, that there may be free space to motion and mouynge. The body
or substance that adioyneth to this passage, where the said passage has his
beginning, is called conarion in greek, because it resembles a pyne apple
named conos. There lie about in the sides of the said myddle passage, round
bodies or substaunces, called in greek, Gloutia, because they been like the
buttockes of a man, some lyken them to the stones.

But there lies over the passage of the brain a particle, which obteyneth a
circumscription like unto a woorme engendered in wood. And therefore the
Anatomistes call that body or substance, that covers the hole passage,
Excrescentiam vermicularem, that is the worm out growyng. There proceed out
of the myddle ventricle, or chamber, two as it were condute pypes, deriuyng
superfluyties unto the roof of the mouth, and cummyng to an hole, called
infundibulum that is a tunnelle, because it is large above, and strayt beneth.
There ben seven pair of synnowes, which grow from the brain. The first.ii.
pertayne to the eyes, and give them faculty of seeing, these are holowe, and
softer than other synnowes, and they join them selves together, and again
before they enter into the eyes, they are divided, representynge this greek
letter. Y. The other payres are declared in Vigo. Finally rhete mirabile, or
the merueylouse net, is made of these arteries, which come into the head
whereas they, passing over the scul, meet at the fundation of the brain. For
there, nature has prepared for this net, as it were a chamber, being
enuyroned with the hard ryme dura matter. Into which place not a little portion
comes of the arteries called carotides, or head arteries, which arteries
afterward ben dyuided in to a ple^tuous generation, and so by those going as
it were lattese wise, a form of a net is fasshoned.

Now that we have spoken suffycyently of the anatomy of the heed, we will
also speak somewhat of the other principal members, and first of the heart.

The heart. The heart on both sides, about the fundament of it, has (as it
were) ears. The right ear with a notable branch is joined unto the hollow
vein, and unto the right ve^tricle of the heart. The left ear is joined to ye
mouth of the veynie artery (called ve nosa arteria) and to the left ventricle
of the heart. For the heart has two ventricles, or cha^bres aryght, and a left
chamber, and they been divided, and parted atweine, through which pertition
there ben holes, by which, blood is conveyed into the left ventricle. In each
of the ventricles, there are two vessels. For a noble vein enters into the
right ventricle, which brings blood from the liver, and distributeth it to
all the veins within, and without the heart. And there comes out of the same
ventricle, an arterious vein, which caryeth blood to the longes. It is called
arteriosa vena, because that in respect of his use, it is a vein, but in
respect of his two tunicles, or skynnes, it is an artery. A veynye artery is
planted in the left ventricle, which brings air from the lo^ges to the
heart. And it is called venosa arteria, because that if ye regard his use, it
is an artery, but if ye regard his tunicle or skin which is syngle, and one
only, it is a vein. The greatest artery of all, called aorta, ye heed spryng
of all other, issues out of this ventricle, whereof one part goes to the
canell bone, and the other is wrythed to the back bone. The liver. The liver
for the most part, is divided into five lappes, called lobi. Howebeit in some
it has but two, in some four, in some none, but is al together round. From
the hollow part of the greater lap, a little pype deriueth cholere, to a
bladder, called cistis cholidochos, which hangs by the said lappes. From
the bunchie part of the liver, there issues the greatest vein of all the
body, and it is called the hollow vein. The stomach. The inner skin of the
stomak being thynne, has streygth filmes, ye outward which is grosser, has
overthwart filmes. First, than the stomach draws meat, stretchyng out the
straight fylmes. Secondlye it retayneth, and embraces the meat be-being
drawn in with the ouertwhart fylmes. And it retayneth the meat so long, till
by the alteratiue power it is turned into good juice. Tha^ the stomach
reserueth the best for his own noryshment, and dryueth down the rest unto
the guts, and from thence that, that is best is returned to the liver, by the
veins called meseraicae. Howbeit that the liver should not tarry to long for
his meat, the stomach sends unto him in the mean season, by little short
veins which grow to the liver, and to the stomach the fyneste, and purest
part of his prepared iuce. Pessarie. Pessus is woll toosed, and made round
after the fassyon of a finger, wherewith medicines are received, and conveyed
into the matrice. Phlegmon. Phlegmone beside boylyng heat, sygnifyeth a
paynefull, read, and hard swellynge. Petrolium. Petroliu^ is used for
naphtha, which droppeth out, of a babilonyke lyme, and has power to draw fire
unto him, though it be somewhat removed. Pilosella. Pilosella is found in no
learned auctour. Howbeit the later writers descrybe it to be an herb, that
grows in stony and dry places, with a red flower, and with leaves spredde
upon the ground, in which leaves there be^ as it were heeres, and therefore they
have barbarously called it pilosella, of pilus an here. The description
agrees with mouseeare, saui^g in ye flour It is Englysshed in an old written
book, hertwort. Where this herb is not found, some think it good to use
mouseeare. Philomu^. Philomu^ is a confection so called of Philon the
inuentoure of it, or as some say, of philos, which sygnifyeth a friend,
because it is frendlye to him that receives it. Policariam. The auctour of the
pa^dectes says that they use policaria for conyza, which is that, that the
latins call pulicaris, which may be called fleiwort For pulex signifies a
fley. Ieronimus Tragus thinks that one kind of pulicaris is arsmerte. This
herb dryueth away fleys. Polium montanu^ Poliu^ montanu^ is a little shrubbe,
of white color an handful high, full of seed. In the top it has a little
heed like the hoore heeres of a man, smelling strongly with some
pleasantness. Polypodie. Some call polipodiu^ oak fern. It draws out
fleame, and cholere, but chefely melancholye. Pori vritides. Vreteres ben
passages, by which brine sondred from blood, is conveyed to the bladder.
Psidia. They use psidia for sydia, which signifies the ryndes of a
pomegranade. Psillium. Psillium has his name of psille, which signifies a
fley. For the seed of this herb is like a fley, and is used in medicines to
cool. The latins also call this herb pulicaris of fleys. It grows nygh the sea, and also in other untilled, and baren places. Pthisis. Phthisis in Greek
signifies wastyng, a consumynge sycknesse, a consumption as we call it.
Pulsatiue. Pulsatiue. Beatynge. Pruna. Pruna: a fyrye cool. Resort to anthrax.
Pustles. There ben two kinds of pustles, or pusches. For some pusches are
high, some broad. The higher are engendered of hot, and subtyle humors, and
cause ytchyng, and are called of some morbilli. The broad ar lower and come of
gross, and cold humors, neither cause ytchynge, and been called variolae of
barbarous writers. Putrefactiue. That, that has power to rotte is called
putrefactiuum. Pyretrum. Pyrethron is called in latin herba fauliaris, because
it provoke spettel merueilously, it grows in ye mountains of Italye called
Alps. Howbeit, that, yt comes out of grecela^de is hoote. It has his name
of fyrye heat. For pyr in greek signifies fire And our word fire is borrowed
of ye grecians, by addition of this lettre H, as the custom of the high
Almaynes is, whose speech we use, and make of pyr, phyr. whereunto we have put
of our own, letter E, and pronounce it phyre. Rasceta. RAsceta: the barbarous
doctors call ye wrest of the hand, unto the knoccles, Rascetam. Radical.
Radical, belongyng to the root. Realgar. Realgar is made of brymstone,
vnsleked lyme, and orpigment. It kylleth rattes. Refrigeration. Refrigeration:
coolynge. Repletion. Repletion: fyllyng. Restoration. Restoration: renuynge,
repayryng, restorynge. Repercussiue. Repercussiue: that, that has power to
drive back. Resolutiue. Resolutiue: loosynge. Retentiue. Retentiue: retaynyng,
holding back. Ribes. Serapion says, that ribes is a plant, having great,
and grene leaves, read clusters of sweet taste. Io. Agricola says, that for
Ribes, we may use the juice of an orange, or of sorell. Rob. Rob or robub, is
used for a purifyed iuce, thycked by the heat of fire, or of the sun, unto
the form of honye: Fuchsius calls it Succum medicatum. Ruptorie. Ruptorie:
that, that has strength to break. Salis gemme. SAl gemmae. In the Mountains
of Germany, and Pannonie, there is a salt dygged out, whereof the whitest is
called Sal gemmae, because it shyneth like a precious stone. Sanamunda.
Sanamunda, Auens. Sanious. Sanious: full of matture, fylthe, corruption.
Sandarache. There ben two kinds of Sandarach, one is of the nature, of
metalles dygged out of the ground, about hypanis, a river of Schythia, the
other is counterfayte, made of ceruse boiled in a furnace. Sanguis draconis.
Sanguis dra. sounds dragons blood: for Pliny thought it to be a co^mixtion
of dragons, and Elephantes blood, when they fight together, the dragon being
oppressed, by the fall of the elephant. Other think that, which we commonly use
in medicines to bethe lyquoure of a tree. And Cadamustus says, that he saw
the tree in one of the new found ylandes. Sarcocoll. Sarcocoll is the lyquour
of a tree growing in Persia. Sarcocides The Grecians call that Sarcocides,
that has the resemblaunce of flesh. Sapa. Sapa is new wine sodden unto the
third part. Saphatum. Runnynge sores, which perce the skin of chyldrens
heedes with sundry little holes, wherout there comes a gluysh matture, and
filth, ben called of the later barbarous writers, Saphata, in Greek achores.
Sebesten. Sebestae been fruits like prunes, which in Siria they strain, and
gather out a slymye liquour, wherewith they make lyme. And for this cause the
later writers call them myxas. For myxa signifies gross, and slymye liquoure.
These fruits are used to quench thyrste, and repress cholere. Scarification.
Scarification: scorchynge, raysynge of the skin. Sclirotike. Sclirotike. The
first skin of the eye, which conteyneth under him all the other skins, and
covers, in ye hinder part the glassye, and cristalline humor, is called in
Greek Scleros, and barbarouslye sclirotike, that is to say, hard. Sclirosis.
Sclerosis: hardness. Sca^monie. Sca^monia is an unknown herb, the iuce of
it, is used to purge choler, and they call it diagredium, or diacrydion. It is
of a strong savor, vnplesaunt in taste, and payneth the heart. And therefore
some wish, that it were used no more. Scotomia. They should say, Scotoma, and
it is a disease, when darkness ryseth before the eyes, and when all things
seem to go round about. Scotos in greek signifies darkness. This disease is
called vertigo, in latyne, of^n^nyng about, though some go about, to make a
foolysh difference of scotoma, and vertigo. Semen macedonicum. Semen
macedonicum is the seed of the percelye, which some call macedonicum, because
it grows in Macedonia, some Hipposelinon, that is horsepercelye, by reason of
his greatness, which some think to be alizau^ders. At the leest instead of
it they commonly use the seed of alexanders. Seen. Sena has little branches,
and the leaf of fenugreke, a thynne codde swellynge as it were full of wind,
wherein there is enclosed a broad, and black seed like a pese in taste. It
purges fleame, and cholere. Sephiros. Sephiros is an arabike word, and it is
called in Greek scirros, in latyne, durities, that is hardness. Serapine.
Sagapenum commenly called Serapina^ droppeth out of the stalk of ferula,
which ferula grows beyond the sea in hoote places, and is like fenell.
Sief. Sief. Resort to collirie. Sigillatiue. Sigillatiue: having strength to
seal up. Siler montanu^. Siler montanum, is thought to be Seseli of Massylia,
which Dioscorides thus descrybeth Sesilli. Massyliense (says he) has leaves
like fenelle, but his stalk is thycker, the top or tuft of it is like the
heed of dyll, in which there is a long seed, sharp in taste. Both the root
and the seed do heat: and they are dronken against the strangurie. Sisamina
ossa. Sisamina ossa (as the auctoure of the Pandectes teaches) are those
boones, which been between the boones of the fyngers, and have that name of
Sisamus (for so they write Sesamum) which is a little grain. Sisamus. Sesamum
is a kind of corn. A playstre made thereof, mollifyeth hardenesse of
synnowes, and discusseth gross things retained in them Of the seed of
Sesamum, there is an oil made, called, Oleum sesaminum. Serpillum. There ben
two kinds of Serpillum: the one is garden Serpillu^, and the other wild
Serpillum. The garden Serpillum, smellethe like Maioram, and it is so called of
crepynge, for serpere sygnifyeth to crepe. The wild Serpillum crepeth not, but
grows on high, and it has little stalks fulle of slyppes, with leaves
longer, and harder tha^ Rue, the flowers thereof smelle pleasauntlye. The
Dutche men call Serpillum Onser vrowen betstroo, that is our ladies bedstrawe.
Sirsen. Sirsenis a barbarouse term, and as the barborous writers say, it
signifies the phransye. Septum transuersum. Where the false rybbes end in a
great grystell, there grows a great and round muscle, which the Grecyans
call diaphragma, the latynes Septum transuersum: And Pliny, Precordia.
Scrophules. Scrophulae been hardened kernelles engendered in the neck,
armeholes, and in the flanks. Squylliticke vinaygre. Squilliticke vyneaygre is
made with the roots of the great oynion called squylla, or Scylla dried, and
with vynaygre. Smaralde. The auctour of the Pandectes says, that Smaraldus is
a stoone of green color, perchance they mean the precious stoone, called a
smaragde. Soldanella. Musa says, that Soldanella is Brassica marina, as if
you would say, sea cole wortes. It has leaves like Aristolochia the round,
and grows by the sea side. The powder thereof (as Musa says, he has
proved) is merueylous good for the hydropsye. Spasme. Spasmus comes of Spao,
which signifies to draw. For it is the contraction or drawing together of
the synnowes, which pain we call the crampe. Spelta. Spelta is a grain like
barlye. It is good for flymynesse of the longes, and of the breast, and it
eases the cough. Spodium. Spodium: Resort to Tutia. Solution of continuitie.
Solution of continuitie is wha^ those parts ben sondred, which before were
joined together. Staphisagria. Staphisagria sounds a wild grape, and it has
that name because the leaf of it is like a vine. The seed is used in
medicines, to draw out strain. Spondylia. Spondylia are the knottes, or
joints in the back bone. Squinantum. It should be written, schoenanthos. For
schoenos signifies a rush, and Authos a flower. Howebeit the straw only is
brought unto us. Schoenanthos in Arabie is ye meat of camelles, it provoke
vryne, and caseth the strangurie. Squinantia. They have turned rynanche, or
synanche into squinantia. Synanche is an inflammation of the throote, which we
call the quynce, and it comes of ^^^a^gchein. which signifies to choke. For
in this disease there is great danger of chokyng. Sticados. Sticas, or
stoecas, boroweth his name of the Islees, which lie over against Mass^^^a in
France, and are called stoccades, because that in those places, it grows
plenteously. This herb is small, and schrubby, and has leaves like thyme,
saving, that they been less: The taste of it is sharp, with some
bytternesse. A decoction of this herb is good for the disease of the breast.
Storax. Storax liquida is that, that other call stacte of Stazein, which
sygnifyeth to drop, and it is the fat of new myrrh stamped in a little
water, and pressed out with an instrument. Howbeit, Pliny says that it
sweateth out of myrrh by his own accord. There is an other kind of storax,
or styrax, which is the liquour of a tree like a quynce tree. Sublimate.
Argentum sublimatum is made of Chalcantum, quycksyluer, vynegre, and sal
armoniake. Stoupes. Stupae be the stalks of flax being pylled. The chirurgyens
use ye name sometimes for hurdes, and sometimes for lynnen cloutes. Sugre
candie of a syrup. That, that grows together, and becomes hard in a
syrup, they call sugre candie. etc. Sugre taberzet. Sugre taberzet is fine
white sugre, and it is so called, because it is made in a country named
Taberzet, as the pandectarie says. Sumach. The old writers, called Sumach
Rhos, and it was used much of skynners, and now it is used in medycynes. The
Egiptians and Syryans use the seed of this tree in their byscatte, or
shyppebreed. Superficial. The vppermoost part of a thing is called
superficies. Suppositorium. Suppositoriu^ comes of supponere, which
signifies to put under It is called more elegantly, glans. Suppuration.
Suppuration: when a thing comes to matture and rottenness. Stiptike.
Stiptike: byndynge. Stupefactiue. Stupefactiue: That, that has strength to
astoynie, and take away feeling. Syrup de duabus radicibus. A syrup of two
roots, that is of percelye and fenell. Syrynges. Syryngx signifies a pype or
spoute. Tamarindi. TAmarindi, or Oxyphoenica, been the fruytes of a wild date
tree, and been called of the Grecians Oxyphoenica, because of their aygre
taste. For oxys signifies tarte and aygre, and phoenix a date tree. They grow
plenteously in India, and they purge yellowe cholere. Tartar. Tartar: the lies
of wine. Tapsus barbatus. Tapsus barbatus, or (as some write it) Tassus
barbassus, in latin Verbascum, is the herb that we call Moleyne in English.
The Germans call it vuulkraute, that is wolleworte, for candelles in some
places been made therewith. For which cause it is also called in Greek
Lychinitis, for lychnos (where of perchance our word light comes)
signifies a candell in Greek. Tendons. Pollux says that tenontes, or
tendines, are broad synnowes, extended from the hamme, to the heel. They are
also two synowes passing by the neck, without the which, the neck could not
be turned ne sustained. Tenasmos. Tenesmos is when a man has great
provocation to the seege, but can do nothing. It comes of teinein, which
signifies to stretche. Tension. Tension: stretchynge. Terra sigillata. Terra
sigillata is an earth dygged out of certain caves in the Isle Lemnos. And
because it was sent from thence being sealed, it was called Sigillata. Some
think, that we have not the thing, though we retain the name. Terebentine.
Mainarde says, that the true Terebinthina was brought out of the Isle
called Chios, and out of Libia, and Pontus: But now in the stead of it, we use
Rhasyne of the fyr, or sapyne tree. Terminatio ad crisim. Crisis sygnifyeth
judgment, and in this case, it is used for a sudden change in a disease.
This change is wont to happen four manner of ways. For either the patient is
immedyatly delivered of his disease, or is much better at ease, or dies
incontynentlye, or becomes much worse.

The first of these chaunges is called Crisis, the second Elleipes that is
wantynge, the third case, that is evil, the fourth ateles, that is imperfect.
Hereafter it appears, yt those chaunges which happen by little and little, are
not properly called Crises, but lises, that is solutions, or loosinges.

Trachea arteria. The wesaunde pype is called, Trachea, because it is rough.
Transuersalis. Transuersalis: crosseouer. Trifera. Trifera is an electuarie,
made of myrobalanes, gynger, cloves. etc. for wyndynesse, raw humors. etc.
Trociskes. Trochiscos in Greek, is a little whele. Among the apothecaries, it
is a confection made of sondrye pouders and spyces, by the mean of some
lyquoure. In latyne they call it Pastillum. Tunecis. Some think that Tunici,
is the herb, that dioscorides calls polemonium, and some take it for the
flowers of gillofloures. Polemonium, after Dioscorides descryption, has leaves
little bygger than Rue, but longer. In the top of his branches it has (as it
were) Iuye berryes, in which there is a black seed. The root is dronken with
wine against venyme. Tutia. Tutia is called in Greek, Pompholix, that is to
say, a bubble. For it is that, that bubbleth up in brass, when it is boiled,
and cleueth to the sides, or cover of the furnace. And that, that synketh, and
is (as it were) the ashes of boiled brass, is called Spodium. For spodos in
Greek sygnifyeth the dust and ashes, whereof spodion is a diminutiue. Turbith.
Musa says, that Turbith is the second kind of spurge. Some think, that
Turbith is taken out of a plant, which has leaves like the leaves of the
myrte tree. Varices. VArix is the swellynge of a vein, somtymes in the
temples, sometime in the base part of the belly, somtymes about the stones,
but chefelye about the legs. Ventoses. They use this word Ventosa for
Cucurbicula, that is a cuppynge or boxynge glass. Ventricles. Ventricles:
Little (as it were) mawes, chambres, holes. Vermicularis. Vermicularis: the
less housleke it grows upon houses. Vesicatorie. Vesicatorie: Bladderynge,
blysterynge. Viscum. One kind of Viscum is byrdelyme, made of honye, and oil.
An other kind is called Damascene, and comes from Damasco. Mysteltowe also
is called Viscum. Ulcers. Ulcers. Sores. Volubilis. There ben many kinds of
volubilis, one has white flowers like belles, and wrappeth it self in hedges.
Another crepeth on the ground, and wyndeth it self about herbs. The
germans call volubilos wind, because (I think) it wyndeth, and wrappeth it
self about bushes or herbs. I found it englished in an old written book
hyehone. Vitis alba. Vitis alba has leaves, and branches like a set vine, and
twyneth it self about brambles, with his tendrelles, as a vine byndeth it
self to trees, and it has clusters of read color like grapes, wherwyth
men were wont to courie skynnes. The name sounds a white vine, and it is
called moreover brionia. There is another called nigra vitis, or a black vine,
and it has leaves like yuie, and catches trees, which grownigh unto him, with
his tendrelles, it bears clusters, first grene, and afterward black, when
they ben ripe, and it is called in latin bryonia nigra, and vua taminia.
Vngula. Vngula is a sinnowye eminence of the skin of the eye called
coniunctiua, beginning at the greater corner of the eye, and procedyng vpto the
apple of the eye, and when it is increased, it covers the apple also.
Vndimia. Vndimia is a barbarouse term, in greek it is called oedema, in latin
tumor. For it is a soft swellynge without pain. Vital spirits. A spirit is
a subtle, fine, aerye, and clear substance, produced of the thynnest, and
fynest part of blood, that virtue, and strength may be carried from the
principal part to ye rest. The physicians teach that there ben three kinds of
spirits, animal, vital, and natural. The animal spirit has his seat in the
brain, and is spredde in to all the body by synnowes, gyuyng faculty of
mouynge, and feeling. It is called animal, because it is the first instrument
of the soul, which the latins call animam. And it is inge^dred of the vital
spirit carried up thither by arteries, and there more parfectly digested, and
elaboured. For which purpose nature made ye merueylouse net in the brain, as
it were a chaungeable, and manifold mase. The vital spirit is contained in
the heart, and is carried to the parts of the body, to cause natural heat.
It is engendered of inspiration, and of exhalation, or outbreathinge of blood.
The natural spirit dwells in the liver, and in ye veins. Howbeit some allow
not the addition of this spirit, being contented with the other two. Now that
we have declared the spirits, we will speak somewhat of the natural faculties.
There ben three faculties (I call a faculty the cause whereof action or doing
proceeds) which govern man, and are distributed to the hole body, as it were
from an hedspringe, namely animal, vital, and natural. The animal faculty is
ye, which sends feeling, and mouynge unto all the body from the brain by
sinnowes, as it were by little pypes, or conduytes, and moreover it nourishes
understanding, and therefore the Grecia^s call it logistice^. The vital faculty
gives life from ye heart by arteries unto all the body, ye Grecians call it
thymoeides, that is fit to be angry, or courageous. whereby it appears yt
the heart is the headsprynge of natural heat. The natural faculty gives
nouryshment to all the parts of the body from the liver by veins, and is
called of the grecians epithymetice, that is coveting, or appetyng, and also
threptice, that is nouryshynge. And it has four virtues attractiue,
retentiue, alteratiue, and expulsive. The attractiue virtue is ye, which ca^
draw such juice, as is agreeable to the part, and ye iuce is agreeable, and
fryndlye to the part, which is apt, and fit to be made like to the said
part, and to feed the same. This faculty ministers matter whereby every
part is nouryshed, and is as it were an handmaide to ye retentiue virtue. The
retentiue virtue is ye which retayneth the drawn juice, until the alteratiue
virtue has changed it in to the nature of the part, that is nouryshed, and
so it serves the alteratiue virtue. The alteratiue virtue is that, which
alters, changes, and boyleth that, that is drawn, and retained a certain
space, and finallye makes it like, and joins it to the part, that is
nouryshed. The expulsive virtue sondreth strange, and unprofitable things
from concoction, and dryueth superfluities out of every part of the body,
lest they taryenge to long in the body, should rotte and putrify.

And this also, is a servant to the alteratiue virtue.

Vitriolu^ romanu^ Musa says that vitriolum romanum is that, that Dioscorides
calls Misy. which is found in mines, and has the color of gold, and is
hard, and when it is broken it sends out ye golden sparcles shinynge like
sterres. It has virtue to purge, to heat, to scour away evil corruption
lyenge in the corners of the eyes. when vitriolum is put without the addition
of this word romanum. Some understand thereby chalcantum which ye shall seek
in the lettre C. Vuea. One of the skynnes of the eye is called vuea because it
is like the stone of a grape. Vuula. In the extreme part of the rouffe of the
mouth, there appears hanging a little piece of flesh, which some call
columellam, some vuulum, yt is a little grape. Xylobalsamu^. The wood of bawme
is called xylobalsamum, the fruit carpobalsamu^, the juice or liquor
opobalsamum. zeduarie. zeduaria is thought to be a root of hot, and dry
temperamente, which they sees in wine for the cough, for pains of the
stomach. etc. Of wieght. Libra or a pound is divided in to twelve ounces. Here
ye shall note, that those apothecaries err, which for a pound put sixtene
ounces into their medicines. For that is the merchants pound. The fourth
part of a pound, is called quadrans in latin, the third triens, the sixte,
sextans. wherefore quadrans, or a quarterne is the weight of three ounces. Triens
of four. Sexta^s of two. An ounce makes viii.. dra^mes, a dram.iii. scruples.
And as ye comune practicioners say.lx. barley corns make a dram. Granum is
the weight of a grain. Manipulus signifies an handful. Here follow the notes
of these weyghtes. A grain. gr. A scruple.. A dram.. An ounce.. A quarterne.
Qr. A pound. li. Half. ss. An handful. m^. Ana. is used for every one In
number. n^.

FINIS.

