A Pattern of a passionate mind.

Containing a brief description of the sundry strange affects of the mind of
man.

In the end where-of is set down a Lesson, meet to be learned of all estates
in general.

PRINTED BY Thomas East. 1580.

A brief collection of diverse effects of the mind: And first of
Perturbations in general.
PErturbations are contritions of the mind, contrary to reason or desires to
much abounding in man.

Physicians affirm that cheerefulnes has abiding in the Spleen, Anger in the
Gall, Lust in the Liver, and fear in the Heart: therefore it is better to slay
then to pluck any thing out of the body, that is to alter the natural
disposition of man.

Except there be passions and perturbations in man, there is no place for
virtue: even as there is no victory, where as there is no adversary: therefore
to be angry, to covet, to lust, is no offense. For it is necessary, that
Perturbations should reign, for the illustration of virtue: but an angrye,
covetous and lecherous man, deserves great reproach. For albe-it we have them,
yet we must use them well: And therefore the end of our affections make them
either good or bad. And thus briefly of the perturbations in general.

Of Pleasure, and her parts.
Pleasure is a certain exultation, or an exceeding rejoicing, sprounge of the
euentes of things desired.

Pleasure is of two sorts, one is said of honest and good things, the other
of dishonest: In respect of honest things, it is called Voluntas: In respect of
dishonest Voluptas.

A wise man ought not to be puffed with pleasure: for it is the food of
filthiness, it kills the body, weakeneth the judgment and takes away
understanding.

Of Ill Will.
Ill-wil is that which never speaks well, neither can take any pleasure at the
prosperity of any man but her own: it is a token of an abject and servile
man, at an other man's prosperity to be grieved, or to rejoice at ye hurt of any
man: because the common state of mankind is such, as none has assurance of
perpetual felicity. For Fortune is like glass, which then may easily be
broke, when it shyneth most.

Of Delectation.
Delectation is a pleasure, which infecteth the mind, by a certain
sweetness, conceived by the ear, without some recreation, cares would
ouercom us.

We ought to bear the discommodityes of this life patiently.

Of Oblectation.
Oblectation is a certain bending, or inclination of the mind, to a pleasure
gentle, and sweetly moliu^yng the mind.

This Oblectation in the beginning a man ought to restrain by reason: For if
it once come to a custom, it will easily come to a habit, and having got an
habit in pleasure, impossible it is to put it away, and to be endued with
virtue.

Insultation.
Insultation is an an exceeding delig^t and pleasure, aken at the hurts of
another: especially, as when we overcome our enimyes, to laugh them to scorn,
and vnreasonablye to rejoice at the same.

More shame for insultation, the^ same for their victory have many me^
purchased, as much honor for cleme^cy, as glory for victory, have diverse
achieved.

Of Boasting.
Boasting is a jesting ioyfulnesse, exalting it self insolently.

If a wise man be defiled with this affection, it makes him not only with
pride to be puffed, but also ridiculous.

Who immoderatly lyketh to praise himself, is a good vice to make wise men
sport. As the shadow does follow the body: so should Fame follow good deeds, it
ought not to be hunted after.

Boasting makes us not only to forget our selves, and the cause of our well
doing, which is good in deed, but also causes many to be ashamed of their
parents, then which, what can be more impiety.

Of Prodigality.
Prodigality is said to be a dissolution, or a to much losing of a virtue.

A prodigal man's property, is to covet other men's goods, and not to care for
his own, to spend lustily, and to fare deliciously: so he has, he cares not
how he gets it: and so he spends, he cares not how, when, or who consumes
it.

No admonition of friends, neither fear of poverty can make a prodigal man
thrifty.

The end of prodigal persons, for the most part, is strange and wicked.

Of Ambition.
Ambition is a love and care of promotion, or an unmeasurable desire of glory.

Except ambitious persons be cut from every common weal, impossible it is to
be without civil and continual discord.

Of Lust.
Lust is a desire raised against reason, or a wild and unbridled appetyte,
which in whom soever it reigns, so kylleth all good motions, yt virtue can
have no place in the mind of him.

Lust makes a man to have neither care of his own good name, nor consideration
of the shame which his posterity shall have by his wicked living.

Of Needinesse.
Needinesse is an insatiable coveting or a desire without al mesure immoderat

Covetousness is never minished, neither with lack nor abundance, and it
lacks as well those things which it inioyeth, as which it wants.

Where little is, little is the care, and little ought to be coueted.

Prodigality and covetousness, are the two plagues, which overthrow great and
famous kingdoms.

Of Anger.
Anger is defined after two sorts, either according to her nature, or
according to her effect: according to her nature, Anger is a heat of blood,
and inflaming of the same, even to the innermoste part of man.

According to her effect, Anger is a lust or desire to punish or to be revenged
on him, which seems to have hurt us.

Of Wrath.
Wrath is a desire to be revenged seeking a time or opportunity for the same.

Anger consists in habit and disposition: but wrath in deed and effect.

It is a hard thing to alter the mind of man, and sodeinly to pluck away,
that which by custom is come to an habit.

(...) Anger does most move us, then (...) we most carefully keep ye tongue.

Of Palenesse.
Palenes is called an anger, newly begone, or but newly beginning and after a
little while is quickly gone.

A man infected with palenes, is soon hot, and soon cold: because reason
overcomes the outragiousnes of ye passion: for if it should persist and
continue long, it would easily come to hatred.

Of Hatred.
Hatred is an old grudge or a desire by which we wish ill to some body, that
so may come either to wealth or profit.

The difference between hatred and anger is, time can assuage anger, but
hatred once rooted, can-not be (or very hardly) plucked from the heart.

He which is angry desires to have hi^ vexed, with who^ he is angry: but he
which hates, desires his death, whom he hates.

Of Discord.
Discord is an anger conceived very at ye heart, by an extreme and inward
hatred.

He which is dissentius, as an unprofitable member should be cut from the body
of a common weal. The dissentius person can agree with none, can yield to
none, but dissenting from all, seeks by conspiracies, Insurrections,
poisoning of Princes, the plain euersion and overthrow of all.

Not the inequality of power, but the disse^tion of minds makes dissension.

By discord the greatest things come to naught, and by the same, the world and
all things else shall perysh.

An angry man, in his heat, dyffereth not from a mad man, behold his looks,
his color, his iesture, voice words and behavior, and no difference shall
you find.

Of Love.
Love is a divine mystery, given unto man, for his conservation and comfort.

The greatest and most burning affection is Love, for Love is the bond of
friendshyp.

A wise man may love, so long as it is without care and sighing.

The cause of Love is delyght, which by the aspect and sight of beauty is
taken, whosoever in viewing and beholding takes no pleasure, can at no time
love in deed.

Love is an insatiable desire, intruding it self into man, by some wonderful
beautye, a passion unmeet for a noble man.

The effects of love are strange, and more to be shunned then any other
perturbation.

This love vexes the mind and casts the body into sickness.

Love is the cause of deadly hatred, and can abide no partner in the same.

Love makes valyant captains, most vile captives, and those which are subduers
of the stoutest, to be in subjection to the most abiects.

Through love, whoredom, deflouring, adultery and incest, are committed.

Love is remedied either by fasting, by time, or with an halter, for good cheer,
nourishes and increases love, time does take away or at ye least assuage the
same: But if neither fasting nor time will do good, then the next remedy is to
take an halter and hang him self.

Of desire and longing.
Longing is an immoderate desire of a thing wished for, and therefore hastening
is a lyngring to him which longs.

Every thing is most esteemed when either it begins to want, or we
altogether lack it, wherefore it appears that we know what a thing is, and of
what estimation when we have it not,

It is unmeet for any wise body, whose part is to bear patie^tly, which must
needs be borne, to be subject to this perturbation of longing.

Of Fear and Sorrow.
Fear is an opinion of some evil coming toward us, which seems to be
intolerable.

A wise and valyant man, should always be heedefull, but never fearful:
for there is more evil in fering, then that which is feared.

A man were better to repent him of his il fortune, the^ to be ashamed of ye
victory.

Of Slothfulness.
Slothfulness is a fear of labor to ensue, and as dilygence helps and
prospers al enterprises, so contrariwise, Slothfulness marreth every thing.
Slothfulnes rises of too much abundance, and Idleness makes of men women, of
women beasts, of beasts mo^sters.

It comes to pass oftentimes, that industrious and dilygent men, by their
pains, excel even those, to who^ Nature has been most beneficial.

Of Bashfulnesse.
Bashfulnesse is a fear of just reprehension, or it is a vehement motion of
the mind, flying shame, desiring commendation, it is the best ruler of the
lusts when it is raised by the care and study of honesty.

Bashfulnes is raised sometime by ill deeds, but shamefastness is always
through consideration of goodness.

Of Terror.
Terror is a certain fere, springing from ye imagination of an unaccustomed thing

He is properly called a valiant man, to whom ye fear of an honest death does
strike no terror.

Of Dread.
Dread is a fear that troubles the mind, before any evil does happen.

Dread makes us not to enjoy our riches nor other commodities of this life,
through a fear of death.

It is the property of a wise man, with a quiet mind, to suffer al things,
whom prosperity can-not inflame with disdain, nor adversity overthrow: but
those things which he possesses, he inioyeth, and those things which he has
not, he does not greatly covet.

Unto every wise man it belongs to have a forecast of those things, which
may happen.

God will not suffer man to have the knowledge of things to come, for if he had
a prescience of his prosperity, he would be careless: and understanding of
his adversity, he would be senceles.

Hope of all paissions is the sweetest, and most pleasant, and heere-off it is
said, that hope comforts captains.

Of Trembling.
Tremblyng is a sudden motion of the mind, joined with an amazednes of the
same.

He is but a wretch who can-not keep his grief in secret.

Wicked men seek the destruction of those which mean best.

Of Conturbation.
Conturbation is an affection contrary unto Fortitude, without which nothing
can be accomplished worthelye, and with commendation.

The whole glory of a battle, consists in the pollycie of a Captain.

The head being troubled the members cannot fulfill their duties.

Of Fearfulness.
Fearfulness is when the mind being moved, does as it were forsake the body.

Fearfulness is an imbecilitie or weakness of Nature, in respect of
years, in childhood, or doting old age, or by sickness, or it rises from a
conscience convict and guilty of some offense.

Of Sorrow.
Sorrow does cause in the mind of man, a biting grief, and vexation: Fear
causes a fight and departinge of the mind: Pleasure rayseth an over prodigal
merinesse, and Lust an unbridled appetite.

Sorrow is an unmeasurable contrition of the mind.

Of Pity or Compassion.
Pity is a sorrow conceived by the miseryes of an other man.

Pity and mercifulnes, brings credit both with God and man.

A merciful conqueror, a friendly foe: Wherefore every man ought to endeavor
to seem, and to be merciful.

Of Envy.
Envy is a sorrow, taken at the prosperity or welfare of an other man.

As the Auker eats and destroys iron, so does Envy eat and consume the
hearts of the enuyous.

Such are most envied as either by wealth, riches, renoume, authority, or
virtue, are better then the rest.

Envy gotten by virtue, obscureth not the name of any man.

The envious like of none, but such as are causers to bring those which are at
rest and in felycitie into misery.

Of Emulation.
Emulation is defined to be a grief of the mind, because one does inioye that,
which we are desirous to have.

That man is said to emulate, which labors with tooth and nail, to get the
praise and glory which an other has, unto unto himself.

Emulation brings Infamy unto those which are infected with ye same, when they
will contend and challenge their better.

Emulation is naught, and necessary: naught, when it springs of an ambitious
Envy, and necessary, when it rises, of a virtuous Study.

Of Obtrectation.
Obtrectation is a grief of mind, because others would have that, which our
selves enjoy.

A good thing, the more common, the more commendable.

Of Fretting.
Fretting is a sorrow of the mind, mightily bringing down a man, and altering
his constitution.

Of Sadness.
Sadness is a sorrow continuing deeply rooted in the mind.

Melancholyke persons are continually vexed, both in mind and body, they are
very seldom well at ease, because they digest their meat very ill, they are
strong in imaginations, and for sharpness of wit, they excel.

Sadness is to be condemned, but gravity is commendable.

Of Pensiveness.
Pensiveness is a doleful or weeping sorrowfulnes, and withers the body of
man.

Of Mourning.
Mourning is a sorrow, conceived of ye death of him which was dear to us.

Their deaths, whose lives have been good, and without any notorious crime,
should always be a comfort unto us by a continual remembrance.

Patiently should that be borne, which no strength can overcome, nor counsel
avoid.

He dies not untimely which dies virtuously.

Of Troublesomnesse.
Troublesomnesse is a laborsome sorrow.

No dolor nor danger ought we to shun and avoid, if there-by we may do
good.

Of Lamentation.
Lamentation is a sorrowfulness, showed by a certain howlyng and crying out.

Of Carfulness.
Carfulness is a sorrowfulness of the mind, proceeding from some great and
deep cogitation fixed at the heart.

Study and carefulnes in a naughty disposed person, causes great hurt: but in a
good and virtuous person, it conuerteth all his endeavors to good exercises.

Of Molestation and Affliction.
Molestation is a grief of mind, not ceasing, but continuing.

Of Desperation.
Despair is a sorrowfulness, without all hope of better fortune.

Who contrary to the will and time prescribed of God, will part the soul from
the body perpetually: he is to be punished.

Of mortal virtues life, and of the chiefest felicity.
SOme men have supposed the delight of the mind, to be the chiefest
felicicitie: Others the beastly pleasure of the body: Others a good
constitution of the body, and perpetual health without sickness. Some have
thought honesty linked with pleasure. Some to be free from sorrow and grief of
mind. some learning and profound knowledge, some to live honestly, and to
follow virtue, some not to declyne from the law of nature, some in the goods of
nature, fortune, and the mind: so that how many sects, so many sentences,
how many men, so many opynions.

Felicity is a virtuous prosperity or a floryshing estate, joined with an
honest conversation: or else a way sufficiently of it self, teaching how to live
well, or a life endued with all kind of pleasure, quiet and glorious.

Of the goods of Fortune.
The goods of Fortune are riches, and will of men, Nobility, Fame, Authority,
Honor, many and virtuous Children, and such like.

Riches do rather stir to vices, then prycke to virtue.

We should rather gather wealth both to relieve our want, and also to succor
the necessity of others.

Riches are according to their use, good, if they be well used: bad, if they be
abused.

Riches without wisdom to use them, can-not honest a man.

Virtue or good qualityes without riches, are as it were a candel under a
bushel.

Riches without virtue do little profit.

A true friend is he, whose care is to pleasure his friend in all honest
things, moved thereunto by a mere good will, which he bears unto him.

Nobleness of birth, is either universal or particular. Uniuersall, as to be
borne in a noble and famous country. Particular, to come of noble parentage.
An obscure country brings no credit to a man, be he never so virtuous. And
to come of noble parentage, and not to be endued with noble qualities, is
rather a defamation, then a glory.

It is better by virtue and good deeds to get renoune, then to depend upon the
opynion of a noble house. Then a good name, nothing is sooner lost, and nothing
harder to be recovered.

As fire cast into the water is quickly quenched: so a false accusation against
an honest life, is soon extinguished.

Honor is the reward of virtue.

Those men have most excellent wits, which are pricked with the desire of
glory.

The getting of children in honest wedlock, is one of the chiefest benefits
that can be in a common weal.

Better unborn, then untaught.

Of the goods of Nature.
By this word Nature is understood the virtue, force, and property of every
thing. In this place the goods of Nature be also understood, all such things
as are in the body of man, as health, strength, beauty and bigness.

If a man want the goods of Nature, he can-not be happy in this life.

Necessary it is for him that is insolent, to be brought to the acknowledging
of him self, by sickness, or other misery. Most covetous is he, which is
desirous to get, careful to keep, and unwilling to forgo.

He is not valiaunter, which kills a Lion, then he which mortifieth his wild
concupiscences.

Beauty, riches, pleasure and prosperity, causes forgetfulness of our selves.

Of the goods of the mind.
Sweeter and more comfortable, are the pleasures of the mind, then the
delyghtes of the flesh.

Of civil or active felicity.
A man should not live to himself but should have a care of his parents, of
his children, and contrymen.

He is a right good man, which serves God devoutly, and deals uprightly with
all men.

The diffinition of Virtue, and her parts.
Virtue is nothing, but auoydinge wickedness.

Fortitude, when it exceeds, falls in-to rashness, when it faynteth, in-to
childysh fearfulness.

Liberality when it lauisheth out of reason, is called prodigality, when it is
not extended any whit, purchases the name of Covetousness.

In good things, nothing is either wanting or superfluous.

Wickedness cannot be comprehended, but godliness may: Therefore easier it is to
become wicked then virtuous.

Virtue is divided into four parts, the first is Prudence, ye second,
Tempera^ce ye third Fortitude, ye fourth justice.

Of Prudence and her parts.
Prudence is a knowledge of good things, bad things, and things indifferent

The very cause of all goodness, is only wisdom, by that we know what to
eschew as hurtful: and again, what to choose as profitable.

Socrates much given to wickedness, by wisdom reformed him self, and became a
good example of a godly man.

Wisdom does not commit, or do any thing, for which she may afterward say,
Non putaram.

The parts of which Prudence depends, are Reason, Judgment, Circumspectio^,
Providence, Docility, Heed; Aristotle adioyneth warines, Iolines, Craftines,
Subtilty and Righteousness.

Of Reason.
Reason is an order to do all things, by the consideration of things to come.

Before a man begin any thing, consultation should be had: but having
delyberated, speedy execution.

Of Understanding.
Understanding consists in descerning truth from falsehood, and in taking
heed, least the mind be overmuch delighted, and so deceived, by the vain
pleasures of the body.

By Idleness, me^ learn to live naghtely.

The way to extinguish the burning passion of love, is to beware of Idleness. He
which rules others ought to be free from all affections: for anger suffers
not a man to see that which is expedient, hatred hasteneth to injustice, love
weakneth the Judgment, lust offers wrong, grief stirs to reuengment, and
envy overthrows a man.

Evil manners come by evil company.

To al men show a good countenance: yet enter familiarity with none, but such
as are of good conversation.

Sodeine cou^sail bring speedy repentance.

Of Circumspection.
Circumspection in an especial care of the mind, to bring those things which
we have in hand, to a good purpose.

Circumspection in war, is the cause of escaping many dangers, in peace does
al things to the increase of unity, amongst me^. The causes bringing
circu^spection, are fear, care, necessitye and affection: fear afflicts,
care co^pelleth, necessity byndeth, affection wounds.

Of Providence.
Providence is a certain virtue and force of the mind, by which we foresee a
thing, before it comes to pass.

Provident me^ ought to be admitted into the consultation of great matters.

Of Docilitie.
Docility or a good capacity, is a certain virtue of the mind, by which we
quickly conceive, and easily understand those things which are taught us, of
an-other, we account not that a good wit, which will easily attain to the
perfection of wickedness.

Docility gotten by industry, though it be hard in conceauing: yet is it not
hasty in forgetting.

To whom Nature has given sharpness of wit, they are most careless, and
least commended in their exercises.

Noble me^, whether they give themselves to godliness or wickedness, in either
of the^ they so excel, as none of our calling.

They have not only a good wit, but also a power to bring all that to pass,
which they are desirous.

Of Heed.
Heed is nothing else, but with Judgment, to decline from things hurtful.

A man ought to encounter at the pleasure and time appointed of the enemy.

Contrary to Heed, is temeritie, a foolishness, which runs all upon the
head, and neither obeys reason nor the persuasion of friends.

Great care ought to be had, whom we may believe, for fair tongues oftentimes
work mischief.

Of Wariness.
As it is the part of a wise man, wisely to consult, and give counsel, so is
it the duty of a wary man, well to conceive and uprightly to judge.

He is the most excellent, which is endued with that discretion, that in all
extremities, can give himself that counsel which is profitable.

Of Wiliness, Craftiness and Subtlety.
The mind of a crafty man, by practice is hardened, even as the hand of a
worke-man by great labor.

To be wily, crafty, subtle, are horrible, if they be used to wicked purposes,
so are they to be embraced, when they be referred to honest ends.

Of Equity and Righteousness.
Equity or Righteousness, is defined to be a more gentle sentence, given to
malefactors, then commonly ye laws do give.

Equity judges with lenity, laws with extremity.

There is a Justice natural, and a Justice legal, the legal justice is the
written law, according to which common Judges give sentence. The natural
Justice, is ye discretion which every prudent and wise man is endued withal,
wher-with he being driven thereunto, through consideration of circumstances,
does oftentimes make things bitter sweet great and dangerous, easy, heinous
and horrible, either not so at al, or not so horrible, as they are supposed to
be.

Equanimitie is a tra^quilitie of the mind, by which in adversity, we do not
through grief and thought, hurt our selves, nor in prosperity, exalt nor
rejoice overmuch.

Of Temperance and her parts.
All virtues are to be divided into. 2. sorts according to Cicero, who calls
the^ either virtues of knowledge or of co^uersatio^: those of knowledge he
calls prudence, and wisdom: wisdom he says only consists in co^te^plation,
prudence in ye knowledge of common matters. Domestical prudence is when every
private man does prude^tly consider of his own affairs: and civil, when we bend
our selves to ye profiting of ye weal publik

The learned have divided virtue into four parts, to wit, prudence,
temperance, fortitude, and Justice.

Temperance is a virtuous habit of the mind, wher-by we abstain, from all
vain and pestilent pleasures both of mind and body.

It is ye office of te^mperance, to covet nothing, wheroff it should afterward
repent her.

Of Modesty.
Modesty is a virtue teaching a man how to rule his affections, and in all his
actions to keep a mean.

Modesty is perceived by ye countenance of a man, for by the same, we may
gather the disposition of any. The gretest ki^gs have ye gretest cares.

It is the part of a good shepherd to sheere his sheep, and not to fleay them.

The true modesty of an honest man, strikes more shame, then the sight of
many wicked and immodest persons, can stir to filthiness.

Of Shamefastness.
Shamefastnes is a natural blushing, by which we are afraid and ashamed to
commit, any thing which is not honest.

Blushing is judged to be a fear coming of a guyltie conscience, but
shamefastness of honest things.

Of Abstinencie and Continency.
Abstinencie is a kind of te^perance, whereby we bring under the power of
reason, our appetite, when it is allured unto unlawful delectation.

Contine^cie is a keeping of our selves from those things, which are not to be
coueted.

Abstinencie consists in the having our appetite: Continency, in tempering
our lusts of the flesh.

Honesty to be preferred before lechery, chastity before incontine^cie, and a
faithful promise, before sinful pleasure.

Incontinent is he which keeps no measure, in the coveting of worldly
things, or cannot contain himself from the effect of fleshly desires.

Of Chastity.
Chastity, is the rule or patron, how a man may lead an honest and virtuous
conversation.

He is to be said to have chaste ears, which can-not abide to hear that, which
is dishonest.

Of Honesty.
Honesty, is a free election of the mind, to do those things, which are
agreeing to the rule of virtue.

Nothing can make men so miserable, as wickedness and impiety.

God has given this gift unto man, that by honesty he may best profit.

The pleasure that comes of honesty, is continual, not transitorye.

The pleasures springing from dishonestie, be mingled with grief, and vexation.

Players of Enterludes, are not to be allowed, because they both speak that
which is not seemly, and by iesture show that which is dishonest.

He whose desire is to live well in the world to come, shall for a time, live
wretchedly.

He which chooses to live well for a time, shall for ever live unquietly.

Of Moderation.
Moderation does so measure all our actions, that it will not suffer us to
pass ye bonds prescribed by honesty.

By moderating our selves, we learn to forbear, when we are injured.

A man should bear and not blame, which can-not be avoided.

A man ought not to revenge his own private cause.

Of Sparing or Hardness.
It is ye common use of most me^ under ye show of one thing to engraft in our
minds an other: and theroff prodigality is called by ye name of liberality,
cruelty of equity, foolish boldness of fortitude, and covetousness of sparing.
We ought therefore to be careful, least those vices deceive us, which seem
to accompany the virtue. A covetous man is he, which out of reason coueteth,
sparing is like a good husband thriftily to kep, not unthriftily to spend

Of Sobriety.
A sober man is he, whose mind is not overcome, but has ye use of wit, and
senses, and contrary wise we call him dronken, whose head, hands nor feet,
can-not discharge their duty.

Dronkennes, is the beginning of dishonestie and whoredom.

Sobernes of diet does not only keep our bodies free from gross humors, which
springs of ill dyeting, but also prolongs our days very much, and makes us
live a healthful old age.

Of Fortitude.
There is no virtue, but either sword, strength, or threats will weake^ ye same.
To vanquish affections, to resist anger, is only the part of a most valiant
man. Fortitude is a knowledge, instructing a man how with co^mendatio^ to
adventure, dangerous, troublesome and fearful things, and in the taking of
them in hand to be nothing terrified.

Of Magnanimity.
Magnanimity is a certain excellency of ye mide, placing before her eyes, at
al times virtue and honor and to ye atteining off, bends al her cogitations and
studies.

It is the nature of him that is magnanimious, for the love of virtue, only
without hope or desire of recompense to do every thing, he is delighted, in a
good conscience: in adversity he mourns not: in prosperity, he insulteth
not, and in trouble he pineth not, he stands in admiration of nothing, he
thinks not any thing too hard, too be brought to pass, he is constant, but in
a good cause, neither will, he go about any thing, but that which will bring
him credit, he is no hipocrite nor flatterer, he can-not abide to currey any
man's favor, if he hate a man, he shall know it, if he love one, he cannot keep
it secret.

He is ashamed, by a benefit to be bound to any man, he thinks him a
conqueror, which bestows a good turn, and him which receives, he
numbreth amongst them which are vanquished. If he receive any thing, he is
never well until he have requited the same with greater measure. He thinks
he should not be desired unto any thing, neither does he love to request a
thing at any bodies hand, for to beg a thing at a friends, is to buy it, it is
no small grief to a good nature to try his friend.

More honesty is gotten by forbearing, then by revenging.

Of Trust or Hope.
Trust or Confidence is a certain persuasion, rather of a prosperity to come,
then at hand.

The causes of this Confidence, be two, either former good luck, and in hope
of the like good-luck, we are animated to take any thing in hand, seem it
never so dangerous, or the authority of some person.

Men ought to take great heed, least by too much confidence they fall into
perilles.

Confidence, except it be guyded by modesty, and proceed from judgment. may
rather be called arrogance.

Through arrgoancy have many come into hatred.

A wise man ought not to take upon him, more then he can discharge, neither to
contend with him, with whom he is not to be compared.

Of Security.
Security is one part of fortitude, by which, after we have cast in our
mind, all inconveniences, and know the worst that can happen, we are quiet
and without care.

Of Magnificence.
Magnificence a virtue only to princes.

Of Constancy.
It is the duty of Constancy, to resist dolours of mind, and of continency
to expel all foolysh pleasure.

Wisdom is in nothing more apparent, then in constancy.

Constancy, except it be in truth, and in a good cause is impudency.

Of Suffering.
Suffering teaches us to go forward in an honest matter, without grief and
gruding.

By familiarnesse, humbleness, and quiet bearing of things, we win the hearts
of men.

It is his part, which governs others, not with words and whyppes to wax
cruel against malefactors: but with suffering and gentleness, to draw them to
his mind.

Of Patience.
Patience is a voluntary aduenturing of hard things for the desire of virtue.

At some times it is meeter to revenge, then to forgive: and sometimes it is a
part of Justice, with injuries, to requite injuries.

It is no less evil to requite, then it is to offer an injury.

Frayes, fightings, and contentions, arise only, because wicked layng aside
all patience, seek occasion to move troubles and tumultes.

Impatie^ce being set against misuse, it ministers matter of continual debate.

He which bends himself to revenge, does immitate his doings, of whom he
is molested: and he which immitateth an evil man, can-not be a good man in any
sort.

Of Stabilitie.
Stabilitie is a continuing in that which is well begone.

Stable virtue overcomes al things,

To say, and unsay with one breath, is to waver, as a wether-cocke.

It is no less virtue, to keep things gotten, then to be desirous of new.

Of Justice.
Fortitude without wisdom, is but rashness, wisdom without justice, is but
craftines, justice without temperance, is but cruelty: temperance without
fortitude, is but sauadgnes.

Justice is a divine and celestial virtue, which if men would embrace, they
might live quietly from troubles, and happily to their hearts desire.

Philosophers makes four sorts of Justice: Celestial, natural, civil, and
judicial.

Celestial Justice, is a perfect consideration and dutiful acknowledging of
God.

Natural Justice is that, which al people have in them selves by nature.

Civil Justice is that, which is made either by the laws of nature, the
statutes of the people, the consultations of Senators, the devices of Princes,
or authority of grave and wise men.

Judicial justice dependes upon laws, made for the commodity of a common well.

The alteration of a Prince, bringes the alteration of a common weal.

A good Prince, more by the example of godliness, then by godliness it self does
persist: so a wicked Prince, more by the (...) challenge, as due unto them.

Every good subject should prefer a common profit, before a private, and a
universal, before a peculier.

By how much more any man knows the thing, which he loves, then the thing
knows him, by so much he loves it better: but a father does better know the
son, then the son the father: and therefore the father does love him better.

They which take ye greater pains in getting of any thing, love that which is
gotten more intyrelye, then they which take less pains: But the mother does
with great pains attain to them, then the father, and therefore her love must
needs be greater.

Of civil Friendship.
Civil Friendship is of three sorts, the first is common or general
good will, wher-by we wish well unto al men: the second is good fellowship, which
continues but a time, as long as pleasure lafteth, but no pleasure, no
frienship: the third is a perfect friendship, which brings to pass yt among
me^, there be a great agreement, both in will and in working.

There is no more certain token of true friendship, then in consent and
communicating of our cogitations, one with an-other.

The greement of the wicked, is easily upon a small occasion broken: but the
friendshyp of the virtuous continues for ever.

As a kingdom cannot have many governors, nor one wife many husbands, and
love them: so one can-not love many intyrely, and be beloved of them again
heartily, without hypocrycye.

Strength is then weakened, when it is divided.

That man is a faithful friend, to whom we may unfold the secrets of our
hearts, and freely communicate, as if we wear alone those things, which any
way trouble us: whose wisdom is great, with whom we may talk boldly and
familiarly, without failing, without dissembling, without hiding any thing
from him.

A faithful friend, come wealth, come woe, come prosperity, come aduertie, is
no chaungeling.

example of godliness, then by the thing it self, does corrupt the manners of
his subjects. For the common sort of men, persuade them selves, al yt to be
well done, which is done by example.

It is the part of every Prince and Magistrate, that he beware least by evil
example, he bring a wicked custom in-to his dominion.

The virtues of the law, are four, to bear sway, to forbid, to punish, and
suffer.

The precepts of the law, may be comprehended under these three things, to
live honestly, to hurt no man wilfully, to render every man his due, carefully.

Of Innocence.
Innocence is an affection of the mind, which will not molest, iniurye, nor
hurt any man.

An innocent man, in respect of a good conscience, conte^neth al worldly things.

A rumor raised of nothing, vanysheth of his own accord.

Innocence may for a time be oppressed, but it will rise again: it may be
obscured, but it will shine again: it may be overwhelmed, but it can never be
drowned.

The remembrance of a good conscience, is a comfort in adversity.

Every man should consider, that he is borne to help, and not to hurt his
fellow neighbors.

Of Friendship.
Friendship is a natural good will of well disposed persons, caused through
sickness of manners, and motions of the mind, fancying each other for nothing
else, but only for ye increase of virtue, not for any pleasure or profit.

The kinds of friendship are three, natural friendship* Civil and Hospital.

Of natural Friendship.
Natural Friendship is divided into pity, kockring, and kynred. Again it is
divided into the love toward God, toward our parents, and toward our
country.

We ought to behave our selves toward our parents as we would have our
children love us.

Nothing is more according to nature then to love the^ of whom we are borne.

No man is borne for himself, but a part of our birth, our country, a part
of our parents, a part our friends (...) should not be ashamed to confess the
same.

Thankefulnes does consist in truth and Justice: truth does acknowledge what is
received, Justice does render good will for good will, and one good turn for
another.

There is no more manifest sign of an ungrateful mind, then to dissemble a
debt, when we are not able to discharge it.

He is an ungrateful man, with whom the benefit perishes, but he more
ungrateful which will forgette the same.

It is impiety not to love our Parents, but not to acknowledge them, is more
then madness.

That is not well given, which is not willyngly given.

How much a benefit is lyngered before it is bestowed, so much it leeseth of
his grace.

We had rather leese all, then long for a thing.

The gift of an enemy, better untaken then received.

As good it were to eat meat from a serpents mouth, as to take a benefit of
our enemy, in both danger, in both death.

He which receives a benefit, should not only remember it, but requite the
same lyberally and fruitfully, according to the nature of ye earth. which
rendereth more frut, then it receives seed.

Piety is only a grateful good will toward our parents.

Of Gentleness.
Greatly are inferiors bent to perfect obedience, when they perceive their
Prince gentle and easy to be spoken with-all, not scornful or full of
disdain.

A Prince should be for countenance so amiable, and for behavior so gentle
to toward his subjects, as none at any time should go from his presence,
pensive, or troubled in mind.

Of Faithfulness.
Faith is a constancy, and performaunce, of that which is promised.

FINIS.
Neither does prosperity manifest a friend, nor adversity hide a flatterer.

Of Hospitality.
This friendship of Hospitality is divided into four parts, wher-off one is
called a glorious enterteinment of men, only to be thought off, an other is a
covetous kind of hospitality only for the penny, the third is a courteous
receiving, either of our friends or strangers, the last is a relygious
enterteinment, of al such as truly without hypocrisy serve God.

Hospitality should be only for the release of such, as are pinched with
poverty.

Of Concord.
Concord is a tower of strength invincible against all invasions.

The common weal with common aid is defended, if men cleave not unto parts.

Of Godliness.
Godliness is a Religious worshipping of God.

In defending Religion both with others and alone, ought we to fight against
our foes.

Rare and few are those men, which call themselves from the world, and are
taken with an earnest desire of heavenly things.

Without the understanding of the will of God by his word, our sight is but
blindness: our understanding, ignorance: our wisdom, foolishnes: and our
devotion, diuelyshnesse.

Of Humanity.
Humanity is to be observed of such, as will be called human or courteous:
for nothing should be more contrary to man's Nature, then to offer injury to any.

Humanity teaches us to abandon cruelty, to love and cherish one another,
even because we are men of one nature reasonable, and by ye reason gentle,
without cruelty, not fierce without mercy, as are savage beasts.

According as man does excel in riches, let him toward the poor exceed in
lyberalytie.

Of Gratefulness.
Gratefulness is nothing else, but to keep a benefit in memory.

He which does receive a good turn

THe giver of all goodness, God almighty, so assist us with his holy Spirit,
that affections may so remain with-in us, as they do not raunge, and stir
to wickedness, but that they being rather banished or abated, and brideled by
the Spirit of God, we may embrace Virtue, which God has promised in this
world to reward, and in the world to come, not to see unrequited.

WHo will see more of this matter at large, let him read Master Rogers Book,
of Moral Philosophy: Entitled, The Anatomy of the Mind.

FINIS.
H.W.

A BRIEF LESSON, for all estates.
Keep counsel. Use not many words. Tell the truth. Bridle thine anger.
Appease debate. Hinder no man's good name. Take heed of drink. Remember thy
end* Be merciful. Try before thou trust. Repose no confidence in a
reconciled adversary. Sorrow not for that, which can-not be got again Rejoice
not in thy neighbors cross Strive not with thy ouer-match. Reveal not thy
secrets to thy wife, nor to thy children: For women and children say all they
know.

Three things undid the Romans reign: privy grude, young heads, and private
gain. Bear with others as thou would have others bear with thee. Be not
too rash, hasty, bold, nor wise in thine own conceit.

Do not speak all thou know. Do not believe all thou hear. Do not do
all thou can. Do not say all thou see.
Behold the end, ere thou begin,
Have mind on death, and fear to sin:
For death shall reap, yt life has sown,
And life shall spring where death has mowen.
Though Fortune have set thee on hie,
Remember yet that thou shall die.
Abstinence is good for the health and wealth of the Soul, Abstinence is good
for the health and wealth of the Mind, Abstinence is good for the health and
wealth of the and Body.
If thou fly Idleness, Cupid has no might,
His Bow lies broken, his fire has no light.
FEAR GOD. And keep his Commandments.

FINIS.
Printed by Thomas East. 1580.


