A TRVE DECLARATION OF THE estate of the Colonie in VIRGINIA, With a
confutation of such scandalous reports as have tended to the disgrace of so
worthy an enterprise.

Published by advise and direction of the Council of VIRGINIA.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for William Barret, and are to be sold at the black Bear in
Paul's Churchyard. 1610.

A true declaration of the estate in VIRGINIA.
THERE is a great distance, betwixt the vulgar opinion of men, and the
judicious apprehension of wise men. Opinion is as blind Oedipus, who could see
nothing, but would hear all things, Hinc aucupari verba rumoris vagi, to hawke
after the winged report of a vagabond rumor. But judgment, is as Solomon in
his throne, able by the spirit of wisdom, to discern betwixt contesting
truth, and falsehood: neither depending on the popular breath of fame, which is
ever partial, nor upon the event of good designs, which are ever casual.
These two commanders of our affections, have divided the universal spirits of
our land, whilst (in the honorable enterprise for plantation in Virginia) some,
are carried away with the tide of vulgar opinion, and others, are encouraged, by
the principles of religion, and reason. But because, it is for hawks and not
for men, to build their nests in aires, and because the honor and prosperity of
this so noble an action, is eclipsed by the interposition of clamorous and
tragical narrations: the compiler of this relation endeavors to wash away
those spots, which foul mouths (to justify their own disloialty) have cast
upon so fruitful, so fertile, and so excellent a country. Wherein he
professes, that he will relate nothing (concerning Virginia) but what he has
from the secrets of the judicial council of Virginia, from the letters of the
Lord La Ware, from the mouth of Sir Thomas Gates, whose wisdoms (he
conceiueth) are not so shallow, as easily to be deceived of others, nor
consciences so wretched, as by pretenses to deceive others.

But when a matter of such consequence, is not to be shufled over with supine
negligence, and when no man raises a fair building, that laith not a firm
foundation, it will not be impertinent, to dig a little deeper, that we may
build a great deal higher: and from the universal policy of all civil
states (in replenishing the world with colonies of domestical subjects) to
derive this wisdom to our populous state and country.

Colonies.
That which Origin said of Christ's actions in virtues moral, holds
proportion with Gods actions in government political, Dei facta, sunt nostra
praecepta, Gods actions, are our instructions: who (in the eleventh of Genesis)
turned the greatest cursing, into the greatest blessing, and by confusion of
tongues, kept them from confusion of states; scattering those cloven people,
into as many colonies over the face of the earth, as there are diversities of
languages in the earth. Now if Tertullians rule be true, Omne genus ab origin
censendum that every action is most beutifull in the original. Can there be a
better beginning then from God, whose wisdom is not questioned, and whose
footsteps in all succeeding ages have been followed. Search the records of
divine truth, and humane monuments of state, you shall find, Salmanasar
transporting the Babilonians, and other Gentiles, to Samaria: and replenishing
with the captives of Israel, the dispeopled confines of Media.

You shall find that 140. years after the destruction of Troy the Ionian
colony, was carried from Greece, to Asia: by which that famous City of Ephesus
was first builded, and inhabited. You shall find the Egiptians, planted
Babylon, Argos, and Athens. The Phenicians first inhabiting Carthage, Vtica,
and Thebes. That Timolcon and the city of Corinth, at one time repeopled
Sicilie, with 10000. souls. That the Romans deduced 53. colonies out of the
City of Rome into the womb of Italy. That Bremius an Englishman by birth, but
son in law to the King of France, with an equal third part of the kingdom,
entered into the heart of Italy, gave the prime sack to the City of Rome, and
diuerted from thence to Gallograecia, whose offspring possess that land unto
this day.

That the Admiral of France, among all the fears and discouragements of
civil wars, never gave over the project of plantation in Florida.

Which heroical actions, have not been undertaken by so mighty states and
Princes, upon triuiall and vulgar motives, when by these courses that first
blessing (of crescite and multiplicamini, increase and multiply) has been
sanctified: the meaner sort have been provided: the matter of plagues, famine
and sedition, has been exhausted: the fennes of a state politic were
drained: the enemies of their peace were bridled: the revenues of their
treasury were augmented: and the limits of their dominions were enlarged.

Which divine, humane, external, and domestical, examples, do shine before
us, as a Pharaoes tower, that we should not make shipwreck of our intentions,
concerning Virginia.

Black envy, and pale fear, being not able to produce any arguments, why
that should be lawful for France, which is (in us) unlawful: that which to
Rome was possible, (to us) is impossible: that which to others is honorable,
and profitable, (in us) should be traduced, as incommodious, base, and
contemptible: Three Heads. Lawful, Possible, Profitable.
wherefore under these three heads of lawfulness, possibility, and commodity,
will I marshall all those reasons, which may resolve the religious, encourage
the personal, confirm the noble, and satisfy the timorous aduenturer.

First, if it be unlawful: it must be so, either in respect of the law of
God, or in regard of the law of man. If in respect of Gods law, (considering
our primarie end is to plant religion, our secondarie and subalternate ends are
for the honor and profit of our nation) I demand a resolution of this plain
question: whether it be not a determinated truth, that the Gospel should be
preached, to all the world, before the end of the world? If, it must be
preached, (as heaven and earth must pass away, but Gods word shall not pass
away) then must it be preached, one of these three ways: Either merely
Apostolically, without the help of man, (without so much as a staff (or
merely imperiallie, when a Prince, has conquered their bodies, that the
Preachers may feed their souls; Or mixtly, by discovery, and trade of
merchants; where all temporal means are used for defense, and security, but
none for offense, or cruelty. For the first (to preach Apostolicallie) it is
simply impossible: except we had the gift of tongues, that every nation
might hear the word of God in their own language; or the gift of miracles,
that it might be confirmed, with wonders from heaven; which two being ceased,
questionless the identicall commission of the Apostles is expired: Or if yet
the matter be urged, that God by fishers did convert Emperors and therefore
that we must adventure our lives without humane help; yet must it be
remembered, that there is no Apostolical preaching, but where we may expect
eitheir their conversion, or our martyrdom. But we can expect neither, not
their conversion who cannot understand us, nor our martyrdom, when the people
of Florida, did devour the Preachers of the word, without speaking any word.
Non quia Christiani, sed quia homines, not because they were christian men, but
because they were men, we cannot be said to be martyrs, when we are not
killed because we are christians. And therefore the Jesuit Acosta confesses
(notwithstanding Bellarmines relation of Indian miracles) that they have no
tongues, they have no signs from heaven, and they can have no martyrdom, and
by consequent there is no means left of Apostolical preaching.

For the second, to preach the Gospel to a nation conquered, and to set their
souls at liberty, when we have brought their bodies to slavery; It may be a
matter sacred in the Preachers, but I know not how justifiable in the rulers.
Who for their mere ambition, do set upon it, the gloss of religion. Let the
divines of Salamanca, discuss that question, how the possessor of the west
Indies, first destroyed, and then instructed.

The third, belongs to us, who by way of marchandizing and trade, do buy of
them the pearls of earth, and sell to them the pearls of heaven; which
action, if it be unlawful, it must proceed from one of these three grounds,
either because we come to them, or trade with them, or tarry and dwell and
possess part of their country amongst them.

Is it unlawful because we come to them? why is it not a duty of
christianity, to behold the imprinted footsteps of Gods glory, in every
region under heaven? Is it not against the law of nations, to violate a
peaceable stranger, or to deny him harbor. The Ethiopians, Egyptians, and men
of China, are branded with a foul mark of sanguinarie and barbarous
inhumanity, for blessing their Idols, with the blood of strangers. It is not
unlawful to trade with them, except Solomon shall be condemned for sending
for gold to Ophir, Abraham for making a league with Abimelech, and all
christendom shall be traduced, for having comerce with Turks and miscreants.

Finally, it is not unlawful, that we possess part of their land, and dwell
with them, and defend our selves from them. Partly because there is no other,
moderate, and mixed course, to bring them to conversion, but by daily
conversation, where they may see the life, and learn the language each of
other.

Partly, because there is no trust to the fidelity of humane beasts, except a
man will make a league, with Lions, Bears, and Crocodiles.

Partly because there is room sufficient in the land (as Sichem sometime
said) for them, and us: the extent of an hundred miles, being scarce peopled
with 2000. inhabitants.

Partly, because they have violated the law of nations, and used our
Ambassadors as Ammon did the servants of David: If in him it were a just cause
to war against the Ammonites, it is lawful, in us, to secure our selves,
against the infidels.

But chiefly because Paspehay, one of their Kings, sold unto us for copper,
land to inherit and inhabit. Powhatan, their chief King, received
voluntarily a crown and a scepter, with a full acknowledgement of duty and
submission.

Principally when Captain Newport was with Powhatan at Warow a comaco he
desired him to come from James town as a place unwholesome, and to take
possession of an other whole kingdom which he gave unto him. If any man
allege, that this was done in subtlety, not that they ever meant we should
possess them, but that they might first gain by us, and then destroy us. This
makes our cause, much the iuster, when God turned their subtletie, to our
utility: giving unto us a lawful possession, (as Pharaoe gave Goshen to
Israel; or Ephron sold his cave to Abraham) and freeing us, from all impious
and sinister construction. If any man allege, that yet we can possess no
farther limits, than was allotted by composition, and that fortitudo sine
iustitia, est iniquitatis Materia, fortitude without justice, is but the
firebrand of iniquity. Let him know that Plato defines it, to be no
injustice, to take a sword out of the hand of a mad man; That Austen has
allowed it, for a lawful offensive war, quod vlciscitur iniurias that
reuengeth bloody injuries. So that if just offenses fhall arise, it can be no
more injustice to war against infidells, than it is when upon just occasions
we war against Christians. And therefore I cannot see, but that these
truths, will fan away all those chaffie imputations, which any Romish
boasters (that challenge a monopoly of all conuersions) will cast upon it, or
any scrupulous conscience can impute unto it. Certainly the Church of Geneua
in the year 1555. determined in a Synod, whereof (Calvin) was president, to
send Peter Richier, and William Quadrigarius, under a French Captain to
Brasilia, who although they were supplanted, by the coming of the Cardinal of
Loraine, and the treachery of their double hearted leader, yet would not the
Church of Geneua, (after a Synodicall consultation) have sent their ministers
to such an adventure, had not all scruples, (in their judgment) been cleared
by the light of Scripture.

When therefore, it is a sweet smelling sacrifice, to propagate the name of
Jesus Christ, when the Babylonish Inchantresse (if her own Calenders, are to
be credited) has compassed sea, and land, to make, six, eight, or ten
millions, of Romish proselites. When there is no other, mixed, moderate, course,
to transport the Virginian souls to heaven. When there has been a real
concession from their rural Emperor, that has licensed us to negotiate among
them, and to possess their country with them. When there is more unpeopled
continent of earth, than we and they (before the dissolution of the pillars of
heaven) can ouerburden with multitude. When we never intend to play the
Rehoboams, and to scourge them with scorpions. It is not good, to create more
sins, then God ever censured: nor to brand that action with impiety, which
God has begun for promulgating of his glory Nunquid ideo deforme est, quia
figura mentitur? is the action therefore deformed, because a false glass does
slander it?

Concerning the other branch of this discourse, wherein some sly whisperers
would seem to cast an aspersion of injustice upon the action, supposing some
foreign Prince to have a former interest.

Certainly he is but a rotten subject that quarells the actions of his
country, descrying a serpentine stinge under the fair leaves of piety. And
though it be not for a theoreticall Scholar, to circumscribe the dominions of
Princes, yet a few proofs from antiquity, shall suffice to controwle ignorant
or presumptuous folly.

In the year 1170. Madocke the son of Owen Guyneth Prince of Northwales
(leaving the land in contention betwixt his two brethren Howell and David)
sailed into the West Indies, and after a second, and a third return, and
supply, settled himself in those dominions.

In the year 1495. John Cabot a Venetian, but the indenized subject of King
Henry the seventh discovered the North parts of America, to Meta incognita,
and so it was annexed to the Crown of England.

As for the donation of Alexander the sixth; it is but a reciprocal clawing,
when Emperors create their servants Bishops universal, and shauelings create
their Lords, Emperors general.

If the donation of Constantine were not more vertuall for Saint Peter's
patrimony, we should have need of more purgatories, to maintain fuel in
the Popes kitchen: for if the kingdom of Christ was not on earth, what a
transubstantiated power, does the pretended Vicar of Christ claim, to dispose
all the kingdoms of the earth. Petrarch records a memorable history, of
Sautius brother to the King of Spain, who was elected general against the
Saracens of Egypt, and coming to Rome for that purpose, the Bishop of Rome,
made it to be proclaimed in the Consistory that he bestowed the kingdom of
Egypt upon Sautius. Sautius understanding this favor, (by his interpreter)
commanded to proclaim the Pope, great Caleph of Baldacho: perfuming the son
of pride, with his own smoke.

The Pope having no more power, to make Sautius a King, then Sautius had power
to make the Pope a Caleph. Let such retailers of Crowns remember, who it was
that sometime said, all these will I give thee if thou will fall down, and
worship me, And yet with this item that the devil pretended to give no more
than he saw.

These points being thus defined, I come to the possibility. Against which
three maine impediments are objected. First the dangerous passage by sea,
secondly the barrenness of the country, thirdly the vnholesomnesse of the
climate: the storm that separated the admiral from the fleet proouing the
first, the famine amongst our men importing the second, the sickness of our
men arguing the third. All which discouragements do astonish our men with
fear, as though our expenses were unprofitable, when our ends are impossible.

But before I shall enter into this discourse I must crave leave to make a
necessary digression, and to justify his reputation whose worth is of
special regard in this plantation.

Sir Thomas Gates supposes himself accused publicly and in print of a
treeble defect.

First that he ran so far Southerlie and into the Tropique, that the heat
caused the infection in the ships.

Secondly that he gave a sealed direction, that if they were separated by
any storm, that they should make for the Baruada in the West Indies, which
direction himself following, it caused his shipwreck, but the other ships,
(upon better judgment) declining these instructions, arrived safely in
Virginia.

Thirdly that he carried in one bottom all the principal Commissioners who
should successively have governed the Colonie. Against all which imputations,
he makes this just Apology.

First he confesses that a little before they came unto the Canaries, that
he entered into consultation with Sir George Summers, Captain Newport, and the
other of chief regard in the fleet, wherein it was resolved by an
uniformity of consent, to run Southerlie into the Tropique, which they did,
till they came to the height of four and twenty, but he denies that this
course was any cause of infection. For in the Faulcon, the Blessing, the Lion,
(and in the Admiral wherein were one hundred and fifty souls) there was not
one sick of the pestilence nor other disease; In the other two ships the
infection was somewhat hot, but they shipped the same from London; To the
second he affirms, that he first gave them sealed instructions (not to be
opened till a time of storm) which directed them to the Baruada, But after
when they came to the height of four and twenty, he countermaunded those
directions by word of mouth, and assigned them, (that if they were scattered)
that they should make with all speed for Virginia. Which himself (esteeming
the price of time invaluable) would have executed, had not the violent leake
of the ship hindered him, So that the other ships safe ariuall in Virginia,
proceeded originallie from his advise and authority.

To the third, he briefly signifies, that no other Commissioners were in his
Ship, but such, (as for especial reasons) were precisely and peremptorily
appointed, by the Council of Virginia. And thus you see, that Tacitus wisely
observed two great enemies of great actions, Ignorantiam very, and Inuidiam,
the ignorance of Truth, and the emulation of Virtue.

To return therefore unto the maine channel of this discourse, and to dispell
the clouds of fear, that threaten shipwracks, and sea-dangers: For we are not
to extenuate the seas tempestuous violence, nor yet therefore to despair of
Gods assisting providence. For true it is, that when Sir Thomas Gates, Sir
George Summers, and Captain Newport, were in the height of 27. and the 24. of
July 1609. there arose such a storm, as if Jonas had been flying unto
Tarshish: the heavens were obscured, and made an Egyptian night of three days
perpetual horror; the women lamented; the hearts of the passengers failed; the
experience of the sea Captains was amassed: the skill of the mariners was
confounded: the Ship most violently leaked, and though two thousand tun of
water by pumping from Tuesday noone till Friday noone was discharged,
notwithstanding the Ship was half filled with water, and those which labored
to keep others from drowning were half drowned themselves in laboring. But
God that heard Jonas crying out of the belly of hell, he pitied the distresses
of his servants: For behold, in the last period of necessity, Sir George
Summers descryed land, which was by so much the more joyful, by how much their
danger was despairefull. The Islands on which they ^ell were the Bermudos, a
place hardly accessable, through the inuironing rocks and dangers:
notwithstanding they were forced to run their Ship on shore, which through
Gods providence fell betwixt two rocks, that caused her to stand firm and not
immediately to be broken, God continuing his mercy unto them, that with their
long Boats they transported to land before night, all their company, men,
women, and children, to the number of one hundred and fifty, they carried to
shore all the provision of unspent and unspoiled victuals, all their furniture
and tackling of the Ship, leaving nothing but bared ribs, as a pray unto the
Ocean.

These Islands of the Bermudos, have ever been accounted as an inchaunted pile
of rocks, and a desert inhabitation for Devils; but all the Fairies of the
rocks were but flocks of birds, and all the Devils that haunted the woods, were
but herds of swine. Yea and when Acosta in his first book of the hystories of
the Indies, auerreth, that though in the continent there were diverse beasts,
and cattle, yet in the Islands of Hispaniola, Iamaica, Marguarita, and
Dominica, there was not one hoof, it increases the wonder, how our people in
the Bermudos found such abundance of Hogs, that for nine months space they
plentifully sufficed: and yet the number seemed not much diminished. Again, as
in the great famine of Israel, God commanded Elias to fly to the brook
Cedron, and there fed him by Ravens; so God provided for our disconsolate
people in the midst of the Sea by fowls: but with an admirable difference:
unto Elias the Ravens brought meat, unto our men the fowls brought
(themselves) for meat: for when they whisteled, or made any strange noise, the
fowls would come and sit on their shoulders, they would suffer themselves to
be taken and weighed by our men, who would make choice of the fattest and
fairest, and let fly the lean and lightest. An accident, I take it, that
cannot be paralleld by any History, except when God sent abundance of Quayles
to feed his Israel in the barren wilderness. Lastly they found the berries of
Cedar, the Palmeto tree, the prickle pear, sufficient fish, plenty of
Tortoises, and diverse others kinds, which sufficed to sustain nature. They
found diversity of woods, which ministered materials for the building of two
Pinaces, according to the direction of the three provident Governors.

Consider all these things together. At the instant of need, they descryed
land, half an hour more, had buried their memorial in the Sea. If they had
fell by night, what expectation of light, from an uninhabited desert? They fell
betwixt a laberinth of rocks, which they conceive are mouldred into the Sea,
by thunder and lightning. This was not Ariadnes thread, but the direct line of
Gods providence. If it had not been so near land, their company or provision
had perished by water: if they had not found Hogs, and foul, and fish, they
had perished by famine: if there had not been fuel, they had perished by want
of fire: if there had not been timber they could not have transported
themselves to Virginia, but must have been forgotten forever. Nimium timet qui
Deo non credit, he is too impiously fearful, that will not trust in God so
powerful.

What is there in all this tragical Comaedie that should discourage us with
impossibility of the enterprise? when of all the Fleet, one only Ship, by a
secret leake was endangered, and yet in the gulf of despair, was so
graciously preserved. Quae videtur poena, est medicina, that which we account a
punishment of evil, is but a medicine against evil.

After nine Months aboade in these Islands, on the tenth of May 1610. they
imbarqued themselves in their two new built Pinaces, and after some eleven
days sail, they arrived near point Comfort upon the coast of Virginia: where
they had intelligence of so woeful misery, as if God had only preserved them,
to communicate in an new extremity.

From which calamity, the other arguments of impossibility are framed; For if
the Country be barren, or the situation contagious; as famine, and
sickness, destroy our Nation: we strive against the stream of reason, and
make our selves the subjects of scorn and derision. Therefore in this maine
point of consequence, I will propound this plain and simple Method; First to
demonstrate that there is, and may be in Virginia a sufficient means (in all
abundance) to sustain the life of man; Next that the Climate is wholesome and
temperate, agreeing with the constitutions of our men; Thirdly, that those
extremities proceeded from accidental and not inherent evils. Lastly, I will
delineate the state of the the Colony, as Sir Thomas Gates left it under the
government of the honorable L. Laware: whereby it shall appear, that all
difficulties are amended, and that the State of that Country is sufficiently
managed.

To begin, with the staff of bread. It is auowed unto me, in writing, in the
words of the Author, that has been there, as follows. They use to put their
wheat into Corn.
the ground, five corns in one spit of earth, and two beans with them: which
wheat corns multiplying into diverse stalks, grow up twelve, or fourteen foot
high: yielding some four, five, or six ears, on every stalk; and in every
ear, some five hundred, some six hundred, some seven hundred corns: the two
beans, run upon the stalks of the wheat, as our garden pease upon sticks,
which multiply to a wondrous increase. I cannot let slip a great secret,
(says the Author) whereof I will avouch no more, then with my hands and eyes I
have handled and seen, and whereof to my great comfort, J have often tasted:
The wheat being sown thick, some stalks bear ears of corn, and some
(like siences in trees) bear none: but in those barren stalks, there is as
much juice as in some sugar cane, of so delicate a taste, as no fruit in
England, is comparable to it; out of which Sir Raph Lane conceived, that we
may extract sugar, in great quantity. But Sir Thomas Gates affirms that our
men do make cordial drink thereof, to their great comfort.

Pease.
Besides, the natural Pease of the Country Fruits.
return an increase innumerable, our Herbs.
garden fruits, both roots, herbs, and flowers, do spring up speedily, all
things committed to the earth, do multiply with an incredible usury.

Beasts.
The Beasts of the Country, as Dear, red, and fallow, do answer in multitude
(people for people considered) to our proportion of Oxen, which appears by
these experiences. First the people of the Country are apparelled in the
skins of these beasts; Next, hard by the fort, two hundred in one heard have
been usually observed: Further, our men have seen 4000. of these skins pyled
up in one wardroabe of Powhaton; Lastly, infinite store have been presented to
Captain Newport upon sundry occurrents: such a plenty of Cattle, as all the
Spaniards found not in the whole kingdom of Mexico, when all their presents
were but hens, and ginycocks, and the bread of Maize, and Cently.

There are Arocouns, and Apossouns, in shape like to pigges, shrouded in hollow
roots of trees; There are Hares and Conies, and other beasts proper to the
Country in plentiful manner.

Our transported Cattle, as Horses, Kine, Hogs, and Goats, do thrive most
happily: which is confirmed by a double experiment; one, of Sir Raph Lane, who
brought Kine from the West Indian Island; the other of our Colony, who need
take no other care of them, but least they should straie too far, or be
stolen from them. The Turkyes of that Country are great, and fat, and
exceeding in plenty. The rivers from August, or September, till February, are
covered with flocks of Wlidfoule
Wildfoule: as swannes, geese, ducke, mallard, teal, wigeons, hearons, bitters,
curlewes, godwights, plouers, snights, dottrels, cormerants, (to use the words
of Sir Thomas Gates) in such abundance, as are not in all the world to be
equalled.

Fruits.
The Fruits: as apples, running on the ground, in bigness and shape of a small
lemmon, in color and taste like to a preserved Apricock: grapes and walnuts
innumerable; the vines being as common as brambles, the walnut trees as the
elmes in England. What should I speak of cucumbers, musk melons, pompions,
potatoes, parsneps, carrets, turnups, which our gardens yielded with little art
and labor. God in this place is ever concurring with his gracious influence,
if man strangle not his blessings, with careless negligence. It shall suffice
to conclude in the words and phrase of that noble Governor, the Lo. Laware, as
it is warranted to me by the copy of his Letters sent to the Virginian
Council.

Howsoever, men have belyed both it and themselves, heretofore, yet let no
rumor of the Country (as if in the womb thereof lay not these elementall
seeds of plenty and increase) wave any man's fair purposes, or wrest them to a
declyning and falling off from the business.

Temperature.
For the healthinesse and temperatenesse of the Clymate, agreeing to our
constitutions, much need not be related, since in all the former written
Treatises, it is expressly observed.

No man ought to judge of any Country by the fennes and marshes (such as is
the place where James town stands) except we will condemn all England, for
the Wilds and Hundreds of Kent and Essex. In our particular, we have an
infallible proof of the temper of the Country: for of an hundred and odd,
which were seated at the Falls, under the government of Captain Francis West,
and of an hundred to the Sea-ward on the South side of the river, (in the
Country of the Nansamunds) under the charge of Captain John Martin; of all
these two hundred, there did not so much as one man miscarrie: when in James
Town, at the same time, and in the same months, 100. sickned, and half the
number died.

The like experiment was long since in the regiment of Sir Raph Lane, where, in
the space of one whole year, not two of one hundred perished. Add unto this
the discourse of philosophy, when in that Country flesh will receive salt,
and continue vnputrified (which it will not in the West Indies) when the most
delicate of all flowers, grow there as familiarly, as in the fields of
Portingale, where the woods are replenished with more sweet barks, and odors,
then they are in the plesantest places of Florida. How is it possible that such
a virgin and temperat air, should work such contrary effects, but because our
fort (that lies as a semy-Iland) is most part environed with an ebbing and
flowing salt water, the owze of which sends forth an unwholesome and
contagious vapor? To close up this part with Sir Thomas Gates his experiment:
he professes, that in a fortnights space he recovered the health of most of
them by moderat labor, whose sickness was bred in them by intemperate idleness.

If any man shall accuse these reports of partial falsehood, supposing them to
be but Vtopian, and legendarie fables, because he cannot conceive, that plenty
and famine, a temperate climate, and distempered bodies, felicities, and
miseries can be reconciled together, let him now read with judgment, but let
him not judge before he has read.

The ground of all those miseries, was the permissiue providence of God, who,
in the forementioned violent storm, separated the head from the body, all
the vital powers of regiment being exiled with Sir Thomas Gates in those
unfortunate (yet fortunate) Islands. The broken remainder of those supplies made
a greater shipwreck in the continent of Virginia, by the tempest of dissension:
every man ouervaluing his own worth, would be a Commander: every man
vnderprising an others value, denied to be commanded. The emulation of Caesar
and Pompey, watered the plains of Pharsaly with blood, and distracted the
sinews of the Roman Monarchy. The dissentions of the three besieged Captains
betrayed the City of Jerusalem to Vespasian. how much more easily might
ambitious discord tear in pieces an infant Colony, where no eminent and
respected magistrates had authority to punish presumptuous disobedience.
Tacitus has observed, that when Nero sent his old trained soldiers to
Tarantum and Autium, (but without their Captains and Centurians) that they
rather made a number, then a Colony: every soldier secretly glided into some
neighbor Province, and forsook their appointed places: which hatched this
consequent mischief; the Cities were uninhabited, and the emperor was
frustrated: when therefore license, sedition, and fury, are the fruits of a
headie, daring, and unruly multitude, it is no wonder that so many in our
colony perished: it is a wonder, that all were not devoured. Omnis inordinatus
animus sibi ipsi fit poena, every inordinate soul becomes his own punishment.

The next fountain of woes was secure negligence, and improuidence, when every
man sharked for his present booty but was altogether careless of succeeding
penury. Now, I demand whether Sicilia, or Sardinia, (sometimes the barnes of
Rome) could hope for increase without manuring? A Colony is therefore
denominated, because they should be Coloni, the tillers of the earth, and
stewards of fertility: our mutinous loiterers would not sow with providence,
and therefore they reaped the fruits of too dearebought repentance. An
incredible example of their idleness, is the report of Sir Thomas Gates, who
affirms, that after his first coming thither, he has seen some of them eat
their fish raw, rather than they would go a stones cast to fetch wood and
dress it. Dij laboribus omnia vendunt, God sels us all things for our labor,
when Adam himself might not live in paradise without dressing the garden.

Unto idleness, you may join treasons, wrought by those unhallowed creatures
that forsook the Colony, and exposed their desolate brethren to extreme
misery. You shall know that 28. or 30. of the company, were appointed (in the
Ship called the Swallow) to truck for Corn with the Indians, and having
obtained a great quantity by trading, the most seditious of them, conspired
together, persuaded some, and enforced others, to this barbarous project. They
stole away the Ship, they made a league amongst themselves to be professed
pirates, with dreams of mountains of gold, and happy robberies: thus at one
instant, they wronged the hopes, and subverted the cares of the Colony, who
depending upon their return, fore-slowed to look out for further provision:
they created the Indians our implacable enemies by some violence they had
offered: they carried away the best Ship (which should have been a refuge, in
extremities:) they weakened our forces, by substraction of their arms, and
succors. These are that scum of men that failing in their piracy, that being
pinched with famine and penury, after their wild rouing upon the Sea, when
all their lawless hopes failed, some remained with other pirates, they men
upon the Sea, the others resolved to return for England, bound themselves by
mutual oath, to agree all in one report, to discredit the land, to deplore the
famyne, and to protest that this their coming away, proceeded from desperate
necessity: These are they, that roared out the tragical history of the man
eating of his dead wife in Virginia; when the master of this Ship willingly
confessed before 40 witnesses, that at their coming away, they left three
months victuals, and all the cattle living in the Fort: sometimes they
reported that they saw this horrible action, sometimes that Captain Dauies
said so, sometimes that one Beadle the Lieutenant of Captain Dauies did relate
it, varying this report into diversity of false colors, which hold no
likeness and proportion: But to clear all doubts, Sir Thomas Gates thus
relates the tragedy.

There was one of the company who mortally hated his wife, and therefore
secretly killed her, then cut her in pieces and hid her in diverse parts of his
house: when the woman was missing, the man suspected, his house searched, and
parts of her mangled body were discovered, to excuse himself he said that his
wife died, that he hid her to satisfy his hunger, and that he fed daily upon
her. Upon this, his house was again searched, where they found a good
quantity of meal, oatemeale, beans and pease. He thereupon was araigned,
confessed the murder, and was burned for his horrible villainy.

Now shall the scandalous reports of a viperous generation, preponderate the
testimonies of so worthy leaders? shall their venomous tongues, blast the
reputation of an ancient and worthy Peer, who upon the ocular certainty of
future blessings, has protested in his Letters, that he will sacrifice
himself for his Country in this service, if he may be seconded; and if the
company do give it over he will yet lay all his fortunes upon the prosecution
of the plantation? shall sworn lies, and combined oaths, so far privilege
treachery, and piracy as to rob us of our hopes, and to quell our noble
resolutions? God forbid: Qui in mendacio confidit, cito diffidit, a liars
confidence, is but a blazing diffidence.

Unto Treasons, you may join covetousness in the Mariners, who for their
private lucre partly imbezeled the provisions, partly prevented our trade with
the Indians, making the matches in the night, and forestalling our market in
the day: whereby the Virginians were glutted with our trifles, and inhaunced
the prices of their Corn and Victual. That Copper which before would have
provided a bushel, would not now obtain so much as a pottle: Non habet
euentus sordida praeda bonos, the consequent of sordid gain is untimely
wretchedness.

Join unto these an other evil: there is great store of Fish in the river,
especially of Sturgeon; but our men provided no more of them, then for present
necessity, not barrelling up any store against that season the Sturgeon
returned to the sea. And not to dissemble their folly, they suffered fourteen
nets (which was all they had) to rot and spoil, which by orderly drying and
mending might have been preserved: but being lost, all help of fishing
perished. Quanto maiora timentur dispendia, tanto promptior debet esse cautela,
fundamental losses that cannot be repealed, ought with the greatest caution to
be prevented.

The state of the Colony, by these accidents began to find a sensible
declyning: which Powhatan (as a greedy Vulture) observing, and boiling with
desire of revenge, he invited Captain Ratclife, and about thirty others to
trade for Corn, and under the color of fairest friendship, he brought them
within the compass of his ambush, whereby they were cruelly murdered, and
massacred. For upon confidence of his fidelity, they went one and one into
several houses, which caused their several destructions, when if but any six
had remained together, they would have been a bulwark for the general
preservation. After this, Powhatan in the night cut off some of our boats, he
drove away all the Dear into the farther part of the Country, he and his
people destroyed our Hogs, (to the number of about six hundred) he sent none
of his Indians to trade with us, but laid secret ambushes in the woods, that
if one or two dropped out of the fort alone, they were indaungered.

Cast up this reckoning together: want of government, store of idleness, their
expectations frustrated by the Traitors, their market spoiled by the Mariners,
our nets broken, the dear chased, our boats lost, our hogs killed, our trade
with the Indians forbidden, some of our men fled, some murdered, and most by
drinking of the brackish water of James fort weakened, and indaungered, famyne
and sickness by all these means increased, here at home the moneys came in so
slowly, that the Lo. Laware could not be dispatched, till the Colony was worn
and spent with difficulties: Above all, having neither Ruler, nor Preacher,
they neither feared God nor man, which provoked the wrath of the Lord of Hosts,
and pulled down his judgments upon them. Discite iustitiam moniti. Now,
(whether it were that God in mercy to us would weed out these rank
hemlockes; or whether in judgment to them he would scourge their impieties; or
whether in wisdom he would try our patience, Vt magna magne desideremus,
that we may beg great blessings earnestly) our hope is that our Sun shall
not set in a cloud, since this violent storm is dispersed, since all
necessary things are provided, an absolute and powerful government is settled,
as by this ensuing relation shall be described.

When Sir Thomas Gates arrived in Virginia, the strange and unexpected
condition wherein he found the Colony, gave him to understand, how never was
there more need of all the powers of judgment, then at this present; it being
now his charge, both to save such as he found so forlorn and wretched, as to
redeem himself and his from fall ing into the like calamities. All which
considered, he entered into consultation with Sir George Summers, and Captain
Newport, and the Gentlemen and council of the former government. They examined
first their store, which after two cakes a day to a man, would hold out but
sixteen days, (it being five months betwixt the stealing away of the
Swallow, and his landing) the Corn of the Indians but newly sowed, not an eye
of Sturgeon, as yet appeared in the river: And therefore at the same
consultation it was concluded by a general approbation, That they should
abandon the Country, and in the four Pinaces (which remained in the river)
they should make for the New found land, where (it being fishing time) they
might meet with many English Ships, into which they hoped to disperse the most
of the Company.

This conclusion taking effect, upon the seventh of June Sir Thomas Gates
(having appointed every ship her complement and number, and delivered likewise
to each a proportionable weight of provision) caused every man to repair
aboard; his company (and of his company himself) remained last on shore, to
keep the town from being burned, which some of our own company maliciously
threatened. About noone they fell down with the tide to the Island of Hogs,
and the next morning to the Mulbury Island: at what time, they discovered the
long Boat of the Lord Laware, which his Lordship (hearing of this resolution
by the Captain of the Fort, which stands at the mouth of the river) suddenly
dispatched with letters to Sir Thomas Gates, which informed him of his
Lordships arrival. Upon receite of these letters, Sir Thomas Gates bore up the
Helm, and that night with a favorable wind relanded all our men at the Fort.
Before which, the tenth of June (being Sunday) his Lordship came with all his
Fleet, went ashore in the afternoon, heard a Sermon, read his Commission, and
entered into consultation for the good of the Colony.

In which secret counsel, I will a little leave his Lordship, that we may
duly observe the revealed counsel of God. He that shall but turn up his eye,
and behold the spangled Canopie of heaven, shall but cast down his eye, and
consider the imbroidered Carpet of the earth, and withal shall mark, how the
heavens hear the earth, the earth hear the corn and oil, and they relieve
the necessities of man, that man will acknowledge Gods infinite providence. But
he that shall further observe, how God inclines all casual events, to work
the necessary help of his Saints, must needs adore the Lords infinite
goodness. Never had any people more just cause to cast themselves at the
footstool of God, and to reverence his mercy, then our distressed Colony: for
if God had not sent Sir Thomas Gates from the Bermudos within four days, they
had all been famished: if God had not directed the heart of that worthy
Knight, to save the Fort from fire at their shipping, they had been destitute
of a present harbor, and succor; if they had abandoned the Fort any longer
time, and had not so soon returned, questionless the Indians would have
destroyed the Fort, which had been the means of our safety among them, and a
terror unto them. If they had set Sail sooner, and had lanched into the vast
Ocean, who could have promised, that they should have encountered the Fleet of
the Lo. La-ware? especially when they made for the Newfound land, a course
contrary to our Nauies approaching. If the Lord La-ware had not brought with
him a years provision, what comfort could those souls have received, to have
been relanded to a second destruction? Brachium Domini, this was thearme of
the Lord of Hosts, who would have his people to pass the red Sea and
Wilderness, and then to possess the land of Canaan: It was divinely spoken of
heathen Socrates, Si Deus sit solicitus prote, cur tu tibi sis solicitus? if
God for man be careful, why should man be over distrustful?

The noble Lord governor, after mature deliberation, delivered some few words
to the company, laying just blame upon them for their haughty vanities, and
sluggish idleness; earnestly entreating them to amend those desperate follies,
lest he should be compelled to draw the sword of Justice, and to cut off such
delinquents, which he had rather draw (even to the shedding of his vital blood)
to protect them from injuries; heartning them with relation of that store he
had brought with him; constituting officers of all conditions to rule over
them, alotting every man his particular place to watch vigilantly and work
painefully. This Oration and direction being received with a general applause,
you might shortly behold the idle and restie diseases of a divided multitude,
by the unity and authority of this government, to be substantially cured. Those
that knew not the way to goodness before, but cherished singularity and faction,
can now chalk out the path of all respective duty and service: every man
endeavoring to outstrip each other in diligence: the French preparing to plant
the Vines, the English laboring in the woods and grounds; every man knows
his charge, and discharges the same with alacrity. Neither let any man be
discouraged, by the relation of their daily labor, (as though the sap of
their bodies should be spent for other men's profit) the settled times of
working (to effect all themselves, or the Adventurers need desire) requiring
no more pains then from six of clock in the morning until ten, and from two
of the clock in the afternoon till four: at both which times they are
provided of spiritual and corporal relie^e. First, they enter into the Church,
and make their prayers unto God; next, they return to their houses, and
receive their proportion of food. Nor should it be conceived, that this
business excludes Gentlemen, whose breeding never knew what a days labor
meant; for though they cannot dig, use the square, nor practice the axe and
chizell; yet may the stayde spirits of any condition find how to employ the
force of knowledge, the exercise of counsel, the operation and power of their
best breeding and qualities. The houses which are built are as warm and
defensible against wind and weather, as if they were tiled and slated; being
covered above with strong boordes, and matted round within, according to the
fashion of the Indians. Our forces are now such as are able to tame the fury
and treachery of the Savages: our Forts assure the Inhabitants, and frustrate
all assailants. And to leave no discouragement in the heart of any, who
personally shall enter into this great action, I will communicate a double
comfort: first, Sir George Summers (that worthy Admiral) has undertaken a
dangerous adventure, for the good of the Colony.

Upon the fifteenth of June (accompanied with Captain Samuel Argoll) he
returned in two Pinaces unto the Bermudos; promising (if by any means God will
open a way to that Island of Rocks) that he would soon return with six
months provision of flesh, and with live Hogs to store again Virginia. It
is but eleven days sail, and we hope that God will send a pillar of fire to
direct his journey. The other comfort is, that the Lord governor has built
two new Forts (the one called Fort Henry, and the other Fort Charles, in honor
of our most noble Prince and his hopeful brother) upon a pleasant hill, and
near a little riuelet, which we call South*hampton river. They stand in a
wholesome air, having plenty of springs of sweet water; they command a great
circuit of ground, containing wood, pasture and meadow; with apt places for
vines, corn and gardens. In which Forts it is resolved, that all those that
come out of England shall be at their first landing quartered; that the
wearisomnes of the sea may be refreshed in this pleasing part of the country.

The fertility of the soil, the temperature of the climate, the form of
government, the condition of our people, their daily inuocating of the name of
God, being thus expressed; Why should the success (by the rules of mortal
judgment) be despaired? Why should not the rich harvest of our hopes be
seasonably expected? I dare say, that the resolution of Caesar in France, the
designs of Alexander in Greece, the discoueries of Hernando Cortes in the
West, and of Emanuel, King of Portugale in the East, were not encouraged upon
so firm grounds of state and possibility. All which I could demonstrate out of
their own Records, were I not prevented with have, to satisfy their longings,
who with an open care, hearken after the commodities of the country: whose
appetites I will no longer frustrate, then their eyes can run over this
succinct Narration.

I called it a succinct Narration, because the commodities in former Treatises
have been largely described, which I will only here epitomize, lest any man
should change his resolution, when the same grounds remain, which were the
cause of his former adventure.

The Council of Virginia (finding the smalnesse of that return, which they
hoped should have defraied the charge of a new supply) entered into a deep
consultation, and propounded amongst themselves, whether it were fit to enter
into a new contribution, or in time to send for home the Lord La-ware, and to
abandon the action. They resolved to send for sir Thomas Gates, who being come,
they adjured him to deal plainly with them, and to make a true relation of
those things which were presently to be had, or hereafter to be hoped for in
Virginia* Sir Thomas Gates with a solemn and sacred oath replied, that all
things before reported were true: that the country yields abundance of wood,
as Oak, Wainscot, Walnut tres, Bay trees, Ash, Sarsafrase, live Oak, green
all the year, Cedar and Fur; which are the materials, of foape ashes, and
pot ashes, of oils of walnuts, and bays, of pitch and tar, of Clap boards,
Pipe*staues, Masts and excellent boardes of forty, fifty and sixty length, and
three foot breadth, when one Fur tree is able to make the maine Mast of the
greatest ship in England. He avouched, that there are incredible variety of
sweet woods, especially of the Balsamum tree, which distilleth a precious gum;
that there are innumerable white Mulberry trees, which in so warm a climate
may cherish and feed millions of silk worms, and return us in a very short
time, as great a plenty of silk as is vented into the whole world from all the
parts of Italy: that there are diverse sorts of Minerals, especially of Iron
oar, lying upon the ground for ten miles circuit; of which we have made
trial at home, that it makes as good Iron as any is in Europe:) that a kind
of hemp or flax, and silk grass do grow there naturally, which will afford
stuff for all manner of excellent Cordage: that the river swarmeth with
Sturgeon; the land abounds with Vines, the woods do harbor exceeding store
of Beauers, Foxes and Squirrils, the waters do nourish a great increase of
Otters; all which are covered with precious furs: that there are in present
discovered dies and drugs of sundry qualities; that the Orenges which have
been planted, did prosper in the winter, which is an infallible argument, that
Lymmons, sugar Canes, Almonds, Rice, Anniseede, and all other commodities which
we have from the Staights, may be supplied to us in our own country, and by
our own industry: that the corn yields a trebble increase more then ours;
and lastly, that it is one of the goodliest countries under the sun;
enterueined with five maine Rivers, and promising as rich entrals as any
Kingdom of the earth, to whom the sun is no nearer a neighbor.

What these things will yield, the Merchant best knows, who finds by
experience, that many hundredth of thousands of pounds are yearly spent in
Christendom in these commodities. The Merchant knows, that Caueare and
Train which come from Russia, can be brought hither but once in the year, in
regard of the Ice: and that Sturgeon which is brought from the East countries,
can come but twice a year; and that not before the end of April, or the
beginning of May; which many times in regard of the heat of those months, is
tainted in the transportation: when from Virginia they may be brought to us in
four and twenty days, and in all the cold seasons of the year. The Merchants
know, that the commodity of soap and pot ashes are very scant in Prussia; that
they are brought three hundred miles by land, and three hundred miles by
rivers, before they come to the Sea; that they pay a custom there, and another
in Denmark, which enhanceth the prices exceedingly: But in Virginia they may
have them without carriage by land or custom (because five Nauigable Rivers do
lead up five several ways into the bowels of the whole country.) As
therefore the like Rivers, are the cause of the riches of Holland, so will
these be to us a wondrous cause of saving of expenses. The merchant knows,
that through the troubles in Poland and Muscouy, (whose eternal wars are
like the Antipathy of the Dragon and Elephants) all their traffic for Mastes,
Deals, Pitch, Tar, Flax, Hemp, and Cordage, are every day more and more
endangered, and the woods of those countries are almost exhausted. All which
are to be had in Virginia with far less charge, and far more safety.
Lastly, the Merchant knows, that for our commodities in the Staights, as
sweet wines, orenges, lemmonds, anniseeds, etc. that we stand at the devotion
of politic Princes and States, who for their proper vtility, devise all
courses to grind our merchants, all pretenses to confiscate their goods, and
to draw from us al marrow of gain by their inquisitiue inventions: when in
Virginia, a few years labor by planting and husbandry, will furnish all our
defects, with honor and security; especially since the Frenchmen (who are with
the Lord Governor) do confidently promise, that within two years we may
expect a plentiful Vintage.

When therefore this noble enterprise, by the rules of Religion is expressly
justified; when the passages by Sea are all open and discovered; when the
climate is so fruitfully tempered; when the natural riches of the soil are so
powerfully confirmed: will any man so much betray his own inconsiderate
ignorance, and bewray his rashness; that when the same Sun shines, he
should not have the same eyes to behold it; when the same hope remains, he
should not have the same heart to apprehend it? At the voyage of Sir Thomas
Gates, what swarms of people desired to be transported? what alacrity and
cheerfulness in the Adventurers by free will offerings, to build up this new
Tabernacle? Shall we now be dejected? Shall we cast down our heads like Bull
rushes? because one storm at sea has deferred our joys and comforts! We are
too effeminate in our longings, and too impatient of delays. Gods al-disposing
providence, is not compellable by man's violence. Let any wisdom give a solid
reason, why his purpose should be changed, when those grounds which gave life
to his first purpose, are not changed. It is but a golden slumber, that
dreameth of any humane felicity, which is not sauced with some contingent
misery. Dolor and voluptas, inuicem cedunt, Grief and pleasure are the cross
sails of the worlds euer-turning-windmill. Let no man therefore be over wise,
to cast beyond the moon and to multiply needless doubts and questions.
Hannibal by too much wisdom, lost opportunity to have sacked Rome Charles the
eighth of France, by temporising, lost the Kingdom of Naples, and the
government of Florence: Henry the seventh by too much ouer-warines, lost the
riches of the golden Indies. Occasion is precious, but when it is occasion.
Some of our neighbors would join in the action, if they might be joint
inheritors in the Plantation; which is an evident proose, that Virginia shall
no sooner be quitted by us, then it will be reinhabited by them. A dishonor of
that nature, that will eternally blemish our Nation; as though we were like the
furious Pyrrhus, or impetuous Swissers, who in a brunt can conquer any thing,
but with wisdom can maintain nothing. It is time to wipe away such an
imputation of Barbarism, especially since the consequence is so pregnant, that
without this or the like, the state cannot subsist without some dangerous and
imminent mutation. He is over blind that does not see* what an inundation of
people does ouerslow this little Island: Shall we vent this deluge, by indirect
and unchristian policies? shall we imitate the bloody and heathenish counsel of
the Romans, to lean a Catthage standing, that may exhaust our people by
foreign war? or shall we nourish domestical faction, that as in the days
of Vitellius and Vespasian, the son may imbrew his hands in the blood of the
father? Or shall we follow the barbarous footsteps of the state of China, to
imprison our people in a little circle of the earth, and consume them by
pestilence? Or shall we like the beast of Babylon, deny to any sort the
honorable estate of marriage, and allow abominable stews, that our people may
not over increase in multitude? Or shall we take an inhumane example from the
Muscouite, in a time of famine to put ten thousand of the poor under the ice
as the Mice and Rats of a state politic? If all these be diabolical and
hellish proiects, what other means remains to us, but by settling so excellent
a Plantation, to disimbarke some millions of people upon a land that flows
with all manner of plenty?

To wade a little further, who ever saluted the monuments of antiquity, and
does not find, that Carthage aspired to be Empress of the world, by her
opportunity of havens and multitude of shipping? What hinders the great
Mahumetane Prince, from seazing upon all the territories of Europe, but only
the want of skillful mariners? What created the rich and free states of
Holland, but their winged Navy? It was a fit emblem that painted death
standing upon the shoares of France, Germany and Spain, and looking over into
England: intymating unto us, that so long as we are Lords of the narrow seas,
death stands on the other shoares, and only can look upon us: but if our
wooden walls were ruinated, death would soon make a bridge to come over, and
devour our Nation. When therefore our mils of Iron, and excess of building,
have already turned our greatest woods into pasture and champion, within these
few years; neither the scattered Forests of England, nor the diminished Groves
of Ireland, will supply the defect of our Navy. When in Virginia there is
nothing wanting, but only men's labors, to furnish both Prince, State and
merchant, without charge or difficulty. Again, whither shall we transport our
cloth, and how shall we sustain our Artisans? Shall we send it into Turkey?
Some private and deceitful avarice has discredited our merchandise. Into
Spain? it abounds with sheep and wool. Into Poland and Muscouy? the
danger does ouer-ballance the gain in times of contention. Into France and
Germany? they are for the most part supplied by their own peace. When if our
Colony were peopled in Virginia, mutabit vellera merces, we shall exchange our
store of cloth for other merchandise. Let any man resolve why the Council of
Virginia, do now most earnestly continue their adventures? why those that were
(eye witnesses) of the former supposed miseries, do voluntarily return with
joy and comfort? why those noble and worthy personages, do offer to make the
action good upon the hazard of their lives and fortunes? And why Sir Thomas
Gates longs and hasteneth to go thither again, and the Lord La-ware desires
so earnestly to stay there? Are not all these things as dear to them as to any
other of the Adventurers? Have not their hopes the same wings? their fears the
same fetters? their estates the same rocks? their lives and souls greater
gulfes of peril and despair? And yet neither the imbracements of their wives,
nor indulgence to their babes, nor the neglect of their domesticke fortunes,
nor banishment from their natine soil, nor any experimented dangers have
broken their noble resolution.

And therefore, he that desires to purchase inf^llible hope of private
vtility; he that aims at the honor and wealth of his native country; he that
esteems his own repute as dear as his own eyes; he that ende^uo^reth to
enlarge the dom nions of his Prince, and the Kingdom of his God: let him
remember what he has already spent, which is all buried; let him consider the
consequences of state, which are all vanished into smoke; let him conceive
what a scorn we shall be made to the maligners of our state abroad, and our il
affected at home; let him meditate, the external riches of other Kingdoms, able
to buy and sell the monarch of the west; let him hear the triumphant boasting
of the beast of Rome, as though God would not suffer our schismatic and
heretical Religion, to be infused into a new converted Region: O all ye
worthies, follow the euer-sounding trumpet of a blessed honor; let Religion be
the first aim of your hopes, and caetera adijcientur, and other things shall be
cast unto you: your names shall be registered to posterity with a glorious
title; These are the men, whom God raised to augment the State of their
country, and to propagate the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Neither ought any man
to live under Augustus, as if he lived under Domitian, quibus inertia est pro
sapientia; to whom sluggishnes and priuacy is imputed for wisdom and policy.
The same God that has joined three Kingdoms under one Caesar, will not be
wanting to add a fourth, if we would dissolve that frosty Ioinesse which
chilleth our zeal, and makes us so cold in the action. But it is a mere
Idaea, speculation and fancy, to sow sparingly, and yet expect for to reap
plentifully; when a penurious supply is like the casting on of a little water
upon a great fire, that quenches not the heat, but augments it: when
procrastinating delays, and lingering counsels, do lose the opportunity of
flying time; whereby we rather bewray our Colony then relieve them: let no man
adore his gold as his God, nor his Mammon as his Maker. If God have scattered
his blessings upon you as snow, will you return no tributary acknowledgement
of his goodness? If you will, can you select a more excellent subject, then to
cast down the altars of Devils, that you may raise up the Altar of Christ: to
forbid the sacrifice of men, that they may offer up the sacrifice of contrite
spirits; to reduce Barbarism and infidelity, to civil government and
Christianity? Sifrigido loquor, nihil loquor; If I speak to a man void of
piety, I speak but the words of wind and vanity; otherwise how does that man
groan under the worlds corruption, that does not actually or vocally hasten
the worlds conversion? Doubtye not but God has determined, and demonstrated
(by the wondrous preservation of those principal persons which fell upon the
Bermudos) that he will raise our state, and build his Church in that excellent
climate, if the action be seconded with resolution and Religion.

Nil disperandum Christo Duce, and Auspice Christo.

FINIS.

