The copy of a letter sent by a learned Physician to his friend, wherein are
detected the manifold errors used hitherto of the Apothecaries, in preparing
their compositions, as Sirropes, Condites, Conserues, Pills, Potions,
Electuaries, Losinges, etc: Wherein also the reader shall find a far better
manner how to preserve and correct the same, to the great honor and credit of
the Physician, and comfort of the sick: but chiefly and especially to the
great praise and glory of Almighty God.
RIght well-beloved Coosin and dear friend, these are to certify you, that I
have received your letters dated the third of March, wherein I perceive you
seem to be sorrowful, for that I am so much addicted to this new sect of
Physicians, called by the name and title of Paracelsians: a more odious and
contemptible name (I persuade my self) you could not have bestowed upon it,
then to entitle it A new sect. But since you cannot justly prove it, I can the
better brook the accusation; it seems that you never read many of Paracelsus
his works, nor yet that book lately set forth by Master B. in our mother
tongue: which if you had done, I hope you would not have called it the New
Physic. For in those authors you shall find this proposition truly and
manifestly confirmed, that it had his beginning with our first father Adam, and
so from time to time has continued until this day: but indeed so amplified
and enlarged of late, and brought unto every man's sight (that has both his
eyes) by the long labor and infinite pains of Paracelsus, that it seems to
be borne a new with him. I cannot therefore be a little grieved at you, nor
take small offense at your scandalous and slanderous terms, which from the
corrupt collar of your angry mind you have given forth against him. For have
you not called him Heretic, Coniurer, Dronkard, Iugler, Tospot, Aleknight,
etc? Ah dear Coosin, did you ever read any heresy in his books? if you had,
then were it your duty to have named where; but if you speak it only upon
hearesay (as many of your coat do commonly) then are you greatly to be
reprehended. I assure you, I have read so many books of his as are extant and
find not any spot of heresy in him, but contrariwise a pure and true
Christian, a friend and favorer of the flock of Christ, and a great enemy to
the enemies of Jesus, as the devil, pope, and turk. And who ever wrote more
against coniuring then he did, against Nigromancie, sorcerie, witchcraft,
gluttony, and such like abominations: repair to his books De occulta
Philosophia, and De Magia, there shall you find it. Judge him not then good
Coosin by the mouth of his enemies (who speak of envy) no more then you would
by the verdict of his friends, but try him by his own words.

Me thinks you go very near him to find fault with his drinking, I think you
have forgotten what Countryman he was. Can you give the Dier leave to quaffe,
and the Smith to carrowse, and will you grudge Paracelsus to drink measurably
and with reason? remember with your selves (for I speak to you and all your
company and favorites) that Paracelsus sat not all day on a cushion with a
pen in his hand, but was occupied both night and day in distilling, subliming,
calcining, melting, fixing, resolving, coagulating, reuerberating, digesting,
and cementing, which things could not be performed without great horrible and
strong fires, which must needs cause a man to have a just quarrel to the
cup. But that he was a drunkard, or took more then he could bear away, you
cannot prove, neither do his works declare. As for his learning, you say he
had none, if you count knowledge of diverse tounges, learning, as I think you
do, he had the knowledge and use of as many as any author you have, and wrote
in more. Galene wrote but in one tongue, and that his mother tongue, no more
did Hippocrates or Aristotle, neither can you certainly say that they had any
more: but he wrote as well in the Latin tongue, as in the Germane tongue,
which you may perceive if you please to peruse his book De Tartaro. He was
also a reader in Basilia, which he could not perform without great learning,
ask Erasmus, he will say the same.

Moreover you lay to his charge that his medecines were nothing but poison,
whereof you nominate some particulars, viZ. Oil of Vitriole, the glass of
Antimonie, the precipitate of Quickesiluer, and the rust of Iron (as you term
it). As for the glass of Antimonie, if it does otherwise then well you do him
great wrong to burden him with it, for you shall not find in all his works
that he did once name it. I deny not but you may find in diverse places of his
works where he makes mention of prepared Antimonie, and what great virtue it
has in curing many diseases, if you suppose that he meant the glass thereof,
you are far deceived, there is great odds between that and the Magisterie
essence, or tincture thereof. If you account and esteem Mathi: Gesnerus,
Andernacus and such like for Paracelsians, as I think they would have proved
if they had lived a little longer: I confess that at that time the glass of
Antimonie was had in great estimation: so that some of them so often as they
named it, would term it Stibium nostru^, others would not stick to call it
the Philosophers stone: yea they avouched that they would do more good with it
(in three days) in any desperate disease, then they could with their
Methodicall medicines in a whole month. And so often as any great grief came
to their hands, whether would they run for succor but to the same glass?
What would they have done think you if they could have obtained the perfect
preparation thereof, that is to separate him quite from his impurities, which is
nothing performed in vitrifiyng him? For in this glass, the earthly sulphur is
so mingled with his Mercury, that he is made rather worse then better, and so
of force he must do more harm then good. And you Galenists cannot so much
disprayse it, but we do as much and ever did abhor it, for our Master has
taught us a far better order how to use it.

The oil of Vitriole, if so be it be well drawn, rectified, and with the
spirit of wine well circulated, until it come to a pleasant tartnes: not
only we have found great commodity therein, as often as we had need to assuage
thirst, open obstructions, or withstand the malignitie of fevers, but a great
many of your opinion have highly commended the same, and will not give it a
Paracelsian name (for they thought it not good enough for such an excellent
extractio^) but they have given it a new name, and termed it their artificial
Melancholy. If Dioscorides durst minister a dram thereof unprepared, why
should we fear to give a scruple of it, when it is purged from his venom by
the fire. As by the contrary effect it does appear, for he gave it to provoke
vomit, we bring it to such a pass, that it becomes a singular medecin to
stay vomit. He says it heateth, and we make it a great cooler. It appears
therefore that he (as he commonly did) respected only the venomous quality
thereof.

You seem also greatly to reprove us for the powder of Iron, and term it the
rust. What ayle you? what do you? what mean you to be so partial in
dispraising of that in us, which you allow in your own authors? you can not
inuey against us therein, but you must include them also. And is there no
difference between Crocus Martis reuerberated into an inpalbable powder and
the dross of Iron. If you had ever seen them together, you would say there is
not so much difference between fine flower and course branne: and yet
Dioscorides may be permitted to use the one, and poor Paracelsus blamed for
occupiyng the other, though he made as small account of it (as if you read him
diligently you shall perceive) as you have done or can do for your lives,
because he knew a far better and more perfect preparation of the same, viZ.
first to dissolve it, then to separate his impurities.

Now you must be answered concerning Precipitate, to speak what I think and
not to flatter you, I tell you plainly that you are so ignorant in these
medecines, that silence were the best answer I could give. But were you not my
very friend and loving Coosin, I should shape you an answer accordingly, for
it were too much to provide you good meat, and to force it upon you. If you do
mean that Precipitate which is commonly used and to be sold at the
Poticaries, fixed wi^h the spirit of Allome Coperose, and Salt Peter; you
mistake the matter: for Paracelsus never durst minister it outwardly, albeit
Mathiolus with diverse other have done it, and that with singular good success
as they affirm. I pray you bestow a little looking on, and perusing of
Paracelsus his books, and there shall you find Mercury prepared three manner
of ways. The first is fixed, the second separated from his impurities, the
third and chiefest brought whole to a perfect ripeness. Concerning the first,
if it be so fixed that it will abide the fire, which your common Precipitate
will not do, then shall you find him a singular good medecin in sundry
grievous diseases, but there are diverse ways to do it, and after it be done
it requires to be dulcerated and washed from his Aqua fortis, I do not mean
your common Aqua fortis. Notwithstanding if it be fixed without any liquor,
only in the sun, which has bin brought to pass, then need he not any
dulcerations, but of himself is so sweet as honey. In all these fixings there
is no separation of his poison, but it is so bound that it cannot work his
will so fully as he did before, although somewhat he does, as by vomiting and
spitting it does appear. Therefore if he be separated from his venom, as
separation may be made, then were he more of value then all the compositions
and drugges in the Apothecaries shops, then should the french disease be
quickly cured without stiffenesse of the joints, and loss of teeth* Then
should these wooden Physicians lack work which cry out the diet, the diet,
and nothing but the diet, to the diet, to the diet. The third and last way
whereof Paracelsus makes mention, is performed not only by separation of his
impuritie, but afterward also to exalt him, by adding thereto a fit Sulphur,
and placing him in a reasonable clymate for a certain space, that he becomes
as an Eagle, that is, expels all venomous impurities of man's body, even as
the Eagle deuoureth the venomous beasts: he becomes a Lion able to vanquish
all impurities, whatsoever we receive from the Animals.

Thus much I have thought good to answer you, concerning such medecines as you
objected in your letters against us: now (if you will give me live a little) I
will be so bold as to examine your medecines, whereof you make such boastes,
and what cures you have done with them. If you did any, I am persuaded it was
through the Lord his blessing of that bad medicine, rather then by certain
skilfulnesse or any cunning, as by that which hereafter follows (if you will
with patience read it) shall plainly appear unto you. And first to begin
with your decoctions, conserues, and syrrupes, all which are compounded either
of herbs, fruits, flowers, roots, or iuyces, by adding either honye or
sugar. As for example, if a conserve of flowers be to be made, then you
prescribe that unto each pound of flowers there be added two pound of sugar* if
juices or decoctions you put equal weight, and sometimes more or less as you
think good. Then are they put up in painted potts till the sick send for
them, and (selie soul) many times he gives a noble for that, which does him
not two penny worth of good. No, you will say, are not these excellent good
simples, as roses, rosemarie flowers, stecados, mints, violets, and such like.
Yes, we confess that the herbs are good and wholesome, but as they are
ordered by you they little avail. Is not wheat, rye, and barlie good and
wholesome too? and yet they being taken into the body, nature finds two
substances in them, the one good, but little in quantity, which she retains,
the other dross and great in quantity, which she expels: part by siege,
part by urine, and part by sweat. If then nature finds two substances in
every thing, the one good the other bad, why should not you do the like, who
ought in all your doings to imitate her? And yet contrary to her rules you do
not only not seek to separate these impurities, which every thing, seem it
never so wholesome, is joined withal, but like indiscreet and unreasonable
me^ you add more unto it, for to a pound of flowers, herbs or roots,
whereof sometimes 15. ounces and an half, and sometimes more is baggage, you
add as much sugar thereunto to help afterward. But your answer is ready, for
you will say that sugar and honey are added for to preserve those and other
things from putrefaction. I will ask you again what that is which putrifieth,
and which of the two parts, whether is it that which nature retayneth, or that
which she expels? I think you will answer according to truth and reason,
that the things which nature drives out by excrement are especially subject to
putrefaction. But it may be that you will make an other answer and more fit
for your purpose, saying that they both do both of the^ corrupt and putrify
together. Then would I demand which of the^ putrifieth each other? I know you
will be loath to give judgment against your self. Well then let separation be
made, let art imitate nature. Let there be an artificial stomach devised,
let 4. bushels of roses be put thereinto, and after digestion and separation,
you shall find in one side half an ounce of pure Sulphur or oil, wherein all
the virtue of that great quantity consists, and on the other side all the
rest drossie matter and impuritie. Now which of these two do last longest I
think you do not doubt, but will affirm it to be that which is small in
quantity: for that is known to last many years, the other not many hours.
The like may be said of all the rest of your sirrupes whatsoever, whether they
be made of herbs, flowers, roots, juices or fruits, in that there is not any
of all these but they abound with impuritie, which must be preserved, or else
they tend not only to putrifactio^, but do also destroy that essence that is
joined with them. Thus may you perceive that your endeavor is and always has
been, to preserve that which nature abhors: to pound or powder that which
she by all means expels: for you see that your preparation is clean
contrary to her: for she works by substraction and division, but you labor
to add and multiply: you are very expert in addition and multiplication,
Natura paucis contenta, Nature is content with a little or a few things, have
you forgotten this rule? do you deal well with her, in that when she sends
to you for aid, telling you that her stomachs are weak and not able to digest
and separate as they were wont to do, to send her juices of herbs or
flowers, laden both with their own impurities, and burdened with the filth of
honey or sugar, make separation of either of them, and you shall find such store
of filth that you would be loath to look upon it. Oh in what estate is nature
in now, that when she was well and strong she digested but one pound of
substance for an ounce of sustenance. And now she must, being weak and feeble,
digest three pound for as much? is this to help her or to hinder her? does she
not abhor your aid ever after? does she not rise so often as she sees it? Let
the sick be judge, which once having tasted of it, must wink when she should
receive it again. How much then is nature, the sick man, and all other
diseased persons bound to praise God for Paracelsus and all his disciples, who
have devised stomachs to prepare and separate for them as often as they have
need of Physic. They have in store Salia olea and Mercuries, whereof one
scruple does more delight her the^ an whole pound either of sirrupes, conserues
or Iuleps. Yea I have seen that 9. graynes of a vegetable salt has more
quenched the burning heat of an ague, then 9. drams of the sirrupe of Violets,
Cichorie or Limons could have done, which thing I know you will scarsly
believe, because your master Galene says that every salt is of an heating and
drying nature: of which opinion I was once, until I came unto another school,
where beholding the Anatomy of saltes, I found not only Salia mundificantia,
coagulantia, consolidantia, diaphoretica, diaretica, but also Sitim and calorem
resoluentia. So likewise there are Mercurij mitigantes, clarificantes,
exhilarantes, consumentes, confortantes and regenerantes, and Sulphura
somnifera, narcotica, mitigantia, concoquentia, anodyna, attrahentia and
sistentia, are in like manner to be found in herbs, parts of beasts minerals,
etc.

Thus dear Cousin, you see that I have proved your co^serues, condites and
sirrupes to be of no force, and compounded contrary to nature, that they are
rather sawces then medecines, and more meet for Cooks then Physicians, and
have showed you that the salts, oiles and liquors of herbs, roots, seeds,
fruits, and flowers, are far more excellent in strength and operation, but in
during also and easines of ministering to the party, in that they are purged of
their impurities, and quite delivered from their loathsome savor and ill
tastes, which must needs be a great comfort to the sick and diseased. Make
trial and you shall find that three drops of the oil of Stecados, or three
drops of the oil of Roses, or three drops of the oil of Nutmegs, will do
more good in stre^gthning the brain, then 6. ounces of the sirupes prepared
with the same simples. Likewise three drops of the oil of Poppie, or of the
oil of Nenuphar, will more avail in causing sleep and rest, then three
ounces of their sirrupes. Moreover three grains of the salt of Radish roots,
Eringus roots, or Restharrow roots will more profit in diseases of the raines
and bladder, then 6. ounces of their sirrupes. Also three drops of the oil of
mints in stre^gthening the stomach, three drops of the Mercury of Buglosse in
comforting the heart is of more force then six ounces of their sirrupes, etc.

Now will I endeavor diligently to take a view and survey of your purgations,
to see whether you are wiser in preparing of them, then of your other
co^fections. I think it will fall out according to the Welchma^s proverb, Droth
in gooth: one bad the other worse: you perceived by the evil accidents which
did ensue, that there was not almost any of them but had an ill quality joined
with him, as the Poet says: Omnis commoditus sua fert incommoda secum. As for
example, Sena did breed wind, Rubarb did dry the body overmuch, Agarick
overthrew the stomach, Scammonie weakened the liver and intrailes, Cassia
feebled the raines, Colocinthis bred the bloody flixe, Euforbium inflamed the
whole body, etc there is not one of them to be found without fault. What order
took you then, did you purge any of these from their evil qualities? not one,
but by all means went about to hide and beguile nature, as for ilsa^ple, to
beguile the nose (for many of the^ have a very ill savor) you went to the
perfumers and bought Musk, ye went also to the Cooks for honey and sugar,
that you might betray the taste thereof: and least the sight and ouglines thereof
should bewray it, you ran to the goldsmithes to buy gold leaves to cover it.

Thus were these poor watchmen betrayed being placed as porters of nature to
see that no enemy come in. After the same manner you thought to flatter the
stomach, liver, and heart, with Mastick, Ginger, oil of sweet Almonds,
quinces, long pepper, gu^me Tragaganth, commin, and spike, but in vain: for
they would see a little nearer to it, although their watchmen were beguild, the
stomach would by all means assay to cast it up again, and oftentimes does,
and never would miss, were not these varlets Mastick Tragaganth etc. ready to
take these traitors parts. The heart rises, falls sends forth cold sweats,
whereby you may plainly perceive that he is not pleased with these naughty
ghests, albeit they bring in their hands, roses, cloves, spikenard, lignum
aloes, cinnamon and such like trifles, he will not have his head broke, and
his cap put on. And as little account makes the liver of your three kinds of
Saunders. What is the cause if you be asked the question, you make a
sleeuelesse answer? But go amongst the common people where a man may better be
instructed by Lady experience, then by reading and reuoluing your methodicall
volumes, the vulgar sort I say, will tell you that every purgatio^ is a poison.
At which saying (when I was in your predicament and opinion) I have oftentimes
laughed: but since the time that I came to the knowledge of the art of
separation, I find it the truth, and no ridiculous matter which they have set
down. For not only Colocinthis, Eleborus, Turbith, Scammonie, Hermodactily,
Euforbium, and such like have their impurities, but Polipodie, Seen, Manna,
Tamarinds, Cassia, Rubarbe, have also their filthiness, though not in that
extremity. This could the simple and unlearned find out: and yet you great
clerks with all your learning and skill could not espy the same, which tends
to your great discredit, and has brought you and your art into such contempt,
that they had rather stand to the mercy of the disease then to meddle with your
slubbered and polluted medecines. Yea, the wise herby are brought into this
opinion and conceyt, that whosoever uses much physic can not be very healthie
ever after. And I have heard diverse say, that they have marked, and sundry
times observed, that if a man had taken a purgation co^fected after your
accustomed manner, and the same had not wrought and taken effect in his body:
if that he did not shortly after break out into itch or scabs, he should feel
such an inward weakness, that a long time after he should not be his own man
again. The cause whereof may be gathered by that which we spoke before, in that
these your adulterate medecines, are co^fected only by addition without
separation of that which is hurtful, for then the pure not working, but the
vnpure getting the mastrie has his effect, and works his will, to the great
hurt of the patient, and slander of our honorable science of physic. But you
to save your own credit will make a sluttish excuse, and say the party would
not be ruled, and has either taken cold or kept an ill diet, and so leave him
oftentimes in worse case then you found him. Alas good Cousin, why are you then
displeased and out of charity with such persons as do advise, and of good will
exhort you, not to cover the venom of Sca^monie with Quinces, the windines of
Seen with ginger, the dryness of Rubarbe with succorie, the fretting of
Colocinthis with gum Tragaganth, the burning and fiery qualities of Euforbium
with the juice of lillies, the stinking savor of Sagapenum with musk, the
bitterness of Aloes with sugar? but have brought to light the manner how to take
quite away these incommodities: that whether they work or work not there ca^
no hurt come to the party. Which that you may bring to pass, you shall not
need to send unto Atticum for fine honey, nor into the East for Sau^ders, nor
into Spain for sugar, nor into Italy for Anniseeds, but only bestow a little
money with the poor Collier, and as much at the Glashouse, and with these two
things of small cost you may draw the pure spirit of wine, which in few days
will separate the good from the bad, the virtue from the venom, the pure from
the vnpure, without any hinderance at all to the operation of the good. Neither
need you to fear this, that your medecines will take any heat thereby, to
cause any annoyance to the sick, in that the menstrue being rightly drawn
will with every small heat euaporate quite away. But if there be any heat left
it will be nothing so much as is in yours, by adding Ginger, Cinnamon, etc: the
which notwithstanding you are wont to give in hot fevers. Now your simples
being prepared in manner aforesaid, you may give Colocinthis, Euforbium,
Eleborus, Elaterium, and Sca^monie so safely, as you may minister the whole
substance either of Seen, Manna, or Cassia. Thus having drawn and extracted
the essence of each simple purger, then may you compound if you list Cholagoga,
Phlegmagoga, Melanagoga, Hydragoga, yea and Panchimagoga, whereunto if you add
also the essence either of Stecados, Mintes, Betonie, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mastick,
Cinnamon. etc: not that you may correct the medicine, but that thereby you may
obtain a double commodity, for your purgation shall both euacuate and
strengthen. In trial whereof you shall find half a scruple of the essence
either of Colocinth, Euforb, Hermodact, Turbith, Lapidis, Cyaney, etc. to be
more auailable and effectual in Hemicrania, Cephalalgia, Hydrope, Paralysi,
Lepra, Melancholia, Arthritide ophthalmia, then two drams either of pillulae
aureae, pillulae Cochiae, pillulae sine quibus esse noli, pillulae ex Esula, ex
hermodactilis or pillulae e lapide Cyaneo and ceteris, and one scruple of the
essence either of Rubarbe, Agarick, Seen, Scammonie (whereof your Diagredium is
prepared) to be used in Febribus colica Nephritide, then an whole ounce either
of Catholicon Benedicta or Diaphaenian, and not only more profitable to the
party, but more pleasant, in that they are small in quantity, pleasant in
taste, and without any loathsome smell. And besides all this more ease and profit
will ensue to the Apothecarie, in that he shall not every year be driven to
search his boxes, and throw away so much as he finds evil (which must be done
in your purgations.) But our extractions will be as perfect 20. years after, as
they were at the beginning when they were first drawn. In so much as we do
not only find fault with that which is ill, but we bring also that which is
better in place, why should you be angry or grieved with us at all? If you
were but reasonable men, you would in some measure requite our pains, at the
least with good words. Thus much concerning your purgations.

Concerning your Comfortatiues, as elect de gemmis, Dia ambrae, dia Margarit:
de cocco Daphn: and such like, wherewith you are commonly accustomed to
strengthen such parts as you see weakened, I am very loath to say my mind, for
that I am assured that I have not a little moved you with that which before I
have spoken; notwithstanding, in that the commodity and use thereof shall
redound to the good of the commonwealth, and public safety of all, which
things both you and I ought to seek being both of us subjects and members
thereof: I hope it shall neither be from my purpose, no new fa^gled toy, nor to
be reprehended, though I do lay open before your eyes those errors which have
been and are daily committed in preparation of these also. And that I may in
brief manner make demonstration thereof, you know that these are commonly
compounded of herbs, roots, spices, stones, and sometimes of metals, which
by ancient experience have been found to have some virtue in them, to comfort
this or that principal part. As for the herbs and roots, you may gather by
those points which have been before set down concerning your sirrupes, that
first of al before they be ministered, there must be separation made of the
virtue from the venom, the vicious and bad from the pure excellent and good:
which being done you shall find Melissa in Doronico, and contrariwise Doronicum
in Melissa, although Melissa is not so manifestly to be seen in Doronico, nor
Doronicum in Melissa. If Mathiolus had seen this secreet conjunction of
nature, he would never have called Doronicum, Daemoniaecum. Likewise Been
album and rubrum have their impurities, which in any case must be taken away
before they be brought to composition. Moreover if five pound of Cinnamon have
but one ounce of virtue, two pound of Nutmegs as much, three pound of Cloves no
more, what should all the rest do in the receipt, which is nothing worth, but
tends only to putrefaction. Consider well with your self, must not that needs
be a singular balm, one ounce whereof will preserve and whole pound of dross
from putrefaction a dozen year, it is not so in Cinnamon, for take a dram out
of the pound, and the rest will endure just two days: the like is to be said
of all your spices whatsoever. Now for the stones and mettalline leaves, as
leaf gold, leaf silver, etc: there is an other thing worthy of reproof
therein (whereof we have not yet spoken) which is Coagulation. We deny not but
consent with you in this, that there is great virtue in gold to comfort the
heart, so is there in pearels, corrall, in the Sapphire against poiso^, likewise
in the Hyacinth and Smaragd against the Epilepsie and Melancholy, in the Iaspis
to help digestion, in Crystal against the stone, in Lapide linceo Iudaico, of
Lapide Spongiae the like virtue is found. But except you can prove that the
stomach of man is able to digest them, that is, dissolve the^ (which is
always performed in digestion) which I am sure you can never do: we will
never grant unto you that the body can receive any help of the^ seem they
never so good and wholesome. For daily experience teaches us, that though a
man eat good and nourishing meat, yet if the same digest not in his stomach,
it does not only hinder the virtue nutritive in the body, but puts that
party so affected, in danger of his life: so that when you are called to such
a patient, you make that a very dangerous matter, and not without cause: Even
so do we affirm that these stones which are taken into the body and
undigested, do not only deny comfort and help thereunto, but (though they
(...) quantity) if they were not expelled by (...) would greatly hurt the
party: yea it has been seen that the leaves of gold have so sticke^ in the
ssdes of the stomach, that digestio^ has bin hindered thereby a long time
after-And as little is either gold, pearls, corrall, crystal, the rubie,
sapphire, smaragd, etc. digested and diminished in the stomach, as it is
dissolved in boiling either in coollis or broth: which thing you have often
attempted but unto small or no profit. Thus may you see dear Cousin ye
watchfulnes and charines of nature, for that the cofers wherein she has put
these cures of most dangerous diseases, as Epilepsia, Melancho: Ietharg,
Paralicis, Lepra, Mania, and such other, are by her as by a faithful keeper,
so fast locked and bound by coagulatio^, that it is impossible for the stomach
of an healthy man to pick them open, much less of him that is sick. Yet if
you will well behold, you shall see that with this her neernes and warines,
there is joined liberality: for though she has locked these cofers, yet has
she left the keys with us: but you are so slouthful that rather then you will
take any pains to seek them, you will cause your patients to eat cofers and all
and bid nature unlock them if she will, when (alas poor wench) she has not
the keys her self, but is enforced to throw them out again to small or no
profit, and to her great disco^fort. Ca^ we then sufficiently recompense the
infinite (...) of these Vulcanists and painful smiths, which (...) ^d day take
pains to blow the coals, to file us fit keys for every lock, one for
Crystal, another for Corrall, one for Pearls, another for the Adamant, one
for Silver, another for Gold, and so for sundry locks sundry keys. And as a
cunning smith makes diverse locks one like another, and to every lock a
several key, yet he will make one key so curiously that it will open them all:
even so nature imitated of many, but surpassed of none, though she has for
diverse locks made sundry keys, yet has she one key that will undo them
all. These keys ought every expert and true Phisicia^ to have always ha^ging
at his girdle, that as often as need requires he might go to the chests of
nature, and fetch Magisters, Essences, Tinctures, Elixirs, and such like: Then
would you soon show your Diamargariton, your Aromatica, your Exhilerantia, in
that you should find more virtue in an ounce of the essence of Pearl or
Corrall, then in the whole composition either of Coccy Bapliuy, or Mithridati
and more strength in one scruple of the solution of the Smaragd, Hyacinth,
Sardi or Granate, then in an whole pound of your Diamargar: or Elect. de gem:
and more virtue in two drams in the solution of Lapis Linceius iudaici spongia
Christallorum, then in the whole receipt of your Elect, iustini, or (...). Thus
may you see the force of your medecines according to their composition: you may
perceive by that which has been, spoken that your sirrupes be but sauces,
your purgations for the most part poisons, and that your Confertatiues,
Exhileratiues, and Regeneratiues, are by nature so fast fettred that they
cannot once move against their enemies. I have told you that the remedies for
the two foremost is separation, and for the other solution.

Yet you have one sort of medecines which you are wont to minister when all the
rest will do no good, whereof a word or two and so an end. These are called
Anodina and Narcotica, of which sort are Philonium, Requies, Esdra, and others;
the chief actors therein are Opium, Mandrake and Poppie, which are most
manifest poisons, which is argued not only by the terrible and dangerous
operations which they effect, but to your curious corrections with Castorie,
Mirrhe, Saffron, etc: and by your words, for you advise men not to use them
but in great necessity, yea never to use them without wise forecast and deep
considerations. But if men would be ruled by that counsel which is more safe,
they should never meddle with them at all, unless they knew a better way to
correct them then that before specified. For as I have said before, these
correctio^s by additions are no true mitigations of the venom, but by
palliations to deceive the outward senses, but every true correction is done by
separation and substraction. The like is to be done in Opium, Mandrake and
Popie: for if you let the stinking Mercury of Opium flee away, and lay aside
his Diaphoreticall salt for another purpose, you shall then have a pure
Narcoticall Sulphur, which by himself may be safely given inwardly to assuage
any pain whatsoever, In like manner may you use Mandrake and Popie, whereunto
as unto the rest, you may add the tinctures of Corrall, Cinnamon, Cloves, and
such like: so shall you have Anodina comforta^tia and Exhilarantia in one
medecin. So shall you not need to stay a long season for the mellowing of
them, but may minister them presently if need require.

These few lines I trust will persuade you, and cause you to confess that you
have a long time erred in the preparation of al your medecines. But I fear you
are so deeply grounded in the principles, the foggie mists and bogges of
Aristotle, Galene, etc. that you are fully resolved that these simples which we
call venomous, are so co^pounded of the four Elements into one substance, that
there ought not to be any separation made, but they must be corrected by
additions. O what impiety is this, that such as are called to the knowledge
and profession of God and his word, should give more credit unto these wicked
Infidels, then to his sacred and blessed word? why should we be Infidels in
our philosophy and Christians by name, only in respect of matters concerning
eternity? why should we be as Christians in matters of the soul, and as
Infidels in things belonging to the body? why should we be as professors of
holy religion in our meeting together after the manner of Christians on the
Lords day, and all the days of the week after be as Infidels in the things
concerning the body, which God has framed as the house of the soul? Does
not Moses that heavenly philosopher record that God beheld al things which he
made, and lo they were exceeding good. How dare you then affirm, that Opium,
Mercury, Arsnick, or any thing else is except. If they were good then does that
goodness still remain in them: how then comes it to pass that they are
such strong poisons? if you seek the cause thereof in Aristotle or Galene, you
shall never find it: for herein they were as blind as beetels, being
altogether deprived of such knowledge, unto whom God vouchsafed not to impart
the same, and yet left them inexcusable against the day of their appearing
before the dreadful Majesty of that great God, eue^ our Savior Jesus Christ.
But let us take our way unto the word of God (which will fully resolve all men
that believe it) which tells us that for the transgression of one, not only
death was enioined unto him, but for his fault, every creature has a death
inflicted upon him, each creature had an evil joined to his good, but like
unto like, unto strong life was added strong death or venom, for the death of
Roses is not so strong as the death of Arsenicke; which may be perceived
hereby, in that the balm of Arsenick is far stronger then the balm of roses,
as the life or balm of roses is inferior to the balm of Arsenick, which is
of such force that he is able to preserve from death and dissolution many
years, that most strong poison which is joined with him, whereby we may
perceive that in the strongest poisons are the most pure and sweetest balmes to
be found. But of this you shall hear more in my Anatomy of death. Now we may
see that before the fall of Adam all things were good, all things came unto
him and were bred unto his hand without his labor. But afterward part of it
was joined to poison, part of it so fast locked up, that without great sweat of
brows he should not eat of it. And in these our latter days sloth is grown
so strong* and idleness has gotten such maisterie, that there are very few
which will let one drop fall from their brows to seek this bread, but endeavor
by all methodicall means to maintain this idleness, and to continue it after
their accustomed manner, that they may sit in their chambers on a soft cushio^,
and take pen and ink and a little paper, setting down their prescriptions to
their Poticaries. rad. flores Semina, etc. These men do not only neglect their
duty themselves, but with might and maine they seek to deface those (which
spare for no costs or labor to earne their bread in this manner) by raising
of ill reports against them, whispering in the ears of the Honorable, and
telling them that we are mad men, that we do and say we know not what, and are
not worthy to live in a commonwealth, Howsoever other men be affected, I pray
you be not angry, I have a better opinion of you, I doubt not but you think as
well of Paracelsus as his great friend Erasmus does, which could not choose but
commend his diligence in preparation of his medecines, and judged them far to
exceed those which were commonly used. At this time I crave no more at your
hands, but patiently to hear me, and read that which I have here set you
down: neither will I at this present trouble your head with any further
declaration of the matters before spoken of, nor in proving unto you how far
you have erred in bringing in your humors intemperie and obstructions to be the
causes of all diseases, that they be but fantastical inue^tions of an idle
head, having no foundation or ground in nature, I know I should but anger you,
or tell you paradoxes to prove, that neither Apoplexia, Epilepsia, Melancolia,
Mania, Paralycis, Lithargas, Pleuritis, Peripneumonia, Pestis, Sincope, Colica,
Iliaca, Dysenteria, Diarhaea, Gonorrhaea, Nephritis, Stranguria, Dissuria,
Cachexia, Hydrops, Icterus ater and flaum, Febris, Diaria, Quotidiana,
Tertiana, Quartana, Hectica, Lepra, Vlcera, Apostemata, or any other disease
whatsoever, are the proper death or sicknesses of Microcosmi, but are the
sicknesses and death of the fruit of Microcosmi, and that by transplantation
they grow in Microcosmus. Hardly would you believe that Estis is the death of
Arsnick. Pluritis the death of Antimonie. Prunella the death of Brimstone.
Epilepsia the death of Vitriole. Colica, Podagra, Gonagra, Chiragra, Ischias.
Arthritis, Hemicrania, the death of Tartar. Morbus gallicus, the death of
Mercury. Lethar, the death of Opiu^. Febris, the death of Nitroci sulphuris.
Vlcera, the death of Saltes, etc. And if you had bestowed but half your study
in the first book of Moses, which you spent in the foolish Philosophy of
Aristotle, you had espied your errors long ago. I have told you already, and
yet I grieve not to tell you again, that for the offense of our first parents,
death was not only laid upon them, but for the same transgression God planted
a death in every thing he had made, in every thing he put a death able to
destroy such a life. And these deaths were not, nether are they dead deaths,
but quick and live deaths, and they took power both of multiplication and
transplantation of him which sent them. This is the cause that man dies such
sundry deaths, because he eats in his bread the death of all other things,
which when perfect separation is not made, brings forth fruit according to
his kind. Over these deaths has the Physician power, and not over that which
was enjoined to the body of man particularly. Therefore we affirm that neither
Podagra, Hidrops, Lepra or Epilepsia, are incurable diseases, the reason is,
for that (as I said before) they are the death of the fruits of the great
world, and not of man, and that they grow not naturally in man but come in by
transplantation, and therefore may be separated. But soft a little, I think I
have angered you before I was aware, wherefore I will imitate the wise and
skillful Surgeon, who when he sees a great deal of proud flesh in an
ulcer, will not apply a strong corosiue to take it away at once, although need
should so require, but will by little and little apply his corrosiue, as well to
keep the good will and favor of his patient, as to prefer his own profit.
Even so I seeing these cancred opinions grafted and rooted in you, think it
best rather to diminish it by little and little, then violently at once to pull
it away, least thereby I should purchase your displeasure, which I am very loath
to do. But if I shall perceive that you will give these my simple letters the
second or third reading over, you shall not only encourage me in my next
labors, to set out particularly and plainly that which I have now hastily
trust up hard in a bundell (cutting it as short as possibly I could, doubting
how you would take it) but it will provoke me to reveal unto you the true and
perfect preparation of such rare medecines which are found out by this art of
separation, so called because it does show the way how to separate the good
from the bad, and not to make that which is e^, as some have falsely understood.
And the more perfect that the separation is, the more worthy name it receives:
as for example, if Antimonie be so purged, that without any evident annoyance
it may be inwardly taken, then is he said to be in his magister, but if he be
further purged one degree higher, then is he in his essence. Now if you leave
him not there, but do purify him more, then does his tincture appear: and if
you can purge him thoroughly and perfectly then shall you have his Arcanum, and
so of others. There are also these degrees in solucion, whereby the essence of
gold surpasses the Magister, and both are expelled by his tincture.

Thus leaving of at this time to trouble you, I commit you unto the tuition and
protection of Almighty God, who for his son Christ his sake inspire you with
his holy spirit, whereby mutual love may be increased in those that are his,
that in things concerning their own and other men's souls and bodies, they may
agree and be of one mind, that God may have the glory by their actions in this
life, and afterward they may through Christ's merits attain everlasting
happiness. From my house at S. the 21. of this present March. 1586.

Your loving Coosin and friend, student in Physic. (...)


