, The office and duty of an husband, made by the excellent Philosopher
Lodouicus Viues, and translated into English by Thomas Paynell.

Imprinted at London in Pouls Churcheyarde, by John Cawood, prynter unto the
Queen's hyghnes.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the right worshipful Sir Antony Brown Knight, Thomas Paynell whyssheth
health and prosperitye.
IDo perceive, and by daily experience do understand most worshipful Sir: how
men do err, and are sore deceived and begi led in the election and choice of
their wives: and how vncurtously and vngentlye they do use and entreat them,
that of equity and right should be most favorably and pleasauntly used and
(...). For why? what thing should a man love or entreat more amiably or more
swetely, then his own wife, that is to say, his own flesh and blood? the
Corin. vij.
which no man (except he be very brutishe and beastly) can or ought to
mislyke, hate, or in any manner of wise abhor. But yet how these poor silye
women are handled, and of their own husbands misordered, contemned, abhored,
yea, and oftentimes without cause rejected, I report me unto the gentle reader
of this book: the which if he have any (...) of wytt or reason, shall (...)
conceive this thing to be true, and the indiscreet election and choice of the
(...) to be the only and original spring and occasion thereof. For in this
our time, a time (I say) most tamentable, men choose not their wives for
their honesty and virtue, but for their intisinge beauty: not for their (...)
and womanly manners, but for their possessions and riches: not to (...) and
bring forth children to the praise and lawde of God, but for carnal (...) and
pleasure: not to be well and (...), occupied at home, but ydely and wantonly to
spend the time abroad: not to be godly, but wordlye: not to be humble and
(...), but to be proud and (...): not to regard their husbands (...),
household, and profit, but their own lusts and solace. Wherein is the cause
then of their wrangelynge and gerre, but only in the (...) election and
choice of their 1. Cor. (...).
wives: and because they do not, when they have them, inform them godly, and
vertuouslye instruct them: for of whom should they be instructed and taught,
but of their own husbands? But per adventure ye will say, we are not learned,
nor we have not read at any time, how to choose them, and how to teach them,
we know not. In as much therefore as I now perceive and know, that ye can not
for lack of experience and knowledge (...) the^, and that ignorance is the
root of such sinister and (...) choice of your wives, and the cause of your
so great debate and strife. I have translated this excellent and fine peace of
work of Master Uiues a Philosopher most famous, the which does teach men,
how to choose their wives, how to love and to entreat them, how and where
with to instruct them, how to array and semely to apparel them, how to
chasten and correct them, how in their absence, and in their age to use them:
and at their departing unto god, how to leave them. And on the other side, it
teaches your wives how to fear and to honor god, how to love, obey, and
serve their husbands, how to bring up and nourter their children, how to
have an eye to their husbands honesty and profit, whether they should be
learned or no, (...) auctors they should read, what company they should
haunte and avoid, how to keep their howses in good report, and them selves
clean and undefiled. O how excellent then, and how profitable a book is this,
for the welthe both of man and woman, and most worthy to be read of all
christians, and of those, which desire and seek to live quietly in matrimony,
and joyfully in this transitorye vale and dungen of al misery. Read it there
fore at your leisure most worshypfull sir, but yet with judgment I pray you:
for as it is a work most meet and convenient for all that may mary, so it is
for your maistershyppe most fruitful, and considering your present estate
and condition, most neadefull. For who can be ciricumspect enough in the
election and choice of her, whom a man cannot elect by gods law, Mar. x
till death them depart, nor yet refuse, but for fornication, nor at no time
(she being Luc. (...).
alive) mary any other without the spot and (...) of adulteri. Counsel
therefore with Master Uiues, how to choose a wife, and choose her, that
fears god, and will be obedient and reformable, and such a one, as shall
give no occasion of breach, or of diuorsement, the which (O lord) is
nothing in these our days regarded: for why? to have many wives at once, or
to refuse her by some cautell or false interpretation of gods most holy word,
that mystyketh, is at this present but (as men call it) a shifte of descante. O
heaven, O earth: but who am I that goes about to counsel you so prudent a
man, so well learned, so circumspecte in all things: and that has a forehande
proved the course and trace of matrimony, how godly and pleasant a thing it
is, if the parties be of one accord and mind, and in Christ's true religion of
one says and opinion. But let the noble orator Master Uiues be al men's guide
and counseyler in this weyghty matter. And in such like beware of temerarious
hastynesse, nor believe not (...) young and light counselor: for after light
credence, comes heavy repentance. Thus god preserve your master ship,
most humbly desiring the same, to accept this my rude translation in good
part, and as a token and a pledge of my unfeigned and cordial love to you
wards.

Of the office and duty of an husband.
IT seemed unto the auctour of nature, when he laid ye foundation of the ages
and time that was to come, that all such beasts, which were sub iecte unto
sicknesses and death, should at one generation and birth bring forth but fea
we yongelynges, to the end their generation might increase, and endure for ever,
and that they of a little beginning might multiply and arise unto an in
finite multitude, and of mortal things obtain, as it were an immortality.
But al other beasts do indifferently (without any order or law) obey nature,
and give them selves unto procreation. And this is, as it were an universal
law, where unto we do perceive and see, that al manner of beasts do willingly
obey, although there be among these, that live in society, and observe the
holiness of matrimony so vndefiledly, yt they may well instruct and teach many
thousands of men the chastity, the charity, ye faith, the manner, and the
quality of matrimony, and in this number are swannes, turtledoues, The
beginning of matrimony.
crows, and doves. But man being borne to live in company, and in the
communion of life, was bound by the auctoure of nature with more exact and
streyghter laws of matrimonye. Nor he would not, that man vntemperately
should meddle with many women, nor that the woman should submit her self
to many men. Therefore he bownde them together in lawful marriage, and delivered
her unto the man, not only for generations sake, but also for the society and
fellowshippe of life. And this is it, ye Gene. ij
Moses does say in Genesis, that the prudent and wise maker of the world
said: It is not good, that man should be alone, let us make him a help like
unto him self. And how many vtilities and profits do spryng and issue of
matrimony? First as all controversies and debates are removed and do cease
among men, when lands be occupied and possessed, The vti lities of matrimo nigh.
and by the power of ye law grau^ ted and stablished: eue^ so when ye woman is
lawfully married, al such co^tentio^s do cease, which certainly would have grown
among men, if women were common. For some would desire those, that were
beautiful and fair, and such as were most mighty and most in power, would
iugde al things to be as a reward of their fortitude and strength, in their
power and dominion. And he that assayde her, would as though he had taken
possession, strongly resist, and fight for her, as for his own wife,
whereupon should arise envy, hatred and debate. And man, the which (if he follow
his natural affection and appetite) is a proud, a fearce, and a desi rous beast
to be reue^ged, shall find many ways to accomplish his lust, and to ensue
and revenge, that he interprets to be an injury, and shall associate and
gather many unto him, either for fear, or by some benefit enticed, whereby
parttakings and sactions should first arise, and afterward war, and cruel
battle, both at home and abroad, as old auctours do report to have chanced
for women ra uished, as for Helen Lacona, Tindarus and Ledas daughter, and for
Lucrecia and Virginia War through women.
Romans. And through Caua Iulians daughter, we lost Spain. In England King
Henry (...) second
king Henry yt second was dri uen out of his realm by his son, for after yt
he had been long in love with Philippes the French kings sister, and that
she was sent into England, and married unto him, his father being in love with
his fair daughter in law, his son making war in Scot la^d, defloured her.
The young woman at the first coming home of her husband, opened unto him,
what had chanced and being moved therewith, drove out his father, and occupi
ed the kingdom. I let pass those things, that Plutarke does write in his
book of lo uely narratio^s. Would god there were not so many examples as give
occasions to eve ry man to write, both of princes, and private persons, how
great contention and debate letcherye has caused. This was to many a man ye
way and occasion to ouerturne king domes and families, and of great and
bitter perils and calamities among all nations. But god the inuenter of matrimo
ny, and most provident father, having pity and compassion upon mankind, has
put a measure to this immoderate luxuriousnes, printinge the law of matrimony
not in paper only, but in every man's heart. In the which matrimony he has
given to al nations (not only to those, the which thorough humanity and good
letters are instructed with rites and civil customs, but also to fearce and
barbarous nations, being far from all good educatio^ and customs) so great
benevolence and charity, yt they which are married iduced through love, will
not leave nor change their mates and when there is no love, shamfastnes does
take place, so ye there is no man so far from ye understanding of man ye is
ignorant, yt to bea thing most scelerate, and worthy to be hated and
punished, to seake, or to embrace any other, as long as matrimonye indureth.
And what a commodity is the wife unto ye husband, in ordering of his house,
and in governing of his family and household? by this cities are edified and
builded. And she comes, even as Genesis ij.
god says, into her husbands house, as an helper like unto him self, and as a
sure companion continuinge unto the end of her life, a partetaker of mirth and
heaviness, ye mother of their common children, the which keeps his goods as
her own, thinkinge none other goods to be hers but those, and keeps the^ to
leave them to her children, the which she loves as her self. It can not be
spoken, from how great a burden, and molestiousnes the mind of man is lightened
there by, the which for the worthiness and dignity thereof, should not be
molested with such inferioure cures. But yet I know not, whether all these The
edu cation of children
thiges may be compared with the education and bringyng up of children, for
surely by certain and true matrimony, they are received and taken for our own
children, whereby they be unto us the more dearly beloved. And charity wills
them to be nourished, and fashioned unto al kind of humanity and virtue, not
only with diligence and cure, but with al solicitude and anxietie. Al other
beasts, after that the dame has nourished them, and that they are once come
to a certain bygnesse, be of nature so instructed and taught that they leave
their dame for ever, being sufficient enough of them selves to shift for
their living, and to defend their lives, yt one naturally ^
not being better nor worse then the other: nor the^ yt yo^g do knowledge yt
dame no more, nor yt dame ye young. But as man has of his maker, and that by a
certain singular benefit, most excellent, reason, and figure of mind: eue^
so he has througe sin corrupted ye seed of virtue, and observed the light
of his wit and understanding. And if he do stand and follow the ways of his
affections, he shall so abace him self, that he shall become seruante unto sin
now received, and being given there unto, how great a beast of a man (a cruel
thing to be spoken) shall he be made then? what obscurity and darckenes shall
grow in him? how unlike and how far of shall he be then from his original
beginning? This obscurity of mind and darckenes through doctrine and learning
may be cast of, and clarified, and the evil inclination thereof by good
manners and customs amended. But this our corrupt and defiled nature has nead
of solicitude, time, labor, and diligence, yea and occasions must be tarried
for until it grow, until it may better perceive and understand his
admonisher, and until it will hear and be admonished. And now and then we
must delay and dissemble such vices and fawtes and reserve them until another
time, that they may be taken a way and removed without any danger or peril.
Nor it is not sufficient to warn him once or twyce, but often, and now and
then he must be reprehended and corrected, and sometimes flattered, mynglynge
ye were with ye sower. And what end shall there be at last of reformynge this
beast so evil and so brutishe, the which does so oftentimes (eue^ of it self)
return and fall into this silthines? Who would take such endless and daily
renu ing pains and labors, if he thought not the children to be his own? and
yet he takes these pains with those, the which he trusts and believes to be
his by lawful marriage, furthermore the love of the parents does redounde unto
their children, and augmenteth their love and charity toward the^, as hatred
does diminish and extinguish ye same, as the fabelles do declare of Medea.
Medea, the which, after she perceived, yt Jason had forsa ken her, being
moved with yt injury, and provoked with a cer tayne bitter hatred against her
husband, murdered her own children. And Euobardus Euobar dus.
hated his son Nero, ye which was Emperor, because he had children by
Agrippa, yt fearce and cruel woman. And ye love of the husband and wife
toward theit children, does fortify and strengthen the love bitwixt
themselves: for he loves his equal, as ye wife herein is, when she loves her
children, which are dear unto their father, as her husband does, whence they
have a double love, and stre^gthe bet wixt the^ selves, and another bending
from their children, for we love those, yt love the things, which are dear
unto us. Therefore fathers having good affection and mind unto their children,
receive the^, and after their possibility and riches do nourishe the^, teach
the^, draw the^ from vice repress their affections, and stirs up the force
and strength of their reason and judgment, to the end they should use it, and yt
al other powers should principally as unto a queen obey unto it. And yet being
thus instructed. they leave the^ not so nor cast the^ not of, nor depart not
from them, as other beasts do, but defend them, embrace the^, and after their
pos sibilitie adourne the^, nourishe them, and help the^. Nor this benevolence
does not subsiste and rest in the^ only, but stretches for the unto the
son and daughter in law, (...) and (...), whereof great (...) and
reconciliacions have oftentimes issued, and cities have had their beginning.
This love does descend unto our neues and cosing, and takes care for the
posterity. And in that nature, which is partet a ker of iminortalitie, does
regard the eternity, the which through generation shall ensue and follow,
where unto the Famisies
house, the family, yt patrimony, and parentage are constituted and made, the
name of the kindred, as it were the note and mark of a certain flock
remaining: ye which family geuinge it self to ydlenes and pride, is no other
thing, but the beginning of al flagitious nes and misihiefe, and for the time
it so remains, shall never be without some mischiefs, cruel, vnquiere, and
violente oppressor of other men's liberty the which taking only a pride of his
name sercheth to excel al other trusting in honest ar tes and knowledge. So on
the other side, it is a thing most beautiful, yt the youth of that family or
house may have a certain discipline and art of honest living, to be used
with lawde and praise: yt which their parents should deliver unto the^ from
hand to hand with their inheritage and name, as a remembrance of good works,
with domestical and fami liar examples, to ensue and follow the same. Who can
declare yt great commodities of all those things, the which by ye gift of god
we have obtained to ouerrunne and finishe this life withal? We are far gone
from the rites and customs of beasts, and humanity has she wed her self
garnished with order, laws, and discipline, the which things should separate
and lead us from vice, and place us in the trade and way of all virtue. One
Eve was given to One man one wife.
one Ada^, as one Church to Christ, as the holy Apostle does interpretate
it to be a Ephe. v
great mystery, as perteyning to Christ and his church. And one man ought to
be the husband of one wife, as nature it self does say: and as the law of
god better, then the law of nature, and the true expositour of the same does
teach us: first by the composition of ye bodies, and by the manner of
generation, the which by the embrasing of two bodies is made perfect, but yet
by a more secret mystery, for the love of two is best and without emulation,
for when two or mo do love one thing, it is not without envy, for very hard it
is, yt one should love two equally, or show, or else suffer it self to be of
the^ beloved; and he of those two yt shall perceau, yt he is best beloved, shall
wax insole^t and proud, as victorious in bat tail, and the other not being so
well accepted and beloved, shall burn as ouercomde with sorrow. and envy his
corriuale and fellow in love: for other he would possess the thing seue rally
alone, or else be principal in the possession thereof: where out should arise
hatred, strife, and trouble in the family, ye which thing the fearcenes of man
with some great tumulte and pertur bation of things should cause, or else through
the debilitie, ye co^playntes and importunity of the woman, which hate none
other weapons, trouble should increase, and cause a man's life to be
intolerable, not only chafing now and then with his fellow in love as with
a stro^pet, but also with her husband. This thing is not expediente for
quietness and pleasant tran quillitie, the which should be at home and in the
family, where unto every man defatigated, and with matters of the common wealth
private or exterior wetied, do draw them selves as unto some sure port or
haue^. But if quietness be so vexed and disquieted at home, and all things
troubled with hatred, where shall then ye mind of man tossed with so many care
full tempests repose it self? Truly a man had rather inha bite among the
litigious striles of the law, among the te^pestes and surges of disputatio^s
and in the ieoperdies of peregri nations, the^ to return home to such an
vnswete, unsavory, and bitter life. For in the amity and love of many, the one
beholds and looks upon the other, and not al upon one, as ser uaunces behold
and look upon their Lord and master. For when two or three behold one, yt is
no (...), but riualitie, and coutention, or else a dominion of many upon one, in
the whithe kind and estate, there is wo^t to be envy, hatred, and trouble, when
yt the favor and love (...) al desired, inclines to one alone. And therefore
at ye beginning, God gave to one Eve, Genesis vii
one Ada^, to be her Lord and master. And being minded to drown the world,
he caused certain men and their wives to enter into the arc for the
conservation and generation of mankind. But the precepts and commandments
of god do very well declare the strength and force of nature, the which being
in us corrupted by the vary tie of affectious leading us to diverse and
contrary things, is by the celestial oracles and precepts restored again
unto his integritye. In Genesis Ada^ (as it were divining) Gene. ii
said, yt two men should be in one flesh, unto ye which words the lord our god
did add this, ye matrimony once consumed and made perfect, they are no more
two, but one man yt it might evidently appear, Note.
that true matrimony ca^ not be between three or four, but between two only.
And as often as god him self speaks of matrimony, he never says husbands and
wives, but wife and husband. And the Apostle. i. Cor. vii.
S. Paul to avoid fornication gives counsel, that every man should have his
wife, but he never says his wives. And truly when the lord does inhibite,
that men should not re fuse their wives for any cause except it be for
fornication, he mat xix
forbids the multitude of wives, for if he mary another Mar. x.
he calls him an aduouterer. Why should he be an aduouterer, Luc. xvi.
that marieth another, his first wife being yet alive, if it were lawful for
him at one time to have many wives? These he the laws of nature the which in
very deed should have sufficed, if our malitiousnes had left our nature pure
and whole, as it came from the hands of his maker. But being now violated
thorough vice, and inclininge unto malitiousnes, the age and time yt ensued,
found remedies for this infirmity, as it were cer tayne bars and doors to
repress vice withal, yt it creep no farther. For the world in the first
increase of man's generation, being yet but young, part of our old and rude
elders did dwell in caves, and part when the cities were builded, in houses.
And at the begynginning the husband and the wife kept house together, the^ were
children begotten and borne, unto the which there arose an incredible love,
kind led with the fyrebrand of nature. These children being of age, married
wives to increase mankind withal, and their children increased, by whose means
the love of the fathers paste on unto the son and daughter in law, and from
thence unto their neues, and all these coupled together by the self same love
and charity, remay ned in one house, being parta kers of one fire, love making
althinges common, or to speak more truly one thing only. But consanguinitie
and affinity crepte in alytle further. and being many in number, would not
depart from yt familye, because they of youth were brought up together (for
there is no sweter thing, then of children to have been conuersaunte and
acquaynted) and because they were such persons, whom they loved as the^
selves, they could not be departed, except they should have been separated and
drawn from the^ selves. And although certain of the^ were removed and gone, as
it were to dwell in another place, yet that notwithstanding they oftentimes
returned un to their original house, and were most familiarly conuersaunt
together. But such as were wise, and by long expe rience witty, perceauing
that chastity through the fervent nes and heat of youth was in great danger,
judged that such feruentnes and motions of youth, ought by some religion and
laws to be (...) and repressed, for unto nature it appeared truly a thing
most abominable to mary other with mother, nece, or daughter, ye which thing
Ada^ (nature not Gene. (...)
being yet corrupted) did suf ficiently enough declare, when that he lokyng
upon his wife said: Behold now the bone of my bones, and the flesh of my
flesh, for this shall man leave both father and mother, the which he would not
have left, if he might have married her. Necessity and scarcenes of peo ple
coupled brother and sister together. But humanity by a little and little (the
world being somewhat more replenyshed) began to despise and refuse yt kind of
marriage, and many nations avoided it by laws, and by religion forbad, yt
such as were so nighe of co^sanguinitie and kind, should not marye together:
for it seemed unto the^ un mete, that any such should be coupled together, and
that al such marriages should be thought incestious, against all right, and by
the authority and will of the superior inhibited, for whether we behold
humayne things, the law, that is the consent of the citezins forbids them,
or divine things, and the majesty of god forbids the^, so it follows that
chastity should be in sauegarde within the walls and houses of those, yt are
of consanguinitie, for it was sufficient enough unto the simplici tie and
innocencye of our elders, to abstain (...) the thing not wont to be used,
unto whom it was enough in times paste to say, I will not (...) Quirites. But
in the time and age yt followed, they could not be (...) from (...) no not
(...) many (...), threatninges, terrors, prysons, nor (...) with death, so
feeble are we to goodness, and so strong and mighty against modestiousnes, nor
we do nothing more coragiously, then to disprayse and contemn virtue. And for
as much as there is no beast, unto whom concord and benevolence is so profi
table, or so necessary to join amity, and to amplify love and charity
withal, as to man, it is provided (as Cicero and S. Augustine do write most
notablye) that men should take their wives from other places, and their
daughters, their husbands out of their families and houses, whereby great love
should arise and increase, and by such bonds of affinity, the one should
greatly favor the other, co^sideryng ye thereby great frendshyp and kyured
should ensue and follow, and that finally both gods law and man's should make
and knyt up, as it were a knot of piety and faithful love. And so it is come
to pass, that charity, which nature had sprinkled thorowout al humayne
generation, was restrained through the affections of the iniquity of man unto
a feaw) is now by the means of matrimony spread abroad, not in one or two
houses only, but in cities, kinredes, and nations, ye which through one sole
marriage, have been revoked from sharp dissentio^s unto loving and swear
agreament and concord. But how far it is law full or unlawful to proceed in
these things by the civil and canon law defined, it is not to be disputed
upon at this time, but hereafter we shall speak thereof, when that we by the
help of Christ shall write of the common welthe. But when so great darcknes
Of the great beneuole^ce of God.
was in the soul of man, and in his will so great iniquity, and that
corruption was increased in man by ye continuau^ce of evil, it seemed good unto
god to restore his work, for he sent his son, by whom he made the world,
to reconcile us after to great dissension and discord, unto the father, and to
be the clarifier of our (...), and an ensample of ye works and deeds of
life. And he puttinge forth his hand, lifted up mankind lyinge upon the
earth and waloyng in mire, to look up into heaven, and to be partaker of the
light thereof. And although he had blown his trompet, all they that heard
that celestial and heavenly voice, contemning and leaving all other things
apart, did hye them toward so great and so excellent a beatitude for them
and for all other prepared. For they perceived and saw that all such things
as by humayne art wisdom, watre, or (...) might be obtained and gotten, and
all such things as were spoken of to the Philosophers scoles, were (...)
offered and given as it were in to their hands more spededely and more purely
then ever before, whereof there arose an incredible heat and feruentnes to
follow Christ, his blood being as yet even hoate, the which in such wise and
manner kindled their breasts whom he touched, ye the kings and princes of the
gentiles stood as they had beue amassed, and the capitaynes of great hosts with
such as bylong expe rience and use of things were sage and wise, of whom in all grave and weyghty matters men asked counsel, and al other learned men the
which being set in yt hight of all humayne things and next unto god, al other
being under them, perceived yt all things with great might and power were
ouercomed by christen men. Every man marueiled, from whence such force and
strength should come, wherewyth so many thousand hearts with one accord should
desire and seek for one thing, should confess one Christ, should speak one
thing, and obtain and come to one end. They cared nether for money nor yet
for their lives, they sought for no superiority, they refused their own
howses, families, parents, kynsfolke, yea and their own wives, that nothing
might let or hinder their course, on flacke the victory over vice, and the
unhard reward of virtue. Nor they cared not for any impedi mentes or caredge yt
doubted not to obtain by this victori such infinite rewards and goods. Nor
they had no leisure in such celeritie of age to think upon any other thing,
being thus occupied and reuished with this high thought and cogitation. But
this heat of piety flowing un to us from Christ, as it were from some
excellent fontaine, is as careful for other, as it is sure and certain of it
self, and is beautified and adorned with singular prudency and wisdom. But the
more that this heat is kindled, the more this wisdom does show it self, and
for gettinge of it self, does profit on her, if that any thing may be
lacking in such fervent and abundant charity. But surely she has situate and
set her self in a stedfalte and a sure place, and being full of hope, cries
out, who shall separate us from the charity To. viij
of Christ? So then he laboreth for other, and not for him self, he says
not he lives, Gala. ij.
but not he now, but Christ lives in him. And so he fulfilleth the
commandments of Christ, that lives in him, and obeys unto his will, to
aid and provide for those, that Christ would it should be provided for, that
is for his flock, for the which he has not spared to offer up his own life.
And therefore when these pietifull masters and coadiutors of Christ, do (...)
xix.
remember, what the Lord answered when he was demanded of wives, yt some did
chasten them selves for the kingdom of heaven sake, and that none other could
do yt, but only they unto whom the father of heaven gave it, Paul (lest that
any manne through an unwise feruentnesse of following, or couetyng that God
has not given him, should unwisely fall into satan's secret snares, ye which he
lays at ye fete of those, ye have the^ to ye p^rfection of life) does exhort
the^ wisely to take heed, and to prepare most effectuous remedy, for yt wherein
is most yeoperdie, and to fortify ye part most strongly, where un to they do
perceive their ene my most valiantly and most stronglye to approach. And yet
the selfsame Paul (the which with his ensample pro i. Cor. vij.
uoketh us esteminge al other things as vile, being bare and crucified to
follow bare Christ and crucified) gives this counsel, yt better it were to
marye, then to burn, lest any man should disturb thorough injury any other
ma^s peace or quietness, or defyle him self with filthy thoughts or deeds. And
therefore herbs and roots are used to be given unto some as meat and to other
some as a medicine so is matrimonye, the which at the beginning was invented
of god for the procreatio^ of children, and is now unto the luxurious and
incontinente person, as a remedy of so great What marriage is.
an evil. Let us therefore take this for a very fondation and ground, yt
matrimonye is a lawful contunction of one man and one wife, to live in
communion of life together all the days of their lives.

Of the election and choice of a wife.
OR ever I do speak of the choice of a wife, I must remove from yt mind of
those which I do instruct and teach that furye, wherewith they choose not
their wives, but invade the^, they marye them not, but rauishe them, and
deceive the^, and contrary to their wills do take them. If the woman were a
certain kind of merchaundise, peradventure it should not seem so vnse^bly by all
manner of means and subteltie to obtain her: for how soever she were
obtained, she would serve to that use, but conslderyng yt now she shall be his
fellow for ever, if she love him not (be she never so fair, nor never so bur
dened with riches, she shall be continually molestious. And what a madness were
it, to be ginne such a misterye of love with hatred? Love is gotten by love; by
honesty and fidelity, and not by violence. For a tune peradventure thou may
en joy her goods, her beauty, and her pare^tage and kindred, but you shall
never enjoy thy wife. Those things are best, which are most comfortable unto
nature, Ada^ did not ravish Eve, Gene. (...)
but received her, delivered unto him by god ye father hegaue her not unto him
per force, but yt they should mutual ly love one another, he drue ye one out of
ye other, and gave the^ like nature and fashion, to the intent that they or ever
they were married, should seem and appear to be one thing, and not two. The
judgment of the mind is the gouernoure of man's life, the which if it go not
before all our deeds, we shall slide and fall into such great yeoperdies, as
we do le daily chance and happen among men. They do well consider, what
thing they should eat or drink, but whom they do call unto their
friendship, and communion of life (the which are much more hurtefull, or
profitable then meat) they care not. So they do love preposterouslye, or ever
they know or judge what they do love, the which error does bring unto the
life of man more evil and more misfortune then can be spoken, whereby so many
and great frendeshippes through cruel dissenti on are changed, and love most
vituperiously and sha^fully broken, the which such men as by nature and
custom could not long endure and continue inloue, had craftily begone and
unwisely. They should first by nature and with reason have judged, and then
embraced yt thing with love, or with hatred avoided the same, the which if
man ought to do in choosynge of friends, how much more diligently ought it to
be done in the choice of a wife, the principal of al amity and frendshippe,
whose name among al other in beneuole^ce and love is most dearest. Epictetus
The saying of Epictetus.
a philosopher, of ye sect of Stoickes, does say, that every thing has his
ear, so that if thou take hold there at, thou may use it most ha^dsomely
and co^modiously. True wisdom is, to know the nature of every thing, and the
use thereof. If thou when thou take a wife, would thynk upon thy children,
and how thou mayeste live with thy wife, thou canste not lightlye fail in the
choice of her, the which (as Zcnophon does write in his Economica) makes
very much for the felicity or misery of man. For how much ye more a thing is
united and knit unto man, so much the more it may help him, if it be good, or
hinder him, if it be evil. Those da^mages and hurtes (which are inwardly in ye
body) are worse the^ those which are without: and those of ye soul, then those
of ye body: and likewise men do judge of those things, which are called
good. But peradventure it shall appear unto some that these things are not
universally true, for unto some the loss of their goods is more the^ ye loss
of their health. But this thing does not arise or happen of the treasure or
money it self, but because they persuade unto them selves, yt to loose their
treasure is a thing intolerable, and therefore the goods are not of more
estimation, then is health, but thaffection does rule in this thing. And
therefore it seems less to some to be dreuen out of his kingdom, then to other
some to loose a small portion of his patrimony. Some will revenge a word most
cruelly, and some other well buffeted and beaten will not revenge it at al. All
these things do pro cede and come of ye soul, ye which as most inwardly
loyned knit unto man, has more power in him, then the body, yea (as Plato
thinks) then man him self. If it be then of so great importance, what manner
of friend thou have to live co^modiously or ineo^modi ously withal the which
shall none otherwise dwell nor be in the self same chamber, bed, nor house
with the, but that thou may shake him of at thy pleasure how much more then
oughteste thou to take heed, when thou choosest thee a wife, the which must
continually be conuersaunt with the at thy table, in thy chamber, in bed, in
thy secrets, and finally in thy heart and breast. If thou go from home, thou
do commit thy house, thy fami lie, thy goods and thy children of all other
things the most pleasant unto her: she is the last, that leaves the at thy
departing, and the first that receaueth thee at thy returning, thou departest
from her with sweet embracementes and kisses, and with sweet kysses and
embraceme^tes she receaueth thee, unto her thou disclosest thy joy and
heaviness. It is an heavenly life to be An heaven ly lyse.
conuersaunte and in company with those that a man delyteth in and loves. But
it is a A calami tie infernal,
calamity infernal to be streyghted to se those things, yt a man does hate,
or to be in company with those, that a man would not be withal, and yet can
not be separated nor depart from them. Of this co meth, as we do see in dinerse
marriages so great ruin, so facinorous and filthy deeds, maymes, and murders,
committed by such desperate per sons, as they are loath to keep and yet can not
lawfully refuse nor leave the^. Therefore in ma riage there are two ways, ye
Two ways in marriage.
one leads a man to miserye, the other to felicity. In the beginning of
these, thou must diligently deliberate and co^sult with thy self, as Prodigus
the Sophist does say in the first book of Zeniphons co^mentaris, yt he caused
Hercules to take auysme^t, whether he should follow vice or virtue. And in
as much as it is a matter of great weight and importau^ce. let it not be
grievous unto yt reader to read it, for it shall not grieve me to declare and
open the thing more copiously and clearly. And seeing yt election Election
or choice is nothing else but to take a thing mete and convenient to the end
it is prepared for, therefore every one, yt must choose, ought to regard the
end, and know what thing is convenient for it. It is need full also, yt he be
prudente and wise, for else he cannot dispose it, nor perceive what is co^mo
dious and mete for yt end. Nor wisdom is not obtained nor gotten, but by the
knowledge, use, and experience of things, and not by following of ye affections
the which do diminish man's judgment. Ignorance and the troubleso^nes of the
mind is ye very cause, yt yongmen judge not things so well, as old me^ do, they
know not the business of man's life, and being but new and raw in all things,
they are sone deceived: and stird with affections their minds by so obfuscate
and cloudye, that they can not see what is right, nor how things ought to be
done and ordered. Therefore the young man Young me^
should leave the care of this election to his parents, yt which have better
judgment and are more free from the agitations and motions of al affections,
then they are. And inasmuche as they do love their children excedingly, they
would that their children should be none otherwise cou^seled, the^ themselves,
for the father (as it nath been sundry times by many examples declared) does
in a manner love his child more, then he loves him self. The young man must
take heed that following the light judgment of his own affection and mind, he
change not a short delectation and plea sure into a continual repentance. We
do learn by great and continual use and experience Note.
of things, yt the secret contractes of matrimonye made between those that be
young, are seldom fortunate and lucky, and feawe to be unlucky that are made,
and stablished by their friends and parents. All the old marriages of the Ie was
and gentiles were made after this form and manner. The pare^tes by their own
The manner of the old marriages.
aucthoritye did entreat and finishe up the matter among them selves, nor it
was not lawful for their children to dissent or to go back from ye thing yt
their parents had accomplished and done. And yet they are to be admonished to
have an eye and a diligent regard (...) marying of their children, yt it may be
to their great qui etnes, and that they (as much as may be possible) may live in
iocunditye and pleasure. They must not have before their eyes these vain and
foolish honors, nor the envious and unsure power, nor ye unquiet factions,
nor riches the which unto old men are wont to be most acceptable: for that
were even to bring unto their children (whileste they fulfill and acco^plishe
their proper will and affections) a mi serable and a wretched life, and a burden
intolerable. And if thou prepare for thy son nobility, riches, power and
dignity to serve thy commodity withal, what other thing is that, then to use
thy child, as an instrumente of thy cupiditie and pleasure, not doubting to
cast thy child into such a devouring evil to saciate and fulfill thy filthy
desire withal, that he shall not be able to bear it without cursyng the, both
privately and apertly. But if there be any, whether he be old or young, that of
him self does not per ceaue, what this thing mea neth, let him counsel with
his very friends and other that are prudent and wise. Nor at no time he must
consent to the opinion of ye common people, and specially in this deliberation
choosing of a wife, the which The common people.
is the foundation of the whole life of man. Is there any thing more out of
tune, more (...). or more without shape, then the vulgar and common people,
called of those that are wise, a beast of mauy heads? And whosoever follows ye
same, must needs be (as it is itself) inwrapped with many evils, and live as it
does a most wretched life. What wisdom can be there, where affections be
vehement and ready at the commandments of ignorance? What a thing should it
be, that he (the which by choosing of an evil wife is most vnfortunateste)
should desire me to choose as he did, to what end should this thing come, but
yt I should intricate my self with like misery, and that he by my co^playntes
should defend his fault through the society and fellowshyp of my mischaunce or
take some comfort of his misfortune, co^sideringe the same to be common with
other. But let him choose first, and show me that he lives a sweet and a
pleasant life, and that he repents him not of his judge meant, and then let
him call me by his ensample to follow ye same trade of living. But if he be
punished for his evil election and choice, let him show me rather how to flee
and avoid the danger. If any thing other by prayer, or by vow should be
asked of god, that is commodious and profitable for man's life, a good wife is
chiefly to A good wife.
be asked: the which shall make that, yt is prosperous more A good wife.
prosperous, and aduersiti more easy. But an evil wife thorough An evil wife.
prosperity waxes ar rogant and proud, and in adversity she loses her
courage, so yt both in wealth and woo, she is intolerable. And therefore the
French proverb is not without a cause commended, saying that he can not be
well borne, that is not well wiued. Socrates does say, yt whosoever de maundeth of
God a wife, riches, Note.
or power, demands as it were license to play at dice, or to fight a
battle, for the end of thosethinges are uncertain. If a man ask a good
woman, the success and end thereof is certain, and given of god unto man, as a
sin guler great gift, as Solomon bears witness in his Proverbs, saying:
House and heri Prove. xix.
tage may a man have by the inheritance of his elders, but a wise woman is the
pro per gift of god. Jesus the son of Syrach says: A good and Eccles. xxvi.
a virtuous womanne is a good gift, and shall be given unto her husband, and to
those that fear god for a good por tion. But to the intent that every man may
know, what he should look to have of a woman or ever he choose her, I have
determined we few words to describe the nature of a womanne, to the end that
no man lokynge to have of her things impossible should be deceived. A man
does co^siste of two things, ye soul and the body.

In yt soul there is as it were The nature of man.
two parts: ye superior wherein is judgment, counsel and reason, the which is
called the mind. The inferior part is, in the which are the motions and
perturbations, the which the Greeks call Pathi. The affections do grow of
opinions, the which are more in one, the^ in another after the disposition, the
customs and vsaunce of the body, age, health, manner, use of living, time and
place: the which dochaunge and move the disposition of the body, and
consequently do work in that part of the soul, that is annexed unto the body,
the which we call the inferior part, and therefore the affections, as ye
persuasions of things and opinions be, are common to al ages. But yet some of
the^ are of more power in man, then in woman, and contraryewyse The nature of
women.
in woman, then in man. After yt nature has cast the sede of man into the
motherly and natural place, it incorporateth the same, and if it find
sufficient heat, it brings forth a man child, if not a woman. So that when
it wants yt most excellent, active, and lively quality, the woman remains
feeble and weak, not only in humayne generation, but also in all other
proportion of her kind, and through such filthiness as increases in her (the
which yt feeble heat that is in her, is not sufficient nor able to cast forth)
she is less of stature, and more sickly, then other be, and of this by and by
(if she be not great bellied) she fuffreth her me^strua: she is time rous
also, for it is heat that encourages the man, and makes him bold and hardy,
and through fear, she is coue tous, and taught secretly by nature: she knows
her self to be feeble, and needful of many things, and busye about many
trifles, and like unto a ruinous house, that must be underset and vpholden
with many small proppes. And through fear she is full of suspicion, co^
playntes, envious, and troubled with many and diverse thoughts. And for lack
of experience of things, of wisdom, and of knowing her own debilitie, she
thinks continuallye that she shall be despised, and therefore in this feeble
and weak nature. anger, and a desire to be (...) does kyndle as it were in
flax continually. She loves also to be (...) and well apparelled, because she
would not be contemned, and as unpotente and subject to all casualties on
every side: she does seek where unto she may lean and stay her self. And
thou shalt easelye perceive, that certain of them do attribute unto glory
things of no estimation, as to have some great man to her (...) boure, or that
some (...) and mighty prince did salute her, or call unto her. I will not
speak of these (...), the which unto many yt would be seen to be most
strongest are thought most precious, as of ^inred, riches beauty and
friends. Of yt self same fear does superstition arise and grow, for as
wisdom does persuade and move a man to religion, so does vain fear lead
a man to su perstition. Many women are full of words, partlye thorough the
variety of though tes and affections, the which as they succeed one another,
so they come unto their minds, and from thence unto yt mouth: partly by
suspicion and fear, lest ye by holdyng their peace, they be not judged (...)
pable, or that through ignorance they know not, what they say. All these
foresaid things are of nature, and not of the women them selves, and therefore
they are not only found in women, but also in such men, as other of nature,
or else by the first constitution and making of the body, the which can not be
changed, are woman like, or become such through age, as children and aged
persons, or by some other casualtie or chance, as they that are long diseased
both in mind and body, nor yet al women have not these fawtes in like sort
and manner, for there has been, and are yet not a few, which are of a more
strong and constant mind then many men be. And many such are spoken of among
the gentiles, as Cleobulina, Consta^te women.
Hypparchia, Diotima, Lucretia, Cornelia graccorum, Portia, Che lia, and
Sulpitia. And among us there are innumerable (...), unto the which another
Athenes the talker, nor Rome the conqueroure may be compared. Nor Christ would
not that even in our time we should be without an example, the which should
flow and descend unto our posterity, left and exhibited unto us by Ca
Catharine queen of England
tharine ye Spaniard Queen of England, and wife unto King Henrye the eyghte
of most famous memory, of whom that may be more truly spoken of, then
that, that Valerius writes of Lucrere, that there was in her fe minine body a
man's heart by the error and fault of nature. I am ashamed of my self, and of
al those that have read so many things. when I behold that woman so strongly
to support and suffer so many and diverse aduersi ties, that there is not one
(although he were well worthy to be remembered and spoken of among our elders,
that with such constancy of mind has suffered cruel fortune, or could so have
ruled (...) felicity, as she did. If such incredible virtue had fortuned
then, when honor was the reward of virtue, this woman had (...) the
brightness of the Heroes, and as a divine thing and a godly sent down from
heaven, had been prayed unto in tem ples, although she lack no te^ ples, for
there can not be erected unto her a more ample or a more magnificente temple
then that, the which every man among al nations marueylinge at her virtues,
have in their own hearts builded and erected. But these things, the which
are now known unto all men, shall be hereafter worthelye and diligentelye
declared. These things before rehearsed were spoken to this intent, to declare
that as man can not be changed, nor utterly deli uered of his affections, so
let no man hope to change a woman from her proper and native nature: make her
better he may. but he shall never wholly adnichilate her assections, for as it is
not in him to make of a woman no woman, so it is not in him to make of a man no
man. And breuely to say, a man shall be continuallye a man, that is, a feeble
beast, impo Man.
tent, mutable, subject unto in firmities and affections, inclyninge to evil,
the which by learning may be amended, and empayred by evil customs. We must
bear with these affections in wonie^, as we bear with them in other our
friends, except we do intend to avoid al company, and live solitariously in
wilderness. And the affections of women ought more reasonably to be suppor ted
and borne withal, then the affections of men, the which are fearce, and can
hardly be tamed, or ruled, and thoroughe a false spies of liberty, yt which
does teach the^, they refuse and disdaynfully cast of the bridle. But as women
are far more weaker then man, so they are far more meke and humble:
therefore thou may bring them under, and rule them other by manlye power,
or by sharpenes of wit, by wisdom, or by the long use and experience of
things. And it is much more grievous to suffer an evil master then an evil
servant. And truly a woman, seeing that she is under the do minion and power
of man, ought to be such a one, nor we should not mistruste, but that the
divine sapience has touched all things strongly from one end to another, and
Sa. viij.
does order them most loving lie. The works of God are wonderful and worthy
to be honored, no man can reprehend them, for that were abominable, nor no man
should so search them, to judge them, Note.
for that can not be done with out great temeritie, or maliti ous impiety. We
can not co^prehende the inscrutable and great reason of gods counsel. But yet
we see certayue thin ges (as Paul says) as it i. Cor. xiij.
were in a glass, the which do suffice to pass over this our peregrination,
of the which we may take a (...), that man should not, will, nor wish a woman
to have any other af fections or conditions, altheughe they might channge the^.
For if the woman were robust and strong, both of mind and body, how could she
suffer to be obediente and subject to him, yt were no stronger then her self?
would she not wax insolent and proud, having in will to rule both house and
household, and to strive peradue^ ture with her husband for yt maistery? who
could keep such a bold peace at home, but yt she would be abroad? if she be
prodigal, she will never save that her husband gains the which saving is for
a ma^s household, a thing most necessary. If she neglect or little regard small
things, how shall she keep the instruments of her house, ye which are made
of many small pieces? how shall she keep her household stuff, among the
which are many vile things worn, destrued and broken? who would take upon
him the office and charges of a house? or the office of a cook? who would
nourishe and bring up children? what a torment were it for a man to do those
things? a man would rather leave all, and dwell in a desert, then to dwell in
such misery and bondage. The loquacitie of the woman so it be with measure, is
now The loquacitie of women
and then a pleasure unto a man weried with public and private matters, for
the^ also she learneth her children to speak, and other things conueniente for
that age, to the which the nobility of man would not incline. Furthermore she
prepa reth and sees, that all things Cleanliness,
be clean and nete, the which thing is not only commodious for the life of man
and profitable to refreshe his spyrites withal, but also for his health, the
which is more (the^ can be well expreste) offended, and noyed with vnclendlynes,
nor that wit does not appear to me to be clean, yt is nouryshed among
filthynes. The envy and emulation that is among women (so that it excede not)
does so sharpen their manifold virtues and qualities, and the domestical
diligence and custody of their behauour, that they another speak nor do,
whereby they may be blamed or suspected. Nor superstition in a woman is not
intolerable, so that it be not so anxius that true religion be therewith
extingui shed. Nor I do not commend that woman, the which does not of a great
carefulnes she has unto religion incline to superstition, except she be one
of the absolute and perfect sort of matrones. These be the inclinations of
women, the which may be bowed unto that, that is good, as the inclinations of
men may, as hereafter shall be declared. In ye mean space there are none in
this nature to be refused, except thou will none, and had deste rather live
alone without any company at all. The end of matrimonye is to have
children, and to The end of matrimony.
live together, and many do err most (...) in both. Some there be, that
force not, of what sort of women they get their children, when that they the
which other by fortune, or by the gifts of nature are more excellent then
other, should diligently take heed. yt Note.
they cast not so noble sede into evil ground, and that it be not corrupted
with some evil and naughty quality. For we see that diligent husbandmen do
diligently take heed to choose out that ground which is most apt and
conueniente for their sede, lest they loose (if the ground being evil and
naughtes bring for the evil corn) both cost and labor, and so much the
more they do sorrow the thing, how much the goodness of ye sede did put them in
good hope and comfort. To this is joined, yt the more tenderly the father
loves his child, the more it greueth him, that he should take any incurable
vice of the mother, the which thing coming by her, should gr^ue him not a
little. Again of what ^reare importance is it to live together? Nor there is
nothing more tedious nor more grievous unto man, then by the way to be in com
pany with an evil and a foolish companion. And it were a great deal better
to live alone, then with an evil man: and to play with a whelpe, then to
reason with a focle. O what a madness were it then, not to think it to make any
thing at al to the matter, of what nature and qualities she be, with whom
thou must both live and dye, if perchance she be molestious, or otherwise
unto the, then thoughts? As touching the child two things are to be wayde
The child.
and considered, the body and the mind of the woman, and that her body be not
to far out of fashion. The magistrates of the Lacedaemonians called Ephori,
condemned king Ephori
Archidamus, because he had married a wife of a low stature, whose children
should not sufficientlye enough represent the person and dignity of a king,
although this thing be not of such importance, that a man should there fore
refuse his wife, so that she have sufficiently enough all other qualities. For
we do see, that such short and defor med women bring forth most beautiful and
goodlye children. We should rather take bid, that she be not infected with
some infirmity or strange disease and sickness, yt which ye physicians do call
hereditarie, and do proceed from the parents unto their children, of the which
some there be most filthy, letting the due tie and office of life. These are
more diligently to be eschued then those which are not so horrible and
filthye. And if thou thy self be infected with any such infirmity. I would
thou should dispose thy self to live chaste without sin, for as it is a
thing most sweet and delectable to have children, so it is very sharp and a
discomfortable thing to see them oppressed with greuouse infyrmityes and
diseases, the which (if it were possible) we would rather desire to have and to
suffer our selves, then with our so great pain and heaviness to se the^ in our
children. And therefore we ought to consider and take heed, yt our minds be
sound, and that our contagiousnes nor vice, nether by nature nor by custom do
infect our children. I say the self same by the man, for this is the office
and duty of a good man, to be content with his misfortune and chance, and
not to let it creep forth to infect other. If we use such love and charity
unto our friends, that they in no wise, nor manner be not infected with our
infirmytyes, how much more should we be studious toward our own children?
And fathers thus counseled do use to mary their children Note ye young men
for young men will hear no such counsel, for the more madder they be, the
more wiser they think them selves. And that is the chiefest point of all
madness, to think him self wise. Unto these things add this, ye thy childs
mind be not through education and manners contaminated, for yt thing is very
hurtful for thy son, and pestiferous for thy daughter, the which being
nourished and brought up with their mothers, obey un to their counsels and
study in word and deed to ensue and follow the same. And as for the stock and
kynred, there neadeth not in this consultation of children to be any great
solicitude or care, for the chil dren do follow thee; and not the woman. Thus
much we have spoken of children. Let us now speak of the communion of life,
wherein must be considered things both good and evil, profitable and
unprofitable. Love whereof amity Love.
does take her name, does grow of this opinion, yt the thing is good and
fair: and this is the knot of amity, the which once taken away, amity
fails. And therefore true and durable love, is only among True love where
those that are good, among whom there is but one constante rule and manner of
living. But the evil united and coupled together we an evil intent and
desire are no longer friends, then that desire endures, for if that vanyshe
away and fail, the force and strength of their love and amity does decay,
for the knot that knit fast it to gether is removed. And therefore we must
consider both the goodness of the mind and of the body, and whether such
things as chance and happen unto man of the exterior things, be good after
ye mind of the Peripatikes, are evil or commodious or inco^modious after the
mind of ye Stoickes, but I labor not greatly in these things. In the soul are
these, sharpnes and dulnes, swiftnes and slouthfulnes, subteltie The thin ges
of yt soul and body.
and simplicity, malignity and goodness, health and infirmity, inclination to
vice and virtue variablye, and such things which are gotten by use, as arts,
knowledge, rudines, wisdom foolishnes, and all virtues and vice contrary unto
these. In the body are these, age, health, stature, for me, strength, and
beauty. The exterior things are these, kynred, fame, ri ches, dignity,
grace, and condition. I have reckened up even sufficiently enough these
qualities for this my treatise, because I have no place here to entreat of
the^ more largely. These things of the body may be easelye perceived and
known. But that yt is inwardlye in man so manifoldely inwrapped and covered is
obscure and darcke to be understood, the which can not be learned nor
perceived more or less, but by the exterior acts, as some certain deeds and
works are manifest tokens of the passions of the mind, and foam other obscure
and confuse. I will not speak of the tokens and signs of Philnomi, but I will
speak more properly and more aptly as touching nature and yt common wisdom of man. The going, sitting, restyng, the countenance and eyes, the motion of
the whole body and the sownde of man's voice are but light and feeble sig
nifications of a man's mind? The more certain tokens are man's manners and
customs, among the which his speech How the affections may be known.
and communication is the principal, declarynge not only man's nature, but
also his affections, as things procedinge from them both. The proverb does
say, look what the man is, such are his words and communication. And
Socrates when that a certain young man was brought unto him by his father for
to learn, said unto him, speak that I may know thee. For a wise man shall
more clearelye know the mind of a young man by his co^municatio^ and speech,
then by yt outward gestures, or proportion and making of the body. By the
speech we perceive the quick sentences, which proceed of the wit, and the
use of a man's communication, as it were a certain education, and how chaste,
how shamefaste, how grave, how sober, how modeste, how benign, or else how
dishonest, how vnshamfull, how light, how insolente, how arrogante, and
how tardious he is, for such is the fontayne from whence this river runs
and is derived. In all other actions of the life, some eftesones and
incontinentlye do show even to those that are most rudest and dulleste their
intentes and minds, for the disdaynfull is often angry, the conten tious
takes occasion to say against the obstinate will give no place, but with
bitter and feigned laughter, or with evil and disdaynefull silence stand in
his own conceyte and opinion. But she that among strangers can not refrain
nor bridle her affections, does declare her self to be unruly and of mind
dissolute, and that she will not be governed, nor have no respect to those, that
see her, or that do speak of her. Those signs that proceed of love or hatred,
are somewhat obscure and uncertain, as those be, yt delight or displease. Every
man deliteth in that he wyllinglye does, and desires to have it familiarly
with him, and hates those things that he coueteth to be far from him. Plato
most nobly and most wiselye would that the makers of the laws, should give
Makers of laws.
and apply all their study, yt the citezins might accustom themselves to
delight in good things, and hate yt is evil. For if they might once obtayn
this, a few laws would serve the city. For every ma might then carye about
him a most just law, that is a moderate mind and a well instituted. The
delectatio^s do show the^ selves with the senses and felinges of the body, and
other by experience and practice do show and declare the end of the^ to be in
the mind of each one. It must be considered, what every man does desire to he
are, see, touch, smell and taste, what communication does delight him? what
books? what company? what co^gressions? what pastymes and plays? what
mightes? what raiment? what orname^tes? Nature does desire nothing so much as
that, that does resemble it, nor abhors, nor yet auoydeth nothing so much,
as that, that is unlike it. And so we may well perceive, yt such is the
inward mind, as the exterior and outward things be, wherein man deliteth. Of
this do love, hatred, amity, conversation, enemitie, and to flee avoid and
some men's company arise, and are confirmed. But first and most principally
men's minds are united and knitte together by a certain secret consent and
similitude of nature, other for the respect of profit, or by some casual
temeritie, as when men mete together in one scole, or in one wagen or ship,
some other by the way, or in warfare, or in one office, or at one banquet, or
by some other necessity. The first of these or the most part are stable and
continual friends, the other as long as there is any profit to be gotten.
The third do cleue best together, if they be given to one manner of study, or
if they find in each other, wherein they may have delight and pleasure. For if
they be given to diverse and contrary studies, nor find not in the^ selves yt
does delight and please the^, they do sone forsake one another. By these
things we may somewhat behold and see yt blind ambages and circuites of our
hertes. For every man calls unto him, and grede ly does retain and hold yt,
that is most likest unto him, or else through a certain co^tagiousnes, or some
familiar co^uersa tio^ he becomes like unto it. For we do read in ye holy Psalm
mes, yt with yt holy thou shall be holy, and with the innocente and the elect,
thou shall be elect and innocent, and with the perverse thou wait be
perverted. Therefore we ought to regard and take good head, what company she
does use with whom we do intend to marye, and how long she has haunted
their company, and whether Company
that by the instinct of na ture, or by any other impulsion she associated her
self unto them, for such a one through conversation will be like unto the^. And
the maid se ruauntes Mayde^s.
do oftentimes open and declare the qualities and conditions of their
maistresses, as ye old saying is: such maistres such maidens. And as Plato
says, such are yt whelps. For it is very like yt she, in whose hand it is
to call, whom she lusts, will call her, the which is most agreeable and
conformable unto her conditions and nature. And being long conuer saunt
together, their vices or virtues, or else their conditions and fashions will
creep unto the^, the which thing is the more easily to be done, as every one
does conform him self unto his nature, whom he does intend to please. And
therefore those maide^s ought not to be considered, that do often change and
depart or ever their minds can be known, or with their evil manners do
infect other. Nor they are not to be wayed yt dwell far from their
maistresses, but they only that have long continued with the^, whose la bour
and service about some bu sinesses they have used, and although they be not
vicious, yet they may hurt the good name of those, that be honest. Other there
be yt are vicious the which must be diversely co^ sidered, for it may be, that
she knows no such vice, or that she knows it. Or it must be serched out
whether she may know it, and if she know it, men must enquire how profitable
the use thereof is, and whether it may commodiously be left or no, or whether
that any other man can do the same, and whether she had rather, yt he as of
necessity should do it, and again whether she be familiar with him. All these
things will sone declare what will follow, what she looks for, what she would,
and what she deliteth in. That womanne which does gladly haunt the company of
fat and well likinge men, but ignoraunte and unskillful of any honest art
apper teyning unto women, or that does gladly talk with such inuitinge him to
her table, what should a man believe or say that she looks for, but to do
evil? Men by the life that The life that is paste.
is paste, do take aknowledge of the life that is to come, for the force and
strength of a custom is great, and how she has used her self with young men,
with maidens, with ser uauntes, and how she has supported both good and evil
fortune, if ever she proved them that is prosperity mekelye and equally, or
fearcely and impote^tlye adversity strongly and moderatly, or desperately and
ab iectly. Piety and religion is a secret and a hidden thing, and Piety.
known of God only, unto whom it perteyneth both to reward and to punish,
and it is no man's part to judge thereof nor Christ's will they should, as a
thing unto his judgment only reserved. But yet his judgment is not light
judgment unto those, yt do gladly speak of God and his holy word, and hear
it without any arrogance or ostentation How the word of god should be read.
of wit, or to be honored of other, but with reverence and submission, that
through the precepts and commandments thereof, both she and other might
learn to live well and virtuously. Nor to speak or commen of exterior
things, pertaining to the acts and deeds of the body do in such wise open
religion, as to speak and reason of ye inward things, and of those that do
eleuate and exalt the mind unto god. The first be, as to dispute and reason
upon fastinges, and the Fasting.
number of prayers, of vows and of holy peregrinations. And notwithstanding
that fasting and prayer are very good things, and that good and devout women
should oftentimes practice and use the^, yet in as much as the evil may like
wise use the^, they do not clearly show and setforth the true and sincere
religion. But to speak of him that is judge both of the quick and the dead,
and of him that beholds the acts and deeds of men, and of the fugacitie of
life, of the va nitie of those things, which men desire, of the contempt of
honor, riches and dignity, of the care that God has to defend us, sustain
us, and to keep us, of ye love of Christ toward us, of our mutual love and
charity, of our aid and help unto the poor, of our love and honor unto our
husbands, of the rule and bringing up of our children and servants, of
death, of the pains of the sinful, of the eternal felicity, and of those
that are virtuous and good, are more euidente promises and witnesses thereof.
And of these things we have compendiouslye entreated and spoken Dissimulation.
of. Dissimulation in all these things is sone speied and perceived, or else it
endures but for a season, and often times even suddenly it opens it self.
For why? a ma^s mind being set and disposed to dissemble, does easelye eue^ of
it self return to his proper nature. Let us therefore now return unto our
purpose, and speak of all those things the which we have set in the soul,
in the body, and in the exterior and outward things, for whose cause we have
somewhat digrest unto the things that we hitherto have spoken of. Piety is
the head of al things. She that is pitiful does never euel, nor any thing
that may be iusiely rebuked. This is the true and native justice, of the which
the old proverb does say, that it embraseth all virtue. But the wicked
woman at no time does any thing well, but when she judges it to be for her
own vt ilite and profit. So my precepts shall have an eye, and regard those
which are not wicked nor perfectly pitiful, for there is not one that is
perfectlye pitiful. For Paul does say, that he does run and labor, i.
Co. ix.
if by any means he may obtain and comprehend. But a great and a well
grown pity is accepted and counted for an absolute and Unchasle women.
perfect pity. Unchaste women are intolerable, what wise man can suffer any
such, except he be wytles? Solomon says: he that expels a Prove. xviij.
good woman, expels a good thing, and he yt keeps an harlote is a fool,
and unwise. What love can a man have to such a woman? For the Lord says,
that she has violated the mystery of matrimonye. And yet they that amend and
return from their enyll life, ought not to be numbered among the euel, in
as much as they have turned their evil life into a bet ter. She is not much
unlike a shameless woman, that being naturallye inclyned to evil does not
give her diligence to erect it, but following her natural pleasure and desire,
does by an use and custom keep it under, and by soft and gentle intreatynge,
nouryshynge of the same, does augment and increase it. And so it chaunseth that
day by day, she ta keth more pleasure and more in it, when that it were far
more convenient to repress it, and by good motions and exercises to wind and
turn it to better. Of ye which Ouide not without a cause does speak,
saying. She yt for fear commits not the fault, is an aduoutres, in as much
as she desires it. And this woman is much worse, then she that declares her
self to be an open harlote: for among these there may be found that give
them selves to honesty, the which perchance were led to dishonestye not by
necessitye (for there can be no necessity to do evil) but by some appearaunce
or spice of necessity, without the which many might live more honestlye.
Nor no man can live pleasauntlye with her that is evil spoken of, nor have
amity or any concord with her, that is not naturally and steadfastly witted.
And what thing is more intolerable or more grievous to a wise man, then to
supporte or to suffer a foolyshe companion? And in as much as to live together,
does not only consiste in confabulation and words, but in all other things
that pertayne to the life of man. Therefore it is to be con sidered and wayed,
who it is that will be married, and whether he be sharp or dull What things
are to be considred in him ye will be married.
witted, what his customs and manners be, whether he be peaceable or angrye,
vehement or soft, impetuous, fearful, a dronkarde or an abstayner from wine,
a nyggarde or prodigal, a wydowe man, or whether he has been married or no,
having children, or without children, how and by what occupation he lives,
upon his lands or by other gain, whether he be an occupiour or a crafts man,
learned or unlearned, a magistrate or a pri uate person, of what age, of what
health, and strength of body of and what stature.

With these things the com modities and incommodities of the woman must be
conferred. For why a dull wife is nothing meet nor convenient for a dull
husband, nor an unwise woman for a wise man. Who shall rule the familye? Who
should nouryshe and bring up the children? Yea, what children should these
two bring forth?

Very asheades, or if they be proper and goodlye, they shall for lack of good
education become dull and astonished. And yet there shall be a bet ter agreement
among these, then between a wise man, and a dull or a foolyshe woman. If thou
marye a foolish woman, as many men do, because she is fair and beutifull,
what matter made it, whether thou had a fair image of Phioia, or such a
wife? For after that thou have once satisfied thy filthye desire, thou shalt
find thy self in miserye. For who shall govern thy house? With whom shall
thou have communication? Who shall look unto thee when thou art diseased? Who
shall comfort thee with words in thine anguyshe and pain? What company
shall thou have in adversity? Who shall rejoice with thee in thy prosperity?
And through the dulnes of the mind, they come to vile thoughts unmeet for
the reasonable soul, and drawing their husbands to their proper affections
and costumes, they utterly do blind them. We read in the holy Bible, that
the children of God perceiving the daughters Genesis vi
of men (before Noes fludde) to be beutiful and fair, took them to their
wives, the which thing moved God to drown man kind. God did punysh this
thing because that wise men, and through virtue the children of God, did not
choose them wives confirmable to their virtue, but took the fleashlye
daughters of men, the which did draw the celestial spirit to earthly and
vile thoughts, tournynge the spirit to fleash, and from quietness to the
motions of the affections. And therefore Genesis vi
God does say: my spirit shall not continue in them for ever, for they are
but fleashe. And if thou marye for her riches, or for kynred sake. A rich wife.
The foolisher, or the more without judgment she be, the more insolente and
the more intolerable she will be. She that is craftye and subtle, A craftye
wife.
does cumbre him very sore that unadvisedly does entreat her, and does not
a little trouble him that is wise. The poor man has The pore ma^s wife
need of such a wife as does bring competente riches with her, or some
sufficient occupation where with she may sustain and uphold her self with
all. But to him that has sufficiently enough to maintain his familye, she
that is apt to learn suffices, the which he may easelye infourwe and
fashion to his own manners and customs. Pride, the very mon Pride.
ster and enemy of quietness, is among al other vices of ye mind, most to be
exchued and avoided. It breaks love and benevolence, with all conjunction and
concord, mingling ye swetenes which should be principally in matrimony with all
bitter sowrnes. The vices which do yshue out of pride are these, arrogancye,
fearcenes, wrath, fastidiousnes, and contempt, the which to be borne or suffered
are most grievous tyrannes. But every man (except he look wyselye about him)
may easelye be intrapte in the signification of this vice. Some women there
be, the which being fearce un to strangers, are unto their own most gentle,
and such ought most dearly to be desi red and beloved. Such were those noble
women, Penelope, Lucretia, Cornelia, and Portia, the which unto their husbands
behaved them selves as handmaidens, and toward al other kept their estate
and dignity, and their chastitye most strongly: being prompte and ready to
wash away from that, were it never so little a spotte or blemishe, even with
their own blood. But if she should use such pride toward her husband,
there should ensue great unquietness and trouble. Such a womanne may be
thus known, when that through the zeal of chastitye she is unto all other
intractable, nothing regardyng her progenye, her beautifulness, or riches, and
this shall be the good wife that we seake for, and the best keeper of womanlye
honesty. But if she thoroughe the foresaid things, wax arrogaunt and proud,
she shall be intolerable. But Note ye women.
she that has an eye unto ver tue, does flee and avoid the company of men,
nor will not gladly commen with the^, fearing none otherwise to bespotte the
beautyfulnesse of her chastytye, then the Armelyne (as it is said) does
avoid myrye and durtye places. This womanne does exchue noble and ignoble,
fair and foul, rich and poor, and al other men, and shall be as touching all
other, except unto her own husband, a white line (as men say) in a white
stone. But if the vanity of those vain and wordly things do vaynelye inspire
her, she shall despise those, which enjoy not ye trifles that she is proud
of, and show her self most benign and affable unto those that fortune does
favor. She that is cruel and sharp, will be as it were a fearce mother in
law, brawling, cruel, and contentious. An obstinate woman should not be
married unto him that is (...), for that were to put towe unto fire, and what
other thing should he do at home then, but burn, and she but to lay on wood
to kyndle the fire withal? A prince ought not A liberal woman.
to refuse her that is liberal, no nor yet her that is munificente Liberalitye.
or prodigal, for there is no virtue that more besemeth a prince, nor that
wynneth more the favor of the people, or that more stablyssheth high and
great dignities then liberality, so that it be not myxte with rapacitie, nor
with the desire to inryche some (as were read of Sylla,) with other men's
goods and substance. He that has children, and does intend to marye, must
avoid her that is a rauener, and specially a prince, and a governor of a
cite, for by such means the evil are wont to creep in, and to corrupt the
integrity of men. And we read that there has been many rulers of
countries condemned, not for their own theft and robberye, but for the
theft and robberyes of their wives. And for this Note.
cause it was ordained in the senate of Rome, Tiberius being Emperor, that
all such as was sent forth to rule and govern the provinces and countries,
should not carye their wives with them.

The negligente woman is unprofitable for him that can not be at home with his
own familye and householde. A nyggarde is not A niggarde.
only profitable for him that is poor, but also for him that in his goods
and substance does sustain and bear the mutabilytye and chances of
fortune. Nor I speak not this, because she has no power in all those things
which are called things of fortune, but I speak of those things which
fortune is wont with great varyetye of chaunches to be medlynge with all. For
why? the patrimonye and goods of merchants are much more subject, and
sooner do feel and taste the instabylytye of fortune, then ye patrimony of
husband men, or of great princes, or of those yt live upon their lands and
rentes. He therefore that is set under the variety and mutabilitie of fortune,
must choose and marye such a wife, as is wont in such chances to be content
with a little, and can order that little both wisely and strongly. Such are they
that are profitable, sober, and borne of a good stock and kindred, nourished
and brought up under honest pare^tes, and taught to fear shame and so to hide
their necessity that it come not abroad, rea dye to eat brown bread, and
to drink water, to cover their poverty wythall. But she that is poorelye and
baselye borne, but dilicatelye and wantonlye brought up, after that she has
once assayed of those delites and pleasures, does prefer her belie above all
honor, and good name and fame. She that is eloquent and well framed to An
eloque^t wife
speak, is a pleasure to him that is heavy spirited, so that she be pleasant
and not bit ter of words, nor to pleasant unto other, the which thing unto
him that is suspicious and gelous, is a very torment. She that is full of
words (unto him that goes about things which are secret, and cannot be
disclosed without danger) is very hurtful, as unto secre taries of Princes,
and Emperors chauncelonrs. The occasion of Fabius Maximus death was, because
he declared unto Linia his wife, that Posthumus Agrippa was cited by his
graundfather Augustus. It is great wisdom for a man to be circumspecte, and to
take heed of him self, as it were of disceytes, what he speaks familierly at
the ta Note this.
ble, or when he embraseth his wife, nor to discover any thing by gesture or
countenance, nor to remove al manner of wrytinges from her, whereby she may
come to the knowledge and understanding thereof, that should be opened with so
great danger and peril. Beautifulnes, riches, and kynred, cause men to be
insolent and proud, for Ouide does say: that pride does fail beutie. And
Iuuenal does say: that there is nothing more intolerable the^ a rich woman.
And Martial says merely as he is wont: ye ask me why I will not marye a
rich woman. Because I will not mary my self to my wife. And Plaute in Asinaria,
does say: I have taken money, and with the dowry I sold mine authority. The
poor that maryeth a rich wife, does not so much live in trouble, because
his wife is molestlous and grievous unto him, as he contynuallye does suspecte
that she will despise and little regard him.

And of kynred Iuuenall does say: I had rather have Venusina, then thee
Cornelia the mother of Graccis, if with thy many virtues thou brig much pride,
and (...) for thy dowrye the great triumphs of thy kynred.

And yet all this most commonly does consiste in the education and bryngyng
up of the woman. There be that are poor, without favor, Is it not so?
and baselye borne, the which are often times more arrogant and proud, then
they which are noble. Marcus Caro the Censor and chiefest of the common
wealth, did choose the daughter of Solonius his cliente to his wife, the
which Solonius believed that he did but gest with him and wondered that so
noble a man would be joined in affinity with him. But Marcus Caro.
what, the old Caro took the young maiden, the rych, the poor, the noble, the
ignoble, the Prince, a vile and a base borne unto his wife.

And yet S. Hierome does say, that she used her self very contemptuouslye
and proudely unto her husband, and was daily less and less obeydient unto
him, so that he (whose words, whether he spoke them in the senate, or to the
people, or in the judgment haule, were taken for an oracle) the which was
esteemed for the most prudent and wysest man of so noble a city, unto whom
there was no man at that time, another at home, nor yet abroad, nor in war, nor
in peace, nor in quietness, nor yet in business able to be compared, had not so
much authority at home, as upon a rude, a foolish, a poor, an ignoble, and
an object wenche, and yet she was in a manner taken for the chiefest of al other
matrones, and for her husbands sake had in great estimation and honor. I
heard often times at Louayne of a certain host of mine, borne in Phrise
land, that there was in his city a certain rich gentle man, the which
purposing to live merely and quietlye, took unto his wife a woman far under his
degree, that is, a pore woman baselye borne and of no great beauty, and yet
most commonly in that country there are exceadinge fair women. But being
rudelye brought up under her pare^tes, she refused to do the things
pertayninge unto his house, and disdained once to touch, or to look upon her
husbands shyrtes. This woman being now dead and departed, and he mnche weried
with her rude and filthy educatio^, married a noble, a rich, a fair, and a
woman meet for his degree, the which did serve him although she had been his
bondmayde, not as compelled, nor yet fainedly but wyllynglye and faith fullye.
She put on, and took of his Note'y e women.
clothes, and his shoes, and made them clean, and having a great family,
would suffer none other but her self to do any thyuge that belonged unto her
husbands body, she mended his garments, washed them, pleted them, laid
them up, and did all other things most promptlye, the which her maidens now
and then would have been grieved to have done. And therefore these exterior
things are even as every man's mind is instituted and accustomed.

Nor I will not deny but that a woman, if she be of a peruers nature, will
arrogantly through her kynred, riches and beautye (if these things be left
her) extolle her self, as does the flame of fire in a dry and a light
matter. A young man asked Pirtacus one of the seven wise Pittacus answer.
men of Greece, whether he should mary one yt was above his degree or no, he made
him this answer: mary her that is equal with thee. Of the which thing there
is an old Epigram of Celimachus, recited by Laercius. For in times paste the
old authors wrote of beautye as it were with certain arguments.

If thou marye her that is fair, thou shalt have her common: if she be foul,
and evil favored, she shall be molestious and grievous, but yet she shall be thine
own.

If she be fair, thou shalt have a pleasure in her. And this. It is a grievous
thing to suffer her that is foul, and a hard thing to keep her that is
fair. And therefore they counseyled men to take those, which were neither to
fair nor yet to foul: And to choose those that were of the mean sort. For
doubtless, they that are excellent fair, wax insolente and proud, for when
they see and perceive that men behold and gase vpou them, and that they be
as it were in admiration to al men, they believe that there is some rare thing in
them above al other, not with standing that with their own eyes they do see as
in a glass how good a thing that beautye is, and do soon forget it.

But consider with the eye of the mind and understanding, making a conjecture
of them selves by other, how unstable a thing that be auty is. And besides al
this, that that thing is hardely kept that many do desire. And Note
therefore a certain poet does say: that there is a great strife, where beauty
and honestye are joined together. And that often times under fair faces are
hydden filthy minds. But she that is very deforme and foul, not withstanding
Deformite.
she be most tender lie beloved, yet she believes it not, thinking her self
un worth ye: and is gelous of all those, that her husband does other behold or
speak unto. Among the which there are some, in whom this sentence may be well
applied and very fied. The foul and evil favored are often chaste, although
there lack no will, but the aduouterer only. But yet in this thing, after
as the quality of the man is: there are certain commodities that the
luxurious and fastidious man may have to satiate and fulfill his will with all,
and he that is suspicious and in gelosye may be in suretye.

All these things are not catholic, and yet it is wont to chance thus. All
things be in manne, as the mind of is, but specially, after as it is
infourmed of youth, and stablished by virtuous customs and manners. His wife
that with his hands does The labo rers wife
labor for his living, ought to be robuste and strong, so that she may help
and labor with him, as in plowinge and harrowynge of his land. The wife that
is sickly is very moleste and grievous, if it let her to bear children, or
to do such things as of necessity must be done at home. Hesiodus, Plato,
and Aristotle, will that ye man be three and thyrtye years The years of ma
riage.
of age, and the woman eyghtene or ever they do mary. For the man being under
those years is not of sufficient strength to get children, and the children are
but feeble, nor increase not as they should do, another in stature nor in
strength. And he being inexpert, does not rule his fa milie and household as he
should do, where he bears because of his youth, but little authority, nor his
children do not re uerence him, the which does appear unto them, not as a
father, but a brother. And if he be very old, he can not help his young
children, nor they him, but have need of other men's aid and help, and does
depart, or ever he make any provision for them. And women before they be
eyghtene yearrs of age, are not mete to bear children, and do travel of
child with great parel and danger. Nor it is not expedient to accustom her
being so tender and young to venerialcopul ation, for lecherye is there by
enflamed, and ye body can not have his due increase, Nor such a young thing can
not rule her family being inexpert of all things, and coming to a more
perfect age, she will not be ruled by her husband, for her conditions and
manners are so grown and rooted in her, that they can not be changed.

Finallye, the foresaid ages do well agree, and are conueniente, both for
them to live together in Matrimonye, and also to eugender and bring forth
children, for their whole power and strength, shall fail them at one time and
season, and their marriage should have little joy or pleasure, if the one were
fruitful, and the other feeble for age. All this have I said after the mind
and opinion of the Philosophers, but specially of Aristotle in his book of
the common wealth. But yet in these things the causes why they did so define
the thing, are more to be considered and lo ked upon, then the definition. Or
else when soever any other like causes, or the self same (the which certes
are very good) do persuade it. Let us perceive and understand that all
ready nature vath defined it, the which having respect to the time and place,
does with secret qualities alter man's body. But first we must consider reason
and pity, the only goodness of the mind. And for the time that we live chaste
and unmarried, we must use such a waner and measure of living yt before the just
age of procre ation, we be not much pricked nor stirred with the flesh. Caesar
Note thlo custom.
does commend the custom of the old Almanes, ye which he prayseth, because
they went long without any skins, or raiment upon them, ye which thing after
the mind and opinion of some, did stablishe their stature, their force and
sinnose. And also their women were greatly esteemed, the which before they were
twenty yea res of age, would company nor lie with no man. But if we cannot live
chaste, let us esteem religion above al things, and follow the precept of Paul,
ye 1. Cor. (...).
it is better to marrye then to burn. Let us eleuate our eyes to the
everlasting countreye, and care little for this life, yt which is but for a
time. And our Lord, that is the voice of the divine and godly wisdom does
say, that it pro Luc. ix.
fiteth a man nothing to win all the world with the loss of his soul. If
she that is aged does marrye, she must be void from all natural vices, and
of all such as she was nourished and brought up withal, for being endured and
hardened with such evil vices, when shall she be reformed? But she that is
young may even as it were wax be fashioned and formed, to what soever a man
will fashion her unto. In parentage and kindred let us remember the old
proverb, that of a good mother comes a good daughter. My countreye men
pronounce that with two senses, thus. Of a good vine take a good branch, and
to thy wife take the daughter of a good mother. And wandering about the
city, first inquire thou of the mother, and then of the daughter. But yet it
imports very much with whom and where (...) was nourished and brought up,
for it is seen often times, that such as be borne of evil parents wax good
even as they be that nourishe them. And borne of good and virtuous parents to
wax (...) tie and evil, for youth does most aptly and expressly ensue and
follow that evil is. The woman's friends must be wayde and considered, whether
they be to mighty, or to grievous for ye or no. Nor I ca^ not say, whether
thou shalt have her sufficiently enough under thy power and dominion; yt
trusts much in the mighty strength of her kindred. Tiberius Caesar married
Iulia Augustus Tiberius.
daughter, a shameless woman, and of a very evil name: but when yt he could
no there chaste^ her, nor yet chase her the daughter of so mighty a father out
of his house, nor durst not accuse her unto him of adultery, being uncertain
how he would take it, and to keep her, and still to continue in her company
was most greuouse of all, under a color to live quietlye he went to the
Rhodes, where at his first co^ ming he lived a life most ignominious, and after
that in great danger for there were yt called him a banished man, and for
Caesar's pleasure his stepsone did threaten to (...) him. I know a certain
man yt mari ed one far above his degree but after yt the days of micth and
pastime were past, he cursed the day as to him most vnfortunatest, when she
was first named unto him. For if he had married one of equal and like degree
unto him self, he having so great abonda^ce of riches, should have been the most
fortunatest and luckieste of al other, nor he should not have repented him self
of his kindred, nor at home have suffered so great molestiousnes, the which
could not have been en ded but by his death or hers. Furthermore men must
consider, of what conditions the woman's kinsfolk be of, and what their manner
and fashion of living is, whether they be spitifull, sharp, intractable,
litigious, brawlinge, or fearce: for with such thou should be continuallye in
trouble. And again whether they be sedi tious, or factious, and special ly in
those parties, where that As (...) (...).
men whether they will or will not are wont to be entangled with partetakinges,
for they shall be unquiet. For who can avoid trouble that familiar ly does
haunte and frequente their company, which are troubelous? Furthermore it must
be considered, whether they be poor, great crauers, shamels, or without
modestiousnes: for there be, yt can not suffer, ne bear no such, but to avoid
al such grefe, are content to go and inhabit other pla ces. It is a grievous
thing to suffer her yt is rich, or to nou rish or intertayn her yt is pore Let
every man look upon his own substance, whether How notable a thing it is to
mary a poor woman.
he be able to support him self and his or no, for there is nothing more
acceptable unto God, nor more commended of man, then to mary a poor and a well
conditioned woman. It is a spice of almose to help ye poor, and thou have her
not only as a wife, but as a servant the which can not lay unto thy charge,
yt she brought thee any thing, but in prosperitye shall use with thee yt is
thine, and kuowledge thee to be master of al, and that al her wealth comes of
thee, and in aduersitye shall patientlye bear and suffer envious and vnfrendlye
fortune, remembryng how little she brought with her, and shall not pity her
self that came porely unto the, but thy self that art spoiled of al thy
goods. But yet I put thee in re membraunce again, that I speak of those that
are well and manerly brought up, for poor men's daughters sluttyshely and
wantonly brought up and nourtered, are as tou chynge their estate, both in
prosperity and pouertye intolerable. But if thy goods suffice not to
intertayne thy wife with all, take thou such a one as can somewhat help thee.
But if thou take her that is rich, to live and spend her goods ydely and
pleasau^tly, thou breakest ye law and ordinance of god, ye which would Genesis
(...).
that man should live of his tra uell and labor, furthermore, it should break
love and co^corde. And how long think thou that she would suffer and support
thee, which as one that is un profitable and idle do consume and devour up
her goods and substance? But such a ruffler ye which as she supposed should
have been unto her sweet and pleasant, shall want no pain, yt is, no strif, no
crabbed words, no mutual hatred in this life. And that bread the which he did
eat without pain or labor, shall bring with it most bitter and sour meat.
How much better had it ben then to have eaten brown bread with v^le and
unsavory meat in tranquillity and peace, then in such a bitter life to have
de uoured and eaten al other delicates following the counsel of the wise man,
saying: that bet ter is a dry morsel of bread Prou. xvij.
with joy and gladness, then a house full of fat offering with strife and
contention. Of the which pleasant and sweet life gotten with labonre and payns
Uirgil does say, yt there was an old husband man at Tarent, the which not
withstandyng ^arens is a noble city of Calabria.
he was but pore and nedye, yet in mind he was equal with prin ces yt which
returning home toward night, furnyshed his Table without any cost or
charge at all.

Marcus Antonius the Philosopher married Fustina, the dou ghter of Antonius
Pius, and trusting that there by he should inherit the Empier, durst not
for her manifest and open aduoutrye refuse her. lest that any controuersye or
trouble should be made for her dowry. I would a great deal sooner counsel the
woman to marrye with her better, then the man to marrye her that is of moore
power, then he him self. For why? the mind of man is noble, and will not
abase it self, to be compared to the woman. But many women for their defense
when they braule and chide, do use this armoure, for incontinentlye thou shall
hear the comparison of their nobility and riches. After al this, thou must
mark their qualities, that is, whether she be a wydowe or unmarried, a virgyn
or corrupt, wont to be loved or no. In a wyddowe, her age must be considered.
In a young woman it ma keth no great matter whether she be a virgyn or no,
although it seem no small thing to have had the flower of her age, and as
Uir gil does say, to have had th first love. Nor it is not of naught that my
country men prouerbiallye do say: that the beginning, as well in love as in
^otage is most pleasant. In her that was long with her husband, that thing,
the which of wise men is commanded to be wayed in friends, must be
considered, that is, how she behaved her self to her first husband and what
manner of man her husband was. For if she (he be ing an honest man) loved him
not, nor could not broke him, way then with thy self, what she will be unto
thee: but if he were evil and importune, and yet she moderatly did suffer him,
thou must ever hope and trust the same. But if he were evil and flagitious,
then thou must take good heed whether he have not allured her unto his own
manners, and how those manners do please the. Make also a comparison betwixt
him and thy self, for if he were more virtuous then thy self, she considering
the good things past and those that are present, shall be heavy and grievous unto
the, and so much the more, because yt the time present seems to be worse, then
that, yt is paste, for the Time.
time does continually turn and incline to ye worse. But if she be better
borne, richer, and of more power then you thy self, she as one yt was some
times married to such an husband unto who^ thou art not to be compared, shall
fastidiously co^tempne thee, and the more bitterly hate thee. how much her
first husband then thou, did more commodiously and gently use her. But she yt
shall come laden to the with children, shall rob thee, and gather to enriche her
own withal. She will not love thy children, nor yet equallye those, which are
common between you, but shall have compassion upon the fatherles being destitute
of al fatherlye help and com forte. In her that was corrupt men must consider
the life that is paste, for of these there are two periculous kinds, for thou
shalt heardlye persuade her that was common, or her that has haunted the
company of great men, or her the which they have loved to be continente: for
it would be heard for her that was wont and accustomed to be a maistres over
great men, to serve him that is so far under those which were her servants.
And how soever she shall find the, she will not believe that al other would have been as thou art, but shall lament that so vnluckedly she came and was married
unto the. I would not counsel yt to mary Excelle^te good con^sell.
her, with whom thou have been in amors withal, whom thou flatterdest, whom
thou did serve, whom thou calledst thy heart, thy life, thy maistres, thy
light, thy eyes, with other such words as foolish love does persuade, vsinge
impiety against god, which is yt end of al desire and goodness. This
submission is and should be the cause, yt she does not regard yt, but
disdayneth to serve thee, whose lady she was as she esteemed, and who^ she
found more obedient unto her, even with yt peril and danger of life, the^ a ny
other slave yt was bought for money. Thus it appears it is not convenient ye
the servant should rule ye maistres, for after yt love, hatred, reverence,
contempt, and fear has once occupied the mind of man they leave certain
continual marks, the which ye Greeks call Hexis, and the Latins Habitus.
Great and noble men do always honor their pedagoges and masters, and that
for the reue^ce they bare the^ of youth and do fear them, notwithstan ding
they be their subjects, and have the authority and power in their hand both
of life and death. And the proverb does say, that whosoever marieth for love,
does live in sorrow. I would yt the flame which was kindled and did burn
before they were married, and after they were married, waxed cold again might
be renewed, perpetual, pure, and liuelye. Thou seeste now, how great prudency
and wisdom is necessary to discern and judge these things, and how necessary
it is to counsel with him, whose motions of the mind are quiet, that they
begile thee not. Let no man trust to obtain a wife, yt shall have no
incommoditie nor fault, but yet the fewer yt she has, shall be instead and
place of her mani fold and great virtues. But he yt is wise, will learn and
take co^ sell by such things as be present. And forasmuch as those things
which be mean, are almost infinite, there ca^ be no universal form nor rule
genen of them, and therefore wisdom is present at hand, the which is not given,
but with precepts aided and helped: and to admonish men of ye same, I have as
for an example written the things and matters aforesaid. In the deliberation
of matrimony, this must be inuiolably (...) (...).
observed, yt we follow not the judgment of our own senses, nor eyes the
which are sone ravished and deceived with beauty, nor of the ears the which
take pleasure in elo quence, nor of the motions of the mind, wherewith men are
led other to kindred, or else to money or riches, the which all through
their instabilitye, abundance or sacietye, do bring with them swyfte and
sudden repentance. And therefore al things are to be revoked and called to
that supreme and exact judgment of the mind. Thou shall take heed, that on thy
part the woman another in body nor in sub sta^ce be not deceived, for thou
shall never use her co^inodiously, and as thou would thy self, whom thou
fraudulent ly and deceytfully did entice and wind unto thee, for natural ly
we hate him as an enemy, yt does begile us, nor nothing does displease a man
more, then to lack the thing he looked for. It were better to disclose unto
her thy vices and infirmities, the mediocrity and means of thy goods and
substance with the peril of ye loss of her, then to obtain her with fraud and
sure discord. Sergius Sergius Gal ba,
Galba his father yt was Empe rour playde (as it is written) the part of a
wise and of an honest man, for when Liuia Occel la that beautiful and rich
woman was in love with him, he put of his clothes, and secretlye did show her
that he was bro ken backte, the which simple gene rositie did so content and
please her, that she regarded not the blemishe of his body, but loved and
honored him more, the^ ever she did before. Many men are wont to say, yt they
will rule their wives, whatsoever they be, or howsoever they came by the^, and
that it is in the hand and power of the husband, what and of what conditions
she shall be. Certes a great part of this does rest and lie in the husband,
so that he as he ought to do, do understand that ma Matrimony.
trimonye is the supreme and most excellent part of all amity, and that it
far differreth from tyranny, the which does compel men to obey. Truly it
compels the body, but not the will, in the which all love and amity do
the only consist, the which if it be drawn does resist, and bow like a
palm tree (as natural The nature of a palm tree.
Philosophers do write) to the contrary part. Nor thou shalt not believe,
that there can be any marriage or concord, where they agree not in wyil and
mind, the which two are the beginning and seat of all amity and friendship.
And they that do auaunce and think the^ selves able to rule their wives, by
that time they have proceeded (...).
and gone a little further, they shall feel and perceive the^ selves begiled,
and find yt thing to be most hard and intractable, the which to be done they
esteemed most light and easy. Some there be, yt through evil and roughe
handelynge and in threatenynge of their wives, have them not as wives, but as
servants.

And yet surely they are but very fools, that judge matri money to be a
dominion. And such as would be feared, do afterward lamente and complain
that they find no love in them, whose love and amite through their own importu
nitie they turned into hatred. And at ye beginnynge glorifiing and craking thus
cruelly to be their wives masters, they purchase unto them selves a most
miserable and alamentble life in time to come, being now yt all love and
pleasure is cast a side, environed with fear and suspicion, hatred, and so
row. Truly if a man (as nature, Ephesians. v.
reason, and holy scripture, do say unto us) be the head of the woman, and
Christ the father, there ought to be between them such societe and fellowship,
as is between ye father and the son, and not such as is between the master
and the servant.

Of the access and going unto Marriage.
AFter yt thou have de termined with thy self to marry, and have done all
dilygence thereto required, thou must desire of God, good and prosperous
success, in whose hand and power it is to gene it, and doutles will give it
most abu^dantly, if thou above al other thin ges have an hope and a respect
unto him, For if thou, after ye thou have satisfied thine appetite, resort unto
him, desiring him yt thou may obtayn the thing that thou most desire, it
should apeare yt thou would make him a minister of thy voluptuous desieres
and pleasures, and so doing thy vows and prayers should appear most manifest
blasphemy A man should not come unto Note
marriage as unto a profane thing, with a solute and an vncareful mind, but
with a quiet and a well pourged mind, as to a thing most sacrate and holy. Nor
matrimony does not only consiste in the conjunction of the body, nor yet in
daunsyng nor bancketing, procedynge and brought unto us with many other
things from the gentiles, when that it should rather beseme us most
studiously to pray unto almighty God, that so wayghtye a thing as matrimonye
is, might have good and prosperous success.

Matrimony as a thing sanctified of God, the which wills the matrimonial
embraceme^tes He, xiij
to be chaste, the bed to be undefiled, and their pro ginie vnbespotted. And it
is after the mind of S. Paul, a sign of that great mystery, wherewith Christ
does indisolubly unite him self unto yt Ephesians. v.
church. Therefore thou ough test as much as shall lie in the to lift up thy
mind, and to remember how great and how worthy an image thou do represent,
and that thy wife is unto thee, as the church, and thou unto her as Christ:
And therefore thou should show thy self unto her as Christ showed him self
unto his church. The charity and love of Christ unto the church is
incredible, and thy love toward thy wife ought to be most effectuous. Societe
and to live together is the most effectuous and su rest knot to knitre and
join amity and love among men and all other beasts. What greater society
or company can there be, then is between a man and his wife? Whose house,
whose chamber, whose bed is common, their children are common, and they them
selves partakers of al good and evil success and fortune, the which society
and fellowship were sufficient to styre and pro uoke him that loves not his
wife, to love and benevolence. And what company or love shall a man look to
have of him that loves not his wife? There are yt in love and amite look for
gain as yt vile Epicures do, unworthy to be beloved, men which love them
selves and not their fre^des. And if we have a respect unto commodity and
profit, there is nothing that gives so much as does a wife, no not horses,
oxen, fermers nor proctours. For a man's wife is the fellow and conforter of all
cares and thoughts, and does moore diligent and good service, then other
maid or servant, the which do serve men for fear or else for wages, but thy
wif is led only by love, and therefore, she does every thing bet ter then all
other. And God does declare it, saying: let us Genesis ij.
make Adam a helper lik unto him self, by the helper is signified the utility
and profit of the service, and by the similitude and likeness is signified
love. For a servant and he that is hired, are far unlike ye master, and are
taken well nyghe for no men. A servant in the stead and place of an horse or of
an ox, ye which must be bete^ and inforsed to their work does serve his
master. A hired seruau^te is in ye place of an hired horse, for when ye hier
is paid, ye socitie and fellowship dissolueth. The child is part of ye father,
and through a natural pity they love each other, but yet ye wife is more
annexed and joined to her husband. The father does labor and takes pain for
his children, but sildome the children for their fathers, and often times they
are sent to inhabit and dwell in other men's houses whereby in a manner it
appears that their strayte and fast societe does dissolve and break. But the
wife clean contrary does incontinently take pains for her husband, nor may
(as long as she lives) another change house nor bed. If com moditie and profit
be looked for, what commodity excels this if you love thy wife you shall live
most pleasantly, if you love her not, most miserablye and wretchedly. For there
is nohing so sharp nor so bitter, as to hate the thing yt does favor and love
the, nor nothing more happy as to love him that hates ye. What does other men's
been uolence and amity help or comfort me, if inwardlye I consume my self
with hatred? or what does other men's envy and hatred hurt me, when my mind is
occupied with sweet and pleasant love? The fountain of felicity and miserye
is inwardly, for outward things do little or nothing to the iocunditie or
miserye of man's life. Some there be, that hate angels, the which that
notwithstanding are through love most happy and fortunate. Some other love
Satan, ye which through envy and hatred are most unfortunate and wretched.
How shall it be possible then, that thou which doste love shall not be loved,
the proverb being true and saying: Love that thou may be loved. Thou shalt
then lead a celestial and a heavenly life, when there is such correspondente
and mutual love between you. as there is among the angels and those blessed
fowls, which have left their dodies, and are clothed with the divine and
godly light. The law of matrimony and The law of love is matrimony.
nature, which Idam or God rather by Ada^ did pronunce, does declare how
great the love of marriage should be, for when Eve after that sweet slumber was
brought unto him to be his wife and companion behold (quod) Ada^ this bone is
of my bones, and this flesh Gene. (...).
of my flesh, for this shall man for sake father and mother, and cleue unto his
wife, and they shall be two in one flesh. This is the sum and end of all
love and amity, to be so joined with the thing that thou do love that thou
may become one thing with it. The Poets declare, that Vulcanus the God of
smithes found two together, the which showed one to another great tokens of
love, and taking a pleasure in this their charity and love, a thing unto god
most acceptable, he asked them whether there were any thing, where in he might
do the^ pleasure. O Vulcane quoth they, we desire yt wtthose thy divine
instruments Note
wouldeste break us in peaces, cast us new again, and make of us two but one.

This is the end of al our desires, and for this does love study, and shall
obtain that it desires, if it may bring yt thing to pass, the which at
length shall be in that heavenly love and charity, when we being spoiled of
this flesh of sin, and renewed by Christ, shall be made one thing with God,
and among our selves, as Christ does teach us. What other thing is it, yt
man must leave father and mother for and cleue Gene. ij
unto his wife, but only yt charity ouercometh al love, yea and yt also which
does elaspe the fa there and the child together, yt ought to be most
greatest. being a man taught only by nature does say, as Homere writes, that
Troy in time to come should be destroyed by yt Greeks, and that he does not care
nor sorrow so much for him self, his father, his mother, or for his brethren,
as he soroweth for his dearly beloved wife. The stout and manly mind of man
has continually his reward: for why? the flame pearseth the woman's heart, the
which loves her husband most fervently. And so did Andromica love Hector
above al other. Zenopho^ does show, that when Tygraue the king of Armenias
son and his wife were Cyrus prisoners, he promised to redeem her with his
own life. And afterward when they asked her what she thought of Cyrus, she
said yt she never beheld nor saw him. And when her husband said, what thing
haste thou seen then, if thou never didste see him? she answered, what thing
should I behold or see, but him only, yt said he would redeem me out of
seruitute and bondage with his own life? so greatly the love of her husband
had inflamed her. But what manner of love should be in matrimony? and with what
other precepts should it be fashyoned, then with those, yt which the Lord
our God does give by his Apostle Paul in the Epistle to the Ephesians where
he says: Cap. v.
That manne is the head of the woman, as Christ is the 1. Cor. iij.
head of the church, and god the head of Christ. He propo neth no vile
thing, nor of earth lie wisdom, that does corrupt, and is foolishnes before
God, and oftentimes in this world does decay, and yet does eleuate and extol
it self to the similitude and image of the eternal wisdom, by the which the
almighty god created and made the world. And that head of the church said so
seriouslye, that he was the salvation of his body, that he doubted not to give
him self for it. The Apostle calls upon his, to ensue and follow this love,
that Ephe. v
is, that as CHRIST has sprynckled and shed his blood to save his church
so should thou not fear, nor that for thine or thy wifes affections, but for
the health and salute of her soul, to die most stronglye. What thing can Love
geneth courage.
make the coragious, if love make the not? the which gives courage and
audacitie to hearts, hares, and other timorous and fearful beasts. In this
word salute is comprised, life, health, virtue and honestye. But as for riches,
ornaments, delitiousnesse, vain glory and voluptuousnes are ta ken for
foolishnes. He him self despised al these things, and taught his, that they
should Note this
come unto him, if they lightly regarded them. Christ did not to enriche his
church with gold and silver, or that it should be of solace or pleasure, but
he was crucified to sanctify his church with wa ter by ye word, that it
might be glorious without any wrynkle or sport, holy and faulteles, and so
ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. The Lord does Ephesians. v.
daily sanctify the church by his death, that being purged with the most
purest blood of her spouse, she may be adourned with all virtue, and by
putting away old Adam with all his deeds, she may be clothed with Christ
her spouse, the which was made of God after the similitude and lykenes of the
first Adam, I say, the heavenly, not after the image of the earthly. There
appear outwardly such wonderful and excellent virtues, whereof the glory of
the church does arise, that by them they may come to the fountain of all
goodness, that do marvel at those sprynges, and does honor them. And therefore
we are commanded to be in eve ii. co. ij
ry place a good odor and savor, but namelye unto the lord. And it is the will
of our master that our good works Mat. v.
should be known to all men to the intent our heaven lie father of whom we
received the^, might be glorified.

The queen did stand upon the right hand of her spouse, in a Psalm xliiij.
vesture of gold wrought about with diverse colors, but yet her glory was not
in her apparel, nor in those things which me^ do behold and se, but in those
yt she sees in sprite, and that her spouse does approve for whose love she
does adourne and apparel her self: who the^ can esteem matrimony to be vile,
consideringe it is yt image of so high and so divine things? And therefore ye
womans life, virtue, and good name and fame, ought to be unto her husband more
derer then his own life, as christ put his own life to great and incredible
pains and torments to save, sa^ctifie, and to honor his church, Nor you must
not behold how fair, of what kindred, how rich, or of what health she is of,
nor yet how greatly she does love thee: for whatsoever she be ye thou haste
married, thou must none other wise, nor with no less affection love her, then
Christ loved his church, the which refused not to suffer great pains for the
wicked, and his enemies, drawing them unto him as members unto the head, to
furnish and to make up his church with all, he does daily teach her,
sustayneth, clarifieth, mundifieth, and with great patience and gentleness
does chasten her, and whatsoever she be, he embraseth her with great love,
although she be unkind, and coldely does recompense his fervent love and
charity, to her wards. She is thy wife, and ye both are now but one thing,
therefore thou ought to love her as thy self. It is written that Epaminudas
enemies appointed him a certain vile off^ce, the which he accepted most
beninglye and thankesully, saying that he would so use it, that in time to
come it should be reputed among the people a very honest office, and so he did
Could this man in so great a dissension of the city and among so many
envious persons and enemies. cause a vile office to be had in estimation, and
can not thou even of thy self bring to pass, that thou d^pise not thine
own fleashe, yeathy self? when that ^^ule does Ephesians. v.
say, he that loves him self loves his wif. Nor there was never man yt hated
his own flesh, but does norish and cherish it, as the lord does cherish his
church, Aristotle following the Pithagorians does define a fre^d that he is the
self same thing A friend
with another. And god does say, yt the wife with her husband Gene. ij
is al one thing. And Cicero to confirm and keep amity gives this counsel,
that the inferior should ascend and the superior descend, for so yt things may
be brought to equality. But in matrimonye this needs not, for it is
sufficient both for yt man and the wife, to perceive and understand, that they
are part each of others body. And therefore to be fair or foul, rich or
poor, noble or ignoble, whole or sick, wise or folyshe, is now through the
operation and work of God, the which has made them both one, common unto them
both. Nor there shall never be true and continual love, except it be
stablyshed upon those things that remain after death.

For beauty, riches, kindred, and such other have their time, some appointed by
nature, and some by fortune, and other human chau^ces. They have also their
sacietie, and in time and place they are forgotten. For we can not at all times
and seasons remember the Fabians, the Cornelians, and that we received a great
dowrye. The affection with the time does wax feeble and cold, and the
plentifulnes and use of that, that a man did gredely first desire does cause
him to loathe it. Al these things do diminishe love, and certain of the^ do
utterly extinguishe it, the which if it had been in the mind and in virtue,
should Virtue.
have continued for ever. For virtue is ever at hand, never idle, never
unprofitable nor void, but always working. Nor yt soul of man by ye death of
the body does not die, so that we may believe that they which be departed do
love all such, as in this world were dear unto them: and that they which
loved the Souls of those which be departed and delivered from the body, do
love them not as dead, but as they love their friends, yt which are absent and
far from them. And therefore we do see many women that keep their faith and
love unto their first husbands, as did Demotions the Ariopagites daughter, of
the which S. Hierome does write against Iouiniane, the which after that her
spouse Leostenes was dead, would Note. this ye women.
mary with none other, saying that she should marry an aduouterer and no
husband, for although he were departed, yet he was alive unto her. And so said
that woman of Rome. And how sharply and wittelye does Lucane bring in
Cornelia, Scipio Metellus daughter, and Pompeus last wife, taking and esteminge
her self but as an harlot as touching Iulia his first wife, as though the
knot and band of matrimonye and love did yet endure bet wixte the living and
dead. And naturally every man desires to be loved and does search for the
favor of other men, and studieth to keep and to increase those things, that
cause him to be in favor. If thy wife do perceive, that thou art ravished and
taken with her beau tie, and would that thou should love her, she will do al
her diligence to increase and augmente it, if with her communication. she will
never cease prattling, if with her virtue, she will daily labor how in all
honest and virtuous deeds she may be better. By as one of the seven wise and
sage men of Greece, gave this one precept By as precepte.
and rule of love. Love so says By as, yt thou may hate, and hate yt thou
may love. I can not say, whether this wise man does more follow the figure
of words, then yt truth of the sentence, inasmuche as he does teach, that no
man should be to other, another faith full friend nor enemy. And therefore
Cicero does say full truly, that all amitye and frendshyppe should decay,
if a man should love so, that he may hate. What should he trust then?
what should he believe, or to whom should he open his mind? or how should he
love him true ly and with all his heart, when he may coniectute and thynk that in
time to come he will be or may by his enemy? surely he will draw back, and
provide against such things, as may fortune and chance. And therefore this
sentence may thus more co^uenientlye both for the use of nature and of this
life be turned. Love never to hate, but hate to love when time shall be. Every
man should love his friend simply, but specially his wife. And forasmuch as
love and other affectes are named of the Philosophers Habitus, the which are
conserved and kept in us through time, operation, and labor, we must even at
the beginning give our diligence, that all injuries and offenses may be
avoided: for as Plutarke does say, tender and soft love is sone broken.
Therefore The beginning of matrimonial love.
that new love and conjunction of the mind, must be nourished with benign,
sweet and gentle conversation, until it be so increased and fastened, yt no
great storm be able to dissolve or break it. And al suspision must be at all
times, but specially at the beginning of matrimony avoided, lest thou first
begin to hate, or ever thou begin to love. And beware thou feign it not, nor
conceive it of no light occasions and conjectures, for unto such thou
shouldeste give no ear, although there were great appearance and liklyhode.
There is no man so well fashioned and brought up, that can satisfye all men, and
he that was able to avoid the fault, was not able to avoid suspicion, for ye
judgments of men are free and licentious, and they do interpret, yt they see
and hear, not after the truth, but after their affections, and the conjecture
that they do feign and rejoice in, unto the which some do give more credit,
then some. Pansanias in platose Simpose does put two Venus and (...). loves.
two loves, a heavenly and an earthly. The earthly is blind abject, vile,
fyithye, and occupied about vile and filthye things, never lokynge up to
things of more worthiness. But that celestial and heavenly love does see most
clear lie, following virtue and those things, which are most beautiful,
and most like unto heavenly things. Those husbands that love the beau tie,
or the riches of their wives, are blind and subject to that earthly love, not
perceauinge the reason nor yet the measure thereof. But they which are true
husbands, True hus bands.
love the soul and virtue, and have a judgment in love, and being inspired
with the strength and spirit of that celestial love, do love wyselye: for
pure and holy love does not vyolentlye compel them, as that does which is
earthlye, but prudentelye does guide, and conduct the^ gently persuaded to ye
place they should go unto. The wise husband does love his wife feruentlye, but
yet as the father loves his son, ye head, the body, the soul, the flesh,
and as Christ does love his church, and thus must the husband and the wife
love each other. Nature it felfe does teach us this, and they likewise that
are learned in divine letters do tell us ye same. Adam was first created like
Gene. ij iij.
unto the image and similitude of his maker. But when he perceived that it was
not convenient nor mete, yt he should live alone, a help like unto him self
was given him, and taken even out of his own side, insomuche that Adam is to
Eve, as the father is unto his son. And it was said to Eve, thou shalt be
under the power of man, and he shall rule thee. Nor it is not thus only in man,
but in all kinds and sorts of beasts, yt the female is under the power and
dominion of the male, and therefore the male is more stronger both in mind and
body, then the female. And the instruments to rule withal, are more
excellent and more perfect in manne, then in womanne, as the sharpenes of
wit, diligence, wisdom, strength, audacitie, generositie, and yt
excellency of the mind. And therefore yt Romans following nature, did never
take the whole authority of man from women. Liuius vsinge ye words of Cato,
does say thus. Our forefathers would not, that women should do any thing
without the auctoritye of man, submittinge them selves to their fathers, to
their brothers and to their husbands. Matrimonye is called a conjunction and a
comparison, but yet they are not like, as Martial does say merelye, except the
woman be unlike the man. O Sexte (says Martial) let the woman be under her
husband, and so they shall be like.

It is sufficient, yt the husband love his wife with a sightiye love, but the
wife is bound unto her husband in two thin ges, that is to love him, and to do
him reverence, the which Love and reverence
affections can not be constray ned, but yet they may be obned of her by
gentleness. But this thing can not be done with words, but as he says: Mark,
if thou will be loved, love. They which are learned do think, that this thing
does not happen by chance meddle, but by the secret artifice of the world. The
Philosopher Plato does say, that the whole world is so compacte and bound
together by God the artificer, as it were with certain knottes, for if thou
draw or take one of them, the other by a certain secret conjunction, as it
were the lynckes of a cheyne do follow, but yet he says, that those things,
which are like and most comfortable one to the other, are most specially
joined together, and that benevolence does grow of the similitude and likeness
of nature and custom, and that they which love, are loved again. And this
love must be pure and sin cere, or else it shall have no strength nor none
effect. Fire painted upon a wall does not burn, nor a false adamante draws no
iron. Many men do maruayl, why they are not loved, saying they do show so many
tokens and signs of love. The signs and tokens of love are not love, and
therefore they cause not the effect of love, but provoke and cause hatred,
when it is perceived, yt they loved not, but fained so many tokens and diverse
signs of love. Love also does grow of the opinion of honesty, for as Cicero
does say, there is nothing more amiable, nor yt draws the mind of man
more to love then virtue. All What love is.
love is a certain affection to yt thing, that is goodly and fair, there is
nothing more goodly then virtue, the which if a man might behold and see with
his bodily eyes, would stir up great love unto it self, but it is seen with
the inward eye of the mind, and draws those that beholds it to
benevolence, and to embrace and love it. The opinion of excellency, the which
is situate and set other in the power of the body, or of you soul, does bring
forth, and engender veneration, Ueneration.
and reverence. Strength, riches, friends, clientes, servants, ministers,
subjects favor, grace, and dignity, be long unto the body. In the soul
are judgment, wisdom, the sharpenes of wit, sagacitie, watch, fortitude,
and audacitie, whereby men do take upon them great acts and enterprises. Of
these things Maiestre
does majesty proceed and arise, by the which al things upon earth are ruled
and governed. And with this, kings and magistrates govern and defend great
nations and king domes, and through this, great multitudes and number of
people do obey unto the will of one alone: with this captains and Emperors do
conducte, whether soever they will great companies and hosts of men. Of this
the master has neade for his servant, the father for his son, and the
husband for his wife, to the end she may love and obey him that is wise, for
prudeneye and wisdom without honesty and goodness is formidable, and
goodness without wisdom is loved, but not obeyed. In this majesty does consist
the force and strength of justice both to re ward and to punish. It shall be
sufficient for an husband to have of these things so much as shall suffice to
rule his wife and his family withal. Other me^ have need of power, and also of
majesty to rule a city, in the which are so many houses and housholdes. The
foundation of al things is faith, ye which Faith.
is most certainly obtained and gotten by science. The next unto faith is, to
be had in good estimation. Marcus Cato Note
(as Salust does write) did labor rather to be good, then to appear good:
and therefore the less he sought for glo rye, the more he obtained it. Those
opinions are wont to be most surest and fast, yt which ^ayth
do occupye the young and tender mind, as we do see by those things, that
children do first learn and commend to memory. Nor wolle does never loose
his first color, nor that clothe the which (as it is commonly spoken) is
died in wolle. And therefore, we ought not only to labor and study to bring
in good affections, but we must so dispose and order the whole state of our
life, that it may be the more easy to be borne, and through conversation
wax more sweet and pleasant. Thou must also consider thine own wit and
qualities, and likewise thy wives, and thy riches and substance, and provide
that it may prosper, not only for the time and state present, but also for
the time that is to come. And thus considering the casualties of man, thou
must dispose the thing in such wise, that not great change or chance may
trouble the soft and delitate mind of the woman, notwithstanding i. pe. v.
that chances are infinite, and that no provision can be found to withstand
them, and that many of them must be referd unto God, the which takes care for
us al, and wuld that we should not care for the things that are to come, the
whi che pertayne to him only, nor no man can make provision against them. But
now to return to our purpose, when thou go a wowyng, thou must beware
and take heed (that thou whether the woman be promised the, or now brought
home unto the) give not thy self to those unmeet and voluptuous love and
lusts, by the which men are compelled to sai and to do many things which are
filthy and childish. And of this love the proverb does say, that it is
scarcely granted to God, to love and to be wise: love and wine are in thy
power or ever thou drink, but after yt thou haste dronken, you shalt be their
subject and servant. And of this she shall judge the to be vain, light,
unapt, and folishe. Nor thou can not keep thy majesty in such filthy love:
for Ouide does say, that majesty and love does not agree, nor remain nor tarry
not in one place. But ye poet does speak of this erthly and blind love, for
cordial and wise love does not diminishe majesty.

Nor a woman can not suffer nor take him for her master, that was some time
her servant. And the weaker a woman is in mind, the more she desires to be
in power, and if she had once domination and rule, she takes it as an injury,
if she rule not still. Nor there is no rule moore Note
violente or moore grievous, then theirs, that by all reason ought to be
subjects, as the rule of servants, artificers children and women. But as we
would that the man when he loves should remember his majesty, so we would
that when he rules he forget not his love, nor to temper it with majesty. And
when he does think him self to be the head and the soul, and the woman as it
were the flesh and the body. He ought in like manner to remember, that she is
his fellow and compa nion of his goods and labors, and that their children be
common between them, bone of bones, and flesh of the flesh of man. And thus
there shall be in wedlock a certain sweet and pleasant conversation, without
the which it is no marriage but a prysone, a hatred and a perpetual torment of
the mind. Let thy wife per ceyue and know that for the good opinion that thou
haste of her, yt do love her simply and faythfullye, and not for any
vtilite or pleasure. For who so does not perceive that he is beloved for his
own sake, will not lightly do the same to another, for the thing that is
loved, loves again. If money or nobility could perceive and understand that
they were beloved, they would if they had any feeling at all of love, requite
it with love: but when the soul is loved, inasmuche as it may love, it gives
love for love, and loves again. The Breaker of horses that does use to ride
and to pace them, does handle the rough and sturdy colte with all craft and
fearcenes that may be, but with it that is more tractable, he takes not so
great pain. A A sharp wife.
sharp wife must be pleased and mitigated with love, and ruled with May
ye: and the more gently thou do use and show thy self unto her that is meke
and honest, themore beninge and meke thou shalt find her. But she that is
noble and of a stout mind and stomach, the less thou do look to be
honored, the more she will honor thee. But yet the wise husband shall never
set him self so far in love, that he forgette that he is a man, the ruler
of the house, and of his wife, and that he is set as it were in a Station to
watch, and delygentlye to take heed, what is done in his house, and to see
who goes out and in.

A shepherd had need to be industrious and diligent, but he much more that has
the ordering and keeping of man, the which is so variable a beast, and so
intractable. If so be that the husband have obtained that his wife does truly
and heartely love him, there shall need another precepts nor laws, for love
shall teach her more things and more effectuously, the^ the precepts of all the Philosophers. And for (...).
as much as the law is made to moderate the affections wtal, they shall be better
refrayned by love, the most pusant of all other affections, then by any law,
how elegantly, or wisely, how imperiouslye or threatynglye so ever it be made.

There is made no law for him that loves, for to what intent should they make
any law, when that love even na turallye does move a man to love? There is no
law made for the father against yt child, but well for the child against the
father, for the father does continuallye love the child, but the child does
now and the^ leave of to love the father. If the wife love her husband, he is
to her a father, mothcr, bre thren, true riches, and all that she will desire.
Fortunate and O fortunate ho^^se.
happy is yt house, the which is knitte with that, wherewith the world, the
heavens, and the celestial spirits are united and bound together, yt is with
charity. And what thing is there in this life that may be compared with one
day of so blessed and so heavenly a life? Galenus was married with Sulpitia,
the which among Sulpitia.
all the Matrones of Rome, was most chaste and best learned: of the which
marriage Mar tial does write in this wise and manner. O Galene how pleasannt
were those. xv. years, that the Lord did give thee with Sulpitia thy wife? O
note it, and now note it well with a white stone, in the which all thy age and
years are comprised: And if Parca had given thee such another day, thou
wouldeste have counted thy self much more happy, then to have lived as
long, as Pilius Nestor. And finally there should be such co^corde between man
and wife, as god has made between heaven and earth, by the which so great a
variety and multitude of beasts and trees is produced and inge^dred. And
therefore it must be wayd and considered, whether ye woman do love simply and
faithfully, for as fire does kindle fire, so does love provoke love, and one
flame augmenteth another. This thing says Seneca, has in it self great joy
and reward: for what can be so joyful or pleasant, as to be so loving un to
thy wife, yt thereby you may love thy self ye better? If there be any thing
among these thin ges of fortune, that the trusts unto, or loves so well,
that she despyseth and little regards her husband, because she has it not,
or prefer reth her self above him, because she has it, that thing must be
laid apart and contemned, as a thing rather accepted and esteemed by the foolish
opinion of man, then of it one proper and natural goodness. Beauty is a
frail gift and a slipperous, and more profitable Beautye
to those that behold it, the^ to those that have it: nor he can take no great
pleasure in it, but a little as it were in a glass, and yet incontinent he does
forgette yt he beheld and saw, and it is to them both a provocation to evil.
He that is fair waxes proud, and he yt does behold it, becomes subject
unto filthy love. In the mind (the which is judged to be the man) do
consiste the true liniame^tes of fayrenes, the which entice and provoke
celestial love, being mixed with nothing yt is shame full other to be done or
spoken, and therefore there is no man so far without wit, yt rather would
not have her which is foul and honest, then her which is fair and dishonest.
Thou may sone declare, that thou do not greatly esteem riches, if thou be
content with that thou have having wherewith al to get thy living, and be ing
content to support poverty with a little, for why? the end of riches, is to
satisfy na ture, the which is content with Riches.
a little. I would not yt thou shul dest commend her yt is eloque^t Eloquice
and full of words, when that ta citurnitie and scilence is more sitting and
comlye for her: nor a woman can not be to soft of speech. And as touching her
Kindred.
kindred, whatsoever it be, yet yt husband ought evermore to be esteemed more
noble then yt wife. Nor she must not consider what his father was, but what her
husband is, of whom both she and her child take their nobility and
ignobilitie, for no man should trust, or have any confidence in any other man's
virtue. For we al are of yt self same elemenres, and god is father unto us al:
and therefore it should be a very wicked thing, that christen men which have laid
away old Adam, and are baptized with the blood of Christ, and by his death
made new creatures, should regard their bodily and fleshly kindred: for they
should now live in spirit, named christians, and resto red by Christ to their
native nobility, from the which al hu main generation was fallen through
sin. In this nobility, the which is ours only, the Greeks do not glory of
their wits, nor the Jew of the earthly promise of Canaan, nor of their
circumcision, nor the Romans of their triumphs and conqueste of all the
world, but the christian, which is the spiritual and the celesti al manne only.
And therefore if it be a filthye and an inconueniente thing for manne to seek
glory of his kindred, how much more filthy and inconueniente is it for the
woman, the which glory now a days is not gotten by virtue, How no bilitie and
glory is gotten.
but by the heapinge up of riches, or else in war by mur der, theft, and
cruelnes, as the Gotes thoro wout al Spain, the which things in manne are
abominable, and so much the less convenient for women unto whom even of
nature war and armor are denied. Many things might copiously be spoken of
beauty, riches, eloquence, and of kindred, the which I have breuelye comprised,
because I would not be onerous in things yt may be easily found unto the
reader Use thy self so unto thy wives friends and parents, that they may
have as much com moditie and honor by thee, as thou may have by them. There
are that will say, that thou art not able to sustain and uphold thy family
and household without their help and succor, use thou the com forte and help
of no such, although thou have need of them, for it is better (after the
mind and the counsel of the wise man) at home to Prou. xvij.
eat brown bread with salt meat, then to be fed most delicately and dayntely
with brawling and bitter words. Nor they (if they be wise men) shall not show thy
wife, that they so little regard and esteem the, least that they breed some
discention and discord betwixt thee and their kinsmen. And in all thy troubles
and discentions with thy wife, they ought (as it is meet they should) to
suppoort and favor thee, for if they do not, they shall show the^ selves
unwise, and that thou haste no need of no such friends. Therefore seek help
and comfort of other in thy affairs and busynesses. And finallye suffer thou
rather all incommoditie, then that thou should use any such evil benefit
or hurtful pleasure of thine affines and kynsmen.

Of the discipline and instruction of women.
THe laws after my mind ought to be such, yt the citezins may be well manerd
and have wholesome doctrine. For if yt city be well instituted and governed, it
shall be no labor nor pain at al to co^mau^d the^ nor to forbid them, nor it
shall not greatly need to fear the^ with pains, nor with rewards to prouokethe^
to live well: our flesh being infected and corrupted with sin, and continually
and inseperably united unto the mind, does first of al and principally offer
unto it self ye perverse and evil opions of al things, and then as much as it
may does fasten such things unto it as be hurtefull as well to the one sect as
to the other. And to extirpate and weed out such sinister opinions and
judgment, we have need of displine the which with the knowledge of good
letters may easelye be obtained and gotten. But it is now in question, whether
it be expedient Whether it be necessary that a woman be ^erned.
for a woman to be learned or no. Some there be that do plainly deny it. But
of this matter I have even with few words sufficientlye enough disputed in
my first book of a christen woman. And therefore I will only say here that
shall be sufficient to confute that opinion the which I do not allow, and
reprove those that of one sort of letters give judgment by another.

And in declaryng of that doctrine wherewith I would that the woman should be
instructed and taught, I think there be but few yt will repine against my mnid
and sayings. There be some kind of letters and writings yt pertayue only to
adourne and increase eloquence withal. Some to delight and please. Some that
make a man subtle and craftye. Some to know natural things, and to instruct
and inform the mind of man withal. The works of Poets, the Fables of
Milesij, as that of the golden ass, and in a manner all Lucianes works, and
many other which are written in the vulgar tongue, as of Trystram, Launcelote,
Ogier, Amasus and of Artur the which were written and made by such as were
idle and knew nothing. These books do hurt both man and woman, for they make
them wylye and craftye, they kyndle and styr up covetousness, inflame anger, and
all beastly and filthy desire. So much knowledge of natural things as
suffiseth to rule and govern this life withal, is sufficient for a woman. But
all such works as are meet and apt to make them better, are necessary as
well for the one as for the other. A man of him self is another good nor evil,
but yet through the first fault he is more inclined and prone to evil and
comes unto it by examples of many, the which have conspired together to sin
and to do mischief, for a man can turn his eye to no place, but he shall see
the evil that he may ensue and follow.

First he is provoked by their exhortations that seem to counsel him well, as
Poets, for such things as they indite and make, are received and song
without respect of things. And scolemaysters the which do teach and
instruct youth, are not far from the opinion of the common people, for with
them they praise nobilite, riches, honor, veniaunce, and to these things they
exhort and instruct youth. Fathers and other parents Is it not so?
esteem the name of virtue as vain, and accustom their children to those
things that flatter and delight the sen ses, and not to rigorous and hard
honest, as me^ that look to crepe no higher, but to live with the vulgar and
rude sort, and yet would be an ex ample of living to al other. There are in
like manner parents which are grave men and well learned, and yet abhor that
virtue should associate and accompanye their children, the which persuade them
to follow pleasure, love and solace, in as much that Quinciliane seeing that
honesty and virtue is so convenient and meet for our nature, does marvel,
that there are so few good men, but he should rather have merueyled, that there
are any good at al, considering their institution and bringing up to be so
evil. But if by natural inclination, and by the comfort and aucthoritye of
great and learned men we be enforced to evil, nor drawn from it by some good
doctrine, what hope is there of any goodness? all shall come to mischief, and
through the custom of sin, we shall hate all honesty, and learn to contemn
the goodness of the mind, and to hate virtue. We should stir up the figure
and strength of reason, and receive the love of virtue, and give the precepts
of wisdom against the corruption of false opinions, and by assue faction and
use resist our natural proves, and inclination to vice, continuallye to the
utmost of our power, striuynge with the same. The woman is even as man is, a
reasonable creature, and has a flexible wit both to good and evil, the
which with use and counsel may be altered and turned. And although there be
some evil and lewd womenne, yet that does no more prove the malice of their
nature, then of me^, and therefore the more ridiculous and foolish are they,
that have inuied against you whole sect for a few evil: and have not with like
fury vituperated al mankind, because yt part of the^ be thieves, and part
inchau^ters. And what a madness were it to judge, or to think yt the ignorance
of good things should cause a man to be ye better? although yt in the mind of
manwere not great and thick darckenes, letting him to behold and see that good
is. for yt evil is, does abound and is plentiful, and neadeth no teacher, nor
does not continue as it entered, but gro weth by little and little, and so
buddeth forth, yt it offends al other. If to read that good is help not, it
shall not help to hear it or to see it: for men do not strive for the form
and fi gures of the letters, but for the sense and understanding in them
included. Shall thy wife or thy daughter learn, how to come her here, adourne
and paynt her self, perfume her gloves, to go pomposely, and with what words
she shall use to set forth her wantonness, and her pride withal, and shall not
hear now she may flee and contemn such trifles, adourne her mind, and
please Christ? Art thou, o thou Christian of that mind? then thou do affirm,
that no fond nor foolish gentile would at any time have believed. Shall the
womanne then be excluded from the knowledge of all that is good and the more
ignoraunte she is, be counted better? Some there be so rude and dull, the
which esteem those to be best that are most ignoraunte. I would counsel all
such rather to beget asses then men, or to give their diligence and labor to
extinguishe the figure and force that God has given them to know good and
worthy things withal, and to make them liker beasts, then men, for so
they shall be even such as they would have them. If erudition and learning be
noyfull unto honesty and goodness. and hurtful to be brought up among those,
that be learned, then it shall be better and most conuenience to nourishe and to
bring them up in the conntrey then in the city, and much better in a foreste,
then in a village among men. But experience does declare the contrary and that
children should be brought up among those that be best learned, and have best
experience. But to return and to speak of women Learned women are better then
unlearned.
as I began, I by experience have seen and known the contrary, and that all
lewd and evil women are unlearned, and that they which be learned are most
desirous of honesty, nor I can not remember, that ever I saw any womanne of
learning, or of knowledge dishonest. Shall not the subtle and crafty lover
sooner persuade yt pleases him the ignorante, then to her yt is fortified with
wit and learning? And this is the only cause, why al women for the most part
are hard to please, studious and most diligent to adourne and deck the^
selves, marueyling at trifles, in prosperity proud and insolent, in
adversity abie ct and feeble, and for lack of good learning, they love and
hate that on ly, the which they learned of their unlearned mothers, and
examples of the evil, leaning to that part only, that the po^derous and heavy
body is in clined and given unto. Nor men should not be far different from
beasts, if they were left unto their own nature corrupted with the spotte of
sin. What beast would be How greatly learning does help man.
more cruel, or so far from the nature and condition of man, as manne him
self, if he were not learned. Socrates, that is (as says Valerius) un
earthly oracle of humayne wisdom, in Symposio of Zenophon does say, ye may by
ma ny other things and by this al so yt ye see this maid do, understand,
that the woman's wit is no less apt to al thin ges, then the man's is: she
wa^teth but counsel and strength, therefore I exhort you husbands to teach
your wives those things that ye would they should do. And Seneca does say,
It makes no matter how rich, or how honora ble the women be, for she is a
very impudent creature, and without erudition unchaste. And to his mother
Albina. ^old to god, yt my father being a very good man, leaving the customs
of his elders had instructed and taught thee the precepts of wisdom, for then
thou should not now have neded to prepare any help against fortune, but
he regardinge those that misused their learning, would not suffer thee to give
thy self to learning. But we have no need of any authorities, for as much as
we may hear the voice of nature, against the which (although that all the
Philosophers would conjure in one) they should as soon obtenebrate and
darcken the sun, as to prevail against it. Also we have annexed unto nature
a celestial testimonye. The Lord does admit women to the misterye of his
religigion in respect of which al other wisdom is but folishnes, and he does
declare that they were created to know high matters, and to come as well as men
unto the beatitude, and therefore they ought and should be instructed and taught
as we men be. And that they are no better, it is our falt, inasmuch It is the
ma^s part to teach the woman.
as we do not our duetyes to teach them. If the husband be ye woman's head,
the mind, the father, and Christ, he ought to execute the office to such a man
belongyng, and to teach the woman: for Christ is not only a savior and a
restorour of his church, but also a Master. The father ought to nouryshe and
to teach his children. And what need is it to reason of the mind and of the
head? In the mind is wit, coun sell, and reason. In the head are all the
senses wherwyth we do guide and rule this life, and therefore he does not his
duetye, that does not instruct and teach his wife. And the self same
Socrates does say, that men should be ruled by Pnblyke and commune laws,
and womenne by their own hnsbandes. And Paul i. Cor. xiiij.
forbyddynge womenne to speak in the Congregation and commaundynge that they,
if they doubted of any thing, should ask their husbands at hooine, does
bind them to teach their wives. To what effect The husband must teach the
wife.
or purpose should she ask her husband, that he another will nor can teach
her?

O how great wars has there been made for women? We take great pain and
labor to see, yt they lack nothing, and that our daughters may have a
convenient dowrye, and yet we flee and avoid the easy works, by the which
they may be the better, for if they were so, their flagitiousnes should not
cause us to war, nor they being content with a little, should need
nothing, but alure many to love them with ye beautifulness of their virtue. A
woman after my judgment ought to know her self, of what beginning What
things women should learn.
she was made of, and to what end, what the order and use of things be, and
specially what Christ's religion is, without the which nothing can be well
done nor iustlye. But yet it must be religion and no superstition, to the end
she may know what difference there is between them. Religion does make them
very simple and good, and superstition very hypocrytes and molestious. And
thus shall she perceive and understand in what things true religion does
consiste, and how they should honor God and love their neighbor, and
thereby know how she ought to love and honor her husband, whom she should
take as a divine and a holy thing, and obey his will as the law of God. Her
house shall be unto her as a common wealth, and she must learn what her
duetye and office is at home, and what is her husbands. There are two
principal virtues of a woman, the religion of nature, and chastity, although
that religion do comprehend all virtues. But we will seperatlye and exactlye
give precepts of chastity, for it must be the chastity of the wise virgyns,
and not of the folyshe. She must know that shamfastnes is coupled with
chastity, and take heed to her good name and fame, that in all places she may
be unto ye lord a good savor to yt example and quietness of her husband, and
how pro^pt and ready the common sort of people be to judge evil, and with what
diligence they do nourish and teach their children, She must learn also to
contemn worldly chances, that is, she must be somewhat manly and strong,
moderatly to bear and suffer both good and evil, lest yt she being unmeet to
suffer aduersite, be constrained other to do, or to think wickedly. If she ca^
not read these things nor yet by Nature learn them (for there be also such
men) her husband must so familierlye and playnelye teach her, that she may
remember them, and use them when need shall require.

Let her hear those that do read, and speak of such thin ges, if she can
read, let her have no books of Poetrye, nor such tryfelynge books as we
have spoken of before, for nature is enough inclined to noughtines, although
we put not fire to towe. And Seneca does say, that the time is short,
although it be all spente in well doing. Such virtuous and holy books as What
bo kes women should read.
may learn her to be wise, and inflame her to live vertuouslye must be
delivered unto her, wherein yet, a certain judgment and prudencye must be
used, that is, that they deliver her no vain, no chyldyshe, no barbarous, Note.
nor no superstitious books. Likewise she shall not be med linge with those
curious and deep questions of divinity, yt which thing besemeth not a woman.
And as concerning moral Philosophy, those religious and virtuous books do
suffice, for virtue does teach us all good fashions and manners. But yet if we
will or in tend privately to teach the^ any customs, let the^ be such as
shall stir and provoke them to live well and vertuouslye, and such as be far
from al conten tion and altercation, where unto womenne are but to much of the^
selves inclined. Let her read many things to subdue and bring under the
affections and to appeace and pacify the te^ pestes and vnquietnesses of the
mind. A woman has very great need of this moral part of philosophi, in yt
which these auctours are excellent. Plato Cicero, Seneca, and Plutarche. And in
this thing those writers do help, that declare the notable examples of
virtue, worthy to be ensued and followed, as Valerius Maximus, Sabellicus, and
in like manner the lau dable works of the holy and virtuous men of our re
ligion, and likewise of those, that have followed the worldly wis dome.
Aristotle and Zenophon do write, how men should rule and govern their house and
fa mily, and of the educatio^ and bringing up of children Plutarche, and lately
Paulus Vergerius, and Francis Philelphe. There are annexed unto these things
certain precepts and rules of a quotidiane and a daily life, and of simple
medicines for ye light in^irmities of young children, yt which have no need to
hire any physicians. I do remember, yt I have already in other places written
of these things, and yet it shall not be without a cause here to write somewhat
of the^ again, for it perteyneth to the husband to see, yt these things be
done. And I do think, yt with this the woman be sufficiently enough
instructed to live co^modiously and religiouslye. But if she delight to read
verses, prepare her these thriste^ poets, Prudentius, Aratus, Sedulius and
Iuuencus other in What (...) tes (...) should read
Latin, or else in their vulgar native language. And as for the knowledge of
grammar, logike, histories, the rule and governance of the commonwealth, and
the art mathematical, they shalleaue it unto me^. Eloquence is not convenient
nor fit for women, although the Cornelians of the Graccis, the Mutians, ye
Lelians, and the Hortentians be much commended, nor yt because they spoke many
things eloque^tlye, but because they spoke a few things purelye and
incorruptlye, nor they never learned that art, but received it by yt familiar
custom of their fathers without any pain or labor. But now a days they
call her eloquente, that with long and vain confabulation can intertayne one,
and what should a man think that she being unlearned, should talk with a
young man little wiser then her self, but that, that is either folish or
filthy? And this they call the gentill intertaynement of the court, Courtlye
doctrine.
that is to say, of yt scole, where they learn other like arts of their
master the devil. See no we where unto ye manners and customs of men be come,
and how all things do turn, for now it is esteemed as vile, that a woman
should hold her peace: that is, that her most fairest virtue should Scilence is
convenient and mete for women.
seem to be deforme and filthy. How great labor shall we conjecture, that
Satan took to persuade man to believe this? But thoushalt number scilence
among other thy wives virtues, yt which is a great ornament of yt hole
feminine sex. And when she sp eaketh, let her co^municatio^ be simple, not
affectate nor ornate, for yt declares the vanity of yt mind. And al such as
were praised of our elders for their eloquence, were most extolled and lauded,
forasmuch as they kept the language of their forefathers sincere and clean, as
Cicero declares in his book of an Orator. And Iuuenal even crabbedly and not
without a cause does say, Let not thy wife be overmuch eloquent, nor full
of her short and quycke arguments, nor have the knowledge of al histories,
nor understand many things, which are written, she pleases not me that
gives her self to poetry, and observing the art and manner of the old
eloquence, does study to speak facundiously. This holy and sincere
institution shall increase thorough The husbands ex ample.
the good example of ye husband, the which to inform and fashion the woman's
life, and his family withal, is of no less valor and force, then the example
of a prince to inform the public manners and customs of a city, for every
manne is a king in his own house, and therefore as it besemeth a king to
excel the common people in judgment, and in example of life, and in the
execution and Note.
performaunce of the thing, that he commands, so he that does marrye, must
east of all childishnes, and remember the saying of the Poet, This age
requires another manner of life, and other manners, and so to take unto him
self the counsel and mind of him yt is aged to maintain the duty and office
of an husband, declarynge a good life not in words and precepts only, but
also in life and deed. The which two things to rule man withal Two necessary
things,
are very necessary, that is wisdom and example, and that thou thy self
fulfill the thing that thou cammaundest to be done. The life whether it he
good or evil, does not only (as Fabius says) persuade, but also
constrain and enforce. We do see how mighty that this exhortation is in
war and in battle. O my soldiers do that ye shall see me do, the which
contempt of death in the captain does so creep through the whole hooste,
that there is not one, be he never so seeble and weak hearted, that does
esteem his life for the which he perceyueth that his captain cares so little
for. Thus did Christ with his Apostles and Martyrs draw the world unto ye
faith, for as they lived so they spoke, and as they spoke, so they lived. Now
shall thy wife obey thee, commaundynge her to be sober and temperate, if she
see thee distempered? and likewise of continence and chastity, if thou be an
aduou terer, and a follower of other men's wives. For Claudian does say, if thou
command any thing to be done, look thou be the first that shall do it, and
so shall other obey thy law and commandment, nor shall not ^eny to do the
thing that they se him do that commanded it. Furthermore he must rehearse
unto his wife the good examples of other women, for that shall seem and apeare
more easy to be done, that has been done already. And if the mind be
courageous and noble it can not be well expreste, no nor scantlye believed, how
it shall be provoked and styrred up with the laud and praise of other.
Themistocles Themistocles.
was wont to say that Mylciades tryumphes did excite and quycken him. Nor
thou shall not only rehearse unto her old and aunciente names, as Sara,
Rebecca, The names of ^^ble women
Penelope, Androinacha, Lu cretia, Colebolina Hipparchia, Portia, Sulpitia,
Cornelia, and of our saints, as Agnes, Catherine, Margaret, Barbara, Monica
and Apolonia, but also those that more fresher, as Catherin queen of england,
Clara, Ceruerta, the wife of Uallearus, and Blanca Maroa, albet I do fear to
be reproved, that I do thus commend my mother, geuynge my self to much to
love and pity, the which truly does take much place in me, but yet the
truth much more. There can not lack in every nation and city ho nest and
deuonte Matrones, by whose examples they may Familier examples
be styrred and provoked, but yet the familier examples, as of the mother, the
^eldame, the aunt, the sister, the cosyn, or of some other kinswoman or friend,
should be of more force and value. For why? such examples as we do fee, do
much moore move us, and better we follow them then any other. And in like
manner the acts and deeds of evil and wicked women, do teach us what we
should flee and avoid, being certain that such things can not be hydden,
and that the reward there of is at hand, at least wise the publyke ignominy
and shame of all the city, that better it were to dye, then to live so.
Familier communication does both Familier communication.
instruct them, and also confirm their manners: but yet let it be simple, as
with her that is thy most friend, and most familier, not using her in thy
words more reave rentlye then is conueniente, nor sufferynge her to honor thee
more then it beseems, the which as at some times they do increace
reverence, so they do diminish love and cha ritie, yt which in matrimonye
should be most true and seruent. And as concerning venerati ^eneration
on and reverence, they cause the mind rather to dissemble, the^ to be simple
and open as it ought to be. No man gives faithful honor or reverence to him
that is arrogant and vain, or that of right does look to have it: for honor
may well be drawn, but not extor ted. Call thy wise by a name that pretends a
love. and that Phil. (...). as some do expound it.
may styr her to love thee, as daughter, or sister as Paul did call his. And
she shall call thee by some name of honor i. pe. iij.
as Sara called Abraham lord. Ye must often times common together of virtue,
of manners, of yt error of the common people, of the use of things, of the
conversation and governing of the house and household, of the arts and
occupations yt ye must get your living with all, of the holy institution and
education of your children, if ye have any, and how you maiste bring the^, I
say not to riches and worship, but to honesty and virtue, we must remember that
women are so feeble and weak of nature, yt they another in mind nor yet with the
body ca^ sustain nor bear yt is heavy and grenous. And therefore we should often
times use merry co^munica tion without curiosity or offense of any man, to
lyghten our hearts with al, of such thin ges as have chanced to our friends or
neighbors, taking good he de that we curiouslye Avoid curiosite.
search not out other men's acts and deeds, for so shall other men likewise
search and inquire of ours, a thing much contrary to conserve amity, or to
live well and quietlye withal. The mind of man does rejoice and desire to
know all things, for knowledge is a food most swetest, and women in as much
as they are kept close within the house, do rejoice and covet to hear such
things as are done abroad, so that they be no such as may corrupt good
manners, for being thus used, they will covet the less to wander and raunge
abroad. Some times they must be merry and talk, but not filthye, nor yet very
often of light matters, for that does so weaken their minds, that afterward
they can not bear ne suffer the things which are serious, and of great
importance, for that continual talk of such light and trifling things does
make them light and feeble minded. The seruitute and bondage of Egypt that was
under Pharao, was in straw and mire, and to slay the male Exo. (...)
children, and to keep the females. The misterye of this bondage may be aptlye
declared by the words of Eusebius, the which in his sermon of The bondage of
Egypt.
Easter, does say thus. What other thing does that hard and tirannicall
seruitute of Egypt signify, then that the devil doch practice the dominion of
sin upon mankind? And what other thing meant those horrible and vile
commandments in mire and straw, but the abominable and detestable
contagiousnes of deuelish vice and sin? for the unfruitful and void works
of this life, are straw, a very mete and a convenient thing for fire. And the
commandment of Pharao, yt the male children of the Hebrews should be slain
and the females reserved, kept, and nourished, does open the nature of Satan
yt very enemy of the sprite, the friend of yt flesh, and the hater of al
virtue: the which consenting to vice and voluptuousnes, choked up fortitude,
and nourished concupiscence, thus says Eusebius the bishop of Emyse, Thou
Unclean i^portes and plays.
shall not only abstain from unclean sportes, but also from plays, and
filthye touchinges, lest thou show thy self rather to be a lover then a
husband. Zistus does say, that the feruente lover of his own wife, is an
aduouterer. For a wife is (as yt prince of Rome said) a name of dignity, and
not of pleasure. Be not thou yt desireste to have a chaste wife (for what is he
that coueteth not that, although he be foolish) yt first that shall inflame
her to letchery, and to think evil. What a madness were it to de fyle and
corrupt that thing, the which if thou should not enjoy it pure and whole,
should be unto thee a thing most molestious and grievous? Never kindle thou
that fire, the which thou canste not quench again. We are made al of towe,
and to what part soever yt fire aprocheth we burn and letcherye is thorowout
all the body dispersed. The wise physicians do astonishe al such members, as
can not be healed. First let us study to be whole and seco^darely to feel no
pain. We do see, yt wise men continu allye do study, yt no occasions be given
to evil thoughts. There were in times past cer Religions of chastisye.
tayne religions of chastity, yt which avoided with all diligence as well
words, as al o there things yt might solicit them to letchery, nor ye only
in holy religion, but also among those monks, ye which inhabited one of the
Ciclades, and kept in another of the^ such beasts, as were necessary for
their sustinaunce and living, because they would not see them engender carnally
together. At Rome in the sacrifices of the good gods, it was not lawful to
behold or look upon a painted man. And in Lacedemon, and the ylande of Delo,
it was a thing most detestable, yt any dog should enter into the temple,
inasmuch as it is a very luxurious beast, and therefore the priest of Delo
was inhibited once to name or to speak of a dog. Augustus did forbid women
to be present at the plays of those, yt played and were naked. And for the
time of yt olimpical strives and pastimes the women departed from Pisa. If we
be corrupted by ye ears, as Minander does say, no marvel if we be corrupted
by the eyes, by the which, corruption semblableme^t does descend unto the
soul. Stu die as much as shall lie in thee, that thy house be clean from all
filthiness. Chastity is kept with shamefastnes, nor ye one can not be without
the other, for shamfastnes is it ye keeps the woman, insomuch that I
Shamefastnes.
would wish, yt the young womanne after she be defloured, should be kept close
for a certain days, as we read of Eli zabeth Zacharias wife, inasmuch Luc. i.
as she being stricken in age, had co^panted with her husband. They yt did so
institute and ordeyn matrimony, yt they, Thecause of betrotheme^tes
which were handfasted should not inco^tmently lie together had a regard unto
shamefastnes, to the intent she should not be familiar, nor so spedely intermedle
with him, whom perthau^ce she never saw before, you which thing ca^ not be done
with out yt great loss of sha^fastnes and chastity, in ye which does co^siste a
great part of all good manners, and public quietness a mo^g al nations. Some
there be betrothed yt ca^ not tarry ne abstayn, ye which do both hurt them
selves and eke their spouses. Jacob was many years in the self same pastures
with Rachel whom he loved, yt which Genesis xxix.
was also promised him, and called his wife: and yet he vced her most holely.
Such a man having two wives is esteemed far above the chasti tie of many, as
S. Augustine does affirm of Abraham Jacobs grandfather, and he loved Rachel
even unto death: and held her for his wife with all honestye. If thy wife
other by nature or by custom be shamefast, increace thou the same by use and
doctrine, if she be lascivious and wanton, refrain it so with severe
disciplyne and correction, that thou forgette not to live merely and swetelye
with her, and in chastitye, purity and cleanness. Paul does command, Hc.
xiij
that matrimonye should be honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled.
And to the Thessalonians he says. i. th. iiij.
Let every man use his own vessel in sanctification and holiness. The which
sen tence whether we understand it of our own bodies, or of our wives, it
pertayneth to refrain the immoderate pleasure and voluptuousnes of the body.
Matrimonye is a sacrament and (as Paul Ephe. v
says) a misterye of great things, and therefore it ought not to be defiled
nor spotted. The Devil killed seven of Saras husbands, the which moved with
her beautye, began their marriage with carnal lust and pleasure: but Toby was
preserved, the which being advised and counseyled by the angel, began his
marriage with prayer. It shall be meet and convenient to rehearse the words of
the angel saying: I will show thee upon whom that Satan has power and
dominion. They that cast god Tob. vi
from them, and marry to content and satisfy bodily lust, as does the horse
and mule, which have no vuderstanding, may soon be overthrown by the devil:
but after you have married thy wife, go thy way into thy chamber, and
abstaynyng three days from her, give thy self to prayer with her, and in the
first night thou shall burn the liver of the fyshe, and the devil shall be
dreuen away. The second night thou shalt be admitted unto the company of
saynctes. The third night shall you obtain the blessyng of God, so that whole
children shall be borne of you. And after the third night be past, take thy wife
unto thee in yt fear of god, and moore for the desire of children, then
bodily lust, that in the seed of Abraham thou may obtain the blessyng in
children, This did Raphel say unto Toby.

Therefore if thou have married a wife to have children, give thy mind to that
only, and not to luxuriousness, following the steps of those old and holy
fathers, the which did marrye for that thing only: and there fore when they
were great with child, they used them ^eastes are less Auxnrious then men.
no more. And in this thing beasts do excel men, the which at certain
times ap poynted do give them selves to carnal copulation, and afterward
do abstain.

But if thou after the counsel of the Apostle do use matrimonye (...). co. vij
as a remedy against fornication, thou should not stir up infirinitie and
sickness, to the intent thou might use Physic, the which does greatly
hurt and displease men, except it be taken when necessi^ie requires.

And who would receive or take a medicine for any delight or pleasure? We
should custom the body from Physic, except that necessity constrayne it,
or that the malitiousnes thereof, if we lacked it, should overcome us. And
(...).
Plutarche does say, that the rare use of bodily pleasure does commend it,
and make it more pleasant and delectable. And sooner thou shall be helped and
healed with one medicine, then with a thousand. And if you accustom thy self
to do justice, thou must leave of and refuse some things that are granted by
the law. And learn thou to abstain from other men's goods, by abstaynyng
from thine own. Thou must learn also what the apostle says. Thou haste no
power (says he) upon thine own body, but thy wife, and likewise the woman is
under the power and yocke of her husband, so that another of them is at his
liberty without the assent of the other. She does greatly offend thee, if
she communicate her body to any other, and thou in like manner do offend
her: and ye both do offend god, as suertie to you both for each other. I do
not search and inquire what is lawful by man's law, nor what men have
usurped, but certes god will punish that ^iurye who soever does it, whose
divinity and godhead in yt matrimonye is violated, with who^ there is no
difference Romans (...).
ofsexe nor kindred, of natiou or of person. The solaces and pleasures of those
which are mar ryed, must be rare and sober, remembering that they are men,
Married men's sola ces and plea sures.
and naturally strong of mind to seek out laud and renown by labor, and yt
they have past that age, unto the which it se meth yt some solace and pleasure
might have been granted and per mitted. Likewise he must remember yt he is set
to rule and govern yt familye, yt is, to give good precepts, and to live
accordingly, for else he should tres pase through a very evil example, and so
doing should not keep yt may ye that is needful and necessary for a
gouerner. And finally he ought to remember that he is a chri sten manne, and
that he has forsaken the world, and the pleasures of the same, and therefore
in matrymony must be moderate pleasure and pastymes, as though they went about
to seek a refreshynge only of their cares and labors, and not a mayntaynynge
and a continuu^nce of their cupidities and bodily pleasures. And the women in
semblable manner must be at these pastymes, that as she is partaker of the
travel and pain, she may likewise rejoice in their recreations, that being
therewith refreshed, she may be the more able to sustain and bear the burden.
Of what will and mind shall we think that woman to be, that sees her self a
companyon and fellow in heavy and grievous things, and in all solaces and
pleasures an outcast and abiected. This thing would displease a man, and much
more a tender and an impotent woman: and specially when they see and perceive
that they are excluded from those delectations, sportes and pleasures, yt which
of nature should be common betwixt the wise and yt husband. What should I
say of those husban des. the which with unlawful pleasures provoke their
wives, and cause them in a manner to be mad: Of the which Isocrates in
Simachio does say thus. Nicocles the king of Salamina does speak. I have
condemned besides and above al these things, the flagitiousnes of those that
have marri ed wives to live a common life with them, and not being with them
contented, have thorough their own carnal pleasures iniuried the^, but if they
by them should suffer, yea were it never so little, any like thing they would
bitterly disdain thereat: and being to all other good and gentle, would show
them selves to their wives most sharp and ungentle, to whom they should use
them selves most peacesably and be ningly, in as much as they are most familier
among the secrets of their life, and partakers of ye best of their goods and
substance, and thus the ignorant do norishe sedicion, and behind them do
leave discention, Thus says Isocrates: but if they give good counsel that
exhort the^ to be humble, which are by fortune exalted, to yt end they should be
less envied, how much better should it be for yt husband, to give his wife no
cause nor occasion to be ge lous, whereof arises great evil and mischife, for
why ye mind being traueyled and grieved with such a passion does not fear to
destroy it self, so it may bring to an end yt it desires. Some do believe yt
they do but gest and play, but such play for ye most part and most commonly
do eth turn unto madness.

And therefore we should take the better heed to observe the auisementes and
precepts of holy scripture above any other rule or precepte of philosophye,
and consider the saying of the holy Apostle.

Begyle not your wives, except i. co vij
it be by a common consent to give your selves to fa styng or prayer, and that
done, come spedely together again, least that Satan through your
incontinencie do tempt you. A christian ought even very often to erect him
self in spirit, and believe that he should not pass over and consume his days
in carnal and fleshely thoughts, for if he live not in spirit, as a christian
should do, he another satisfies his name, nor yet his proffession, nor they
shall not obtain that promised felicity, but with a spiritual and a ghostlye
life, wherewith they must be united and coupled unto god, and to that most
purest spirit, unto the which no man can approach nor come, but by the purity
and clennes of spi rite, the which is so much the more made perfect, how
much it does study to separate and divide it self from the contagiousnes and
infection of the fleashe. As long as by the commandment of the celestial
god, we are included in this mortal body, we must provide that the spirit
may live, and yt the body may labor and serve yt spirit, as we do perceive
and see in a horse, for if he be scarcelye fed, he cannot bear the burden, and
if he be de licatly fed, he will be stuburne, But as oil must at certain times
be powered into yt la^pe that it may burn, so are the times, in the which we
do infu^de and power oil both into yt body and soul, These two have their
time to be restored, although at no time, for our time being, we should fuffer
the^ to perish, taking good heed that by the restoring of yt one, the other
be not extinguished, nor that by seruyng of yt one, the other wax slack and
feeble. Therefore, when with fasting and prayer we do water the spirit with oil,
Paul will (...). co. vij
leth us to refrain from those works yt resist, and as it were, do water the
oil, yt does bathe the spirit. Fasting does Fasting.
keep under the body, and subdueth it, that it let not the spi rite, of this
the flamynge and burning spirit does eleuate and lift up it self in prayer,
the Prayer.
which is a meditacion of high things, not of one hour, but of many days,
for to accustom yt mind to those works, yt which after it be dissolved and
loused from yt body, it must perform and do. The lord when we Mat. vi
pray wills us to speak few Luce. xviij.
words, and to be long in medita tion, and therefore he admonishes us to pray
continualy. And Paul's mind is, that we being given to this meditation, i. co.
vij
should abstain from carnal copulatio^, lest yt the ponde rous flesh draw us
from it, inasmuch Carnal copulatio^
as that carnal copula tion of it self is a beastly thing twinynge the mind
from his high contemplation. And ye wise man, when it was asked him when that
a man should (...)
use that carnal and fleshly act, answered, that when he would be equal with a
beast. All the life of a christian man should be a continual fast, and no day
should escape with out prayer, and somtymes of the year christian men Note.
ought to live chaste and abstain from their wives, and give the^ selves to
abstinence and prayer, and for that time they must not only abstain from
their embracementes, and from lyinge one with the other, but also from such
pleasures and delites, as may provoke the body, and obscure the light of the
mind and soul. And then they must be think the^, what they are, what life is,
what yt use of things is, whither they shall, how they were taken and bought of
sin, how they were redeemed by Christ, and of other things, the which a
christian should both know, and understand. But yt Apostle does teach us, that
such separation must be done by i. co. vij
both their consentes, to keep unity and concord, and the love of Christ,
geuinge their minds to please God without any offense or hurt of their
neighbor. It pleases me well to write the mind of Fulgen^ius in this matter.
When ye come and resort together says he, do all things honestlye, giuynge
such place in that carnal act to infirmity, that the flesh serve not to
luxuriousness, but that the ver tue of the soul and mind helped by GOD, may
refrain the concupiscence of the body. And they which are married, must so
honestlye give them selves to the generation of children, that the faithful
manne preparynge and geuynge him self to that act, may by the help of GOD in
that be modestious. And in another place he says: Let those which are
married principallye remember, that they give them selves to almose deeds, and
to prayer, and not continuallye to continue and stand in the infirmity and
weakness of the flesh, but to study to as cende to a better life, that the
mind may come to continency, and that carnal lust may every day more and more
be bridled and refrayned, yt after we have passed over that state and degree
wherein the infirmity of man requires pardon and forgeuenes, we may obtain
the reward of a better life, for the which we do tarry and look. And this as
touching yt sprite Also they must abstayn, when they are sick and diseased,
lest yt they which are whole and sound chance to be infected. A woe manne well
brought up, is fruitful and profitable unto her husband, for so shall his
The fruits of a well instructed woman.
house be wisely governed, his children vertuouslye instructed, the affections
less insued and followed, so that they shall live in tranquillity and
pleasure. Nor thou shall not have her as a servant, or as a com panion of thy
prosperity and welfare only, but also as a most faithful secretary of thy
cares and thoughts, and in doubt full matters a wise and a hearty counseler.
This is the true so cietie and fellowship of man, not True society.
only to participate with him our pains and trauelles, but also the
affections and cares of our mind, the which do no less trouble the body, then
to plowe, to dig, to delue, or to bear any heavy or weyghty burden, for if
their full and burning hearts should not disclose and open them selves, ^hey
would none otherwise break, then a vessel replenished with fire yt has no
vente, for carefulnes and thoughts are fire, that does in^^ame and consume
the heart. And therefore we see certain men, the which (as though they were
with child through care and co^motions of the mind) do seek for some one, upon
whom they may discharge the^ of their bur den, as Terence says. O Jupiter,
how happens this, yt I meet with no curious fellow, the which would instant
lie ask me, wherefore I am thus merry, whether I go, from whence I come? etc.
We do read, yt many have died suddenly, of soden mirth, fear and heau^^es. What
riches may be compared to that friend, unto Nothing can be compared to a
friend.
whom a man may commit not only such things, which are common, but also the
secrets of his heart, and open most surely great matters and small, good and
evil, and disburden his mind, and to whom (as says Ennius) thou may com
municate both privily and apertlye all thy joy and pleasure. And of such a
friend, when the mind is so obfuscated with perturbations and thoughts, that it
can not discern, what is best, or most expedient to be done, let us ask cou^
sell. There is in this life no such sauce, nor no like swetenes among these
businesses. If there be the^ so great good nes among friends, the which at
some times are so far divided one from the other, how much more should there
be among those, that dwell in one house, in one chamber, and in the self same
bed? A woman well taught and instructed, as a faithful womaune shall keep
close thy secrets, and as wife and learned shall give thee good counsel, and
shall coun sell thee, as she would counsel her self, consideringe that she
loves the no less, then she lo ueth her self, the which thing is as well
comprised in the christian, as in the matronale Philosophy. In com mitting of
our secrets one to another, two things are to be considered, Love, the which
Commit thy secrets tohim that is louinge and wise.
will keep that thing secret and close, that is perillours to be opened: and
wisdom the which with knowledge can hold in and keep scilence, having
prudencye for his guide and ruler. Tell not that to the unwise, or to a babbler,
that thou woul deste not have published or known. A foolish womanne may sone
be known by her words and manners, al such are busye and curious to know that
is secret, nor does never cease, until they come to the knowledge thereof.
Such are known with many, and they know many, the which thing they should never
have obtained, but that they know the secrets of many, and had discovered
them to many, they whisper with many, and when they are idle and occupied
about evil, they seem to be best occupied. There be other that are void and
far from all good arts and knoledge, the which being given to futilitie and
vain com munication, do sound as it were a little bell, being void of all
other things saving of the clapper. Some other do take themselves as women
without civility and good manners, unless they disclose (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...)
the secrets and priuityes (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
of their houses (the which should be kept most secret) to their friends and
parents, thinking by that to win their love and favor. There be yt rejoice
to be taken for the inuenters of great and couel rumors, as there be like wise
among men, esteming the^ selves to be had in great admiration, if the things
that they do tell be merueylous. And they go about to declare of what
authority and credence they be of with all other, for as much as they know
other men's secrets. And because there be for lack of knowledge many such, yt
ancient wise fathers did forbid that no man should Why we should not show our
secrets to women.
disclose his secrets another to mother, sister, nor yet to his wife. Portius
Latro does say, that a woman can keep that thing secret and close, that she
knows not, Of this I have seen many examples that confirm those old
sayings. As this: other amend, or else beware. But it shall be best to give thy
diligence to make her better, for so with little labor and pain thou shall
gather great commodity (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
and profit. And among (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
all other things thou must beware of this, yt thou give not yt rope to him,
that shall make an halter to hang thee with all. What thing can be moore
hurtefull then that, whereof the wise man speaks in holy Scripture. Ec, ix.


Give not the power of thy life unto a womanne, least she comme in thy
strength, and so thou be confounded.

Men say that Policides was Policides.
so subtle a thief, that it auay led not to shut the cofers, but that it was
necessary to feign that there was nothing in them, and to leave them open, for
all things were as open unto him. And it is said, that a certain wolf having
A fable of a certain wulfe.
a great and a rich family, was often times monyshed by her children of
such thin^es, which were profitable to be done at home: but she be inge old
and by long experience wyly, named her right ear wisdom, and her left ear
memory: when her children spoke to her on the left side, she considered what
they said, and agreed unto them. But when they were on her right side, she
syldome agreed unto them, although they brought home the lefse, so that it
were not to great a loss and hynderaunce unto her. And when they accused her
because she lightly regarded their counsel, nor took not the pray that she
was wont to take, she made them this answer: O my children I have brought
home quietness, a moore delicate thing then is the pray, the which I keep by
the aid and help of Majesty. But when they counseyled her un wyselye, she
mekely declared unto them their ignorance. And thus when they were to importune
she put the^ back, and when they were deceived she taught the^, so that by
this means they had her in more veneration and reverence. But when they kept
plainly their woluishe nature, and used her as it became them to do, she
received their counsel, not as it were any new thing unto her, but perceyuyng
the woluishe qualities to be in the^, she commended it, acceptyng and taking
them for her own children, so that they would learn yt craftines of the
wolf, and be modestious. And furthermore to give the^ to understand that they
had to do with her that was old, she showed them the thing, that in counsel
they might better and with more effect have considered and thought upon.

Of the house.
THey that are married ought inwardlye in mind to be such among the^sel ues.
Now we will speak of exterior and outward things, in the which the husband
which has not purposed to live miserably and wretchedlye, must not follow the
common voice of the people, the which are without reason. That city is not by
and by well ruled, that does confourme it self to other cities, nor that
house that follows the example of the house that is next unto it, nor never a
one of us all, that will live as other men do live.

This is an execrable error, to be drawn and led by the example of other,
having no will to do that ought to be done, but that, that is accusto med to
be done. What madness is it to will unto thy self that is evil, because thy
neighbor has the same, or to do the self same without any consideration
of the success or end thereof: or so high ly to esteem the consent of the
synnefull, that thou had rather suffer a certain and a present miserye,
then to be separated, or to go from the^. We in taking of deliberation how
we should live, are very obfuscate and blind, nor we know not what ways to
take, nor how to settle our selves, and therefore we have need of light, and
of a good guide. God is the clear light in all reason and ways of living, the
which is only wise, and that only has eyes, and light, and that knows by
what ways every man should enter, not men only, but angels and every other
creature. Xenophon in the first book of his commentaryes A noble saying.
of Socrates, does say: that who soever despises the precepts and com
maundementes of God, and follows manne, does leave him that knows the way,
and follows him that is ignoraunte and blind. And in like manner he does
reprehende those that have a respect unto man's judgments, and refuses gods.
There The kno wledge of yt law of God.
is nothing (...) profitable not only to obtain the eternal life, but also
to inform and fashi on every man's life withal, as the law of God, whose
inferior part is higher, then yt hieste part or top of all humayn and worldly
wisdom. Look diligently upon this law, cause it to be observed and kept in
thy house, as a most direct and righteous rule of al thy acts and deeds. They
are next unto it (although they be far fro^it) ye with wit, wisdom, and
virtue as much as lies in the^, do en sue and follow God, leadinge in this
mortality a godly life, as they yt are devout, and given to the study of
wisdom, of yt which there were many among the gentiles. Some peradue^ ture
will say: It were a great enterprise, for one to with stand as it were a furious
water a great multitude. But I do say, yt virtue does consiste and vest in
things, which are hard to be accomplished and done. Nor thou shall not be
alone, for as many a man has followed that, yt is evil and naughtes, so some
will follow that, the which is good and virtue ous. Nor let us not despeare of
mankind, for as virtue is not without profit, so vice is not with out loss and
damage. We may see in yt governance and rule of an household, wherein is
labor, sparynge. and frugalitye, what commodities it brings to the life of
man: and how many and great virtues, as tempetaunce, continence, chastity,
and fidelity, for the vices con trary to these virtues, come of uouthfulnes,
waste expenses, and pouertye. We have the examples of those, the which
despisynge and for sakynge the folythenes of the common people, have reduced
them selves and theyrs, to judgment, to reason, to honestye, and laud, and
were commended and praised of those the which the contemned, and many followed
them, Thus does virtue reward itself, yea god, the head and father of al
virtue. Shall he that is wicked and corrupted with evil affections and manners
be so bold as to stir up reproved and noughtye customs, and thou a wise and
a sober man shalt not be so bold as to bring in a good custom? Shall mo
things be granted to those that be evil and perverse, then to those that be
good and virtuous? And shall liberty granted to evil things be in (...)
assurance and (...), then that, that is good and for a common wealth? The
fool does devide and laugh the wise man to scorn, and the wise manne the
fool, of whom had thou rather be laughed to scorn? He said I esteem
Plato above all the people of Athens, and I regard a wise man, more then althe
cought of artificers, or of those that have no experience. Hadste thou not
rather stand with god and wysdom; then with the contrary part? Nor yet I say
not this, because thou should so avoid the common custom, yt thou should
fall wholly to the contrary, as if one should clothe him self with silk or
gold, that thou, because thou woul dest not be like him, should cloth thy
self with white canuas or if he wear a ringe of gold with a precious jewel, yt
thou should wear a ring of iron, or of tin with a flinte stone, or if he
were fed with capons and partritches, yt thou should eat bread made of
branne, or any other vnhelth full or evil meat. There are in all the actions
and works of our life certain lunittes and measures, among the which virtue
does consiste, and the man that is wise does know them. Horace does say, yt
the foolish, exchuing of vice, do fall into the contrary vices. My meaning is
not, yt ciuility, and good manners should be taken from eities, but yt all such
things, as be fallen in rume and de mye, might as much as were possible, be
erected and restored again. And asin acitie there is nothing more unequal, yt
every man should be like equal, so it is not convenient that in one house every
man should be like and equal together.

There is no equality in that city. where the prtuate man is equal with the
magestrate, the people with the Senate, but rather a confusion of all offices.
The husband and the wife are lords of the house, unto whom the lord Gene. i.
said, be ye lords over the fyshe of the sea; the fowls of the air, and
over the beasts that move upon the earth. And the self same Genesis ii
creator said unto the woman, that she should be a help unto the man.
Therefore the husband without any exception is master over all the The
authority of the man and wife.
house, and has as touching his family, moore authority then a king in his
kingdom. The wife is ruler of al other things, but yet under her husband.
There are cer tayne things in the house that only do pertain to the
authority of the husband, wherewith it were a reprofe for the wife without
the consent of her husband to meddle withal: as to receive strangers, or to
marry her daughter. There are other things in the which the husband gives
over his right unto the woman, as to rule and govern her maidens, to see to
those things yt belong unto ye kitchen, and to ye most part of ye hou should
stuff: other mean thin ges, as to bye and sell certain necessary things, may
be ordered after the wit and fidelity of the woman. There be women, of whom I
would take counsel, and suffer them to do great matters, eue^ after their
own industry and judgment. Unto other because of their improbitie and
folishenes, I would scarcely commit things of small importance, and valuere.
Again diverse countries have diverse fashions Diverse countrics diverse manners.
and manners: for Mela the cosmographer does say: that the women of Egypt do al
out ward businesses, and that the men do spinne and govern the house at home:
and that the women bear their burdens upon their shulders, and men upon their
heads. In Hollande women do exercise merchandise, and the men do give them
selves to quafting, the which customs and manners I allow not, for they agree
not with na The thin ges given by nature to man and woman.
ture, ye which has given unto man a noble, a high, and a diligent mind to be
busye and occupied abroad, to gain and to bring home to their wives and
family, to rule them and their children, and also all their household. And to
ye woman nature has given a fearful, a covetous, and an humble mind to be
subject unto man, and to keep yt he does gain. Husbands must remember that
they are men, and therefore they ought to be stronglye minded, and far above
all thoughts and cares. Nature does inuit and call manne to such offices,
and makes him ready and fre from bearing and bringing up of children, the
which things women do at home, but yet with so great heauynes and weight both
of body and mind, that scantly they can move theymselues. And what pain is it
for a lustye man to get and prepare those things abroad, that shall be
necessary and meet for his wife and family? let him therefore be waking, and
exercise al good and honest ways both of wit and of body, that there lack
nothing another for wife nor family, for so shall every one do their duty.
Who is so cru el or so ungentle, that will not see and provide that his wife
lack nothing? nor he does not his duetye, that will not provide for his wife
eue^ with his own blood. And who perceyueth not how vile min ded they be,
that do rob or take any thing from their wi ues to devour and consume it? nor
it was never seen in any beast, that ever the male took any thing that should
norishe her from the female, and there fore such men as do so, are worse the^
bestes, and iu nothing but only in face are unlike them. In the old time
there was in Greece an habitacion for men only, another for women, and the
third for virgins, the rest were common. But we have no such differences,
although that the kytchen be moore apt and convenient for the woman than for
the man, where that she in a manner does reygne all alone, The wife has the
rule of the Kitchen.
but yet in such wise and ma ner, that she put to her hand to dress her
husbands meat, and not to command it to be dressed being absent. She must
often times over look her house and household stuff, and repair all such
things as be woren and broken, and if there lack any thing, she in time
must show her husband thereof, and be much conuersaunt with her children, and
with her maide^s, but sildom with her servants, nor thou with her maidens. Nor
thou shall not suffer her to be idle, for when a woman (as Publius Sirus does
sai) does think alone, she thinks evil. Let her be do ing not that, that is
delitious and pleasant, but that is pro fitable, although you be rich, for
there is nothing moore Fortune.
chau^geable then fortune, notwithstanding she appears to thee to be
steadfast and stable. And profitable things do keep close ye mind and thought
of her yt works, nor lightlye does not suffer it to wander and vage about
other things. And when it is thy mind and plea sure yt she be occupied about
some business or some labor, you must have a respect unto the health and the
state of her body. Thou must not leave her idle norso ouercharge her with labor
yt we fall sick, namely if she be troubled with the infitmities of nature, as with
me^strua, with beri^g of children and with laboring of child She must not be given
to Play.
play, for upon what goodness can she think when she plays? and a woman is
much inclined to pleasure. The house shall be unto her in steed and place of a
great and a large city, and she must go so sildom forth, To go forth.
that when she sets her foot over the thresholde, she must think yt she
goth a pilgrimage. She must go only to necessary places, seking no occa sion
to viset mother, pare^tes or any other fre^des, Paul does blame those widows
yt as (...). tim. v
idle persons do wa^der about other men's houses, whereof comes curiosite, and
garrulite with many other vices, for all such virtues as be keeping ye house were
maintained and kept, do by decay. And Paul wills i. Ti. v.
us to avoid ye company of such widows. Let devotion be looked upon in the
church, and not ye pomp and the multitude of the people, for through devout
prayer many of our sins are remitted. I would wish yt this custom of
Flanders The custom of flanders
were every where used, that womenne when they go forth were so covered, thatno
man might know the^, and that they loking right forth, might see al men. Nor
it is not expe dient, yt she go forth alone, nor that she be accompanied with
many, and that as well to avoid great costs and charges, as to exchue pomp and
pride, for being so accompanied, she will covet and desire to be seen. Let her
company be of such honesty, that another her conditions and manners, nor yet
the dignity of matrimony be blemished, or with any spotte infected.

Of the exterior and outward things.
FOr why? in the society and company of men, one does infecte the other, as in
fruit and beasts. And this contagious infection and corruption does penetrate
al our senses, the worcester des by the ears, and the deeds by ye eyes. And therefore
David Psalm. xvij.
does say, yt we should use the company of good and innocent men, and avoid
those, that be wicked and evil. He in the fable does marueyle, and wonder at
the nature of the young man, yt being so long in co^pani with the evil, he was
not infected: but yet inco^tinently after the thing it self did manifestly de
clare, yt he was not untouched nor vnbespotted. Therefore if it may be, thou
must choose to dwell in a well instituted and ordered city, in the which be few
corrupt, few evil manners, and few corruptors of the same. But if thou canste
find no such city, choose thou such places, as are about thee.

The strangers and gestes, the which that thou doste receive into thy house,
do oftentimes become thy enemies, and through a certain benevolence do cause
much wickedness. Thou must therefore consider the company, and Avoid evil com
pany.
search what manner of men they be, lest they co^ueye any flagitious person
into thy house, they which may bring it into an evil name and fame. Such a one
was Sergius Catilina, as says Cicero, ye which left the house yt he entered
in at, defamed, although he com mitted there no fault at all. Nor this saying
of Pitagoras, yt among friends al things should be common, takes no place in
this thing. I do speak of this vulgar and com mon amity, for yt perfect
love and amity is sildome seen: for if it might be found, we would no more
holily regard our own mother, then we would regard our friends wife, and such
correspo^dent love, should be able to save chastity and all other virtues: for
what amity is that, when one man calls another his friend? The customs also
and manners of thy wives pare^tes must be wayd and considered. Also her ears
must be kept pure and clean. For Hiero the Siracusane co^ Note.
demned a certain poet in a great sum of money, because he had
rehearsed unclean and unchaste verses, his wife being present. There be yt do
talk filthy and vnclenlye communication for civility, and him to be rude and
rustical, that takes not a pleasure in the same. And to this they do all this
common proverb. Al thin ges are helthye to those, that be whole.

But Paul alledgynge Menanders verse unto the i. co, xv
Corinthians to let and withstand the sinister opinion of some, does say,
Let no man deceive you, for evil communication does corrupt good ma ners. We
are infected with filthy words, the which by the ears do descend unto ye
soul, and with filthy pictures, the which by ye eyes do so provoke the mind,
yt of right Aristotle did ordeyne and appoynte Note.
a public pain for those, that did set forth any such pictures, whereby
lechery kindled enough of it self, might be in flamed. What a madness is it
then to bye such pictures, and to set them up in chambers? They are also
worthy to be blamed, that before their wives and their daughters do speak
dishonestly, disclosing their lightness and madness, and that they in stead and
place of the heart, have an imposteme, wherout flows such corrupt matter.
Thou shalt not admit nor call no young men unto thy house, for of yt come
these daunces, plays, banckettes, and other things, yongmen.
that hurt and waste men's substance, nothing profitable for their honor and
worship, the enemies of quietness, the very pestilence of chastitye, and unto
GOD, the which is principally to be regarded most odious. Thou shall not bring
these things into thy house, nor commend them in none other man's, nor lead
thy wife nor thy daughter thither, for ye were to put fire and towe together.
And therefore we do say, as we have said, that shamefastnes of the which
proceeds chastitye, must specially be nourished and mayntayned in women, and
chiefly to be had and showed there, where we fear of those to be reprcheded,
unto whom we bear most reverence, as of our fathers, our friends, and
familiars, and of those, whose co^ pany we have used of children, if they be
good and honest. Learn her to set by her good Fame.
name and fame, and to fear the contrary. There is none suffi ciently chaste
enough, says the declamator, whose honesty is searched and asked for. And
another of the self same scole does say, he that does not fear the opinion
and infamy of adultery, does not fear to be an adulterer. The most valiant
way for a man to be noble of mind, is to keep him self in good estimation,
for he that is vile and abject, estemeth his fame but little, nor yet what men
say by him. For he dares not once breathe unto that, yt he despereth to come
unto, nor with laud goth not about any noble feats, and if perchance he find
them, he as with a reward does content him self with them. But he that is of
a noble nature and courage does take and draw strength unto him, as fire in
ye air, and how much ye more he thinks to be better, so much the more he
does study other by ye desire of laud and praise or by ye absolute mind and
example of virtue to be so. Thou must therefore now and the^ blow this fire,
other with thine own breath, or with some other ma^s, to the end it may kyndle
and burn as it ought to do. It shall be profitable to know the manner and
fashion of Eubolus, Eubolus.
the master of exercise and de fence, the which going into the scole of the
young man Accetes, did by and by frame him self to follow the gesture of
Asbites the Crotoniate, the which exercised him self in the five arts of
plays, and had won the game of ye circle. Those in whom he saw a fault
other in runninge or in wrastlyng, or that had won the price by any fraud or
disteyte, he blamed, and that to fear ye young man from following and ensuyng
the^, and to ye intent he should perceive and know, that such deades were not
commended there, nor should not be cloked, but that they which brake the order
and ru les of the scole, should be rebu lied. Eubolus commended all those, that
frequented the same scole, and yt to encourage the young man to have a desire
to be in like manner co^me^ded, and to be ashamed in the presence of so many
noble and valiant men, to be rebuked. Hercules does speak well and
naturally in Neuio, saying: O my father, I do rejoice to be lauded and praised
of thee, which art praise worthy. Nor Themistocles the Atheniane could not
stepe, when he mused upon the tryumphes of My Isiades, Nor Achilles should not
so greatly have esteemed the glory of the war, if Thersites had only beheld
and looked upon his noble acts, but ye Aiaces, the Diomedi, the Vlissi, the
Nestori, the Children of Atreus, and Hector his enemy did prick them
forwards, the which would not have been slack to have wounded him, if his
courage or force had failed him. Nor this was no dull spur, nor no small
provocation. O my companions and fellows with how great Disclose not the
secrets of matrimonye.
sorrow shall Greece mourn to depart from hence, and how joyful shall Priamus
and his people be? Thou must circumspectlye and wisely speak to other men of
thy wife, for ye secrets of matrimony are as were it mysteries, where unto thou
should admit no man: for if thou do, thou shall be taken as unwise and
folishe, the which thing Candales ye king of Lidia has taught us. Holy
scripture in the commendation of women says thus: And her husband shall
commend her, that is, pro. xiij
she shall be praised with the affections of her husband.

What greater laud or praise can chance or be given unto the woman? the which
thing is unto her as a Theater full of her commendation. It is a very
dangerous thing for a man to praise his wife, for Praise not thy wife to much.
men shall say, that he intends to sell her, and suspecte him of lightness
seeing that he so highlye commends her: or else the gifts and virtues
(among the which gelosye has no place) that should rather extinguishe evil
cupidities then provoke the^, should very often through perverse minds be
kynled to corruption, as Lucrece virtues played we Tarquinius: for there are
some so importune in letchery, that they love and desire the thing yt they
should abstain from, and the more they are removed by reason and equity, the
more ye flame of their desire and love increases. And therefore they
considered the thing most wisely which said, that the most surest way was
not to know a womanne, and that all occasions of sin and wickedness ought
to be removed. For the LORD does exhort both manne and woman to desire the
celestial and heavenly father with diligente prayer, not Mat. vi
to be led into temptation.

Of apparel and raiment.
GOd at the beginning Genesis iij
did cloth Adam and Eve to hide and to cover their secret parts withal. The
other parts of the body were covered for diverse necessities, after the
quality and disposition of the air, some where to with stand cold, and other
where to repel and wythstande hete, And therefore in all cities certain apparel
for very neces sitie to satisfy the eye of man wythall was invented and
appointed. But the evil and corrupt nature of man has desired and searched
for honor and ornaments in all things, in good, in evil, in sorrow, in
shame, tourning and wining that to honor and glory, the which at the begin
ning was given and appointed to shame and necessity. And thus there is no end
of superfluous raiment, and special ly among those yt study to honor their
garments more then the^ selves, as for ye most part al women do, and many men
also. That Philosopher (whosoever he were) said gravely unto him, that took a
pride in his apparel, go to quoth he, and leave not of to glorify in the goodness
and virtue of a sheep. Aristotle makes a magistrate named Gineconomon, whose
office was to take heed, O how necessary were he in these our days
that women should use no inconvenient excess in their apparel, and that it
were mere and agreeable for their age and condition.

And the Romans had their laws, both for the excess of meat, and of
raiment, wherewith they withstoode this evil. But now there is another law
nor magistrate, for now so much as is lawful to every man, how much as does
please him: or to say more truly, so much does please him, how much is
lawful, not by the law, but by his substance and riches. And therefore every
man may be in his own house, both a law and a magistrate, as well for the
common utility. as for the common example. The husband must consider, yt the
woman ought to adourne and deck her self for his eyes and pleasure only. Note
ye women.
And the proverb does say, for whose sake and pleasure does the blind man's
wife trymme and deck her self? And the maker of the Lace demonians laws
commanded full well, that maidens and virgins should go forth uncovered,
because they sought to have husbands, and married women covered, because they
had found them already. He is very simple and folish, whom his wife cannot
please, except she be pricked up and trimmed. Man should be in love with
virtue, and not with the apparel, with iewelles, nor with the fair natyue
skin, how much less then with that, that is painted and filthy? And if
thou delight in these things, thou shall when you doste behold her natural face
and visage both loathe it and abhor it. Be thou so affectioned to thy
concubine, but not to thy wife: for thou sekest to be provoked to lust and
carnal pleasure by the senses, and not by any interior or inward love. If thy
wife howsoever she be apparelled, do content thee and please the (for she is
one mind and body with the) to what pur pose are these anxious, molestious,
perilous, and hurtful or namentes sought for and desired? Such gorgious and
trimly The dau^ gers that come of gaye appa rel.
decked wives are gredy and desirous to wander abroad, and to be seen, and
that is the fruit of al yt cost and charge, and they that behold the^ so gorgi
ously apparelled, are thereby the more enticed and provoked: for such array and
ornaments do set the^ forth, and much commend the^. Take dilligent head that
thou suffer not thy wife to be an inuenter of new or of vnwontful things,
lest yt thereby she^ be known, and be come acquaynted in the city, for usual
and customable things are less noted and regarded. At home they will lay
their hands to nothing, that is needful to be done, they keep the^ selves a
loofe from the kitchen, and other such unclean places, and keep the^ in one
place for filing of their apparel, or troubling of any of those thin ges so
artificiously co^pou^ded and made. Her maidens forget ting and leaving all
other things undone, are all the day long occupied about trymming and
decking of her. What shall I say, how great is their arrogancye and pride? For
inasmuch as they are better and more preciously be seen then other, they
despise and disdain all other. Whereof springs the envy and hatred of the
poorer sort, and kindles the city with hatred, whereout does spring and arise
very often great factions, as in the time of our elders in Barcinni de
Lelitanes in Spain, when that the merchants wives (the course of
marchaundise from Alexandria florisshing there) far exceadeth the pompose and
costlye raiment of the noble women, prouokinge and increasynge therewyth fond
cupiditie, or gnawinge envy, and so one thing does grow of another. Precious
garments require convenient hemmes and borders, girdelles, jewels, chains, and
bracelettes: ye which places being so apparelled and adourned, will not suffer
the hands to be bare, nor to be covered with all sorts of gloves, but with
perfumed gloves, and wroughte with buttons of gold, here unto come earynges,
and other iewelles of pure gold, and then the worckemanshyppe that excels
the matter, and thus men's riches and substance, which they set forth and show
in this wise and manner, decay and come to ruin. It fa reth by ye apparel, as
it does by writings and instruments made of co^tractes and bargaynes: in yt
which, because they made the^ simple, having only a respect to equity and good
faith, few words suffised: And is it not so now?
but after yt cauillations were found out, there appeared a thousand
creuesses, the which
no wit nor words was sufficient or able to stop. So the simple and mean
garment does consist, and is of it self, but the curious has another end nor
measure. The rich citezins yt suffer their wives to have, whatsoever they will
do much harm, for they bring Example and emulation.
in that custom and fashion, ye which even she that has little or nothing, will
not doubt to follow, and does esteem it as fylthy and a thing most inconue
nient, to be over gone in luxurious excess and raiment, but not in faith,
diligence, and chaste, for they consider not, what they are able to do, but
what other have done. And therefore in certain towns and cities evil
instituted and ordered, many women through a desire to be wantoulye and gaylye
apparelled and besene, are content to be other men's concubines. But when the
rich perceive, that the poor go about to be equal with them, they to
exceade them, deck and apparel them selves moore costelye and rychelye, and
thus contendynge they comme both to ruin, and that strength at the last (as
it is in the comedye) falls down headlonge. There are certain words in
Liui where he perswadynge for the law Oppia, that make for this purpose, and
are attributed and ascribed unto the authorytye and Person of Cato, the
which for the grauitye of the sentence are worthy hear to be recyted. I
(says he) can not find the cause nor the reasone of certain appetites.
For why? to be lawefull full for some men to do certain things. and not
for thee, may come of shame, or else of dysdayne.

So is the apparel and raymente of all men if it be like, for every manne
will have and coueteth that he sees in another.

That shame to be counted or taken for coueteous or for poor, is the worste
and most haynoust of all other. But the law takes both from you, seeing ye
have not the thing that is lawefull for you to have.

But she that is rich, does say, equalitye does not please me, for why
should I not be seen in gold and purple? And why is the pouertye of other
cloked under the color of this law? Whereby it apeareth that they regard the
law and not poverty. O ye Quirites will ye give your wives such a battle,
that they being contented to be taken and esteemed for rich, should do that
other cannot do, and that the poor should extend the^ selves above their
ability, because they would not be despised? For so where no need is, they
should be ashamed, and where need is, they would not, and what she might
prepare of her own, she would, and that she could not, she should desire and
pray her husband to do. Wretched is that husband, the which whether he
consent or no, shall see his wife have that thing of another, the which he
gave her not. This does Cato say. And in what a miserable necessity are they
in that to uphold such charges do search diverse and payneful ways full of
envy, dangerous, scelerate, and unjust? These men do abuse their wives, the
which thing Paul does forbid, yet that not withstanding they love their
husbands even as a master loves his diligent and faithful steward, of whom
he perceyueth his goods to be truly and faith fully used and augmented. And so
does ye costly and sumptuous wife love her husband, not for his own sake, but
for her own utility and profit: by whose industrious labor she lives ydlye
and arrogantly, having great abundaunce of al things. But if fortune do
turn, and the knot of love be removed and taken away, that love will soon be
loused and diminished, or else wax very faynte and feeble. But being wise,
thou shall take ano there way with thee, for thou shall call to thy remembrance,
that thou waste not borne for the woman, but the woman for the: and therefore
thou must accustom her to serve the, and so to apply her mind, yt she may
understand and know that she is a helper and a partaker of thy travel and
labor. and not an idle mistres. Thou shalt take and refer all authority to
thy self, and not to her, taking diligent heed to her honor and chastity,
as thou would to thine own proper life, for in this ye are but one. As for
those delites, pleasures and ornaments, thou shalt deride and laughe to
scorn, nor no more esteem them, the^ the ridiculous and folish desires of
children. And so thou shall obey the counsel of the Apostle, commaundynge us
so to have our wives, although i. co. (...)
we had them not, and so to use them, that we abuse them not. Thou shall so
apparel and array thy self and thy wife, that Nature may sufficiently be
satisfied and thy dignity kept and conserved. And yet in this thing ye must
differ, for thou ought to be clothed more like a man, that is, more simplye
and soberlye, and the woman more exactlye and cleanlye. And as great costlye
array does another become man nor woman, so does clean and honest apparel
become the woman. This is the force and strength of nature that can not be
altered. This femine sex does set much stoore by goodlye and precious
raymente, the immoderate and insatiable desire thereof may be brydeled and
refrayned, but not clean taken away and disanulled. It shall be sufficient,
if she be thus well instructed and taught that in adourning and decking of her
self, she do not so much regard the price and newnes of the thing, as to
avoid the uncleanness thereof, and so to behave her self, that she be not
lothed and reproved. The mean and moderate use of ornaments and garments with
gravity and cleanlines is of al men much more commended, then is that delicate
and sumptuous raymente and apparel. He that does array him self very
sumptuously and gorgiou slye, of some shall be counted and taken for rich, and
of other for a vain waster. But he does show him self wise, that meanlye
does apparel him self, and as necessity shall require. That curious and
exqui site decking of the womanne does declare her to be vain and light, nor
the existimation or fame of her beautye, whose universal grace is assined unto
her apparel and orna me^ts, does therefore increase or augment the more. Nor a
married woman should not care now to be counted and retkened fair unto other
men's eyes. O how great a sign and token of chastity and of A womans true
ornaments and apparel
a pure and a clean heart is yt simple and mean apparel, the which do then
appear most manifestly, when all men do know, that she had rather adourne her
self with wisdom gravity and faith, with governing of her family and
household, and instructing and teaching of her children, then with gold, silck.
or precious stones. Nor there is no man, yt does not much more honor one
such matrone, then a number of those, that glister in their pre tious and
sumptuous ornamen tes and apparel. Who did not more honor Cornelia the mother
of the Graccis being pore and without gold or precious stones, then her hosts
of Ca^pania having al those things most plentuously? Therefore let no man
hereafter say un to me, ye eye of him yt looks must somewhat be satisfied
and co^tended, for to yt we give to great attendance. That simple, pure,
modest, and grave orname^t does declare the house to be The com modity of
simple a^^ye.
holy and vncorrupt, and commen death poverty, the which by teaching and
instructing one what modesty is, does cause him to know him self. Every manne
does blame the poor woman, if she be sumptuously arayde, for they know full well
in cities, what every man's substance is, and what he may do. And therefore
such a pore woman is reckened and taken as proud and insolent, and her
husband as fond, that does consent to her foolishnes and madness. The rich
are commended, if they be modeste and te^perate in the usage and use of their
riches, as they be, which through their riches and great substance are not
arrogante nor statelye. Thus does virtue adourne the raymente, and man is
adourned of him self, and not of his vain clothing and apparel. Marchau^ts,
whose riches is in the hands of fortune, are in more creditie, and the
nobility within more favor with the people, when they abase and somewhat
apply the^ selves to their qualities and customs. And it is a christi ans
duetye and office, to divide The duty of a christen man.
that among the poor, that is wont to be consumed in such vanities, and not
to have and lay up such a number of gowns and raiment, as would content and
serve many a poor woman, when that the master of all wisdom does say: He
that Luc. (...).
has two coats, or two gow nes should give him one that has none. But if
there be any so weak and feable sprited yt another secretly nor apertly will
part with nothing, yet let him not waste and consume his money in bieyng of
such soft and costly apparel, ye which does sone corrupt and consume, or if he
do intend to sell the^, yet they shall lack a great part of that they cost
him, as iewelles, gold, and silver artificiously wroughte and made with more
cost and charge, then the thing it self is worth. Let thy gold and thy
silver be meanlye wroughte, and let the woman believe ra there, that she has it
in her ke pyngeh, ten inher possession, as to help and aid her with all if
need reqnire. These thin ges (if thou have no need of them) do adourne and
garnyshe thee without envy or hatred, and do set forth thy riches, and
acquire credence. At home let thy wife be homely and simply arayd, to the end
that she may be expedyte and ready to all domestical and familiar busi
nesses.

Of the husbands absence.
Whosoever does intend to marry, must so dispose and orders his matters, that
he depart and be absente from home as little as may be, for it is an old saying
that the eye of the master does make the horse fat, and the ground fertile.
In like manner all things, the master being present, are well and truly
done. For why? the forehead (as Cato says) is before the hinder part of the
head. But inasmuch as we can not foresee the things, that be to come, when
thou art absente do thy diligence, that thou be not long absent. It shall be a
help and for thy profit, to have some saythful and trusty man, that may send
the word of all such things as be done at home. And if thou have no such man,
reme^ ber to prepare ye one. Leave no such at home, and specially when thou
art absent, that shall disdain and defile thy honor, keep no such in thy
house that fear not god, for Note.
he that does another fear, nor worship god, other for a present reward, or
else for the hope of the same, shall do and commit al mischief: when thou art
absente leave few men at home, but yet such as be faithful, but no idle
persons, no vagaboundes, no trymme and well decked per sons, nor no
musit^o^s: for the laws are weaker and of less force and strength, when the
magestrate and judge is absente. And of ydlenes grow evil thoughts. Let no
young man of an evil name and fame be in thy house, nor no such as be
greatly acquaynted in the City.

Take good heed to those that frequente and haunte thy house, and be sure that
thou know them thoroughlye. Commit thy house to some nyghe kynsmanne or
acquayntaunce of thine, whether he be manne or womanne, whose fidelytye is not
unknown unto thee. And see that they be of some aucthoritye, for so shall thy
familye and thy wife regard them, and have a respect unto them.

Of reprehention and castigation.
THe vice and fautle of a ma^s wife must (as says Varro) other be suffered
and borne with all, or else clean taken away, the which thing chaunseth but
syldome, but yfit can not, it must then needs be borne with all. Yet let
him not mistruste, but with all means and ways study how to amend it,
least that thing do chance, that the Poet does say: By bearing and
sufferynge of thy Friends faults, thou shalt make them thine own.

For the master and ruler of the house must know and understand that he is
set as it were in an high tower, to behold and see who comes into the house,
and to withstand all such things as may hurt the emolumentes and commodities
of the same, or the good name and report of his wife. Y et I would not that he
should feign any falfe drea mes of the goodness and honestye of her, mouynge
vain tragides and noyses, as certain bandogges do that be kept to watch, the
which being troubled and feared in their sleep, do bark in such wise and
manner that they cause the house to be searched, and afterward are soore
beaten for their vain warning. And therefore, thou shalt not trouble nor vex
thy self with any such bitter cares and thoughts, of thine own invention,
least thou be scorned of other, and taken for light and cruel. A husband
as much as shall lie in him to do, must beware that his wife trespass not,
and be diligent to know such things as he yet perfectlye knows not. But
gelosye does Gelosye.
only trouble the mind, and causes it to be subject to most bitter
torments.

Do thou not take diligent head to a peace or a cup made of glass? and
do thou not nouryshe and bring up thy child without any gelousy? Why do
thou not the same unto thy wife? Believe not lightly ye evil wylled, nor the
suspicious in great and waightye matters, nor the malign interpreter of
things, although they be thy parents or fre^des, but yet to curious and to
light of credence.

There was a noble man in Ualence called Carrosus, the which had a very
chaste A notable historye.
woman unto his wife, but yet of no good name nor fame, and of this her friends
did often times accuse her unto her husband. This manne at the fyr^te
neglected not the thing, but gave good ear unto it.

But after that he had found these suspicions to be vain and false, and that
they for all that ceased not calumniouslye to accuse her, enforsynge him as it
were to punyshe her, he defending the Chastity of his wife, told them, what
he had sought for, and what he had found. But perceiving that they were
not contented with his words, he bought him a horse of a good kind, and
prayed them to go with him, and to see his horse run, in the place between
the palace and the Trinity church there unto appointed. And when he had
made three or four curses, he asked them that saw him, what they thought by
his horse, some of them praised him hyghlye, and some in certain points dis
praised him.

Then he drew out his sword, saying: I swear unto you by Christ, that I
will kill him, who soever he be, that shall speak evil other of my horse, or
of my wife.

And thus at that time he put the^ to silence. And after that the thing was
manifest, and her innocencye proved and known to all men, he was counted and
taken for a wise man, and a man of great courage. Reprehention, and correction
must be done for amendment, or for the example of other.

For other wise it is vengeance, or else a spyce of Crudelytye, the which
some do use against those that they do hate: yea, and do kill them, and yet
do say that they do but chasten the^. A goodly manner of correction in deed to
kill one. Seneca does say, that no wise man does punish for the faults
committed, but to the end, that hereafter they should trespass no more, for the
thing once done can not be revoked, but yet it may be so reprehended and
avoided, yt it shall be done no more. There be three kinds of sins and
trespasses in wedlock, The tres passes of matrimo nigh.
and three ways to amend them. The first and most grievous is adultery, the
which does separate the man and ye woman, and does so break the mat. xix.
band of matrimonial love and charity, that even by the lords own words
and sentence he may refuse her, although his will be, that she infected or
infamed with any other vice, be kept and retained. In this thing men do use
the castigation by the law permitted. A wise surgen does not burn nor cut
any manne, except very necessity co^strayne him, or yt there be none other
remedy. And yet or ever he begin, he considers his instruments, his
audacitie, and his knowledge, and then if he perceive, yt he be not able to do
it, he will not meddle withal. There are other like faults, and likewise other
that are mean between the^ both, the which by reprehention and correction may
sone be amended. And after yt thou have chosen thy wife, think with thy self
that it can not be comprised with few words, that with long experience can
not be opened nor known. Nor thou must not believe, that she is perfect, for
afterward knowing the contrary, thou shall pecceaue, that thouwast begiled.
Think therefore to find a great deal less of those things in her, then
appeared at the beginning, that thou, if thou find any mo, may be a
gayner. Furthermore The miserable estate of women.
thou must consider, that womenne be sickly, and feeble of body, troubled with
many diseases, and in mind fore vexed with diverse tempests and motions. And
what grefe does she suffer monthly in purginge of her self? what
fastidiousnes being with child, and after that she is delivered? And how is
she rent and broken at her vprising? and to how many perilles and dangers is
she subject? wonder it is, that any of them do escape death. And what other
thing do they all their life time but serve us? the daughter serves her
father, the wife her husband, the mother her children. Of mind they are not so
strong as man, their judgment, their eruditio^, and their experience is far
under man's. Who is so cruel then, ytwil not pity this their miserable estate
and condition? And therefore we ought to wincke at many of their faults and
as the stronger, suffer and bear with the weaker. Paul says, ye that are
strong ought to bear with ye feeble. To. xv
And if that wise greek, because he would not be grievously offended with his
friends misdoinges, was wont to say thus with him self. And this is a man also,
a mutable creature, apt to fall, and to be deceived: how much more reasonably
should the self same be thought of a woman? And nature does teach us, that
youth should give place to age the strong to the feeble, and the right to the
lame. And if the wiseshuld not bear with the foolish, he should not
sufficiently answer, and satisfy the excellency of his name. And besides all this, civil education and manners, reason, and the sentences of the wise, do
persuade this, and likewise peace and domestical quietness do move us unto ye
same. What pain and labor wol dest thou take, both by water and by land to
gather a little money, wherewyth thou might live quietly and joy fully at
home? Why should thou not then suffer a little in commodity at home to have
qnietnes, without the which riches are nothing profitable, nor life it self
sweet nor pleasant. What amity or frendshippe can thou find, wherein thou
must not suffer and disse^ble many things? Thou should ste in like manner way
and consider, whether the thing yt displeases thee, was done of weakness, or
of malice, for so doing, you may moderatly correct it. But inasmuch as
correction is one of those bitter medicines which heal not yt body without
lothing and ahhorring ye thing: it should not be ministered, except necessity
required it. Nor there is nothing ye causes re prehention to be so well
esteemed and accepted, as when he yt is wise and beneuolent does (...).
use it, and that thexa^ple of his life be agreeable unto his precepts and
sayings. Nor the evil can be with nothing so well rebuked, as with the life
of those that are good, as it is above declared.

If thou secretly do show the^ way of vice, and vicious living, why should est
thou compain, if they of thy own house do as thou do learn the^? he
would answer him, yt should rebuke him, as the child Asotus answered, and
said unto his luxurious father, that reproved him, as it is read in Cestius
Pius declamations. And we must know and perceive, that often reprehention
^iminisheth the auctority Au^th^^^tie
thereof, and leaseth his sorce and strength, for he that is accustomed to be
reprehended and rebuked, does little esteem it. It shall be best therefore to
dissemble and wincke at small faults, and reserve the aucthori tie of
reprehention to amend that is moore grievous, the which thing we do see that
these craftye marchaun tes, and subtyl courtiers do use, the which do prove
their credence, and how their prince does favor them in great and
ieoperdious matters only, leaving all other small and light busynesses
untouched. There are other faults, the which must be pretermitted and not
meddled wythall, when there is any hope of amendment, other for honor sake,
or if any other vice or fault, if they were detected should spryng and arise
of the same. Some there be, that willing lie do amend, if they think not them
selves to be taken as evil and reproved persons. Gneus Pompeius in the the
war against Sertorius did burn the whole hooste lookynge upon him, the
letters which were found in Sertorius cheste, to the entente that the
Citizyns, perceiving their secrets to be disclosed, should not be taken for
enemies. Caesar did even the same after that he had overthrown Pompey at
Pharsalia, and likewise in Affricke, when Metellus Scipio was ouercommed. There
be certain small faults, the which are natural both to man and woman, and
ought to be suffered and borne withal in the woman, in as much as she does
keep her chastity, and specially when she with often reprehention will not
amend, for then by thy pa cient suffering of her, you shalt have great profile
and find her very benign and gentle and using thy self to suffer and to
forbear her, she will be unto thee most pleasant, for familier conversation
causes al bitter things to be sweet and sauoury. Thou must not reprehend her
furiouslye, but with judgment, nor ferue^tly, but coldly and discretly, for yt
reprehe^tion which is annexed with gravity and te^pera^ Approved repre hention.
cie of mind, is most aproued and most effectuous as when thou she west thy
selse to be moved with the greatness of the fault, and not for any disdain,
nor to satisfye and content thine affections, but to amend her whom thou
rebukest. Thou must observe both time and place, least that through
feruentnes of reprehention thou bespot thy wife, and cause thy chances to be
openly known to strangers, and other thy familiars, whereby in time to come
thy wife shall continuallye hate thee. Be not long angry, least yt thy
desperate wife fall headlonge into vice and noughtynes. The apostle Col. iij.
says, ye husbands love your wives, and be not bitter unto them. And if the
lord forbid us to be angrye with our brother, how Mat. v.
much ye less ought we to be angrye with our wives, the which exceade all
brotherlye love and benevolence, as we have told you before, and it is meat
it be often times repeted. And if manne be the head of the woman, and Christ
Ephesians. v.
the head of the man, he must use him self unto the womanne, as Christ does
use him self unto us, that is, beniglye and frendelye. And the self same
Apostle does call the womanne the body Ephesians. v.
of the manne, as the church is the body of Christ. And not wythstandynge we
sustain and suffer many incommodities of the body, yet we hate it not, but
suffers it, nourysheth it, and governs it. The husbands reprehention must
be short, for if it should continue, hatred would ensue, the which would
coule matrimonial love, kyndle disdain, and change the sweetness of their
conversation into bytternes. Furthermore, thou must allege the reason and
cause that moves thee to rebuke her, that both now and in time to come, she
may be admonished. The force and strength of reason has great power in the
mind of Reason.
man, nor there is nothing that so cleaves unto it, nor less penetreth the
same, as this sentence: Thus I will, and thus I command.

Thou must so rebuke her, that she may perceive it to proceed and come of
good love, to make her better, and to be without vice or fault, yt the love
which is between you may be the more fervent, and without any quarrel or
complaynt at al. Therefore as soon as thou have chastened and corrected her, and
that she, other by word, honest shamefastnes, or silence does declare that
she will obey thee, give her then fair words again, and a gentle countenance
as thou waste wont to do. There are in noble women as there is among men,
certain excellent motions of the mind: the which to those that be not wise,
and do marcke the thing but slenderlye, seem to come of arrogancye and pride.
Nor these ought not utterly to be kept under, and clean extinguished, for
without them they can not approach nor come to that high and memorable
ornament, that exciteth and moves man to marvel and to praise and extolle
them. Such affections of the mind are apt and meet to conserve and keep the
honestye and chastity of women. Such noble women should not be grievously or
sharply reprehe^ded or rebuked, but drawn from vice, other by ye example or
virtue of such women as be gone already, or of those that they were aquaynted
with all, or else by putting them in remembrance of their old virtue and
godly living. To some woman a beck of her husband is sufficient to declare,
yt there is somewhat amiss, yt displeases him, and specially if she bear her
hus ba^d any reverence. An honest matrone has no need of any greter staff,
but of one word or one sour countenance of her husband. But where yt this
can not help, but that Note ye husbands.
brawling and staves acre must needs be used, I give no pre ceptes nor rules,
for there they use violence, but yet by mine advice the husband shall never come
to yt extremity, for if thy wife be often rebuked and will not bow, but
waxes more stiff and crooked: yet inasmuche as she keeps her self pure and
chaste, she must be supported and borne withal. Nor the bow must not be bro ken
with to much bendynge thereof. Thus did Socrates forbear his wife Xantippa,
whom we should follow, if we were so wvse as to think that our patience by
reason of the woman is exercised and proved, to ye augmentation and increase of
virtue, as Job and Toby did to their great profit, and to Job. (...).
the woman's rebuke and shame, Tob. (...)
as yt lord whenever it shall be, will declare and judge as well of the one as
of the other. Also he must think that she fell unto him by lotte, as his
kindred, his country, his body, his soul, and his wit did: wherewith every man
ought to hold him content, thinking with him self, that the omnipotente and
everlasting God does dispense and order al thing most wyselye, and most
iustelye. Finallye, it is meet and conueniente that the authority of God,
which coupled them together, should set them at one if they were out, and
agree the^. And what man durst be so bold to break the peace that the king
has made? Or who would reject him that by some noble man was co^maun ded and
delivered unto him? if in this thing the reverence that we have and bear unto
those which are of great power be of such force and strength., or else
love it self, how much should it be toward god? for who is so mighty, or
so louinge unto, us as he? him we should reave rence and love above all other
things. Also he ought to remember what Paul says, ye the wife and the
husband are al Ephe. v
one flesh. Of ye body do come continually many inco^modities, but yet no man
does hate it, but to his power does nourish it, and if at any time he be
miscontent there with by and by he pleases it again. Such like love should
every man bear his wise, and this after the mind of ye Apostle.

Of the proceeding and going forwards in matrimony.
AFter ye thou haste had experience of thy wife, you oughteste to love her more
tenderlye. And nature does induce a man to that, yt which does make sweet,
familiar, and customable things, be they never so sharp or grievous, for the
use and continual company does so establishe and confirm love and
benevolence, yt we upon that occasion, do love dogs, cattes, horses, and
other brute beasts, and do mourn and sorrow their death and absence. And what
thing is less conueniente for a wise and a well nourtred man, then not to love
his wife, whose co^ pany he has so long and so familiarly used? Meleager
Oeneus son being both angry with him self and all his sat him down in his
chamber: The Curetes, which made war against the Calidonians assailed the
city, and molested them so sort, that there was no hope another in man nor
woman. The elders Meleagers love toward his wife
of yt city came unto Me leager the only save guard of all the country,
desiryng him to put on his harnes, and to defend the^. yea, the priests with
their ceremonies were present, and promised a great reward, but he despised
all this. Then came Oneus his fa there, a man worthy of great veneration, and
kneled down before his obstinate son, His mother also, whose anger was now
changed into humble prayer and piticion came unto him, his systers and his
most pleasant companions, with whom he had lived most iocundly the best
part of all his time, prayed him not to forsake the^ now in this their extreme
pe ryi, and ieoperdie. But yt fearce mind of his was nothing moved, but
denied the help that all they with exhortacion, prayer, and promis desired. In
the mean while the enemies entered the city, and sertynge it a fire in diverse
and many places, murdered and loore vexed the people. His wife Cloopatra
being soore afraid, came unto him, saying: Help us O my husband, for if
thou help us not, we are all but dead, for our enemies have and posesse all.
That implacable and fearse heart, moved with the only voice and peril of his
wife, armed him self, and driuynge his enemies out, delivered the city from
extreme danger and peril. That noble man had written in his heart, that
precept of nature, the which he never read nor heard, by the which he knew
that his wife and he were all one, and that all other (notwithstanding they
were knytte unto him by great love and amity) were without him, and that a
man's wife is so united and with such a conjunction and knotte bound unto her
husband, that he does many things for her the which he would not do for
him self. Does that noble and most worthy boron in Homer cry this alone,
does Agamemnon and Menelaus only love their wives? For so does every honest
man that has any point of judgment: as I loved most heartelye Loryseis,
although I took her in war. That king Masuissa king of Numidi^
(as Salust writes) lyinge now a diynge, exhorted his children to concord
after this sort and manner. Who is moore frendlye then one brother to another?
Or who shalt thou find to be thy friend, if thou be enemy to thine own? Who
can think that thou love him, that perceyueth thou love not thy wife,
being good and honest? And if thou offended with certain her vices do hate
her, it shall cause thy friends to forsake thee, to ye which it is not
unknown, that no man lives without fault, and do trust that through use
and time they shall wax tolerable: but seeing thou (the which haste been so
long acquaynted and conuersaunte with thy wife) canste not bear her, what
other thing can he hope or trust, but yt the more strayghtlye and
familiarlye thou art conuersaunt with him, and the better that thou know
him, the less frendlye thou shalt be unto him? Can there be any vice (I
speak of these common vices) so far from the nature of any man, as the
nature and manners of beasts be? And yet conversation does so work, that they
live pleasauntly under one roof, and that manne does play and sport him
self with the Lion, and the nature and deeds of each of them does so please
and content the other, yt being absent they seek each other: for
familiarity is of such vehemencye and force, that it coupleth those things,
which are of contrary natures, and that because malice is far of for if it
were mixed the rewith, it could not clapse nor fasten those things, which
are most like each other, so great Malice.
a poison is malice unto concord and good agreement. Nor this herb called
mynt, does not (as the natural Philosophers The property of the mynt.
do say) so much let milk to be turned into chese, as the malice of the
heart, does let veneuolence to increase and grow. And in matrimonial
debate and discord, the man is more blamed then is the woman, because that he
being the chief ruler and head, does not (as says Uarro) purge her of
that vice, the which ingendered that discord, or else patiently bear and
suffer the same, for the blame of al discord is most commonly laid unto him
that is best: because he would not moderate nor let the thing to come to such
a strife and discord, or else because he was not able to do it: In the first
there appears manifest ma lice, in the second impacience and weakness, the
which ought to be far from him, yt is esteemed to be most worthyest, and
appointed to rule and govern other. And thus he comes into hatred, for
as much as he has begiled us and left of to do his duetye and office when it
neded not.

That love unto thy wife, after thou haste enjoyed her, for a season does wax
feeble and cold, is a thing most mete and convenient for those that are
kindled with bodily lust and letchery, the which are very beasts and no men,
having no reason, but are drawn to those deades through the motions of their
senses, the which after that the heat be a little paste, shall clean change
their opinion. Also there are other occasions that should cause this
benevolence and love, in case he be not duller then a stone: The causes why the
husband should love his wife.
As that his wife has suffered so great travel and labor, that she has
brought him for the children the heirs of his name and substance, and the
vpholders of his familye: and that she has forsaken her fathers goods and
riches to follow him, and to suffer with him both good and evil, and that she
setting her whole mind now upon him, knows another father, nor yet any of
all her kynne. What one thing then shall suffyce to knytte them in love, if
many things can not do it? who so will then obey nature, humanity, and
wisdom, shall every day love his wife more and moore: And the better he knows
her, the more he will trust her, and to open and disclose his love, shall show
her greater signs and tokens of beneuole^ce, manifestinge yt to be borne and
nouryshed through the expience of her virtue, and through hope to be continued
and kept, that in time to come she may be like her self, and (as Plato
writes) strive to overcome her self with virtue. Thou shall only love thy
wife thus tender ly, but from her, as srom a foun tayne, you must extend it
unto The husband must love his wives kinsfolk.
her parents and kinsfolk, to the end that they may well know and perceive,
how greatly their cosyn does aid and help them, and that she in like manner
may understand that thy benevolence and love to her is such, that it red
undeth among her friends and parents, and of this thou shalt receive no
little profit at home. And if we will that her kinsmen be loved for her sake,
how much more ought we the^ to love her chil dren, the which if thou love
their mother, can not be but most dearly beloved, and most acceptable unto
thee: and she in like case shall love thine, ill you have any: and they saying
this mutual love between us, shall knitte and couple the^ selves in good love
and charity. In matrimony Chau^ces
there chance many casualties, as poverty, infamy, enprisonmente,
banishement, and sicknesses, the which are ro^inon to all men, and yet may
touch only the one of the^, which are married, and not offend the other: as
ill thy fa there in law (of whom thou lokedst to have had a great inhe ritau^ce)
had lost all his goods and were defamed, wherewith his daughter also were somewhat
bespotted, and falsely convicted of some crime, and imprisoned, or banished the
city, or fallen into some disease or sickness. But as concerning this thing,
I will only say, as nature does prescribe and determine it: for god does
commau^de us, to bear such good Luc. vi
will and mind unto other, as we wuld and desire they should bear unto us, nor
that only in this great conjunction of soul and body, but also universally
unto all men. Supporte and suffer thou thy wives mischaunces, as she ought
to suffer thine, for matrimonial love should have every thing so mixte and
myngled, that they should not say, this is mine and this thine, but that all
thing, as profit and disprofyte, good and badde should be common.

And if ye be one and not two, then can not she be sick and diseased, but
that thou must needs be sick with her, nor she poor, and thou rich: The
which thing can not chance among friends, how shall it happen then where
is so great and so fast a knotte and conjunction both of mind and of love?

A sure and a true friend says Ennius, is in a thing uncertain.

Her syckenes and afflictions shall declare how well thou dydst love her when
she was in health. And following the instincte of Nature, and the
commandment of God, thou should judge her to be even one thing with thy
(...). (...).
self, and her body consumed with sickness to be thy body, as when it was most
flourishing and most pleasant unto thine eye, and thou should serve and keep
it with no less diligence. then thou kepest thine own. And as charity
through mer cy should grow and increace toward thy self and thy children, so
should love teach thee to do toward thy wife, true ly loving her as thy self,
and as thine own proper children: whereby she being diseased or troubled by
fortune, shall be unto thee more derely beloved, then ever she was in her most
floryshyng estate and condition, women have their certain small debates and
envy, and their diverse disdaynefulnesses and hatredes the which of very
light occasions and causes do spryng and rise suddenly, as of such whose
judgments are weak and feeble, but with such matters men of gravity ought
not to meddle. They have like wise their proper ambition and pride both in
word and place, and whether they sit or go. But yet the husband shall not
increase these things, nor show himself a minister nor a revenger of her
complaints and sorrows, be cause she was not honored nor taken after her will
and pleasure, but rather to laugh at them and contempne the^: calling most
diligently upon her to see to other things of moore importance and profit.
For such as do meddle or trouble them selves with such light and folishe
matters are more mete to wear wome^s apparel and garments, and to spynne,
then to wear a berde, or to be esteemed or taken for a man. Make such me^
rulers of cities, seeing they are so unapt to rule and govern their own
family, and household. What thing is there moore unmeet for a man then to
move or to trouble him self with the light appitites and fond lusts of women.

What vtilities and profits the mutual love of those which are married does
bring.
IT can not be well rehearsed nor told, how many vtilites and profits this
concord does bring to great things both at home and abroad, nor how many
losses and inco^modities do grow of the dissentio^ and discord yt is between
the good manne and his wife. The household when their master and their mistres
are at debate can no otherwise be in quiet and at rest, then a city whose
rulers agree not, but when it sees them in con cord and quietness, then it re
ioyseth, trusting that they will be even so unto them as it perceyueth them
to be among the^ selves, wherein surely they are not deceyned, for if yt man
and his wife do benigly and gently support and entreat one another, they
learn not to disdain, or for every light fault to be angrye with their
servants, or yet for any house hold words to be vexed or an gry with each
other, but to set a side al hasty and cruel words and correction with all
other things that proceed of a disdaynefull and a furious mind. And the
servants are not only merry therefore, but also they do their service ye more
obediently and gladly, showing reverence unto the majesty that proceeds and
increases of quietness and concord. For the husband does defend his wives
majesty with love and benevolence, and the wife her husbands with honor and
obedience. What shall I need to say yt concord causes the^ to be esteemed wise
and honest. And they must needs be good, seeing they have loved so long
together. Nor there can be no Note.
long amity or frendshyp but between those, that are good, the which do
suffer and devour up those things, for the which other men leave and forsake
amity, and break of charity. Nor there grows of none other thing so great
reverence and majesty, as of the opinion and estimation of ano there ma^s
goodness and wisdom, the which reverence is not only honored within the doors,
but also shyneth and extends it self into the city, so that he is taken for
an honest man, and borne to be loving and gentle, seeing that he loves so
constantly, and for a wise man, considering ye he fo moderatly can handle so
di ficulte and hard matters, and worthy to rule a common wealth, that with
such wisdom and judgment does rule his own house, and that he may easily
conserve and keep his citezyns in peace and concord, that has so well
stablyshed the same in his own house and family. And on the other side, who
thynkest thou will believe, that thou art able to be ruler or to keep peace and
quietness in the city, seeing thou can not live peacesably in thine own
house, where thou art not only a Ruler, but a King and Lord of all?

Leontinus Gorgias (the Leon-tinus.
which was the syrste that among the Greeks was commended for his eloquence)
exhortinge the Greeks with many words at the plays of Olympe unto peace and
concord, certain men (as it is said) cried out, saying. Let him first be at
con cord with his wife and his maid, and then come to persuade and counsel
us to peace. There is no man, but will trust to obtain (and that easly) the
amity and friendship of so noble and so gentle a person, whose benelouence and
gentleness can not be equinalled with all worldly riches. How magnificente a
thing is it, to be taken for good and faithful in another man's house? as it
is written of Crates Thebanus, Crates.
unto whom for his singular goodness, and love that he bare unto his wife
Hypparchia, was granted, to enter not only into the gate, but into the
chambers and most secret places of all the city, and there fore the Greeks
called him Thirepanictes, that is a man that might enter and go into other
men's houses. For no man does mistruste or fear that he will defyle any
other ma^s bed, that agrees so well with his own wife, and with so sweet and
so sure a knot is fastened unto her. All the whole family do their duties,
when the wife does gladlye and wyllynglye help her husband, and the husband
his wife moved by the only love and concord that is between them: for he that
is not moved nor styrde with ye furiousnes and commotions of the mind, may
easily retain and cause them to do their duties, so that he leave not of,
nor fails not to do his own duetye. Thus they may with diligence govern
their goods and substance, so that neither of them be alienate and far from
their domestical and familier cares and busynesses, and in their family do
rule and te^peral things with love. He is far deceived that does think, that
fear, reward, or any other like thing shall so quicken or provoke a man to
do his duetye, as charity and love shall do. Men perchance will not greatly
meruel if their own children be sweet and most acceptable unto the^, the
which if they were but ye children of one of them, yet love might so work,
that they should be unto each other most accep table and pleasant: how much
more then must the flame needs burn, unto the which they both, as it were
put torches under? But this peradventure shall seem moore merueylous (the
which unto those yt have the knowledge of natural things is most plain and
sure) that ye children of those which be married and love one another, shall be
meke peaceable, modeste, amiable, and apt to all kind of benignity and
gentleness. For why? the qualities and affections of ye father and the mother
Note.
(the which do occupy the inward parts of man) are most commonly
transfuded into the bodies and souls of their children, and of their pa rentes
they learn placabilitie and mekenes. To live thus at home in tranquillity and
concord, is much like the celestial and heavenly life: whereof (as says that
wise man in Homer) great joy and cherefulnesse redoundeth unto their friends,
and to their enemies great sorrow and heaviness: and as the other rejoice,
these do lament when they see or hear that we be other in hatred or in any
discord: for the evil and wicked man does desire that is evil, and exchueth
virtue, as a most pernicious poison. But all that I have said hitherto
(although as ye do see, they are of great importance) yet they can not be
compared to this one thing, that I will now say. At home we learn charity,
the which we may use and show toward other that being in tranquillity,
and pleased with the suauitie and swetnes of mutual and correspondent love, we
may ye ease liar give our selves to religion, to conte^plation, to love, and to
give reverence to that om nipote^t and divine nature. And our hearts being
thus touched with matrimonial love, and with ye holy and celestial fire we shall
by little and little, be so kindled therewith, that it shall conceive and bring
forth great flames. And what greater or more excellent gift may be desired or
granted of god unto mankind, then that we may be made true and faithful lovers
of that his divine beauti fulness.

Of those that have no children.
Unto some the lord now and then gives no children, or else he takes them
again, when he has given them, and that by his secret and incomprehensible
judgment yea with a fatherly indulge^ce and pity: For he sees it to be for
our profit, yt it should be so, lest yt we should refer all things to
fortune and natural causes, the which thing no wise man, nor no christen man
should do. And let us take it for no small benefit yt we have not proved of yt
sweet gal, for after that we have swalowed it, we shall say, yt there is put
unto one drop of honey, six hundred drops of gall: And he did eue^ reasonably
reke^ it amongye felicities of man, to live without children. And August through
his daughter and his nyce was constrained co rehearce eue^ with alowd voice these
words of Homere. Would god I had ne uer been married, for then I should have had
no children. I willet pass Cicero co^playnts to Atticus. Nor I will not dis
pute here of ye priuatio^ of children, but only monish and exhort those yt be
married, yt they (because the fruit of children is so uncertain, and that
oftenti mes they do bring unto their parents more calamity then profit or
pleasure) seek not to have children by any flagitiousnes, yt is, with one
certain evil, one uncertain calamity. Be not sharp nor bitter to your baren
wives, for yt chaun seth very often without any fault other of ye one or of
the other, or of the^ both. And ye shall understand and know yt the wife
desires moore to have children, then ye husband, as the wall that is falling,
desires to have shores to uphold it with al. Anne yt wife of Helcana yt Ephraite
was baren, and how did her husband comfort her. Am not I i. Re. i.
quoth he better to thee then te^ne children? It was very meet and convenient yt
Samuel yt prophet should be gotten of a man. If god do send the children,
receive the^ as ye gift of god ioyfullye, and instruct the^ well, yt their
goodness and honesty may profit the^ selves and the to, not on ly for thy
solace and good name, but also to augment the merits The merits of this life.
of this life, by yt which the immortal reward of the eternal life is obtained
and gotten.

Of her that is in age.
AFter yt an honest and a well nourtured woe man waxes old, we must do as men
use to do to al faithful and diligent servants, we loose and unbind our old
horse and ox, and suffer them to wander and to feed where they will the^
selves, and put them to less labor: we make our bondemen free, and we
assign to old soldiers certain possessions and feldes to live upon, we make
our free minister and servant, af ter that he has well and faythfullye
served us, equal as it were unto us, and call him to our affinity. Now much
more ought thou then honorificently to entreat thy wife be ing aged and
old, the which is no brute beast, no bo^dmayd nor of no worse condition then
thou thy self, nor thy hired servant, but equal with thee, and assygned by
GOD to be thy fellow, and with such love coupled unto thee, as far passes
and exceadeth all other. And reason it is, that she which has been so long
obedient and subject to her husband, be now even like and equal with him, for
now those agitations and troubles of the mind (the which by the majesty, and
as it were by the kingedome of the husband should be refrayned) are now
through use and time pacified and cooled, so that now it shall not need that he
rule his wife or study to observe and retain his majesty any more: for it
can not now dimynyshe, seeing that all such things, as required a just
and a moderate impyre and rule, are dyspached and taken away.

And therefore GOD commanded Gc. xxi
Abraam to obey his old Sara, not as to his wife and flesh, but as some what
elevated unto ye nature of man and condition and quality of the spirit. Nor
from hence forth she must not be handled nor entreated like a young woman, in
as much as she is feeble and her bodily heat swaged and couled. And her travail
and pains by the aid and help of servants must now be ligh tened, for ye
infirmities of her mind yt blinded so her judgment, yt she could not perceive
the truth, are now healed and her self made better, more cir cu^spect, and
wiser then she was before. Begin now therefore to make her equal with thy
self, and counsel with her about thy matters whether they be great or small, for
so shall she re ceyue ye fruit and reward of her obedience, to be a mistres, the
which was so long thy servant. Nor she shall not be now intolerable or
insolente or a stately mistres, that so long a time before has learned to be
obedient. Thus by little and little ye shall learn to discern the sexes, and
begin to prepare you unto yt celestial life, in the which there is no sex
as touching carnal use. For there (as says ye son of god) they another
marry, nor are married, but live as ye angels Math. xxij.
of God, pure and incorruptible spirits, among ye which no man is borne, nor
no man perishes, so that there needs no reparation of man kind by
generation. This love not fastened in caduke and mortal things, but in the
soul, shall follow her being dead, for albe it she be departed, buried and
lamented, yet nevertheless The remembrance of ye wife.
charity shall live, and the remem braunce of such a woman shall be pleasant
unto her husband: and therefore his children shall be the derer unto him, inasmuch
as they be his, and begotten and borne of such a woman, and he shall pity
them the more, saying that they be deprived of the fruit of such a mother and
take her children by another husband instead and place of his own as borne of
her, the which with him was one thing, both by the sacrament of matrimony, and
by the nature of love. Also thou shalt cause the memory and reme^brauuce of
her, which is now dead, to be no less profitable unto her kynsfolke, then it
was she being yet alive, for not withstanding she be departed and dead, yet
yt knot of love the which coupled her kynred to the, as thine own. is not
extinguished: and the communion of blood and chance of birth is a moore
weker and a more febler band to couple men together in amity, then is the
band of benevolence and love. If thou dye before her, leave such a testimonye
unto her and all other, not only of thy benevolence but also of thy judgment
to herwardes, ge uynge her such thanks for her fidelity and concord to the
wards, that al other may un Note ye husba^ndes.
derstand what manner of wife she was, and that she her self may perceive that
her will and works were well allowed, and being yet alive, may receive the
fruits of her honestye and goodness, the which in that blessed life she shall
receive and take for the greatest and most truest. And therefore, it shall be
thy part for the gentleness and love thou had unto her (seeing that thou the
very stay of the house and goods shall be now taken from her, and that she
being fearful and feeble shall be destituted of thee yet only (...) and
help) to leave her to the comfort and relief of her widdowhed, such a portion
of thy goods, as may sustain her: lest that funestious and bitter day, the
which took thee from her, should some to bring al misery and euilles unto her,
but yet this must be ordered after every man's nature and custom. To some woman
whose fidielitie, fruga litie, and wisdom thou know thou may leave all
that euet thou haste. And to some it is not for their utility and profit to
be left (...), unto whom money should be (...) instrument and an occasion of
lechery and bodily pleasure. Some be (...) (...), and through avarice and
covetousness, very cruel unto their own children. No man ought to know her
better the^ her own husband, the which has been secretly both in spor tes and
serious matters so long acquaynted with her, yt except he be a very tru^ke or a
block, he might (...) ought to have (...) ed out and known al her senses and
qualities. And therefore giving judgment of those things, yt he by the works
and life of his wife death know, he may do, yt shall some unto him (...) mete
and convenient to be done, but so yet, yt love may temper the sentence of
judgment, and judgment the excess of love. But yet of what, sort soever
she be, thou oughteste not as far forth as thy goods will stretche, to leave
her in pouer tie. And if thou should fault in any of these two things, I
had rather you shouldeste leave her exceading rich then yt she should lack any
thing pertaining to her living, for there is a moore danger in poverty, then
in welthe or riches. And forasmuch as by death he goes to a better place,
let him not care for such things as he leaves here, but commit the^ unto
such, as presentlye shall have the use of the^, nor desire yt his wife should
so remember A fond (...) quest of many hus bands.
him to continue his widow still to her great inco^modity, and the peril of
pity. Let him therefore leave her free, and in her own hand and judgment of
her friends, to do that she shall think most convenient for her honesty, and
the quietness of her own will and mind.


